

01 Preface
Contents
0101
Purpose of guide
0102
How to use this guide
0103
Mission statement
0104
Our services
0105
KPMG International Network
0101 Purpose of guide
This guide aims to be a useful and practical point of reference in the conduct of MAS engagements within the firm.
It contains the practical experience of the members of MAS built up over a number of years of carrying out a wide variety of MAS assignments.
The guide is not intended as a one stop reference guide.
The situations encountered during an MAS engagement are too varied for that ever to be possible, nor is it intended to be a substitute for discussion within the network.
0102 How to use this guide
This guide should also be read in conjunction with the Corporate Finance Manual where indicated.
The purpose of the Corporate Finance Manual is to set out the required procedures and technical standards for all Special Engagements.
Everyone in MAS should be familiar with the chapters applicable to all MAS engagements, the remaining chapters can be referred to as necessary when working on the appropriate type of engagement.
This manual will be updated by the Editor from time to time.
Any new methodology will in the meantime be circulated on an as arising basis.
The up to date text will be made available in computer accessible form.
In order that everyone in the firm benefits from your practical experience you should forward your suggested updates to your regional network member, for onward submission to the compiler.
0103 Mission statement
The recent past has seen major developments in the mergers and acquisitions environment in the UK.
The formation of large international financing groupings, the issues surrounding the use of leverage, the emphasis on core activities and the prospect of more and larger cross-border deals have created a dynamic market.
There is an even greater need for good advice, particularly away from the headlines, in agreed as opposed to hostile transactions.
KPMG Peat Marwick is very much aware of this need and the aim of MAS is to provide such a service to our clients.
Our ability to deliver an effective service is built on four simple principles:
Professionalism
We are specialists and must maintain the highest standards in our work.
Independence
The firm is wholly independent from all sources of finance and seeks no investor role in any transaction.
Personal service
Our approach is designed to be personal and responsive to our client's needs.
Innovative solutions
We must combine innovative thinking with exposure to market developments.
MAS is built on these principles and, backed by the national and international practices of KPMG, is ideally placed to assist our clients in all aspects of the merger and acquisition process.
In essence we aim to provide a personal service of the highest standard by combining advanced techniques and specialist knowledge.
Our hallmarks must be our professionalism and innovative thinking.
We must ensure that each deal is completed to our client's maximum advantage.
Regular and effective use of this Practice Guide will maintain and improve the standard of service to our clients.
0104 Our services
Merger and Acquisition services are provided to UK clients through an extensive network of M&A dedicated and semi-dedicated partners and staff co-ordinated by the MAS team in London office.
In addition, one of the London partners, Richard Agutter is a founder member of the KPMG M&A International Network, which provides worldwide M&A coverage.
A list of the network members, who represent 28 countries principally engaged in cross-border M&A activities, is circulated by Richard Agutter from time to time.
MAS services encompass the following:
1.
THE PROVISION OF A COMPREHENSIVE HANDS-ON DEAL MANAGEMENT SERVICE
MAS specialists can provide assistance at any point in the acquisition or disposal process.
No specific transaction size is set but typically, in the current market place, most transactions will be in the 0.5 million to 50 million bracket, which is defined as the middle market.
The role of an MAS specialist, in addition to helping a retained client through all stages of a proposed transaction, is to co-ordinate the delivery of other KPMG services, at the appropriate time, and to liaise with other professional parties to the transaction.
MAS specialists do not seek to take over the work of an existing client service team.
The role of the MAS specialist is to support that team in the acquisition or divestment process and in so doing to add value to the service provided.
All assistance given by KPMG partners and staff is in their capacity as professional advisers.
The majority of assistance has historically been provided to private companies, in many cases non-clients, where the shareholders wish to realise their capital and to larger groups (which do not have their own corporate finance departments and/or where the deal size is insufficient to interest a merchant bank) wishing to dispose of non-core subsidiaries.
This assistance ranges from advice on the preparation of an Information memorandum and the identification of possible purchasers to advice during the negotiation of a successful transaction.
MAS has also been assisting purchasers transact acquisitions.
The service ranges from a search for suitable target profiles (linking with MC Strategy Services where appropriate), to assisting with structuring and negotiating the deal and liaising with the KPMG Investigation Service team.
Introductions to potential sources of finance may also be provided.
Increasingly, both buyer and vendor mandates demand a European if not a fully international focus.
In addition to the International Network, MAS has designated people responsible for initial service delivery in most of the European countries.
The majority of middle market transactions are completed on a low profile, negotiated basis often involving a mixture of individual and corporate participants.
The specialist national and international skills necessary to complete such transactions include:
transaction management;
detailed market knowledge;
negotiating expertise;
innovative financial and tax structuring; and
regulatory awareness.
2.
OPPORTUNITY DEVELOPMENT AND RESEARCH
The MAS databases record the acquisition criteria of:
(a)
existing clients; and
(b)
non-clients reported publicly or through known contacts to be interested in making acquisitions.
Sale opportunities identified by MAS are matched against the recorded criteria on a reactive basis.
Such opportunities are obtained from the following sources:
Accountants' Business Network (ABN)
The International Network
Clients
Contacts
Press commentary and advertisements
Brokers
Subject to the quality of the opportunity confines of confidentiality required by a vendor, MAS specialists are responsible for maximising the exposure of each opportunity.
MAS also has access to a research facility comprising many proprietary databases recording corporate information and sector deal history in order to support the following:
Opportunity development
The identification of potential acquirors for retained vendors
The proactive search for possible targets for retained purchasers
Price analysis for vendors and purchasers
3.
VALUATION SERVICES
MAS specialists can provide a source of valuation advice and information support (via its research facility) to clients (or partners) requiring a valuation in connection with a commercial transaction or an acquisition or disposal.
It is not intended that MAS specialists should offer advice where valuations are solely for tax purposes.
4.
DEVELOPMENT OF CLIENT DATA BASE
In addition to servicing our existing clients, MAS specialists seek to obtain new clients by providing initial acquisition or disposal services to non-clients with a view to establishing a long term client relationship for other KPMG services.
5.
MAS OPERATIONAL MANDATE
It is envisaged that MAS specialists should have the capability of providing a total service to a client.
However in line with KPMG publicised policies on corporate finance services activities, MAS partners (along with other partners) should not commit either themselves or the firm to sponsor issues.
It is also the position that unless special clearance procedures have been obtained partners should not:
(i)
make a public recommendation to the directors/shareholders for inclusion in an offer or defence document (see below);
(ii)
lead on behalf of a client in the public arena where the transaction is covered by the City Code (see below);
The clearance procedure involves a review of the circumstances to confirm our competence to act which should be carried out by two independent MAS partners plus a senior partner the names of whom are available from CFSU.
In addition, the ICAEW ethical guideline on corporate finance advice, effective from 1st September 1989, precludes our acting as the lead adviser (for example , confirming that the terms offered to the client disposing of the business are fair and reasonable) in situations where the transaction is subject to the City Code and both parties are clients of KPMG.
In the above excluded instances the MAS team will remain an important member of the client's team, acting as a catalyst/manager of the process, but the lead role as far as the public are concerned would fall to either a merchant bank or stockbroker with suitable experience in the public arena.
6.
MAS services are dealt with under the following broad headings in this guide:
The majority of MAS's chargeable hours is spent on selling, buying and valuations.
0105 KPMG International Network
Guidelines have been devised by the Network members to govern their conduct during the most common kinds of situations giving rise to contact between Network members.
Hence, the guidelines cover the following situations:
Exclusive sale mandates
Third party, non-exclusive sale opportunities
Exclusive buying assistance
Initial contact with acquisition targets
Acquisition research assistance
Basic information requests
Client courtesy meetings
Since these situations can give rise to different fee arrangements the relevant sections of the guidelines should be read before quoting fees for providing international assistance.
The guidelines also place obligations on the responding members in each of the above situations including content and timeliness of response.
It should be explained that sale opportunities should be referred to the Network only when it is certain that they have an international implication.
02 Standards of work
Contents
0201
Technical standards and aide memoire 
0202
Regulatory and statutory framework
0203
Negotiating
0204
Other considerations
0201 Technical standards and aide memoire 
0201.1 Introduction
This section provides an overview of the technical standards which should be applied in respect of all corporate finance engagements.
Additional guidance relevant to MAS is covered in the chapters of this guide dealing with buying, selling, valuations and other work.
Chapter 3 of the Corporate Finance Manual (‘CFM’) contains the full text of the firm's technical standards.
It is the firm's requirement that anyone involved in corporate finance work (including MAS work) should be thoroughly familiar with and apply these standards.
On each Corporate Finance Engagement Record (‘CFER’) the engagement partner and in-charge must confirm that they have applied the technical standards of the CFM.
0201.2 Technical standards aide memoire The following ‘quick reference’ aide memoire summarises important points to consider at the various stages of an engagement in respect of the firm's technical standards.
This aide memoire should not be used as a substitute for referring to the CFM (Chapter 3).
All items in italics are additions for the purpose of this guide to the index to Chapter 3 of the CFM and refer to matters of particular relevance to MAS assignments.
1
Special Engagement Progress Record
1.1
Definition of the term special engagement
1.2
Use of the Special Engagement Progress Record
Its use does not preclude the side-by-side use of specific MAS checklists or work programmes but the SEPR must be regarded and treated as the lead control record.
2
Consultation procedures
2.1
Appointment of a consultation partner
2.2
Consultation with other experts
Consultation with a review partner or relevant experts should take place during the course of an engagement where the engagement partner considers such a course of action appropriate.
In practical terms this means with regional MAS representatives.
On engagements associated with financings in foreign jurisdictions it will be necessary to take advice from a partner in the country where the finance is being raised to ensure that the documents are in order and that the local regulatory and filing requirements are being met.
Use the MAS International Network as initial point of contact.
2.3
Technical Panel
In appropriate cases we should advise the client to seek an early discussion with the London Stock Exchange or Takeover Panel on potentially contentious issues.
We should offer to make such approaches ourselves.
The Firm has good contacts at both organisations.
Discuss with CFSU before approaching either organisation.
The form of declaration with regard to directors (Schedule 4 of Section 2 of the Yellow Book) should usually be reviewed by the sponsors (which cannot be KPMG) at the preliminary review stage.
7
Fieldwork
7.1
Professional standards
7.2
Supervision
7.3
Work papers and documentation — retention and review
7.4
Establishing the responsibility of directors or officials of the client — Use of Board Memoranda
KPMG Peat Marwick will not assume the responsibility which properly rests with the directors for the fair disclosure of information (including financial information) in investment advertisements (including prospectuses, listing particulars, offer documents, Information memoranda and information circulars.
MAS's role in advising on or assisting in the preparation of a client's Information memorandum does not involve the issuance of a published report nor does it involve any association with the client's Information memorandum beyond that set out in the terms of engagement, which should be appropriately limited.
The only time a board memorandum might be contemplated is where the Information Memorandum includes forward projections (typically seeking US buyers) and we ask for a letter of representation (see 1103.4).
7.5
Minimum level of work
7.6
Communication with the client — calls, meetings and other advice
7.7
Review by the engagement partner — all documents and workpapers
7.8
Review of other specialists
Consultation with a review partner or relevant experts should take place during the course of an engagement where the engagement partner considers such a course of action appropriate.
In practical terms this means with regional MAS representatives.
7.9
Retention of working papers
7.10
Access to working papers
8
Association with public documents
8.1
Form and context
8.2
Pre-insurance review — independent partner
8.3
Reliance by third parties on our association with documents
Particular care must be taken to avoid our Information Memorandum being used for the purposes of fund raising unless the full prospectus documentation has been followed.
Where is it clear that reliance may be placed on our association with the preparation of financial information, and where that reliance is not justified by the nature of the association, we should take every opportunity to make the nature of our position clear (for example, in discussing information, prepared but not reported on by ourselves, with a client's bankers).
9
Reporting
9.1
Reporting standards
9.2
The firm's role in negotiations
9.3
Communication of draft reports
Preference is for each and every page to bear the ‘watermark’ legend draft.
A transmittal letter should be used whenever draft reports are submitted or preliminary opinions given.
The letter should be issued on the firm's normal headed paper.
9.4
Mandatory forms of wording for reports and comfort letters
9.5
Oral presentations
9.6
Qualifications or reservations
9.7
Restrictions on distribution of reports
A common law duty of care is owned by a person providing reports or advice under the law of contract to his client and under the law of tort, to those whom he knew, or ought reasonably to have known, or should have foreseen, might rely on his reports or advice.
9.8
Completion procedures — obtain final copies of reports
9.9
Consent letter
10
Debriefing
10.1
Debriefing notes
10.2
Client debriefing
10.3
Requirement to send documentation to London office
11
Engagements with an international dimension
11.1
Working with overseas offices
11.2
Undertaking work for an overseas office
11.3
Undertaking work in the UK for an overseas client
11.4
Undertaking work for a UK client in an overseas jurisdiction
11.5
Undertaking work for a client with securities listed in a overseas jurisdiction
11.6
Multi jurisdictional offers
11.7
Wording of reports and letters to be used in foreign jurisdictions
0202 Regulatory and statutory framework
It is important to realise that compliance with the firm's technical standards must go hand in hand with compliance with the laws and regulations governing companies and the provision of financial services, including the services provided by MAS.
Compliance with one set of rules or standards does not ensure compliance with the other.
The regulatory and statutory framework in which MAS operates is covered as follows:
General advice on the provisions of the Companies Acts and Taxes Acts should be obtained from relevant KPMG specialists.
Detailed guidance on the regulatory environment is also given in Chapter 1 of the CFM.
0203 Negotiating
0203.1 Introduction
Negotiating assistance is an advisory service designed to aid management in making its decisions.
This may involve attending negotiating sessions with the client and conveying information from the client to potential acquirers, sellers and financing sources.
In all cases, advice must be given in an objective, balanced and professional manner.
Although the firm may negotiate within pre-agreed negotiating parameters or instructions on behalf of a client, it is not part of the firm's role to take decisions for a client.
We should act only in a professional or agency capacity in connection with negotiations (ie not as principal) and the client for whom we are acting should be clearly identified.
Subject to this constraint and the firm's other technical standards we must always act in the best interests of our client.
To this end MAS professionals should be aware that negotiating is an activity demanding a high level of skill and application.
All MAS professionals should endeavour to attend the firm's two day course entitled Negotiating Skills.
Some advice on negotiating in the context of a normal M&A deal is presented below.
0203.2 Planning to negotiate
Negotiation should be a planned activity if it is to be efficient.
Inefficient time spent in negotiation is always costly
distracts the buyer and target managements; and
sours the relationship between buyer and seller.
Often a seller will deal concurrently with a number of potential buyers.
The seller's intention is to play off one buyer against another and introduce elements of haste and competitive bidding into negotiations in order to maximise the price.
Sometime genuinely strong potential acquirers will not enter into such a process because they cannot react quickly.
In addition other purchasers, not wishing to miss a golden opportunity because they cannot react quickly will attempt to insist that the seller grants them exclusive negotiating rights for a reasonable period of, for example, six weeks during which they should be able to agree a deal; a so called lock out agreement.
Care should be taken before agreeing to a lock out.
In order to establish their seriousness and integrity in seeking exclusive negotiations, the buyer should also consider volunteering to enter into a confidentiality agreement with the seller.
A prerequisite for the effective planning of negotiations is that throughout the buying/selling process management should be aware of the factors which will affect the final form of the purchase agreement.
This awareness comes from monitoring these five activities: valuing the business, structuring, securing legal protection, investigating the target and, if relevant, complying with the regulations affecting publicly held companies.
Any concerns which have surfaced in these other areas should be brought into the negotiations.
Against this background, advisers, together with management, should plan each meeting or each round of negotiation in a purposeful manner.
At the start of any meeting to discuss the terms of an acquisition, both parties should be aware of what has been agreed so far, what is outstanding and what is to be covered in the forthcoming session.
It is all too easy to find that the only properly planned meetings are the ones at which exchange of contracts and completion take place and those are meetings which are usually orchestrated by the solicitors acting for the buyer and the seller.
It is essential when planning for negotiations to define in broad terms the stances that will be adopted.
Imagination is needed here and brainstorming sessions before each round of negotiation can be used to consider problems from new angles and to generate new ideas for introduction into a negotiation.
For example, tax planning ideas can be used to breathe new life into apparently stale negotiations.
Furthermore, it is important to make sure that, in the heat of bargaining, significant points are not conceded while insignificant items are staunchly defended.
Therefore, in advance of any negotiation, management should identify priorities, areas of flexibility and tactics.
There can be no substitute for thorough preparations before a negotiation session.
The consideration of the other side's point of view is essential.
0203.3 Negotiating tactics
Although buyers will want to secure the best possible deal for themselves, sellers will only want to sell if they too think that they will obtain a good deal.
After all, they might be selling the results of a lifetime's work.
Consequently, in a negotiation the buyer is not trying to beat the seller or vice versa.
In terms of an acquisition you are only trying to ‘beat’ rival buyers and perhaps alternative options for the seller, such as flotation, by selling yourself and your deal.
Even if the seller has no real alternatives, there is little point in trying to win a visible victory.
Indeed, the humiliation of a weak seller can be costly in terms of the post -acquisition performance of the target.
If the vendor is to feel that he has secured a good deal, then he, like the buyer, must feel that he has won some concessions.
It is often quoted that the best deal is where both sides have won!
Accordingly, the preparation for bargaining should be extended to cover planned concessions.
It is however important that the opening position adopted by the buyer is credible.
No real concession should be won by the buyer in moving away from an insultingly low offer.
It is also wise to make the most of any planned concessions by using them to achieve a notable reduction in tension, thereby making it more likely that the seller will reciprocate.
Do not forget the opportune use of humour to lower tension.
The buyer should not become obsessed with an issue or entrenched in a particular position and they should avoid defining certain conditions as non-negotiable or certain demands as absolute.
This merely leads to confrontation and transforms the negotiation into a contest.
If such a situation arises a break to reconsider positions is valuable.
In an acquisition, where the seller is represented by management or advisers acting as negotiators, it can be beneficial to identify ways of making these negotiators lose sight of the vendor company's true interests.
This is possible where a target's management are bargaining on behalf of their shareholders.
A soft approach can be taken with management on job security, benefits-in-kind, salaries, golden handshakes and so on.
Finally, buying management and their advisers should try and appreciate what tactics are being used on them.
While seeking to understand the opposition, the buyers should recognise that they are probably their own most formidable adversaries.
Hard as it may be to accept, there is ultimately no point in agreeing to a bad deal, no matter how much money and energy have been put into the process of buying a business.
Managers and their advisers have to resist the great temptation of trying to save a deal or outbid a rival at all costs.
They must instead stick to a range of sensible prices reflecting the value of the target business to them.
Good negotiating discipline is to sum regularly, thereby ensuring points of progress are agreed and noted stage by stage.
Negotiations should always be conducted as a two men team, to ensure points of detail are not missed.
0203.4 What is negotiable
Price is usually the principal item for negotiation with a buyer or seller.
By way of preparation, a buyer should perform a thorough valuation exercise and define a range of prices within which a sensible deal can be struck.
How the price is to be paid is the next issue.
It can be paid in the form of shares in the buyer, debt, cash or any combination of these three possibilities.
The price can also be immediate, deferred or contingent upon future results.
Tax planning and accounting objectives are frequently of crucial importance in determining an appropriate form of consideration.
Determining what precisely is to be bought is also negotiable.
Will it be assets or shares in an established company or a hive-down company?
Can the buyer also choose to take over some assets or some operations but not others?
Once again, tax planning objectives need to be recognised and worked on during the negotiation to come up with a mutually acceptable deal.
Often value to one side can be given without significant loss to the other, who may then attempt to gain on other points.
Section 0609 includes more detailed commentary on such structuring points.
The legal agreements between the buyer and the seller are additional matters for negotiation.
They usually include conditional terms and provisions to tie key people into the target business and restrict the actions of sellers.
There are also warranties and indemnities.
Although most warranties and indemnities are given by the seller, the seller is likely to seek some undertakings from the buyer and some limits to the scope of any future liabilities.
It is normal to restrict both the amounts involved and the timescale for seeking redress.
Chapter 07 deals with sale and purchase agreements in detail.
Receivers however always want to sell without giving any warranties and indemnities because their own knowledge of the business is limited and they do not want any continuing involvement with the buyer.
A buyer should not try to change a receiver's approach.
Success in that direction is unlikely and, besides, warranties and indemnities from an insolvent company would be worthless.
Instead, the buyer should seek to ensure that the consideration reflects the higher risk to the buyer and the terms which the seller wants for completing the disposal.
Receivers want to sell for cash to satisfy debenture holders and secured creditors and they generally want to sell quickly before the business has deteriorated to the extent of being unsaleable.
It is not enough to agree a deal in principle with a receiver, the purchaser will have to deliver the cash before anyone else in order to win.
0204 Other considerations
The need to be familiar with the firm's technical standards for MAS work has been highlighted.
Of equal importance is for clients to have confidence in our abilities and in particular this will be reinforced by our knowledge of the current market.
As well as using this guide and learning from practical experience, an important way of improving our service is for us to continue to be knowledgeable about the broader theory and practice of our work.
In this way we will improve our capacity to produce innovative solutions to problems and to offer practical options and timely answers to our clients.
Effectively all MAS professionals have a duty to build up a good working knowledge of corporate finance theory and practice (particularly M&A and valuations) and maintain this knowledge through regular but selective reading.
To begin with this process will probably require some informal self-education within the constraints of working in MAS.
The number of articles, booklets and text books written on the subject of corporate finance is vast.
Selective reading is therefore essential.
In addition MAS professionals should be aware of the following useful sources:
Acquisitions Monthly
FT Mergers and Acquisitions International (monthly)
KPMG Deal Watch (produced in International Office)
Mergers and Acquisitions in Europe (Editor: SG Warburg)(Textbook)
The Financial Times (daily)
Investors Chronicle (weekly)
Takeover Code & Stock Exchange Yellow Book
Practical law for companies (monthly)
Business information centre in London
03 Engagement letter
Contents
0301
Introduction
0302
Corporate Finance engagement letters
0303
Assignment letters
0304
Professional ethics — courtesy letter
0305
Other matters
0306
Fees
0301 Introduction
0301.1 Preliminary actions
The background of prospective clients and the motives for requesting the firm to perform a particular function should always be considered carefully before agreeing to accept our assignment.
Further guidance on the acceptance of professional appointments can be found in section 7203 of the KPMG International manual.
Research into the background of the client and the sector in which they operate should be conducted.
In the case of a sale it is essential to establish that the owners of the business do not have irreconcilable differences regarding an acceptable selling price.
In such cases the use of a professionally drafted memorandum of understanding to which all shareholders are party is recommended.
An example is set out in Section 1101.11.
0301.2 Purpose of engagement letters
In order to avoid any misunderstandings the specific terms of our engagement must be agreed in writing.
The engagement letters serve to establish the instructions and are an important element in determining the terms of contract between the firm and our clients and should clearly set out our role and responsibilities.
As an engagement progresses it may be necessary to issue a revised terms of engagement letter which should also be agreed to by the client.
Clear documentation of a revision to previously agreed terms is essential.
In the past where fee disputes have arisen following an M&A engagement we have always been able to establish our position to the lawyers' satisfaction as a result of a clear and comprehensive engagement letter agreed to in writing by the client.
0301.3 Public arena
The Firm is taking an increasingly high profile in this activity — ie Blue Book work.
Due to the onerous nature of this work it is important that any engagement letter fully indemnifies the Firm.
An example engagement letter is set out in 1101.10 — please note that this is a live example and as such is the result of a series of negotiations — ie this should not be assumed to be our starting position.
Professional legal advice should be sought by the Firm before issuing such an engagement letter.
The key point in such a engagement letter is the client agreeing to indemnify KPMG etc against any and all losses which may arise as a result of the transaction other than in circumstances of KPMG's gross negligence.
0302 Corporate Finance engagement letters
We are required under the CFM to obtain a corporate finance engagement letter from a client before undertaking any corporate finance engagement.
Particular care is required to ensure the letter is requested from and signed by the correct parties.
The most obvious occasion where this occurs is in the sale of a private company with multiple shareholders.
We may in such circumstances act on the instructions of the Board of Directors, provided we are sure they are mandated to act.
(In such cases reference should be made to your local MAS regional representative and/or CFSU).
A Specimen Corporate Finance engagement letter is set out in Section 1101.1 We are required to document why it is we consider the client may properly be regarded as a Corporate Finance client.
The Compliance Unit in London office maintains a central register of all CFEL's.
Refer to the Compliance Unit to establish whether a letter already exists.
A copy should be obtained for the departmental records (CFS binder).
If any doubt exists as to whether a group engagement letter covers the particular assignment in question an additional letter should be requested.
The detailed process of applying the rules of the Financial Services Act 1986 to engagement letters is set out in Section 0401.3.
0303 Assignment letters
0303.1 Framework
Specific examples of engagement letters are set out in Chapter 11.
A general letter is set out at 1101.2.
The KPMG Investigations Service Practice Guide suggests a format for drafting the section dealing with the scope of our work as a separate Appendix.
This sets out the objective in each area and at each stage and so may be appropriate for a long or complex assignment.
The Example letters are all tailored versions of live letters which have been written with the benefit of a client meeting.
Do not assume such letters will apply to your situation.
0303.2 Issues to consider
The terms of engagement should be drafted to embrace matters critical to the firm's role, the transaction contemplated and the responsibilities to be undertaken.
Points that should be considered include:
the identity of the client: defining the client relationship and the involvement of other parties; we must clearly establish whom it is we are advising and who is to meet our fees.
It may not be appropriate to address the letter to the Board in the position of a whole company disposal.
Also in such a position the impact of CA 1985 s.151 must be addressed in that the company cannot meet our fees except in a particular set of circumstances.
confidentiality: establishing the level of confidentiality required, as between the various parties involved.
In order that the firm can communicate directly with any other parties it may be appropriate to include an authority to this effect in the letter; it is also sensible to include a comment to the effect that there is always an element of trade off between absolute confidentiality and achieving the desired result.
requirements: establishing the client's requirements and the objective of the engagement and clearly addressing our role.
A clause such as‘we do insist that appointments are on an exclusive basis to avoid duplications and a dispersed marketing effort’ will help to avoid misunderstanding.
transaction structure: the Example MAS engagement letters all include an outline of the various stages of the transaction process and indicate our role in that process.
The mapping out of the clear process ensures the prospective client understands the full complexity and inevitable length of the transaction and should also assist in justifying fee ranges.
scope of work: defining the extent of the services.
Any restrictions on our ability to act should be clearly set out to avoid misunderstandings.
We should for instance clearly specify whether or not we intend issuing a formal valuation report/opinion.
timetable and responsibilities: a realistic timetable should be established with a clear allocation of tasks between the firm, the client and any other parties.
access to information and personnel: setting out a list of the general or specific information required to perform the work.
availability/co-operation of client/subject entity personnel: indicating the importance of effective communication to complete the work in the required timeframe.
representations: indicating any representations required from the client or any other party.
It is usual for engagement letters for sale mandates to include a phrase along the following lines: ‘The responsibility for the Information Memorandum's factual accuracy and opinions expressed therein will rest with yourselves.
It will be counter productive and damaging to the process if the subsequent enquiries of a prospective purchaser invalidate the document’
A formal letter of representation is included in the example reports chapter.
Informing the auditors: It is a requirement of the Institute of Chartered Accountants in England and Wales, under whose regulations and guidance we act, that we should notify a client's incumbent auditors or accountants of the scope of our appointment in order that they may assess whether the appointment has a bearing on their own continuing responsibilities.
The requirement is subject to the proviso that our client may give a valid reason why such notice should not be given.
expected form and content of the report.
A pre-issuance review of the engagement letter may be desirable where this is included.
This is normally only an issue in purchase advisory work.
the extent of reliance which can be placed on the information to be included in the report: to avoid misunderstandings the client should be made aware that suitable caveats may need to be included in the report.
It may be appropriate for the engagement letter to be included as an attachment to the report (if the reader of the report was not a recipient of the engagement letter).
engagement team and other external specialists required;
the limitation on circulation of the report: normally the client's instructions, the scope of work and the time constraints in which it is performed mean that circulation should be restricted to those to whom the report is addressed and to other named parties to whom the report is relevant.
This should be confirmed.
an estimate of fees and out-of-pocket expenses associated with the engagement and proposed billing arrangements.
We should be explicit as to the basis of charging, eg time or contingency.
We should also address issues such as our abort fees or minimum costs or indeed a retainer.
This is the only contract we will have with our client should we have to pursue payment via legal means.
client acknowledgement: normally, the client should be requested to confirm the terms of engagement by signing and returning a copy of the engagement letter; if this is the case, we must ensure that we do not commence work until the signed copy is on file.
0304 Professional ethics — courtesy letter
The ICAEW Guidance notes dealing with changes in professional appointments (date 1.85) require that we should notify the other accountants that we are undertaking the corporate finance work unless the client gives a valid reason why such notice should not be given.
The example engagement letter at 1101.2 includes a request for permission for us to inform the auditors of our appointment.
This is both for the purposes of common courtesy but also as it may have an important bearing on the way he discharges his own continuing professional responsibilities.
The form of the note is not included in the Examples section since it merely requires a straightforward letter informing the acquirer of our involvement.
In many instances it is perhaps better for the client to also send a letter (copied to us) to his other professional advisers informing them of our role and thereby introducing us.
0305 Other matters
The subject of confidentiality will be high in your prospective client's mind; you must attempt to persuade him that it is a common concern and we are experts at dealing with such issues including when and how to inform other directors and staff.
Do not give any assurances that confidentiality can be maintained throughout the deal process as this is unrealistic.
0306 Fees
Guidance on setting of fees is set out in Chapter 3 of the CFM.
Guidance notes on fees for MAS work are set out in various sections of this MAS Practice Guide as follows:
05 Selling
06 Buying
08 Valuations
09 Public Transactions and the lead advisers' role
10 Reactive and proactive searches
Section 1105 gives some example wording on fee structures.
The notes below are intended to consider three areas only and to be illustrative rather than prescriptive as an inflexible attitude towards fees can adversely affect the generation of new business.
As a consequence setting fees will remain the responsibility of the Engagement partner with reference to the client partner but should be subject to his/her compliance with the firm's position nationally.
0306.1 Contingent Fees
The firm's position on contingency fees on corporate finance work is set out in the CFM.
Unless there are exceptional mitigating circumstances (which should require the prior approval of a senior regional partner and/or the UK head of corporate finance) the guidance should be followed.
Prior to the agreement of any contingency fee arrangement MAS practice is to obtain documented approval from the appropriate office managing partner and/or head of corporate finance.
Whilst the appropriate personnel and appropriate fee levels requiring authorisation from region to region it is important that a control mechanism exists.
0306.2 Brokerage Fees
Whilst it is our preference to generate fees for the provision of professional advice on a transaction we may also generate fees for a brokerage transaction.
In these circumstances where we have referred a sale opportunity to the purchaser, the terms and conditions of our introductory fee are set out in sections 1103.1 and 1108.1.
0306.3 Work for other KPMG offices
In most circumstances internal KPMG referrals or requests for limited assistance from other offices, such as an introduction to an existing client or provision of non proprietary knowledge gained from a previous assignment, should not result in a fee being paid by the originating office to the receiving office.
There should be a quid pro quo arrangement whereby we all cooperate.
However, in instances whereby an originating office makes a request for assistance that would result in more than simply providing a favour' then a fee is appropriate and its level should be determined directly between the two offices concerned.
If a receiving office makes use of a referral from an originating office then one should assume that the originating office will take his fee from his client and the receiving office should seek to take a fee, either finders fee or fee for professional assistance, from his client or contact.
Any network circulars where the originating office dos not have a fee paying client and he is seeking a brokerage type fee from the receiving office's client or contact, should be clearly stated from the outset.
04 The Financial Services Act 1986
Contents
0401 Introduction
.1
General considerations
.2
Reasons for the FSA
.3
Flowchart of the FSA considerations for a new assignment
.4
KPMG's authorisation under the FSA
.5
KPMG's general rule as to the applicability of the FSA
.6
Interaction with the City Code
.7
Unlisted securities
0402 Regulated work under the Financial Services Act 1986
.1
Conduct of business rules
.2
Investment business — definition
.3
Excluded activities — key
.4
Excluded activities — other
.5
Corporate finance activities
0403 Impact on clients and terms of engagement
.1
KPMG classification of clients and terms of engagement
.2
FSA engagement letters generally
.3
Who is our client?
.4
Corporate finance clients
.5
Additional considerations if a client is not a corporate finance client
0404 Information memoranda, investment overviews and tombstones as investment advertisements
.1
Investment overviews and Information memoranda as investment advertisements
.2
The appropriate FSA wording in the disclaimer
.3
Tombstones 
0405 Investment advertisements
.1
Purpose of rules on investment advertisements
.2
Misleading statements and practices
.3
Definition of investment advertisement
.4
Exemptions from the rules on investment advertisements
.5
Restrictions on the use of the KPMG Peat Marwick name in investment advertisements
.6
Approval procedure for investment advertisements
0406 Other FSA regulations
.1
Investment business clients' money
.2
Title documents
.3
Custodial investments
.4
Regulated fee income — reporting
0407 Offences under the FSA
.1
Compliance with FSA
.2
Market manipulation
.3
Unsolicited calls regulations (or ‘cold calling’ regulations)
Appendices
1
Worked examples of FSA considerations for new assignments
2
ICAEW definition of Corporate Finance Activities
3
Flowchart of FSA approval process for Information memoranda/Investment Overview
4
Flowchart of investment advertisement approval
0401 Introduction
0401.1 General considerations
This section is limited to an outline of the principal requirements of the Financial Services Act 1986 (‘FSA’), particularly in terms of its impact on MAS activities.
It should not be regarded as a comprehensive guide on all aspects of the FSA or all other relevant regulatory material.
All MAS professionals must be aware of the regulatory and statutory framework in which the firm operates.
This is explained the CFM.
Our actions on behalf of our clients and our duty to our clients and others are constrained by law, the common law and regulations set by quasi statutory bodies.
When necessary, consideration must be given to consulting specialists both within and outside the firm (eg Corporate Finance Services Unit in London).
All doubts about the legality of a potential course of action by us or our clients must be resolved speedily and with certainty.
0401.2 Reasons for the FSA
The FSA is the source of the requirement for the firm to follow the ICAEW rules in the conduct of investment business.
It was the first major and comprehensive revision of investor protection legislation since the mid-1930's.
In addition to the framework for regulating the financial services industry in the UK, it was also designed to replace the Prevention of Fraud (Investments) Act 1958 and to provide a new statutory basis for the offers of listed and unlisted securities (in the latter case replacing, when finally implemented, the provisions of the Companies Act 1985 on prospectuses).
The FSA provides an overriding control on:
the conduct of investment business by regulating the authorisation and conduct of persons authorised to conduct investment business and
public offers and the sale of securities (and other investment products) by regulating the issue and content of investment advertisements prepared or issued by those operating within and outside the self-regulating environment.
0401.3 Flowchart of the FSA considerations for a new assignment
Set out below is a flowchart of the issues to consider from an FSA perspective when any new assignment is obtained.
This flowchart is not an exhaustive guide to all FSA considerations but is sufficient to ensure that, if used in conjunction with detailed guidance obtained in unusual circumstances, the correct FSA issues will be considered and procedures followed.
Appendix 1 at the end of this chapter gives a number of worked examples using the questions posed in the flowchart and the answers set out in the information contained elsewhere in this section.
0401.4 KPMG's authorisation under the FSA
KPMG has authorisation from the ICAEW to carry on all investment business except discretionary management.
However, the firm is precluded from receiving or holding either Investment Business Clients Money or Custodial Investments.
The ICAEW rules are contained in the publication ‘Investment business regulations and guidance notes’.
0401.5 KPMG's general rule as to the applicability of the FSA
Much of the work MAS does in the course of a corporate finance engagement will not constitute ‘investment business’ as defined in the FSA rules.
The term has, however, wide application and because of the difficulties in isolating investment business as defined by the FSA, our policy is that all corporate finance work must be carried out in accordance with the ICAEW's Recognised Professional Body (‘RPB’) rules for investment business.
This means applying the full range of the applicable ICAEW rules to investment business for all clients on all occasions unless exemptions or restrictions are applicable.
This applies whether or not accountants' work is investment business in itself under the FSA.
The RPB rules set out the standards and procedures to be followed.
The relevant minimum RPB requirements are incorporated in our own operational, reporting and technical standards.
Compliance with the firm's requirements is monitored by the KPMG UK Compliance Partner, assisted by the Compliance, Ethics and Independence Committee, the Director of Compliance, the Compliance Unit in London and local Compliance Liaison Partners.
0401.6 Interaction with the City Code
The rules of the SRO's and the RPB's (including the ICAEW) require compliance with the City Code on Takeovers and Mergers.
0401.7 Unlisted securities
The objective of the FSA's provisions will be to introduce for unlisted securities a regulatory regime which is broadly similar to that for listed securities.
The implementation of Part V of the FSA (covering Offers of Unlisted Securities) has been delayed since 1986 and since that time the EC directive on prospectuses has been adopted.
The directive contains requirements for the contents of prospectuses which broadly mirror those for listing particulars under the listing directive.
It is not yet known to what extent the original provisions contained in Part V will remain unchanged when the full provisions on unlisted securities are finally implemented.
0402 Regulated work under the Financial Services Act 1986
0402.1 Conduct of business rules
The FSA provides that Investment Business will be subject to conduct of business rules, compliance with which has to be monitored by the ICAEW as an RPB.
The conduct of business rules are designed to preclude conflicts of interests and state principles and standards of conduct in the light of the following three objectives:
(a)
that investment business should be carried on honestly and fairly;
(b)
that those involved in the conduct of investment business carry out their responsibilities capably, carefully and to the best of their abilities; and
(c)
they should be fair to their customers, which implies avoiding conflicts of interest.
0402.2 Investment business — definition
The FSA defines certain activities as investment business.
Investment business is defined in paragraph 1(2) of FSA as meaning the business of engaging in one or more of the activities which fall within the paragraphs in Part II of Schedule 1 of FSA (‘Investment Business’) and which are not specifically excluded by Part III of Schedule 1 (‘Excluded Activities’).
In all the above cases, investment business is undertaken even if the firm does not make a recommendation.
In summary, investment business comprises:
Dealing in investments (investments are defined in Part 1 of Schedule 1 of FSA)
Buying, selling, subscribing for or underwriting investments or offering or agreeing to do so, either as principal or as an agent
Arranging deals in investments
Making, or offering or agreeing to make
(a)
arrangements with a view to another person buying, selling, subscribing for or underwriting an investment; or
(b)
arrangements with a view to a person who participates in the arrangements buying, selling, subscribing for or underwriting investments.
Investment advice
Giving, or offering or agreeing to give to persons in their capacity as investors or potential investors advice on the merits of their purchasing, selling, subscribing for or underwriting an investment, or exercising any right conferred by an investment to acquire, dispose of, underwrite or convert an investment.
Managing investments
Managing, or offering or agreeing to manage, assets, belonging to another person if
(a)
those assets consist of or include investments; or
(b)
the arrangements for their management are such that those assets may consist of or include investments…
Establishing etc collective investment schemes
Establishing, operating or winding up a collective investment scheme, including acting as trustee of an authorised unit trust scheme.
0402.3 Excluded activities — key
As noted above, certain activities are specifically excluded from the definition of investment business.
The concept of excluded investment activities serves to remove some of the uncertainty in respect of industrial and commercial companies which may be involved in investment activities but whose mainstream business is not in the financial services sector.
A key exclusion for KPMG is that contained in paragraph 21 of Schedule 1 FSA.
If the conditions below are met, the service to corporate clients will be outside the scope of the FSA (except for open ended investment companies).
Section 21 states, in summary, that:
Paragraphs classifying as Investment Business the acquisition or disposal of shares in a body corporate (other than an open-ended investment company) or relating to investment advice given in connection with the acquisition or disposal of such shares do not apply if:
(a)
the shares consist of or include shares carrying 75% or more of the votes exercisable at general meeting; or
(b)
the shares, together with any shares already held by the person acquiring them carry not less than 75% of the votes; and
(c)
the acquiror and disposers are each bodies corporate, partnerships, individuals or a group of connected individuals.
Sales of assets (other than assets which are themselves FSA ‘Investments’) are thus excluded.
NBthere can only be one party on each side of the deal.
The 75% shareholder cannot comprise a company and an individual — it must be just one of these.
‘Group of connected individuals’ is defined as:
disposer:directors, managers, their close relatives (spouse, children, etc)
acquiror: people who are to be directors, managers etc and their close relatives
’ group’does not include shareholders if, for the disposer, this is their only relationship with the company or, for an acquiror, this will be their only relationship.
Thus, for example, if KPMG is acting for a number of private individuals who do not (or will not) work for the target, the exemption does not apply.
It should also be noted that at the beginning of an assignment, the composition of both vendor and purchaser must be known to be able to consider taking advantage of this exclusion.
Other provisions of the FSA (eg those relating to investment advertisements) will still apply to these activities.
0402.4 Excluded activities — other
The following are specifically excluded from the ICAEW definition of Investment Business:
(a)
market making in investments
(b)
acting as principal in any transaction relating to an investment.
This limitation does not apply to any transaction for the Firm's own account or for the accounts of an Associate provided that such transactions:
are not with a client whether for Investment Business or otherwise
are not effected through an Authorised third party
(c)
buying or selling as agent for a client, options, future or contracts for differences unless the transaction is effected with or through and Authorised third party
(d)
acting in any way with a view to stabilising the market price of any investment
(e)
establishing, operating or acting as trustee of an authorised unit trust scheme or a recognised collective investment scheme.
Excluded activities under the FSA also include:
Dealing in investments
FSA applies to a transaction which is or is to be entered into by a person as principal only if he is, effectively, a market maker
FSA does not apply if the principal is not an authorised person, is for certain types of investment and the principal will enter into the transaction with or through an authorised person
FSA does not apply to any transaction between a principal and another person if they are bodies corporate within the same group or the transaction is in connection with a joint enterprise in which they are, or propose to become, participators.
If an agent enters into the transaction, then for certain types of investment and if the agent does not regularly hold himself out as buying investments, the transaction is excluded.
Arranging deals in investments
excluded if it refers to arrangements between a body corporate and another body corporate within the same group or is in connection with a joint enterprise as noted above
Investment advice
FSA does not apply to advice given by a person to another person (ie it is excluded) if:
(a)
they are bodies corporate in the same group; or
(b)
they are, or propose to become, participators in a joint enterprise and the advice is given for the purposes of, or in connection with, that enterprise.
There are also exclusions, inter :for the supply of goods or services and the supplier's main business is not to engage in investment business
for the provision of services outside the UK
in connection with Employee Share Schemes
for persons acting as trustees
for persons acting with permission granted by the Secretary of State
0402.5 Corporate finance activities
The ICAEW has developed a modified level of protection suitable for investment business carried out in the course of corporate finance activities for a corporate finance client.
The purpose of this is to disapply some of the more onerous administrative procedures which would otherwise be required to be carried out.
Section 0403 below sets out the procedures to be followed in determining if a client is a corporate finance client.
Corporate finance activities are defined in Appendix C to the Financial Services Compliance Binder and in Appendix 2 to this section.
Corporate finance activities include:
offering, placement, de-listing, cancellation or listing of investments
acting as official or sponsoring broker for admission to listing on LSE or USM
exchange, conversion, change in terms etc of securities
reduction of share capital or share premium account, scheme of arrangement etc
takeover, acquisition, disposal, merger, reorganisation, MBO, MBI
underwriting
valuation or appraisal of an investment, asset, business or security
appointments as trustee
default or prospective default and insolvency and prospective insolvency
advising a country or its monetary authorities
financing, refinancing, rescheduling or reorganising debt
financing or establishment of a construction or business or project or its expansion
raising borrowed money
appointment of a securities trustee or scheme operator
general corporate or general financial advice to a business
any other similar matter
0403 Impact on clients and terms of engagement
0403.1 KPMG classification of clients and terms of engagement
The flowchart in section 0401.3 above outlines the FSA considerations for determining whether we can accept an engagement and how to classify a client.
Other non-FSA considerations will also apply (eg potential or actual conflicts of interest) as explained in Section 0201 of this guide.
KPMG's FSA classification of clients can be best expressed in terms of the three types of FSA engagement letters which the firm issues:
Corporate Finance engagement letter (‘CFEL’) -most common for MAS assignments
This modified approach may only be employed where the client has agreed to the terms of and countersigned a corporate finance engagement letter issued to him by the firm.
Prior to requesting the client to sign such a letter, the firm must be satisfied that the client can properly be regarded as a corporate finance client and place a note on file to this effect (which is to say that there are no grounds for believing that it would be more appropriate to treat the client as a normal investment business client).
See section 0403.4 below.
An example engagement letter is set out in Section 1101.1.
Investment business engagement letter
This is required where the client cannot be regarded as a corporate finance client or where a mainstream regulated service (ie stand alone general (ie non-specific) investment advice or investment service) is provided.
This form of letter could thus apply to any MAS activity if the client is not a corporate finance client.
Alternatively, the investment service involved could be pension advice where a particular product is recommended.
An example engagement letter is set out in Appendix B of the Financial Services Act Compliance Binder.
CFSU should be consulted before issuing such an engagement letter.
General professional services letter — extremely rare for MAS assignments.
CFSU to be consulted in advance.
This must be used where regulated advice is given in the course of providing general services.
An example would be where the firm is carrying out one exercise, which then prompts the idea of another exercise as an integral part of the first service (eg a review of a person's CGT position leads to advice being given on an appropriate pension policy).
This letter allows advice only; the firm cannot then arrange or effect a transaction or instruct a broker.
An example engagement letter is set out in Appendix E of the Financial Services Act Compliance Binder.
0403.2 FSA engagement letters generally
When is the FSA engagement letter issued?
If a service is provided in the UK (even to overseas based clients), FSA rules apply and an FSA engagement letter must be obtained.
The engagement letter need only be issued after, not before, an initial meeting where potential services are outlined.
The type of engagement letter issued must be by reference to the KPMG classification of each client as set out above.
The firm must consider the knowledge and experience of each client for each activity and must place a note on file as to why a certain type of letter is issued.
When is the FSA engagement letter signed by the client?
Engagement letters must be signed by the client who must have time to consider the terms of the letter such that there can be no suggestion of undue pressure to sign having been placed on the client.
It should be the exception rather than the rule for client to sign the letter at the meeting when it is first presented to him.
0403.3 Who is our client?
The FSA engagement letter must be issued to:
the Firm's client — the person paying for the service may often be irrelevant in determining our who our client is; and
any other financial adviser involved with the transaction — check with Compliance Unit, London and CFSU (the JAP programme) to see if letters are already in place.
It is essential to identify all the firm's clients at the outset and to ensure that the correct form of engagement letter is issued and signed by each of them For example, in an MBO, if our clients are the directors, not the company, each director must sign an engagement letter as an individual or, more commonly, one director, with appropriate authority, can sign for all of them as individuals.
In this latter case, we must be able to regard the representative director as a corporate finance client' and to be able to issue a CFEL.
Similar considerations may apply for share valuations carried out to resolve inter-shareholder disputes.
If work is being undertaken for a subsidiary, care should be taken to ensure that a valid FSA engagement letter is in place for that subsidiary, not simply for the holding company.
If we are acting for a group of shareholders, some of whom may not be Corporate Finance Clients (eg in the sale of shares in a family business where any of the shareholders have no active business interests), care must be exercised.
If we can be satisfied that:
the shareholders are acting as a group (eg each has agreed to sell his or her shares if all the others also agree to sell); and
the member of this group to whom we address substantially all of our communication and advice is a Corporate Finance Client who discusses our advice and the transaction in general with all the other vendor shareholders
then we can treat the vendor shareholders as a single unit and as a Corporate Finance Client.
0403.4 Corporate finance clients
A corporate finance client will only enjoy the benefit of modified Conduct of Business rules imposed on the Firm rather than the full Conduct of Business Rules which are imposed on the Firm when dealing with Investment Business clients.
The additional burdens on the firm when dealing with Investment Business clients are reviewed in section 0403.5 below.
If a client cannot be regarded as a corporate finance client it does not mean that we cannot act on his behalf.
It means that we will need to issue a full form investment business engagement letter (see 0403.1 above) and the client will be afforded the protection under the FSA for individual investors.
A corporate finance client can be a body corporate, an association, a partnership, an individual, or a group of individuals.
The flowchart in section 0401.3 outlines the FSA considerations for determining whether we can accept an engagement and whether a client can be treated a corporate finance client.
A ‘corporate finance client’ is defined as:
Any client (corporate or otherwise) in relation to whom the firm performs services amounting to corporate finance activities provided he has agreed to the terms of and signed a corporate finance engagement letter issued to him by the firm.
The firm must be satisfied that the client can be regarded as a corporate finance client.
‘Corporate finance activities’ are defined above (Section 0402.5) and in Appendix 1 to this section.
There are no specific tests to enable the firm to be’ satisfied that the client can be regarded as a corporate finance client’.
The Securities and Investments Board (‘SIB’) and the FSA make distinctions between various forms of ‘customer’, including ‘business investors’, ‘execution-only customers’ and ‘experienced investors’.
There are also rules in the context of investment advertisements in respect of people who are ‘sufficiently expert to understand the risks involved’.
The ICAEW does not recognise such distinctions on the grounds that, when determining if a client is a corporate finance client, a chartered accountant should apply similar standards to all clients.
The general approach of the Firm in interpreting the ICAEW rules as to being ‘satisfied that the client can be regarded as a corporate finance client’ is that consideration must be given to the client's knowledge and experience appropriate to the specific activity to be undertaken — ie both the investment activity for which we are advising and the business activity in which the target operates.
It may thus be that a client is a corporate finance client for some activities but not for others.
The issues to consider are similar to those required in order for the Firm to comply with the ‘know your client’ requirements under the Conduct of Business Rules (which are appropriate only to non-corporate finance clients).
These rules include the items listed below.
Those items in italics are particular issues which you should address in deciding whether a client is a corporate finance client.
The following tests, which are essentially judgemental in nature may be appropriate:
Corporate clients
company profile (history, current financial position, markets, management and corporate structure, prospects, forecasts, commitments, risk profile etc)
financial expertise of management
scale of transaction relative to the scale of the client
relevance of the experience and ability of key members of management to the transaction in question and to the business of the target
new aspects introduced by the transaction (eg currency exposure, new markets, cultural differences, regulatory differences etc)
objectives.
Personal clients:
personal situation and investment objectives
financial situation and investment objectives
business, management and financial experience
knowledge of tax, legal and other relevant issues
relevance of experience
age
family influences
0403.5 Additional considerations if a client is not a corporate finance client
As noted above, the firm can still act for a client who is not a corporate finance client.
However, the protections available to the client under the FSA and the rules governing the actions of the Firm are more extensive and, as a result, such clients are likely to arise only rarely.
As far as the actions of the Firm are concerned, if a client is an Investment Business Client, the Conduct of Business Rules of Chapter 2 of the ICAEW Investment Business Regulations apply.
For a Corporate Finance Client, the Rules of Chapter 3 apply instead.
The key additional requirements of Chapter 2 affecting MAS are:
the know your client rules satisfy yourself as to the suitability for the Client of the proposed Investment Business
clients' understanding of risk warn the Client of the extent to which he may be exposed to risk
best advice and best execution take reasonable steps to ensure that a transaction is effected on the best terms available at the time
investments not readily disposablehave regard to the client's knowledge and experience before recommending such an investment (eg buying shares in a private company)
client's best interests a transaction which is fee or commission earning cannot be recommended or effected unless the Firm reasonable believes it to be in the Client's best interests
unsolicited callsthe Firm shall not make unsolicited calls on a person who is not a client for the purpose of obtaining Investment Business work.
It may be necessary for an Investment Business Client to be accompanied to meetings by legal advisers so that we can be sure that the Client fully understands the implications of the issues and advice being discussed.
0404 Information memoranda, investment overviews and tombstones as investment advertisements
0404.1 Investment overviews and Information memoranda as investment advertisements
The issue of Information memoranda and related advertisements in connection with the disposal by clients of businesses is an example of when we issue advertisements as agents for our clients.
The advertisements will generally fall into one of three categories and the FSA approval issues are as follows:
(i)
‘Business opportunity’ advertisements in local or national newspapers
It should be noted that advertisements for the sale of a business (rather than the shares in a business) would typically fall outside the investment advertisement provisions since the individual assets would typically not be ‘investments’ in their own right.
In many cases, it will not be possible to be certain how the sale will ultimately be structured; if there is a chance that a share sale may be arranged to meet the acquiror's needs, it will be necessary to regard all advertisements leading up to sale as investment advertisements.
We would generally issue these advertisements as agent for the vendor.
If what we issue is an investment advertisement, we will need to approve the advertisement under section 57 unless another authorised person can do so.
We would thus have primary responsibility to ensure that the advertisement is factually accurate.
In practice this may not be onerous as very limited factual information is contained in the typical advertisement.
Pro-forma business opportunity advertisements are shown in Chapter 1102.1 and 1102.2.
(ii)
Investment overviews (or anonymous one page profile)
These would be distributed to suitable respondents to the initial advertisement and would generally contain brief details of the business including financial information but still not reveal the name of the vendor or company for sale.
In the majority of cases these would need to be approved as Investment Advertisements.
However, each request should be considered on its own merits on the basis of the criteria set out above.
The flowchart to go through is set out in detail in Appendix 3 to this section.
(iii)
Information memoranda
This generally takes the form of a tailored information memorandum and would be given to prospective purchasers during the course of negotiations.
Our policy is that Information memoranda should be issued only on the instruction of the disposing entity.
The decision tree to go through to decide whether the Information memorandum is an investment advertisement or not is set out in detail in Appendix 3 to this section and should be followed in all cases.
The most common exemption to the need for approval will be that set out in paragraph 9 of SI 1988 No. 316 noted below (0405.43) where the document is being issued to ‘persons sufficiently expert to understand the risks involved’.
It should be noted that this exemption cannot be used if our client is itself an authorised person.
Our agency role and the directors' responsibility should be clearly set out and the procedures relevant for the wider distribution of long form reports followed (see CFM Chapter 5, section 8.8).
0404.2 The appropriate FSA wording in the disclaimer
The attached flowchart (Appendix 3) shows three instances where an Information memorandum or investment overview does not need approval under the FSA as an investment advertisement.
In each of these cases, the appropriate wording to put in the disclaimer used at the start of the document (see Chapter 1103.3) is as follows.
If the document is:
(a)
Sale of 75% or more of the shares of a body corporate to a single buyer
‘…the person to whom this report is being issued in the United Kingdom is a single body corporate, a partnership, a single individual or a group of connected individuals (as defined in Article 5 of The Financial Services Act 1986 (Investment Advertisements)(Exemptions)(No 2) Order 1988)…’
This is the most common form of exemption applied for in Information memoranda.
(b)
being issued to a ‘professional investor’
‘…each person to whom this report is being issued in the United Kingdom is a ‘professional investor’(for the purposes of the Financial Services (Conduct of Business) Rules 1987 of the Securities and Investments Board Limited) or a person who carries on investment business for the purposes of the Financial Services Act 1986…’
(c)
being issued to ‘persons sufficiently expert to understand the risks involved’:
‘…
Each person to whom this report is being issued in the United Kingdom has acknowledged that they are a person defined in Article 9(3) of The Financial Services Act 1986 (Investment Advertisements)(Exemptions) Order 1988…’
ie the recipient has to acknowledge its status prior to receiving the item.
This is normally only suitable for Information Memoranda.
0404.3 Tombstones
Tombstones are classified as investment advertisements issued by the firm on its own behalf if they relate, for example, to mergers, acquisitions, disposals, MBI's or MBO's, new issues, reconstructions or corporate finance advice.
The above requirements for the approval of an investment advertisement issued on behalf of a client will apply to a tombstone, together with the ICAEW rules governing advertising by an authorised firm.
The ICAEW rules (Schedule 2 of the Investment Business Regulations) are summarised in Appendix K to the Financial Services Act Compliance Binder.
In practical terms, the information contained in the tombstone should always be general rather than specific and should be cleared with the parties named therein in advance and we should aim to ensure that publication does not breach the heads of agreement, confidentiality terms, sale and purchase contract or other agreements.
Tombstones which will be circulated within the UK, should carry the legend:
‘KPMG Peat Marwick is authorised by the Institute of Chartered Accountants in England and Wales to carry on investment business’.
For tombstones which will be circulated outside the UK, it is usual to carry the legend:
‘This announcement appears as a matter of record only’
This enables the firm to publish the tombstone without the normal legend ‘KPMG Peat Marwick is authorised by the Institute of Chartered Accountants in England and Wales to carry on investment business’.
0405 Investment advertisements
0405.1 Purpose of rules on investment advertisements
Whether or not a company is carrying on investment business, the regulations on investment advertisements (a fairly wide ranging concept) must be adhered to.
The most important provisions are contained in two sections of the FSA:
Section 47 which deals with the general prohibition on misleading statements and practices; and
Section 57 which, subject to certain exemptions, requires investment advertisements to be approved by a person authorised to conduct investment business.
Sections 47 and 57 should be read together.
If these provisions are not adhered to, ensuing contracts may be unenforceable and criminal sanctions may follow.
Further guidance on investment advertisements is contained in Corporate Finance Practice Bulletin No. 4-90 (October 1990).
Further detailed guidance can also be obtained from CFSU London.
0405.2 Misleading statements and practices
Misleading statements
It is an offence under Section 47(1) of the FSA if a person (including as an adviser):
makes a statement, promise or forecast which he knows to be misleading, false or deceptive or dishonestly conceals any material facts; or
recklessly makes (dishonestly or otherwise) a statement, promise or forecast which is misleading, false or deceptive
if the purpose is to induce, or the person is reckless as to whether it may induce, another person to enter or offer to enter into or refrain from entering or from offering to enter into an investment agreement or to exercise or refrain from exercising any rights conferred by an investment.
The omission of a material fact only involves an offence where that fact was concealed with dishonest intention.
This only applies to statements etc made in or from the UK, if the recipient' is in the UK or if the agreement or rights would be exercised in the UK.
Misleading practices
It is an offence under Section 47(2) to do any act or engage in any course of conduct which creates a false or misleading impression as to the market price or value of any investments if the purpose is to create that impression and thereby induce another person to acquire, dispose of, subscribe for or underwrite those investments or to refrain from doing so or to exercise or refrain from exercising any rights conferred by those investments.
Again, the provisions broadly only apply to acts in the UK and it is a defence to show that a person reasonably believed that his act or conduct would not create and impression that was false or misleading.
0405.3 Definition of investment advertisement
The FSA introduced the new concept of an ‘investment advertisement’ which is defined to mean:
‘…any advertisement inviting persons to enter or offer to enter into an investment agreement or to exercise any rights conferred by an investment to acquire, dispose of, underwrite or convert an investment or containing information calculated to lead directly or indirectly to persons doing so’.
The concept of ‘investment advertisement’ is wide (Section 207(2)) and will embrace written, pictorial and broadcast media, including:
circulars;
press advertising;
television and radio broadcasting; and
most other forms of financial advertising and PR activity.
Subject to certain exemptions contained in Section 58 of the FSA and subsequent statutory instruments, Section 57(1) provides that:
‘…no person other than an authorised person shall issue or cause to be issued an investment advertisement in the United Kingdom unless its contents have been approved by an authorised person’.
‘In the United Kingdom’ shall include investment advertisements issued outside the UK if they are directed at persons in the UK otherwise than in a newspaper etc published and principally circulated outside the UK or broadcast on a media primarily aimed outside the UK.
(Section 207(3)).
If this rule is not complied with, the issuer is guilty of an offence, any subsequent contract etc entered into may be unenforceable and the issuer of the advertisement may face criminal charges and/or fines.
0405.4 Exemptions from the rules on investment advertisements
There are exemptions from the general rule.
The principal exemptions to the general requirement for investment advertisements to be approved are those contained in Section 58 of the FSA, those included in two statutory instruments issued in 1988, SI 316 and SI 716, and two statutory instruments issued in 1992, SI 274 and SI 813.
The following sections discuss those provisions which are most likely to be encountered in practice.
Clients should be advised that requests for advice relating to exemption (other than in straightforward cases) should be provided by their legal advisers.
0405.41 Sale of a body corporate
A client can issue an investment advertisement without approval by an authorised person (eg ourselves) if:
‘…the invitation is made or the information is given by or on behalf of a body corporate, a single individual, or a group of connected individuals for the purposes of or with a view to the acquisition or disposal of shares in a body corporate other than an open ended investment company between parties each of whom is a body corporate, a single individual, or a group of connected individuals, being shares which—
(a)
consist of or include shares carrying 75% or more of the voting rights attributable to share capital which are exercisable in all circumstances at any general meeting of the body corporate; or
(b)
would, together with any shares already held by the person or persons by or on whose behalf the advertisement is being issued, carry not less than that percentage of those voting rights.’
The definitions of a ‘group of connected individuals’ is as for 0402.3 above.
The disposal must be made in one block of at least 75% of the shares in a body corporate.
0405.42 Advertisements relating to certain types of security
The following are exempt from the approval requirement:
interim and preliminary announcements and annual reports or precise extracts from them by listed companies
verbatim extracts from any announcement or any extract made in accordance with the rules of a recognised exchange
most ‘corporate image’ and ‘short term’advertising
issue by a company of its own securities for cash provided it complies with the listing particulars provisions, or, as appropriate, the prospectus provisions.
The publication of interim and preliminary announcements and annual reports or precise extracts from them by listed companies is subject to the exemption contained in Section 58(1) (d)(i) of the FSA, as supplemented by SI 1992 No 813, which exempts from the investment advertisement provisions any document required or permitted to be published by listing rules issued by the London Stock Exchange or any other market specified by the SI, which includes the USM, and most major overseas stock exchanges.
The exemption covers advertisements which consist of verbatim extracts from any announcement or any extract from such an announcement, made in accordance with the rules of the exchange.
For instance, companies are required to release through the Company Announcements Office of the Stock Exchange any information necessary to enable shareholders and the public to appraise the position of the company and to avoid a false market in the company's securities.
SI 1992 No 274 provides a complementary exemption, permitting companies which have ‘relevant securities’ traded or dealt in on the markets indicated above to issue investment advertisements provided that, in broad terms, they do not overtly advertise the company's securities as investments or seek to advertise any other investments or investment services.
A further provision of SI 274 extends the exemption to companies other than listed companies and those listed on specified exchanges, provided that the advertisement meets the general criteria, and consists of or is accompanied by the whole or any part of the body corporate's annual accounts or by the directors' report.
Special provisions also apply to advertisements for listed and unlisted securities.
For example, an advertisement relating to the issue by a company of its own securities for cash is excluded from the advertising restriction provided it complies with the listing particulars provisions, or, as appropriate, the prospectus provisions.
0405.43 Persons sufficiently expert to understand the risks involved
This exemption is available only to unauthorised persons issuing advertisements.
KPMG, for example, being an authorised person, would not be permitted to take advantage of the exemption so as to avoid the need to approve an advertisement (or Information memorandum) issued in its own name.
This exemption is widely used to exempt the distribution of confidential material such as long form reports, business plans and investment memoranda to small groups of potential investors.
This exemption cannot be used if the client itself is an Authorised Person under the FSA.
This is one of the more widely used exemptions and is contained in SI 1988 No 316.
Persons sufficiently expert to understand the risks involved include:
authorised persons;
exempted persons;
a person whose business or employment involves the dissemination of information concerning investments through newspapers, journals, magazines etc;
a body corporate which has more than 20 members (or is the subsidiary of a holding company which has more than 20 members) and it, or any of its holding companies or subsidiaries has called up share capital or net assets of not less than 500,000
a body corporate with fewer than 20 members and it, or any of its holding companies or subsidiaries, has share capital or net assets of not less than 5 million;
an unincorporated association with net assets of not less than 5 million; and
directors, officers and employees of such bodies whilst acting in their professional capacity, whose employment involves them in investment business activities.
It should be noted that the term ‘persons sufficiently expert to understand the risks involved’ is somewhat more narrowly defined than might initially be assumed.
It does not, for example, cover experienced investors acting in their personal capacity.
Its main use, therefore, is for the issue of advertisements to incorporated companies of a reasonable size.
SI 1992 No 813 contains a similar exemption dealing with ‘advertisements directed at informing or influencing persons of a particular kind’.
Whilst the exemption is available to both authorised and unauthorised persons, the types of investor to which the exemption applies are an even narrower group than those envisaged by SI 316, encompassing, in broad terms, only professional investors acting in that capacity.
0405.44 Other
The approval rule of section 57 also does not apply, broadly, to investment advertisements issued by:
the UK government, UK local authorities, UK (regional) development agencies the Bank of England and other central banks and international bodies of which the UK is a member;
a person outside the UK in the course of lawful investment business in that country
recognised investment exchanges (eg LSE), clearing houses, Lloyd's, listed money market institutions and certain miscellaneous persons
a body corporate (other than open-ended investment companies) to persons it reasonably believes to be members or creditors or holders of other investments issued by it (or another group company) and it contains only an invitation relating to that investment
a body corporate in connection with an employee share scheme
a body corporate to another body corporate in the same group
Further exemptions and detailed information on the above exemptions are contained in the FSA and in the later Statutory Instruments referred to above and can be obtained from CFSU, London.
All the exemptions are also covered in greater detail in Corporate Finance Briefing I.7 ‘Exclusion from investment advertisement regulations’.
0405.5 Restrictions on the use of the KPMG Peat Marwick name in investment advertisements
The terms of all engagement letters should preclude the use of the firm's name in investment advertisements and other public documents without the express consent of the firm in writing.
References to our name will be appropriate only where we have provided a report for publication in a public document or circular, or (as provided for in the engagement letter) have otherwise consented to the ‘form and context’ in which our name is to appear.
It is not appropriate for information from confidential comfort letters and, in particular, information contained in long-form reports, to be quoted in investment advertisements and other public documents without our express consent.
Particular care is needed where reports are prepared and it is believed that a person other than the client will have access to the report and may seek to rely upon it (eg a long form report prepared for a vendor prior to sale).
Detailed instructions on the form of the engagement letter and the report and its covering letter have been issued separately in the CFM and queries should be discussed with CFSU, London.
0405.6 Approval procedure for investment advertisements
Whenever possible the firm should avoid having to approve investment advertisements leaving this task to other advisers.
Approving an investment advertisement is an onerous obligation, requiring the approver:
to be satisfied that the contents of the advertisement are in compliance with the SIB Conduct of Business Rules on investment advertising;
to obtain confirmation from the preparer of the advertisement and the issuer of the advertisement (if other than the preparer) that to the best of his knowledge and belief the facts contained in the advertisement are true and accurate and will remain so during the currency of the advertisement;
to be satisfied that the preparer of the advertisement has evidence in his possession to support those facts;
to be satisfied that any statement, promise or forecast forming part of the advertisement is not misleading in the form and context in which it appears.
The KPMG approval process for investment advertisements issued on behalf of clients (not on the firm's own behalf) is set out as a flowchart in Appendix 4.
The issue of Information memoranda and investment overviews are dealt with separately.
The key steps for an investment advertisement are as follows:
initiate the required form (see chapter 1102.3) when approving, exempting or advising on investment advertisements
an advertisement should be approved only if it complies, in all material respects, with the SIB rules (see checklist of contents contained in the Interim Accounts Checklist (Form 825)) and when the working papers are complete (including verification and recording of all facts)
review the draft investment advertisement to ensure that, as a whole, it is not misleading (as defined above)
the operational and reporting standards applicable to corporate finance work should be followed for assignments associated with the approval of investment advertisements.
In particular, a pre-issuance review should be carried out, before signing a consent letter to the issue of the advertisement, in accordance with the CFM.
the formal authorisation wording to appear on the advertisement itself is as follows:
‘The contents of this statement have been approved for the purposes of Section 57 of the Financial Services Act 1986 by KPMG Peat Marwick which is authorised by the Institute of Chartered Accountants in England and Wales to carry on investment business.
[Past performance is not necessarily an indication of future performance.]’
The advertisement should also state the firm's address.
We would not normally insist on the wording in square brackets where the client's legal advisers consider that the words are not required.
use the following standard form of wording for the consent letter:
‘We hereby give our consent for the purposes of Section 57(1) of the Financial Services Act 1986 to the issue of the investment advertisement attached hereto, dated and signed for the purpose of identification’.
every investment advertisement approved by KPMG Peat Marwick should be signed in his/her own name and dated by the approving partner
file the investment advertisement approval form, together with a copy of the advertisement bearing the approving partner's original signature, as specified
send copies of advertisements to CFSU for post issuance review
send a copy of approved advertisements, signed in his own name and dated by the approving partner (who should be the engagement partner), accompanied by the consent letter and the appropriate form:
in the case of London office, directly to the Head of Public Relations in the Marketing Advisory Group (formerly National Marketing Department); or
in cases other than London office, to the local compliance liaison partner.
a copy of the advertisement must be retained for at least three years.
0406 Other FSA regulations
It is policy of the Corporate Finance Group not to hold client money, title documents or custodial investments because the necessary systems, procedures and expertise are not in place.
Company secretarial department (St Albans and Stoke offices) have performed these functions in the past.
0406.1 Investment business clients' money
Specific rules apply as set out in section IV of the Financial Services Act Compliance Binder.
In broad terms, these state that:
if money for investment is made payable to the firm, it should be returned to the client to be made payable to the correct third party or, if this is not possible due to extreme circumstances, the cheque should be endorsed and forwarded immediately to the third party
cheques payable to third parties should be despatched as quickly as possible
if a cheque cannot be endorsed or forwarded, a bank account should be opened in the name ‘KPMG Peat Marwick as nominee for [name]’ or ‘KPMG Peat Marwick in trust for [name]’.
Money for investment should never be processed through the firm's bank accounts.
Clients' money rules have also been issued by the ICAEW (with effect from 1 April 1992) for non investment business clients' money, which is defined as:
Money of any currency which a Firm holds or receives for or from a client and which is not immediately due and payable on demand to the firm for its own account and money held by the firm as stakeholder.
Compliance with the associated rules should be discussed with Compliance Unit, London.
0406.2 Title documents
Specific rules apply as set out in section V of the Financial Services Act Compliance Binder.
Title documents are documents of title and certificates evidencing title to the following types of investments and which are in the possession or control of the firm in connection with or for the purposes of its investment business:
shares
debentures
government and public securities
instruments entitling to shares or securities
certificates representing securities
units in collective investment schemes.
Detailed procedures for safeguarding against loss or damage and recording title documents must be put in place.
0406.3 Custodial investments
Specific rules apply as set out in section V of the Financial Services Act Compliance Binder.
Custodial Investments are essentially bearer instruments and readily disposable investments held for a client and which are neither the subject of a discretionary management agreement nor held in connection with any personal appointment and which the firm can sell without the client needing to authorise such sale.
The requirements as to title documents also apply to custodial investments, but there are additional requirements for, inter alia, regular valuations for internal reporting purposes.
0406.4 Regulated fee income — reporting
Specific rules apply as set out in section VI of the Financial Services Act Compliance Binder.
Regulated fee income arises when a regulated service is provided as a stand alone service.
For corporate finance, regulated income arises if:
the service relates to specific shares in the context of a merger, acquisition or disposal and advice has been given on the merits of the transaction or a transaction arranged; or
the service is a share valuation exercise for a disposal yet to take place.
Regulated fee income must be recorded so that the aggregate for the firm can be computed and reported to the ICAEW.
There are also further rules if the firm receives commission income.
0407 Offences under the FSA
0407.1 Compliance with FSA
Carrying on investment business without the appropriate authorisation, except where professionals are dealing with professionals, is not only a criminal offence but may render unenforceable any contract entered into.
The importance of compliance with Conduct of Business Rules and other statutory provisions lies in the fact that a loss of authorisation will mean that an investment business (such as KPMG) will no longer be able to carry on its investment activities; indeed liability to damages may be incurred for losses suffered by investors through breach of Conduct of Business Rules.
0407.2 Market manipulation
Section 47(2) of the FSA makes it an offence for a person to carry out any act or engage in any course of conduct which creates a false or misleading impression about the market in, or the price or value of, any investment.
There has to be dishonest intention and a deliberate course of conduct intended to create the impression with a view to inducing the acquisition, disposal or underwriting of, or the exercise of rights in relation to, investments.
The same would apply to attempts to persuade someone to refrain from doing so.
The burden of proof is shifted on to the defendant and although the prosecution does not need to prove that the accused intended that the impression be false and misleading, the defendant may need to establish that he reasonably believed that it would not be so.
There are exemptions for the stabilisation of the price of new issues, for example, in the Eurobond market.
0407.3 Unsolicited calls regulations (or ‘cold-calling’ regulations)
Under the ICAEW rules, firms are prohibited from telephoning or making a personal call on a prospective client (an’ unsolicited call’) which is in relation to‘audit or other financial reporting work’.
‘Other financial reporting work’ is not defined by the ICAEW but they give some guidance by stating that other financial reporting assignments include assignments requiring a professional opinion or a reporting assignment where a document has been prepared in contemplation that a third party may rely on it.
Hence, corporate advisory services such as deal management and similar work are capable of being promoted using cold calling techniques in addition to using other permitted methods.
The rules are essentially that, for deal management services:
Acting for a buyer or a seller
an initial call to ascertain whether a business is for sale or a potential buyer is interested in the opportunity would appear to be permitted.
Arrangements should be made during this call for any follow up call to be made by MAS (not by the target) to reduce the risk of any further call either being deemed a ‘cold’ call or harassment.
General
promotional or technical material may be sent to non-clients by mail (not by fax or telex).
A follow up personal visit or telephone call is permitted.
one letter introducing the firm and its services may be sent to other professional advisers.
This may be followed by a visit or telephone call only if such follow up relates to the needs of the clients of the professional adviser, not the needs of the professional adviser itself.
one unsolicited call or visit can be made to a non-client.
The ICAEW rules do state that we should, under no various circumstances, promote or seek to promote our services in such a way or such an extent as to amount to harassment of a prospective client.
The content of any cold' contact must meet ethical constraints on advertising, fees, disparaging statements etc issued by the ICAEW from time to time.
05 Selling
Contents
0501
Introduction
.1
Introduction
.2
Circumstances in which MAS may be acting as advisers in a disposal
.3
The MAS role
0502
Planning and proposal
.1
Standards of work
.2
Planning
.3
Formal proposals
.4
Engagement letters
.5
Fees
0503
Sale strategy
.1
The options
.2
Sales strategy
0504
Information memorandum & Investment Overview
.1
Introduction
.2
Investment Overview
.3
Information memorandum
0505
Operational procedures
.1
Introduction
.2
Research
.3
Advertising
.4
Contacting acquirers
.5
Selecting the preferred bidder
.6
Declining offers
.7
Return of information memorandum
0506
Negotiations and the offer
.1
Introduction
.2
Tactics
0507
Heads of agreement
.1
Introduction
.2
Accounting policies
0508
Completion
.1
Introduction
.2
Sale and purchase agreement
.3
Completion accounts
0509
Using the International Network
.1
Introduction
.2
Approach
.3
Basic concepts
.4
Exclusive sell situations
.5
Third party sell situations
0501 Introduction
0501.1 Introduction
This chapter outlines the procedures and recommended practice to be adopted when engaged to sell a company or business.
The chapter is presented in the order in which the activities involved in selling a company will normally be encountered.
0501.2 Circumstances in which MAS may be acting as advisers in a disposal
The majority of disposals have historically been provided to:
owners or owner managers of private companies, in many cases non-clients, who for personal financial reasons are seeking to realise the capital tied up in their company; and
subsidiaries of groups, often clients, which do not have adequate in-house corporate finance experience, where the subsidiary no longer fits with the group's corporate strategy and, for listed groups, where the transaction is smaller than one their normal advisers would be used to.
0501.3 The MAS role
The MAS role is one of deal management:
‘assisting our client with all aspects of the transaction- assessing the prospects for sale — identifying likely purchasers —‘packing’ the business for sale — marketing the opportunity — selecting potential purchasers -advising on deal structure and assisting in negotiation and contract drafting.’
The deal management role also involves the co-ordination of the delivery of other professional services including those provided by the KPMG Business Units.
In addition to providing this overall service, we may provide ad hoc advice to vendors in the following areas:—
Valuations or ‘pricing analysis’(see Chapter 08)
Reviewing and advising on alternative options to a sale
Advising on sales strategy
Advising on the preparation of an Information memorandum
Identifying potential purchasers for sale opportunities
Advising on deal structures
0502 Planning and proposal
0502.1 Standards of work
The general standards relating to the acceptance of new clients are set out in the CFM and in Chapter 02.
Of particular relevance in determining whether to accept a disposal engagement are:
Engagement risk
The risk to the firm's image in the financial community and the industry if it is associated with adverse criticism in a large or well-publicised transaction.
This may arise as a consequence of an unsuccessful or ill-considered approach to a potential purchaser or from the nature (or financial condition) of a prospective client and the motive for requesting us to carry out the work.
Independence
The firm's independence may be thought to be compromised because of the fee arrangements or because of the relationship with the client.
Conflicts of interest
Where the purchaser and seller are both clients of the firm, their attention should be drawn to this fact at an early stage of the preliminary discussions concerning the proposed transaction.
Appropriate measures should be taken to ensure that staff working for the vendors are not involved in work performed for the purchaser or vice versa.
In addition, the engagement letter should include acknowledgement and acceptance of the situation from both parties and confirmation of the firm's independence.
Capacity in which MAS acts
The firm should not normally act in the role of principal during the course of divestment negotiations, but only in a professional or agency role.
The client for whom the firm is acting should be clearly identified and care should be taken to ensure that third parties do not form the impression that the firm is advising them or acting for them when this is not the case.
Further, members of MAS should not conclude on the appropriateness of a course of action under consideration; the firm must maintain an independent and objective attitude throughout the engagement.
MAS should provide clear advice on alternative courses of action.
It should always be the client who decides how to proceed.
Responsibility
Often, the acquisition agreement requires that the seller warrants the ‘correctness’ of the financial statements to the purchaser.
In all cases, financial statements are representations of the entity and its management and should never be considered those of the firm.
The contents of the Information memorandum should be excluded from any warranty statement.
Financial statements
Although responsibility for the financial statements lies with the entity and its management, in order to mitigate engagement risk it will be necessary for MAS to be satisfied with the information presented in the financial statements of the entity being divested.
For whom MAS acts
Normally MAS would act for the shareholders or their appointed representatives.
If instructions are received from a senior executive who is also the principal shareholder of an entity, it should be established, preferably in writing, whether the engagement is for the entity or for the individual acting in a private capacity.
The firm is not precluded from accepting instructions from an individual shareholder acting on his own behalf, but the potential for a conflict of interests should be carefully considered.
The percentage shareholding and status of the person appointing the firm to act has clear responsibilities under both the CA 1985 (S151) and the FSA.
Selling price
If the client proposes an asking price which appears even after investigation to be unrealistic or unreasonable, it may be preferable to withdraw from the engagement.
It is also desirable to establish that the owners of the business to be sold are not likely to have irreconcilable differences among themselves over what the selling price should be.
Start-ups
The firm should not normally act for a client where the divestment is of a start-up business.
The KPMG International Network
Some engagements will require the involvement of other offices in the KPMG network.
The standards in this chapter and elsewhere in the guide are to be followed on such engagements.
Further guidance is given in the handbook.
0502.2 Planning
0502.21 Preliminary assessment of the disposal
Before a marketing strategy, fee quote or detailed proposal can be considered, a preliminary assessment of the entity to be disposed of should be carried out.
This may take place at the first meeting with the client, though for larger assignments a site visit and access to confidential material may be necessary before such an assessment can be properly made.
It is inevitable, however, that the owner will still require an indication as to price expectation and fees at the first meeting.
It is necessary, therefore, to be well prepared for the initial meeting.
Useful and readily available key information on the business may include:
filed accounts and statutory information
text line searches
industry background papers
material from previous assignments in the sector
research on major potential purchasers and competitors
confidential documentation and sales brochures provided by the client.
0502.22 The initial meeting
The following issues should be covered in the initial meeting:
Ownership of the entity and what may be for sale.
(What percentage of the business are we acting for?)
Existing or prior contact with the firm
Reasons for the disposal and possible alternative options
An outline of the business and its financial position — understand patterns/trends .
Are these company or industry specific.
The competitive edge of the business — product developments
The importance of the vendors to the business and their plans following the intended disposal.
(Are these realistic?)
Initial suggestions for possible purchasers
Details of any previous attempted sales and any approaches received from potential purchasers
Confidentiality constraints and their impact on circulation of the Information memoranda.
There may be a trade-off between price maximisation and restricting the circulation of the information memorandum.
Critical areas and identification of any deal breaking issues
Quality of accounting records and standing of auditors
Assessment of maintainable earnings (for example, after adjusting for so called excessive shareholder directors' remuneration)
Potential revaluations/devaluations to balance sheet items
The client's existing financial position and details of other advisers
The client's price expectations and if necessary our price expectation
Fee arrangements (see Section 0502.5 below)
If the disposal plans appear viable the following should be discussed:
The likely timetable
The various disposal marketing strategies available (see Section 0503 below) and those which at this stage appear most suitable.
The suggested format of the information memorandum and the use of the entity's own promotional material (videos, brochures and photographs)
The volume of work and dedication of time from the client which will be required during the disposal process, particularly at due diligence and disclosure stages.
The distractions from the running of the business and the adverse impact on profit performance.
Disposal related work may be allocated to, say, a sub-committee of the board to minimise disruptions.
The level of confidentiality required; establishing who and when directors and staff will be informed; security procedures such as confidential faxes, deliveries and use of home addresses.
The client's existing lawyers and the need for experienced commercial lawyers
The involvement of other KPMG specialists (for example, tax, actuarial services and industry specialists).
The involvement of third party specialists.
Use of the M&A International network.
Further guidance is given in the handbook.
An aide memoire covering basic client data which should be obtained at an initial meeting is set out at 1109.1.
0502.23 Planning and work progress documentation.
A structure to the assignment should be established from the outset.
This should encompass an outline Information memorandum, the necessary depth for purchaser research and the various milestones and associated budget.
0502.3 Formal proposals
On some disposal assignments it will be necessary to make formal oral and written presentations.
Full use should be made of visual aids and internal specialist advice should be taken.
Naturally each presentation should be tailored to the specific circumstances.
0502.4 Engagement letters
0502.41 Introduction
The firm's general standards relating to engagement letters are contained in Chapter 03.
In summary, the steps to be taken are:—
obtain a corporate finance engagement letter (‘CFEL’), if not already in place; and
agree the terms of the engagement in writing.
0502.42 CFEL
Work can only be undertaken if an FSA engagement letter (usually a CFEL) is in place.
This requirement is covered in more detail in Chapter 04.
Whilst preliminary discussions with vendors may take place before terms of engagement have been agreed, a formal CFEL must be obtained before any document preparation begins.
Compliance unit in London office maintains a central register of all corporate finance engagement letters obtained by the firm.
Refer to the compliance unit if the client is an audit client or if there is a possibility that the UK firm has carried out any work for the client in the past.
0502.43 Terms of engagement
The terms of engagement letter should aim to set out unambiguously our understanding of the clients requirements and the nature of the services and assistance we intend to provide.
Once agreed by the client in writing, this letter will establish the instructions and terms of reference and avoid misunderstandings as to MAS's and KPMG's role and responsibilities.
If it becomes apparent that the scope of the work required by the terms of engagement will need to be modified, the client should be notified immediately, and agreement reached in the revised terms.
The revisions should preferably be confirmed in writing.
The engagement letter will need to be tailored to each disposal assignment.
For some assignments with less experienced clients it will be appropriate to set out in detail and at some length the scope of the MAS and KPMG involvement at each stage; for more experienced clients a shorter approach may be appropriate.
Examples of the two approaches are included at Section 1101.3 and Section 1101.4.
The fee structure has not been included in either of these letters and is discussed in paragraph 0502.5 and section 4 of the handbook.
A comprehensive check list for matters to be dealt with in the terms of engagement letter is set out in Section 03.
Of particular relevance to disposal engagements are the following:
Identity of the client.
The extent to which confidentiality must be maintained.
The sale strategy (see Section 0503).
Responsibility for the contents of the Information memorandum (see below).
Fee arrangements (see Section 0502.5).
Where the engagement includes advice or assistance in the preparation of an information memorandum, particular care may be needed to ensure that the client understands the purpose and nature of the document and the extent of his own responsibility.
Responsibility for the Information memorandum and Investment Overview (see below) is always that of the client.
This remains so even when, as usually happens, MAS provides substantial assistance in the preparation of the documents.
It is vital that this point is understood by all parties concerned and clearly set out in the terms of engagement letter.
The client must also represent to the firm, and must define in writing to each recipient of sales information the limitations of the firm's role.
The only exception to this is any financial statements with which the firm is already publicly associated.
0502.5 Fees
0502.51 Policy
Setting of fees is the responsibility of the client partner and should be clearly set out in any engagement letter.
It is MAS policy to charge fees on a basis consistent with that stated in Chapter 3 of the CFM.
It is not MAS practice to fix fees solely contingent on the price obtained for the company; however, acting on a part fixed/part contingent basis is acceptable provided it is judged that the interest in selling is genuine, the price expectation is realistic and there is likely to be at least one buyer.
In such circumstances MAS will usually negotiate a fixed ‘commitment fee’, possibly to cover the cost of preparing any documentation.
Such a fee may be payable in advance, for example where the client is a private company with no previous contact with KPMG.
Any tax, structuring, supporting accountancy, pensions, MC and other professional advice should always be non-contingent and this should be clearly stated in the engagement letter.
It is also usually appropriate to emphasise that this work will be carried out by non — MAS teams and will be governed by separate terms of engagement.
Fees will normally be based on time taken at premium rates to reflect the skills and responsibilities of the assignment or on some mix of fixed and contingency fee.
The scale of fee should be commensurate with the risk undertaken, except where this could be detrimental to the establishment of a long term recurring client relationship, in so far as such opportunity presents itself when acting for a vendor client.
For example, where work done does not result in a transaction, it is open to the client partner to discount the fee.
0502.52 Fee Structure
The objectives in setting a fee structure must be to:
set a competitive and attractive fee structure which secures the assignment;
receive additional reward commensurate with any additional risk undertaken;
recover debts in full; and
at least cover costs in the event of a withdrawal.
To achieve these objectives it will be necessary to tailor the fee structure to the circumstances of each disposal.
On some occasions a straight time basis will be appropriate; on others a high element of contingent fee will be required by the vendor.
0502.53 Time based fee structures
The time based structure retains an element of flexibility in that the fee will be more of an estimate than a fixed price quotation.
It should be remembered that in the majority of cases involving the sale of ‘family’ companies, failure to conclude a transaction may place even our TIME based fees in jeopardy as the client simply will not have the funds to pay.
The vendor will, however, expect any estimate to be reasonably accurate and may ask for our fees to be capped at a certain level.
All such estimates and quotes should reflect:
the marketing strategy
ease and speed of sale
vendors' competence in providing accurate information and self-presentation
specific complexities
use of the International Network
It should be borne in mind that many vendors are used to paying their accountants an audit fee of only £5-10,000 per annum.
If the level of fees is of concern, particularly in the event of a failure to sell, it can be helpful to break down costs and adopt a staged approach.
The client can then assess the probable costs of abandoning the disposal at each stage of the process should a sale begin to look unlikely.
It should be remembered that failure to negotiate on our own behalf will undermine any confidence the client has in our ability to negotiate well for him.
The scheduling of payments should also be covered at an early stage.
MAS policy is to seek an early payment normally on completion of the Information memorandum.
This acts as a commitment payment and demonstrates the seriousness of the vendors confirming that it is not their intention just to test the water and withdraw.
For vendors who have had no previous contact with KPMG and who appear not to be totally committed to the proposed transaction, consideration should be given to requesting an up front commitment to cover set up costs of the job (preliminary buyer research etc) and as contribution to the costs of preparing any documentation.
The disposal process can be drawn out (six to nine months is quite possible) and it is desirable to seek a further part payment, normally on heads of agreement or perhaps by monthly instalment before final settlement on completion.
A structure may be:
This may not be possible if the vendors do not have available funds until after receiving the sale proceeds, in which case a risk premium needs to be built into the fee structure because of contingent nature of the job.
For some time based fees, it is extremely important to cover the payment of MAS fees in the event of failure to sell or unreasonable withdrawal by the vendor either before or after an acceptable offer has been received.
MAS policy is to recover costs in full in the case of an unreasonable withdrawal; in the event of failure to sell a small discount below our time costs may be appropriate, particularly if MAS is likely to be reappointed at a later date to have another attempt at the sale.
0502.54 Contingency fee structure
Many of the issues relating to time based fees also apply to contingency fee structures.
It is difficult to give precise guidelines for contingency fee structures as these will vary significantly between assignments but in addition to the points raised in 0502.53 above the following points should be considered:
The contingency premium must be commensurate with the risk undertaken
There must be a reasonable probability of finding a buyer
The vendor should have the right to withdraw from the transaction without liability to our outstanding costs if interest above a reserve price (for example, net asset value) fails to materialise.
The agreement of a mutually acceptable reserve price is key.
MAS: outstanding costs should be recoverable if a sale falls through either because the vendors voluntarily withdraw from the sale process or because the status of the vendor company is materially different from that disclosed in the Information memorandum.
There is also a temptation to accept unrealistic contingent terms in the light of previous successes.
It does not take long for the difficulties encountered in finding a buyer at the contingent price during earlier disposals to be forgotten.
A detached approach to setting contingent fees is therefore essential.
0502.55 Commission band for structures
A hybrid form of non-contingent cost based fee arrangement is to quote on a time basis for all work on the basis that the fee is payable whether or not the transaction completes in addition to arranging for a ‘success fee’ to be payable eg. a fixed amount on any completion and/or a sliding scale based on some monitor of performance.
0502.56 Example fee structures
Examples of fee structures are set out in Chapter 11:
Time based quote with minor add on 1105.1
Time based with a low quote and major add-ons 1105.2
Time based with fail/success adjustments 1105.3
Contingent basis 1105.4
Commission basis 1105.5
0502.57 Other issues
There can be a temptation to quote too low a fee on the grounds of:
competitive circumstances
current lack of work
prestige assignment
disposal for existing prestige client
These are easy excuses which undermine the MAS high added value policy and should be resisted.
It is nearly always impossible to raise the first quote.
M&A work is different to many other more traditional types of work in that it normally concludes in a completion meeting.
When quoting fees, which increasingly will be more than just time based, the requirement for them to be paid at the completion meeting, like other advisers and financiers, should be stipulated.
All aspects of the fee structure must be clearly set out in the engagement letter.
0503 Sale Strategy
0503.1 The options
The question of whether the proposed disposal is in the best interests of the client and when the business should best be sold should be addressed at an early stage.
Alternative options (MBO, flotation etc) and the timing of these options need to be considered.
In some circumstances delaying the sale by six or more months may produce a significantly higher price (for example, where substantial profits growth in anticipated but not yet realised), although the temptation of ‘jam tomorrow’ should be resisted.
MAS will normally conduct a ‘strategic review’ in which alternative options are considered.
Arising out of this must be a clear statement of the client's objectives from the transaction and a considered judgement whether the proposed structure will achieve this.
The statement of objectives will normally be far more rounded than merely a price discussion.
It should encompass the life style ambitions of the vendor and care should be taken to take into account the views of the vendors immediate family as these are likely to have significant impact.
Any advice given on corporate strategy should emphasise the importance of strategic considerations (in addition, where appropriate, to identify any opportunistic considerations) in determining divesture programmes.
The MAS valuation of the business will also be of critical importance in the evaluation of alternative options.
The valuation is considered further below.
0503.2 Sales strategy
The appropriate sale strategy will evolve from consideration the clients' objectives and from our assessment of the valuation of the business, the degree of interest it is likely to attract, and deal structuring considerations.
0503.21 Valuation and pricing analysis
Critical to the sales strategy and marketing of the company is valuation and pricing analysis, which is used to advise the client of the likely realisable value range for the business.
A valuation of the business has to be undertaken before pricing analysis since it will not be possible to advise on an initial asking price unless a reasonable estimate of current market value can be established.
The valuation of the business should be performed in accordance with the Valuation section of this manual (see Chapter 08) and should take into account factors particular to the disposal, such as the likely number of potential purchasers (as restricted by the vendor's requirements for confidentiality) and desired speed of sale and general market conditions.
No report should be issued since this is an internal document.
The valuation becomes a benchmark against which to judge sellers' expectations and offers received.
In those cases where the use of a guide price is deemed sensible, the pricing analysis will determine the estimated asking price which will generally be given as a range of values.
This will normally be wider and higher than the range associated with the valuation since the likelihood of a buyer seeking a subsequent price reduction during the negotiating process will need to be anticipated.
A guide price is usually necessary where potential buyers will not be able to gauge the price expectations of the vendors from the information supplied.
If a client proposes an asking price which appears unrealistic or unreasonable, it may be preferable to withdraw from the engagement rather than to be involved in protracted negotiations which are likely to have little prospect of success.
0503.22 Understanding the business and the vendors' intentions
An overall grasp of the business and the vendors' intentions must be established.
This should be carried out under the guidelines set out in the CFM for Quick Appraisals (Chapter 5).
In addition, for MAS assignments, the following aspects which will be important to a potential buyer must be considered:
Key non-financial matters:
Is the vendor committed to and clear as to the reason for a sale?
How key is the vendor to maintaining the profitability of the business?
Will the vendor continue to work for the company after it is sold?
Is there over reliance on one customer, one product, or one market?
What are the current developments in the company's principal markets?
What is the competitive edge which the company has and is this sustainable?
Key financial matters:
How accurate and reliable are the management accounts?
What are the maintainable profits of the business?
Do expenses include non-recurring items or non-standard items eg management charges, substantial pension payments, items of personal expenditure (vendor's gardener, golf club subscription etc), and research and marketing expenditure in advance of new product launches?(see Chapter 08 for a more complete list).
Is the balance sheet presentation correct?
Should loans be classified as capital?
Is property and plant at net book value or are they included at current valuation or depreciated replacement cost?
Where significant work is envisaged in determining these factors MAS have in the past negotiated a separate investigation fee for a report on the business which can be used to highlight and rectify or address weaknesses prior to any investigation by the purchaser.
MC Groups may be of assistance.
Where such a ‘Healthcheck’ is carried out, care should be taken to ensure that the report addressed to the client only that the client is made aware that it is not a comprehensive list of all matters to be addressed prior to sale and that implementation of recommendations does not necessarily mean that management should provide any warranties on the matter.
Refer to the CFM for further guidance.
0503.23 Deal structuring
The types of deals acceptable to the vendors should be considered and structured to achieve the maximum after tax return.
The following points should be addressed:
Will the vendor be prepared to dispose of less then 100% if suitable minority shareholder safeguards are agreed?
Will the vendor take cash, shares, or deferred consideration (loan notes)?
What is the vendor's attitude to an earnout arrangement?
Is there an opportunity for an offshore trust structure to be applied to the vendor's advantage?
These and other structuring considerations are considered in more detail in Section 0609.
Early determination of vendors' requirements and matching with their market feasibility is essential.
0503.24 Marketing strategy
There are a number of methods which can be used to market a business.
The methods can be usefully categorised into strict auction, more flexible sale timetable and advertising.
The appropriate method will depend on the business being sold, the confidentiality required, and the anticipated demand from purchasers.
Most vendors have detailed knowledge of activity in their sector.
This should be used to enhance MAS's own research results.
Detailed procedural matters are set out in section 0505.
Strict auction or flexible timetable arrangements?
A strict auction is appropriate if there are a considerable number of interested parties or it is known that there are several parties determined to acquire the business.
Unfavourable economic conditions and the existence of overseas potential purchasers tend to lengthen the sale process and the timetable should allow for these factors.
Having to move an offer deadline date backward due to a lack of attractive offers will place a vendor in a weak position.
Flexible arrangements are therefore more advisable if it is likely to prove difficult to sell the company or general economic circumstances are unfavourable.
It may be preferable to be silent regarding the date for expressions of interest until such time as a number of parties have expressed such interest.
Care should be taken to avoid key information being released at a late stage in the process which therefore weakens the vendor's controlling hand.
Advertising or research based mailshot or both?
A Financial Times advertisement can produce a large response (70-100) of which only very few will be serious purchasers.
It can suggest lack of confidence in the opportunity and even worse the vendors and potential purchasers can assume we are suggesting the opportunity is a forced sale.
Consider advertising in trade press or special features (eg FT supplement) in order to obtain maximum coverage.
Advertising in overseas countries may not be culturally acceptable (see 1102.4).
Many potential purchasers can be easily identified with minimum cost using research.
The ABN, MAS Buyers database and broker contacts are also cost effective methods of finding purchasers.
(See section 10)
Large or restricted circulation?
A circulation in excess of 10 will probably lead to a leak within the entity's trade sector; a circulation of less than 5 may not result in competitive bidding.
Second guessing the acquisition criteria of Chief Executives can be unfruitful.
The careful selection of the most logical buyers in order to reduce circulation size can therefore be a wasted effort.
If confidentiality is an issue the most effective approach may be to discuss brief, anonymous details of the opportunity with possible interested parties and use their responses as a basis for preparing a shortlist.
In most cases vendors have extremely conservative attitudes towards contacting potential interested parties.
Care should be taken not to accept an overly conservative brief merely to pamper a difficult client.
In order to obtain the best price (if this is the prime objective) a full researched contact list should be undertaken.
Otherwise consider ranking (with the client) the possible purchasers in order of their likely interest in the transaction and then approach on this basis.
The International M & A Network
The International M & A Network should be used where it is believed that the opportunity has international attractions.
The cost implications and the Network procedures are set out at 0509 below and in the handbook and should be carefully considered.
Information memorandum presentation
The standard MAS covers may be adequate.
Summerhouse Communications can assist if special covers or more extensive printed documents with illustrations and photographs are required; the cost effectiveness of each opportunity must be considered.
0503.25 Deal timetable
The deal timetable may be rigid, as in the case of an auction style sale or it may be flexible.
A timetable for an orderly sale with a longer period for developing relationships with purchasers than may be necessary in a rushed sale is included in Section 1102.5.
An auction timetable is included in the transmittal letter for an information memorandum set out in Section 1102.12.
0504 Information Memorandum and Investment Overview
0504.1 Introduction
The Investment Overview is an anonymous document which is used to arouse the initial interest of potential acquirers.
The Information memorandum (or ‘corporate profile’) is a document containing confidential information about the business to be sold.
It is provided to a limited number of recipients who have entered into a confidentiality agreement and should enable potential acquirers to decide whether the business fits their acquisition criteria and whether to pursue their initial interest.
It does not purport to be a fully comprehensive report but merely to provide information on key issues which may be relevant to potential investors.
Tailor the document to the requirements of the market.
It is also used together with any supplemental information to determine the terms and quantum of any indicative offer they may make.
Both documents are marketing documents, not merely factual ones, and effort should be made to present the company in the most favourable manner.
These documents together with covering letters enable MAS and the vendor to control the sale process, something which should be used to maximum advantage to help enable an acceptable/full price in line with the agreed objectives to be achieved.
As stated above the responsibility for the Information memorandum and Investment Overview is always that of the client.
It is important to make it clear to the client that any material inaccuracies in the documentation will be discovered at the due diligence stage, when there is a real risk that an offer might be withdrawn, and almost certainly will be materially adjusted.
Information memoranda should not be sent to interested parties until a signed confidentiality letter has been received.
An example letter is set out in 1103.3.
Care must be taken to ensure that any specific confidentiality concerns of the client are addressed.
It may be necessary to involve a commercial lawyer.
The confidentiality letter should cover both the memorandum and also any additional information which might be subsequently released.
On larger sales or ones with special confidentiality considerations it may be appropriate to prepare additional document for distribution such as a second phase transaction pack.
0504.2 Investment Overview
The Investment Overview should be restricted in size and should provide basic details on the financial performance and type of business.
It is normally circulated under covering letter and will incorporate a confidentiality agreement.
It should be remembered that the recipients receive numerous business profiles.
An investment overview should therefore quickly impart the essential basic information which will interest the potential purchaser.
The information should enable the recipient to evaluate the opportunity against his acquisition criteria and to take an instant decision to reject or proceed with the opportunity.
KPMG should not be associated with an Investment Overview which we know at the time of issue to be misleading or factually incorrect.
An example Investment Overview is included at 1103.1.
Points which should be considered are:
the anonymity of the vendor must be retained; carefully consider whether the business description and references to locations area are a danger to the anonymity
the type set, i.e. the presentation is important in conveying information quickly
keep figures to a minimum; the use of rounded financials should assist confidentiality
use MAS business opportunity paper with the introductory fee information removed to avoid misunderstanding
the factsheet can be lifted from the executive summary of the information memorandum (or vice versa); information in the overview must agree with the full memorandum
Profiles should state that they are only introductory documents to measure the possible interest of each recipient in receiving an Information memorandum.
Unaudited financial data must be clearly marked as such.
The profile should not be extended to a length which might cause misconceptions about its intended scope and purpose.
0504.3 Information Memorandum
0504.31 Contents of the Information Memorandum
The length and detail of the Information memorandum will clearly be governed by the size and complexity of the vendor's business.
It should be recognised that, in general, it will be read by busy people and therefore should be concise.
An outline of the structure and contents of a typical Information memorandum is set out below.
Disclaimer (with date and number of information memorandum)
Sale procedure and contacts — identify what is for sale!
Executive Summary (including strengths, weaknesses and opportunities)
History, Background and Group Structure
Shareholders and reason for sale
Trading Activities/Description of the business
Property/Premises
Personnel
Financial information
Net Assets
Future Prospects
Appendices
Latest statutory accounts
Organisation structure
Advertising literature
Key personnel profiles — should not name individuals unless they or both key and have been informed of the sale.
The use of an executive summary is recommended to ensure that the key decision maker is at least appraised of key facts.
Disclaimer
This should be placed prominently at the front of the memorandum in the standard format.
A disclaimer is set out at 1103.2.
On occasions clients may wish to take their own legal advice as to the format of the disclaimer.
The disclaimer at 1103.2 refers to the issue of FSA exemption.
If such exemption cannot be obtained, a full verification exercise will have to be undertaken.
A general report disclaimer is also given at 1106.1.
Each Information memorandum should be dated and numbered when finalised on the disclosure page.
The principal reason for numbering is to identify the source of a memorandum.
It may also be argued that numbering an Information Memorandum shows an intent to control and restrict the circulation and therefore complies with Companies Act's requirements for prospectuses and the provisions of the FSA.
It should be noted that experience has shown that a high number can deter a potential acquirer.
Executive Summary
This section should summarise the critical factors as to type of business, what is for sale, reasons for sale, financial position and investment considerations and opportunities.
It should emphasise the strong features of the business and its future potential.
History and Background
This should include a brief outline of the background of the business and its industry, highlighting positive factors in the development of the business.
Tailor to the audience.
Shareholders and reason for sale (may be unnecessary if fully covered above)
The memorandum should specify the individual shareholders, their shareholding and any particular rights attaching to specific classes of shares.
It should also state the percentage of shareholding offered for sale and whether the vendor(s) wishes to remain involved with the company after the sale.
A well drafted paragraph giving the reasons for the sale, presented in a positive and plausible manner, is key (i.e. ‘the money’— becomes financial security/reducing exposure to risk).
The truth is always best as it will stand up at later meetings when the topic will inevitably be discussed at length.
Trading Activities /Description of the business
This should describe the key factors underlying the trading operations of the company; typically this will include:
principal products, the competitive edge and why it is sustainable, development strategy, recent product introductions.
sales, customer base analysis, marketing and competitive position
suppliers (vulnerability to limited sourcing)
production process
plant and facilities
Property/Premises
This section should give summary details of all properties used or owned by the company including:—
leasehold or freehold
terms of leases i.e. length, rental per annum, rent reviews and uniform business rate
size and condition of sites
size of manufacturing/office/storage facilities
current valuations
Detailed information should be restricted to the Appendix.
Personnel
This should cover the directors and key personnel of the company detailing their responsibilities, experience and remuneration.
If the current owner does not wish to continue with an involvement in the business after its sale but currently has a day to day role in the business it is important to address this issue and to demonstrate the ability of the remainder of the management team to perform without him.
This section should also give brief details on numbers of employees, analysed between operations, and the organisation.
It should give an indication as to the companies relations with employees — such as whether trade unionised, and the level of staff turnover.
Details of the executive and company pension scheme, including the intentions regarding the schemes and future requirements, should be discussed.
This is a particularly sensitive area and care should be taken to reveal no more than is necessary.
Remember this information is valuable to a competitor especially employee names etc.
Financial information
(a)
Historic data
The appropriate historic financial information needs to be considered on a case-by-case basis.
Typically an Information memorandum would include three years historic profit and loss accounts and balance sheets.
Careful consideration should be given to the timing of the release of both beneficial and potentially awkward financial information.
Many clients may consider that a replica of the statutory audited accounts is not appropriate and seek to present data which they consider reflects the underlying results of the business adjusted for any ‘non-recurring’ items, eg one-off items or items which would not continue with a change of ownership.
MAS policy on the presentation of financial data which differs from audited data is that:
to the extent that such adjustments could be made if the data were to be used in an accountants' short form report, the guidance in the CFM on the procedures to adopt for short form reporting should be followed.
This guidance states that adjustments are appropriate ‘…in order that a true and fair view is presented of profits stated on a consistent basis over the period covered by the report’
to the extent that the adjustments do not meet this test, the financial data should be presented as an ‘illustrative pro-forma’ rather than as historical fact.
In both cases, the basis of the adjustments to audited data should be explained and the results commented on when appropriate.
It is essential that schedules are available for later use reconciling the financial information as presented in the Information memorandum with the audited accounts.
The accounting policies used should also be commented on if in any way unusual or conservative.
Any one-off changes in the normal pattern of trading should be also discussed.
(b)
Current trading
The provision of up to date trading information is an area which requires careful thought.
It is unlikely that a potential purchaser will be interested if the Information memorandum contains no information on recent trading.
To delay the introduction of such information may make the vendor less credible to a buyer.
In particular, recent positive changes in trading should not be introduced too late in the process.
Management information and accounting systems should be described briefly.
Net Assets
This section should contain the latest audited balance sheet together with a commentary on its main features including taxation.
The current status of tax computations should also be explained, as should details of PAYE and VAT audits.
Focus should be on the critical areas.
Include details of properties, revaluations, significant property holdings held at cost, and plant and machinery at nil or low net book value.
Future Prospects (Vital with non-European purchaser in mind)
In general, vendor managements are to be discouraged from including projections since their inclusion raises potential problems both for management and for MAS.
For management, their inclusion may lead to their use as inflexible performance targets or as the basis for warranties as to future results.
For MAS, whilst the disclaimer will state what we have and have not done, we may still be associated with the data if we are asked to present it to potential buyers or if our name is mentioned in the document.
It is the firm's policy not to be associated with any published document which is false or misleading.
MAS procedures when associated with an Information memorandum containing projections should be sufficient to enable us to be satisfied that the vendor has not recklessly included information which it does not have reasonable grounds to believe is correct.
The procedures should take into account that management projections are likely to be a fairly bullish assessment of the company's prospects.
In the event that projections are included, they must be accompanied by a suitable health warning to protect our own and our client's position.
An example health warning is given below:
‘The illustrative profit projections are intended to show a possible outcome based on the stated assumptions.
Because [the business has not yet commenced][a significant expansion is envisaged][other reasons]and because of the length of the period covered, the assumptions are necessarily more subjective than would be appropriate for a profit forecast.
The illustrative profit projections do not therefore constitute a forecast.
The projections in this section have been prepared by the Group's management for inclusion in this memorandum and are the responsibility of the Directors.
The projections represent an illustration of the potential future trading results and funding requirements.
The present state of the defence industry, the uncertainty of the ‘peace dividend’ and the conflict in the Gulf, means that any form of accurate forecasting, especially over a [six]year horizon is extremely difficult.
The actual results of the Group may differ materially from those illustrated.
It should be noted that these projections do not reflect any benefits that may accrue to the Group following a transfer of ownership and have been prepared under the assumption that the Group's current operating conditions will apply over the whole period under review’.
The board should minute the projections thereby approving them before the Information memorandum is distributed.
A Board memorandum may be necessary.
Sale procedure and contacts
The detailed sale procedures may either be set out in the covering letter to the information memorandum or as a section of the information memorandum.
The choice will depend on the sale strategy; however, if it is decided to set out the detailed procedures in the covering letter it is normal to include brief details in the information memorandum such as dates, KPMG contact staff, and a statement that direct contact should not be made with the management or staff of the business.
The detailed sales procedures are set out in Section 0505.
0504.32 Preparation of information memorandum
The detailed work for the first drafts of the Information memorandum can usefully be carried out by non-MAS staff using example documentation.
The following procedures should be adopted when advising on or assisting in the preparation of an Information memorandum:
Advise the client on the typical format and contents of an information memorandum.
All Information Memoranda prepared by KPMG on behalf of the client should follow the Report Style Guide unless this is inconsistent with the client's own equivalent guidance.
Visit the client's principal facilities and discuss the entity's business with persons familiar with the financial, operational and marketing aspects of the business.
Care must be taken to ensure that the possibility of a sale is not disclosed to the client's staff.
Particular care must be given to telephone calls to MAS staff on the clients' premises and MAS documentation which may be casually observed by employees.
The information memorandum can be prepared under the guise of a management consultancy report.
Review the contents and preparation of the information memorandum, remembering that the information should enable the recipient to evaluate the opportunity.
Particular attention should be given to:
overall presentation and contents for the executive summary
unaudited financial data (for example, year-to-date comparisons)
pro forma financial adjustments
appraisal data — consider stockturn etc for reasonableness
prospective financial information, where included
commentary on financial data
comments of a subjective or unsupported nature, and
reference to KPMG (the face sheet should not refer to KPMG other than in the introductory disclaimers and, as required, to explain its role).
Check the draft for arithmetical accuracy and internal consistency
Obtain representation in writing from the client acknowledging its responsibility.
Where a report by us is to be published, it is our policy that important information supplied by the directors, and for which they are responsible, should normally be included in or endorsed by a Board Memorandum.
An example representation letter is set out at 1103.4.
Obtain copies of:
a client disclaimer clarifying the firm's involvement which will appear at the start of every Information memorandum which is issued (see section 1103.2); and
a confidentiality letter to be sent to potential acquirers before they may receive a copy of the information memorandum (see section 1103.3)
Ensure that work papers include appropriate documentation of KPMG's role and support the contents of the information memorandum.
0504.33 Relationship with the client
The Information memorandum is the responsibility of the vendors, and while MAS should give advice as to its contents, unlike an Investigation Service report, MAS do not always have complete control over its contents.
It is often the case that the client will want to be deeply involved in the preparation of the document.
Some clients may feel that no-one can know or therefore write about their company as well as they can.
This can be helpful to us but it may give rise to difficulties and require careful handling if the client's writing skills leave something to be desired.
Ultimately MAS should not be associated with an Information memorandum which is not produced in a professional manner.
0504.34 Other issues
Consider the following issues:
Confidentiality.
Carefully consider all aspects of confidentiality including the appropriate stages to release further information and whether particularly sensitive matters can be withheld until later.
It may be inadvisable to disclose some information in the information memorandum such as the names of major customers and suppliers in the analyses of sales and purchases.
These can be referred to by letters (ie A-Z) in the information memorandum and disclosed to the preferred bidder at a later stage.
What does the business do?
Surprisingly sometimes this does not come over in the investment overview or information memorandum.
(i.e. does it manufacture or just buy in and sell?)
Length.
Keep it short.
Reports.
The Information memorandum should not contain any business valuation reports, etc., which have been prepared either by KPMG or any other advisers.
Representations.
The client should acknowledge the limitations of the MAS role.
Under current law, there is no KPMG responsibility to a potential buyer not envisaged at the date of the audit report with respect to any financial statements with which KPMG is already publicly associated.
This may change and staff should contact CFSU if in any doubt.
0505 Operational procedures
0505.1 Introduction
The section sets out detailed operational procedures for the sale process.
The various techniques described and proforma letters set out in section 11 are intended to provide a helpful aid to the smooth running of the sale rather than to prescribe standard procedures and formats.
The considerations underlying the choice of marketing strategy are set out in section 0503.24 above.
0505.2 Research
0505.21 Methodology
The principal objective of purchaser research is to identify companies in the same business sector which may wish to acquire the client's business.
A secondary objective will be to identify companies not in the business sector but which may have an acquisition strategy to diversify into that sector.
There is a low chance of success in identifying companies intending to diversify into a sector other than the occasional press statement.
It is therefore generally not worth spending time trying to research such purchasers.
The sources of information for identifying acquisition targets set out in Section 0604 may be used for identifying potential purchasers.
To these should be added:
Suggestions from the client (which will normally consist of competitors and earlier approaches).
Lotus One Source European M&A or Acquisitions Monthly's summary of deals.
These can be used to identify companies active in or diversifying into new sectors.
Stockbroker reports.
PPD Library in London receives and retains analysts reports from certain brokers.
These can give useful information on public companies operating in the sector.
Financial Times Surveys.
MAS and MC Business Information Centre retain copies of FT Surveys.
These can give a quick, if somewhat superficial, overview of a sector or geographical area.
MAS Buyers database.
Business Libraries.
For example City Business Library.
There are also business libraries in Birmingham, Manchester, Sheffield, Glasgow, Aberdeen and Warwick University in Coventry.
These subscribe to trade journals, annuals and directories.
Kompass Directory or Yellow Pages.
From experience not recommended as these are very time consuming to use.
Trade Associations.
MC Business Information Centre has a directory of UK and European Trade Associations.
Key Note Market Reports.
MC Business Information Centre has a directory of reports on market sectors and retains copies of reports which have been purchased by KPMG.
Site visits.
For example an effective method of identifying manufacturers of products is to visit retail outlets.
0505.22 Lotus One Source
The CD databases such as Lotus One Source are more user friendly than on line databases and without the pressure of on line time costs it is easier to give careful consideration to the search strategy.
The following are useful tips.
Lotus One Source is more powerful and quicker than using the Hambros Company Guide reference book for identifying quoted companies in a particular sector.
The One Source database can first be screened for quoted companies and then screened by activity.
The company size function provides a USM/fully quoted split.
It is also possible to search by business descriptions (see below).
(N.B. The weakness of the Hambros index can be illustrated by P&O — transport and freight with no reference under construction; and Allied Lyons — breweries with no reference under bakeries).
A useful research technique, particularly when there is a large population to review, is to prepare a summary custom report.
Having identified potential companies using the activity screening facilities, print a landscape report sorted by turnover containing:
company name
principal business activity
ultimate holding company
turnover
pre-tax profits
net assets
The ultimate holding company function will highlight related companies within groups and identify companies which, while they appear to be too small to do the deal, may be able to do so with the support of their holding company.
Companies can be screened by business activity by using SIC codes, given business descriptions on the One Source glossary, or by a word search through the principal activity description in the directors' reports.
If making use of the latter, which is very powerful, make use of the wild card facility and think laterally for alternative words, i.e. if searching for steel stockholders search using the intersect of Set A (stock* AND distribute* AND supply* AND wholesale*) AND Set B (steel* AND metal* AND ferr* AND alloy*).
This type of search should of course identify the company being sold which is a useful check.
0505.22 Overseas research
Overseas research, particularly European research, is harder to perform than research for UK acquirors.
If the M&A network is to be used the agreed procedures set out in the handbook should be observed.
The following are possible ways of identifying overseas companies short of approaching other network members:
Lotus One Source European M&A database.
The Fame overseas companies CD databases.
US on line M&A deal databases.
Foreign ultimate holding companies of UK companies (no matter how small the turnover) identified through Lotus One Source searches.
European Trade Associations.
MC National Marketing retain a directory of European Trade Associations.
International Trade Directories.
0505.3 Advertising
0505.31 Introduction
This section covers the procedures to be followed in placing business for sale advertisements.
It is essential that sections 0404 and 0405 of this manual on Investment Advertisements is read and understood before placing any advertisements.
Business Opportunity advertisements are generally placed in local, national newspapers or trade publications.
The Financial Times Business for Sale section each Tuesday, Friday and Saturday is the recognised standard for advertising businesses.
Other options include the Daily Telegraph and the Economist.
There are two types of advertisement which may be placed.
The first where the client does not require any reference at all to KPMG in the advertisement; the second where the advertisement refers to KPMG.
The procedure for placing the former type of advertisement is set out below under ‘Placing of the Business Opportunity Advertisement by the client’.
These advertisements generally use a Box number at the publication as the contact address and may be placed by the client.
If the KPMG header is to be used or KPMG is to be referred to in the advertisement either as the contact address or in some other form, then the procedure to be followed is that set out under ‘Placing of the Business Opportunity Advertisement by KPMG’ below.
0505.32 Placing of the Business Opportunity Advertisement by the client
An example of this type of advertisement is included at 1102.1.
The client first contacts the publication (e.g. Financial Times) with the details of the proposed advertisement including the wording.
The publisher will require the client to complete an enquiry form so as to be satisfied as to the factual accuracy of the advertisement.
The advertisement will have to be authorised by an authorised person.
The client will thus have to approach a firm such as KPMG to obtain authorisation for the advertisement and notification of such authorisation will have to be provided to the publisher.
If KPMG is approached and requested to provide authorisation then as this is regulated work a CFEL should be obtained.
Following an approach to KPMG for authorisation of the advertisement, the factual content of the advertisement should be confirmed in compliance with the procedures set out in the CFM and in the Corporate Finance Bulletin ‘Investment Advertisements’(see Section 0405.6).
The partner is responsible for verification of the advertisement contents and must initial the advertisement as proof of verification.
When the content of the advertisement has been confirmed and the advertisement initialled, MAS should carry out the last three steps shown for ‘Placing a Business Opportunity advertisement by KPMG on behalf of a client’ outlined below.
0505.33 Placing a Business Opportunity advertisement by KPMG on behalf of a client.
All advertisements should be placed through the ARC Advertising /RADA public relations company:
Contact: David Tallon (KPMG account director) /Maxine Cox
ARC International Advertising Ltd
195, Euston Road
London NW1 2BN
Telephone 071-387 7707 Fax 071-388 3585
The PR company needs prior notification of any intention to advertise.
The steps to create and place the advertisement on behalf of a client are as follows:
Note the format of the standard KPMG advertisement (1102.2).
Draft the advertisement according to the particular circumstances of the business to be sold.
Note that advertisements which include a reference to KPMG, require the KPMG headed logo.
The general format and size of advertisements has been specified by National Marketing and must be adhered to; it includes the KPMG logo at both top and bottom of the details and therefore the advertisement has to have a minimum size of 2 columns wide and 8 cm deep.
The cost is currently about £50/column cm for a Business for Sale and an additional £150 for basic standard typesetting.
(Business Wanted are £50/column cm and Business Opportunity £55.50/column cm).
The advertisement must include the Merger & Acquisition Services legend under the KPMG Peat Marwick (see example) and must also state that KPMG is ‘authorised by the ICAEW to carry on investment business’.
Someone at KPMG should be nominated to receive enquiry calls and the advertisement should include their name and the KPMG address and phone number.
The factual content of the advert should be confirmed and comply with the procedures as set out in Corporate Finance Bulletin ‘Investment Advertisements’(Section 7).
The draft advertisement should be approved by a partner and then sent to the client.
Written confirmation in accordance with Corporate Finance Bulletin ‘Investment Advertisements’(Section 8) should be obtained from the client confirming their approval of the advertisement.
When written agreement is received from the client fax the draft advertisement to the agency.
The contact at the agency will read and lay it out and return the advertisement for KPMG approval.
The typesetting will be arranged by the agency, after which the advertisement will be faxed to us for final proof reading and confirmation of our approval.
Proof read the completed advertisement and have the partner initial it as confirmed
A copy of the initialled final advertisement must be sent to the Marketing Advisery Group along with a copy of the standard KPMG Internal Approval Form (Section 1102.3) completed as appropriate.
Retain a copy of both on the client file, and put a further copy of both on the department's CFS file.
Confirm with the agency that the advertisement can be placed and note the costs and the agency job reference.
It is possible the publication itself may need further verification and will call KPMG to confirm the authenticity of the advertisement.
0505.4 Contacting acquirers
0505.41 Introduction
When the sales strategy, Information memorandum and Investment Overview have been approved by the client and the appropriate responsibility letter obtained the marketing stage of the sale process can commence.
This section sets out the procedures and standard letters for the first stage of the marketing process.
0505.42 Timetables
The draft timetable will have been decided on at the sale strategy stage and will be to an extent a function of the marketing process chosen.
The timetable is a critical element in the marketing process and should be reconfirmed.
It is important to establish that the client and key employees will be available at the appropriate time.
Likewise arrangements should be made to ensure that supplementary information will be available where required.
An example timetable for a flexible timetable arrangement is set out in Section 1102.5.
A timetable for an auction process is included in the information memorandum transmittal letter at 1102.12.
0505.43 Issuing the investment overview
The potential acquirors identified by the research process must be discussed with and approved by the client prior to the initial contact.
It will also be necessary to establish with the client:
the form of the transmittal letter.
what additional information may be released during verbal discussions with interested parties and in what circumstances.
what information should be sought from the potential purchasers.
what further steps should be taken if a favourable response is obtained.
Where it is proposed to approach a potential purchaser which is a KPMG client the relevant client service partner should be informed in advance and he should agree the means by which the approach is to be made.
It is therefore necessary to forward the proforma transmittal letter, Investment Overview and a confidentiality letter to the partner concerned.
An example covering memorandum is set out at 1102.6.
If practical, where the potential purchaser is not a KPMG client the appropriate person in the operating office nearest to the identified candidate (normally the managing partner or the merger and acquisition services specialist) should be contacted to establish whether there are any KPMG connections with the potential purchaser and whether it would be more beneficial for the approach to be made directly from the nearest operating office.
It is essential that contacts with non-KPMG clients are made in a highly professional manner.
A disposal assignment may involve a considerable number of approaches to entities which have no previous association with KPMG.
MAS's performance at this stage and at subsequent meetings represents an opportunity to raise the profile of MAS which, if we impress sufficiently, may provide future work for MAS and KPMG in general.
It is important that the transmittal letter is correctly addressed to the appropriate executive.
To ensure that the information we use is correct each potential purchaser must be telephoned and the following determined:
the name, initials and title of the appropriate executive.
the correct name and current address of the company.
whether the individual will be in to receive the pack.
In large organisations it may be difficult to identify the correct individual.
An approach, born of experience, to overcome this problem is to request to speak to the finance director's secretary and to explain to her:
who we are; and that
we are trying to identify the appropriate person in their organisation to whom we should write concerning a business opportunity which may be of interest to them.
If this is done courteously the call may be transferred to that person.
The opportunity can be described to the individual and their interest determined.
An immediate yes or no can often result and at least the individual will be forewarned when the profile arrives on their desk.
An example of a cold approach transmittal letter is set out in 1102.7.
If the maintenance of confidentiality is of critical importance consider notifying members of the MAS department how to respond to telephone enquiries.
It has happened that individuals who have not been contacted by MAS have become aware that the client's business is being marketed and have telephoned MAS asking to speak to the manager handling the sale.
An ill-considered initial response will confirm the callers suspicions and will make any subsequent attempt to deny the sale unconvincing.
It may in some sales be appropriate to issue full details of the sale procedures with the Investment Overview.
Detailed sale procedures are discussed at Section 0505.5 below and an example sale procedure suitable for issue with a Investment Overview is set out in Section 1102.10.
0505.44 Responses to advertisements
It is normal to request respondents to advertisements whether they telephone or write, to:
declare whether they are acting as principal or agent.
provide brief details as to who they are.
It may be appropriate to establish in the course of the discussions the information on the potential acquiror which may be conveyed back to the client.
indicate the nature of their funding.
explain that if our client approves their name an Information memorandum will be released on receipt of a signed confidentiality letter.
When the client has approved the name the confidentiality letter should be forwarded under cover of a pre-marketed transmittal letter, an example of which is included at 1102.8.
A investment overview may be enclosed if it is thought appropriate.
0505.45 Sale control log
During the engagement a ‘control log’ should be maintained which includes details of the parties identified, those contacted (or responding to advertisements), the dates and methods of contact and the proposed next step.
This is essential to facilitate the smooth running of a sale and to provide the client with regular written status reports.
An example of a sale control log is given at 1102.9.
While the names and addresses of potential acquirors can be usefully input on to a database to permit mail merging, it may not be cost effective to use a computerised control log unless a substantial number of potential acquirors are anticipated.
When creating a computerised database, the following are useful tips:
It is helpful, in view of the different transmittal procedures, to split potential purchasers between:
i)
MAS buyers database clients.
ii)
Other KPMG clients.
iii)
Non-KPMG clients.
iv)
Overseas purchasers.
It is not worthwhile imputing the addresses of KPMG clients unless they are clients of an MAS partner.
Private individuals (i.e. where there is no company name in the address) can cause a problem when mail merging.
The database listing facilities can be used to provide typed status updates to the client.
0505.46 Follow ups to non-replies
Companies not replying to the initial transmittal letter should be contacted only to establish if the letter has not been received, in which case a copy can be sent.
It is not worthwhile chasing non-replies any further for experience shows that where little interest exists at the preliminary stages, the possibility of completing a deal will be small.
Inclusion of a proforma fax sheet addressed to MAS as part of the Investment Overview package may encourage responses from even no interest parties and thereby save follow up effort.
0505.47 Accountants Business Network
The business for sale can be placed on the Accountants Business Network by providing details of the business to the KPMG ABN Coordinator.
Two options are available:
Investment Overviews — the business must be for sale and a sales memorandum must exist.
Newsflash — maximum ten lines but otherwise no rules.
Examples of an Investment Overview, ABN listing and a newsflash are included at 1108.1, 1108.2 and 1108. respectively.
For further details of the ABN procedures refer to the UK M&A Network Handbook.
0505.48 Intermediaries
Although information may be shared with other intermediaries, the following procedures should be followed:
client approval should be obtained before any information is released.
the intermediaries should confirm that they will preserve confidentiality.
control must be maintained over the dissemination of information.
One way of achieving this is for MAS to hold all copies of the Information Memoranda and only to despatch these once the intermediary has returned a confidentiality undertaking to us.
This may not be practical when dealing with foreign intermediaries.
0505.5 Distribution of Information Memoranda
The Information Memorandum may only be released to potential acquirors once we have received the signed confidentiality letter.
Requests by potential purchasers to change the wording of our standard letter must be considered individually and if necessary authorised by the client.
It is the client's business that may be damaged by a breach of confidentiality.
By this stage each party contacted should have been made aware of the firm's professional relationship with the client and the confidentiality and sensitivity of any client information discussed.
Also the degree to which the firm is associated with any financial information or other data conveyed to the potential purchaser relating to the client should always be made clear in the information memorandum itself, in any subsequent information provided and in any transmittal letter sent with the information.
The issue date and Information memorandum number should be recorded in the sale control log.
The covering letter to the Information memorandum — the stage two transmittal letter — will normally detail further sale procedures and set the timetable for the submission of indicative offers.
A guide price may or may not be provided.
The procedures for the flexible and auction approaches differ at this stage in the process and are considered separately below.
0505.51 Flexible sale process — issue of the Information memorandum
An example covering letter for the Information memorandum for a flexible sales process is set out at section 1102.11.
This covering letter comprehensively covers the sale procedures which should be considered in a flexible sale arrangement.
These procedures will need to tailored to each specific sale but a common theme will be a guideline for the submission date for indicative offers rather than a deadline.
0505.52 Auction — issue of the Information memorandum
The auction process involves tightly controlling the timing, rules of bidding and the conduct of the sale from beginning to end.
It is a route which has much appeal to vendors but tends to be detested by purchasers who dislike the control placed on their ability to negotiate directly with the vendors.
Auctions may be strict auctions or may have an element of flexibility, however the terms and timetable of the auction must be clearly laid down, normally in the transmittal letter, and strictly adhered to.
The procedures for an auction process are set out in a transmittal included in section 1102.12.
If demand for the business is not obviously very strong from the outset, consideration should be given to delaying the announcement of the date for indicative bids until such time as firm expressions of interest have been received.
Other features of an auction process which may need to be set out in the transmittal letter are:
Approaches to potential purchasers are made simultaneously.
The sale and purchase agreement is drafted by the vendor's solicitors and not the purchaser's and is often enclosed in the transmittal letter.
The terms of the contract are not usually negotiable and offers are made subject only to an accountant's report.
The flow of information, visits to the company and discussions with management are strictly controlled to ensure equal dissemination of information.
The auction is open to invited parties only.
There is a minimum bid price of entry to a second phase.
This may or may not be disclosed.
All potential bidders are told they are in an auction process.
Negotiations must be with the advisers and no approaches whatsoever may be made direct to the vendors.
Bidders missing the deadline for offers or not shortlisted for the second phase may not be readmitted.
Bidders may be requested to state their intentions with regard to the future of the business, major changes to be introduced and continued employment and career development opportunities.
The bidding process is conducted in secrecy; bidders are not told the identity of other bidders; and information on bids received is not discharged other than to the vendor.
The last point can be essential to persuade major companies that they will not be used as ‘stalking horses’ and that the major effort and expense put in by them will not be wasted.
0505.6 Selecting the preferred bidder
The procedures for the flexible sale process and auction are considered separately in the sections below.
0505.61 Flexible sale process — selecting the preferred bidder
This stage in the sale process involves eliciting written indicative offers from potential purchasers, cultivating relationships, assessing offers and interest and advising the client on the selection on the preferred bidder.
It can be broken down into three phases.
Phase I — Indicative offers
This phase covers the period from the issue of the information memorandum to the guideline date for the submission of indicative offers.
The following points are relevant to this phase:
Purchasers will normally seek guidance and answers to their queries by telephone to MAS.
This enables the development of a relationship and a probing of positions.
Purchasers will often stress their reluctance to become involved in a Dutch auction.
Although MAS will obviously be seeking to create an auction, it is normal to state that the vendors are not motivated purely by financial concerns but give great importance to other factors such as finding the right buyer, etc.
It is often helpful to explain to purchasers the nature of the indicative offer being sought.
These should normally provide an indication to price, the nature of the consideration and major terms.
They will of course be subject to a number of conditions such as inter alia a given level of profits and due diligence.
It may be appropriate to release supplementary information during this stage (i.e. final audited accounts, latest management accounts and budgets) or it may be preferable to delay this until phase II or III.
Some information may only be released to the preferred bidder after phase III.
If supplementary information is provided it must be issued with repeat of the original disclaimer or under cover of the following statement: ‘provided under the terms of the confidentiality agreement and the disclaimer of responsibility set out in the information memorandum’.
Indicative offers should be acknowledged immediately on receipt by a holding letter (Section 1102.13).
If insufficient offers are received it may be necessary to extend the guideline date for the submission of offers.
An example of a letter extending a guideline date is set out in section 1102.14.
Some purchasers may decline to submit an indicative offer before meeting the management /vendors and visiting the factory.
It will be a matter of judgement as to whether these companies may proceed to phase II without submitting an indicative offer.
Phase II — Visits and meetings
This phase involves selecting a limited number of indicative offers with which to proceed and arranging site visits and meetings between the potential purchasers and vendors and/or management.
The following points are relevant to this phase:
If several offers are received it may be necessary to select say the best five with which to proceed and to reject the other offers.
Before doing so all offers received should be examined and explained to the client with a recommendation as to which offers to proceed with.
An example letter to the client is set out in Section 1102.15.
MAS should inform potential purchasers selected to proceed to the next phase and arrange meetings and site visits.
An example letter to potential purchasers selected for phase II is set out at 1102.16.
Rather than declining offers out of hand it may be appropriate to decline offers as they stand but to suggest that potential purchasers may wish to reconsider their offers (or perhaps certain aspects of their offers) in the light of further information.
An example letter is set out in section 1102.17.
Beware the unrealistic high offer submitted just to ensure passage to phase II.
The need for KPMG to attend meetings and site visits will be dependent on the experience of the client.
It is very time consuming for MAS staff to attend all meetings and site visits.
Confident clients with strong management teams may not need a KPMG presence — provided it is made clear to potential purchasers that price is not to be discussed.
This can also help in maintaining confidentiality in that KPMG are not seen attending meetings with ‘clients’ or ‘management consultants’.
Weak clients, i.e. those lacking confidence, may not perform well at the first meeting but normally go through a sharp learning curve.
Consider using an outside potential purchaser for the first meeting as a trial run.
Prepare agendas for the meetings which set out the ground rules, issues to be covered and those which may not be discussed (i.e. whether to talk price).
An example agenda is set out at 1102.18 together with the ‘hidden objectives’ for the client.
Prepare the client for the types of question which will be asked (see section 0608 Key Features Review) and in particular the question ‘why are you selling?’.
They should also be briefed as to the questions they should ask.
Consider releasing more information at this stage.
Remember that one of the purposes of the meeting is to show off the client and/or management team to the vendor, who is buying that team rather than KPMG.
Agree with the vendors the timetable of events following the meeting and the deadline for the revised firm offers.
Phase III — Selecting the preferred bidder
The revised and firm offers submitted following the meetings should be assessed, the consideration evaluated and the relative values of the offers compared.
The client should then be briefed.
It is normal to select one preferred bidder and to attempt to keep a second or third bidder on hold in case the first bidder should withdraw.
The selection of the preferred bidder will be made in conjunction with the client and may well hinge on factors other than the highest price (i.e. intentions or nature of consideration).
An example letter concerning the selection of the preferred bidder is included at section 1102.19.
In some sales, potential purchasers may not be required to issue formal offers but the process will move directly to the negotiating stage (section 0506 below) and price and terms will be discussed with MAS at a meeting, in the presence of the client.
If an agreement is reached the terms will then be set out in a heads of agreement.
0505.62 Auction — selecting the preferred bidder
An example of a letter to indicative offerors selected for the second phase of the auction is set out in 1102.20.
The selection of the preferred bidder from the second phase is straight forward in the case of the strict auction in that it will be the highest bidder.
In less strict auctions other considerations may be taken into account such as compatibility, intentions, personal views and nature of the consideration.
0505.7 Declining offers
Those offers not being proceeded with should be politely declined.
0505.8 Return of information memorandum
At appropriate stages of the sales process potential purchasers should be requested to return Information memoranda.
An example letter is set out in section 1102.21.
0506 Negotiations and the offer
0506.1 Introduction
0506.11
The role and limitations to KPMG's involvement in negotiations for clients is set out in section 0203 Negotiating.
That section also covers planning for negotiations, negotiating tactics, and what is negotiable.
In this section the topic is extended to cover areas particular to representing the client in a sale procedure.
0506.2 Tactics
The negotiation process is an on-going process which commences with the issue of the Information memorandum, passes through the formal negotiating stage to the heads of agreement and normally ends with the detailed negotiation of purchase and sale agreement clauses.
In some sales, negotiations may continue over the agreement of the completion accounts.
With MAS assistance the vendor will normally have set his expectation, upper and lower limits and opening position by the time of the issue of the Information memorandum.
Potential purchasers begin their negotiations by carrying out an information gathering exercise, feeling out the vendor's position and assessing his strengths and weaknesses through telephone discussions and meetings.
The indicative offer follows this stage and sets the scene for the formal eye ball to eye ball negotiations.
The objective of the negotiation phase will be to close the deal with the preferred purchaser on the best terms for the client.
The chosen tactics will vary from deal to deal and should be discussed and planned with the client.
We should receive negotiating parameters from the client within which MAS is permitted to reach agreement.
The negotiating process normally involves MAS closing the gap between the vendor's expectation and the preferred purchaser's indicative offer, hopefully by persuading the purchaser to increase his offer.
Use all the normal negotiating tactics (i.e. argue, signal, propose, package, adjourn, bargain, close).
Gradually introduce the purchaser to the idea that he will be ‘doing the deal’.
Try to retain an auction style process, playing the potential purchasers (real or imaginary (very high risk)) off against each other.
Think creatively to devise deal structures which are beneficial to both vendor (maximising after tax return) and purchaser.
Section 0609 Deal Structuring considers structuring issues in detail.
Do not let tax issues drive the deal -eg British & Commonwealth loan notes may have deferred CGT but they were ultimately a disaster for vendors who took them.
Identify the purchaser's difficulties and constraints and look for methods of overcoming these.
When conceding issues always trade for something (if you…then we will…) and value your concessions in terms of their value to the purchaser not the vendor.
Try to detach the price from a P/E ratio applied to profits to avoid the due diligence findings being used to obtain a multiplied discount.
Use the release of additional information to the vendor's best advantage.
Purchasers may need to be reminded that a loss of confidence in them by the vendors can be difficult to recover and will adversely affect relationships after completion.
When agreement is reached close the deal quickly and immediately confirm the agreed terms in writing in a heads of agreement.
Consider restricting the heads of agreement to key terms only and covering minor issues at the contract stage.
Hitting the purchaser with a lengthy and detailed document soon after agreement may cause them to waver and reconsider their offer.
0507 Heads of agreement
0507.1 Introduction
MAS should always attempt to draft heads of agreement as this thereby enables us to control the transaction.
Section 0610 provides comprehensive listings of the contents, conditions and definitions which might be found in a heads of agreement letter.
Although found in the buying section of this Practice Guide these listings have not been prepared solely from a buyer's perspective.
However, tactical considerations may dictate that some conditions and definition terms are omitted from the vendors' draft of the heads.
Section 0610 should also be used by MAS to review heads of agreement received by the vendors.
If the transaction involves cross border parties some reluctance may be encountered to the proposed signing of a heads of agreement as in some countries such agreements are seen to be morally binding.
0507.2 Accounting policies
Accounting policies used in preparing accounts are not always explicitly, fully and clearly stated.
This leaves ground for misunderstandings and may lead to a disappointed purchaser seeking to reduce the purchase consideration by disputing the accounting policies used for the completion accounts.
Particular care should therefore be given to defining the accounting policies at an early stage.
Accounting policies should normally be discussed and agreed during the main negotiations.
The vendor should try to seek agreement from the purchaser that the policies applied in the last audited accounts, will be applied to the completion accounts.
It may be appropriate just to state this intention in the heads of agreement and to leave the detailed description, which should be in greater detail than is normal in statutory accounts (i.e. the policy for holiday pay accrual etc) to the purchase and sale agreement.
The vendor can try to obtain additional protection by obtaining agreement from the purchaser that the issue of the accounting policies may only be discussed, and if appropriate the policies amended, following due diligence.
After that time no further amendments to the policies may be made and the policies, as agreed, must be applied by the vendor's auditors in the preparation of the completion accounts.
An example of accounting policies to be included in a purchase and sale agreement are set out in section 1102.22.
0508 Completion
0508.1 Introduction
The completion stage of the sales process involves the preparation of the sale and purchase agreement by the vendor's and purchaser's lawyers, other legal formalities such as the disclosure letter, the announcement of the sale and the agreement of the completion accounts.
In a smooth sale MAS involvement will be minimal.
Most sales, however are not problem free and MAS involvement may be substantial.
For this reason hourly based fee structures tend not to include within the cost estimate any MAS involvement at the completion stage.
0508.2 Sale and purchase agreement
Chapter 7 covers this topic in detail and the comments in this section are restricted to useful tips when managing a sale for a vendor.
Following due diligence the purchaser may try to seek price reductions to cover issues which their accountant's have identified.
These should be expected and resisted.
The price reduction initially requested may be substantial and may be designed to provoke a reaction from the vendors to test their minimum price and their negotiating strength at this late stage (i.e. whether they are irrevocably committed to the deal).
This may be disturbing for the client who should be forewarned.
It is inevitable that the lawyers will reach deadlock in their negotiations over the detailed terms in the purchase and sale agreement.
Some negotiation will be necessary and MAS can usefully help with this.
At some point it may be necessary for the principals to reign their lawyers in.
The deal is not in the bag until the ink is on the purchase and sale agreement so always keep looking for the opportunity to close the door and complete the deal.
It may be helpful to advise the client on how to announce the sale to their staff.
This should normally be done jointly with the acquiror.
Some points which the client may wish to make are set out in section 1102.23.
Consider advising the client that it is in his interest to maintain profitability through any warranty period.
A satisfied purchaser is unlikely to seek damages.
To this end consider making staff bonuses, due as a consequence of the sale, conditional and payable after the warranty period.
0508.3 Completion accounts
It is to be hoped that the completion accounts will be easily agreed between the parties.
If this is not the case, MAS involvement may enable the parties and the company's auditor to reach an amicable agreement.
0509.2 Using the International Network
0509.1 Introduction
The following are guidelines for the conduct of cross-border relationships between Network members and their firms
Three factors will determine the continued future success of the Network:
Coordinated international marketing support services, as presently provided by International Office, in the form of the KPMG International M&A brochure and related biographical inserts, the quarterly publication of Deal Watch, standard media kits, the coordination of Network member selection, and Network member meeting arrangements.
Effective and profitable national M&A practices which enjoy the support of local senior management and which are invested with sufficient professional and technical resources to allow the provision of an appropriate scope of M&A advisory services.
Observance of reasonable guidelines designed to encourage increased and profitable participation by Network members in cross-border transactions.
The third success factor is the subject of these Guidelines.
They are intended to ensure that increased levels of interaction amongst Network members do not result in friction or embarrassment amongst Network members or the extensive use of other Network members' resources on an unprofitable basis.
0509.2 Approach
These Guidelines attempt to:
identify the most common kinds of cross-border interaction that are likely to occur amongst Network members;
identify the key issues that arise in each kind of interaction;
present in brief checklist form the protocols that should govern the different kinds of cross-border interaction; and
establish a common vocabulary amongst Network members (such terms are presented in italics in these Guidelines).
Nothing in these Guidelines is intended to prevent two Network members from reaching mutual agreement, on an ad hoc basis, for the application of a different set of protocols to govern their relationship in a particular transaction.
However, such an agreement should not prejudice other Network members who are not party to the ad hoc arrangement.
0509.3 Basic concepts
In identifying the most common kinds of cross-border interaction amongst Network members, these Guidelines are premised on the concept of:
an initiating member, who initiates the particular process.
participating members, who are requested to assess or react to the process commenced by the initiating member; and
a client, who may not necessarily be a KPMG audit client.
The most common kinds of situations giving rise to interaction amongst Network members are summarised below, together with a checklist which sets out the obligations of the initiating member and the participating member in each set of circumstances.
Exclusive sell situations
Third party sell situations
Requests for exclusive acquisition advice
Acquisition target contact assistance
Acquisition research case
Information requests
Client courtesy meetings
Cross-border deal initiation
Each of these situations can give rise to different forms of fee arrangement, examples of which are:
the referral of fee-paying client work by a initiating member to a participating member;
value-added/success fee-splitting arrangements between two Network members;
the charging of time-based fees by a participating member either to an initiating member or to the initiating member's client; or
complimentary services by a participating member.
It is essential that, in all Network communications initiating members clearly set out the fee basis upon which participating members are to be included.
0509.4 Exclusive Sell Situations
These are divestiture engagements in which the initiating member has been retained on an exclusive basis to assist in the sale of a business, and the business merits justify (or the client specifically requests) an international marketing program.
It is recognised that each Network member may undertake exclusive sell situations for which international marketing is inappropriate and which will therefore not be circulated amongst Network members.
In conducting an exclusive sell situation, the engagement selling documents should comprise:
an Investment Overview, which is a brief memorandum that highlights the main features of the business and which may not necessarily identify the name of the business; and
a Confidential Information Memorandum, which is a more comprehensive and detailed document made available to approved purchasers who typically have executed a Confidentiality Agreement.
It is also anticipated that the initiating member's fee arrangements with his exclusive sell situation client will take the form of a time-based fee at or in excess of standard fee rates, or the inclusion in the fee arrangement of an element of value-added/success fees.
In planning the distribution of the Investment Overview to foreign prospective purchasers in an exclusive sell situation, the following guidelines apply:
The initiating member should provide an advance copy of the Investment Overview text to all Network members (mailings to other than the full Network are discouraged), together with a list of foreign prospective purchasers already identified by the initiating member for each Network members jurisdiction (eg the Swiss member of the Network will receive the Investment Overview text together with a list of Swiss prospective purchasers, if any, identified by the initiating member).
If the initiating member or his client has decided that the exclusive sell situation will be of interest only to certain countries, then the Investment Overview text should still be distributed to all Network members but the covering memorandum should clearly identify those Network members to whom the material is being sent for information purposes only.
Participating members should distribute the Investment Overview direct to foreign prospective purchasers in their countries unless they prefer to have it distributed by the initiating member.
If the initiating member has provided a list of foreign prospective purchasers which contains KPMG clients, client service partners may remove their clients' names from that list when they deem it advisable.
Under these circumstances the initiating member should contact the client service partner to further discuss the reasons for exclusion.
Distribution of Investment Overviews should be done at no cost to the initiating member or his client.
However, the initiating member should consider retaining participating members on a fee-paying basis to contact and follow-up with prospective purchasers in a more direct (also more time consuming) manner.
The initiating member should offer an incentive to all Network members to encourage the submission of original prospective purchaser suggestions, in the form of a success fee equal to, for instance, 10% of the total estimated engagement fee and which would only be payable to a Network member's firm if the following conditions are satisfied:
the prospective purchaser suggested by a Network member becomes the successful purchaser
the Network member submitting the suggestions has provided full corporate details to the initiating member (ie full corporate name of prospective purchaser, address, telephone number and name of senior office to contact), a brief summary of the current business activities of the prospective purchaser, and reasons why the prospective purchaser might be interested.
the Network member submitting the suggestion has, following approval of the suggestion by the initiating member, contacted the prospective purchaser on behalf of the initiating member in order to ensure that the exclusive sell situation is brought to the attention of the prospective purchaser in an effective and professionally-handled manner.
The success fee should be paid to the firm of the Network member who submitted the successful suggestion, by remittance at closing of the sale transaction or upon receipt of the final fee payment by the initiating member.
It should be noted, therefore, that the success fee is intended to compensate the Network member submitting the suggestion for identifying an original and successful prospective purchaser name and for handling the initial contact with the suggested prospective purchaser.
In the event that the initiating member wishes additional professional services to be provided by the Network member submitting the suggestion, then such services should be paid for on a separate and non-contingent basis by the initiating member.
It is strongly recommended that initiating members seek to negotiate fee arrangements with their exclusive sell situation clients that allow them to offer time-based remuneration to participating members with respect to the process of originating foreign purchaser suggestions and/or contacting foreign purchasers.
It is extremely important that Network members are given the opportunity to handle both of these tasks (origination and/or contacts) in an effective and professional manner.
There is more likelihood of continuing to achieve this result if time-based remuneration (on a pre-budgeted basis) is offered to participating members in preference, where possible, to the success fee-based approach described above.
Exclusive Sell Situations Checklist of Network Member Obligations
Initiating Member
1.
Consider whether to sub-contact research on prospective foreign purchasers to specific participating members.
2.
Consider retaining Network members on a fee paying basis to deliver the Investment Overview to foreign prospective purchasers and thereby enhance preliminary contact and follow-up.
3.
Provide copies of Investment Overview to all Network members in advance of distribution to the purchaser marketplace, and include a transmittal memo which:
identifies the opportunity as an Exclusive Sell Situation
describes why the business may interest purchasers on an international basis
describes the proposed sale procedures and related timing.
identifies whether the business for sale is a KPMG audit client
clearly sets out the fee basis upon which the participating member is to be involved
lists in an appendix the prospective purchasers, if any, already identified in each participating member's country
requests each participating member, in whose country prospective purchasers have already been identified, to comment on: whether any prospective purchasers on the list are clients of the participating member's firm and, if so, to identify the client partner and his local office
Participating Member
1.
If you are retained to conduct purchaser research for your country, ensure that accurate and up-to-date details of prospective purchaser descriptions are provided.
2.
Ensure that, if you are retained to conduct contact with prospective purchasers in your country, the contact process is handled expeditiously and by a partner or senior professional.
3.
Review the Investment Overview and related transmittal memo and consider submission of purchaser suggestions.
4.
If prospective purchasers in your country have been identified by the initiating member then, on an expeditious basis, advise the initiating member as to:
which prospective purchasers are clients of your firm and provide details of the client partner and his local office
whether any prospective purchasers on the list are, on their merits, inappropriate
confirm that you undertake to deliver the Investment Overview expeditiously, or identify those on the list which you prefer receive the Investment Overview directly from the initiating member
whether the initiating member has identified the proper senior officer with whom to make contact
5.
Ensure that engagement staff respond expeditiously to purchaser suggestions submitted by Network members, and that a record of all purchaser suggestions is maintained.
6.
Advise those Network members who are participating in the distribution of the Investment Overview of the progress of the engagement, at significant milestones, and also ensure that they receive copies of all subsequent material being transmitted.
7.
At the successful completion of the engagement, advise all Network members of the outcome (ie whether the successful purchaser was originally suggested by a Network member and, if so, which Network member).
8.
Ensure that disclaimers accompany all material distributed to the purchaser marketplace, and that such disclaimers cover ‘KPMG and its Member Firms:
0509.5 Third Party Sell Situations
These situations are represented by businesses which:(i) are offered for sale in credible circumstances and on realistic term;(ii) in respect of which the initiating member has not been retained on an exclusive basis; and (iii) which on their merits would warrant international marketing if the initiating member had been retained on an exclusive basis.
These situations are likely to involve businesses with respect to which:
the owners have decided to sell without the assistance of any M&A adviser;
other M&A advisers have been retained on an exclusive basis;
the initiating member's firm has a non-exclusive arrangement;
the initiating member's firm has been retained to provide non-M&A services (such as transaction tax planning); or
the initiating member's firm has been requested to contact the Network on behalf of a client seeking a white knight, on a non-exclusive basis.
Any value-added/success fee obtained by a Network member in a third party sell situation should be shared equally between the initiating member and the participating member.
The objectives of the Network do not include distribution of a large volume of third party sell situations, although some involvement in them may be a necessary feature of certain domestic M&A marketplaces.
Third party sell situations: Checklist of network member obligations
Initiating Member
1.
Before distributing details to the Network, assess whether the sell situation meets the Network criteria:
is offered for sale in credible circumstances,
is offered for sale on reasonable terms,
current and adequate information is in your possession, and
the opportunity merits international marketing.
2.
Ensure that your memo to the Network identifies the opportunity as a Third Party Sell Situation and explains why the opportunity is being circulated to the Network.
This should identify the likely benefits to KPMG.
3.
Identify in your memo whether the situation requires a sale or an injection of finance.
4.
Identify in your memo what information is currently available or can be expected later, and whether the company has been on the market before.
5.
Explain in your memo whether Network members can obtain success-based remuneration from you, the vendor of the business, or from the vendor's agent, or whether network members must make their own fee arrangements with prospective purchasers.
6.
Explain in your memo how Network member should respond if they wish to do so (eg who to contact, when and how).
Participating Member
1.
If you respond to the situation and become involved in the subsequent process, copy the initiating member on all relevant correspondence.
2.
When your involvement ceases or the sale process terminates, briefly advise the initiating member of the outcome, problems encountered during the process, etc.
3.
If you obtain a value-added/success fee, arrange to remit upon receipt 50% of the fee to the initiating member's firm.
06 Buying
Contents
0601 Introduction
.1
Circumstances in which MAS may be acting as advisers in an acquisition
.2
The MAS role
.3
Standards of work
0602
Planning and proposal
.1
Standards of work
.2
Planning
.3
Formal proposals
.4
Engagement letters
.5
Confidentiality Undertakings
0603
Strategic review
0604
Proactive search
0605
Reactive search
0606
Target approach
0607
Presentation to interested parties
0608
Key features review
0609
Deal structuring
.1
Introduction
.2
Earnout considerations
0610
Heads of agreement
.1
Introduction
.2
Profit definitions
.3
Net asset definitions
0611
Investigations Service
0612
Using the International Network
.1
Introduction
.2
Request for exclusive acquisition advice
.3
Acquisition target contact assistance
.4
Acquisition research case
0601 Introduction
This chapter outlines the procedures and recommended practice to be adopted when engaged to provide acquisition assistance.
The chapter is presented in the order of activities involved in purchasing a company.
0601.1 Circumstances in which MAS may be acting as advisers in an acquisition
To date MAS has tended to provide acquisition assistance to the following type of organisation:
Private companies with limited acquisition experience or inadequate resources (general or specialist) to complete a deal.
Public companies which do not have adequate in-house corporate finance experience/resources, where the acquisition is not of sufficient size to interest its merchant bank.
Foreign companies wishing to acquire in the UK, normally introduced to MAS by a member of the M&A International Network.
In terms of transaction size, MAS has assisted on several large acquisitions (with purchase prices approaching £50 million) as well as number of smaller transactions.
0601.2 The MAS role
There are two distinct phases to an acquisition assignment and MAS may be involved in either phase or, ideally, in both phases; these are:—
(i)
Acquisition search and preliminary contact with possible targets.
(ii)
Transaction management, involving target investigation, deal structuring and negotiation and contract drafting.
The services that MAS may provide include:
Strategic review and consideration of alternatives to acquisition.
Reactive and proactive target search.
Anonymous approach to targets.
Valuation or ‘pricing analysis’(see Chapter 08).
Deal structuring and negotiation.
Drafting of heads of agreement.
Terms of reference for Investigations Service.
Assistance with contract drafting and negotiation.
Acquisition assignments often provide good opportunities for cross selling other KPMG services.
For example, strategy and industry specialist MC staff may assist MAS with acquisition searches and, where appropriate, MAS will recommend that the purchaser engages a KPMG general practice department to undertake an Investigation Service Report of the target.
MAS will be responsible for co-ordinating the delivery of these services and those provided by other professionals (for example, lawyers and surveyors).
Importantly, there are opportunities for recurring work from satisfied acquisitive clients in the form of assistance with future acquisitions and audit appointments at target companies.
0601.3 Standards of work
Our work should be carried out in accordance with the general technical standards set out in the Corporate Finance Manual and summarized in Chapter 02 of this guide.
Additional considerations specific to acquisitions are covered at the appropriate points in this chapter.
0602 Planning and proposal
0602.1 Standards of work
The general standards relating to the acceptance of new clients are set out in section 0201 of Chapter 02 and are detailed in the CFM.
Of particular relevance in determining whether to accept an acquisition engagement are:
Engagement risk.
The risk to the firm's image in the financial community and the industry if it is associated with adverse criticism in a large or well-publicised transaction.
This may arise as a consequence of an unsuccessful or ill-considered approach to a potential target.
Consideration should be given to the background of prospective clients and their motives for requiring us to carry out the work.
Independence.
The firm's independence may be thought to be compromised because of the fee arrangements or because of the relationship with the client.
Conflicts of interest.
Where the purchaser and target are both clients of the firm, their attention should be drawn to this fact at the earliest possible stage.
Consideration should be given to ensuring that the staff assigned to the engagement are not involved in other work carried out in relation to either the purchaser or the target.
In addition, the engagement letter should include acknowledgement and acceptance of the situation from both parties and confirmation of the firm's independence.
Capacity in which MAS acts.
The firm should normally act only in a professional or agency role.
The client for whom the firm is acting should be clearly identified and care should be taken to ensure that third parties do not form the impression that the firm is advising them or acting for them when this is not the case.
Further, the firm should not conclude on the appropriateness of a course of action under consideration, for example, on whether the acquisition is worthwhile.
The firm must maintain an independent and objective attitude throughout the engagement, rather than advocating an acquisition.
KPMG network.
Some engagements will require the involvement of other offices in the KPMG network.
The standards set out in this chapter and elsewhere in the guide are to be followed on such engagements.
In addition, the International M&A Network has prepared further guidelines that address the particular circumstances of cross-border engagements (see the handbook).
Acquisition search.
Where the engagement involves acting for a client in an acquisition search, steps should be taken to ensure that the client is a serious acquirer with specific acquisition criteria (which MAS may help to develop and refine) and that there is a reasonable likelihood that the firm can discover potential acquisition candidates.
Acquisition searches should only be undertaken by MAS if appropriate research capabilities are in place.
0602.2 Planning
0602.21 Preliminary assessment of acquisition plans
Before an acquisition strategy, fee quote or detailed proposal can be considered, a preliminary assessment of the client's acquisition plans must be carried out.
This may take place at the first meeting with the client, although for larger assignments access to confidential material may be necessary before such an assessment can be made.
It is necessary, therefore, to be well prepared for the first meeting, although unduly high start-up costs should be avoided at this stage.
In addition to carrying out background research on the purchaser and its principal markets (see section 0602.22 below), preliminary consideration should be given to how to tailor MAS and KPMG services to best meet client needs.
The following sections of this chapter lists the full range of services that MAS and other departments are able to offer in conjunction with an acquisition.
However, each section of the work may assume greater or lesser importance depending on the work that the client may have already done (for example, determination of investment criteria and identification of possible targets), always assuming that the client's approach has been sound.
Hence, it will always be necessary to understand how a client has approached a proposed acquisition and to consider the possible flaws or gaps in its method.
The scale of the assignment will also influence MAS's approach.
In the case of a relatively small acquisition it may be sufficient just to have an appreciation of the clients' strategic thinking.
Conversely, where the acquisition involves ambitious market entry plans, the client may wish for MAS and MC Strategy Services to undertake a comprehensive strategic review.
0602.22 First meeting or contact
The principal objective of the first meeting/contact must be to sell MAS and other KPMG services and win the assignment.
The secondary objective is to undertake a preliminary assessment of the client and its acquisition plans.
Whereas vendors are frequently inexperienced, purchasers will often have previous acquisition experience.
Hence MAS needs to sell its expertise.
Consider marketing the overall KPMG service:—
MC assistance with acquisition strategy.
MC assistance with target research (ie industry specialists etc).
International Network assistance with target research.
International Network as a source of sale opportunities.
MAS's ‘key features review’ or ‘quick appraisal’product.
MAS's deal structuring experience, drawing on KPMG's taxation expertise and International Network input in efficient cross-border structures.
MAS's experience in drafting heads of agreement.
KPMG Investigation Service, again using MC industry specialists where necessary.
The agenda for the first meeting/contact should then endeavour to cover the following topics:—
An overview of the purchaser's business (SWOT analysis) and its financial position (*).
The purchaser's reason for the acquisition and consideration of other options.
The purchaser's commitment to the acquisition process (ie full board approval and the authority of the purchaser's representative).
Source and amount of funds available for the acquisition.
The purchaser's previous acquisition experience (*).
The actions of key players in the purchaser's target market (*).
The purchaser's investment strategy/criteria and any key deal breaking/winning issues.
Initial suggestions of possible targets (*).
Details of preparatory work already undertaken by the purchaser.
The purchaser's proposed timetable.
Consideration of the need for other professionals/specialists from within KPMG and externally.
Does the purchaser already use a good UK commercial lawyer?
The level of confidentiality required.
The purchaser's plans may be commercially sensitive, dictating the need to first approach targets anonymously.
The purchaser should be prepared to sign a target's confidentiality undertaking.
The strategy for integrating the acquired business after the proposed transaction.
The information gained from consideration of these topics should then be drawn together in an outline verbal proposal to the purchaser, detailing our assistance and the likely fee basis.
An aide-memoire for basic client data which should be obtained at an initial meeting is at 1109.1.
0602.23 Fee considerations
As a general rule, a purchaser often has more freedom and grounds to withdraw from a transaction than a reasonably committed vendor.
In addition, a purchaser should have the necessary funding support to complete the deal.
As a result of both of these considerations, it is most unusual for MAS to act for a buyer on a contingent fee basis (other than an MBO or MBI team, and then only on a selected basis with a suitable risk reward ratio.)
The normal fee arrangement for buying assistance is therefore time, sometimes capped by a total fee estimate.
General fee considerations are covered in the UK handbook and in Chapter 3 of this Practice Guide.
Theoretically there is no reason why MAS should not be paid bonuses according to our degree of success at negotiating a deal below a price agreed in advance with our client.
However, in practice such ‘reverse commission scales’ are rarely used.
0602.24 Work progress documentation
Although acquisition assistance may be less structured than normal corporate finance (ie special) work, it is important to impose a structure as early as possible and to maintain working papers in accordance with that structure.
0602.3 Formal proposals
On some acquisition assignments it will be necessary to make formal oral presentations.
Full use should be made of visual aids and internal specialist advice should be taken.
0602.4 Engagement letters
0602.41 Introduction
The firm's general standards relating to engagement letters are contained in Chapter 03.
In summary, the steps to be taken are:—
Obtain a corporate finance engagement letter (‘CFEL’), if not already in place.
Agree the terms of the engagement in writing.
An example buying proposal letter is given in Section 1101.8
0602.42 CFEL
Work can only be undertaken if an FSA engagement letter (usually a CFEL letter) is in place.
(This requirement is covered in more detail in Chapter 04.)
Whilst preliminary discussion with a purchaser may take place before terms of engagement have been confirmed with the client, a formal CFEL must be obtained before any preparation of documentation begins.
Compliance Unit in London office maintains a central register of all CFELs obtained by the firm.
Refer to compliance unit if the client is an audit client or if there is a possibility that the UK firm has carried out any corporate finance work for the client in the past.
0602.43 Terms of engagement
The terms of engagement letter should aim to set out unambiguously our understanding of the clients' requirements and the nature of the services and assistance we intend to provide.
Once agreed by the client in writing, this letter will establish the instructions and terms of reference and avoid misunderstandings as to MAS's and KPMG's role and responsibilities.
If it becomes apparent that the scope of the work required by the terms of engagement will need to be modified, the client should be notified immediately, and agreement reached on the revised terms.
The revisions should preferably be confirmed in writing.
The engagement letter will need to be tailored to each acquisition assignment.
For some assignments with less experienced clients it will be appropriate to set out in detail and at some length the scope of the MAS and KPMG involvement at each stage.
For more experienced clients a shorter approach may be appropriate.
An example of a buying proposal letter as set out in section 1101.8 and an acquisition search proposal letter is at 1101.6.
Chapter 11 also contains an example public offer deal lead engagement letter (1101.10) and an engagement letter for fund raising advisery work (1101.9).
A comprehensive checklist for matters to be dealt with in the terms of engagement letter is set out in Chapter 03.
Of particular relevance to acquisition engagements are the following:
Defining our role, such that responsibility for deciding whether to proceed with an acquisition rests with our client.
Obtaining precise acquisition criteria prior to undertaking proactive search work.
Obtaining client input for price analysis in order to value synergistic benefits and possible cost savings.
0602.5 Confidentiality undertakings
When MAS is acting for a prospective purchaser, we should advise our client to obtain a confidentiality undertaking from the vendors.
An example is given at 1106.5.
When acting on an acquisition, MAS may be asked by the prospective vendors to sign a confidentiality agreement.
The firm's position on this is set out in detail in Chapter 9 of the CFM but, in summary, concerns over possible limitations on the scope of our work and the possible requirement to return material supporting any advice given, it is our preferred policy to use the form of wording set out at 1106.4.
If this is unacceptable, contact CFSU.
0603 Strategic review
A well planned acquisition has a better chance of success.
Planning is all the more important when trading conditions are difficult and shareholders and debt financiers are consequently more nervous.
In addition, the safety net of being able to dispose of an ill-targeted acquisition or a business that becomes non-core as a result of an acquisition may not exist when times are hard.
Before commencing the acquisition process the potential purchaser should set its corporate objectives and assess its ability to achieve these objectives from the existing business.
An acquisition strategy should be formulated to bridge the gap between corporate objectives and the company's existing capability to achieve those objectives.
Planning may also deter purchasers from undertaking opportunistic acquisitions for short term motives without regard to long term strategic aims.
The strategic review process may be represented schematically as follows:—
Corporate objectives may be expressed in terms of a range of criteria, including targets for:
revenues
profitability
securities market rating
market share
economies of scale
quality or stability of earnings
product range
geographical coverage
extent of diversification
quality of management
Prior to advising on M&A strategy, an objective assessment should be made of:
the purchaser's market share and market position
the expected development of the market
the purchaser's existing portfolio of investments
the capabilities of its management
The process of identifying targets in accordance with defined investment criteria is dealt with in the section on pro-active searches (see section 0604).
If the timetable for the achievement of the corporate objectives is sufficiently long, the option of organic growth should not be overlooked.
Target profiling is undertaken initially as an overview and subsequently in greater detail, by which time ideally the following information and assessments should be provided about each possible target subject to availability:
nature and size of the business (in terms of sales, net assets and employees)
estimated market share
geographical location
source and estimated sustainability of competitive advantage
organisational structure
assessment of compatibility of management styles
profitability and stability of earnings
possible opportunities for synergy
net assets and capital structure
likely valuation range
assessment of likelihood of an agreed deal 
0604 Proactive Search
A proactive search is undertaken to identify companies and businesses which are not necessarily known to be for sale but which meet the client's acquisition criteria.
Such searches may be undertaken as part of a comprehensive strategic review or in order to assist a client in implementing an agreed acquisition strategy.
With a population of some 11,000 public and 130,000 active private companies in the UK alone, it is important that the search criteria precisely define the target market or place other limitations on the scope of the search.
Equally important is an unambiguous record of the purchaser's detailed acquisition criteria, ranked in order of importance.
If in any doubt, we should ask the client for written confirmation of our understanding of the criteria.
In assisting a client in defining or refining its acquisition criteria, we should ensure that consideration is given to the following parameters:—
the industry/product sector
the market place (regional, national or international)
financial performance (sales levels, gross margin and profitability requirements)
financial position (asset backing, working capital ratios, borrowing levels)
management expertise (management team to be retained or strengthened)
nature of investment (controlling interest, minority stake, strategic alliance or start-up)
target structure (statutory company, business/division, assets or brand)
going concern and/or receivership situations
price range
The buy register input form can serve as a useful checklist.
Consideration should be given to using the following sources of information as the means to identify targets:—
Lotus One Source UK corporate database (MAS)
Textline database of press reports (MC Business Information Centre)
Other on-line databases operated by the Business Information Centre and PPD Library
MC industry specialists (for example, High Technology, Regis McKenna)
Relevant trade journals and directories.
Willings Press Guide will identify the prominent publications in each sector
The International Network.
The Network guidelines (see the handbook) list the procedures involved in requesting cross-border acquisition research assistance
The UK M&A Network
The Accountants Business Network as a source of companies for sale.
The client's acquisition criteria may also be advertised as an ABN Newsflash (see section 1004)
Advertising
Whilst the pure search work may be sub-contracted to other specialist departments, MAS should have principal responsibility for monitoring the progress of the search process (particularly ensuring that time is not being spent researching targets outside the purchaser's price range) and drawing together all the findings.
Depending on the client's instructions, it may be helpful to rank the possible targets ‘A’, ‘B’ or ‘C’, depending on how closely they satisfy the acquisition criteria.
Another crucial piece of information that must be presented (on the basis of publicly available information only) with our findings is an assessment by MAS of the likelihood of each possible transaction being completed.
In making this assessment, consideration should be given to the following:—
The shareholder profile (eg entrenched family holdings, owner-managers approaching retirement age or venture capitalists looking for an exit)
Possible deal breakers (eg. unquantifiable contingent liabilities)
The possibility of competing bids
The likely response of the target's management team.
Will the approach lead to greater job security, access to new markets for the target's products and higher capital investment, or is rationalisation contemplated?
The method of reporting back to the client should be specified in the terms of engagement letter.
Normally MAS will issue a report in which case consideration should be given to the following presentation:—
Covering letter (search method, sources of information, limitations of method, costs incurred, recommended way forward).
Summary of findings (targets ranked A, B or C with a separate assessment of likely target resistance)
Detailed profiles for each target (see the suggested format in Section 0603 above).
Consider preparing a short form profile for C ranked targets.
Up to date contact names and addresses for all targets ranked A and B. KPMG contacts with all such targets should also be reported.
Copy of the engagement letter (as an appendix).
Example acquisition search engagement letters are given in Chapter 11 (1101.6 and 1101.7 (cross-border)).
0605 Reactive search
As an alternative to a proactive search, acquisitive clients can be provided with a reactive search service, whereby their acquisition criteria are registered on MAS's Buyreg database and then matched with sale opportunities brought to the attention of clients.
Principal differences, other than the fee scales, between the proactive and reactive services are as follows:—
The reactive service only identifies known sale opportunities.
Because the flow of companies coming to the market is outside of MAS's control, we cannot give the acquiror any assurances as to how many opportunities will be identified within a certain timescale.
Indeed, where an acquiror has particularly precise and specialist criteria, we should consider whether any relevant opportunities will ever be found using the reactive approach.
The proactive approach is best suited to identifying strategic acquisitions where a purchaser is prepared to pay a fair price, whereas the reactive approach is more suited to acquirors looking for opportunistic sale situations.
Shareholders will often entertain reasonable buying propositions, even when they have not previously contemplated sale of their shares.
Hence, the proactive approach will enable an acquiror to select targets from a larger population of companies.
By pursuing only known sale opportunities, there is greater chance that the reactive approach will lead an acquiror into a formal sale process, where the vendor has appointed professional advisers to handle the transactions on its behalf.
Normally, such advisers will run an informal auction for the target so as to introduce competitive bidding and encourage a high price for the shares.
Conversely, a credible purchaser following the proactive approach may be able to persuade the target's shareholders of the merits of its offer (for example, a strong strategic fit and synergistic benefits reflected in its offer price) and so discourage the shareholders from approaching other possible purchasers and risk damaging the business through a loss of confidence.
The reactive service is cheaper.
0606 Target approach
MAS may be asked to contact potential acquisition candidates already identified by a client.
Alternatively, MAS may undertake a proactive search for a client with target approach being the next logical step in MAS's acquisition assistance.
In both cases we should satisfy ourselves that our client is committed to the acquisition process and has a genuine interest in the target companies.
The first step is to decide how many candidates to approach.
The following factors should be borne in mind:—
What percentage of candidates are likely to respond favourably to an approach?
Has the purchaser the desire, resources and ability to proceed with more than one acquisition concurrently?
If so, how many?
What is the purchaser's desired timetable?
If, unusually, there is no time pressure, the targets can be approached one at a time in order of their relative attractiveness.
When under more time pressure, targets will need to be approached simultaneously.
The situation where more than one target responds favourably will then need to be managed carefully to avoid damaging the purchaser's credibility and the firm's reputation.
The following procedures should be adopted before approaching any potential acquisition candidate:—
ensure that each identified candidate is approved by the client
identify any candidates which are clients of KPMG
for KPMG clients, inform the client service partner of the intention to approach the client and agree the means by which the approach is to be made
for overseas targets, use the M&A network as set out at 0612 below
for non-KPMG clients, if practical, inform the appropriate person in the operating office nearest to the identified candidate of the firm's intention to approach (this will normally be the managing partner specialising in merger and acquisition services) and inquire whether there are any KPMG connections with the identified candidate and whether or not it would be more appropriate for the approach to be made directly from the nearest operating office
If the identified candidate is a KPMG client, it should be informed at the time of making the approach of the firm's role in the acquisition search (see section 0602.1 above).
As a rule, purchasers tend to prefer us to approach acquisition candidates anonymously on their behalf.
The text of such approach letters are included in Section 1106.2 and 1106.3.
Anonymous approaches by telephone are now permitted although experience shows that without any forewarning of the approach they are unlikely to be successful (see chapter 0407 for the detailed rules).
In due course, the target may respond by letter or telephone.
Copies notes of all such telephone conversations will be needed to give comprehensive feedback to our client.
Before giving a reaction to our letter, a target may ask for clarification as to the purchaser's intentions, normally with regard to the development of the business and job security for the employees.
To respond effectively, we must understand the purchaser's strategy and have thought through in advance with the purchaser how best to present its case.
However, we should avoid going into too much detail at this stage and, if appropriate, should encourage the target to express interest in attending a non-committal, preliminary meeting where the purchaser can make a comprehensive presentation (see section 0607).
The client (ie. the purchaser) needs to be kept regularly informed of progress with each possible candidate.
Once all responses have been received, we should assist our client in drawing up a shortlist of those targets our client would most wish to meet, by combining the relative enthusiasm of each response with the proactive search rankings.
We must then immediately write to every candidate which responded positively to our approach letter, either revealing our client's identity and confirming its interest in a meeting or stating, regretfully, that due to other favourable responses, our client will not be able to pursue the initial interest.
In such circumstances the rejected candidate needs to be reassured that his response will be treated in confidence.
The purchaser may also wish to suggest a willingness to re-open discussions at a future date, subject to the candidate's approval at that time.
Naturally a candidate's response may alter once our client's identity is revealed.
Indeed, candidates may be reluctant to respond positively without knowing the purchaser's identity.
Whilst an anonymous approach is accepted practice, the purchaser should be advised of the negative features of this approach so that it can consider whether its need for initial anonymity is warranted.
0607 Presentation to interested parties
Purchasers should be encouraged to meet with potential acquisition candidates at the earliest opportunity after they have first been approached.
This may help to dispel any ill feeling associated with an anonymous approach, but more importantly it provides an opportunity for the purchaser to build on the candidate's positive response before there is any change of heart.
The purchaser's objectives for the first meeting should be as follows:
(a)
To gain the confidence of the vendors
(b)
To obtain an assurance from the vendors that they wish to pursue matters on an exclusive basis, at least for a specified time period
(c)
To make arrangements to obtain sufficient information to confirm its willingness to proceed.
As a gesture of goodwill, it should be suggested to the purchaser that he offers to sign a confidentiality undertaking in favour of the vendors covering such information.
A two-way contract of confidentiality may be appropriate.
In deciding whether MAS should attend such a meeting, it will be important to consider whether our presence may hinder the achievement of objective (a).
Nevertheless MAS can assist the purchaser in preparing for the meeting.
The question doubtless uppermost in the vendors' mind will be price and the purchaser's response when pressed on this point should be carefully considered in advance.
Whilst the purchaser may wish to elicit the vendors' considered expectations before giving any indication, it is doubtful that much progress will be made in satisfying the above objectives without the purchaser giving a suitably caveated valuation range or at least an indication of the band of earnings multiples/net asset premiums it may be prepared to apply.
It is likely that the vendors will also wish to understand more fully the purchaser's interest in the acquisition and its future plans for the business.
This will help them to assess the reasonableness of any subsequent offer; for example, are the vendors to be rewarded for any synergies or rationalisation benefits resulting from the transaction?
The vendors may be less inclined to invite competing bids for the company if there is already a strong fit with the prospective purchaser, provided they feel they are obtaining fair value.
The vendors may not be entirely price motivated and may be looking for reassurance from the purchaser as to, for example , the compatibility of management styles, career development opportunities for senior staff and job security for the workforce.
They may like the idea of the trading name being adopted by a larger group but may be reluctant to see their business relocated or asset stripped.
Naturally the purchaser should be alert to any signals from the vendors on such matters.
Prior to the meeting, the purchaser and MAS will need to establish their further information requirements distinguishing between that which will need to be investigated before more precise deal terms can be negotiated and that which will need to be seen before a deal can be completed.
Normally MAS (in conjunction with KPMG and MC) will have two separate opportunities to investigate the target; firstly, as part of the key features review and, secondly, at the due diligence stage.
Terms of reference for both investigations will be determined by the purchaser, who will normally want to make separate enquiries in areas such as operations and management.
In discussing the above information and access requirements, the purchaser should be careful not to discourage the vendors either by presenting a long shopping list or by giving the impression that the price expectation already given has been poorly researched.
0608 Key features review
The purpose of the key features review, which typically forms a 2-3 man day investigation, is for MAS to identify, at an early stage in the transaction cycle, any major potential deal breaking points and other contentions issues relating to a proposed acquisition.
Such a review is undertaken with a view to saving the purchaser the costs of more expensive, full scale investigations (and other professional fees), which may be incurred unnecessarily if the above issues cannot be resolved and the deal has to be aborted.
The review should be carried out under the guidelines set out in the CFM for Quick Appraisals (Chapter 5).
The following issues of particular relevance from a buyer's perspective may be identified by such a review:
Factors which suggest that the target's competitive edge may not be sustainable; for example, the expiration of patent protection.
Past failed attempts at market and product development.
Supply agreements with key customers which are due for renewal shortly after the intended completion date.
Commercial constraints which may limit sales growth; for example, territorial restrictions contained in agency and licensing agreements.
Capacity and other resource constraints which may limit the target's ability to respond to increases in demand.
Apparent strengths in the target's management team which need to be secured and weaknesses which need to be resolved; for example, past health record of key executives.
Areas of exposure to external events; for example, political instability in foreign markets, currency exposure, recessionary effects and labour disputes.
Material provisions whose adequacy cannot be assessed objectively on the basis of actual experience either in the run up to completion or within a short period from completion (so that it may not be reasonable to expect to obtain a retention from the vendors); for example, pension provisions and reserves for goods supplied in previous years.
Onerous leasing obligations and other capital commitments which cannot be revoked without incurring a penalty/losing a deposit and/or which are essential for the ongoing business.
Contingent liabilities where it will not be possible to assess objectively prior to completion the likelihood of crystallisation, the possible timing of crystallisation and/or the financial effect (for example potential environmental damage claims).
Details of material off-balance sheet transactions.
Unreasonable assumptions in the target's budgets and projections.
Unusual peaks and troughs in cash balances/borrowing levels during previous accounting periods.
Accounting policies which if altered for consistency with the purchaser's policies would have a material effect on the earnings or net assets of the target.
The key features review provides MAS with an opportunity to add value to the purchaser's acquisition plans by identifying factors that give grounds for the purchaser to reduce both his and the vendors' price expectations and by suggesting pragmatic solutions, based on experience, that enable the deal to proceed without leaving either side overly exposed.
0609 Deal structuring
0609.1 Introduction
The devising of an appropriate deal structure can be as important to the financial success of the transaction as the strategic fit with the candidate and the reasonableness of the purchase price.
The deal structuring stage should draw together all the information now available about the target (including the results of the key features review and the purchaser's assessment of possible synergies and cost savings) with a view to establishing the most efficient structure for the proposed transaction and firming up on any price expectations already communicated to the vendors.
Taxation is often the deciding factor in choosing between alternative deal structures.
Proactive tax advice by MAS and KPMG may enable the purchaser to offer a deal structure which provides benefits for the vendors at little or no extra cost to the purchaser.
The following structuring issues should be considered:
Whether to purchase the shares of the target company or the assets (including trading goodwill) of the business?
Consider the differential treatment of capital allowances, stamp duty, corporation tax and VAT.
Assuming that shares are purchased, whether to acquire full control, majority holding or a minority stake?
The contents of shareholder agreements may provide important protection for minority investors.
If the purchaser is UK based, will tax relief be available on the financing costs for the acquisition?
It may be advantageous for the interest charge to be borne by a separate investment company if the purchasing group has insufficient profits to absorb the interest charge in a single year.
The calculation and accounting treatment of goodwill will also be of importance to UK based purchasers.
The tax and accounting treatment for acquisition financing costs and goodwill might be optimised by establishing a foreign intermediate holding company (‘IHC’).
The gain on any disposal may then be recognised outside the UK,(provided the management of the IHC are located abroad), ideally in a jurisdiction which does not tax capital gains (for example The Netherlands).
Where the ultimate holding company is UK based, such an approach offers a deferral of tax payable until the proceeds are remitted to the UK.
The impact of exchange control legislation and taxation on the repatriation of profits will also be an issue for purchasers based overseas.
It will be important to ensure that the relevant double tax treaties cover the treatment of dividends and interest.
The use of an IHC may have important implications for the distributable reserves of the purchasing group.
If the target is eventually sold for a profit, the benefit of the realised reserves can only be transferred to the original purchaser (by dividend) if the IHC has adequate distributable resources.
If sold at a loss, the distributable reserves of the purchaser may be protected, assuming that the purchaser does not need to provide against its investment in the IHC.
Whether to write off loans due to the vendors appearing in the target balance sheet or repay them and reduce the purchase price accordingly?
The latter method has the advantage of reducing the vendors' capital gains tax liability and the purchaser's stamp duty.
Any loan made by the purchaser to the target to fund the repayment should be structured as a ‘debt on a security’ to enable tax relief to be claimed on any loss arising on the loan.
Whether to offer consideration in shares, loan notes, or cash?
The vendors may be attracted to non-cash consideration which, subject to Inland Revenue clearance, allows the capital gains tax liability on the sale to be held-over (ie deferred) until the securities are sold.
Guarantee costs of these should normally be at the vendors' expense.
Clearance applications require planning as it may take up to 30 days to obtain clearance.
Care must be taken during negotiations with or on behalf of a target that any group relief claims are not jeopardised by the existence of an ‘arrangement’ to sell.
Whether the vendors' financial arrangements present any structuring opportunities?
Whether to allow or encourage the vendor to declare a pre-sale dividend, to enable the vendor to receive part of the proceeds at, effectively, 20% rates of tax?
Dividend strip anti avoidance legislation should be watched.
A repurchase of shares may be equally tax efficient.
Whether deferred consideration or an earnout is appropriate?
0609.2 Earnout considerations
The profit definition considerations of an earnout are considered under heads of agreement (see section 0610 below).
The reasons for structuring a deal around an earnout may be summarised as follows:
From the purchaser's viewpoint
An earnout may enable the purchaser to bridge the gap between both parties' price expectations, with the assurance that a higher price will only be paid if projections are achieved.
An earnout may help to continue to motivate the vendors and secure their services even after they have received the initial consideration.
This may be particularly important in service industries where there may be limited net asset backing.
Compared with bonuses, this means of incentivising management will not deplete the post acquisition earnings of the target.
An earnout will provide a purchaser with a cash flow advantage in not having to pay the extra consideration upfront.
From the vendors' viewpoint
An earnout provides a mechanism for vendors to receive some of the benefit of future profit growth which, owing to past performance of the target, a purchaser may not be prepared to pay for at completion.
The key issues in negotiating an earnout are as follows:
The initial purchase consideration should reflect the present performance of the business.
The earnout payment should reflect marginal improvements above this base.
The purchaser may want the earnout to run for at least two years to ensure that the earnout payment is not based on a one-off peak in earnings.
Conversely, a long period may restrict the purchaser should he wish to make changes to the vendor management team (either because they do not live up to first impressions or because he wishes to promote them within the enlarged group).
The purchaser may also wish to restructure the new group, making it difficult to identify the earnings solely attributable to the original target company.
The vendor management will want sufficient freedom during the earnout period to maximise their performance under the earnout.
For example, they may be reluctant to develop new markets and products if these actions are likely to result in initial losses, unless the cost of such initiatives are ‘added back’ in the definition of earnout profits.
They may also make short term cut backs in expenditure such as advertising and repairs, to the longer term detriment of the business.
The tax treatment of unconditional deferred cash consideration may be disadvantageous to the vendors as capital gains tax may become payable before a deferred consideration is received.
The Inland Revenue will place a value on the future worth of an earnout agreement and, where this is to be satisfied in cash, capital gains tax may again become payable before the earnout payment is received.
There are hardship provisions which may alleviate the inequity for unconditional deferred consideration, but not for earnouts.
It may be important, therefore, to arrange for deferred consideration and earnouts to be payable mainly in shares and loan notes, always subject to the creditworthiness of the vendor, to enable capital gains tax liabilities to be held-over.
0610 Heads of agreement
0610.1 Introduction
Assuming that consensus can be reached between both parties as to the principal deal terms, with structuring being used to bridge the inevitable gap between the expectations of the purchaser and vendors, it will be important for this consensus to be confirmed in writing in the form of non-binding heads of agreement.
Where appropriate MAS will prepare the first draft of the heads on behalf of the purchaser.
In addition to focussing both parties' attention on the key elements of a deal, the heads will form a useful briefing document for the purchaser's lawyers in preparing the first draft of the sale and purchase contract.
Example heads of agreement are given at 1104.1 (detailed version) and 1104.2 (shorter version).
Consideration should be given to inclusion of the following items in the heads:
Purpose of heads of agreement.
The parties and their advisers.
Details of the shares or assets being acquired.
Details of the offer:
Details of pre-sale dividends, repayment of balances due to vendors, initial consideration and deferred consideration.
Adjustments to initial consideration and deferred consideration depending on net assets and profits (see below).
Basis and responsibility for and timing of calculation of net assets and profits.
Details of cash and non-cash consideration.
Conversation rate from cash to non-cash consideration.
Timing of payment or issue of consideration.
Timing and procedures for exchange and completion.
Conditions attaching to offer:
Shareholder approval.
Agreement of minority shareholders.
Accounting, taxation and legal due diligence.
Reasonable access to be provided.
Confirmation that the target has sufficient working capital for the next [12]months.
Target business to be run in ordinary course up to completion with no material changes in trading performance or net assets.
Actuarial valuation of pension fund.
Signing of new property leases.
Signing of non-competition and non-solicitation agreements by vendors.
Signing of new contracts of employment for key staff.
Favourable responses at joint presentations to key customers, key suppliers and workforce.
Vendors' assistance during changeover period.
Schedule of repayment of vendor loans
Tax indemnity for 7 years.
Indemnities for specific items already identified by the key features review and any further items discovered at due diligence.
Indemnity periods to be appropriate to the circumstances of each such item.
Exposure to be covered by bank guarantees, retentions or right of set-off against deferred consideration.
Where there is limited net asset cover, the vendors might be asked to warrant that they are not aware of any information relating to the target which has been knowingly withheld, the disclosure of which might effect the decision of the purchaser to proceed.
In reply, the vendors might ask for the purchaser's investigation report to be disclosed.
General statutory and business warranties for a period of 2-3 years.
To be covered in part by a simple bank guarantee, or retention or right of set-off.
Receipt of tax and other regulatory clearances.
Other terms
Purchaser and vendor to bear their own costs.
Purchaser to use reasonable endeavours to release target directors from any personal guarantees.
Exclusivity period to follow signing of heads.
Announcement procedures.
Position of KPMG Peat Marwick
Acting as advisers to the purchaser and shall not have any liability under the heads.
Whilst the heads as a whole should be marked ‘subject to contract and not legally binding’, where the heads refer to confidentiality and exclusivity these clauses should be expressly marked as legally binding.
0610.2 Profit definitions
Deal terms often provide for consideration to be calculated on a multiple of profits, calculated in accordance with a pre-arranged formula.
Given the multiplier effect, it is critical that there is no ambiguity in the definition of earnings that purchaser is willing to reward.
This will usually involve detailing precisely the accounting adopted for each major item of income and expenditure in far more detail then appears in notes to the accounts.
It is quite normal for such a profit definition to extend to several pages.
Set out below is a list of possible terms and considerations to be covered by a profit definition.
This list has been prepared without a buying or selling perspective and, hence, for practical reasons it might be decided to omit certain terms when acting for either party.
These are suggestions of areas of potential conflict or misunderstanding.
KPMG advice on these can be given to the client or the client's lawyers.
It is not KPMG's role to undertake the drafting of legally binding contracts; all drafting should be carried out or reviewed in detail and approved by the client's lawyers.
We should however be prepared to provide detailed drafting assistance on financial or similar aspects of a contract where a client requires expert' financial or accounting knowledge.
In such cases, careful consideration should be given to the appropriate internal review.
For example, if recently introduced accounting standards, contentious topics or complex technical issues are involved, it may be appropriate to consult PPD-TA and/or CFSU.
To be prepared and audited on the basis of accounting policies consistent with previous years or with the purchaser's own policies.
The impact of subsequent changes in accounting standards or legislation on the above consistent accounting policies requirement.
The order of precedence between consistent accounting policies, generally accepted accounting principles and special requirements (as set out below)
Whether to use post-tax profit, pre-tax profit or trading profit as the starting profit figure.
The timing of the recognition of income.
The procedures adopted in the valuation of stock.
Is a physical count necessary and how should obsolescence be provided for?
The distinction between revenue and capital expenditure.
The recognition of expenditure incurred in areas such as product and market development, especially where this expenditure does not yield a positive return by the end of the accounting period.
The basis of accruing for services expenditure (including the period over which expenditure is spread).
The procedures adopted in making and releasing subjective provisions, for example a general bad debt reserve.
The treatment of one-off salary items (eg bonuses).
The identification of expenditure requirements (for example, repairs and improvements) and the basis for making the accrual.
Should the full cost be provided for immediately or spread over future accounting periods?
The continuation of short term discretionary expenditure, such as plant maintenance and advertising.
The treatment of research and development expenditure.
The treatment of profits arising on the sale of fixed assets and other ‘wind fall’ profits.
Possibly distinguish one-off transactions from regular replacement.
The treatment of costs arising from a change of ownership.
The treatment of accounting costs involved in calculating profit or net assets in accordance with the definition.
The treatment of management charges, especially where these replace services previously obtained from third parties.
The treatment of group benefits such as the lower group interest rates on borrowings.
The treatment of exceptional and extraordinary items.
Care should be taken in differentiating exceptional items as the definition is somewhat subjective.
Whether there are any problems regarding the remitting of overseas retained earnings (eg political difficulties in the overseas country).
Are profits to be calculated before or after dividends?
0610.3 Net asset definitions
Similar considerations apply to the definition of net assets, which again have been presented without a buying or selling perspective.
Accounting policy considerations as mentioned above.
The possibility of revaluing certain assets.
The reliability of current valuations of property assets.
The reclassification of investments to avoid devaluation.
The treatment of goodwill.
The valuation of intangibles (including brands).
The procedures adopted in making and reclaiming subjective provisions.
The basis for the tax provision.
The recognition of deferred tax assets and ACT recoverable.
The possibility of potential deferred tax liabilities crystallising.
The possibility of contingencies (remote or otherwise) becoming actual liabilities.
Given the complexity of drafting watertight, unambiguous definitions, it is recommended that an independent member of staff is asked to review the definitions.
Example definitions for stock and fixed assets are given at 1104.3.
0611 Investigations Service
MAS professionals should be aware of the firm's revised approach to due diligence entitled ‘The KPMG Investigations Service’.
MAS's involvement in investigations tends to be limited to briefing the investigating accountants on the outcome of the key features review and studying with the purchaser the due diligence findings, to consider how these may impact on the heads of agreement and the client's warranty and indemnity requirements.
Whilst MAS will always endeavour to ensure that KPMG is appointed investigating accountant, MAS should bear in mind that in recommending KPMG it is acting as an agent for the purchaser.
Accordingly, terms of reference should be agreed formally in writing and MAS should ensure that the investigations is given a tight, commercial focus so that for its cost it is of maximum use to the client.
Depending on the size of the target, the concerns identified by the key features review and the information available, KPMG will be able to undertake any scale of investigation report.
This could range in scope from a review of certain commercial aspects of the target, carried out by a suitably experienced consultant, to a full ‘long-form’ investigation of five years' historical financial results.
An investigation of the target's tax affairs is normally carried out in conjunction with the acquisition investigation.
0612 Using the International Network
0612.1 Introduction
The approach and basic concepts are set out at 0509.
0612.2 Request for exclusive acquisition advice
In this situation, an initiating member receives a request from a client in his country who has already identified an acquisition target in a participating member's jurisdiction and, indeed, may already have commenced the acquisition process.
As a result, the initating member has been asked to contact the participating member to elicit general or specifically defined acquisition advisery assistance, which could take the form of:
the provision of a full range of proactive acquisition advisery assistance, or
the provision of specific transaction related services (such as due diligence, a businessman's review, or a business valuation).
The normal expectation is that a Request for Exclusive Acquisition Advice will result in a fee-paying engagement for the participating member's firm.
Request for Exclusive Acquisition Advice
Checklist of Network Member Obligations
Initiating Member
1
Provide the initiating member with a copy of your engagement letter to the client.
2
Ensure that the initiating member is kept informed of the progress of the engagement and copy him on all relevant correspondence.
3
Ensure that the initiating member is advised of the outcome of the engagement.
Participating Member
1
In your initial contact with the participating member, identify the situation as a Request for Exclusive Acquisition Advice.
2
In you preliminary discussions with local client, do not make any detailed commitments with respect to fees or services without first clearing them with the participating member.
3
Provide the participating member with basic background information on the local client and the target.
0612.3 Acquisition target contact assistance
In this situation, an initiating member receives a request from a client in his country for assistance, to be provided by the participating member, in making initial contact with an acquisition target.
The normal expectation is that Acquisition Target Contact Assistance will be conducted on a fee-paying basis by the participating member, but such arrangements should be agreed in advice and a participating member may decide not to charge a fee (in expectation of more significant fees for the prospective engagement involving broader acquisition advice should contact with the acquisition target result in negotiations).
Acquisition Target Contact Assistance
Checklist of Network Member Obligations
Participating Member
1
In your initial contact with the participating member, identify the situation as Acquisition Target Contact Assistance.
2
Ensure your client has properly and adequately identified the acquisition target to be contacted (proper corporate name, location, etc.).
3
Satisfy yourself that the potential acquiror's interest is serious.
4
Discuss fee arrangements with the participating member before making any detailed commitments to the client.
5
Advise the participating member as to the likelihood of subsequent services being required of him by the client.
6
Consider whether the participating member should be given the opportunity to discuss details of the request with the client.
7
Consider providing the participating member with the opportunity to report on results of contact directly to the client, in order to ensure effective communication.
Initiating Member
1
Check whether the acquisition target is a client and advise the initiating member or his client accordingly.
If the target is a client, discuss implications of the contact with the client partner and consider whether to proceed.
2
Consider what further background information on the target you should obtain prior to an effective and professionally-handled contact.
3
Advise the initiating member or the client of the results of the contact on an expeditious basis or, alternatively, explain the reasons for delay.
0612.4 Acquisition research case
This kind of assistance is likely to fall into one of two categories:
the conduct by the participating member of research, and compilation of information, with respect to an acquisition target already identified by a client in the country of the initiating member; or
the conduct of a formal acquisition search by the participating member based upon acquisition search criteria provided by the initiating member or his client.
In the case of a formal acquisition search, distinction should be made between:
the sub-contracting of local acquisition search requirement to the participating member, as part of a larger international acquisition search engagement being conducted by the initiating member on behalf of a client in his country (in these circumstance, the participating member will usually take his instructions from the initiating member); and
the direct referral of an acquisition search engagement from the initiating member to the participating member on behalf of a client in the initiating member's jurisdiction (in which circumstances, the participating member will usually enter into an engagement letter directly with the initiating member's client).
Acquisition research cases are conducted on a fee paying basis.
Acquisition Research Case
Checklist of Network Member Obligations
1
In your initial contact with the participating member, identify the situation as an Acquisition Research Case
2
Discuss fee arrangements with the participating member before making any detailed commitments to the client.
3
Advise the participating member whether work is to be conducted on a sub-contract basis reporting directly to you or to be conducted directly for the client.
4
Clearly identify for the participating member the required timing, forms of reporting required, etc.
07 Sale and purchase agreements
Contents
0701
Responsibilities for preparation
0702
The sale and purchase agreement
0703
Form of business sale agreements
0704
Warranties and indemnities
0701 Responsibilities for preparation
Drafting of sale and purchase agreements is the responsibility of the solicitors.
Nevertheless, we should be prepared, at our client's request to provide advice on matters included.
It is normal practice for the definitive sale and purchase agreement to be drafted by the acquirer's solicitors.
This is because it is they who know what level of assurance the acquirer may seek through warranties and indemnities.
The most common occasion when the agreement is drafted by the seller's solicitors is when the seller is offering a company on a tender basis under which information about the company, together with a draft contract, is sent out to those who express interest and they are required by a specified date to indicate the price they would be prepared to pay for the company and, often, the changes that they would request to the contract.
The theory is that the seller will be able to evaluate the prices offered in the light of the different contractual terms required, but in practice it is rarely the case that there is no further negotiation.
It is of course important for the acquirer to find out before the final tender date the way in which the tender will actually be handled, which may not be the same way as the tender documents had optimistically indicated.
There are other comparatively rare occasions when the seller's solicitors prepare the draft.
This can be where the seller feels that it has the bargaining power and will be able to obtain a negotiating advantage by putting forward a document with negligible warranties.
Having the conduct of the drafting of the agreement is a considerable advantage because points agreed in negotiation can be reflected in the document in the way in which the lawyers drafting it prefer, and it is the other party who is always having to ask for changes to the text.
It is also clearly much easier to produce one's own draft agreement than to work from and mark-up someone else's.
If the seller proposes to have its solicitors prepare the draft, it should consult with the acquirer who may be reluctant to forfeit the advantage of drafting.
If the acquirer's solicitors are to prepare the agreement, it is very important that they are fully informed as to the acquirer's aims and concerns about the acquisition and its assessment of its bargaining position and that they discuss the draft with the acquirer before it is released to the seller.
The heads of agreement will often form a useful briefing document for the lawyers.
There is usually a pressing desire of all parties to proceed as fast as possible so the solicitors are required to produce their draft agreement before they have received all the information requested or the accountants have completed due diligence.
In this case, the lawyers will expressly reserve their right to make changes to reflect any further information they may learn about the offeree group.
This is still some disadvantage for the acquirer because it is more difficult to gain agreement to a change made subsequently than to a provision included in the first draft.
How reasonable or unreasonable the first draft agreement should be depends upon the instructions the acquirer gives and the perception of the acquirer's bargaining position.
Draft agreements in the UK are not usually as one-sided as is frequently the case in the United States.
If the agreement is clearly inappropriate or fails to reflect what has already been agreed, this can be counter-productive.
It may jeopardise the deal or the other side may demand a redraft before they will even discuss it.
If this has to be conceded, the other side's bargaining position is greatly strengthened.
0701.1 Negotiation
The manner in which the agreement is negotiated will depend very much upon the attitude of the parties and their advisers.
If there are major disagreements as to concepts (eg as to whether the warranties are to be very detailed or are merely trying to catch material items) it may be necessary to have a meeting of the principals to resolve the concepts against which the agreement is to be negotiated.
A properly drafted heads of agreement should, however, take care of such conceptual problems.
Then the lawyers should be able themselves to resolve a lot of the drafting.
If either side indicates that it has time pressure, such as the seller needing to complete the sale before its financial year end, the other may well wish to exploit this.
Most of the time in negotiation is usually spent over the terms of the warranties.
These are usually substantially negotiated before the seller produces the disclosure letter which contains items of non-compliance with the warranties.
The disclosure letter is sometimes drafted in such a way as effectively totally to modify or negate the negotiated warranties.
This should be resisted by the acquirer.
The acquirer should refuse finally to settle the terms of the warranties until it has seen the disclosure letter and disclosure material.
In practical terms the disclose letter should be released on a piecemeal draft basis as negotiations proceed.
0701.2 Disclosure letter
The warranties (but not usually the tax indemnities) in the sale and purchase agreement are given subject to disclosures made in a separate disclosure letter from the seller (or its solicitors) to the acquirer (or its solicitors) handed over in final form at the time of the signing of the agreement.
It is separate from the agreement but forms the same purpose as would disclosure schedules contained in the agreement.
It is practice to state in the agreement that all warranties are subject to matters fairly and properly disclosed in the disclosure letter.
Hence the warranties will sometimes state matters which all parties know to be incorrect.
The correct state of affairs is understood by reading the warranty together with the disclosures in the disclosure letter.
The matter is further complicated by the fact that the disclosure letter will almost always say the disclosures are made by reference to the warranty to which they are thought to be most applicable, but they also apply to all warranties.
The disclosure letter usually will start by reciting that certain matters are to be considered as generally disclosed.
These may include matters which:
are apparent from the relevant companies' registers at Companies House; or
are apparent on an inspection of any properties; or
would be disclosed on an investigation of title to the properties; or
have been communicated to the acquirer or any of its advisers at any time in the negotiation.
It is therefore essential for the vendors and their advisers to keep accurate records of information communicated to the potential purchaser; or
the contents of the audited accounts; or
are otherwise known to the acquirer.
The first of these will almost always be acceptable but many of the others will not.
The acquirer may not have the time or be willing to make the inspections and will not want to accept the risk that some information may have been given to one of its employees or advisers who was unable at the time to appreciate its significance in relation to the transaction, or indeed may have been forgotten.
The acquirer will wish to limit disclosures to those specifically referred to in the disclosure letter.
The disclosure letter will frequently have attached to it, or referred to in it, a significant amount of documents which are deemed to be disclosed, so it is vital that the acquirer insists on receiving this material early enough to be able properly to evaluate it.
It is a common tactic of sellers to delay producing the disclosure letter until as late as possible, usually saying that they cannot prepare the disclosure letter until the warranties against which disclosure is made have been finalised.
The acquirer should insist that a draft disclosure letter is produced early on the basis of the draft warranties, and that the warranties will not be finalised until the disclosure letter is finalised.
If some unexpected problems are revealed by the disclosure letter, the acquirer may want to insist on special provisions or indemnities being included in the agreement.
A particular tactic of the vendor may be to attempt to use the purchaser's Accountant's Investigation as part of the disclosure document.
Clearly the purchaser will resist this, however a compromise solution can be to release the report without the executive summary as it is often the practice of the purchaser's accountants to request confirmation of factual accuracy.
In framing the warranties, the acquirer and its solicitors should have regard to the level of disclosure that they actually want.
Not only does detailed disclosure impose a heavy burden on the seller but it means a major effort for the acquirer to understand and evaluate it.
Otherwise there will be a danger that some important disclosures are missed in a mass of detail.
0701.3 Signing and completion
Once the agreement is negotiated, the disclosure letter finalised and any relevant exhibits agreed between the lawyers, signing can occur.
If no conditions remain to be fulfilled or consents obtained, completion is likely to be simultaneous, as that avoids the difficulties inherent in carrying on business pending completion.
These are especially acute where a substantial private company is being acquired in a Reverse or Super Class One transaction.
The vendors intention to sell will be made public as soon as the circular is sent out, yet no consideration will be payable.
The purchaser may therefore obtain the benefit of, effectively, owning the company before he pays for it.
If warranties are allowed to run until completion (see section 0702.5) then there will be in practice a period of risk without reward.
If conditions or consents remain, completion will generally occur as soon as practicable after they are satisfied or waived.
If either the acquirer or seller is listed on the London Stock Exchange and is obliged to announce the transaction, it probably has to do so immediately on signing.
0702 The sale and purchase agreement
The nature and length of sale and purchase agreements vary enormously, most particularly depending on the nature and length of the warranties and any indemnities to be given by the seller.
An aide memoire for use when reviewing sale and purchase agreements is set out at 1109.2.
0702.1 Sale
There will be provision for the shares to be sold free from adverse interests and with all future rights but, perhaps, with the right for the seller to receive a final pre-completion dividend.
0702.2 Conditions
Any conditions attaching to the sale such as a favourable indication that the transaction will not be referred to the MMC, favourable tax clearances and any necessary approval from the purchaser's shareholders will be included.
On a sale of a private company, or if there have been reorganisations for taxation purposes, it is common for the seller to require the contract to be conditional on a clearance under s.703 (cancellation of tax advantage) and any other applicable tax provisions.
If any condition is expressed as being a condition to the obligations of one party only, that party would be able unilaterally to waive the condition.
0702.3 Consideration
There will be a statement of the consideration, how it is to be calculated and when it is to be paid and, if applicable, provision for the preparation of completion accounts and the accounting principles to be adopted (see section 0610).
Each side usually considers it advantageous to be the side that prepares the accounts, even if as is usual they are to be checked by the other side.
In the absence of agreement between the two parties within a particular time, there is usually provision for reference to a third firm of accountants to determine the area of disagreement.
A longer time period is probably advantageous to the acquirer as it enables a better assessment of assets to be made and gives time for undisclosed liabilities to appear.
0702.4 Completion
Provision for all the completion formalities will be necessary, such as:
the transfer of the shares;
changes of directors, secretary and auditors;
variation of bank mandates;
waiver of pre-emption rights and/or adoption of new Articles of Association;
the signing of any required employment agreements with senior executives, or trading or other agreements;
release or counter-indemnity for guarantees by the seller in respect of the offeree group; and
subject to due compliance with completion formalities, the payment of the consideration.
The agreement will have provision for warranties (qualified by the disclosure letter) and indemnities (especially indemnities against taxation) and for the limitation of liability in respect of the warranties and indemnities.
This is discussed further below.
0702.5 Conduct pending, and conditions to, completion
Provision will be made for the conduct of the business of the offeree during the period, if any, between signing and completion and for the right for the acquirer to terminate the contract if any major changes occur or breaches of warranty are discovered during such period.
There is always considerable negotiation over the provisions governing the conduct of the business between signing and completion.
At the least, the seller should agree to ensure that the business of the offeree group is carried on in the ordinary and usual course so as to maintain the same as a going concern; and that nothing is voluntarily done or omitted which would result in a material inaccuracy in the warranties if they were repeated on, and as at, completion.
It is quite common to insert further provisions prohibiting the offeree group from entering into contracts or commitments involving more than a stated sum or for a longer period than, say, a year, or entering into other transactions which are outside the routine course of trading without the consent of the acquirer.
Disputes can also arise on the framing of the conditions to the obligation to complete.
It is now uncommon, and ill-advised, for the seller to agree to warranties being repeated at completion, since matters could happen between contract and completion completely outside its control (indeed despite its best efforts) which would result in a breach of warranty at completion and hence a potential damages claim from the acquirer.
That claim could be so serious that the seller would far prefer that the transaction did not proceed.
Quite often, however, the acquirer will be given a right to rescind the contract, without any damages claim, if any event occurs which would render the warranties materially inaccurate at completion.
The right of rescission may also extend to the occurrence of certain events which, although not a breach of warranty, may lead to the acquirer being unwilling to proceed (for example, a major fire).
The seller will of course wish to restrict these conditions as far as possible and sometimes the conditions are restricted to events which fundamentally affect the business or value of the offeree and which cannot be adequately compensated by an offer of financial or other compensation which the seller may be prepared to make.
The acquirer should not agree to a clause which states that if by completion it is aware of a breach of warranty and it still elects to proceed to completion it thereby waives any claim for damages.
Because of these difficulties and the commercial desire that once a company is to be sold its sale should be completed as soon as possible, the parties usually try to have a simultaneous signing and completion.
However, that will not be possible if third party consents, etc. are required which cannot previously be sought because of confidentiality.
0702.6 Covenants, trading, pensions, etc
There will be provision for other matters of importance in a particular transaction, such as:
restrictive covenants;
trading agreements;
agreements for sharing of facilities;
key employees;
pensions, etc.
If the target is part of a group, it may be necessary for there to be trading agreements or agreements for sharing of facilities.
A major part of its business may be supplied by, or making supplies to, other group companies and it will be vital to establish whether or not these arrangements are to continue.
There may also be shared sites which would have to be divided, or where one party would have to be given a licence or lease by the other.
Also in group situations, it may be the case that the senior executives are employed by the top company, so it will be necessary if they are to continue to work for the target to negotiate with each of them a revision to their service agreements.
Pensions are usually dealt with in a separate schedule to the agreement.
This is convenient because it is now recognised that they are such an important aspect of the transaction; and pension under-funding or, in recent times more likely, over-funding, can involve such large amounts of money that the arrangements will generally be negotiated separately from the rest of the agreement by specialist pension lawyers from the parties' solicitors and the parties' respective actuaries.
To assist our client and reinforce our role as deal managers, MAS should consider involving the MC Actuarial Services if pensions are likely to be material to the agreement.
It is likely that the lawyers will try to introduce their pension advisers early in the contract negotiations.
The principal issue is likely to be whether a pension fund transferred is fully funded or the amount that is transferred from the old pension fund to the new one is sufficient to cover the existing liabilities.
In each case the actuarial assumptions agreed can materially affect the size of the transfer value.
The trustees of the seller's pension scheme are not under the seller's control and so the seller may not be able to procure payment of a transfer value equal to that agreed.
Therefore, the acquirer should obtain a covenant that the seller will make up any shortfall.
If a pension fund transferred is over-funded, the seller will often seek extra consideration or a payment from the acquirer equal to the excess funding net of any tax considerations.
0702.7 Other provisions
Less important provisions will also be covered, such as:
access to documents (in particular accounting and tax records);
restrictions on announcements;
payment of costs of the transaction (including fees of any finders or other intermediaries);
service of notices; and
governing law and submission to jurisdiction.
The acquirer will want to examine carefully what costs and fees are proposed to be paid by the target since, if there is no adjustment to net assets at completion, moneys paid by the target will effectively have been paid by the acquirer.
There is also a legal question as to what costs and expenses the target can properly pay, having regard to the best interests of the company and the restrictions under s.151 CA 1985 on companies giving financial assistance for the purpose of the acquisition of their shares.
If the agreement relates to the acquisition of shares in an English company, it is likely to be best to have the contract governed by English law since the concepts and provisions referred to, and the problems likely to arise, will be familiar to English courts.
The acquirer or any foreign party is likely to be asked to submit to the jurisdiction of the English courts and appoint an agent in England for the purposes of the agreement.
0703 Form of business sale agreements
Because of the complexity of conveying all the assets, agreements for the sale of businesses are perhaps even more varied than share sale agreements.
An aide memoire for use when reviewing business sale agreements is set out at 1109.2.
0703.1 Assets sold
A description or list of the assets to be sold, assets excluded and the encumbrances subject to which the assets, particularly properties, are sold.
In respect of the transfer of properties, the agreement may include reference to the applicable provisions from the National Conditions of Sale — a national standard form set of property sale terms.
It is very common in the sale of a business for debtor balances owing to the business not to be transferred.
This is primarily to avoid the payment of stamp duty at 1% on those debts.
The acquirer may want to have conduct of the collection of those debts, so that the seller does not use an unduly heavy-handed approach and damage the goodwill of the business after sale.
In this case the seller will probably require some statement of the efforts that the acquirer will take to collect the debts, provision for unallocated payments received from debtors to be attributed first to pre-completion obligations, and a right to take over the enforcement of debts which are not collected within a period of, say, six months.
0703.2 Liabilities
A description of those liabilities to be taken over and those not to be taken over.
Broadly, the parties can choose what liabilities are to be taken over or treated as taken over, although liabilities to employees and liabilities attaching to specific assets pass automatically.
With those exceptions, no liabilities (including tax liabilities) pass automatically.
Other liabilities can only pass with the consent of the other parties involved, but the acquirer can discharge the liabilities of the offeree and indemnify it for any residual liability.
Liabilities to creditors are not normally transferred.
0703.3 Current contracts
An obligation on the acquirer to take over the obligations under existing contracts and other continuing obligations of the business; to indemnify the offeree for any liability that arises subsequent to completion in respect of them; and, in particular, provision for dealing with warranty claims in respect of products sold prior to completion and product liability.
Warranty claims do not pass automatically to the acquirer.
Obviously all the customer and supplier agreements current at the time of completion must be transferred and future responsibility must pass to the acquirer.
The acquirer will rely on the warranties to establish whether the business is in proper compliance with those agreements at completion.
It will frequently be convenient for provisions to be included under which the acquirer will deal with normal repairs and replacements under warranty claims with an agreed method of charging the offeree: product and other liability resulting from products sold prior to completion will normally remain with the offeree.
0703.4 Conditions
Conditions attaching to the sale, similar to those in sale of shares agreement, but also consents required for the transfer of properties, other major assets and major contracts.
The contract will contain provisions for the parties to co-operate in obtaining necessary consents from third parties.
The most usual area of difficulty is in relation to leasehold properties.
It is usually the case that a lease cannot be assigned without the consent of the lessor: if the lease states this, the lessor will be obliged, not unreasonably, to withhold consent.
Lessors do not however always act with great speed!
If the lease contains an absolute prohibition on assignment, there is no obligation on the lessor to give consent.
In connection with the obtaining of consents, especially where the seller is a guarantor, a parent company guarantee may be required.
0703.5 Consideration
A statement of the consideration, etc. similar to that in a sale of shares agreement.
0703.6 VAT
Undertakings to obtain exemption from a charge to value added tax on the transaction.
The sale of a business as a going concern does not attract VAT but certain undertakings as to the keeping of records are required and it is normal to apply in advance for confirmation of the exemption.
This can be particularly important if there is some argument as to whether the sale is of a business or merely of assets.
The latter would not be a VAT exempt transaction.
0703.7 Completion
Provision for completion formalities transferring all the assets.
If part of the business includes companies, provisions such as those on a sale of shares will also be required.
The contract will somewhat quaintly oblige the seller to unfasten as many assets as possible to make them movable.
The reason for this is that movables can be transferred by delivery free of 1% stamp duty.
The contract will also have to make provision about what is to happen if third party consents have not been obtained.
The contract may provide that the obtaining of some or all of these consents is a condition to completion, waivable by the acquirer.
The agreement usually provides that if necessary consents have not been obtained, the contract or asset will not be transferred to the acquirer but the acquirer will perform the contract or enter the property (subject to the terms of the lease) as the agent of the offeree.
This is on the basis that the acquirer is entitled to profits and responsible for losses.
0703.8 Warranties
Provision for warranties, qualified by the disclosure letter, and perhaps indemnities, and for limitation of liability in respect of them.
The warranties on a sale of a business are usually more limited than a sale of shares because taxation and other undisclosed liabilities remain with the offeree and do not pass with the business (unless otherwise agreed).
The due diligence report prepared by the purchaser's accountants may give rise to specific warranties or disclosures and may itself by subject to negotiation as to whether the report itself is disclosed.
Guidance on negotiating this issue is given at 1109.3.
0703.9 Employees
Provision for the effects of transfers of employees and liabilities in respect of them under the Transfer of Undertakings (Protection of Employment) Regulations 1981 and transfers of pension rights.
Pension schemes may also have to be split or transferred, and considerations similar to those in a share sale will apply.
The key issues covered by the regulations are summarised as follows:
Apply to all sales of businesses or parts (provided sold as going concern).
Do not apply to sale of shares.
All employees of business (employed directly by vendor) transferred automatically to purchaser.
If there are any pre transfer dismissals connected with the sale — liability to pay contractual damages redundancy etc may pass to the purchaser.
Purchaser will be obliged to maintain terms and conditions that preexisted.
Purchaser however not liable for vendor's PAYE/NI or vendor's pension scheme liability.
Vendors and purchasers have a duty to inform the unions.
0703.10 Covenants, trading etc
Provision for restrictions on future business, trading agreements, sharing of facilities agreements, key employees, etc, as in a sale of shares agreement.
0703.11 Conduct pending completion
Provision similar to those in a share sale for the carrying on of the business in the period between signing and completion.
In view of the consents that are likely to be necessary for the transfer of assets, there will almost certainly have to be such a period.
0703.12 Other provisions
The less important provisions similar to those found in a sale of shares agreement.
0704 Warranties and indemnities
Warranties and indemnities are usually the most lengthy and contentious part of the agreement.
It has become standard in share sale transactions for there to be a separate deed of indemnity for taxation.
The practical distinction between warranties and indemnities is provided in section 0704.3 below.
Examples of more common warranties, customary purchasers' and vendors' arguments on each and, in some cases, possible compromises are given in detail at 1109.3 and should be consulted when reviewing warranties and assisting the client to plan tactics and strategy.
0704.1 Who should be liable?
The acquirer will obviously want warranties and indemnities to be given by people with financial strength.
In a sale of a company or business by a group, the warranties and indemnities will normally be given, or at least guaranteed, by the top company.
In a sale of a family company with widely dispersed shareholdings, there may be some difficulty in persuading some of the shareholders to give warranties about the business in which they have not been involved.
In that case, the only people who may be available to give warranties may be any major shareholders and/or directors, who may then wish to receive some form of indemnity against liability from other shareholders.
If any warranties are qualified as to knowledge, the acquirer should consider whether the warrantors have sufficient knowledge of the business.
In theory it is possible to obtain insurance against warranty liability (e.g. Directors and officers) but in practice the insurers are normally so demanding in the kind of confirmations they require and so restrictive as to what they will insure (eg not taxation) that this is rarely practicable or worthwhile.
0704.2 Pre-contractual representations
In practice, it is standard for agreements to seek to exclude any liability for pre-contractual representations by including entire agreement provisions under which the acquirer confirms that it is not relying on any representations, etc. other than those included in the agreement.
Although this exclusion would not be valid if it was not reasonable, it is likely that in such a contract on which the acquirer had received professional legal advice the provision would be upheld as being reasonable.
The acquirer must, therefore, ensure that any important representations which induced it to wish to buy the target or the business are covered by a warranty contained in the agreement.
MAS should ensure that when acting for the vendor the contents of the Information memorandum and any other correspondence, it and the rest of KADVISERG may have had with the purchaser is disclosed in the contract.
Exceptions may be made for specific schedules which may be the subject of separate warranties.
0704.3 Remedies for breach
As mentioned above, the agreement is likely to contain a provision that if there is a material breach of warranty discovered before completion, the acquirer can rescind the contract.
Even if there were no such provision expressly contained in the contract, such a right may be implied for very material breaches of warranty.
If there is a breach of warranty, subject to any limitations in the contract, the acquirer will be entitled to damages representing the difference between the value of the shares or the business with all the warranties fulfilled — which need not be (but generally will be) the same as the purchase consideration — and their actual value at that time in view of the breach of warranty.
Thus the acquirer should be compensated for its loss of bargain and, in very extreme cases, damages could exceed the purchase consideration.
The parties can make provision in the agreement for a different measure of damages which, for example, may be appropriate if the acquirer is to invest large amounts of money in the offeree and hence could lose much more than merely the purchase consideration.
Damages for breach of warranty should be contrasted with payments under an indemnity.
Under an indemnity, a person is liable on a pound for pound basis for any loss, whether or not the purchase price would actually have been reduced if that liability had been discovered prior to contract.
Where a successful claim is made against the vendor for breach of warranty under the sale agreement, adjustments will be made which effectively reduce the consideration for capital gains tax purposes by the amount of the damages paid to the purchaser.
This will result in a reduction in base acquisition cost for the purchaser and reduce any capital gains tax liability of the vendor.
It has been confirmed in an extra-statutory concession (dated 19.12.88) that the taxation position is treated by the Inland Revenue as the same where payments are made to the purchaser under an indemnity in the sale agreement.
If, however, the agreement provides for payment to be made to any member of the group the position is less clear.
The payment may constitute taxable income or capital of the recipient in which case it will not be sufficient to meet the full liability in respect of which it was paid.
Accordingly, the purchaser should require the acquisition agreement to provide for grossing-up so that the amount payable under the indemnity equals the amount of the liability, together with any tax chargeable.
It may be preferably for any payments to be payable to the purchaser and to be stated to be adjustments to the purchase price.
The group company may then receive the benefit of any allowable loss in respect of the liability, which the warrantors would want taken into account in calculating their liability.
0704.4 Limitations on liability
It is common for the seller to seek to agree contractual limitations on his liability.
These are unlikely to assist the seller in the event of fraud whatever is said.
It is usual to seek to limit warranty liability to the amount of the purchase consideration and sometimes, especially in very large transactions possibly with a high property content, a much smaller sum is negotiated.
It is also common to say that there will be no liability in respect of a single claim of less than a small sum and then only when the aggregate of all such small claims exceeds a certain sum.
Parties will then negotiate as to whether once the limit is exceeded the full amount or merely the excess is claimable.
The contract should also deal with the issue of provisions in that only excess provisions (as defined) have been taken into account should a warranty claim proceed.
The vendor will seek to refer to all excess provisions rather than merely the one that relates to the items under dispute.
Where the target has exceeded any profit or net asset tests at completion, the vendor may also wish to take this excess into account.
Also, it will be usual to say that there will be no claim if the liability arose from acts of the acquirer or target (after completion only) which are outside the ordinary course of business or undertaken in the knowledge that they will create liability.
However, there may be argument about claims which arise as a result of two separate actions, one before and one after completion; tax claims can fall into this category.
The acquirer needs to ensure it is adequately protected.
In addition, it is normal to put a maximum period during which claims can be made — usually six or seven years for taxation, since that is the normal limitation period, and two to three years for other warranties; but this obviously needs to be looked at in each case in the light of particular facts, warranties, assets and liabilities.
For an ordinary agreement (not under seal) the limitation period for taking proceedings will be six years.
The agreement sometimes requires any proceedings on a claim to be issued within, say, six months after the latest date for notifying claims.
If there is a particular liability that is causing concern which has been identified prior to contract but is not precisely quantifiable, it may be appropriate that it should not be covered by a warranty at all but by an indemnity or other specific provision.
The agreement will usually contain provisions requiring the acquirer to notify any events which may give rise to claims as soon as possible and to allow the seller to investigate and perhaps handle any third party claim.
It will also oblige the acquirer to co-operate with the seller in trying to avoid or reduce the claim and generally to mitigate the liability.
There is an obligation at law on the acquirer to seek to mitigate a warranty claim, although this may be expressly stated.
The acquirer will want to ensure that it is only obliged to take reasonable acts to mitigate and not ones which would harm the target or the business.
There is no obligation at law to take steps to mitigate indemnity claims: this is why specific provisions will almost always be inserted in relation to the conduct of matters covered by indemnities.
0704.5 Joint and several liability
If there is more than one person giving warranties or indemnities, the acquirer will request that the warranties are a joint and several liability.
This will mean that any person can be liable to the acquirer for the full liability, with a separate right for that person subsequently to obtain contributions from other people liable.
It is obviously unwise for a minority shareholder to assume the obligations of the whole contract.
In certain cases (eg the sale of a joint venture company owned by two groups) there may be a strong desire on the part of the sellers for the liability to be several and proportionate.
This will mean that if each is selling 50% of the shares, each will have a maximum liability of half the warranty claim, and the acquirer would have to take action against both and, of course, would be on risk to the financial soundness of both.
In special situations, such as sales by receivers or trustees, less protection may be available for the acquirer.
Generally receivers will only give very limited warranties and trustees and personal representatives will insist on their liability being limited to the extent of the trust fund or estate.
For that reason the acquirer may insist that the trust fund or estate is not distributed for a period, unless the beneficiaries accept liability.
0704.6 General qualifications as to knowledge
In many cases the seller will want to qualify the warranty as ‘to the best of its knowledge, information and belief’.
In such cases the warrantor will need actual or constructive knowledge, which includes information supplied to the warrantor but not necessarily read by him.
It may be preferable from the warrantor's point of view to use the subjective phrase ‘so far as he is aware’ to reduce the risk of constructive knowledge.
In many lawyers opinions such phases reduce the viability of the warranty totally since to prove such knowledge etc. is virtually impossible.
If the price has been fixed on the basis that a particular fact is correct, the acquirer will agree that the risk of it not being so, even if no one could have known, should fall on the seller, since the seller will have been paid a price which assumed that the warranty was correct; although no doubt the seller will point out that the business is being bought as a going concern and a business cannot be carried on without risk.
Overall knowledge qualifications are uncommon.
Where such qualifications may be allowed for certain warranties, the acquirer will probably require the seller to confirm that it has made all reasonable enquiries.
If, because of confidentiality or for other reasons, it has not been possible for the seller to make all enquiries that it otherwise would, the seller would be well advised to stipulate in the contract or disclosure letter what enquiries have been made.
The seller may also wish to stipulate whose knowledge will be imputed to it; it may be that a company could have knowledge through a person who knows nothing of the existence of the warranties.
0704.7 General qualifications as to materiality
As in any ongoing business things can change; it is often thought reasonable that at least the more general warranties should be qualified as to materiality.
The acquirer may take the view that if the limitations of liability give the seller a generous ‘cushion’ before a claim can be made, then no further qualification for materiality should be allowed.
There is clearly some element of doubling-up of protection, but equally in the interests of a deal being completed quickly it may not be desirable to encourage the seller to produce vast amounts of disclosure against very detailed warranties.
There is always a danger with such large amounts of disclosure that the major points can be missed by the acquirer and its advisers.
Various terms are used to qualify the warranties:
material — the exact meaning of this will depend upon the context, but it suggests something that is not trivial or insubstantial and in a context where quantification is appropriate the starting point is, as a rule, taken to be around 5% of the price;
substantial — this is generally taken to be 10% or more;
a major — this will be 25% or so;
the major — this is more than 50%; and
significant — this is usually thought of as a slightly more rigorous test than material.
0704.8 General qualifications as to subjectivity and objectivity
If the seller is allowed to qualify the warranties by a subjective test such as‘in the opinion of the seller’, the acquirer will not have the protection it would hope for.
The seller may be unreasonable and the acquirer would have to be able to show what the opinion of the seller was.
An objective test would be determined by a court.
One compromise sometimes reached in appropriate circumstances is a mixture such as‘in the reasonable opinion of the seller’.
This will protect the acquirer from an unreasonable, even if apparently genuine, opinion of the seller.
0704.9 Text of the warranties
The text of the warranties should be considered in the light of every case.
Inappropriate warranties in the standard form should be omitted, but the acquirer's advisers should give careful thought as to what special warranties are appropriate.
The acquirer's solicitor should reserve the right to incorporate additional warranties when he has received all the information about the target, read the accountants' report and read the draft disclosure letter.
The text of warranties has become much longer because solicitors have included very many specific warranties as well as general warranties.
This is because it can often be easier to sue on a specific warranty than on a general warranty.
Specific warranties are, however, also useful as a checklist and reminder for the seller when preparing its disclosure letter.
Most warranties are aimed at undisclosed liabilities and problems of the target and are not particular to the UK.
0704.10 Authority and information
Authority and capacity of the seller.
This warranty has arisen from US practice but in the UK the acquirer's solicitors should check on the seller's authorities as it is not usual practice for the solicitors of one party to render a formal legal opinion to another party, each party being expected to seek and rely on advice from its own solicitors.
Ownership of shares in the offeree.
Accuracy and adequacy of information disclosed to the acquirer.
(The seller will generally try to restrict this to a warranty of specifically identified information: the acquirer will want a warranty of all information but not if the consequence is that all information is to be treated as a disclosure).
Copies of accounts, Memoranda and Articles of Association, etc.
0704.11 Financial warranties
Latest accounts — including liabilities, valuation of stock and work in progress, provision for taxation and deferred taxation and liability to capital gains tax if assets are disposed of at their balance sheet values.
Effect of exceptional items on a trend of profits.
Collectability of debts.
(There is sometimes instead an indemnity if debts are not paid within a fixed period, under which the seller pays any uncollected amount against assignment of the uncollected debts.
Alternatively the acquiror may wish to have a specific retention out of the consideration only to be released after a specific timeframe once all identified pre-contract trade debtors have been collected).
Accuracy of accounting and other records.
Changes since last audited balance sheet date.
Borrowings and other liabilities.
0704.12 Warranties on business matters
Insurance and claims record.
On a share sale product liability is vital.
On a business sale the acquirer must insure or be joined as a beneficiary under the vendor's insurance from the date of signing of the contract.
Investment and other grants.
The acquirer will want to be sure that grants will not be withdrawn or have to be repaid.
Capital commitments.
Material contracts.
(These are sometimes specifically described by category and amount in an attempt to avoid arguments as to what is material).
Guarantees of obligations of persons outside the vendor group.
Debts, contracts and arrangements with the seller and its connected persons.
(These will normally have to be settled at completion unless they arise from ordinary trading).
Effect of the sale on the contracts and business of the target.
Dependence on individual suppliers or customers.
Commissions and finder's fees.
These are only likely to be payable where there is a clear agreement.
Joint ventures, partnerships, agency agreements and restrictions on the business.
Quality and age of stock and work in progress.
Sufficiency of assets to continue the business of the target.
This is particularly important if the target was part of a group because some assets may not be owned by the company which uses them.
General compliance with laws and obtaining of necessary licences and consents.
Compliance with agreements.
Litigation.
Compliance with fair trading and restrictive practices legislation.
Defective products.
Existence of powers of attorney.
Filing of documents.
No questionable payments.
This is of particular importance to US purchasers in view of the US Foreign Corrupt Practices Act.
Not being bound by warranties and indemnities from sales of businesses, assets (assignment of leases) or companies.
0704.13 Employee warranties
Employees and terms of employment, including liabilities.
Compliance with law and redundancies.
Liabilities to employees pass automatically on a sale of a business.
Industrial disputes and negotiations, and union and collective agreements and recent redundancies.
Share incentive and bonus schemes which may be linked into employee stock ownership plan (ESOP) trusts.
Pensions.
0704.14 Title warranties
Assets other than those in the last audited balance sheet.
Consider retention of title provisions which are common in the UK.
Title to freehold and leasehold properties and encumbrances, etc. unless being dealt with only by investigation or certificates of title.
Town and country planning.
This covers use as well as construction.
Compliance with law in respect of properties.
It is particularly important to examine any possible environmental problems.
State and condition of properties.
Compliance with leases.
In practice leases are so tightly drawn it will be very rare indeed that anyone is in full and strict compliance with their leases and hence the acquirer will be more concerned about material non-compliance, which may lead to forfeiture of a lease.
0704.15 UK taxation
In addition to the above general warranties, there are likely to be several warranties aimed at UK taxation.
These should not be intended to duplicate the deed of indemnity but to obtain information as to possible taxation problems and where things have been done in the past which could, depending on what is done in the future, give problems after completion.
These warranties would include general warranties as to:
Compliance in making tax returns.
Not having had to pay penalties.
Not being in dispute.
Not expecting to have to make any payment under the deed of indemnity.
In addition there will be specific warranties aimed at specific provisions of the Taxes Acts related to matters such as:
Dividends and other distributions.
Any carry-forward of losses.
Close companies.
Transfers and transactions within a group.
Capital allowances.
Transactions not at arm's length.
Base values of assets.
Company residence and migration.
Compliance with UK pay-as-you-earn (deduction of tax for employees) and National Insurance (contributions for health and social security) provisions and other provisions for deduction of tax.
Anti-avoidance provisions.
Compliance with value added tax requirements.
Payments of stamp duty, capital transfer tax and inheritance tax.
0704.16 Taxation indemnity
It has become usual that there should be a generally drafted indemnity against all taxation liabilities arising from trading transactions prior to the last balance sheet date and which were not provided for in such accounts, or which arose from transactions outside the ordinary course of business since that date.
It is particularly important that the indemnity catches any liabilities on the target group as a result of activities of the vendor's group or family shareholders.
It is becoming increasingly frequent that liabilities under the indemnity should be subject to the same limitations as for the warranties, except that the period for claims will be six or seven years because those are the years in respect of which tax can generally be assessed.
It is also becoming a more common practice for sellers to try to qualify their liability by reference to matters revealed in the disclosure letter.
This rather defeats the object of having an indemnity, at least for general (tax) liabilities, but it is a matter for negotiation who is to bear the cost of known, or feared, tax liabilities and other liabilities.
08 Valuations
Contents
0801
Introduction
.1
Introduction
.2
Our service
.3
The nature of valuations
.4
Types of valuation
.5
Type of report: ‘value added’ or ‘assurance oriented’
.6
Role of valuations in pricing analysis
0802
MAS approach to commercial valuations
.1
Circumstances in which a commercial valuation is required
.2
Valuation ‘building blocks’
.3
Valuation bases
0803
MAS approach to other valuations
.1
Circumstances in which a valuation is required for statutory reasons
.2
Circumstances in which a valuation is required for regulatory reasons
0804
Preliminary actions
.1
Engagement letters
.2
Firm competence
.3
Involvement of other offices
.4
Conflicts of interest
.5
Competence to act
.6
Preliminary meeting with client
0805
Operational procedures
.1
Type of valuation engagement
.2
The approach to evidence gathering
.3
External parties
.4
Representation of supporting facts
.5
Negotiating
0806
Reporting
.1
Oral presentation or discussion
.2
Format of valuation reports
.3
Preparation of a valuation memorandum
.4
Date of report
.5
Pre-issuance review
.6
Restrictions on distribution of reports
.7
Valuations Checklist
0807
Practical considerations
.1
Introduction
.2
Factors to be considered in conducting valuation engagements
.3
Specific factors affecting valuations
.4
Relevance of control to the valuation
.5
Relevance of size of holding on choice of basis
0801 Introduction
0801.1 Introduction
This chapter provides guidance to be followed in the conduct of valuation engagements and preparing and issuing the related reports.
The chapter does not reproduce the detailed guidance on valuations contained in the CFM.
Valuations are an important part of the range of services offered by MAS, especially since they can lead to further work within the department, eg handling a disposal based on a valuation provided by us.
There is no ‘right’ answer to a valuation as the work is (generally) opinion based.
This does not mean however that some valuations are not more right than others; appreciating at least the following practical points will help make sure that our valuations are ‘more right’ than not:
The ‘Fair Value’ of a transaction is either the value obtained between a willing buyer and a willing seller or the valuation required in the particular circumstances;
Always question any information provided and visit the organisation to obtain a ‘feel’ for the business;
Commercial valuations, albeit based on established principles, necessarily involve an element of negotiation.
0801.2 Our service
The firm may be requested to undertake valuations of a shareholding in an entity or of a business as a whole in a variety of circumstances.
Such valuations are in the following broad categories:
I Independent valuations
The approach to independent valuations seeks to ensure that the valuer retains an impartial stance, since, in these circumstances, he will usually be acting as an expert resolving the position between two or more parties.
Examples of independent valuations include
‘fair value’ valuations at the request of all shareholders
valuations on a fair and reasonable basis under the articles of a company
valuations resulting from mergers and amalgamations
arbitration related valuations
the pricing of a flotation
valuations relating to the terms of Class 4 transactions for Stock Exchange purposes
valuations relating to a company's purchase of its own shares
valuation of assets in connection with an offer under the City Code
‘Section 108’ valuations under Section 103 and Section 104 of the Companies Act 1985
Guidance on fair value reports and Section 108 valuations is contained in the CFM and is therefore not repeated in detail in this guide.
If carrying out an independent valuation it is important to interview both (or more) parties.
II ‘One party’ valuations
In one party valuations, the valuer is often advising his client (ie one party to the transaction) on the way of obtaining the most favourable price which can be established within sensible limits.
In these circumstances commercial considerations are likely to play a significant part in determining the value finally agreed upon.
One party valuations will be required in connection with acquisitions and disposals
valuations for offers to shareholders in private companies
compulsory acquisitions
III Fiscal valuations
These are valuations relating to
liabilities for capital taxes
employee share schemes
transfers between connected persons
stamp duty
A tax partner should be consulted prior to undertaking a fiscal valuation.
Tax valuations specialists (Tim Harding and John Cooper) are located in London office.
Unless otherwise noted, the legal and other considerations outlined in this section apply generally to all of these categories of valuation.
0801.3 The nature of valuations
A valuation offers an indication as to value.
The form which the valuation takes may vary depending on the nature of the engagement and the scope of work performed in relation to the supporting information.
As part of a valuation exercise we assemble detailed information on the business and its characteristics, its past and current financial performance, the sector in which it operates and economic factors which affect it.
In addition, by monitoring the market and using previous transaction involvement experience, together with the theoretical principles of valuation, we are able to provide independent professional valuations.
When the shares in question are listed on the LSE or other exchange the approximate value of the company can be determined more easily.
However, where they are not, the valuation becomes more subjective; it is on such valuations that this chapter concentrates.
Ultimately, a commercial value is determined by negotiation and is the price the acquiror is willing to pay and that which the vendor will accept.
The key feature here is the agreement of both parties.
0801.4 Types of valuation
For marketing and practical purposes there are two types of valuation:
Commercial (covered in section 0802 below)
Broadly non statutory independent and one party valuations.
AND
Other (covered in section 0803 below)
The main ‘other’ valuations are:
fiscal valuations — the tax authorities, or a client carrying out tax planning, may require the determination of values for capital gains tax, stamp duty or other fiscal purposes; or
other — as may be required by the LSE, Takeover Panel or the Companies Act.
0801.5 Type of report: ‘value added’ or ‘assurance oriented’
The type of valuation report we may be asked to provide will be either a ‘value added’ report (where the firm provides a commentary) or an ‘assurance oriented’report (where the firm reports on a valuation prepared by a third party).
(See section 0802 et seq.)
These terms are used in KPMG's international Special Engagements Manual but are not yet widely used in the UK.
For the purpose of this guide these terms will be used as they are in themselves descriptive of the types of valuation report we may be asked to prepare, although naturally our clients will not use this terminology.
From experience in the majority of cases the valuation report has been ‘value added’.
0801.6 Role of valuations in pricing analysis
The first stage of a divestiture search is often a pricing analysis, designed to advise the client on the initial asking price for the business.
This can be done formally or informally.
In cases where the price is difficult to establish, a pricing analysis should only be carried out if a valuation of the business has been undertaken, since it will not be possible to advise on an initial asking price unless a reasonable estimate of the current market value can be established.
In certain countries where KPMG carries out valuation work, it may be appropriate to undertake them simultaneously.
This is an important part of shaping the client's expectations.
The work must be done to a high standard as the Firm's fee may depend on the asking price being achieved.
The estimated asking price will generally be given as a range of values, which will normally be wider than those associated with the valuation since account will need to be taken of the expectations of buyers and sellers of price reductions during the bargaining process.
0802 MAS approach to Commercial valuations
0802.1 Circumstances in which a commercial valuation is required
Commercial valuations are most frequently required for:
the transfer of shares in non-quoted companies;
the assessment of acquisition and disposal opportunities; and
the settlement of disputes.
0802.2 Valuation ‘building blocks’
These fundamental initial considerations or ‘building blocks’(developed by Roy Nicholson) are applicable to all valuation engagements and enable a skeleton of the valuation to be developed at an early stage:
THE BUILDING BLOCKS
Purpose of valuation — high value/low value desired?
Nature of business
Detailed profit and loss account for last three years
Look for:—
Turnover
Pre- and post-tax profits
Unusual one-offs
Balance sheet
Look for:—
Break-up value
Working capital/loans etc
0802.3 Valuation bases
The value of a holding in a listed company is generally not difficult to assess as market forces will determine the market value.
The valuation of holdings in unlisted companies needs a different approach and are, in nearly all cases, valued broadly in accordance with bases derived from case law.
There are specific legislative provisions which apply to fiscal valuations and which supplement case law.
Advice on the bases believed to be used by the Shares Valuation Division of the Inland Revenue are available from the Shares Valuation Unit in London Office.
In summary the main valuation bases are:
Maintainable earnings (See 0802.31)
Maintainable dividends (See 0802.32)
Assets (See 0802.33)
Break-up value (See 0802.34)
Discounted cash flow (see 0802.35)
The theory behind the methods utilising these bases is described below for the purpose of completeness.
A full description of the theory and practice of the generally accepted methods is beyond the scope of the guide, so please refer to the CFM, valuations training material (from the advanced corporate finance course) or textbooks (see chapter 14 of the handbook for list) for detailed technical guidance.
0802.31 Maintainable earnings basis method
In order to establish a value under this method, the maintainable level of future earnings is estimated and applied to a suitably chosen price/earnings ratio (P/E ratio).
This method is commonly used for the valuation of majority holdings.
The maintainable level of future earnings may be considered as the level below which, in the absence of unforeseen and exceptional circumstances, the entity's earnings would be unlikely to fall.
The P/E ratio may be selected from newspapers and published financial statements for similar individual entities or from the relevant industry sector statistics.
Considerable judgment is required in determining the extent of comparability.
0802.32 Maintainable dividends basis method
A valuation on this basis is determined by applying an estimate of the maintainable future dividends to a suitable dividend yield for the entity or business concerned.
This method may be appropriate for the valuation of minority holdings where effective influence or control is limited.
Detailed guidance on determining maintainable earnings and dividends and the selection of appropriate P/E ratios and dividend yields given in the CFM.
0802.33 Assets basis method
The assets basis may be appropriate if the value computed by reference to earnings or dividend yields is appreciably different to the underlying net asset value, for example, property companies and investment trusts.
The asset value is a measure of security for the investor's capital and may be relevant even where the shareholder does not have full control.
0802.34 Break-up value basis method
Where there is a likelihood that the purchaser could achieve the best return by putting the company into liquidation, and would in practice be able to carry this out, then the assets basis valuation using break-up values should be applied.
It will normally be necessary to seek expert advice on the realisable values of all the major assets.
Care should be taken to assess the effect of forced sales on fixed assets and stocks, the level of recoverability of receivables and the discount to be applied.
An assessment will be necessary of special liabilities arising on cessation, e.g., commitments under leases, and obligations to compensate employees made redundant or contractual suppliers.
Full allowance must be made also for the costs of the liquidation (to be distinguished from the costs of realising the assets).
These depend on the size and circumstances of the company, but in smaller companies may well amount to at least 10% of the funds available for distribution.
The possibility that parts of the business could be sold off as a going concern should not be overlooked.
This method may be used as a check on the reasonableness of valuations on other bases since it gives an indication of the minimum likely value.
0802.35 Discounted cash flow basis method
This method determines the net present value of the underlying business.
It recognises that money has a time value by discounting future cash flows at an appropriate discount rate.
This may be an appropriate method to use when long range prospective financial information is involved and the nature and timing of future cash inflows and outflows can be determined.
The discount rate needs to take account not only of the relevant market interest and inflation rates but also the business and financial risks involved.
0802.36 Valuations: Shareholders' powers according to size of holding
The Companies Act affords certain powers to holders of specified percentages of the total voting capital:
Under 25%Very limited influence unless constituting the single largest shareholding and is also not substantially less than 25% in which case influence may be significant
25% to 50%When there is also a majority shareholder, has ‘negative’ influence which may give bargaining power through the ability to block special resolutions; where the holding is the single largest shareholding may have a considerable degree of control
Over 50% but less than 75% Holder may control:
(a)
composition of board;
(b)
increase of capital;
(c)
declaration of dividends; and
(d)
remuneration of directors.
75% and over Almost unfettered control; holder can:
(a)
alter Articles;
(b)
reduce the capital; and
(c)
place the company in liquidation.
0803 MAS approach to other valuations
Such valuations are generally required for statutory or regulatory reasons.
0803.1 Circumstances in which a valuation is required for statutory reasons
(i)
Section 108 Report
Detailed guidance is contained in the CFM.
(ii)
Section 109 Report
Under section 104 of the Companies Act 1985 a public company may not, in a defined initial period, enter into an agreement with a subscriber to the company's memorandum for the transfer of one or more non-cash assets to the company, unless (among other conditions) the consideration to be received by the company, and any consideration other than cash to be given by the company, have been independently valued.
Section 109 contains the requirements for the appointment of an independent valuer (who must be an accountant qualified to be the auditor of that company) and the contents of his report.
(iii)
Purchase of own shares
The legislative provisions on purchase of own shares (Chapter VII Companies Act 1985) give rise to a need for independent valuations.
(iv)
Fiscal valuations
Fiscal valuations are required to determine the value of shares or other property for capital gains or inheritance tax purposes.
0803.2 Circumstances in which a valuation is required for regulatory reasons
(i)
Class 4 transactions
(ii)
Offer terms
Further details are given in the CFM, together with example reports.
0804 Preliminary actions
General standards relating to preliminary actions on all MAS engagements are dealt with in chapter 02 of this guide.
This section deals with the additional preliminary actions specific to valuation engagements and applies equally to commercial and non-commercial valuations.
0804.1 Engagement letters
General guidance on engagement letters is given in chapter 03 and should be followed.
In summary the steps to be taken are:
obtain a corporate finance engagement letter (or full form of engagement letter if not a corporate finance client (see chapter 04)), if not already in place; and
agree the terms of the engagement in writing.
It should be agreed in the engagement letter that the firm's fees in respect of the provision of a valuation report will be agreed in writing before the report is issued.
Where we are acting as independent valuers, MAS may resist releasing a completed valuation report before physically receiving the agreed payment for the report.
An example valuation engagement letter is set out in Section 1101.5.
This includes the necessary disclaimer for appointment as an expert.
0804.2 Firm competence
The following points are relevant to whether we are in a position to carry out the engagement:
Because of the specialised and sensitive nature of valuation work, share valuations should be performed under the close supervision of a partner.
The firm should not normally become involved in carrying out valuations of such assets as land and buildings or plant and machinery unless this is within the scope of the firm's expertise.
An appropriately experienced consultation partner who is a valuations specialist and is not otherwise associated with the client's (or the subject entity's, if different) affairs should be appointed, and thereafter, should make himself available for consultation as required during the engagement.
The consultation partner should be involved in the engagement at the outset and in appropriate circumstances the basis of valuation discussed and agreed in advance.
The role of the consultation partner is separate from that of the pre-issuance review partner.
With a view to both promoting valuations expertise available within our firm and to improving the quality of valuations prepared, a group of valuations specialists is being set up in London office.
These experts have considerable experience and knowledge regarding market conditions and methodologies for commercial valuations, tax valuations, disputes and valuations of items such as brands.
0804.3 Involvement of other offices
Some engagements will require the involvement of other offices in the KPMG network.
The standards in this chapter and elsewhere in the guide are to be followed on such engagements.
In addition, the International M&A network has prepared additional guidelines that address the particular circumstances of cross-border engagements (contained in the UK handbook).
0804.4 Conflicts of interest
Care should be taken when undertaking a valuation for a minority shareholder in situations where the firm acts in another capacity for the entity itself.
0804.5 Competence to act
Engagement personnel should have appropriate skills and competence to carry out properly the work for which they are responsible.
0804.6 Preliminary meeting with client
It is imperative to meet face to face with the client and to visit the company to be valued to get a ‘feel’ for the business.
The agenda for the preliminary meeting should contain at least the following:
Reason for valuation
Size of shareholding being valued
Details of other shareholdings
Any relevant or unusual provisions in the Articles (eg pre-exemption rights)
Our role — independent, one party or fiscal
Distribution and use of valuation report
Background information about the entity being valued, the markets in which it operates and supplier and customer relations
Details of any previous valuations
Consideration of possible comparable quoted companies
Possible bases of valuation
Availability and reliability of information (eg management accounts and forecasts)
Impact of abnormal transactions on historical results and present net assets
Timetable considerations
Fee arrangements
Possibility of adding value, such as assistance with any subsequent transaction
Engagement letters
0805 Operational procedures
General standards relating to operational procedures are dealt with in chapter 02.
This section deals with the additional operational procedures specific to valuation engagements and applies equally to commercial and non-commercial valuations.
0805.1 Type of valuation engagement
A valuation may be either an assurance oriented (ie providing assurance or comfort) or a value added engagement.
In an assurance oriented engagement the firm will be reporting on a valuation prepared by a third party.
In the majority of cases however, the valuation engagement will be value added, where the firm uses information, which may already have been the subject of validation, enquiry and analytical procedures or information gathering work, to derive a conclusion in the form of an estimated value or range of values for a particular purpose.
The reliability of the valuation necessarily depends on the reliability of the underlying information as well as on the skill of the valuer.
0805.2 The approach to evidence gathering
The extent of evidence supporting the underlying data is a matter for the judgment of the engagement partner, within the broad parameters described in this chapter.
In assurance oriented valuation engagements the type of report to be given will determine the procedures to be adopted.
In order for positive assurance to be given, validation procedures will be required.
For negative assurance, enquiry and analytical procedures will be required.
In value added valuation work the views expressed in a report and the valuation are the firm's.
The extent of evidence gathering will need to be sufficient to ensure that each statement made is factually correct and that the valuation opinion is properly supported.
The key consideration will be the use to which the report is to be put.
Valuation work will be relied on by those instructing the firm for purposes agreed in the terms of engagement and, on occasions, the firm may be aware that it is to be relied on by third parties too.
Where the report will lead to an investment decision the need for evidence gathering is likely to be critical.
The general information contained in a long-form valuation report is likely to be obtained from a variety of sources, oral or written, from within or outside the entity being reported upon (for example, auditors' files).
It is appropriate to make clear at an early stage in the report the general status of the information which it contains.
0805.3 External parties
Where valuation engagements involve reference to or reliance on information which is the responsibility of external parties, the sources and responsibilities for the information should be disclosed and the firm should normally be satisfied as to the independence, qualifications, experience and reputation of such parties.
0805.4 Representations of supporting facts
It will generally be appropriate for representations relating to significant items to be obtained in writing, in the form of a board memorandum adopted by the directors of the company.
Refusal by the client to furnish a written representation that the firm believes is essential would normally be grounds for reappraising our relationship with the client and considering withdrawing from the engagement.
0805.5 Negotiating
Commercial valuations, although based on established principles, necessarily involve an element of negotiation.
Each situation will be different but the negotiating skills needed will always be the same.
Although the firm may negotiate within pre-agreed negotiating parameters or instructions on behalf of a client, it is not part of the firm's role to take decisions for a client.
We should normally act only in a professional or agency capacity in connection with negotiations (ie not as principal) and the client for whom we are acting should be clearly identified.
0806 Reporting
General standards relating to reporting are dealt with in chapter 02.
This section deals with the reporting requirements specific to valuation engagements and applies equally to commercial and non-commercial valuations.
0806.1 Oral presentation or discussion
After oral presentation or discussion, an engagement team member should prepare a written record of the matters covered (including caveats).
0806.2 Format of valuation reports
The content of the firm's valuation report may vary depending on the particular circumstances of the engagement, ie
Assurance oriented report:
In reporting as a result of an assurance oriented valuation engagement, the following principles should be borne in mind:
Positive assurance on a series of assertions may only be expressed as the outcome of validation procedures.
Negative assurance may be expressed as a result of review work, on the basis of inquiry and analytical procedures.
Value added report:
Because of the significant degree of judgment involved in selecting methods and bases of valuation and the significant number of items which may be subjectively considered by the valuer, it is preferable not to set out, in detail, the means of arriving at the valuation.
Minimum reporting standards require that valuation reports to be issued to clients or to the relevant authorities should normally take the form of a letter which would contain the following:
a reference to the engagement letter/letter of instruction (unless otherwise dealt with in the wording of the report);
an identification of what is being valued;
the purpose of the valuation;
the fact that the valuation has been based on information given;
a valuation expressed in the form of a conclusion;
a definition of the concept of a valuation, using such wording as: ‘Fair market value is defined as the price at which shares would change hands between a willing buyer and a willing seller, neither being under compulsion to buy or sell, and both having reasonable knowledge of relevant facts and market conditions at the time.’;
and
a restriction on distribution.
An example valuation report (taken from the CFM) is contained in chapter 1107.1.
Where the firm's written reports contain appendices or attachments which are separate from the main report, these attachments should include a suitable reference to the firm's report, such as, ‘To be read in conjunction with the KPMG Peat Marwick report dated…’.
0806.3 Preparation of a valuation memorandum
Details of the nature and content of a valuation memorandum and its distinction from a valuation report are contained in Section 8 of the CFM.
0806.4 Date of report
The firm's report should be dated as of the completion of the engagement which will normally be the date of the final discussions or client agreement to the draft report.
0806.5 Pre-issuance review
Unless agreed with CFSU, a pre-issuance review should be carried out of all valuation reports.
Because of the sensitive nature of this service the pre-issuance review is necessary to give additional assurance that the firm policy is adhered to and that the firm's report is clear and responds to the needs of the client.
The review is designed to identify matters which might give rise to queries following a review by a reasonably informed, but uninvolved, reader.
It is not therefore appropriate for a partner who has had any detailed involvement with the engagement to carry out the review.
The review is designed to identify substantive points rather than minor drafting matters and it is essential that it is carried out in sufficient time to enable any major issues to be dealt with.
0806.6 Restrictions on distribution of reports
Valuation reports should be restricted in their distribution to the client (and, where appropriate, other named parties as noted in the engagement letter) for the following reasons:
valuation engagements and valuation reports are tailored to the particular needs and circumstances of the individual client and these can be expected to vary widely from those of other parties and/or investors; and
to avoid any possible misunderstanding about the nature of the work performed and the degree of responsibility that the firm is taking for the information contained in the report, it is preferable for the report distribution to be limited to those with a clear appreciation of the purpose and nature of the engagement.
The report should set out the restriction in a separate paragraph (usually placed before the firm's signature) using such wording as:
‘As described in our engagement letter dated…, this report is for your internal use only and is not to be distributed except to…(name of relevant parties) or to be referred to or quoted, in whole or in part, without our prior written consent.’
Where the firm becomes aware of the unauthorised distribution or misuse of a valuation engagement report, the corporate finance professional practice partner should be consulted to determine the appropriate course of action.
0806.7 Valuations Checklist
This checklist may be used as an index for a share valuation permanent file.
1.
Client details.
2.
Company in which shares valued.
Description of its activities.
3.
Purpose of valuation and nature of transaction.
4.
Size and description of holding valued.
Names of transferor/transferee.
5.
Nominal/issued share capital.
6.
Proportion of holding to issued share capital (NB: the effective proportion may be different for IHT and CGT purposes).
7.
Date at which shares valued.
8.
Date of last accounts:
date of directors' meeting approving issue;
date accounts issued — later dates of directors' report or auditor's report; and
date of release of other information.
9.
Extracts of Articles covering:
share transfer provisions;
share valuation provisions;
rights of shares where more than one class in issue; and
any other unusual provisions, eg. restrictions on borrowings powers.
10.
History of the share capital including details of any bonus, rights or other issues.
11.
Schedule of shareholders and their holdings, showing which are directors any family connections between shareholders.
12.
Details of recent share transactions including share transactions not formally valued:
size of holding; and
price.
13.
Balance sheets for past two years;
summary; and
ratios.
14.
Information on maintainable earnings.
15.
Comparisons:
Details of listed companies used for comparison at date of valuation:
gross yield and P/E ratios on date of valuation from:
FT actuaries index relevant industry category from above index.
16.
Future prospects.
17.
Special features, if any.
Other considerations when putting together a share valuation permanent file:
The Investigation Checklist (KPMG Form 822) and the Forecasts and Projections checklist (KPMG Form 824) may often be of use in assembling background information needed for valuations.
A summary of previous negotiations with the Shares Valuation Division, noting dates and brief details and matters accepted/rejected in reaching final agreement, should be included.
In setting out the price agreed in any previous calculation in the permanent file, the basis of its agreement should also be noted.
0807 Practical considerations
0807.1 Introduction
This section serves to bring together a number of practical considerations and pointers for use when carrying out a valuation.
0807.2 Factors to be considered in conducting valuation engagements
In conducting valuation engagements a number of factors may be crucial.
The following is a list (not exhaustive) of matters which should certainly be given consideration.
size and reputation of the entities concerned and the prospects
marketability of the shareholding or business
restrictions on transfer or voting rights as specified in the statutes of a company
potential premium for a controlling interest or discount for a minority interest
quality and continuity of key management personnel
working capital availability
extent and effect of gearing (ratio of debt capital to equity capital)
appropriate value of the underlying assets
extent of related party transactions
any exceptional or extraordinary items
any previous valuations or transactions which would provide guidance
0807.3 Specific factors affecting valuations
(i)
Possible flotation
If we are carrying out the valuation of a private company which intends to float in the foreseeable future it should be borne in mind that the flotation will make the shares marketable.
(ii)
‘People’ businesses
The staff and management of a ‘people’ business such as an advertising agency, design consultancy etc are the main asset of that business.
Any potential buyer of such a business would not choose to buy without getting the management on side and locked-in first.
(iii)
Different classes of shares
It is essential that the restrictions placed on different classes of shares in a company are fully considered since these can have a material affect on the valuation method and result.
(iv)
Minority holdings
Small minority holdings would normally be valued by reference to dividends, and earnings and assets are generally of less importance in these cases.
A private individual who buys a minority shareholding in a non-dividend paying private company as a pure portfolio investment must do so on the basis of some prospect which, if realised, will provide him with the return he seeks.
Where the valuer is advising an individual contemplating such an investment, he should discuss the likely possibility with him so the shares can be valued on that expectancy.
(v)
Use of dividend yield
In determining an appropriate dividend yield, regard should be had not only for comparable public company yields but allowance should also be made for factors such as non-negotiability, dividend cover, asset backing etc.
(vi)
Private company discount
One would generally expect to pay less for a private company than for a similar public company.
The reason for the discount is the lack of marketability of the shares (although this will not be relevant if 100% of the shares are to be acquired) and the generally smaller size (and hence vulnerability) of the business.
For example a private company may have:
lower turnover
less adequate working capital
weaker accounting controls
less depth of management
One might pay more for a private company because a pre-acquisition investigation could be more thorough.
(vii)
Double check of valuation using ‘rules of thumb’
Most businesses would be valued on either an earnings or asset or dividend yield basis as appropriate but there are certain ‘rules of thumb’ or key features which one may use as a ‘double check’to confirm the reasonableness of the determined value.
These are outlined below for certain businesses.
A bank
Needs careful consideration of the loan book and resultant income yield
An Insurance broker
Value on the basis of the annual fees or commissions received, plus a separate value for the client list, working capital and fixed assets.
An hotel
Focus would be on:
occupancy
room rates
food and beverage cost percentages.
A good check is the price per room paid.
A firm of Chartered Accountants
Value on the basis of gross annual billings plus element for the ‘goodwill of the business’.
This approach is typical for service companies of this kind
A fund management
A rule of thumb is a percentage of funds under business management (typically 2% — 3%)
A leasing company
Discount the future lease income to present values after careful analysis of residual values
A property company
Consider the yields derived from the properties held, together with a realistic assessment of the current market value of the portfolio
Nursing homes
Value of the business would be based on ‘price per bed’ multiplied by number of beds
A mining company
Value on the basis of comparable quoted companies if the client is relatively significant with a number of minority holdings.
A construction company
This sector is highly cyclical.
High gearing is common, so key ratios are gross profit margin and stock turnover ratio.
Distribution
There is often a long term trend to concentration of operators.
A valuation of a smaller company must take account of its potential as a takeover target.
Bookmakers
The goodwill in such cases is commonly valued at so many weeks betting receipts (often three to four weeks' is used).
Dairies
In such cases the average daily retail gallonage may be multiplied by £x per retail gallon.
It may also be possible to use a figure for average daily semi-retail gallonage with a reduced figure for the £ per semi-retail gallon.
Pharmaceutical chemists
The goodwill in this case maybe calculated on two to three years' purchase of so-called absolute net profit (ie net profit after allowing for the salary of a fully-qualified manager for each shop).
Garages/Petrol stations
The goodwill figure in such cases can be derived from the average net profit margin per gallon, multiplied by the daily throughput.
Licensed premises
Again the goodwill is either inherent in the site or personally attached to the owner.
There is no customary valuation based on average daily pints drunk or spirits consumed.
Gambling casinos
Gambling casinos have goodwill valued on a similar basis to betting shops.
The argument is that it is essentially turnover that matters since this shows the amount of client participation at the roulette or blackjack tables.
It is up to the house then to maximise profits from the available clientele.
Butchers, bakers & and greengrocers
Other similar businesses can often be valued at around two years' purchase of the average of the last three years net profits without deduction for proprietor's remuneration or interest on capital.
The multiplier and basis in this case can be derived from the figures used in decided cases, many of them concerning rating or compensation.
(viii)
Other factors
Other factors explored in more detail in the CFM include:
Previous share transactions
Absence of marketability
Dominant shareholders
Fiscal valuations: Unlisted Securities Market
Substantial controlling and other majority interests
Existence of a special purchaser
Acquisitions and mergers
Convertibles, gearing and partly paid shares
Valuations where no profits are earned
Valuations where there are no dividends
Valuations where liquidation is possible
The valuation of new ventures
The valuation of quasi-partnerships
Valuations on purchase of own shares by a company
Valuation of non-voting shares, preference shares and convertible instruments
Restrictions or rights in the articles
History and future prospects of a company
Surplus assets
0807.4 Relevance of control to the valuation
It is generally assumed that ‘control’ is a desirable feature and therefore has an additional premium value, ie purchasers will pay extra to acquire control and vendors will expect extra money to relinquish control.
0807.5 Relevance of size of holding on choice of basis
In general terms when valuing majority holdings the greatest influence is likely to be the earning capacity of the company with the underlying assets being an added influence if they differ materially from a valuation based on earnings.
In the case of minority holdings of less than 25%, the dividend yield is likely to be of primary consideration.
There are, however, no hard and fast rules and a ‘cocktail’ of methods is sometimes adopted in complex cases; the basis to be adopted depends entirely on the facts of each case, especially for holdings of between 25% and 50.1%.
09 Public Transactions and the Lead Advisers' Role
Contents
0901
Introduction
0902
The Corporate Finance Manual
0903
Initial Steps prior to acceptance of appointment
0904
Engagement formalities
0905
Further formalities associated with the engagement
0906
Preliminary considerations
.1
Financing
.2
Standard Documentation
.3
Compliance
.4
Verification
.5
Recording communications
.6
Conduct
.7
KPMG work programme as lead advisor
0907
Progress and drafting meetings
.1
Progress meetings
.2
Drafting meetings
.3
Meeting organisation
0908
Agreeing documents with the Stock Exchange
0909
The Takeover Panel
0910
Other practical considerations
.1
Due diligence
.2
Printers
.3
Public relations
.4
Transmission of announcements to the Exchange
.5
Posting of documents to shareholders
.6
Appointment of a receiving banker
0911
Summary and Conclusion
0912
Regulatory framework
0901 Introduction
This section of the MAS Practice Guide is an introduction to the area of work where the Firm is deemed to be acting as a lead advisor in a public transaction.
This is not intended to be an exhaustive checklist of the regulatory requirements of either the Yellow Book or Blue Book.
It does, however, attempt to summarise some of the practical considerations and experience already gained in order to assist members of MAS undertaking work in similar areas.
0902The Corporate Finance Manual
It is envisaged that MAS should have the capability to provide a total service to the client.
However Chapter 9 of the CFM, it is also stated that MAS (or other) partners should not (except in ‘special’ circumstances as noted in the CFM):
Make a public recommendation to directors/shareholders for inclusion in an offer or defence document; or
Lead on behalf of a client in the public arena where the transaction is covered by the City Code; or
Sponsor issues.
Although a total prohibition exists for the third category above, special circumstances may exist for the first two services.
It is where these exist that we may act as ‘lead adviser’.
General guidance on the firm's role (where it is not lead advisor) in respect of City Code transactions is given in Chapter 9 of the CFM.
0903 Initial steps prior to acceptance of appointment
In order for the firm to undertake work as a lead financial adviser (broadly within the first two categories identified above) the particular circumstances must have been approved as ‘special’ by at least two independent MAS partners plus the nominated senior partner.
The Firm will normally act in agreed bids ie where the target's board and Financial advisers are willing to recommend the terms of the offer.
The easiest method to use to comply with this requirement is a ‘round-robin’ memorandum which sets out:
the outline of the proposal deal; and
why the lead partner believes the firm is able to act in such a role.
The memorandum should then be authorised by the three further partners.
An example of such a memorandum is given at 1101.12.
The memorandum may also address any conflict of interest issues and set out where the perceived responsibilities (and, therefore, risks) lie.
0904 Engagement formalities
As well as the normal forms of engagement letter the following should also be considered if acting as a lead adviser:
The format of the engagement letter for the deal management role may need to be agreed with CFSU prior to submission.
This is particularly true if the transaction is in any way governed by the City Code; and
there may need to be a separate contract dealing with specific services.
In the case of a City Code transaction where the firm is making an offer on behalf of its client, a separate contract (which should be drawn up by the firm's lawyers) should form the basis of the firm's responsibilities for making such an offer.
An example of such a contract is included at 11.01.10.
Some important points to consider in the process of drawing up such an engagement contract are as follows:
Although there is likely to be a fairly close relationship with the lawyers acting for the client, they will probably be asked to act for the client in respect of the firm's contract.
We need to be aware of the distinction between these roles;
The example contract included at 1101.10 is a final negotiated contract and should not be used as the basis of initial negotiations.
The form of contract should be discussed with the firm's own lawyers and a draft approved before the client's lawyers are asked to comment;
Specific attention should be drawn to the indemnification section.
In a lead adviser role or public deal, consideration should be given to the statement of indemnity which might even be included in the more standard engagement letter where a specific contract is not applicable.
The extent of legal advice required should be considered in each case;
Care should also be taken with warranties to be given by the client.
While we should at all times act reasonably with the client's best interests in mind, when such a specific contract is required, it must be extremely clear that the firm acts on behalf of the client and is, as far as the public arena is concerned, not acting in its own right.
Suitable warranties should, therefore, be given by the client to ensure this is the position;
Whilst in most cases evident, the contract should identify those members of the client's board, management or the client's agents on whose instructions the firm is entitled to act.
It is then vital throughout the engagement that the firm only acts on instructions from these persons and that evidence is kept of such instructions.
Major steps in the transaction may require to be evidenced in the board minutes or at least written instruction to be received by the Firm; and
Finally the firm's own lawyers should be asked to formally approve the final form of negotiated contract as evidence of their advice to the firm.
0905 Further formalities associated with the engagement
Certain lead adviser roles will involve the co-ordination not only of external advisers but also of other parts of KPMG.
The engagement partner should discuss with the partners leading other work in which the firm is involved, their terms of reference and the way in which they will report to the lead adviser.
All of the other work, outside the deal management role, should if possible be governed by a single engagement letter.
Fees are more likely to be addressed in the deal management engagement letter and not the specific contract.
However, the following might be considered in structuring the fee arrangements:
is an advance payment appropriate?
should stage fees be payable on the issue of each public document?
final fee deadline: for example, at or 7 days after shareholder meeting/effective completion?
any contingent fee arrangement must be approved as set out in Section 3.
0906 Preliminary considerations
0906.1 Financing
Certain public transactions, notably where the firm is making an offer on behalf of its client, require funds to be available in a specific currency at a specific time and place.
This demands careful planning well ahead of the requirement.
Not only must the firm be satisfied that the client is able to finance the transaction but before making any public announcement, tangible evidence must be available.
The following considerations should be addressed:
A receiving agent will eventually need to be appointed (either to receive funds if the transaction is raising funds or to pay funds in an offer).
It might be appropriate if the receiving agent appointed is also the registrar of either the client or a target as appropriate.
The company secretarial department of the firm can and have acted in this role on occasions.
As evidence of funds availability it may not be appropriate for actual funds to be deposited to the firm's account.
Consideration should be given to arranging for a banker's guarantee in the firm's favour.
An example of such a guarantee is set out at 1106.6.
Whether cash funds or guarantee, careful consideration should be given to the maximum requirement and whether the guarantee or deposit should cover professional fees.
The period over which the firm should have the right to draw down funds should be established at the outset and formally agreed with both the banker and the client.
Consideration should be given to the client's money and title document rules under the Financial Services Act.
Since the guarantee is addressed to KPMG rather than to the client, a guarantee would not seem to fall within this category and, therefore, simplifies matters.
This situation may change so CFSU should be consulted.
Any guarantee should be kept secure by deposit in a safe or other suitable arrangement.
0906.2 Standard Documentation
For all complex deal management roles but specifically when acting as lead adviser it is important to establish detailed responsibilities from the outset.
In order to facilitate this process the following, at least should be developed and agreed with all parties:
List of documents
Timetable
List of parties
The list of parties needs to identify direct lines and home numbers and fax numbers and addresses as appropriate.
0906.3 Compliance
Lead adviser roles are likely to be governed by more extensive regulations than for non public deal management roles.
The following, inter alia, need be considered:
Companies Acts
Financial Services Act (‘FSA’)
Insider Dealing Legislation
The Yellow Book
The Blue Book (City Code)
SIB
Investment Business Regulations of the Institute of Chartered Accountants in England and Wales (as a recognised professional body, ‘RPB’).
As far as possible and at least as regards all legal aspects, the lawyers should be clearly responsible for compliance with these regulations.
If this can be identified in the firm's specific contract with the client it will significantly reduce the firm's risk position.
It is desirable to specifically request from the client's lawyers that they will advise the Firm where they believe they have a conflict of interest in advising both their client and the Firm regarding the proposed transaction.
The firm is able to act within the FSA but unlike traditional lead advisers (i.e. the merchant banks) is governed by an Institute and not as a member of the Stock Exchange or Securities and Futures Authority.
Specific areas which require careful attention in this area are the cold calling rules and coordination and agreement of documents with the Stock Exchange.
It should be noted that while there is no reason why (acting as lead adviser) the firm should not deal directly with the Stock Exchange, it is somewhat unusual.
The broker (through whom the approach would normally be made) must be kept informed at each stage of the process.
The firm has from time to time various secondees both at the Listing Groups of the Stock Exchange and with the Panel.
These are useful initial contact points.
0906.4 Verification
As part of their engagement the lawyers will prepare detailed verification notes to support and provide evidence for the information and statements made in public documents.
As part of the co-ordination role, the engagement team should consider if suggested drafting amendments to documents will cause subsequent verification difficulties.
However, it should be ensured that such considerations do not preclude the drafting of the document in as commercial a manner as possible, taking into account at all times the purpose of its production.
0906.5 Recording communications
Throughout the programme the recording of communications with any external party — eg the Panel, the Target, the Target's advisers etc — is vital.
0906.6 Conduct
The announcement rules (2.2 Blue Book) are always of particular significance in a public transaction.
Care must be taken to ensure the Firm does not take a more onerous duties than are required of it.
The announcement of an impending bid is the responsibility of the target and its advisors not the acquiror or their advisors.
0906.7 KPMG work programme as lead adviser
A standard KPMG work programme as lead advisor in a public company transaction is contained at Section 1109.4.
This sets out issues to consider and actions to take at the planning stage and during the engagement.
This work programme is designed primarily for use in preparing circulars, rather than for making recommended offers.
0907 Progress and drafting meetings
In accordance with the timetable developed and agreed as set out above, it is important that the lead adviser coordinates and controls the responsibilities of the other professionals who may be involved in the transaction.
Whilst the timetable may need to be flexed throughout the transaction, it needs to include regular meetings to coordinate the input from the various parties.
These meetings can be segregated into two broad types:
0907.1 Progress Meetings
Throughout the transaction process it is necessary to ensure that all of the parties are achieving their set responsibilities in accordance with the timetable and that, if not, the timetable is revised as necessary.
The lead adviser must be seen to be controlling the progress of the transaction and therefore it is useful to appoint a chairman for each progress meeting which should be attended by the principals and the senior member of each professional team.
Once the chairman has summarised progress to date the other advisors should be requested to report (to the lead adviser and, if present, principals) on their progress and to highlight any potential difficulties which may affect the timetable.
0907.2 Drafting Meetings
The number and frequency of drafting meetings will depend on the complexity of the documentation required.
As part of the coordination role MAS will probably be drafting the documentation.
It is therefore important to ensure that wording is agreed as far as possible during drafting meetings.
Purely in order to minimise costs, drafting meetings should be kept to a minimum and should wherever possible be restricted.
When all agreed amendments have been implemented the documents should be recirculated for further comment as applicable.
It is key to the coordination role that redrafting is kept under control; it is all too tempting for the various parties to attempt to improve the wording and suggest further amendment without adding material value.
0907.3 Meeting organisation
As part of the control of the transaction it is important that the majority of meetings are held at the firm's own premises.
As some of the various meetings, especially the progress meetings, are likely to be attended by all parties it is necessary to arrange for the booking of boardrooms and associated facilities as early as possible as the availability of rooms of sufficient size will be restricted.
0908 Agreeing documents with the Stock Exchange
Whether directly or indirectly through a broker, documents submitted to the Stock Exchange for reading need to be marked up for the relevant references from the Yellow and Blue Books.
In certain cases an additional list of non — applicable items also needs to be submitted in the form of a letter.
The Stock Exchange Quotation Department is organised into various listing groups alphabetically according to the name of the listed (target) company.
Apart from actually submitting the documents for reading, discussion by telephone of any points raised is perfectly acceptable.
The degree to which the document is examined depends on its purpose.
Any document that includes listing particulars, where new shares are to be listed, will be examined in great detail and a list of non-applicable items will be required.
Corporate lawyers are well versed in the marking up of documents for reading so it is quite useful to arrange for a junior member of the lawyer team to undertake the initial mark up.
Practical points:
Four copies of each document should be marked-up and sent for reading;
When returned, subsequent amendments fall into two categories:
(a)
amendments for points raised by the reader should be marked in red; and
(b)
all other amendments should be marked in black.
Practically this can be done by type underlining all ‘black’ amendments and marking up ‘red’amendments by hand as appropriate.
Other arrangements may be appropriate if a printer is engaged at an early stage.
Prior to submission and at an early stage in drafting, a coding system should be developed to ensure, as far as possible, that price sensitive information does not become generally available.
The names of the major parties (eg. client and target) should be coded.
Practical points on coding:
(a)
each code should have the same number of letters as the real name to avoid tabbing difficulties later;
(b)
care should be taken with apostrophes and alike (compare Bloggs' and Smith's) so that the search and replace exercise on decoding is as easy as possible; and
(c)
avoid codes which may also appear as general text (eg place names) since on decoding normal text may be improperly converted.
Where a document is also subject to the City Code, then six copies of the final document should be sent to the Takeover Panel.
It is unlikely that the Panel will be at all interested in reading drafts of any document.
When the final offer document is sent to the Panel a document charge is payable according to the scales set out in the Blue Book.
It will, therefore, be necessary to arrange for the drawing of a cheque by accounts payable department before submission.
0909 The Takeover Panel
General enquiries should be addressed to CFSU in the first instance.
IF CFSU considers it appropriate or is unable to consider the query, general enquiries can then be addressed to the Panel (on a no name basis if necessary) at any stage in the process if there is uncertainty as to whether the Blue Book is relevant to the particular transaction.
It is worth noting that an offer need not be for a listed company for the Panel to be interested in it.
Broadly, the purpose of the City Code is to protect the shareholder in the public domain.
Consequently offers for unlisted public companies and even for private companies may be of interest to the Panel if the shareholder base is sufficiently wide for minority protection to be relevant.
Greater detail of companies and transactions to which the Code applies is given in Section 4 to the Introduction to the Blue Book.
It is a matter for consideration between the engagement team and the appointed lawyers if a visit to the Panel is required or whether any points need to be discussed by telephone.
Given that the firm will not undertake work in this area that is likely to lead to a contested bid, the majority of such ‘friendly’ transactions will involve the seeking of irrevocable undertakings from directors (who would normally be recommending the offer) and possibly from other shareholders.
The structure of the transaction may be such that an early dialogue with the Panel is likely to be useful.
Particularly important is the mandatory offer requirements under Rule 9 of the Code and the rules on persons acting in concert which are set out in the notes to Rule 9.
A study of the General Principles of the Code as set out in the Blue Book is a useful introduction to the basic ideas underlying the detailed rules.
0910 Other practical considerations
0910.1 Due diligence
When acting as a lead adviser in respect of an acquisition of a private company or business by a listed company there is the normal requirement for due diligence, the coordination of which may fall within the deal management role.
Where the lead adviser's role is in respect of the acquisition of a listed company and is, therefore subject to the City Code, due diligence should be considered carefully.
While there is no regulation that specifically excludes due diligence work on a listed company, in practice it is rarely undertaken due to the rules on equality of information to be given not only to all shareholders but also to offerors or bona fide potential offerors.
Careful consideration should be given, in consultation with the client, as to the likelihood of a further offer from another party and the relative risk of not undertaking due diligence compared to having to make disclosure of sensitive information to an existing or potential competitor.
Reference should be made to Rule 20 of the Code.
Conditions:
Some comfort can be obtained by placing certain conditions to the offer e.g. minimum net assets etc.
This allows for a completion review.
The Panel discourages over complex and onerous conditions as the shareholder is left with great uncertainty as to the terms of the offer.
0910.2 Printers
At some point during the course of the drafting of the documentation it will be necessary to consider when and if printers are to be engaged to print (and most likely despatch) the documentation to shareholders.
Some practical points to consider are:
(a)
obtain at least two quotes to ensure the best price is obtained for the client;
(b)
where the initial word processing is to be undertaken within the firm, ensure that the technology is such that the transfer of files to the printer's system will maintain the integrity of the document and be cost effective; and
(c)
ensure that the printers' own security procedures are sufficient.
There are a number of printers with whom MAS has worked already (some being clients) who are well known for security printing.
0910.3 Public Relations
It may be appropriate to consider with the client the appointment of an independent public relations consultant depending on the purpose of the transaction and the requirement for press coverage.
0910.4 Transmission of announcements to the Exchange
Throughout the transaction process announcements in accordance with the Yellow and Blue Book will need to be made to the Exchange and simultaneously transmitted to shareholders.
Announcements need to be delivered to the Company's Announcements Office (‘CAO’) at the Stock Exchange.
Six copies are required.
Dependent on the length of the document, the means of delivery can vary:
(a)
By hand, for retyping onto screen by the CAO; or
(b)
By hand in machine readable form (ie able to be scanned).
Details of requirements can be obtained from the CAO; or
(c)
Data transfer by modem.
The firm is currently investigating the possibilities of arranging for direct data transfer to the CAO.
However the CAO is considering restricting access to brokers which would preclude our being able to transmit independently.
0910.5 Posting of documents to shareholders
In general, the mailing house facilities of the security printers are the most efficient means of despatch of documents to shareholders.Where the number of shareholders is manageable, or the firm is undertaking the whole of the word processing, then it may be appropriate to arrange for mailing direct from the firm.
Practical points to consider are, inter alia, as follows:
(a)
the registrars for the target can supply the address labels given sufficient notice.
The Companies Acts provides for Registrars to give complete shareholder lists to persons on payment of a fee;
(b)
a certificate of posting should be obtained in either case if taken directly to the post office or a file note of despatch kept if posted through internal mailing system;
(c)
consider at an early stage if client headed note paper and /or specimen signatures will be required; and
(d)
make arrangements for the printing of any special logos required.
0910.6 Appointment of a receiving banker
A receiving agent will need to be appointed (either to receive funds if the transaction is raising funds or to pay funds in an offer).
It might be appropriate if the receiving agent appointed is also the registrar of either the client or a target as appropriate.
The company secretarial department of the firm (St Albans and Stoke offices) have acted in this role on occasions.
0911 Summary and Conclusion
To a certain extent the lead adviser's role is simply an extended and more detailed deal management role.
However, it may also involve the firm indicating having given advice to its client in public documents the content and form of which may need to be agreed with the Stock Exchange.
The document is almost certainly an investment advertisement and must be verified and approved as such.
It is the extent of the work that is in the public arena that distinguishes the role from others undertaken by MAS and, therefore, affects the firm's perception of its risk in acting.
The requirement to assess these issues at an early stage and to confirm the special circumstances that exist by obtaining the approval of three partners other than the lead partner is set out at the beginning of this section.
Wherever possible throughout the transaction, the engagement team should ensure that the firm's risk is minimised.
The key guidelines to ensure this is the case are as follows:
A separate contract (with appropriate indemnities and warranties) dealing with specific services outside the general deal management role;
Ensuring the appointment of City lawyers with the specific experience required;
Ensure that responsibilities are stated and consents obtained from all other parties to include, inter alia, the directors of each company, the brokers and reporting accountants or other parties taking responsibility for any financial extracts;
Ensure that a full verification exercise is undertaken by the lawyers which also evidences the responsibilities above; and
Where the public documentation indicates that the firm is giving advice to its client, careful consideration should be given as to how that advice is delivered.
Legal advice should be considered in each case but any letter of advice should address, with suitable caveats, the following key points:
(a)
the key decision criteria such as price and structure and the various options for their implementation;
(b)
that ultimate responsibility for the decision to proceed with the transaction rests solely with the directors of the client company;
(c)
a summary of the mechanisms of the transaction and the regulations under which it is being undertaken; and
(d)
that the directors take primary responsibility for the information contained in all public documentation and that this information will be subject to verification.
It is particularly important, especially with non UK resident corporations that the onerous requirements of the Code are understood and that they indicate in writing and by their actions that they are willing to be bound by them.
0912 Regulatory framework
Prospectuses
The law governing prospectuses is contained in the Companies Act 1985.
This Act lays down the matters to be stated, and reports to be set out, in a prospectus issued when an offer or invitation is being made to the public.
We will usually aim to ensure that any document containing financial and other information issued by the firm as agent to a small group of potential investors, which the firm will generally need to approve as an authorised person under the Financial Services Act, does not fall foul of the prospectus provisions of the companies Act 1985.
This can be achieved by ensuring that we fall within the exemption contained in Section 60(1) of the Companies Act, which states that an offer or invitation is not to be treated as made to the public ‘if it can properly be regarded, in all the circumstances, as not being calculated to result, directly or indirectly, in the shares or debentures becoming available for subscription or purchase by persons other than those receiving the offer or invitation, or otherwise as being a domestic concern of the persons receiving and making it’.
If this exemption applies we do not have to comply with the prospectus provisions of the Companies Act as to the contents of prospectuses.
Under the Act an offer of shares in or debentures of a private company, or an invitation to subscribe for shares or debentures will be regarded (unless the contrary can be proved) as being a ‘domestic concern’(ie not an offer to the public) if it is made to:
an existing member of the company making the offer or invitation;
an existing employee of that company;
a member of the (close) family of such a member or employee; or
an existing debenture holder.
Regarding the ‘domestic concern’ exemption the following points are important to avoid the offer being treated as an offer to the public:
each publication or document sent to potential investors should be personalised or at the very least individually numbered or serialised;
each potential investor who accepts the invitation should warrant that he/she is acquiring the shares for his/her own account for long term investment and notwithstanding this warranty it must be reasonable for the issuing company in all the circumstances to believe this warranty;
non-renounceable documents of title should be issued by the company; and
the invitation must not be associated with or followed by an immediate application for listing on The Stock Exchange or some other trading facility.
It is important to obtain specific legal advice in all circumstances to protect the firm's position and to minimise any likelihood of the arrangements entered into being set aside by any ‘disgruntled’ investor after the event.
The current minimum requirements on disclosure in a prospectus issued when an offer or invitation is being made to the public are contained in Schedule 3 of the Companies Act 1985.
Other regulatory considerations
The Companies Act 1985 also contains provisions relating to the protection of minorities, for example, on the issue of shares for non-cash consideration, compulsory purchase provisions on takeovers and other general provisions.The conduct of takeovers is also affected by competition policy, in particular by the Competition Act 1980 and by EC regulations concerning fair competition.
In addition, multi-national securities offerings and cross-border acquisitions will be affected by the regulations of the territories involved.
Regulation of the listed securities market
Under the listed securities regulations contained in Part IV of the FSA, the London Stock Exchange is appointed the competent authority to make listing rules to govern the admission of securities to listing and the continuing obligation of listed companies.
‘Admission of Securities to Listing’(the Yellow Book) contains these listing rules.
Investor protection
The Panel on Takeovers and Mergers
The detailed conduct of takeovers and mergers is, at present, subject to a separate non-statutory regime administered by the Panel and contained in the City Code on Takeovers and Mergers (‘the City Code’).
There is, however, an interaction with the FSA in that the rules of SROs and RPBs require compliance with the City Code.
(It should also be noted that the EC has announced plans to promulgate a directive aimed at the regulation of the conduct of takeovers and mergers throughout the Community.)
Although the City Code does not have the force of law, those who wish to take advantage of the facilities of the securities markets in the UK are expected to conduct themselves in matters relating to takeovers according to the City Code.
Those who do not may find that the facilities of the markets are withheld from them.
Familiarity with the contents of the Blue Book, especially to whom the City Code applies and the main rules and general principles of the Code is important.
Status of the City Code
The City Code comprises a set of general principles supported by detailed rules on the conduct of takeovers.
It is intended to represent the collective opinion of those professionally involved in the field of takeovers on a range of business standards appropriate to the conduct of such takeovers.
The City Code applies equally to company directors, professional advisors and independent reporting accountants.
The City Code was substantially revised in October 1990.
In determining whether the City Code applies it is the nature of the target company which is relevant.
The City Code applies to listed and unlisted public companies and to the following classes of private company:
(a)
companies whose equity share capital has been listed on the Stock Exchange at any time during the 10 years prior to the relevant date;
(b)
companies in whose equity share capital dealings have been advertised in a newspaper on a regular basis for a continuous period of at least 6 months in the 10 years prior to the relevant date;
(c)
companies whose equity share capital has been subject to a marketing arrangement as described in Section 163(2) (b) of the Companies Act 1985 at any time during the 10 years prior to the relevant date (e.g. companies whose shares have been traded on the USM or used to be traded on the 3rd Market);
(d)
companies which have filed a prospectus for the issue of equity share capital at the companies' registry at any time during the 10 years prior to the relevant date.
In each case the relevant date is the date on which an announcement is made or the date on which some other event occurs in relation to the company which has significance under the City Code.
The Panel accepts that the provisions of the City Code may not be appropriate to all such private companies and will, therefore, apply the City Code with a degree of flexibility in suitable cases.
The City Code applies to all such companies if they are considered by the Panel to be resident in the UK, the Channel Islands or the Isle of Man.
It also applies to companies resident in the Irish Republic if they are listed on the Stock Exchange, are traded on the USM, or under Stock Exchange Rule 535.3 or used to be traded on the 3rd Market.
(A company is normally considered to be ‘resident’ only if it is incorporated in the UK, the Channel Islands, the Isle of Man or the Irish Republic and has its head office and place of central management in one of these jurisdictions.)
The City Code is concerned with takeover and merger transactions, however effected, of all relevant companies; these include partial offers, offers by a parent company for shares in its subsidiary and certain other transactions where control of a company (as defined in the Code) is to be obtained or consolidated.
The City Code does not apply to offers for non-voting non-equity share capital.
If shares are being issued and listing particulars or a prospectus are required, reporting accountants may also be asked to provide a private comfort letter on the statement made by the directors as to the adequacy of working capital even if the transaction does not require formal comfort to be given.
Further guidance on reporting accountants requirements is given in the CFM.
Directors' duties
In common law the directors of a company owe a general fiduciary duty to act honestly and fairly for the benefit of the company and its shareholders.
They act as agents of the company and must exercise reasonable skill and care in the performance of their duties consistent with the level of their knowledge and experience.
Supplementing the common law duties, there are specific responsibilities under the Companies Act 1985 and related legislation (including the Insolvency Act 1986).
Taken as a whole, the duties of directors are onerous.
They are particularly onerous when companies engage in corporate finance related activities, for example, in raising new capital or embarking upon mergers and acquisitions.
Directors' duties under company law are contained in Part IX of the Companies Act 1985 (Sections 282 — 344).
Responsibility for listing particulars and prospectuses
In addition to the general responsibilities of directors, the FSA confers responsibility for listing particulars and prospectuses on each person who is a director on the date the listing particulars are submitted to the Stock Exchange or issued.
However, the responsibility for any report included in listing particulars or a prospectus (for example, an accountants' report) remains with the person who has given his consent to the inclusion of that report in the form and context in which it is included.
Directors' responsibilities under the City Code
The City Code envisages that the full board of directors maintains an active involvement in monitoring the conduct of a take-over offer.
The Panel regards each director of the offeror and the offeree company as having responsibility under the City Code to ensure, so far as he is reasonably able, that the City Code is complied with in the conduct of an offer.
Whilst boards of directors may delegate the day to day conduct of an offer to individual directors or committees of directors, the board as a whole must ensure that proper arrangements are in place to enable it to monitor that conduct in order that each director may fulfil that responsibility.
Where relevant, the opinions of professional advisors should be available to the full board of directors.
Financial advisors are regarded as having a special responsibility to ensure that all directors are aware of their responsibilities under the City Code.
Directors are expected to co-operate with the Panel in connection with its enquiries, by providing promptly on request, copies of minutes of board meetings and other information in their possession, or in the possession of the offeror or offeree company as appropriate.
KPMG Peat Marwick ‘s role in relation to that of the directors
It is the prime duty of the directors to check that they have complied with the law and that any investment advertisement issued by them on behalf of their company complies with, and contains the matters specified by, the law and by Stock Exchange and other regulations.
In performing this duty the directors usually act on the advice of the issuing house and the lawyers acting.
In accordance with our operational and reporting standards, we must review any document with which we are associated through being named in the document (or through the provision of confidential comfort letters) to identify as far as practicable any respects in which, in our view, legal, Stock Exchange or other requirements have not been complied with.
Insider Dealing
The Company Securities (Insider Dealing Act 1985) provides that a person (‘the buyer’) who knowingly obtains information, directly or indirectly, from an individual (‘the insider’) who is or has been during the preceding six months ‘knowingly connected’ with the company commits a criminal offence if the buyer deals on a recognised Stock Exchange in securities of that company when the buyer:—
a)
knowingly or has reasonable cause to believe that the insider holds the relevant information by virtue of being ‘connected with the company’ and
b)
knows or has reasonable cause to believe that because of the insider's connection and position it would be reasonable to expect the person in his position not to disclose the information except in the proper performance of his duties; and
c)
knows the information to be ‘unpublished price sensitive information’ in relation to those securities.
For this purpose ‘dealing’ means buying, selling or agreeing to buy or sell shares through a recognised Stock Exchange or an off market dealer.
A person is ‘connected with a company’ if he is, or has recently been, a director or an employee of the company in question.
‘Unpublished price sensitive information’ is information which relates to specific matters relating to or of concern (directly or indirectly) to that company, that is to say it is not of a general nature relating to or of concern to that company and is not generally known to those persons who are accustomed or would be likely to deal in those securities but which if it were generally known to them would be likely to affect the price of those securities.
These provisions are somewhat complicated.
10 Other Services
Contents
Purchaser research
1001
Introduction
1002
Reactive search
1003
Proactive search
1004
Accountants' Business Network
Other Services
1005
Fund raising
1006
‘Quick appraisal’ review
Strategy Services
1007
MC Introduction
1008
MAS Services
1009
MC Services
1001 Introduction
Purchaser research is the name given to the research services we can provide to our clients to help them advance and achieve strategic objectives.
Opportunity development in this context therefore relates primarily to the acquisition and disposal search and other ad hoc research services that we can provide in MAS.
There are two types of search available, reactive search and pro-active search.
The differences between and the characteristics of each type of search is outlined below.
If the request is for a search outside the UK, this gets passed on to MC Strategy Services.
1002 Reactive search
A reactive search is by its nature a limited search for potential acquisition candidates using a small number of information sources.
MAS maintains a computerised database, called BUYERS, of potential purchasers and their acquisition criteria against which all acquisition opportunities which are brought to us or come to our attention are screened.
No charge is made for including a potential purchaser on the database; however, if we introduce an opportunity which leads to an acquisition we charge an introduction fee.
We also a member of the Accountants' Business Network (ABN) which exists to circulate details of companies for sale and companies wishing to buy among the major accountancy firms.
The ABN is covered in greater detail in section 1004 below.
1003 Proactive search
1003.1 Introduction
A proactive search is a systematic search for a transaction partner.
It is generally time consuming involving more sources and therefore more expensive than a reactive search.
It is also far more likely than a reactive search to yield positive results.
There are two principal forms of proactive search as outlined below.
1003.2 Principal forms of proactive search
Search Type 1
We can produce a listing of potential candidate companies which match a client's acquisition or disposal criteria.
This involves a search of computerised databases against these criteria by using standard industry classification codes.
This search can be further refined by defining minimum profitability, location etc, until a short list of companies is identified.
At this stage, we can obtain further detailed company information, eg financial statements.
Our fee for this type of work would be based on time taken plus outlays and is very dependent upon the number of companies in the sample.
Search Type 2
We can also provide a more detailed report, for example, covering principal customers, suppliers and more market based information such as company reputation.
The work normally comprises three distinct stages:
1
market research into the sector of interest;
2
a listing of potential companies meeting the client's criteria; and
3
a short list of potential candidates.
Stage 1:Market research involves obtaining the information with which to identify all potential candidates and with which to evaluate them.
The databases available are listed in section 1003.4 below.
The findings are presented in a report.
The report would normally comment on the structure of the sector, the sector output, the major competitors and market shares.
Stage 2: The companies which met the client's criteria would be listed and reviewed with the client before the shortlist in Stage 3 was compiled.
Stage 3: Additional criteria would be defined and agreed with the client to compile the shortlist of target companies.
Further detailed information about the specific companies would be gained by desk research methods using all or some of the following:
trade directories;
business reviews and industry surveys;
company reports;
Company accounts;
company literature;
Stock brokers reports;
Business/Financial press;
Trade magazines;
Published market studies; and
Internal sources (ie within KPMG).
These would be supplemented, where necessary, by telephone and personal interviews with:—
trade associations;
government bodies;
industry experts and KPMG commercial contacts.
The fee for this type of work would again be based on time taken plus outlays, but, since it is a detailed survey, it will be more costly than the Type 1 search described above.
It will generally be difficult to give an indication of the costs to the client without a detailed knowledge of the matters to be covered by our report.
Candidate shortlist
The typical end product of a search is a prioritised short list of candidates.
Each should be ranked against key criteria and a profile prepared.
The key characteristics of each company which make them a good fit with the client should be identified.
Following discussion of the short list, the client may require further detailed investigation of a preferred candidate.
The scope of a pro-active search will not normally extend to a fully detailed analysis of a specific company, competitors, forecasts etc.
This information, if required by the client, should be the subject of a detailed investigation as a follow-up stage.
1003.3 Criteria for search
Establishing the criteria for the search is critical.
These must be clearly thought through at the outset.
They will vary case by case but typical headings include:
market sector
activity type
size of company
location
ownership
market share/position
financial performance
There is a temptation to overload the criteria in the early stages of the search.
The initial long list should be based on a few key criteria.
Successive rounds of screening bring into play more criteria until the short list is reached.
Care must be taken not to over-commit on the information which will be provided.
1003.4 Databases available in MAS
Internal databases
MAS maintain a number of internal databases.
These are listed below:
Buyers this maintains acquisition criteria of both clients and non-clients which have been notified to MAS.
Extbuy records acquisition criteria which are announced in the press by companies (not included are those already recorded on Buyers).
Oldbuy records which are no longer current and which we have been requested to delete from Buyers.
Filreg this is primarily a record of all file numbers which have been opened for clients and non-clients in the filing system.
Searching this database on the company name will tell you whether or not we currently maintain a file for them.
Dwmail mailing list for KPMG deal watch.
Now maintained by the Watford distribution centre.
External databases
MAS also has direct access to a small number of external databases.
More details are contained in section 3 of the handbook.
1004 Accountants' Business Network
1004.1 Introduction
As a subscriber to the ABN the firm is entitled to use the facility from any of the UK offices in order to:
1.
Market Opportunities where we have been retained by vendors and where a sales memorandum has been prepared.
2.
Introduce Suitable Opportunities to clients and contacts whose acquisition requirements are known to us and appear on our database (BUYERS).
3.
Introduce Opportunities to parties whose acquisition requirements are a matter of public knowledge (EXTBUY).
4.
Advertise the requirements of clients and contacts who may wish to acquire or sell through the NEWSFLASH system.
Participants in ABN have developed a set of ground rules in order to ensure protection of the vendor and security against any illegal use of the systems by non-authorised parties.
Each firm has nominated the persons whom enquiries should be addressed, and for the sake of good order, those are the people through whom both inputs and outputs are channelled.
1004.2 Input to the ABN
Infocheck Limited will accept inputs on the approved form only.
Before submitting the document we must be sure that a full Information memorandum exists, and ideally the data on input form should be taken from the completed Information memorandum.
Newsflashes are restricted to ten lines (including spaces) and although there is no obligation to back the newsflash with a formal selling document, some further detail will be required for those expressing interest.
Respondents to Newsflashes may be directed to any partner or manager in the firm.
1004.3 Procedures on receipt of an enquiry through the ABN
RECEIPT OF ENQUIRIES FOR OUR OPPORTUNITIES
A
Identify the firm and name of the person who is making the enquiry.
B
Obtain the name of their client who has expressed an interest.
C
Obtain some details — Quoted or Private company, activities, location, size and whether there is synergy.
D
Insert above details on an ABN enquiry form.
NAME CLEARANCE
Contact vendor or partner representing the vendor and disclose the name and other details.
If name is cleared note date of clearance and by whom on the ABN enquiry form and request a confidentiality letter from the firm making the enquiry.
CONFIDENTIALITY LETTER
Ensure that a standard undertaking and confidentiality has been approved by all ABN subscribers and is acceptable.
It should be addressed to KPMG and signed by a director or authorised signatory of the company expressing interest.
On receipt of the signed undertaking we are obliged to release a copy of the Information memorandum.
Note date of receipt on ABN enquiry form.
RELEASING INFORMATION MEMORANDA
As a matter of courtesy we generally release the Information memorandum to accountants acting for the would-be buyer unless they request it be sent direct to their clients.
Note the name of the person to whom the document is sent and the date on the ABN enquiry form.
ABN ENQUIRY FORMS
The manager should monitor progress on the incoming enquiries.
When an Information memorandum is released the form is passed to Mirian Sedlan who records it as an introduction on the INTRODUCE database and files the papers.
MATCHING OPPORTUNITIES TO OUR CLIENT'S REQUIREMENTS
All opportunities which appear on the ABN are screened against Buyers.
Where a match is identified, a profile of the opportunity is produced on the ‘business opportunity’ stationery and sent under cover of a memo to the appropriate partner or where applicable direct to the contact.
(see 1108.7 or 1108.8 for an example covering letter).
If further interest is expressed we convey such interest to the accountancy firm acting for the vendor.
Open an ABN enquiry form with details of the buyer etc.
1004.4 Placing enquiries on behalf of our buyers
Contact is made in the first instance with the manager nominated by the vendor's representative.
We are obliged to disclose the name of our client and such other relevant details concerning his business.
Note the date of contact and the person contacted on the ABN enquiry form.
OBTAINING NAME CLEARANCE
When names are cleared we are advised by the vendor's accountant and are requested to obtain the standard confidentiality letter from our clients.
Note the date of name clearance on the ABN enquiry form.
CONFIDENTIALITY LETTERS
The departmental secretary has a standard letter on file which may be refined to the precise addressees and description of the opportunity.
Such a letter is sent to the would be buyer for signature.
Note the date sent and to whom on our ABN enquiry form.
On receipt of the signed document advise the vendor's representative, send the letter and obtain the Information memorandum for our client.
Note when and to whom the selling memorandum is sent.
THE NEWSFLASH SYSTEM
Where NEWSFLASHes name a member of the department as a contact, the person should familiarise himself with the subject matter and have readily available those to whom reference may be made in order to progress the matter.
1004.5 Recording buyer criteria
Buyer criteria are held on the BUYERS database.
New potential buyers should be asked to complete a Buyers Input Form (see 1108.4) which should be sent under a standard covering letter (1108.5).
Requests for updates to buyers' criteria should be made using the standard letter at 1108.6.
1005 Fund raising
Institutional contacts are listed in a publication produced by KPMG Peat Marwick, which can be obtained from the MBO unit in London.
1006 ‘Quick Appraisal’ review
1006.1 Key issues review
AIM
To identify key issues relating to a proposed transaction with particular emphasis on:—
(1)
Differences in understanding between the buyer and seller.
(2)
Items to be addressed/resolved prior to contract.
TIMING
A key issues review should take approximately 1-3 days of a manager's time and 1 day of a partner's time depending on the size of the transaction.
SOURCES OF INFORMATION
Management of company
Company searches
Management accounts
Statutory books
Advertising brochures
Previous similar transactions
POTENTIAL PROBLEM AREAS
(1)
are we dealing with those who either own the shares or have full authority to buy or sell?
(2)
Definition of profits (if warranted) or if price is based on profits or future profits.
In particular:—
difference in accounting policies between acquiror and acquire
release of provisions from last balance sheet trading with other companies controlled by the vendors but which do not form part of the transaction
management remuneration including prerequisites treatment of exceptional/extraordinary items
goodwill write offs
dividends
capital profits and losses
profits from subsidiaries/associates
taxation
(3)
Ability to provide a short-form report to stock exchange requirements (ie unqualified as far as possible).
(4)
Purchases and vendor's tax positions vis a vis capital, income, losses carried forward etc.
(5)
Future funding requirements of the acquirer.
(6)
Does purchaser have sufficient authorised but unissued share capital if deal involves exchange of shares.
REVIEW OF PROCESS
Day 1 — half day — Partner/Manager
discussion with senior manager of the company/companies being reviewed.
half day — Manager
review of company accounts/statutory information/background information.
Day 2 — half/one day — Manager
review of management accounts/forecasts.
Further discussions with management.
Day 3 — Manager/Partner
preparation of Key Issues letter to client.
POSSIBLE POINTS TO ADDRESS IN KEY ISSUES LETTER
Potential issues fall into the categories of:
dealbreaker
areas of additional KPMG work
changes in scope of our work
practicability of the deal
tax and other planning issues
Possible items to include in a letter are:
Definition of profit
Definition of net assets (minimum)
Tax clearances
Stock exchange clearances problem
Dates of exchange and completion
Costs — who bears
Warranties/indemnities
Changes in accounting policies
Timing of deferred payments
VAT/PAYE inspections
Clawback of consideration
Limitations on warranties
Release of liens/encumbrances on shares
Distribution prior to exchange and completion
Issues of new stocks
Key employees/employee contracts/family employees
Weaknesses in accounting system
Audit report qualifications
Repayments of inter-company/related company balances and directors' loans
Pension funding position
1007 MC Introduction
KPMG, through the international M&A network, seeks to provide comprehensive services to clients at all stages of the M&A process.
The delivery of these services varies country by country, and involves the accounting practice, management consultants and sometimes third parties.
In the UK MAS, in the Corporate Finance Group, is the focal point for advisory services.
In certain aspects of M&A advisory work it is appropriate to involve specialists from the management consultancy firm who may have a useful role to play on larger and/or more complex assignments.
Management consulting advice is available at different stages of the acquisition process as follows:
acquisition strategy
acquisition search
take-over target review
enhanced due diligence
acquisition implementation
The main groups involved are likely to be Strategy Services, Actuarial Services, Human Resources and industry groups as appropriate.
The purpose of this chapter is to acquaint MAS professionals with the services provided by MC, describe how MC go about their work and the considerations they employ, and to give some guidance on when it is necessary to involve MC.
1008 MAS Services
MAS's ability to provide strategy and acquisition search type services will generally be constrained by the size and complexity of the assignment.
MAS services in this area are covered in chapter 05 (Selling) and chapter 06 (Buying).
The decision to involve MC will be made by the engagement partner based on his assessment of the individual circumstances and the best way to fulfil the client's requirements.
The strategy services which MAS can provide are outlined below.
1008.1 Acquisition search
Acquisition search services are provided primarily by MAS and by Strategy Services.
Assignments requiring the formulation of an acquisition strategy or the preparation of an overall corporate strategy will need to involve MC Strategy Services.
The acquisition search service provided by MAS is based on the list of companies for sale which are held on the Accountants' Business Network database jointly shared by the major accounting firms.
MAS attempt to match a buyer's requirements with what is available on the database.
The does not often provide a suitable candidate.
MAS can also undertake a restricted search of the main on-line and CD based company databases to identify candidates.
If the client is willing to pay for a comprehensive pro-active search, MAS will generally refer the search to MC Strategy Services.
Similarly if the request is for a search outside the UK, this gets passed on to MC Strategy Services.
1009 MC Services
The acquisition consultancy services provided by MC are described below.
1009.1 Acquisition search
Acquisition search services are provided primarily by the MAS group in Corporate Finance and by Strategy Services.
The services provided by MAS are described briefly in section 1008.1 above.
There are several stages to a comprehensive pro-active search carried out by MC, some of which may not always be applicable:
BUSINESS STRATEGY
INDUSTRY/MARKET ANALYSIS
CRITERIA FOR SEARCH
PROGRESSIVE SCREENING
CANDIDATE SHORTLIST
DETAILED INVESTIGATION
APPROACH TO STRATEGY
The following guideline notes (based on notes prepared by MC Strategy Services) are presented below as a guide to how MC carries out an acquisition search.
The headings are in the same order as the diagram above.
Business strategy
The decision to acquire should be the result of formal strategic analysis and the examination of alternative ways of meeting business objectives.
If the client has not been through this process the search brief should be broadened to include this.
In many cases this is unlikely to be successful but for both professional and business reasons we should endeavour to ensure that acquisition is the appropriate route for the company to follow.
Help in the preparation of an acquisition strategy or an overall corporate strategy, if not already done and if required by the client, can be provided by MC Strategy Services.
Industry/market analysis
Even when the decision has been made to pursue an acquisition, the client might lack good information on the market structure and competitive forces.
This is often the case when the search is being undertaken across borders or in a new market segment.
An up-front market study can provide valuable insights and provide sharper focus for the subsequent search.
We should always seek to sell this ‘added-value’ element when the opportunity arises.
Even when not specifically commissioned it is helpful to provide a brief market overview (size, trends, structure etc).
Criteria for search
Establishing the criteria for the search is critical.
These must be clearly thought through at the outset.
These vary case by case but typical headings include:
market sector
activity type
size of company
location
ownership
market share/position
financial performance
There is a temptation to overload the criteria in the early stages of the search.
The initial long list should be based on a few key criteria.
Successive rounds of screening bring into play more criteria until the short list is reached.
Care must be taken not to over-commit on the information which will be provided.
Progressive screening
The first step is to begin the pro-active search.
The approach to pro-active searches is well established and involves a combination of desk and field research.
Desk research
This invariably starts with the Business Information Centre (BIC) and the identification of information sources.
MC's access to over 2000 on-line databases is both an invaluable aid to search work and a very strong ‘selling’ point.
Typical data sources include:
Company accounts Stock brokers reports
Company reports Business/Financial press
Trade directories Trade magazines
Published market studies Industry surveys
Internal sources
Field research
This is a key part of the search service.
The extent of the interview programme will depend on the availability and quality of data available.
In many European countries hard data is difficult to come by which means a heavy reliance on interviews.
In any event, a minimum interview programme should be undertaken, at least of the short list, among customers, suppliers, competitors, industry ‘experts’, trade bodies, at trade fairs etc.
The qualitative impressions (trade gossip) gleaned from this often provide valuable insights.
Candidate shortlist
The typical end product of a search is a prioritised short list of candidates.
Each should be ranked against key criteria and a profile prepared.
The key characteristics of each company which make them a good fit with the client should be identified.
Following discussion of the short list, the client may require further detailed investigation of a preferred candidate.
The scope of a pro-active search will not normally extend to a fully detailed analysis of a specific company, competitors, forecasts etc.
Detailed investigation
A pro-active search will not, as stated above, provide full details on the target.
This information should be the subject of a detailed investigation as a follow-up stage.
This service is also offered independently of a search when a target company has already been identified.
It may be inappropriate to undertake a detailed investigation prior to opening discussions with the target.
This is often the case when the target is a small/medium sized company.
In continental Europe, the paucity of reliable financial and other information may make if impracticable to attempt this.
Approach strategy
When the decision is made to approach a target company the best way of doing this should be considered.
All the preceding research and analysis can be sabotaged in seconds if careful thought is not given to the initial approach.
This requires identifying the key factors which will benefit the business/strategic performance of the target company and its owners.
We should offer to make the initial contact if the client does not wish to handle this himself.
Smaller companies or companies not having made a previous acquisition will often ask us to act as intermediaries.
this should be handled at partner/senior manager level, having regard to the views of the client partner if the target is a client.
Other considerations
Involvement with other groups within KPMG
It will often be necessary to network with other groups when a specialist industry or discipline inputs are required.
In , if the skills of MAS are likely to be required by the client in the later stages of the acquisition process, MAS should be included at the earliest possible opportunity (if not already the main client contact).Specific mention should be made of searches across Europe.
The majority of KPMG's offices in Europe do not have a pro-active search capacity although several have been involved by us in this type of work — in particular Amsterdam, Utrecht, Paris, Frankfurt and Madrid.
Searches in Europe are generally more difficult than in the UK.
They therefore need to be strongly managed and should not be left to the local office to undertake on their own.
The following approach should be adopted:
provide a full and clear brief of the work to be undertaken and of the deliverables.
agree at the outset on the precise involvement of the local firm and the fee which they will receive.
at the outset of the search meet with the local firm to ensure full understanding of requirements.
pro-actively manage the job from London.
This could involve periodic visits to monitor progress (depending on size/complexity of the work).
Fees
Search work will be charged for on a standard fee basis.
MC do not work on a contingency fee basis.
It is often difficult to anticipate the time required to undertake a search.
Ironically searches for small/medium sized companies are more time consuming and therefore higher cost than for large companies.
Following the survey meeting, and before preparing the quote, it is worth getting BIC to make a quick trawl to indicate how easy or difficult it is likely to be to obtain information.
Professional ethics issues
There has always been nervousness, and there still is, among audit partners about pro-active search work.
It is therefore essential to observe the following guidelines:
(i)
Confidentiality:
while we do not exclude audit clients from the scope of the search it is crucial that not professional contact is made with anybody working for potential target companies in KPMG.
similarly no information held in-house relating to those companies should be assessed, ie the principle to adopt is that we only access information available in the public domain.
if we are undertaking two identical searches in parallel, there must be no overlap between the engagement teams, including at partner level.
confidential client information made available during the course of the search should be carefully filed and not left lying around.
details of search work should not be discussed with colleagues when the search is confidential.
(ii)
Search activities:
as part of the interviewing programme among suppliers/customers/competitors we will talk to audit clients.
Normally it is necessary to clear this through audit partners — the latter may however be able to provide useful contacts.
when obtaining information through interviews care must be exercised.
No hard and fast rules can be laid down but generally we will wish to impart minimum information to obtain maximum in return.
The guidelines for interviewing laid down in the Market Research Society Code of Conduct should be adopted where relevant.
A copy is available in the Strategy Services Group.
1009.2 Takeover target review
Nature of service
This service by MC provides a detailed investigation of a take-over candidate once the target has been identified.
This advice is particularly geared to contested bids or where the downside risks are high (eg leveraged deals).
In the case of agreed bids where the target co-operates, we have to have regard to the City Code rules requiring equivalent information to be made available to all genuine competing bidders.
Also there are legal constraints on the use of price sensitive information.
A take-over review (or commercial review) can be contrasted with standard investigation (or financial review).
The latter is normally undertaken in non-contested situations and has a strong emphasis on financial analysis.
Such an enhanced investigations service for private companies would be similar to the take-over target review discussed here.
However, it would be undertaken predominantly outside MAS, with inputs from MC, and provided to clients not subject to the City Code.
The takeover target review, on the other hand, would be undertaken primarily by Strategy Services, with support from MAS and general practice, principally in contested situations or where a candidate is being analysed in detail prior to an approach being made.
On no account can the service be offered to the predator in a contested situation where the target company is a KPMG audit client.
CFSU should be informed in all cases where it is proposed to undertake a take-over target review.
Scope of service
The scope and detail of a review will vary considerably, but will comprise elements of standard services provided by Strategy Services, MAS and the audit practice.
If we are successful in obtaining major reviews, this could require assembling multi-disciplinary teams at short notice to work intensively against tight deadlines.
A premium is thus put on the ability to mobilise organise and control such teams.
The likely users of this service are:
companies seeking to make, or defend, a take-over bid
shareholders of either of the above
intermediaries acting on behalf of the companies or shareholders, eg merchant banks.
Merchant banks are prime users of this service.
In recent years they have used commercial strategy consultants to undertake this work on behalf of their clients.
It should be emphasised that we are providing a service complementary to that of merchant banks; they do not normally have the resources to do it themselves.
Basis of charging
There are two approaches which can be adopted to charging for the service:
service fee based on scale rates
minimum discounted fee
Professional Practice issues
As with acquisition searches, this service can involve sensitive issues.
It is crucial therefore that these guidelines are followed in all cases:
a completely objective approach adopted.
We provide a rigourous professional assessment of the target.
We do not adopt an adversarial approach.
in line with the above, we do not become involved in accounts rubbishing.
where the target is a KPMG client in a contested bid, the service is not provided to, or on behalf of, the predator.
1009.3 Post acquisition implementation
This work is not carried out by MAS but we should be mindful of opportunities to sell (subtly) the firm's services in this area.
1101 Engagement letters
See 0302, 0403.1
1101.1 Corporate Finance Engagement Letter
This is the standard Corporate Finance Engagement Letter and is taken from the CFM.
Investment business may only be carried out for a ‘corporate finance client’ in connection with‘corporate finance activities’in accordance with the terms of a ‘corporate finance engagement letter’which has been agreed with the client.
A Corporate Finance Engagement Letter should be obtained from every client for whom corporate finance activities are to be undertaken prior to the first engagement.
The standard letter below should be used in all cases and should not be amended without reference to CFSU.
It is often worth contacting Compliance, Independence and Ethics Unit in London office to check if a Corporate Finance Engagement Letter has been obtained previously from the client.
All Corporate Finance Engagement letters are logged by the Unit.
The Directors,
Growing Business PLC,
[Address]
1 December 19XX
Dear Sirs
As you may be aware, elements of the corporate financial services work we may do for you are regulated under the Financial Services Act (‘FSA’) by the Institute of Chartered Accountants in England and Wales (‘ICAEW’) as investment business (‘regulated work’).
Our Management Consultancy firm, which may undertake some of the work, is regulated by the ICAEW as an associate and, as such, is also subject to the same ICAEW regulations for any regulated work.
The ICAEW recognises that many of the detailed provisions, designed with the individual private investor in mind, may not be appropriate for the experienced or corporate client (referred to under the regulations as ‘corporate finance clients’).
This is particularly so in circumstances where accountants carry out what are referred to as ‘corporate finance activities’(broadly, corporate finance related work and much of the corporate advisory work you might expect us to undertake for you).
Under the ICAEW regulations, any regulated work carried out by us for ‘corporate finance clients’ in the course of ‘corporate finance activities’is subject to those of the ICAEW's investment business regulations which are designed to provide general protection for ‘corporate finance clients’.
As you would expect, this differs in certain material respects from the protection appropriate under the general rules for individual private investors.
For example, some of the restrictions on the type of advice we can provide in particular circumstances are removed.
The modified regulations are tailored to the requirements of business people for a more comprehensive, responsive and cost effective service than we could provide under the general rules.
We can confirm that we are satisfied (as we are required to be under the regulations) that Growing Business plc may properly be regarded as, using the technical term introduced by the regulations, a ‘corporate finance client’.
If you countersign this letter in agreement, we will treat you as such for the purpose of regulated work which may arise in the course of future assignments.
It is the case, of course, that terms of engagement for individual assignments will be agreed separately.
Finally, may we emphasise that this letter is not intended to restrict or otherwise affect the quality of our products or service.
Yours faithfully
KPMG Peat Marwick
I/ [we]confirm the above terms of business:
Name: A. Director
Position: Financial Director
Date: 5th December 19XX
EDITOR'S NOTE: We must document on our files why it is we consider that the client may be regarded as a corporate finance client.
1101.2 Specimen letter containing terms of engagement
See 0303.1 and 0303.2
This letter is not specific to MAS and should be tailored to the specific requirements of each engagement.
The specimen is drafted as an outline to cover circumstances applicable generally which may not be relevant to all engagements.
Conversely, there may be matters relevant to a particular engagement not covered by the specimen.
Private and confidential
I Prosper Esq
Chairman
Growing Business PLC
[Address]
1 July 19X8
[Items in square brackets are for reference only]
Dear Sir
Following our appointment to [nature of appointment]and in confirmation of our recent discussion with…, we set out below the nature of the responsibilities which we undertake in that appointment and our understanding of the further services which you wish us to perform.
[Identity of client]
Our understanding is that we shall report to [the directors of Growing Business PLC].
We shall also report to the financial advisers in accordance with the terms of the engagement as set out below.
Note: Deal with any special features of client relationship.
[Confidentiality]
We agree that we will hold in strict confidence all information obtained from [Growing Business PLC]and will not disclose such information to others or use such information except in connection with the performance of the services agreed in this letter.
We understand the confidential nature of the engagement and that staff, other than the directors, should not be made aware of its purpose.
Note: Deal with any particular confidentiality issues and restrictions on the information to be made available.
[Conflicts of interest]
It is not an uncommon circumstance for us to be the appointed auditors of more than one of the companies involved in a transaction.
In such situations we take appropriate measures to ensure that strict confidentiality is maintained in all respects.
However, we will write to you with the details of the potential conflicts of interest and how they will be avoided before we commence work in accordance with the terms of this letter..
[Terms of engagement]
Note: Set out the detailed terms of engagement as agreed with the instructing clients as appropriate to the nature of the engagement.
Reference can be made to the CFM for guidance on the terms of engagement that may be appropriate to particular types of engagement in the context of the reports involved.
You may also wish to use the Special Engagement Tools developed by CFSU for the Macintosh.
[Scope of work]
Attention is drawn to the limitations in the scope of our work set out therein.
Our work will be directed to those matters which in our view materially affect the engagement and will not be directed to the discovery of errors or misstatements which we consider to be immaterial.
You will appreciate that the report is prepared solely in connection with the terms of this letter.
We shall carry out such verification work as we believe appropriate in the context of the terms of engagement agreed as set out above.
We must emphasise that this is not an audit.
The scope of this work is different from that for an audit under the Companies Act and, for that reason, it does not provide the same level of assurance as an audit.
Note: Deal with any restrictions on scope specific to the engagement.
[Timetable and responsibilities]
A timetable covering the completion of our work and of the transaction under the terms of the engagement will be drawn up and agreed between the directors and us by [date].
The critical dates are:
Note: A detailed timetable should be drawn up showing the steps involved and allocating responsibilities between the various parties.
The critical dates and responsibilities only should be set out in the engagement letter.
[Access to information]
You have agreed to ensure that any information which we may require for the purpose of providing the services set out in this letter is made available to us, as and when we may reasonable require.
You will appreciate that we cannot be held responsible if information material to our task is withheld or concealed from us.
[Representations]
[We may ask [you]to confirm formally [your]responsibility for certain information or matters to which our services relate.
You have agreed to provide such confirmations as we may require.]
[Announcements]
KPMG reserve the right to publish at its own expense and subject to your prior approval a tombstone recording the completed transaction unless you inform us that this would be in breach of specific confidentiality undertakings exchanged between the parties.
[Specialist expertise required]
As agreed the engagement team will be supplemented by the following specialists.
Note: This section is meant to specify only expertise external to the firm introduced to the assignment.
[Reports/comfort letters to be provided and restriction on circulation]
We shall provide the following reports:
[List reports to be provided]
[Arrangements relating to draft reports]
Note: Ensure that the requirements of the CFM are met such that sufficient work is carried out covering the period from the issue of a draft until the report is finalised.
Particular care is needed to identify any material adverse changes.
Whilst we may agree, at your request, to release a draft of our report at any stage prior to completion of the services set out in this letter, the suitability of a draft for release is a matter for our judgement, and we reserve the right not to release a draft it, if in our view, release is not appropriate.
[Limitation on circulation of the report]
As is usual, our report is provided on the basis that it is for your information only and that it will not be quoted or referred to, in whole or in part, without our prior written consent.
[Arrangements relating to updating reports]
We will have no obligation to update our report for events or transactions occurring subsequent to the date of issue of the report in final form.
[City Code]
We are required to inform you, under the terms of the guidance note issued by the Institutes of Chartered Accountants dealing with compliance with the City Code on Takeovers and Mergers (the City Code), that, in the course of the engagement, we will comply with the provisions of the City Code, the Rules Governing Substantial Acquisitions of Shares (the SARs), and with all rulings made and guidance issued under them by the Panel on Takeovers and Mergers (the Panel).
Under the terms of the guidance note we may also be obliged to supply to the Panel any information, books, documents or other records concerning the transaction which the Panel may properly require and otherwise render all such assistance as we are reasonable able to give to the Panel.
Your agreement to the terms of engagement contained in this letter will be confirmation of our authority to comply with this requirement.
We are also required to agree with you that should the Panel make a statement that it considers that the facilities of the securities markets in the United Kingdom should be withheld from you, or should you fail to comply with the City Code, we may withdraw from the engagement.
Your agreement to the terms of engagement contained in this letter will be confirmation or our right so to withdraw.
[Fees]
Our fees are based upon the degree of responsibility and skill involved and the time necessarily occupied on the work, plus the reimbursement of our outlays.
Note:If appropriate an estimate of fees may be provided couched with suitable caveats, and the person who is to settle the fees specified.
Whilst an estimate of our fees has been given, additional costs may be required as a result of any material change in the assignment or difficulties in obtaining information which could not reasonably be foreseen and which caused additional work not included in the original estimate.
As discussed, our fees for [work other than statutory audit, short-form reports, investigations and other attest work]will include a contingent element — see 0306 and 1105 for fee structure examples and CFM Chapter 3.4 for the firm's policy on contingent fees.
All fees are payable when the invoice is issued.
I would anticipate billing you [for work done to date at monthly/weekly intervals][according to the following schedule:
If appropriate, consider inserting wording indicating that interest (at a specified rate etc) will be charged for late payment.
Either:
As agreed at our initial meeting, we shall inform your auditors of this appointment.
Or:
As discussed at out initial meeting, you have asked that we do not inform you auditors of our involvement on this assignment.
By signing this letter, you confirm that this is the case.
Client acknowledgement
[We shall be grateful if you will kindly acknowledge receipt of this letter.
If the contents are not in accordance with your understanding of our agreement, we shall be pleased to receive your further observations and to give you any other information you require.]
This engagement shall be governed by and construed in accordance with English law and all disputes and claims arising hereunder shall be subject to the exclusive jurisdiction of the English Courts.
Yours faithfully
KPMG Corporate Finance
1101.3 Specimen letter confirming terms of engagement for the sale of a company (more brief letter for a more experienced client)
See 0502.43
This specimen may be used as a guide to the type of letter to be sent to a more experienced client for whom we are acting in connection with the sale of a company.
It should be tailored to the specific requirements of each engagement.
Private and Confidential
I. Prosper, Esq.
Chairman,
Mature Business PLC,
[Address]
21st March, 19X0
Dear Sir,
Following the recent discussions between [name of MAS partner/manager]and[name of vendor/vendor's representative]we are writing to confirm that we would be pleased to act for the shareholders in the proposed sale of your subsidiary, More Mature Business Limited (‘the company’), and to set out formally our terms of reference and responsibilities with regard to our involvement in the sale process.
Confidentiality
We understand the importance attached to both internal and external confidentiality and that particular care should be taken to avoid revealing the possibility of a sale to the staff prior to them being notified by the directors.
We have discussed how the requirement for external confidentiality will limit the approach to potential purchasers and the consequential sale strategy which will involve contacting only a small number of potential purchasers, most of which are likely to be foreign companies.
There is a possible trade-off between confidentiality and price expectation.
Contacting more than, say, three potential purchasers will make maintaining confidentiality more difficult yet increases the chances of finding the ‘right’ purchaser.
We will keep this issue closely under review during the early stages.
Stage 1 Review of the company and preparation of an Information memorandum
Following the completion of the audit [specify], we will carry out a review of the company, giving particular attention to those areas which are likely to be given close scrutiny during any due diligence procedure.
As part of this exercise we will perform a ‘practice run’ with the company's executives to check the areas where they will be asked questions and to prepare them for the meetings with would be acquirors.
At the same time as carrying out this exercise we will prepare an Information memorandum which will form the principal marketing document and which will be used to provide interested parties with the company's history and details on its activities, assets, and its past current financial performance.
We will be discussing all these aspects with the company's directors on the basis that the Information memorandum should have ‘joint’ input and flavour.
While we shall be responsible for the preparation of the memorandum on your behalf, you should appreciate that we will not attempt to verify its factual accuracy.
While the memorandum should highlight the positive points and potential of the company it is important for the information to be accurate and for opinions expressed to be reasonable.
It is embarrassing and counter-productive if subsequent enquiries invalidate the document.
We will require you to sign a representation letter to us stating inter alia that all the information contained in the Information memorandum portrayed fairly…
Stage 2 Research to identify suitable purchasers
The search for would be acquirors will involve contributions from both us and the company.
Our strategy is influenced by your requirement for confidentiality and will be based on a circulation to a small number of carefully selected parties.
We intend to identify a small number of potential purchasers by discrete enquiries in the UK and through our International M&A Network.
We would discuss these possible purchasers and parties, identified though our research in the Mergers and Acquisitions department, together with suggestions from the directors, before short-listing the most suitable purchasers.
A wide circulation or advertising the sale does not seem appropriate — at least not in the first instance.
Stage 3 Contacting the short-listed parties
We will seek the directors' approval to contact the short-listed parties and will provide an anonymous one page synopsis of the company for the first approach.
The contact will be made by ourselves in London or where necessary by our International M&A Network partners with contacts within the organisations identified.
The Information memorandum will only be released after we have received a confidentiality agreement and we would stress at this stage the need for total confidentiality.
Direct approaches to the company's staff, customers or suppliers will not be permitted.
Stage 4 Developing the relationship with potential purchasers and evaluation of interest
We will develop a relationship with the short-listed purchasers, taking questions, determining their degree of interest and trying to elicit a ‘ball-park’ offer price.
We will arrange and chair meetings between potential purchasers and the directors as appropriate.
Often meetings with ‘advisers’ can be counter productive and it will be desirable to bring you and, say, Mr [Chief Executive]into the picture so that the potential purchaser feels he is talking to a principal.
The Information memorandum and covering letter will establish your price expectation, while avoiding a maximum price, set out the sale procedure and the intended timetable and invite the interested parties to make indicative offers.
We will also request that the following issues are addressed in their indicative offers:
(i)
the financing options available for payment of the consideration;
(ii)
the principal terms and conditions on which the offer is made;
(iii)
any areas of uncertainty that would impact on price;
(iv)
an indication of due diligence procedures which will be required; and
(v)
any clearances needed to complete the acquisition and the timescale required to obtain these approvals.
Stage 5 Selection of a preferred bidder
On receiving the indicative offers we will discuss the pros and cons with the directors and will help evaluate alternative deal structures.
We will negotiate further with the offerors, exploring their offers.
It may be necessary at this stage to release further information, such as current trading and sensitive information such as detailed customer and supplier analyses, which will enable the offerors to finalise their offers into a Heads of Agreement.
A preferred bidder will emerge from this stage and it is normal to grant a period of exclusivity during which due diligence procedures can be carried out.
We would stress that although we can advise on the pros and cons of each offer, the final decision as to whether to proceed and with whom rests ultimately with Mature Business PLC's shareholders.
Stage 6 Due diligence and completion
Following the conclusion of the Heads of Agreement, we will be available to assist should any issues arise during the due diligence carried out by the acquiror's accountants.
We would review with lawyers the sale and purchase agreement and advise as to the reasonableness of clauses where required; we will also attend where necessary the drafting meetings and final completion meetings.
We shall if you request, negotiate in the capacity of professional advisers on your behalf within pre-agreed negotiating parameters or instructions.
We shall highlight the options available to you and their potential benefits and hazards to enable your final decision to be based as far as possible on a complete understanding of the available alternatives.
Fees
[Our fees are based upon the degree of responsibility and skill involved and the time necessarily occupied on the work, plus the reimbursement of our outlays.]
[As appropriate time basis or percentage basis].
[Provide fee estimate for each stage if appropriate see 0306 and 1105 for examples].
All fees are payable when the invoice is issued.
I would anticipate billing you [for work done to date at monthly/weekly intervals][according to the following schedule:
If appropriate, consider inserting wording indicating that interest (at a specified rate etc) will be charged for late payment.
Conflicts of interest
It is not an uncommon circumstance for us to be the appointed auditors of more than one of the companies involved in a transaction.
In such situations we take appropriate measures to ensure that strict confidentiality is maintained in all respects.
However, we will write to you with the details of the potential conflicts of interest and how they will be avoided before we commence work in accordance with the terms of this letter.
Access to information
You have agreed to ensure that any information which we may require for the purpose of providing the services set out in this letter is made available to us, as and when we may reasonably require.
You will appreciate that we cannot be held responsible if information material to our task is withheld or concealed from us.
City Code
We are required to inform you, under the terms of the guidance note issued by the Institutes of Chartered Accountants dealing with compliance with the City Code on Takeovers and Mergers (the City Code), that, in the course of the engagement, we will comply with the provisions of the City Code, the Rules Governing Substantial Acquisitions of Shares (the SARs), and with all rulings made and guidance issued under them by the Panel on Takeovers and Mergers (the Panel).
Under the terms of the guidance note we may also be obliged to supply to the Panel any information, books, documents or other records concerning the transaction which the Panel may properly require and otherwise render all such assistance as we are reasonably able to give to the Panel.
Your agreement to the terms of engagement contained in this letter will be confirmation of our authority to comply with this requirement.
We are also required to agree with you that [should the Panel make a statement that it considers that the facilities of the securities markets in the United Kingdom should be withheld from you, or]should you fail to comply with the City Code, we may withdraw from the engagement.
Your agreement to the terms of engagement contained in this letter will be confirmation of our right so to withdraw.
Announcements
KPMG reserve the right to publish at its own expense and subject to your prior approval a tombstone recording the completed transaction unless you inform us that this would be in breach of specific confidentiality undertakings exchanged between the parties.
Law and jurisdiction
This engagement shall be governed by and construed in accordance with English law and all disputes and claims arising hereunder shall be subject to the exclusive jurisdiction of the English Courts.
[Finally as we have mentioned before it is now necessary for me to obtain a Corporate Finance Engagement Letter and we enclose two copies of our standard letter.
One copy should be returned to ourselves duly signed.]
Either:
As agreed at our initial meeting, we shall inform your auditors of this appointment.
or
As discussed at out initial meeting, you have asked that we do not inform your auditors of our involvement on this assignment.
By signing this letter, you confirm that this is the case.
We shall be grateful if you will kindly acknowledge receipt of this letter.
If the contents are not in accordance with your understanding of our agreement, we shall be pleased to receive your further observations and to give you any other information you require.
Yours faithfully
KPMG Peat Marwick
1101.4 Specimen letter confirming terms of engagement for the sale of a company (more detailed letter for a less experienced client)
See 0502.43
This specimen may be used as a guide to the type of letter to be sent to a less experienced client for whom we are acting in connection with the sale of a company.
It should be tailored to the specific requirements of each engagement.
Private and Confidential
I Prosper Esq
Chairman
Recent Business PLC
[Address]
21 March 19X0
Dear Mr Prosper
Further to our meeting last Friday, I am writing to set out the advice and assistance that we are able to provide in connection with the intended sale of Older Business Limited.
Role
Our role can best be summarised as that of deal management.
We have considerable experience in managing all aspects of the sale process, which we outline below, and would be willing to represent your interests at each stage in this process.
Hence, subject to your approval, we would intend to act as the principal point of contact for interested parties and their various professional advisers, keeping you fully appraised of developments as they arise.
Assuming you wish to do so, it should then be possible for you to limit your involvement in the sale process to attendance at the key meetings, so that the management of the business continues to receive your full attention.
We do insist that appointments are on an exclusive basis to avoid duplications and a dispersed marketing effort.
KPMG Peat Marwick's Credentials
[In a competitive proposal situation it is good practice to market our track record.
You will need to obtain latest statistics from MAG in London.
An example is set out below]
KPMG Peat Marwick is the UK firm of one of the world's largest accountancy and management consultancy organisations, Klynveld Peat Marwick Goerdeler, which has some 700 offices in over 115 countries worldwide.
KPMG has a dominant position within the European Community with a network of 168 offices.
KPMG Peat Marwick itself operates from 57 offices throughout the UK.
The Merger and Acquisition Units of KPMG have capitalised on this global spread by establishing the KPMG International Merger and Acquisition network which operates across the world with representatives in 28 countries.
Within the UK KPMG has some [40]Merger and Acquisition professionals based in [10]offices in every region of the UK. [18]are based in London forming a specialist team within the Corporate Finance department.
[Use latest figures]
Our marketing capability is based on a full time professional qualified research department complimented by a regularly updated internal database of the acquisition criteria of some 2,000 plus potential buyers and the full resource of the Accountants Business Network, a confidential national computerised database of companies for sale to which the [13]largest firms of accountants in the UK are the sole subscribers.
In addition as the firm with the largest numbers of middle market clients we have excellent contacts at the board level with most corporations in the UK.
These resources have led to the completion of some [24]deals with a value in excess of £300 million during the last twenty four months [to 30.9.91]of which five were cross border in that a non UK purchaser was involved.
Strategy
We discussed, in essence, two basic options, namely a sale of the business solely to [name], or an expanded marketing exercise including other likely acquiror companies.
In each case, I believe that the initial phase of the exercise is similar.
The main objective will be to structure the proposed deal:
to identify the range of values of a sale prices acceptable to you
to identify the principal negotiating strategies which will maximise the sale proceeds 
to devise a commercially efficient package for the sale proceeds
to examine the most tax efficient structure for the deal, as regards the capital sums and future income which will accrue to you, and also to examine the opportunities for tax saving prior to the disposal
to ensure that any matters which might be raised by the acquiror company's ‘due diligence’ exercise are identified in advance, and considered in the light of the effect on the proposed deal.
This point is particularly important in the light of the ability of an acquiror to ‘talk the price down’ later in the transaction.
Preparation of the Information memorandum
The Information memorandum will form the principal marketing document.
Its purpose will be to inform interested parties about the company's history, current activities and production facilities, profiles of key employees and financial performance including current position and anticipated future prospects.
Included as an appendix to this letter is a schedule of the anticipated contents of the Information memorandum.
[Suitable for local office proposal]
The memorandum would be prepared by our people here in [name of local office][making use of our familiarity with your business audit clients only].
Nevertheless, we will, of course, require your assistance in drafting the non-financial section of the memorandum.
Our Merger and Acquisition Services section (‘MAS’) in [London]will review this draft and prepare an executive summary for the memorandum which will highlight the key features of the opportunity.
Whilst we shall be responsible for the preparation of the memorandum, you should appreciate that we will not attempt to verify its contents.
Responsibility for the memorandum's factual accuracy and the opinions expressed therein will rest, therefore, with the vendors and we may ask for a formal representation from you.
This is an important point to realise, since it would be embarrassing and counter-productive if subsequent enquiries made by a prospective purchaser invalidated the document.
We shall also prepare a one page anonymous profile (or Investment Overview) summarising the salient details of the memorandum.
This is a confidential document and considerable care is taken to ensure that it cannot be related back to the company in question, although there is always an element of trade off between absolute confidentiality and achieving the desired results.
Search for interested parties
The search for interested parties will be conducted by MAS in conjunction with yourself and, if appropriate, we may use other KPMG offices and in-house industry specialists.
It is obviously sensible, given your knowledge of the sector, to utilise you [and your in house experts]in the search process and we will very much welcome feedback from you at every stage of the search process.
As explained at our meeting, we have access to a large number of information bases from which potentially interested parties may be identified.
Ideally, MAS will search for organisations with complementary [type of industry]skills where there are opportunities for synergy.
MAS will also wish to consider each party's ability to complete a transaction of this size.
In the first instance, MAS will search our computerised register of some [specify number]acquisitive clients and contacts to identify companies that have expressed a desire to expand in your industry.
Secondly, MAS will search our databases of publicly available information to identify other organisations that may have an interest in [type of industry].
Thirdly, MAS will attempt to ascertain the likely level of overseas and especially European interest in the opportunity both by searching our international databases and by contacting our mergers and acquisition specialists in our overseas offices.
It is envisaged that a list of approximately [specify number]likely interested parties will be generated from these three initiatives.
The activities and financial attributes of each candidate will then be summarised (together with any relevant press comment) for your and our further consideration.
Subsequently, we shall ask you to formally approve a list of parties to whom details of the opportunity will be circulated.
An additional initiative available is to advertise the opportunity either in the Financial Times or on the Accountants Business Network (‘ABN’).
It is usual to receive a strong response from advertisements in the Financial Times, but the commitment of the respondents may vary considerably.
The current cost of a typical advertisement in the Financial Times is approximately £ [specify].
The ABN is a method for the larger firms of accountants to market their own opportunities to the others' clients and contacts.
Unlike the Financial Times, there is no charge for marketing an opportunity on the ABN.
On balance, we would probably recommend the ABN in preference to the Financial Times.
In any event, we would suggest that a decision as to whether to advertise the opportunity is deferred at least until you have had an opportunity to review the output of the earlier search activity.
Deal structuring and tax planning
Prior to circulating interested parties, we would wish to consider how the proposed deal might best be structured to yield the greatest post-tax return to you and your family.
There are a number of ways of structuring the deal.
First, we will need to consider the relative merits of selling the assets of the business as opposed to the shares.
This decision is likely to be influenced by the age and tax base cost of the company's plant.
Secondly, we shall need to contemplate the various options available for disposing of the company's properties.
A higher price may be obtained by selling the properties separately to a property specialist,[possibly at a later date in, hopefully, a more favourable economic climate].
This Information memorandum, or a covering letter for the memorandum (which will outline the sale procedures and timetable) will advise interested parties of the intended structure of the transaction, highlighting areas where you may be prepared to be flexible.
Contacting interested parties
We shall require your approval to contact the interested parties identified by our acquisition search activity and the respondents to any advertisement.
The approved parties will receive a one page anonymous synopsis of the opportunity and will be asked to sign a standard form of confidentiality undertaking prior to receiving the Information memorandum.
The signing of a confidentiality agreement imposes a significant moral and to some extent legal hurdle on potential purchasers and should therefore effectively restrict disclosure to genuinely interested parties.
Approaches to members of staff and to the company's premises, customers and suppliers will not be permitted at this stage.
Indicative offers from interested parties
A procedures letter will request that interested parties wishing to proceed to heads of agreement should make an indicative offer for the business within [three to four]weeks of receiving the Information memorandum.
These offers should be based on the contents of the memorandum and any information obtained from subsequent meetings.
Interested parties will be asked to incorporate in their indicative offer the following information:
(a)
The financing options available for the payment of the consideration.
(b)
The terms and conditions under which the offer is made.
(c)
Any key areas of uncertainty that may have an impact on price.
(d)
An indication of the due diligence procedures required prior to completion.
(e)
The clearances needed to complete the deal and the likely timescale required to achieve these approvals.
Selection of preferred party
In the period following the receipt of indicative offers interested parties will become increasingly anxious to learn whether they have been chosen as the preferred bidder.
From the vendors' viewpoint, it will be important tactically to ensure that the preferred party is selected once all potential deal breaking points have been cleared with that party.
Hence time will be of the essence during negotiations to conclude heads of agreement with the party which we both consider to offer the best indicative terms.
This will especially be the case should it not be possible to agree terms with the preferred bidder, as it may then be necessary to open negotiations with another party before all the indicative offerers become aware of the initial set back.
Even without this problem, it should be our objective to advance negotiations, contract drafting and due diligence as far as possible with the preferred bidder before the remaining offerers realise that they have been unsuccessful.
From then on the strength of our negotiating position is likely to deteriorate.
Contract drafting
The drafting of a detailed contract is usually undertaken, in the first instance, by the intending purchaser's lawyers.
Although not of itself usually intended to be legally binding, we find that the heads of agreement act as a useful instruction to the lawyers, since the terms convey the intentions of the principals and deal with many of the theoretical and technical points that each side's lawyer feel duty bound to raise.
You will need to engage a Commercial lawyer to protect your interests in the drafting of a contract.
We shall work with your lawyer to assist you to negotiate a contract on the best available terms.
We also anticipate, together with your lawyers, assisting in the interpretation of any warranty and indemnity requirements included in a contract.
Pricing analysis
At this stage an indicative value of the company is based on our perceptions and at this stage limited knowledge of your business and the sector in which it operates.
Example:
The [Name]Group designs, sells and installs window systems.
Approximately 60 per cent of the Group's sales are accounted for by uPVC products and 40 per cent are thermally treated aluminium products.
This product split is regarded as well balanced, mirroring the demand for replacement windows in the market.
The Group operated primarily in [location]where it is estimated that it holds a 16% share of the replacement window market, above that of any competitor.
Customers are predominantly members of the public, but some contract work is also undertaken for bodies such as local authorities.
[name]is now the largest replacement window services operation in the UK without manufacturing capacity.
During 1988 [name]undertook the disposal of all its retail outlets following a detailed market research survey which suggested that showrooms were no longer the optimum sales medium for [name]products.
Therefore the operation is now entirely direct-sales orientated supported by advertising in the local and national press.
This decision has been vindicated by the fact that sales have grown whilst showroom costs have clearly been reduced.
The full results of this strategy should show through in the 1989 profit figures.
Turnover for the Group in 1988 was [x]million producing profit before tax to November of £ [x]million.
It is anticipated that turnover will rise to between £ [x]million to £ [x]million in 1989 producing profit before tax of £ [x]to £ [x]million.
It should be noted that for the purposes of our valuation we have used a conservative forecast of £ [B]million, reflecting a below target performance for the first five months of the financial year.
The Group leases its headquarters in [location]which consist of approximately 3,000 sq.ft. of offices.
In addition the Group holds a lease on a 5,500 sq.ft. storage depot at [location].
[Name]currently employs approximately [x]personnel as follows:
In our analysis of [name]we have looked at several quoted companies which demonstrate similarities to the business from a valuation perspective.
Owing to the Group's unique development without a manufacturing capacity there are no directly comparable quoted companies, but those chosen are all involved in retailing and manufacturing home improvement products.
We mentioned at our meeting an indicative valuation of the company of approximately £ [specify]million.
This was based on adjusted maintainable pre-tax earnings of £ [specify]and a post-tax earnings of multiple of [specify number].
Our valuation did not attribute any further value to the land assets of the company.
This valuation is based on quoted companies of a broadly comparable nature to [name]of [specify]times historic earnings and [specify]times prospective earnings.
Similarly, the acquisitions schedule would advocate that companies of this nature have been sold on exit multiples of [].
It would be our intention to update this valuation once we have prepared the Information memorandum and undertaken some further research into recent deals in comparable [type of industry]sectors.
This guide price will obviously be a useful benchmark from which to evaluate any indicative offers.
Fees
[Our fees are based upon the degree of responsibility and skill involved and the time necessarily occupied on the work, plus the reimbursement of our outlays.]
[Provide fee estimate if appropriate- see 0306 and 1105 for examples.]
All fees are payable when the invoice is issued.
I would anticipate billing you [for work done to date at monthly/weekly intervals][according to the following schedule:
If appropriate, consider inserting workin indicating that interest (at a specified rate etc) will be charged for late payment.
Provisional timetable
It is our experience that from appointment to completion, the sale of a company can take as long as six months or, perhaps, longer.
We would envisage being in a position to despatch the sales documentation by the end of four to six weeks.
Interested parties would then be given [three to four weeks more if ‘soft market’ or overseas interest]to study the memorandum.
We shall attempt to introduce into the timetable a period of up to a week in which to consider indicative offers and possibly commence negotiations with a preferred bidder.
Thereafter any timetable will depend very much on the intending purchasers' due diligence and clearance requirements and the energy of both parties' lawyers.
As discussed at our meeting it will be our job during this period to ensure that the momentum of the transaction is maintained.
Conflicts of interest
It is not an uncommon circumstance for us to be the appointed auditors of more than one of the companies involved in a transaction.
In such situations we take appropriate measures to ensure that strict confidentiality is maintained in all respects.
However, we will write to you with the details of the potential conflicts of interest and how they will be avoided before we commence work in accordance with the terms of this letter.
Confidentiality
We agree that we will hold in strict confidence all information obtained from [Growing Business PLC]and will not disclose such information to others or use such information except in connection with the performance of the services agreed in this letter.
We understand the confidential nature of the engagement and that staff, other than the directors, should not be made aware of its purpose.
Note: Deal with any particular confidentiality issues and restrictions on the information to be made available.
Access to information
You have agreed to ensure that any information which we may require for the purpose of providing the services set out in this letter is made available to us, as and when we may reasonably require.
You will appreciate that we cannot be held responsible if information material to our task is withheld or concealed from us.
City Code
We are required to inform you, under the terms of the guidance note issued by the Institutes of Chartered Accountants dealing with compliance with the City Code on Takeovers and Mergers (the City Code), that, in the course of the engagement, we will comply with the provisions of the City Code, the Rules Governing Substantial Acquisitions of Shares (the SARs), and with all rulings made and guidance issued under them by the Panel on Takeovers and Mergers (the Panel).
Under the terms of the guidance note we may also be obliged to supply to the Panel and information, books, documents or other records concerning the transaction which the Panel may properly require and otherwise render all such assistance as we are reasonably able to give to the Panel.
Your agreement to the terms of engagement contained in this letter will be confirmation of our authority to comply with this requirement.
We are also required to agree with you that [should the Panel make a statement that it considers that the facilities of the securities markets in the United Kingdom should be withheld from you, or]should you fail to comply with the City Code, we may withdraw from the engagement.
Your agreement to the terms of engagement contained in this letter will be confirmation of our right so to withdraw.]
Announcements
KPMG reserve the right to publish at its own expense and subject to your prior approval a tombstone recording the completed transaction unless you inform us that this would be in breach of specific confidentiality undertakings exchanged between the parties.
Law and jurisdiction
This engagement shall be governed by and contrued in accordance with English law and all disputes and claims arising hereunder shall be subject to the exclusive jurisdiction of the English Courts.
Either:
As agreed at our initial meeting, we shall inform your auditors of this appointment.
Or:
As discussed at our initial meeting, you have asked that we do not inform your auditors of our involvement on this assignment.
By signing this letter you confirm that this is the case.
I apologise for the length of this letter but I do believe that it is essential that you have a clear understanding of what it is we are to do.
If you want to discuss any of the matters raised in this letter please let me know.
Yours sincerely
[MAS partner]
Partner 
Proposed contents of Information memorandum
Sales procedures
Present shareholding structure
Executive summary
History and Group structure
History of the business
Reason for sale
Products and markets
Product range and recent product developments
Sales mix
Customer base and marketing initiatives
Terms of trading
Production and suppliers
Production facilities
Sources of supply
Management information and accounting systems
Management and personnel
Staff numbers and organisation
Management team details
Other staff details
Pension arrangement
Operating results
Historical results (Explain any unusual changes in the pattern of trading results)
Anticipated results for the year ended [specify date]
Balance sheet
Present position
Analysis of major balances
Existing premises and property
Recent valuations thereof
Taxation
Cash flow and funding
Future prospects
Key investment features
Appendices
Organisation chart
Audited accounts as at [specify date]
Product details
1101.5 Example valuation engagement letter
See 0804.1
The following example engagement letter is concerned with the valuation of shares in a private company.
Private and Confidential
The Directors
Smith & Co Limited
[Address]
[Other instructing parties]
18 April 19W8
Dear Sirs
In connection with the role you have asked me to undertake in the dispute between Mr D Smith and the other directors of and shareholders in Smith & Co Limited, I am writing to set out the nature of the responsibilities which you wish me to perform.
Instructions
My understanding from your letter of [Date]is that I am jointly instructed by the vendor, Mr D Smith, and the purchasers (as set out in the Agreement between the parties dated [Date]) and that I am requested to certify in writing to the parties, the value, in my opinion, of Mr D Smith's shares at [Date].
I received representations from both parties on [Date]and expect to receive replies to the representations on [Date].
Method of Valuation
I will consider the written representations and representations in reply of both the parties and may, where I consider it necessary, seek additional oral representations from the parties possibly by means of interviews.
If there appears to be a dispute on the facts, I will prepare a valuation memorandum which sets out the factual information which forms the background to the valuation.
This will be based on information which has been made available to me or which I have requested in accordance with clause [specify]of the Agreement.
I will seek confirmation from both parties as to the factual accuracy of any such memorandum.
Following confirmation of the factual accuracy of the memorandum, if prepared, I will value the shares having regard to the bases in Clause [specify]of the Agreement.
While valuation reports of this nature often include reference to the submission made by the parties and any other evidence collated, the reasoning behind valuations is not normally set out in detail.
Appointment as expert
In confirming the terms of appointment requiring us to act an expert, the engagement letter should be carefully worded so as to be protective of our position.
Wording similar to that included below may be incorporated with the objective of retaining the benefit of an appointment regarded as quasi-arbitration in circumstances where there are risks that such benefits may be lost during the conduct of the engagement.
Each of the parties recognises and acknowledges that I act as expert and as expert will, in carrying out my duties hereunder and in determination of any dispute referred to me, act in a quasi-judicial capacity.
Accordingly, I will reach my decision on the basis of the evidence and arguments submitted to me by the parties.
Each of the parties further recognises that, by reason of my acting in such capacity, I will, in performing my duties hereunder (but subject to doing so honestly and in good faith), be immune from all actions and proceedings whatsoever arising out of or in connection with my appointment hereunder.
It is further acknowledged that each of the parties shall indemnify me for all reasonable costs of defending such actions and proceedings.
Accordingly, the parties agree that each of them will accept my decision on the matters referred to me hereunder as conclusive and binding and that neither will bring any action or proceeding or make any claim against me as expert relating to or arising from the performance of my duties hereunder.
It is also acknowledged and agreed that I will perform my functions hereunder solely for the said parties and neither correspondence relating to the dispute nor any finding or award made by me as expert shall give rise to any right in favour of any person not a party hereto and any such correspondence and finding [or award]will be confidential to the said parties and will not be disclosed without my prior written consent, which I will not unreasonably withhold but which may be given subject to conditions.
Fees
Our fees will be based on the time taken at our normal hourly scale rates appropriate to the level of expertise required.
I understand that our fee will be split equally between both parties.
I will, as requested, provide you with details of our costs as the matter progresses and will submit our final fee, which should be approved by both parties, prior to issuing the valuation report.
In an appointment as an expert, it is best practice to refer to the following:
either:payment will be x days in advance of the delivery of the opinion.
or:the process for fee recovery if one party does not pay their share, when the fee is due.
and:allocation of fees due between the interested parties.
Timetable
I will contact both parties by [Date], assuming we receive the representations in reply on [Date], in order to inform you whether or not we intend to seek verbal clarification or produce a factual memorandum.
However it is almost certain that we will find it appropriate to meet the parties and will seek to make these arrangements as soon as possible after the receipt of the representations in reply.
Assuming no factual memorandum is required we hope to be able to make our report available within [specify number]weeks of any such visit subject to the receipt of ‘outside’ information, for example, the report of the compensation valuer.
Either:
As agreed at our initial meeting, we shall inform your auditors of this appointment.
Or:
As discussed at our initial meeting, you have asked that we do not inform your auditors of our involvement on this assignment.
By signing this letter, you confirm that this is the case.
Law and jurisdiction
This engagement shall be governed by and construed in accordance with English law and all disputes and claims arising hereunder shall be subject to the exclusive jurisdiction of the English Courts.
I enclose a copy of this letter and should be grateful if the parties would sign and return their copy, confirming their acceptance of the above.
Yours faithfully
[MAS Partner]
Partner 
1101.6 Example acquisition search proposal letter
See 0602.4 and 0604
This letter outlines how we may assist a client with an acquisition search in the UK.
Private and Confidential
A. Peabody Esq.
AAA Industries PLC
[Address]
14 November 19Y1
Dear Mr Peabody
Following our telephone conversation today I have considered how we might be able to help you identify the companies which will best satisfy your strategic plan for expansion into the UK.
There are two broad approaches to identifying acquisition candidates: proactive and reactive.
The proactive approach involves considerably more effort but is more likely to produce a positive result.
The reactive approach will certainly involve less effort in the early stages; however, it is unlikely to produce the ideal result within a reasonable timescale.
Proactive Searches
We are able to carry out proactive searches for clients.
There are two principal forms of search and I outline these below.
The identification of an acquisition candidate does not, of course, mean that the company is for sale although we would be pleased to approach its management on your behalf without disclosing your identity if this would be your wish.
Search Type 1
We can produce a listing of potential candidate companies which match your acquisition criteria.
This involves a search of computerised databases against the acquisition criteria by using standard industry classification codes.
By way of example, we have ascertained that a search on the industrial classifications listed below, using purely a sales criterion, revealed the following numbers of companies:
This search could be further refined by defining minimum profitability, location etc, until a short list of say [specify number, eg 15]companies is identified.
At this stage, we can obtain further detailed company information such as financial statements.
Our fee for this type of work would be based on time taken plus outlays and naturally is very dependent upon the number of companies in the sample.
Search type 2
We can also provide a more detailed report, for example, covering principal customers, suppliers and more market based information such as company reputation.
The work normally comprises three distinct stages:
market research into the target sector;
a listing of potential companies meeting your criteria; and
a short list of potential target companies.
Stage 1
Market research involves obtaining the information with which to identify all potential acquisition candidates and with which to evaluate them.
The findings are presented in a report.
The report would normally comment on the structure of the sector, the sector output, the major competitors and market shares.
Stage 2
The companies which meet your criteria would be listed and reviewed with you before the shortlist in Stage 3 was compiled.
Stage 3
Additional criteria would be defined and agreed with you to compile the shortlist of target companies.
Further detailed information about the specific companies would be gained by desk research methods using:
trade directories and journals;
business reviews and surveys;
company reports;
company literature; and
newspaper and journal articles.
These would be supplemented, where necessary, by telephone and personal interviews with:—
trade associations;
government bodies;
industry experts and KPMG commercial contacts.
The fee for this type of work would again be based on time taken plus outlays, but, since it is a detailed survey, it will be more costly than the Type 1 search described above.
The likely price range may well be [say, £15,000]to [say, £20,000]for a full survey.
It is difficult, however, to give an indication of the costs without a more detailed knowledge of the matters to be covered by the report.
All fees are payable when the invoice is issued.
I would anticipate billing you [for work done to date at monthly/weekly intervals][according to the following schedule:
If appropriate, consider inserting working indicating that interest (at a specific rate etc) will be charge for late payment.
Reactive Searches
We maintain a computerised database of potential purchasers and their acquisition criteria against which all acquisition opportunities which are brought to us or come to our attention are screened.
No charge is made for including a potential purchaser on the database; however, if we introduce an opportunity which leads to an acquisition we charge an introduction fee.
Our scale of charges is attached.
If you wish to be entered on this system I would ask that you complete the enclosed input form and return it to me.
Law and jurisdiction
This engagement shall be governed by and construed in accordance with English law and all disputes and claims arising hereunder shall be subject to the exclusive jurisdiction of the English Courts.
Either:
As agreed at our initial meeting, we would need to inform your auditors of this appointment.
Or:
As discussed at our initial meeting, you have asked that we would not inform your auditors of our involvement on this assignment.
[The ICAEW ethics guidelines are not clear as to whether this courtesy is to be extended to non-UK based auditors].
I hope this letter is helpful and gives you an understanding of the various services we can offer you.
If you have any queries or would like to discuss this matter further please telephone me.
With kind regards.
Yours sincerely
[MAS Partner]
Partner 
1101.7 Example cross-border acquisition proposal letter
See 0604
This example letter outlines how we may assist a client with an acquisition from overseas, involving acquisition search, targeting, approach and completion.
Private & Confidential
AB Jones Esq
Big Brother Inc
[Address]
24 March 19X3
Dear Mr Jones
Further to our meeting earlier this week, I am writing to you to outline how KPMG Peat Marwick (‘KPMG’) may assist you with your plans to establish a significant presence in Europe in []services.
Naturally, we would be delighted to have the opportunity to work with Big Brother Inc.
(‘Big’) on this challenging assignment.
From our discussions we understand that in reviewing the European market you have three major criteria for selecting companies and organisations with which you would choose to work together, namely:
(i)
those companies which would combine []activity together with [], but where the former was the most substantial part of the business;
(ii)
companies which were already the first or second company in their respective national market;
(iii)
companies which would help Big extend and expand its higher margin []business.
We would propose to approach the assignment in the following manner.
Introduction to the Team
The assistance KPMG is able to provide directly falls into two distinct areas of expertise, being transaction management and strategic analysis.
In addition we would draw upon the legal skills of [Solicitors].
I would perform the role of client partner and co-ordinator for the whole assignment and would delegate responsibility for the technical aspects of the three main aspects of the work to [MAS Partner]and [MC Partner]and [Lawyer]at [Solicitors].
[MAS Partner]is a Mergers and Acquisition Services (‘MAS’) Partner in KPMG's London office.
MAS in London is staffed with full time acquisition professionals who have considerable experience of managing both national and cross border transactions.
In fact, MAS provides a service similar to that of an investment banker in America, although when dealing with acquisitions of quoted companies it will normally involve a merchant bank in certain aspects of the work.
Where appropriate, MAS would draw upon the local knowledge and resources of the KPMG International Network, which is represented by acquisition specialists in each country in Europe.
I have enclosed a copy of MAS's brochure, which provides more information about their services, and the most recent edition of KPMG's quarterly Deal Watch publication, which gives details of the International Network.
[MC Partner]is a partner in the Strategy and Planning Group (‘SPG’) at KPMG Peat Marwick's London office, which has considerable experience of co-ordinating pan-European strategic assignments.
He would control this part of any assignment and would use our network of European offices to undertake field research and market interviews.
In this way specialised professional knowledge and skills can be harnessed in each country.
[Lawyer]is a partner of [Solicitors]with whom our firm has a very close working relationship.
His practice has established an enviable reputation in all aspects of European Community Law and, hence, its expertise should be invaluable when dealing with matters such as competition and anti-dumping legislation, as well as in the more standard contract drafting work.
Through [Solicitors]the legal aspects of due diligence work would be co-ordinated and supervised on a European basis and [Lawyer]would assume overall personal responsibility for this area.
Deal Management
MAS in conjunction with SPG and KPMG will be able to provide a comprehensive advice and assistance at each of the following stages in the acquisition process:
MAS also has the experience to assist in the disposal of any non-core activities purchased indirectly as part of the acquisition process.
Strategic review
SPG would begin by initially developing with you clear objectives for Big's European entry strategy for both []and []services.
SPG would then be able to generate a set of criteria which European companies must satisfy in order to best meet your objectives.
Parallel with this process, SPG would undertake research within each European country in order to quickly ascertain the following features:
Market size;
Market structures;
Human resources issues;
Key players; and
Opportunities for and barriers to entry.
SPG would rank the countries in terms of attractiveness and prepare a shortlist of appropriate partners within each country.
It is possible that after analysing certain European markets it becomes apparent that your objectives might best be met by a start-up venture.
Otherwise, the partners would be profiled in terms of their key characteristics, financial performance and likely valuation.
SPG would identify any []and []interests that these partners may have elsewhere in Europe, plus non-core activities that might be available for sale following an acquisition.
As co-ordinator, I would ensure that the strategic review remains highly focused and relevant and to this end we would foresee close co-operation of our efforts together with yourself and your newly appointed European Executive.
MAS would also review SPG's progress to ensure that, prior to partner profiling and on the basis of publicly available information, there are no fundamental reasons why it should not be possible to conclude a deal with each of the partners identified through the above process.
Strategic alliance
Once the candidates on the shortlist have been prioritised for approach, SPG would analyse and recommend what form of strategic alliance would best suit Big's objectives in that country.
SPG would also assess the value the Big brand name might bring to any such alliance or start-up.
A strategic alliance may take the form of an outright acquisition, minority stake, joint venture or brand franchise.
The preferred approach is likely to vary between countries, depending both on market characteristics and corporate profiles, and may need to be modified slightly in the light of subsequent deal structuring recommendations.
Nevertheless, in order to achieve a successful European presence it is vital to ensure that appropriate modes of alliance are correctly identified at the outset.
Action Plan
Once the modes of alliance have been decided upon, MAS and SPG would develop with yourselves a detailed action plan and suitable approach strategy in order to maximise the changes of a successful outcome with each preferred partner.
Naturally, we would all meet to consider the action plan which, where acquisition is the recommended form of alliance, MAS and [Solicitors]would be primarily responsible for implementing.
Deal Structuring
Although a deal may be concluded for a strategically important acquisition at a fair price, the subsequent financial success of such an acquisition will be often dependent on the appropriateness of the deal structure.
Accordingly, MAS would apply its considerable acquisition experience and KPMG's international tax and accounting expertise to formulating a structure for each acquisition which, subject to the vendor's requirements, provides Big with the most favourable global tax and accounting treatment.
It is also the case that proactive tax advice may enable you to offer a deal structure which provides certain benefits for the vendor at little or no extra cost to Big.
Typically, the following structural issues would be addressed:
whether to acquire assets or shares and, hence, whether to treat the acquisition as a foreign branch/division or a subsidiary/associated company;
assuming shares are acquired, the percentage holding to be acquired;
the tax and accounting treatment of goodwill and acquisition financing costs; and
the impact of exchange control legislation and taxation on the repatriation of profits.
Fee arrangements
SPG, MAS and KPMG would charge for their services on a strict time basis at their normal hourly scale rates, which are as follows:
Estimates of the likely time costs for each stage of the assignment would be provided in advance and Big would be informed immediately if it appeared that our cost estimate was likely to be exceeded.
These fee arrangements and the division of acquisition search and deal management responsibilities between SPG and MAS should provide you with comfort that through the acquisition process MAS will provide Big with impartial advice on the merits of proceeding with each deal.
The key features review referred to above is devised to identify potential deal breaking problems at an early stage, so as to limit the possibility of Big accumulating large professional fees on ultimately abortive deals.
Detailed fee issues
All fees are payable when the invoice is issued.
I would anticipate billing you [for work done to date at monthly/weekly intervals][according to the following schedule:
If appropriate, consider inserting wording indicating that interest (at a specified rate etc) will be charged for late payment.
Timetable
I envisage that the strategic analysis aspects of the assignment would be completed within an overall elapsed time of [specify number, say eight]weeks, provided that SPG can discuss with you your strategic objectives towards the beginning of this period.
This should be a convenient time to undertake this review since progress on the acquisitions side would be hindered by European [summer]holidays.
It is not feasible at this stage to set a precise timetable for each acquisition since much will depend on the availability of information and the complexity of each deal.
Furthermore, it may be in Big's interest to deliberately slow down the progress of an acquisition possibly to await the occurrence of certain events or to put pressure on the vendor.
Conversely, there may be advantages in you proceeding concurrently on several deals before vendors' price expectations are raised by the realisation of your pan-European intentions.
Confidentiality
We agree that we will hold in strict confidence all information obtained from [Growing Business PLC]and will not disclose such information to others or use such information except in connection with the performance of the services agreed in this letter.
We understand the confidential nature of the engagement and that staff, other than the directors, should not be made aware of its purpose.
Note: Deal with any particular confidentiality issues and restrictions on the information to be made available.
Conflicts of interest
It is not an uncommon circumstance for us to be the appointed auditors of more than one of the companies involved in a transaction.
In such situations we take appropriate measures to ensure that strict confidentiality is maintained in all respects.
However, we will write to you with the details of the potential conflicts of interest and how they will be avoided before we commence work in accordance with the terms of this letter.
City Code
We are required to inform you, under the terms of the guidance note issued by the Institutes of Chartered Accountants dealing with compliance with the City Code on Takeovers and Mergers (the City Code), that, in the course of the engagement, we will comply with the provisions of the City Code, the Rules Governing Substantial Acquisitions of Shares (the SARs), and with all rulings made and guidance issued under them by the Panel on Takeovers and Mergers (the Panel).
Under the terms of the guidance note we may also be obliged to supply to the Panel and information, books, documents or other records concerning the transaction which the Panel may properly require and otherwise render all such assistance as we are reasonably able to give to the Panel.
Your agreement to the terms of engagement contained in this letter will be confirmation of our authority to comply with this requirement.
We are also required to agree with you that [should the Panel make a statement that it considers that the facilities of the securities markets in the United Kingdom should be withheld from you, or]should you fail to comply with the City Code, we may withdraw from the engagement.
Your agreement to the terms of engagement contained in this letter will be confirmation of our right so to withdraw.]
Announcements
KPMG reserve the right to publish at its own expense and subject to your prior approval a tombstone recording the completed transaction unless you inform us that this would be in breach of specific confidentiality undertakings exchanged between the parties.
Law and jurisdiction
This engagement shall be governed by and construed in accordance with English law and all disputes and claims arising hereunder shall be subject to the exclusive jurisdiction of the English Courts.
In summary, I hope that the contents of this letter provide you with an overview of the services that KPMG is able to offer in connection with your ambitious plans and demonstrate how we would propose to undertake the assignment, capitalising on our relationship with [Solicitors].
I am confident that we can provide you with the high level of service you require.
I hope that you find our proposal acceptable and look forward to the prospect of working closely with you on this project.
We shall be grateful if you will kindly acknowledge receipt of this letter.
If the contents are not in accordance with your understanding, we shall be pleased to receive your further observations and to give you any other information you require]
Yours sincerely
1101.8 Example buying proposal letter
See 0602.41 and 0602.43
This example letter outlines how we may assist a client with an acquisition, involving acquisition search, targeting, approach and completion, ie a full deal management service.
A Stevens Esq
ABC Limited
[Address]
3 September 19W9
Dear Mr Stevens,
Assistance provided by Merger & Acquisition Services (‘MAS’)
Introduction
As discussed at our meeting on [date], MAS's principal role in connection with the proposed transaction to purchase a company in [name of industry]would be one of deal management which, for the purpose of this transaction, would encompass the following stages which you will find described in greater detail below:—
Anonymous approach
Presentation to interested parties
Key features review
Deal structuring and outline heads of agreement
Due diligence
Contract drafting and negotiation
As is evident from the above summary, MAS's role follows on logically from the acquisition search.
Whilst not expressly stated here, it is reasonable to expect that MAS will monitor the overall progress of the search initiative and, specifically, will provide informal valuations of potential targets when called upon to do so.
As set out below, more detailed valuations will be undertaken for actual targets at subsequent stages in the deal process.
You should be aware at the outset that, whilst MAS can provide a comprehensive deal management and advisory service, it will operate in the capacity of your professional advisers and so cannot operate independently from yourselves at any stage in the deal process.
Hence, notwithstanding MAS's involvement, you will be required, inter alia, to evaluate non-financial information relating to a target and quantify the benefits of synergy and cost savings resulting from an acquisition.
It should also be stressed that the decision whether or not to proceed with a deal at any stage rests with yourselves.
Anonymous approach
MAS will approach in writing the principal shareholders of the shortlisted targets decided upon by yourselves to ascertain whether they would be interested in considering your proposals.
As you requested, your identity will be preserved in the approach letter and interested parties will be asked, in the first instance, to contact MAS, who will assess the parties' willingness to proceed and then report back to yourselves.
You will appreciate that there can be no guarantee of success following an approach.
This feature should clearly be borne in mind whilst selecting a shortlist.
MAS will advise you if they consider that your requirements might at an early stage unnecessarily make it more difficult to find suitable targets.
This is why we envisage at least some MAS input during the acquisition search stage.
You should also be aware that, whilst it is accepted practice for the approach letter to be written on the anonymous basis proposed above, you are likely to receive a more positive response from a target company should the circumstances of a particular approach allow you to relax your requirement for anonymity.
Presentation to interested parties
Once MAS have identified a potentially interested party, it would, with your approval, reveal your identity and arrange an initial meeting between senior members of your own organisation and the majority shareholders of the possible target.
Your objectives for this meeting would be as follows:—
(a)
to gain the confidence of the vendors;
(b)
to obtain sufficient information to confirm your willingness to proceed with the transaction; and
(c)
to obtain an assurance from the vendors that they wish to pursue matters on an exclusive basis.
MAS would propose to attend such a meeting unless it was considered that their presence might in any respect hinder the achievement of objective (a) above.
MAS will, however, advise and assist you in preparing for the initial meeting.
As regards items (a) and (c) above, it will be necessary to you to reassure the target on the mutual benefits of the deal, including career development opportunities and the benefits of synergy, so that the shareholders feel less inclined to commence an informal auction for the target.
It follows that one question doubtless uppermost in shareholders' minds at this initial meeting will be price.
MAS will consider with yourselves in advance of the meeting a likely range of indicative values based on publicly available information and the conclusions drawn from the acquisition search activity.
As a gesture of goodwill, it is MAS's recommendation that you offer to sign a confidentiality undertaking following the meeting in order for you and ourselves to obtain further financial, product and management information relating to the target.
This information will be considered by ourselves at the key features review and due diligence stages.
MAS will also use the information to fine tune its indicative range of values, following a reappraisal by yourselves of likely commercial and operational benefits stemming from the deal.
Clearly there will need to be input from yourselves to consider, principally, the operational features revealed by this additional information.
Key features review
Rather than commit you at this stage to the costs of detailed accounting, due diligence and contract drafting, which may subsequently prove to be abortive, MAS would intend performing a short key features review devised to highlight potential deal breaking points and other inevitably contentious issues (such as possible earn-out terms) which will need to be resolved with the vendors prior to proceeding.
Deal structuring and outline heads of agreement
The outcome of the key features review will normally be a short report summarising MAS's factual findings and a covering letter dealing with MAS's recommendations as to how any problem areas might be overcome.
Deal structuring points are inevitably raised by the review, which MAS will consider with yourselves and, ultimately, the vendors.
Taxation will often be the deciding factor in choosing between alternative structures and MAS will obtain from within the firm the appropriate degree of corporate, personal and international tax advice.
Proactive tax advice may enable you to offer a deal structure which provides benefits for the vendors at little or no extra cost to yourselves.
Assuming that consensus can be reached, MAS will then draft outline heads of agreement for the target to acknowledge.
These will be prepared on the basis of the information already provided and will, necessarily, be subject to a comprehensive list of conditions.
Whilst the heads do not represent a legally binding document, the drafting process for the heads will tend to assist the progress of the deal by enabling yourselves and the vendor to focus on the key issues.
The heads of agreement can also be used to brief your lawyers prior to drafting the sale and purchase agreement.
Due diligence
As explained at our meeting, MAS's involvement in due diligence tends to be limited to briefing the investigating accountants on the outcome of the key features review and reviewing with yourselves the due diligence findings, to consider how these may impact on price and your warranty and indemnity requirements.
Terms of reference for due diligence will naturally be a matter for yourselves and the investigating accountants to consider and agree.
Subject to your approval it would be MAS's intention to use [name of accountants]for the due diligence.
Depending on the size of the target, the concerns identified by the key features review and the information available,[name of accountants]would be able to undertake any scale of investigation report.
This could range in scope from a review of certain commercial aspects of the target, carried out by a suitably experienced consultant, to a full ‘long-form’ investigation of five years' historical financial results.
An investigation of the target's tax affairs is normally carried out in conjunction with the acquisition investigation.
Contract drafting and negotiation
Contract drafting can generally proceed concurrently with due diligence.
As the purchaser, it would be usual for your lawyers to commence the drafting of a detailed contract.
As already mentioned, we find that the heads of agreement act as a useful instruction to the lawyers, since the terms convey the intentions of the principals and deal with many of the theoretical and technical points that each side's lawyers feel duty bound to raise.
You will need to engage a Commercial lawyer to protect your interests in the drafting of a contract.
We shall work with your lawyers to assist you to negotiate a contract on the best available terms.
We also anticipate, together with your lawyers, assisting in the interpretation of any warranty and indemnity requirements included in a contract.
We shall if you request, negotiate in the capacity of professional advisers on your behalf within pre-agreed negotiating parameters or instructions but it is our policy not to take decisions on your behalf.
Fee arrangements
MAS will charge for its services in connection with the above programme of work on a time basis.
Budgets and terms of reference for each subsequent stage of assistance will be agreed with yourselves before starting an assignment.
If a fee estimate is included, consider adding the following:
All fees are payable when invoice is issued.
I would anticipate billing you [for work done to date at monthly/weekly intervals][according to the following schedule:
If appropriate, consider inserting wording indicating that interest (at a specified rate etc) will be charged for late payment.
Conflicts of interest
It is not an uncommon circumstance for us to be the appointed auditors of more than one of the companies involved in a transaction.
In such situations we take appropriate measures to ensure that strict confidentiality is maintained in all respects.
However, we will write to you with the details of the potential conflicts of interest and how they will be avoided before we commence work in accordance with the terms of this letter.
Confidentiality
We agree that we will hold in strict confidence all information obtained from [Growing Business PLC]and will not disclose such information to others or use such information except in connection with the performance of the services agreed in this letter.
We understand the confidential nature of the engagement and that staff, other than the directors, should not be made aware of its purpose.
Note: Deal with any particular confidentiality issues and restrictions on the information to be made available.
City Code
We are required to inform you, under the terms of the guidance note issued by the Institutes of Chartered Accountants dealing with compliance with the City Code on Takeovers and Mergers (the City Code), that, in the course of the engagement, we will comply with the provisions of the City Code, the Rules Governing Substantial Acquisitions of Shares (the SARs), and with all rulings made and guidance issued under them by the Panel on Takeovers and Mergers (the Panel).
Under the terms of the guidance note we may also be obliged to supply to the Panel and information, books, documents or other records concerning the transaction which the Panel may properly require and otherwise render all such assistance as we are reasonably able to give to the Panel.
Your agreement to the terms of engagement contained in this letter will be confirmation of our authority to comply with this requirement.
We are also required to agree with you that [should the Panel make a statement that it considers that the facilities of the securities markets in the United Kingdom should be withheld from you, or]should you fail to comply with the City Code, we may withdraw from the engagement.
Your agreement to the terms of engagement contained in this letter will be confirmation of our right so to withdraw.]
Announcements
KPMG reserve the right to publish at its own expense and subject to your prior approval a tombstone recording on the completed transaction unless you inform us that this would be in breach of specific confidentiality undertakings exchanged between the parties.
Law and jurisdiction
This engagement shall be governed by and construed in accordance with English law and all disputes and claims arising hereunder shall be subject to the exclusive jurisdiction of the English Courts.
Either:
As agreed at our initial meeting, we shall inform your auditors of this appointment.
Or:
As discussed at our initial meeting, you have asked that we do not inform your auditors of our involvement on this assignment.
By signing this letter, you confirm that this is the case.
[The ICAEW ethics guidelines are not clear as to whether this courtesy is to be extended to non-UK based auditors]
Client acknowledgment
[We shall be grateful if you will kindly acknowledge receipt of this letter.
If the contents are not in accordance with your understanding of our agreement, we shall be pleased to receive your further observations and to give you any other information you require.]
Where this form of wording is used, we must ensure that acknowledgement is received from the client in writing prior to commencing work on the engagement.
Yours sincerely
[MAS Partner]
Partner
1101.9 Example fund raising advisory proposal letter
See 0602.43
The following example can be used as the basis of a letter outlining our fund raising advisory services, following an initial meeting.
C Jones Esq
ABC Limited
[Address]
17 August 19Y2
Dear Mr Jones
I very much enjoyed meeting Mr Evans and yourself last week and having the opportunity to discuss your business intentions as well as some of the details of your first targeted acquisition.
I can confirm that both [name of second partner]and I are most interested in the [Industry]sector and would be delighted to carry out assignments on your behalf.
I itemise below the categories of work we could carry out for you in relation to establishing and developing the early stages of your group's development programme, together with fee estimates.
I have specifically not repeated details about ourselves as I feel this was most adequately discussed during our meeting and the focus of this letter is fees.
However, should you require further details on any aspect concerning this firm and its method of operation then naturally [name of second partner]or I would be delighted to help.
1.
Business plan
To help you to develop your current business plan, incorporating aspects of your target company, to a standard for presentation to funding sources.
2.
Sources of finance
With regard to the proposals set out in your finalised business plan, we will make recommendations as to the type and source of funds, effect appropriate introductions through our extensive network of funding source contacts (including venture capital and banking sources) and advise and support on presentations to funding sources.
Fee estimate: It is difficult to estimate the time involvement or costs of this category of work as this is a function of the number of funding sources approached and the number of meetings required.
It is anticipated that our average fee per hour will be of the order of £ [].
However, conditional on the points raised below, I am prepared to render this fee only if you are successful in receiving a formal offer of funding.
3.
Advising founder directors and ‘Newco’
Should you be successful in raising the required funding for your projects, then you will require specialist advice (particularly when negotiating with the funding source) on the financial structure of the new company, both in terms of gearing and should venture capitalists be involved, on the proportion of dilution of the equity stake held by yourselves as founder directors.
Additionally, as it is most important to consider the taxation effect that these decisions will have on the founder directors, we will provide specialist tax advice.
We will also provide detailed advice during the preparation of legal agreements and completion.
Fee estimate: Our charging basis will be a contingent based fee similar to 2 above, except that the range of fee per hour will be £ []— £ []depending on the type of advice given and will be contingent on your establishing the new company in broad terms as outlined in the business plan.
4.
Other specialist advice
Where you might require specialist advice in what I might describe as ‘stand alone’ projects, which in themselves will generate a report, for example, the founder directors requiring a due diligence report on the target company or advice on establishing share option schemes or other suitable management incentives for the new company, I would expect, following a more detailed discussion to provide a separate terms of reference and fee estimate.
I would not expect this work to be on a contingency basis and would expect the fees to fall in the range of £ []— £ []per hour.
I trust that the above gives you the information you require to take our discussion to the next stage, but in any event, I should be please to discuss any further matters that you may raise.
It is usual to indicate to the management team that the audit appointment is often awarded to its advisers.
If ethical considerations are such that it is appropriate to include this in the engagement letter, the following wording may be appropriate:
I have referred above to certain conditions of us working on a contingency basis.
In return for the risk we undertake, which clearly a contingency fee basis gives rise to, I would expect KPMG Peat Marwick be appointed auditors to the Group and to any Newco, on the understanding that our fee will be consistent with market rates and with the audit fee which the target has borne.
The fee will be agreed with you before the appointments are finalised.
All fee quotations exclude Value Added Tax and any outlays that we may incur whilst carrying our assignments.
All fees are payable when the invoice is issued [and all final fees are to be settled at completion].
Conflicts of interest
It is not an uncommon circumstance for us to be the appointed auditors of more than one of the companies involved in a transaction.
In such situations we take appropriate measures to ensure that strict confidentiality is maintained in all respects.
However, we will write to you with the details of the potential conflicts of interest and how they will be avoided before we commence work in accordance with the terms of this letter.
Confidentiality
We agree that we will hold in strict confidence all information obtained from [Growing Business PLC]and will not disclose such information to others or use such information except in connection with the performance of the services agreed in this letter.
We understand the confidential nature of the engagement and that staff, other than the directors, should not be made aware of its purpose.
Note: Deal with any particular confidentiality issues and restrictions on the information to be made available.
Access to information
You have agreed to ensure that any information which we may require for the purpose of providing the services set out in this letter is made available to us, and when we may reasonably require.
You will appreciate that we cannot be held responsible if information material to our task is withheld from us].
Representations
We may ask [you]to confirm formally [your]responsibility for certain information or matters to which our services relate.
You have agreed to provide such confirmations as we may require].
City Code
We are required to inform you, under the terms of the guidance note issued by the Institutes of Chartered Accountants dealing with compliance with the City Code on Takeovers and Mergers (the City Code), that, in the course of the engagement, we will comply with the provisions of the City Code, the Rules Governing Substantial Acquisitions of Shares (the SARs), and with all rulings made and guidance issued under them by the Panel on Takeovers and Mergers (the Panel).
Under the terms of the guidance note we may also be obliged to supply to the Panel and information, books, documents or other records concerning the transaction which the Panel may properly require and otherwise render all such assistance as we are reasonably able to give to the Panel.
Your agreement to the terms of engagement contained in this letter will be confirmation of our authority to comply with this requirement.
We are also required to agree with you that [should the Panel make a statement that it considers that the facilities of the securities markets in the United Kingdom should be withheld from you, or]should you fail to comply with the City Code, we may withdraw from the engagement.
Your agreement to the terms of engagement contained in this letter will be confirmation of our right so to withdraw.]
Announcements
KPMG reserve the right to publish at its own expense and subject to your prior approval a tombstone recording the completed transaction unless you inform us that this would be in breach of specific confidentiality undertakings exchanged between the parties.
Either:
As agreed at our initial meeting, we shall inform your auditors of this appointment.
Or:
As discussed at our initial meeting, you have asked that we do not inform your auditors of our involvement on this assignment.
By signing this letter, you confirm that this is the case.
[The ICAEW Ethics guidelines are not clear as to whether this courtesy is to be extended to non-UK based auditors].
Law and jurisdiction
This engagement shall be governed by and construed in accordance with English law and all disputes and claims arising hereunder shall be subject to the exclusive jurisdiction of the English Courts.
Client acknowledgement
[We shall be grateful if you will kindly acknowledge receipt of this letter.
If the contents are not in accordance with your understanding of our agreement, we shall be pleased to receive your further observations and to give you any other information you require].
In conclusion, I would like to reiterate my earlier remarks concerning our own enthusiasm for your project and indeed would look forward to being part of the team that would bring about a successful conclusion to your plans.
I hope our fee proposals reflect this view and give you the flexibility to achieve your goals economically and efficiently.
Yours sincerely
[MAS Partner]
Partner
1101.10 Example public offer deal lead engagement letter
See 0301.3 and 0904
This letter is illustrative of the type to be used where the firm is leading an agreed public offer (ie subject to the Takeover Code) on behalf of a client and is ni addition to a deal management' engagement letter as set out in 1101.2.
This letter should always be reviewed by CFSU and, if necessary, by the firm's lawyers.
This example is based on a real letter issued to a client and hence is the result of a certain amount of negotiation.
The Directors,
[Acquiring Client]
[Address]
Our ref:[]
[Date]Dear Sirs
We, KPMG Peat Marwick (‘KPMG’) write to confirm the arrangements whereby we are to make on behalf of[Acquiring Client](‘Client’) an offer (the ‘Offer’) for the issued share capital of Target plc (‘Target’).
1.
Appointment
KPMG is appointed as exclusive financial adviser to Client in connection with the Offer.
The services to be provided by KPMG will include:
i)
The making of an announcement of the intention to make the Offer;
ii)
The making of the Offer for and on behalf and as an agent for Client; and
iii)
Advising Client as to whether KPMG considers the conditions of the Offer to have been satisfied.
It is a condition of KPMG making the announcement and Offer on the basis described above that the terms of the Offer shall be agreed in advance by the Board of Target and that irrevocable undertakings to accept the Offer, addressed to Client [and/or KPMG], and in a form approved by KPMG, have been received in respect of shares of Target carrying over 50 per cent.
of the voting rights of Target as at the date of the announcement.
Subject to the prior written consent of Client, which shall not be unreasonably withheld, KPMG shall be entitled to appoint a broker (an ‘Approved Broker’) to act on behalf of Client in connection with the Offer.
2.
Compensation
In consideration of the services of KPMG and whether or not the Offer is made, Client will pay fees to KPMG based on the time taken at our normal hourly scale rates appropriate to the level of KPMG expertise required.
3.
Expenses
Client will, whether or not the Offer is made, promptly reimburse KPMG for all costs and expenses reasonably and properly incurred by KPMG in the fulfilment of its services hereunder in relation to the Offer (including legal expenses and the expenses of any Approved Broker and, subject to Client's prior consent which shall not be unreasonably withheld or delayed, the fees and expenses of other advisers, agents and consultants retained by KPMG for KPMG's own benefit in connection with the Offer) and all matters preparatory or ancillary thereto (including any value added tax if applicable).
All other expenses including (without limitation) legal, accounting and printing expenses and Registrar's fees will be paid by Client.
4.
Indemnification
Client agrees with KPMG (for itself and on trust and as agent for the others mentioned below) fully to indemnify and to hold harmless KPMG, its partners, employees, its lawyers,[Stephenson Harwood], any Approved Broker and (subject to Client's prior consent to their engagement) any other advisers, agents and consultants retained by KPMG in connection with the Offer (any and all of which or whom is referred to as an ‘Indemnified Person’) from and against any and all losses, claims, costs, damages, actions, proceedings, demands, liabilities and expenses whatsoever, joint or several,(collectively ‘claims’) which any such Indemnified Person may suffer or incur and which relate to or arise from, directly or indirectly, KPMG's engagement hereunder and/or the provision by KPMG of its services in connection with the Offer.
Client will not be liablewhether under this indemnity or otherwise for any claims arising directly or indirectly from the gross negligence or wilful default of any Indemnified Person.
KPMG will have due regard to any reasonable request which the offeror may make in relation to any claim subject to the offeror indemnifying and securing KPMG in a manner satisfactory to KPMG against any and all costs, charges and expenses incurred by it in complying with any such request.
The foregoing indemnities shall be in addition to any rights that any Indemnified Person may have at common law or otherwise and shall remain in full force and effect not withstanding KPMG's engagement hereunder may be terminated.
Client also agrees, that no Indemnified Person shall have any liability (whether direct or indirect, in contract or tort or otherwise) to Client for or in connection with such engagement, except for losses, claims, damages or liabilities incurred by Client that are found in a final judgement by a court of competent jurisdiction to have resulted from the gross negligence or wilful default of any Indemnified Person.
5.
Confirmation and Undertakings
Client will comply with all applicable legal and regulatory provisions, including the City Code on Takeovers and Mergers and the Rules of the Stock Exchange.
Your own legal advisers are primarily responsible for advising you on matters of English law, including the Companies Acts 1985 to 1989, the Financial Services Act 1986 and the Insider Dealing Legislation and the legal aspects of the requirements of the City Code on Takeovers and Mergers and the Stock Exchange.
In addition, your legal advisers will be responsible for the drafting of the offer document and associated documentation and for advice as to its contents for the purposes of satisfying the requirements of the London Stock Exchange and the City Code.
Client undertakes and warrants that:
1)
Client will ensure that all information relating to itself comprised in announcements, public statements, the Offer document and any other documents during KPMG's engagement hereunder issued by or with the consent or knowledge of Client will be true and accurate in all material respects and will not be misleading, and that all expressions of opinion, intention and expectation therein will be honestly held and will be made only after due consideration and that there will not be omitted from any such document any fact the omission of which would make any statement therein false or misleading;
2)
Every announcement, public statement or document as aforesaid made or published by it or on its behalf in the course of KPMG's engagement hereunder will contain all particulars required to comply with all applicable statutory, legal and regulatory provisions (other than particulars required by the rules and regulations of the Institute of Chartered Accountants in England and Wales arising out of the involvement of any Indemnified Person in the Offer) and all requirements of The Stock Exchange and of the City Code, all other information which might reasonably be considered material in the context thereof and all facts, expressions of opinion, expectations or intentions or other information reasonably required by KPMG;
3)
Client will provide to KPMG such information as KPMG may reasonably request from time to time in connection with the Offer and will not, without prior consultation and the written consent of KPMG (such consent not to be unreasonably withheld or delayed) make or publish any announcement, public statement or document concerning the Offer whether before the announcement of or during the course of the Offer; and
4)
Client will procure that appropriate arrangements are made for the provision of finance to meet the costs of acquiring shares pursuant to the Offer.
Client accepts that KPMG is required to comply with the rules and the regulations of the Institute of Chartered Accountants in England and Wales and rules and regulations of the SIB, the City Code and all other relevant authorities and KPMG undertakes that it and the Indemnified Persons will not breach such rules and regulations (provided that this breach would not have arisen if Client had complied with the undertakings and warranties contained in sub-paragraphs 1) to 4) of this section).
Client will not require KPMG to undertake, nor will Client take any action which could or might result in KPMG being in breach thereof.
Client accepts that should the Panel make a statement that it considers that the facilities of the securities markets in the United Kingdom should be withheld from you, or should you fail to comply with the City Code, we may withdraw from the engagement.
You agreement to the terms of engagement contained in this letter will be confirmation of our right so to withdraw.
KPMG warrants and undertakes that it has full power and authority under the Financial Services Act 1986 and otherwise to make the Offer on behalf of Client.
6.
Termination
KPMG and Client reserve the right to terminate KPMG's engagement hereunder at any time and without liability or continuing obligation to each other save that termination of this agreement shall be without prejudice to rights accrued and obligations incurred by either KPMG or Client prior to such date and shall not affect the indemnification in section 4, or Client's obligation under sections 2 and 3.
KPMG will be entitled to act on the instructions of any one of the persons listed at Appendix I to this letter for all purposes in connection with the Offer and all matters connected therewith.
7.
Governing law
This agreement constituted and evidenced by this letter and your acceptance of it shall be governed by and construed in accordance with English law and all disputes and claims arising hereunder shall be subject to the exclusive jurisdiction of the English Courts.
Please confirm that the foregoing is in accordance with your understanding by signing and returning to us the enclosed copy of this letter.
Yours faithfully 
Appendix I
1101.11 Example memorandum of understanding
See 0301.1
This is to be used where there is a need to ensure all shareholders are agreed to the common nature of a sale and that they are prepared to meet our fees, ie acknowledges the CA 1985 s151 problem with the company paying other professional advisers' fees.
Memorandum of Understanding
1.
It has been recommended by the Board and is hereby agreed between the Shareholders of [name]Limited (‘the Company’) that steps should be taken by means of the distribution of an Information memorandum (‘the Memorandum’) in the first instance to identified prospective buyers of shares in the capital of the Company, to establish whether an acceptable bid can be obtained either for the whole of the shares in the Company or for the shares held by [ABC]Ltd.
If this approach fails alternative proposals will be considered.
2.
It has also been agreed that the preparation and despatch of the Memorandum and the general arrangements for sale will, up to the point of despatch of this Memorandum be co-ordinated, on behalf of the Shareholders as a whole by KPMG Peat Marwick (‘KPMG’) and the legal advice in relation to the Memorandum and the arrangements generally will be provided by [name of lawyer]on the understanding that each will be able to provide appropriate advice in the jurisdiction in which the Memorandum will be distributed.
3.
It is agreed that the text of the Memorandum will be finalised by a committee of the Board probably consisting of [specify names].
4.
It is agreed between us that in connection with the preparation and despatch of the Memorandum (and the handling of the prospective sale proceeds envisaged by the memorandum), the proper and reasonable costs of KPMG and [lawyer]will be borne by the shareholders pro rata to their respective shareholdings.
5.
It is envisaged that these arrangements shall remain in force until initial expressions of interest have been received and analysed and a decision taken regarding the handling of the next stage of the formal sale process.
It is envisaged that this will occur in [specify date].
6.
If the Shareholders decide not to proceed with the proposed sale for any reason, the fees of KPMG and [name]will be calculated according to time spent and will not exceed £ [x]in the case of KPMG and £ [y]in the case of [lawyer]and all such fees will be payable by the Company.
These fees ‘caps’ cover the period until the receipt of responses to the Memorandum either offering to purchase the Company or declining to do so.
7.
This understanding shall continue until either principal shareholders [specify names]gives notice of its termination to the other, the Company and to each of KPMG and [lawyer].
8.
This Memorandum of Understanding is not intended to be legally binding on any person except to the extent that paragraphs 4, 5 and 6 oblige the Company and the Shareholders to pay certain costs.
1101.12 Public offer acceptance memorandum
See 0903
This memorandum is illustrative of the type to be used where the firm is leading an agreed public offer (ie subject to the Takeover Code) on behalf of a client.
The approval of two MAS Partners is required and the UK Head of Corporate Finance or a person of similar standing in the region.
To: See list Date:
From: MAS Partner Ref:
[Public offer acceptance memorandum]— Client proposed acquisition of Target
We have been retained by the board of Acquiring Client plc (‘Client’), a client of KPMG [Office], to act as lead financial adviser and to make an offer on behalf of Client to the holders of shares in Target plc (‘Target’).
We also act as coordinators for the production of the various documentation.
The initial terms of the offer are []p per share following a dividend payment by the target of []p per share.
The offer is recommended [and Client wish to have more than 50% acceptance before the offer is made, either in irrevocable undertakings or firm sales.
Hence the offer is being made under Rule 9.]
[Explain the background to the transaction]
The following summarises the major considerations in respect of our ability to act in such a role:
we were initially requested to act by another KPMG member firm which already acts as auditors to Client.
KPMG are not auditors to Target.
we have checked to ensure no conflicts of interest.
the responsibility for the recommendation of the offer to shareholders will lie with the directors of Target as advised by [Bankers].
we will also seek to make [Bankers]responsible for the target's financial extracts.
KPMG [Office]will give clearance on the Client numbers
the offer will be financed in cash
[Client's lawyers]will act for Client and it is proposed [KPMG lawyers/Stephenson Harwood]approve our contract with Client.
The Mergers and Acquisitions unit's operational mandate, as set out in the corporate finance manual, requires approval for our involvement as lead advisers in the public arena.
The approval requires to be given by two M&A partners and the UK Head of Corporate Finance.
Since this is an agreed cash bid [under Rule 9]and we have no relationship with the target I believe we can act.
1102 Operational procedures for selling
See 0404.1 and 0505.32
1102.1 Proforma advertisement placed by client
This is an example of an advertisement which may be placed by the client (or by KPMG on behalf of the client).
Note that this type of advertisement is only acceptable where there is no reference to KPMG 
FOR SALE PROFITABLE RETAILER OF BED LINEN
Established and profitable retailer of luxury bed linen and accessories.
Operates from prime London location.
Profit before tax £160,000 p.a.
Offers in region of £900,000 invited for the business and net assets.
Write Box H6281 Financial Times, One Southwark Bridge, London, SE1 9HL.
1102.2 Proforma KPMG Financial Times advertisements
See 0404.2 and 0505.33
It may be more appropriate to use the name ‘KPMG Peat Marwick’ with ‘Corporate Finance’appearing underneath the firm's name.
However, the provisions of the KPMG Marketing manual must be followed.
For guidance refer to Abigail Oxer, Marketing Advisory Group, London office.
1102.3 Investment advertisement approval form
See 0405.6 
This page left intentionally blank
1102.4 Sale advertising outside the UK
See 0503.24
The following is guide to sale advertising outside the UK, including suggested media.
Country & Comment Newspaper
1.
US
Business for sale advertisements are regularly placed in financial and trade journals.
Wall Street Journal
2.
Germany
Business for sale advertisements are very rarely used.
The anticipated chance of finding a buyer is not very high.
KPMG Germany would rather an advertisement was not used.
Frankfurter Allgemeine Zeitung
3.
Holland
KPMG Holland are reluctant to place advertisements.
It would suggest an inability to research or find a suitable purchaser.
Financieel Dagblod
4.
Italy
Culturally in Italy business advertisements are not placed and legally it is apparently a doubtful method of selling a company.
KPMG Italy have experienced difficulties with the Italian Securities Exchange Commission.
5.
France
KPMG Paris do not have experience of advertising.
It is possible though not normal.
Les Echos
6.
Sweden
Advertising is possible though it is not common practice.
Dagens Industre 1102.5 Timetable for a flexible sale
See 0503.25 and 0505.42
This example timetable is provided for illustrative purposes only.
It does not purport to be the ideal timetable for such a transaction.
Example disposal: assume receipt of instructions at the start of December 19Y0 
1.
Completion of August 19Y0 accounts by end November 19Y0
2.
Preparation and discussion of Information end December 19Y0 memorandum
3.
Research on potential purchasers December 19Y0
4.
Marketing
i)
re-release of ABN January 19Y1
ii)
one page profile released to selected purchasers
iii)
possible advertisement
5.
Release of Information memorandum January 19Y1
6.
Procuring offers
i)
dealing with enquiries
ii)
evaluating interest, arranging meetings and visits
iii)
target date for offers — a strict deadline may not be appropriate end February 19Y1
7.
Selection of preferred bidder and negotiation of March 19Y1 heads of agreement 
8.
Completion process April 19Y1
i)
preparation of completion account
ii)
audit and accounting due diligence
iii)
legal due diligence
iv)
contract preparation
v)
completion
Dates
Editor's note: Cross border transactions may involve considerably longer lead items1102.6 Covering memorandum to KPMG partner
See 0505.43
To: AN Partner
From: AN Partner — MAS, Salisbury Square
Re: High Technology Metal Alloys Stockholder
We have been retained to sell a high technology alloy steelholder based in the UK with representation in Germany and the USA.
A profile is attached.
From our research of the stockholding sector [information on our buy register database]we have identified a client of yours, Company, as being potentially interested in this opportunity.
Please forward the profile to your client, together with the attached confidentiality letter.
If you feel it is inappropriate for your client would you please advise me.
I attach a proforma transmittal letter which you may wish to personalise (see 1102.7).
1102.6 Covering memorandum to KPMG partner
See 0505.43
To: AN Partner
From: AN Partner — MAS, Salisbury Square
Re: High Technology Metal Alloys Stockholder
We have been retained to sell a high technology alloy steelholder based in the UK with representation in Germany and the USA.
A profile is attached.
From our research of the stockholding sector [information on our buy register database]we have identified a client of yours, Company, as being potentially interested in this opportunity.
Please forward the profile to your client, together with the attached confidentiality letter.
If you feel it is inappropriate for your client would you please advise me.
I attach a proforma transmittal letter which you may wish to personalise (see 1102.7).
1102.7 Transmittal letter — cold approach
See 0505.43
This is a cold approach to be sent following market research.
A Smith Esq
ABC PLC
[Address]
25 October 19Y1
Dear Mr Smith
We have been retained to assist in the sale of a private group engaged in [activity].
The sale of this group represents an opportunity to establish or consolidate a position in this niche area of the UK [sector]industry.
A profile of the group is attached.
If you are interested in pursuing this opportunity please sign and return the attached undertaking of confidentiality to me.
On receipt of your undertaking I will forward an Information memorandum to you.
Yours sincerely
[MAS Partner]
Partner
Enc.
1102.8 Transmittal letter — pre-marketed
See 0505.44
This is a suggested first stage transmittal letter for use where pre marketing or an advert has been used.
Strictly Private & Confidential — Addressee only
[Name]
[Company]
[Address]
[date]
Dear []
Name Limited
Further to your response to our advertisement in [publication of date]/telephone conversation with [person]of this office, I can advise you that a confidential Information memorandum has been prepared covering the business of [Name Limited]and that our client has agreed to provide you with a copy in exchange for asigned undertaking of confidentiality.
We would ask that before we send you a copy of the detailed memorandum you return to [person]at this address, the attached confidentiality undertaking typed on your own letter heading.
Your response should also indicate to whom the memorandum should be sent and who will be the party we should address all future correspondence.
Once we received this letter we will despatch the Information memorandum with detailed guidance as to the procedure to be adopted by yourselves during the sale process.
In order to ensure prompt despatch of the Information memorandum to you please fax the signed confidentiality agreement to me on.
The original should be sent in the post.
Yours sincerely
[MAS Partner]
Partner
1102.9 Sale control log
See 0505.45
This is essential to facilitate the smooth running of a sale to be able to brief the client at any time.
An example is given below.
Phase I — The enclosed investment overview is being provided to selected parties who have expressed interest in evaluating the possible acquisition of the Company.
Those parties who, after reviewing the investment overview, are interested in receiving a Profile, should sign a copy of the enclosed confidentiality statement and return it immediately to KPMG.
Phase II — Upon receipt of a signed confidentiality statement, KPMG will obtain permission from its client to send a Profile to interested buyers.
Those parties, who after reviewing this Profile, are interested in visiting the Company's head office, should respond to KPMG in writing within []days with an expression of interest, a preliminary indication of value, and alternative dates to visit the Company.
Recipients of the Profile who do not wish to pursue the acquisition are asked to return the Profile to KPMG as soon as possible.
Phase III — Parties responding affirmatively will be notified as to whether they will be invited to participate further.
At that time, visits to the Company will be scheduled.
Participants will be given the opportunity to meet with the Company's management, inspect its facilities, and review relevant internal documents.
Also, the proposed purchase contract will be supplied.
KPMG will be available to respond to reasonable requests for additional information.
Completed purchase contracts should be submitted shortly after the Company visit to KPMG Partner at the address below.
Our client intends to sell the entire Company to one buyer in a 100% cash for shares transaction.
Phase IV — KPMG and its client will review the purchase contracts submitted under Phase III.
Shortly thereafter, KPMG will notify the party its client has selected to negotiate an executed purchase agreement.
PROCEDURES REGARDING THE POTENTIAL SALE OF EXAMPLE COMPANY PLC (the Company)
While our client intends to proceed as outlined above, they reserve the right under their own discretion to modify the timetable and sequence of events as deemed appropriate.
Our client is under no obligation to accept any offer, whether or not such offer represents the highest purchase price proposed by any of the prospective purchasers.
On no account should direct contact be made with the management or staff of the Company.
KPMG Partner/Manager
Address 
1102.11 Flexible arrangements — information memorandum transmittal letter or sales procedures section in the Information memorandum
See 0505.51 
This is a suggested transmittal letter for the Information memorandum.
Strictly Private & Confidential — Addressee only
[Name and address of Signatory of confidentiality undertaking]
[date]
Dear []
Name Limited [’ name’]
Thank you for returning the signed Confidentiality Undertaking.
I now have pleasure in enclosing an Information memorandum which should be read in conjunction with this letter.
I should clarify that, as you are aware, the shareholders of [name]have retained us to seek offers for the x% interest in [name]held by [shareholder].
[Shareholder]has expressed the desire to dispose of its interest since following its recent refocussing it no longer feels able to act as [name]partner in the [specify]markets.
In the event of the sale, no restrictions will be placed on [name]regarding the use of technical and intellectual property rights developed by name in conjunction with[shareholder]during the period of its association with [shareholder].
The sale however is not restricted to an immediate outright sale of [shareholder]'s interest.
[Shareholder], in order to accommodate the desires of potential interested parties, is willing to consider a range of sale scenarios:
a)
a partial sale of [shareholder]'s x% stake with agreement for purchase of the remaining stock at some specified time in the future; or
b)
an outright sale of 100% of all the shares.
The sale of a majority interest but not an outright sale is not a favoured path unless clear strategic reasons to favour this route are demonstrated by the potential purchaser.
You should note that [Selling agent]and the vendors reserve the right to:
amend, modify or terminate, without explanation, the timetable and procedures set out below;
negotiate with one or more prospective purchasers at any time; and
enter into a definitive agreement for the purchase and sale of the shares of the Company without prior notice to other prospective purchasers.
The Information memorandum
The memorandum has been prepared by [selling agent]solely for the purpose of providing selected information on a confidential basis to prospective investors.
There may be other issues of importance to prospective investors, who must undertake their own additional enquiries, as they see fit.
An opportunity will be made available for prospective investors to make additional enquiries.
If a prospective purchaser wishes to obtain supplementary information contact should be made with the designated representatives of KPMG Peat Marwick.
Such information will be given, provided such requests are (at the sole discretion of KPMG Peat Marwick) reasonable in nature.
Timetable[ be wary of over demanding timetables!]
If in doubt do not mention a timetable in the transmittal letter — send out an offers deadline once you have established sufficient interest
As stated, the timetable may necessarily be subject to amendment as the sale process develops.
Interested parties should advise [selling agent]in writing no later than [6pm]London time on [date]that, subject to further investigations, they have a bona fide interest, at a specific price level in making an acquisition proposal for the shares in [name].
The expression of interest should address the following:
(i)
the percentage shareholding desired and the cash price offered for that shareholding.
This may be a range of alternative propositions, however, a clear indication of preference must be made.
[If a range of prices is offered this range should not be greater than [£500,000];
(ii)
the assumptions, if any, on which the price indications in (i) above are based.
Clear indication should be given of any areas of uncertainty that may impact significantly on the amount of the offer;
(iii)
plans for [name]and its employees.
The question of employee motivation is regarded as key to the future success of the company.
Proposals should therefore address this need;
(iv)
due diligence requirements;
(v)
any internal and external consent procedures which could attach to the offer; and
Selection of preferred parties
Based on the indications of interest, the shareholders, with the assistance of [selling agent]will, at their sole and absolute discretion, select a preferred party or parties who will be invited to perform such limited due diligence as they deem necessary in order to be able to make a binding offer.
It is intended that the vendors shall provide a draft purchase and sale document and draft disclosure letter prior to the submission of the binding offer.
Additional information and contacts
KPMG Peat Marwick will be available on behalf of the shareholders to consult with prospective purchasers and to provide guidance as to the form and content of contemplated offers and to respond to requests for additional information and if appropriate, discussions with senior management of [name]and visits to the relevant sites.
Every effort will be made to accommodate requests to provide all interested parties with the same information.
Any enquiries relating to the information memorandum or this letter should be directed only to [selling agent].
Other matters
The vendors will meet their own costs.
Interested parties meet their own costs in all circumstances.
If at any time you should decide not to pursue your interest in [name]or upon request by [selling agent]or any one of the shareholders you will return promptly all material (including any copies thereof) received from [selling agent]or the shareholders, or any of their representatives.
Yours sincerely,
[MAS Partner]
Partner 
1102.12 Strict auction — Information memorandum transmittal letter or sales procedures section in the Information memorandum
See 0503.25, 0504.42 and 0505.52
This is a suggested transmittal letter for the information memorandum for a strict auction 
Strictly Private & Confidential — Addressee only
[Name and address of Signatory of confidentiality undertaking]
[date]
Dear []
Name Limited [’ name’]
Thank you for your expression of interest in the acquisition of [name]and for the signed confidentiality undertaking.
I should clarify at the outset that the vendors have retained us to seek offers for a single package comprising 100% of the share capital of [name]together with five additional freehold property investments.
As we explained in our initial letter, we have been instructed to conduct the sale by means of a strict auction process.
In order to enable you to assess whether you wish to take matters further, I now have pleasure in enclosing the full sales pack which should be read in conjunction with this letter.
For convenience, the sales pack is presented in the following parts:—
(a)
The Information memorandum.
This includes an executive summary of the opportunity, a description of the business and other details relevant to the purchase of [name].
(b)
The property brochure.
This contains the particulars, site plans and photographs of the properties and freehold and leasehold sites included in the sale.
You should note that neither this letter nor the enclosed documents constitute an offer.
The vendors, in turn, are under no obligation to accept any offer made for [name].
Timetable
I outline below the timetable and procedures which the vendors wish to adopt in the selling process.
The timetable and the procedures may, necessarily, be subject to amendment as the sale process develops.
Stage 1.
Indicative offers deadline: 12 noon, Thursday 19th October, 19XX
Stage 2.
Shortlisted bidders selected, notified and provided with further information: Tuesday 24th October, 19XX
Contractual offers deadline: Wednesday 22nd November, 19XX
Stage 3.
Deal completed by: Friday 1st December, 19XX
Procedures
Stage 1.
If you are interested in pursuing the opportunity having read the sales pack, we would be pleased to discuss any questions you may have.
Enquiries relating to the transaction overall should be addressed to myself or my colleague [M & A contact].
Enquiries relating specifically to the properties should be addressed to [Property Surveyors, phone no]who are advising the vendors on the property aspects.
Access to the properties and contact with the employees, and tenants will not be permitted under any circumstances at this stage.
Absolutely no approaches may be made by potential purchasers to the vendors at any stage in the auction process.
Following your enquiries you are requested to make an indicative offer by midday on Thursday 19th October in writing to myself.
Your offer should address the following:—
a
The price at which you are interested in acquiring 100% of the share capital of [name]together with the five additional property assets.
b
Confirmation that you have available the funds required to finance your indicative offer.
If the funds are to be obtained from a third party source, letters of support should be provided.
The vendors are seeking a cash deal and, hence, will not accept consideration in the form of shares, loan notes or other securities.
c
Confirmation that you are able to complete the deal in accordance with the timetable set out above.
If you need to obtain shareholder or to other approval prior to completion, you should inform us of the specific clearances that you need to obtain and confirm your ability to exchange contracts by Friday 1st December, 19XX.
d
Any conditions attaching to your indicative offer.
e
Any areas of uncertainty that may impact significantly on the quantum of your offer.
f
The extent of any due diligence procedures that you would wish to carry out in stage 2.
Stage 2.
Subject to the content of the replies received by the indicative offers deadline, the vendors will select a shortlist of interested parties to whom further information will be made available.
This will include the following:—
a
A draft sale and purchase agreement;
b
A draft disclosure letter;
c
Certain information relating to each of the properties, including details of title and the results of recent local authority searches, available for inspection at the offices of the vendors' solicitors;
d
A tax package containing copies of tax computations and outstanding correspondence with the Inland Revenue; and
e
Property valuation information relating to the estimated 1982 capital gains base value.
Arrangements will be made for shortlisted bidders to have reasonable access to the properties and records of [name]in order to carry out due diligence work.
Shortlisted parties will also be given access to the vendors' various professional advisers to obtain information and to discuss specific areas.
You should be aware that the information relating to the individual properties is considerable.
I will attempt to accommodate shortlisted parties preferences as to the dates of their review but you should anticipate a requirement to work to a tight timescale.
Shortlisted bidders who wish to make a final offer for the business will be required to make a binding offer based on the documentation provided, subject only to specific provisos and their proposed amendments to the sale and purchase agreement.
Stage 3.
Final offers will not be opened until the contracted offer deadline, when subject to the replies received and the specific provisos and amendments sought, the vendors will choose the preferred bidder with whom to complete the transaction on the basis of the highest offer submitted.
Other matters
1)
Costs
The vendors will meet their own costs.
Interested parties will meet their own costs in all circumstances.
2)
Warranties
It is envisaged that the warranties will encompass the operations of the business, taxation, the statutory accounts of Name for the year ended 24th June, 19XX and the marketable title to the properties and be subject to a maximum claim limit of £2,000,000 and a de minimis level of £250,000 that must be exceeded for the vendors to have any liability under the warranties.
3)
Other
You should be aware that the directors of [name]do not propose to make a statutory declaration in connection with the relaxation of the statutory provisions relating to the provision of financial assistance.
I look forward to hearing from you.
Yours sincerely,
[M & A Partner]
Partner
Enc.
1102.13 Holding letter for indicative offers
See 0505.61
May be better to telephone the potential purchaser and see them to ‘explore’ the expression of interest 
Strictly Private & Confidential — Addressee only
[Name and address of Signatory of confidentiality undertaking]
[date]
Dear []
Name Limited
Thank you for your indicative offer letter.
I will be contacting you again after [date]when my client has had an opportunity to consider all indicative offers received.
Yours sincerely,
[MAS Partner]
Partner
1102.14 Flexible arrangements — delaying letter
See 0505.61
May be better to telephone the potential purchaser and see them to ‘explore’ the expression of interest 
Strictly Private & Confidential — Addressee only
[Name and address of Signatory of confidentiality undertaking]
[date]
Dear []
Name Limited
I have received requests from a number of parties to extend the guideline for indicative offers.
In view of the level of overseas interest and the difficulty being experienced in meeting the timetable, I have extended the guideline to [date].
This extension, for the sake of fairness, is available to all interested parties.
If you have any issues you wish to clarify please contact me, or in my absence,[M & A contact]at the above address.
Yours sincerely
[MAS Partner]
Partner
1102.15 Letter to client reviewing indicative offers
See 0505.61 
Strictly Private & Confidential — Addressee only
[Client]
[date]
Dear [],
As I indicated to you on the phone on Friday, I believe it is appropriate that I formally review the position of the sale of your company following receipt of the indicative offers.
Before focussing on the potential offers, I think it is perhaps appropriate to sound a few caveats.
Firstly, when we were first discussing the sale, the market was somewhat more buoyant than at the present time.
Since that time, interest rates have increased and there have been the well publicised problems in the sector.
Consequently, if we are to achieve your objective in terms of price, then unless one can find a niche buyer, it may be difficult to achieve.
A key element of obtaining that price would be your ability to demonstrate that the profits to October have been met and that your outlook on the future market is still as good as when we last met with your colleagues.
Having said the above, I believe that the annexed offer letters demonstrate that the total price of £ []million including, as we suggested to you, the need for an earnout may be obtainable.
However, you may prefer a lower figure with a different on-going environment and on this I need your guidance.
I would comment as follows:—
1.
ABC Plc
This would appear to be a major company with Australian connections.
The multiplier of 8-12 is obviously of interest if it is at the top of its range (12 x £900,000 less tax £7 million).
I would propose that we explore with the Managing Director a possibility of a deal at the higher end of this range but this may mean some form of earnout.
You and your colleagues will need to consider how you could exploit the business of Name working within the ABC Plc Group.
2.
Flybynight Plc
On the face of it, this offer gives you the option of substantially more than £6 million providing over a two year period profits increase.
You will note that they are initially indicating that you should hold some of the Flybynight stock for a period of two years.
You would be a material shareholder in Flybynight as presently constituted and I enclose a copy of their accounts for your perusal.
You will note that Mr. A. N. Other is a material holder in the company; he is perhaps better known for his holding in Major Plc.
3.
DEF GmbH
DEF is well known to us and would be a different sort of purchaser giving you the German influence.
You will note, however, from my colleague's memo to me that before DEF can arrive at a price they would wish to meet management.
This is because as I understand it, they regard management a very important ingredient within their strategy.
Whether, however, their price will be say £6 million, is debatable.
4.
Italian International
Italian International was introduced to us by our Italian office.
Although they are somewhat late in entering the bids scenario, I believe we should not rule them out since having talked to my partner in Italy, he regards them very much as an niche buyer.
I would suggest that we now arrange meetings with each of the above four parties to take the matter further and in this respect I note that you are going on holiday on 15th December.
I would hope we can fix meetings prior to that time.
We have also received offers from Smith (Holdings) Plc, R. Tank Limited, Steels Stockholders Limited and Aerospace International Plc.
With the exception of R. Tank Limited, they all appear to be looking towards a low number.
However, I would suggest that we have a conversation with these four people before eradicating them from first round discussions.
Finally, I annex by way of an Appendix a schedule of companies who have signed the confidentiality agreement and their status.
I believe that given the potential field to whom we circulated details, over 65 UK companies alone, that this level of response is not unreasonable.
However, one cannot rule out the possibility that certain other new parties may appear.
I would suggest that we can deal with these parties if they arise but that we should not hold up the negotiations with the top four.
I look forward to hearing from you with your agreement to the above after you have discussed the matter with your colleagues.
Yours sincerely,
[MAS Partner]
Partner 
1102.16 Letter to potential purchaser selected for phase II — flexible sale arrangements
[Indicative offeror]
[date]
Dear [],
Name Group
We have now reviewed the indicative offers in respect of the above group and have available the unaudited draft consolidated group results for the year to 31st October, 19XX which have been prepared by [client]and have not been reviewed or verified by ourselves.
As indicated in previous correspondence, my clients are not envisaging a ‘walk away’ deal and therefore the next stage is to arrange a mutually convenient time for you to meet with my clients.
The purpose of this meeting would be for you to gain an insight into the qualities of the [Name]management and for them to gain an understanding of how you would propose to manage the group.
In order to understand better and to compare offers received, it would be helpful to my clients if you were prepared to discuss the mechanics of your offer price which should be worked assuming a debt free group and thus based on profit before tax and interest.
We also need to understand any terms and conditions you wish to include as part of the deal structure.
I would suggest that we try to arrange a meeting at my office within four weeks of [date].
Please call either myself or, in my absence, my colleagues [M & A contacts]to arrange a suitable time.
Following this meeting arrangements will be made for you to visit the company's premises.
In order to assist you with your understanding of the results of the group to date I attach, as Appendix A to this letter, the unaudited draft consolidated group results for the year to 31st October, 19XX referred to above.
These reveal that forecast turnover has been achieved and gross margins have been maintained.
The net profit margin is lower than forecast due to the increase in interest rates and certain items of expenditure not anticipated at the time of the forecast.
A reconciliation of actual and forecast net expenses is included as Appendix B.
This information is provided under the terms of confidentiality agreement and disclaimer of responsibility set out in the Information memorandum.
I look forward to hearing from you.
Yours sincerely
MAS Partner
Partner
1102.17 Letter declining indicative offer — flexible sale arrangements
See 0505.61
[Indicative offeror]
[date]
Dear []
Name Group
We have now reviewed the indicative offers in respect of the above group.
Unfortunately your offer, as currently expressed, is not sufficiently interesting to my clients.
However, they have asked that I provide you with the draft (unaudited) results for the year to 31st October, 19XX in order that you may, if you so wish, reconsider your offer.
If you feel able to revise your offer, please call me or my colleague [M & A contact].
If you are able to meet my clients' price expectations by revising your offer, I would then propose that you meet with them this month to exchange their and your thoughts for the future.
I look forward to hearing from you.
Yours sincerely
[MAS Partner]
Partner
NBThis information, attached as Appendix A and a reconciliation of actual and forecast net expenses attached as Appendix B, is provided under the terms of the confidentiality agreement and disclaimer of responsibility set out in the Information memorandum.
The information has been prepared by management and has not been reviewed or verified by KPMG Peat Marwick.
1102.18 Agenda and objectives for meetings with potential purchasers
See 0505.61 
Provide offeror with the Name Group:
i)
background
ii)
management style
iii)
aims
Listen to offeror's intention for the Name Group regarding:
i)
the fit within their group
ii)
strategy
iii)
effect on/requirements of:
a)
directors
b)
employees
Discuss the indicative offer, and understand it and any other terms fully.
i.e.
cash v earnout — source of funds
Exchange information.
Programme as to how the vendors intend to move forward linking to a definitive offer.
e.g.
contact again week commencing [date]
extent and timing of due diligence
earliest date offeror can complete by.
Objectives
To gain an impression of the offerors
To obtain an understanding of offerors intentions
To understand the quantum and terms of the likely offer
To estimate the keenness of the offeror to make the acquisition
To feel for a likely maximum price and possible revisions to their offer.
i.e. uncertainties or reservations affecting the price
To conclude whether the vendor is desirable.
AGENDA
Hidden objectives for the client
1102.19 Letter to client concerning the selection of the preferred bidder
See 0505.61
[Client]
[date]
Dear [],
Name Group
Now that you have had all four meetings with prospective purchasers I feel I should recap on the progress so far and set out how we move forward from here.
Short list
With the four prospective purchasers which we have at this stage it will be necessary to go through an elimination process, selecting one to proceed with and perhaps one to keep on hold.
The initial meetings were completed on [date]and we now require firm offers or a good indication of likely maximum prices.
I would suggest that we aim, following a discussion with you, to eliminate those who are unable to match your price expectations or with whom you are uncomfortable and select the preferred bidder during the week commencing [date].
Additional information
To select the preferred party we will need final offer prices, terms and conditions which will mean having to provide the short listed parties with the further information necessary for them to make a firm offer.
I set out below the additional information which will be required for the week commencing [date].
i)
audited group accounts for 19XX;
ii)
a detailed profit and loss account, analysed between the UK, Germany and USA;
iii)
supplier and customer analysis for 19XX;
iv)
non-recurring costs incurred in 19XX, 19XX and 19XX, including the directors' remuneration and related employer's national insurance contributions;
v)
your estimates of the directors' remuneration on an arms length basis for those years and your expectations for your remuneration package following the sale;
vi)
the tax effect of adding back the exceptional German stock provision; and
vii)
a group budget for 19XX with an analysis between the UK, Germany and USA.
I understand that you have either already prepared the information or have the matters in hand.
Selecting the preferred bidder
This additional information will be provided together with a draft heads of agreement.
The heads of agreement will be prepared by us in consultattion with you and will set out the principal terms such as the definition of profits for the purpose of the multiplier.
Following this, but before selecting a preferred party, we will negotiate with the short listed parties, exploring their firm offers.
In order to do this we will need to know your preferences as regards the alternative structures which are being suggested by the various parties in discussions so far.
In particular you will probably need to consider:
i)
Whether you prefer to sell 100% for an immediate cash payment or to receive a smaller upfront payment and a deferred payment, determined by an earnout or retention or a minority stake with a pre-arranged exit.
ii)
Other issues such as pension arrangements for employees and yourselves which may be offered as part of the package.
We will assist you with evaluating these alternatives in our discussion during the week beginning the [date]and with your assistance will discuss the pros and cons of the different structures.
Having selected a preferred party it will then be important to finalise heads of agreement quickly, and ensure due diligence and disclosure procedures are completed promptly.
For should any difficulty emerge at this stage, we will want to return to the party kept on hold without undue delay.
Draft completion balance sheet
I anticipate that at completion, the group will by then be five months into the 19XX financial year.
Given that the group is expected to have made profits for the current year, the net assets will be higher than at the last account date and as the company is being purchased on a multiple of earnings we should consider stripping out the excess assets.
A tax effective method of achieving this may be by means of a payment to your pension scheme.
To do this we would need to know the maximum payment that can be made without overfunding the scheme.
An alternative method might be to pay a pre-sale dividend.
It would be helpful to prepare a forecast balance sheet for completion so that we can consider the various options.
Fees
In my letter of [date]I informed you that I would keep the progress and costs closely under review.
I feel it is appropriate to provide you with the details of our costs to date and to give an indication of the likely costs to the conclusion of the heads of agreement.
As you are aware we are conducting meetings and discussions with several interested parties, including foreign parties, and that my original indication of cost was based on a single interested party.
Our costs to date which have been increased as a result of the German problems are some [](net of our fees on account of[]).
I would estimate that on present form our cost to the heads of agreement stage may be another []assuming it is a UK buyer and that the information you supply is satisfactory to the potential purchasers.
I realise this is higher than originally envisaged but I firmly believe our approach will lead to the best result.
I am pleased with the progress to date and trust you are not finding the process too disruptive.
Yours sincerely
[MAS Partner]
Partner
1102.20 Auction process — letter to bidders selected for phase II
See 0505.62 
Strictly Private & Confidential — Addressee only
[Offeror]
Dear [Offeror],
Name Limited (‘Name’) and additional freehold properties
In response to your indicative offer letter and further to our conversation today, I am confirming in writing that the shareholders have agreed that []should be included on the shortlist for stage 2 of the Name sale process.
I am therefore enclosing the following documentation for your inspection:—
a
a draft sale and purchase agreement;
b
a draft disclosure letter;
c
a tax package;
d
property valuation information relating to the estimated 1982 capital gains base value;
e
an update of the information contained in the property portfolio brochure;
f
letters of authority to enter and inspect the properties;
g
a listing of billposting site locations;
h
Name's statutory accounts for the financial year ended 24th June, 19XX;
i
copies of Name's memorandum and articles of association; and
j
a list of the vendors' professional advisers.
Due diligence
We envisage the following arrangements being made for all short-listed parties to complete their due diligence.
i)
Legal Matters — Corporate
a)
A file of disclosure documentation is available at [Lawyers], with whom access should be arranged via [contact].
b)
It is not envisaged that any material changes will be made to the sale and purchase agreement.
However, we wish to discuss and agree any amendments that you may seek to make to the contract in advance of you submitting your final binding offer.
We shall make the necessary arrangements to meet with you in due course.
Any specific enquiries in respect of the document should be directed to [Lawyers].
ii)
Legal Matters — Property
The property legal information is available for inspection at the offices of [Lawyers][contact].
In order to allow all parties reasonable access to this documentation we will ask you to adhere to a strict timetable.
We shall contact you to make the necessary detailed arrangements.
iii)
Property — Access
I enclose five original letters of authority to enter and inspect all of the premises owned by Name, other than the head office at [address].
All of the tenants have been notified in writing that interested parties may wish to carry out internal inspections.
They have been advised only to admit callers who can present one of the enclosed passes (a copy will not be sufficient for these purposes) and provide any further identification that might reasonably be expected.
If you encounter any problems in this respect please contact [Surveyors].
iv)
Property — Development Potential
[Surveyors]are willing to discuss the development potential considerations relating to the principal properties and sites.
Please contact them to arrange a meeting if you so require.
v)
Head Office Access
There is little of substance to be seen at the head office and, therefore, only brief accompanied visits are envisaged.
If you wish to make a visit please contact my colleague [contact]who will arrange for you to be accompanied.
vi)
Audit Files
The majority of the financial information can be obtained via a review of the audit files, which can be arranged in accordance with the normal rules of [auditors].
Please contact [contact]to arrange a time if you so require.
vii)
Poster Agreements
We have prepared a package containing copies of all the agreements in respect of the licensed 48, 64 and 96 sheet panels.
The identity of the licensors has been concealed on these copies.
Sample agreements form part of the disclosure file at [Lawyers].
The full package will be made available to you as soon as you can confirm to us that the other material areas of uncertainty in your offer have been resolved.
viii)
Taxation
If you wish to meet to discuss any taxation matters please [contact]who will make the necessary arrangements.
I trust that the above arrangements cover all aspects of the due diligence that you plan to undertake.
If there are other specific requests please let us know and we shall endeavour to satisfy them.
I should be grateful if you would provide me with a list of your professional advisers as soon as possible.
Offer timetable
We are prepared to discuss any alterations you wish to make to your indicative offer at any stage during the due diligence process.
Our clients require your final binding offer based on the documentation provided, where appropriate in an amended form agreed by the vendors, on [date].
The vendors will choose the preferred bidder over the following weekend with a view to completion taking place prior to[date].
Our clients reserve the right to alter this timetable in the event of unforeseen circumstances.
Please do not hesitate to make contact with me in the event that this letter leaves unanswered any questions you might have.
Yours sincerely,
[MAS Partner]
Partner 
1102.21 Request for return of information memorandum
See 0505.8 
Strictly Private & Confidential — Addressee only
[Name and address of contact or signatory of the confidentiality agreement]
[date]
Dear []
Name Group
EITHER
Thank you for informing me that you do not wish to pursue your initial interest in the above Group.
I should be grateful if you would, in accordance with the confidentiality undertaking, now return the Information memorandum to me and at the same time confirm in writing that you and your advisers have destroyed any further copies of the documentation.
OR
As I have not heard from you since sending the Information memorandum on the above group.
I am assuming that you have decided not to pursue your initial interest.
I am therefore requesting, in accordance with the confidentiality undertaking, that the Information memorandum is returned to me and that at the same time you confirm in writing that you and your advisers have destroyed any further copies of the documentation.
Yours sincerely
[MAS Partner]
Partner
1102.22 Example accounting policies to be included in the purchase and sale agreement
See 0507.2
Set out below in A is an example of the accounting policies proposed by MAS /vendors accountants in real transactions.
These are drawn from proposals for a number of sale and purchase agreements, including those relating to the sale of a steel stock holder, an aerostructures contractor and a guarding company.
For comparison the accounting policies proposed by the MAS /purchaser's accountants for the same companies following the due diligence exercise are set out in B below.
The key differences to the proposals at A are shown in B in italics together with the reasons.
B could thus be an aide-memoire for MAS proposals if MAS is acting for the purchaser.
A PROPOSED BY VENDOR
Name Limited — Group
Group accounting policies
General principles
The completion accounts shall consist of [a statement of net assets of the business drawn up at the transfer date and a profit and loss account for the xx months then ended and such additional notes as the Vendor's accountants shall deem reasonable]and shall be prepared, in order of descending priority, with due regard to the concept of materiality in accordance with:
(1)
the policies set out in this schedule
(2)
accounting standards and policies consistent with and to be applied on a similar basis to those adopted for and implicit in the accounts of the Company for the year ended [date 19XX]
(3)
the requirements of all relevant statutes and all accounting standards
on the assumption that the Group will continue as a going concern and without regard to the intended sale or future intentions or decisions of new management following completion.
The party responsible for the preparation of the completion accounts will be the Warrantors.
For the avoidance of doubt, no asset or liability or provision shall be included more than once in the completion accounts.
B PROPOSED BY PURCHASER
Name Limited — Group
Group accounting policies
General principles
The completion accounts shall consist of [a statement of net assets of the business drawn up at the transfer date and a profit and loss account for the xx months then ended and such additional notes as the Vendor's accountants shall deem reasonable]and shall be prepared, in order of descending priority, with due regard to the concept of materiality in accordance with:
(1)
the requirements of all relevant statutes and all accounting standards
(2)
the policies set out in this schedule
(3)
accounting standards and policies consistent with and to be applied on a similar basis to those adopted for and implicit in the accounts of the Company for the year ended [date 19XX]
on the assumption that the Group will continue as a going concern and without regard to the intended sale or future intentions or decisions of new management following completion.
The party responsible for the preparation of the completion accounts will be the Warrantors.
For the avoidance of doubt, no asset or liability or provision shall be included more than once in the completion accounts.
Issue:
The purchaser will seek to allow the management of the vendor company as little latitude as possible in the preparation of the completion accounts and will be seeking to ensure that past practices which have no doubt been adventageous for the vendor cannot be used.
A PROPOSED BY VENDOR
Name Limited — Group
Group accounting policies
Specific policies
With reference to(1) above the following accounting policies shall apply:—
(a)
Consolidation
The accounts will be prepared on a consolidated basis so as to incorporate the results and assets and liabilities of the company and each of its subsidiary undertakings, all of which are to be made up to[Transfer date].
The accounts for each subsidiary undertaking shall be prepared on the same basis as those for the company or such adjustments shall be made on consolidation to amend the accounts of each subsidiary undertaking to be equivalent to accounts prepared on such a basis.
The group's share of the results and net assets of associated undertakings [as defined under current UK legislation]shall also be included.
Where subsidiary or associated undertakings are acquired during the year, their results or the group's share thereof are to be included from the effective date of acquisition.
Where subsidiary or associated undertakings are disposed of during the year, their results are to be included up to the effective date of disposal.
(b)
Goodwill
The surplus of cost over fair value attributed to the net assets (excluding goodwill) of subsidiary or associated undertakings acquired during the year shall be written off directly to reserves.
B PROPOSED BY PURCHASER
Name Limited — Group
Group accounting policies
Specific policies
With reference to(2) above the following accounting policies shall apply:—
(a) Consolidation
The accounts will be prepared on a consolidated basis so as to incorporate the results and assets and liabilities of the company and each of its subsidiary undertakings, all of which are to be made up to[Transfer date].
The accounts for each subsidiary undertaking shall be prepared on the same basis as those for the company or such adjustments shall be made on consolidation to amend the accounts of each subsidiary undertaking to be equivalent to accounts prepared on such a basis.
The group's share of the results and net assets of associated undertakings [as defined under current UK legislation]shall also be included.
Where subsidiary or associated undertakings are acquired during the year, their results or the group's share thereof are to be included from the effective date of acquisition.
Where subsidiary or associated undertakings are disposed of during the year, their results are to be included up to the effective date of disposal.
(b) Goodwill
The surplus of cost over fair value attributed to the net assets (excluding goodwill) of subsidiary or associated undertakings acquired during the year shall be written off directly to reserves.
A PROPOSED BY VENDOR
Name Limited — Group
Group accounting policies
Specific policies 
(c) Turnover
Turnover will represent the net value of invoiced work or services rendered.
Sales will be recognised when title passes or a separately identifiable phase of a contract or development has been completed and its overall profitability can be reasonably foreseen.
B PROPOSED BY PURCHASER
Name Limited — Group
Group accounting policies
Specific policies
(c) Turnover
Turnover shall represent the net value of deliveries made, or services rendered and includes adjustments arising from the use of estimated prices in previous years.
Sales will be recognised when title passes or a separately identifiable phase of a contract or development has been completed and its overall profitability can be reasonably foreseen.
Issue:
The purchaser may be seeking to ensure that invoices are not raised pre-acquisition for deliveries to be made post-acquisition and also to ensure that full account is taken of any potential refunds etc which may be due to customers as a result of estimated prices being used.
By minimising the net asset value which he is acquiring or year to date turnover, the purchaser is seeking a price reduction if the price is based on one or other of these factors or if there is a price adjustment mechanism based on either item.
A PROPOSED BY VENDOR
Name Limited — Group
Group accounting policies
Specific policies 
(d) Fixed Assets
Land and buildings are to be shown at original cost or subsequent valuation.
No depreciation is to be charged in respect of the months of acquisition or disposal.
Depreciation shall be calculated at each month end as follows:—
Tangible fixed assets:
Intangible fixed assets:
B PROPOSED BY PURCHASER
Name Limited — Group
Group accounting policies
Specific policies
(d) Fixed Assets
Land and buildings are to be shown at original cost or subsequent valuation.
All fixed assets shall be valued on the same basis as used in the last audited accounts and there shall be no upward revaluation of them or any of them above the value(s) used in the last audited accounts.
No value shall be attributable to any intangible asset including but not limited to, goodwill, intellectual property rights, research and development expenditure, third party rights, customer contracts, computer software and hardware, assets located in the business which is to be closed, any assets with an original cost of less than £500, books and records but full provision shall be made for all liabilities in respect thereof.
No depreciation is to be charged in respect of the months of acquisition or disposal.
Depreciation shall be calculated at each month end as follows:—
No values will be given to intangible assets both because of the difficulty of agreeing the value and because, in many instances, they will be of no value to the purchaser (eg the goodwill of the name of the target if the purchaser intends to change the name)
no revaluations which would serve to increase net asset value.
Purchasers may however insist on revaluations if asset values have fallen since the year end
depreciation to be charged on all buildings.
Issues:
A PROPOSED BY VENDOR
Name Limited — Group
Group accounting policies
Specific policies 
(e) Hire Purchase and Leased Assets
Assets held under hire purchase and finance lease arrangements that transfer substantially all the risks and rewards of ownership to the group are to be capitalised at a value equal to the original cost incurred by the lessor less accumulated depreciation and the related rental obligations are to be included in creditors.
Depreciation is to be based on the shorter of the lease term and useful economic life.
Rental obligations are to be apportioned between the finance element, which is to be charged to the profit and loss account, and the capital element which is to be applied to reduce the outstanding obligation for future instalments so as to produce a periodic rate of charge which represents a constant proportion of the balance of capital repayments outstanding.
Rentals in respect of all other leases are to be charged to the profit and loss account in equal annual amounts over the periods of the relevant lease.
(f) Provision for Bad and Doubtful Debts
Provision is to be made against specific debts which are beyond the normal due date for payment to the extent that the directors recognise the possibility of irrecoverability.
No general bad debt provision is to be maintained.
Stocks held outside the UK
(g)
The values of stocks held [in Germany]are to be adjusted if necessary to values equivalent to those if the stock were held in the UK.
B PROPOSED BY PURCHASER
Name Limited — Group
Group accounting policies
Specific policies
(e) Hire Purchase and Leased Assets
Assets held under hire purchase and finance lease arrangements that transfer substantially all the risks and rewards of ownership to the group are to be capitalised at a value equal to the original cost incurred by the lessor less accumulated depreciation and the related rental obligations are to be included in creditors.
Depreciation is to be based on the shorter of the lease term and useful economic life.
Rental obligations are to be apportioned between the finance element, which is to be charged to the profit and loss account, and the capital element which is to be applied to reduce the outstanding obligation for future instalments so as to produce a periodic rate of charge which represents a constant proportion of the balance of capital repayments outstanding.
Rentals in respect of all other leases are to be charged to the profit and loss account in equal annual amounts over the periods of the relevant lease.
(f) Provision for Bad and Doubtful Debts
[Set out specific schedule of % provisions based on size and length overdue eg all over 120 days]
Issue:
clarification of policy, possibly to bring it into line with the purchaser's group policy but may also be seeking to ensure that the vendors collect as many overdue debtors as possible prior to sale.
(g) Stocks held outside the UK
The values of stocks held [in Germany]are to be adjusted if necessary to values equivalent to those if the stock were held in the UK.
A PROPOSED BY VENDOR
Name Limited — Group
Group accounting policies
Specific policies
(h) Stocks held by the UK Group Companies
Stocks held by the UK Group Companies are to be valued at the lower of cost (including all relevant overhead expenditure and external sub-contractor costs of processing stock) and net realisable value [excluding freight costs]after making due allowance for obsolete items, slow moving items, unusable items, unsaleable items and nonstandard items.
Realisable value will be identified on a going concern basis and by reference to a moving average of prices obtained from customers in the ordinary course of trade.
Provisions for obsolete and slow moving stock will be determined by the directors based on physical and recorded stock levels but the presence or not of a part number on an item of stock or the recording or not of the item on the stock records will not of itself be any be any form of guide as to obsolescence.
Expenditure on jigs and tools and education costs is to be carried forward in stocks and is amortised by reference to total actual and projected sales.
Work in progress relating to long term contracts is to be stated at cost plus attributable profit earned to date less provisions for anticipated losses and progress payments received.
B PROPOSED BY PURCHASER
Name Limited — Group
Group accounting policies
Specific policies
(h) Stocks held by the UK Group Companies
Stocks held by the UK Group Companies are to be valued at the lower of cost (calculated as direct materials and labour and an appropriate allocation of manufacturing overhead) and net realisable value [excluding freight costs and disposal costs].
A consistent basis for valuation is to be employed worldwide whereby all unrealised intercompany profit will be eliminated on consolidation and provision for slow-moving or obsolete stock to be made on the following basis;
(a)
All stock that has been held for more than twenty months at the balance sheet date will be written down to scrap value with reference to independently verifiable third party documentation;
(b)
Specific provision will be made to write down to scrap value:
(i)
any other stock items that have been returned by customers;
(ii)
stock items where no sale has been recorded in the last twelve months; or
(iii)
stock items otherwise identified as being technically or commercially obsolete by reference to expected sales in the next twelve months.
Expenditure on jigs and tools and education costs shall be carried forward in stocks and shall be amortised by reference to actual and projected sales.
Work in progress relating to long term contracts is to be stated at cost plus attributable profit earned to date less provisions for anticipated losses and progress payments received.
Full provision shall be made for any losses in the year in which they are first foreseen.
manufacturing overhead only is to be included in WIP to lower the valuation
disposal costs are to be included when calculating net realisable value — these may be significant
specific rules set out for stock provisioning rather than directors' estimates.
These rules may give rise to larger provisions than the directors may otherwise have made.
clarification of WIP provisioning policy to seek to avoid potential disputes
(i)
Accruals and Prepayments
The following specific policies are to be adopted for material accruals and prepayments:
(i)
Full provision for holiday pay, including employer's National Insurance
(ii)
No adjustment is to be made to the carrying value of prepaid advertising brochure and directory costs to take account of the sale of the company or any proposed change of name
(iii)
No provision is to be made for future rentals of warehouse or office space not currently used
(iv)
No provision is to be made for liabilities to pay interest [on loans not to be taken over by the purchaser](v) Full provision will be made for future rentals and other property costs on the Scottish warehouse lease
(vi)
Full provision will be made for potential exchange losses on forward contracts
(vii)
Full provision will be made for accrued employee bonuses
(viii)
Full provision will be made for dilapidation payments payable under lease agreements.
(ix)
Full provision will be made for the costs of preparing and reviewing the completion accounts
(x)
Full provision will be made for all liabilities of the business relating to any period before the Transfer date discharged or agreed to be discharged by the Purchaser at any time during the period from the Transfer date down to the date upon which the Completion accounts have become final and binding.
Issues:
B PROPOSED BY PURCHASER
Name Limited — Group
Group accounting policies
Specific policies
Prepayments and other assets will only be carried in the balance sheet to the extent that their recoverability in the business can reasonably and prudently foreseen.
In particular, prepayments for insurance will be carried at the amount that can be realised on the cancellation of the policy.
Overseas debtors and any others over 90 days to be held in escrow or subject to a specific warranty.
Issue:
purchaser is seeking to take account of areas of potential expenditure after acquisition for events occurring prior to acquisition as identified by the purchaser's due diligence or from other sources.
(j)
Warranties
Provision for specific warranty claims against the group are to be made where in the opinion of the directors there is a probability of the claims becoming payable.
A PROPOSED BY VENDOR
Name Limited — Group
Group accounting policies
Specific policies
(k)
Deferred Taxation
Deferred tax is to be provided, using the liability method, on all timing differences which are expected to reverse in the future at rates of tax likely to be in force at the time of the reversal.
Advance corporation tax is to be carried forward to the extent that it is expected to be recovered in the foreseeable future.
(l)
Pension Costs — defined benefit schemes
Contributions to the pension fund schemes are assessed in accordance with advice from qualified actuaries and charged to the profit and loss account so as to spread the cost over the remaining expected service lives of the employees within the relevant schemes.
(j)
Warranties
Full provision is to be made for potential warranty claims and credit notes relating to sales made on or before the balance sheet date.
B PROPOSED BY PURCHASER
Name Limited — Group
Group accounting policies
Specific policies
Issue:
purchaser is seeking increased objectivity of warranty provisioning and to identify further potential warranty problem areas
credit notes may be significant
(k)
Deferred Taxation
Full provision is to be made for current and deferred taxation at the local statutory rate applicable, which for the United Kingdom is to be 35%.
No deferred tax asset should be carried on the balance sheet.
Issue:
Full deferred tax provision rather than partial provision.
Again, this is to drive down the net asset value of the business.
(l)
Pension Costs — defined benefit schemes
Contributions to the pension fund schemes are assessed in accordance with advice from qualified actuaries and charged to the profit and loss account so as to spread the cost over the remaining expected service lives of the employees within the relevant schemes.
The actuarial assumptions to be used in valuing the scheme will be chosen by the Purchaser's actuaries.
Any actuarial surplus in any scheme will not be included in the completion accounts.
Any underfunding will be included in the completion accounts as a liability.
Any accounting provision arising as a result of SSAP 24 will be included as a provision in the completion balance sheet.
(m)
Pension Costs — German defined benefit scheme
Provision is made for the net actuarial liability in respect of this scheme (actuarial valuation less cash surrender value).
A PROPOSED BY VENDOR
Name Limited — Group
Group accounting policies
Specific policies
(n)
Taxation
UK Corporation tax and other overseas taxes are to be provided as if the completion account date was an accounting period date with the relevant tax rules apportioned in the ratio of the period from [date, 19XX]to completion, to the whole year.
The provision for taxation is based on best estimates of the liability at completion.
(o)
Foreign Currency Conversion
Assets and liabilities denominated in foreign currencies are translated into sterling at the rate of exchange ruling at the completion balance sheet date.
Transactions in foreign currencies are translated into sterling at the rate of exchange ruling at the date of the transaction or, where forward cover contracts have been arranged, at the contracted rates.
Exchange differences are taken into account in arriving at the operating result.
On consolidation, the assets and liabilities of overseas subsidiary and associated undertakings are translated at the completion rate of exchange.
Exchange differences arising from the retranslation of these accounts from the beginning of the year are recorded as a movement on reserves.
(m)
Pension Costs — German defined benefit scheme
Provision is made for the net actuarial liability in respect of this scheme (actuarial valuation less cash surrender value).
B PROPOSED BY PURCHASER
Name Limited — Group
Group accounting policies
Specific policies
(n)
Taxation
UK Corporation tax and other overseas taxes are to be provided as if the completion account date was an accounting period date with the relevant tax rules apportioned in the ratio of the period from [date, 19XX]to completion, to the whole year.
The provision for taxation is based on best estimates of the liability at completion.
(o)
Foreign Currency Conversion
Assets and liabilities denominated in foreign currencies are translated into sterling at the rate of exchange ruling at the completion balance sheet date.
Transactions in foreign currencies are translated into sterling at the rate of exchange ruling at the date of the transaction or, where forward cover contracts have been arranged, at the contracted rates.
Exchange differences are taken into account in arriving at the operating result.
On consolidation, the assets and liabilities of overseas subsidiary and associated undertakings are translated at the completion rate of exchange.
Exchange differences arising from the retranslation of these accounts from the beginning of the year are recorded as a movement on reserves.
1102.23 Informing the staff — some suggested points
See 0508.2
The following is a briefing note prepared for a vendor by MAS which formed the basis of his address to the company's staff.
Announcement to employees
It is important to recognise that the employees of a company or business which is subject to a change of ownership will have a natural apprehension which will produce both negative and positive expectations.
The proper handling of these expectations will have a major impact on the overall success of the company following the acquisition.
The employees' fears will include matters such as continuity of management, redundancies, capital investment, employment terms, career opportunities, pensions, and the business plans and intentions.
It is important, therefore, to consider at an early stage of the transaction the manner in which employees should be informed of what is happening to their employer.
In circumstances where confidentiality is being maintained, it is important to be aware of the possibility of a leak at any stage of the process.
If an announcement has been prepared then the response to a leak should be more effective than in the event of having to deal with the situation at short notice.
The format of the announcement will vary depending on the circumstances, as will the way in which the announcement is made.
Set out below are:
ideas for matters which might be included in an announcement to employees; and
matters to consider in relation to the way in which the announcement is made.
These are based on actual deals.
i)
Introduction
Name has been acquired by ABC;
ii)
Reasons for the acquisition
Name had reached a ceiling on what could be achieved under present arrangements;
Either a company keeps going forward or it runs the dangers of stagnating;
Name required a partner with financial and technical resources to enable expansion and to take advantage of the huge developing market in its business sector;
Remove the uncertainty of succession, all three directors are approaching their mid-forties, and therefore to provide the staff with greater job security and prospects.
iii)
ABC plc
Is a UK company quoted on the Stock Exchange;
Is based in [place]and is involved in manufacturing castings, forgings, extensions etc. and distributing steels, machine tools and building products;
Turnover of ABC group is £120m.
iv)
Business benefits for Name
ABC is committed to expanding its European division; that is why they have acquired Name and is why they intend to expand it;
ABC is a large organisation with the funds to develop Name's business;
When combined with ABC's subsidiaries, Name will be a major purchasing force in the market;
The complementary areas of activity means Name will have access to technical support from other group companies;
It will be part of a group with like minded, experienced people, who understand Name's business;
Name's style and independence will be retained and it will continue to operate as an independent subsidiary;
The German and US branches of Name are remaining part of the Name Group and form major parts of the growth plan.
More new branches are being considered.
v)
Benefits for Name employees
Security of the management succession;
Security from the membership of a large group which has a major commitment to the growth of Name;
Renewed emphasis on and commitment to growth and achievement will secure the future;
ABC will be conducting a review of employee benefits to bring them into line with those of ABC (i.e. pensions);
Improved career opportunities with the possibility for promotions and transfer around the group as well as promotions within Name;
No redundancies are foreseen and a relocation is not currently intended.
vi)
Summary
All three directors of Name are staying with the company and are totally committed to the business;
The directors have chosen ABC first before several other companies not because it offered the most money, but because it is the organisation most in tune with Name's philosophy, shares its commitment to growing the business and is most able to deliver;
ABC provides what is required in terms of synergy, technical support and security for the staff;
Thank you for your past help and services.
Matters to consider include:
possible use of in-house employees magazine or news letter;
who should make the announcement — this may involve briefing a team of management who may not to date have been informed of the transaction;
material to be presented.
The credibility of a purchaser can be improved by use of the purchaser's material, including accounts, videos etc;
timing — usually immediately following completion.
At an earlier stage runs the risk of unsettling employees price to an event which may not occur;
informing the purchases of the forms and content of the presentation.
understanding the purchasers intention re informing employees (post-acquisitions integration.
Ideas for the announcement
The way in which the announcement is made
1103 Investment overview and Information memorandum
See 0306.2 and 0504.2
1103.1 Investment overview
An example Investment Overview is given below.
(The format for an ABN Investment Overview differs and is shown at 1108.1).
The responsibility statement forms part of the Investment Overview.
Business Opportunity
A privately owned and highly successful UK company engaged in the stockholding and distribution of high technology metal alloys in the UK with representation in West Germany and the USA 
Trading 1988 1989
Profits after tax in 1988 were £262,000.
Growth The number of users of and applications for high technology metal alloys is expanding rapidly, giving rise to a substantial and sustained growth in demand.
The company has achieved average annual compound growth over the last four years of 15%.
Reputation
The company has established an enviable reputation for strict quality control, extensive technical knowledge, tight supply times and in depth support services.
Owners
The company is wholly owned by the founding directors who now seek a partner to provide the support required to take advantage of the rationalisation expected in the European metal stockholding industry.
Customers
Principally high tech engineering companies, including a number of, and sub-contractors to, well known names in the aerospace industry.
As well as distributing alloys the company carries out certification, preliminary manufacturing processes such as forging, rolling and cutting and provides technical support services.
Suppliers
Manufacturers of high technology alloys principally in the USA and UK.
Premises
Leasehold offices and/or warehouses in the UK, Germany and USA.
[MAS LOGO HERE]
Your attention is drawn to the Responsibility statement applicable to this opportunity given overleaf.
Further details of this opportunity will be supplied to your, subject to the vendor's agreement on application to KPMG Peat Marwick Mergers and Acquisition Services, 1 Puddle Dock, Blackfriars, London EC4V 3PD.
Telephone: 071-236 8000 Telefax: 071-832 8252.
Authorised to carry on investment business by the Institute of Chartered Accountants in England and Wales.
The reverse of this Investment Overview should contain the following wording:
Responsibility statement
This investment overview does not constitute an offer or invitation to persons to subscribe for or purchase any shares or other securities in any company or for persons to enter or offer into an investment agreement or to exercise any rights conferred by a investment to acquire, dispose of, underwrite or convert an investment.
The investment overview contains basic information, statements, estimates and projections provided to KPMG by the Group and its shareholders and its management.
Any person including any proposed acquiror of securities of the company referred to in this document or any business or assets referred to herein must satisfy himself as to all matters relating to that company or such business assets including all the information and statements contained herein.
KPMG on behalf of itself and all other member firms of KPMG does not accept responsibility for any information contained herein and disclaims all liability to any person or entity arising out of or in connection with such information.
1103.2 Disclaimer for an information memorandum
See 0504.31
An Information memorandum should include a form of wording emphasising that it is not a prospectus, that the information it contains is confidential and that neither we nor the directors of the company concerned accept responsibility for it.
An example of such a disclaimer is set out below:
This Information memorandum (this ‘Document’) has been compiled by KPMG Peat Marwick on behalf of the shareholders of [xxxxxx limited](the ‘Company’) from information supplied to KPMG Peat Marwick by the shareholders and management of the Company.
This Document is provided solely for use by recipients in considering their interest in acquiring shares in the Company.
This document is not a prospectus and does not constitute or form any part of any offer or invitation to subscribe for, underwrite or purchase securities.
It does not contain and should not be treated as constituting any representation in connection with any offer or invitation, nor shall it or any part of it form the basis or be relied upon in any way in connection with any contract relating to any securities.
The information contained in this Document is selective and is subject to updating, expansion, revision and amendment.
It does not purport to contain all the information that a prospective purchaser may require.
Prospective purchasers should conduct their own investigation and analysis of the Company and of the information contained in this Document and are advised to seek their own professional advice on the legal, financial and taxation consequences of acquiring shares in the Company.
KPMG Peat Marwick has not independently verified any of the information contained herein.
KPMG Peat Marwick, other member forms of KPMG, the Company, the shareholders and the management of the Company do not make any representation or warranty as to the accuracy or completeness of this Document.
This Document includes certain statements, estimates and projections with respect to the anticipated future performance of the Company and as to the market for the Company's products in the United Kingdom and elsewhere.
Such statements, estimates and projections reflect various assumptions made by the Shareholders and by the management of the Company concerning anticipated results, which assumptions may or may not prove to be correct.
No representation is made as to the accuracy of such statements, estimates and projections.
Specific tests to show which FSA Investment Advertisement Disclaimer is appropriate are set out in Chapter 4 and the wording is given in Chapter 0404.2
A general disclaimer may be inserted as follows if appropriate:
This Document [is issued by the Company]and is for distribution in the United Kingdom only to persons of the kind described in Article 9(3) of the Financial Services Act 1986 (Investment Advertisements)(Exemptions) Order 1988, as amended, or of a kind to whom this Document may otherwise lawfully be issued.
This Document is confidential being for use only by the persons to whom it is issued and who have signed the required form of confidentiality agreement.
This Document may not be copied or distributed by the recipient to third parties (other than in confidence to the recipient's professional advisers).
In the event that the recipient does not continue with his interest in the Company, this Document must be returned to [the Company].
Recipients of this Document shall not be deemed to be customers of KPMG Peat Marwick.
[No shares or other securities of the Company have been registered or otherwise qualified for sale or resale under Federal or State laws in the United States of America or Canada.
Each recipient doing business in or organised under the laws of the United States of America or in areas subject to its jurisdiction represents that it is an institutional investor, expressing an interest for its own account and agrees not to purchase, distribute or sell any of the Company's securities or any interest therein except in compliance with the above laws.]
1103.3 Confidentiality letter for an Information memorandum
See 0404.2
In order to restrict the circulation of information memoranda, we require recipients of the memorandum to supply us with a letter confirming that they will treat the information contained therein as strictly private and confidential and will not disclose or otherwise make it available to third party.
Letter to KPMG Merger & Acquisition Services:
Merger & Acquisition Services,
KPMG Peat Marwick,
[Address]
11 August 19X7
Ref MAS contact/initials
Dear Sirs —
Confidentiality Agreement
As you are aware, we have been retained in connection with the sale of the shares of a Company (‘the Company’) in the business of [].
You have expressed an interest in the possible acquisition of the Company and have requested certain information concerning the Company which is non-public, confidential and proprietary in nature.
Such information (the ‘Information’) comprises:
The fact that the Company is for sale,
The information contained in the documents referred to as the Investment Overview and the Information Memorandum, available from KPMG Peat Marwick,
Any other information, oral written, or in pictorial form including but not limited to material of a technical, operational, administrative economic, planning business or financial nature which may be provided to you and your Representatives (as defined below) during the course of your evaluation of the Company, whether provided by KPMG Peat Marwick, the management and employees of the Company, or the shareholders of the Company (‘the Vendors’) or their professional advisers.
In consideration of your being provided with the Information, you hereby agree with KPMG Peat Marwick, the Company and the Vendors on the following terms.
This letter and such terms being referred to herein as ‘this Agreement’.
1.
The Information will be used by you solely for the purpose of evaluating the possible purchase by you of the Company and, unless and until you have completed such a transaction, the Information will be kept confidential by you and will not be disclosed, in whole or in part to any other person, except that the Information or portions thereof may be disclosed to those of your directors, officers, employees, agents, auditors, lawyers, bankers and professional advisers (collectively ‘Representatives’) who need to know such information for the purpose of evaluating the prospective acquisition (it being understood that those Representatives will be informed of the confidential nature of the Information and shall agree to be bound by this Agreement and, if requested by ourselves, will enter into a direct agreement with us on the same terms as this Agreement).
Until the execution of any confidentiality agreement by your Representatives you agree to be responsible for any breach of this Agreement by your Representatives.
You and your Representatives will not make any notes, copies, photographs, drawings or recordings of any type whatsoever (‘Copy Information’) in respect of the information save for evaluating the Company as aforesaid.
2.
The term ‘Information’ does not include any information which (i) is generally available to and known by the public (other than as a result of its disclosure by you or your Representatives),(ii) was available to you on a non-confidential basis from a source other than KPMG Peat Marwick, the management and employees of the Company, or the Vendors or their professional advisers, or (iii) has been independently acquired or developed by you without breaching any of your obligations under this Agreement.
3.
If the vendors conclude that a purchase and sale transaction is not to be consummated with you, or if you decide to withdraw your interest, you will upon request immediately return to KPMG Peat Marwick all copies of the Information Memorandum and all Copy Information in your possession or in the possession of your Representatives, and you will destroy all copies of any computer software analysis, compilations, studies or other documents or records prepared by you or your Representatives for your internal use which are based in whole or in part on the Information without retaining any copies or notes thereof or extracts therefrom.
4.
Without the prior written consent of KPMG Peat Marwick, which shall not be unreasonably withheld or delayed if such announcement or disclosure is required by law or by any supervisory or regulatory body with whose rules it is necessary for you to comply, you will not, and will direct your Representatives not to, make any announcements or disclose to any person either the fact that discussions or negotiations are taking place concerning a possible transaction in respect of the Company, or any of the terms, conditions or other facts with respect of the Company, or any of the terms, conditions or other facts with respect to any such possible transaction, including the status thereof.
5.
Until the earliest of (i) the execution by you of a definitive unconditional legally binding agreement regarding the acquisition of the Company;(ii) an acquisition of the Company by a third party;(iii) three years from the date of this Agreement, you agree not to initiate or maintain contact (except for those contacts made in the ordinary course of business) with any officer, director or employee of the Company regarding the Company's business, operations, prospects or finances, except with the express written permission of the Vendors.
It is understood that KPMG Peat Marwick will arrange for appropriate contacts for due diligence purposes.
Unless otherwise agreed to in writing by the Vendors, all (i) communications regarding a possible transaction,(ii) requests for additional information,(iii) requests for management meetings, and (iv) discussions or questions regarding the sale procedures, will be submitted or directed to KPMG Peat Marwick.
6.
You understand and acknowledge that KPMG Peat Marwick and the Vendors make no representations or warranties, expressed or implied, as to the accuracy or completeness of the Information and shall have no liability to you or any other person resulting from your use of the Information.
You will understand that you will be required in the execution of any agreement for the purchase and sale of the company to acknowledge that you have not relied on or been induced to enter into such agreement by any representation or warranty other than expressly set forth in such agreement subject to such limitations and restrictions as may be specified therein.
All Information supplied to you and your Representatives and statements of fact in any reports prepared by you or your Representatives in connection with the purchase and sale of the Company will be deemed to be disclosed for the purposes of any representations or warranties that may be given.
7.
You acknowledge that KPMG Peat Marwick has entered into this Agreement as agent for and on behalf of the Vendors and that the Vendors are entitled to enforce in their own name any and all provisions of this Agreement.
8.
This Agreement is for the benefit of KPMG Peat Marwick and the Vendors, and shall be governed by and construed in accordance with the laws of England and you submit to the non-exclusive jurisdiction of the English courts in respect hereof.
9.
You will be responsible for all fees and expenses incurred by you in reviewing the Information and investigating the affairs of the Company and neither KPMG Peat Marwick, the Company nor the Vendors shall have any liability therefor.
10.
You shall not be deemed to be in breach of this Agreement if you are compelled by law or any regulatory authority to disclose the Information or any part thereof.
You confirm that you are acting in this matter as principal and not as agent or broker for any other party.
Please indicate your acceptance of the terms of this Agreement by signing the enclosed duplicate copy in the space indicated and returning it to the undersigned at the letterhead address.
Yours faithfully
KPMG Peat Marwick
We accept and agree to be bound by the terms of this Agreement, for and on behalf of:
Name of Company (Please print)
Authorised Officer — Signature
Authorised Officer — Name (Please print)
Position
Date 
1103.4 Representation letter from client
See 0504.32
In cases where we require the client to confirm in writing certain representations made to us the following letter may be used.
Normally only appropriate where significant reliance has had to be placed on management who are not the sole owners of the business.
Letter to KPMG Corporate Finance:
KPMG Peat Marwick
[Address]
[Date]
F.A.O.
[Name of partner]
Dear Sirs,
Confidential information Memorandum
In connection with your role in assisting in the preparation and despatch of the Information memorandum and its two related transmittal letters (‘Memorandum’) describing the business and operations of [Company name]Limited and its subsidiary companies (‘the Group’) certain representations have been made to you.
This letter will confirm that the representations made to you during the preparation of the Memorandum are true to the best of our knowledge and belief and that:
a)
All historical financial information provided in the Memorandum has been prepared from and using the same accounting policies as the financial records of the Group.
b)
All information relating to, and explanations of, the past financial results of the Group have been based upon information believed to be reliable.
c)
We have reviewed the final text of the Memorandum prior to its release to third parties and confirm that to the best of our knowledge and belief it is true and accurate in all material respects and is both clear and not misleading.
In so doing, we have ensured to the best of our ability that all financial information is not misleading in any material respect.
Further, we concur with the presentation of the non-financial information and represent that in our view it fairly describes the various operating business segments of the Group.
d)
To the best of our knowledge and belief there are no events or new information which have occurred or have become known subsequent to[date of last audited financial statements]that would reasonably necessitate adjustments to the Memorandum.
e)
The results for the current (ie interim) period are prepared on a comparable basis to historical data and show clearly where if any seasonal or other irregular fluctuations income and expenditure have been adjusted for.
An estimate of charges including taxation which will only be known with certainty at the end of the year has been fairly included.
f)
To the best of our knowledge and belief there are no material undisclosed liabilities or contingencies existing as at the date of this letter relating to the Group that would be the responsibility of a purchaser subsequent to the purchase of the shares of the Group other than any such liabilities or contingencies of which a prudent purchaser might reasonably be expected to know having made appropriate enquiries.
g)
The financial projections contained in the future prospects section of the Memorandum are the sole responsibility of the directors of [Company name]Limited and, fairly describe, in that context, the directors' view of the future prospects of the Group.
h)
[To the best of our knowledge and belief publication of the information contained in the Memorandum regarding the contracts to which the Group is a party is not in breach of any of those contracts.]
We acknowledge that your role as advisers to the proposed sale of part or all of the company is as agent for the shareholders and not as auditors.
We further acknowledge and hold you free of any responsibility for the information contained in the Memorandum (other than arising from the gross negligence or wilful default of KPMG Peat Marwick or any of its partners and employees or agents).
We attach a certified copy of a Board minute authorising the signature of this letter.
Yours faithfully,
[MD's name]…for and on behalf of the board of [Company name]Limited.
1104 Heads of agreement
See 0610.1
1104.1 Example heads of agreement dealing with the sale of a company (detailed version)
SUBJECT TO CONTRACT
HEADS OF AGREEMENT FOR ACQUISITION OF THE WHOLE OF THE ISSUED SHARE CAPITAL OF ABC HOLDINGS LIMITED (‘ABC’)
The purpose of these Heads of Agreement is to set out the degree of understanding between the parties for the purchase by []Plc from the shareholders of ABC (‘the Vendors’) of the whole of the issued share capital of ABC including any shares issued pursuant to the share option scheme (‘Adjusted Share Capital’).
Neither these heads of agreement nor their acceptance by the Vendors will constitute a binding contract between the parties nor a restriction on any further terms which may be included in that contract, but, subject thereto, it is intended that they form the basis of instruction to lawyers for the drafting and completion of a legally binding agreement between the parties.
THE PARTIES
Purchaser
[]Plc whose registered office and postal address is [].
Vendors
As per Schedule 1, column (1).
Advisers
A list of advisers to the parties is set out in Schedule 4.
1.
ABC whose authorised share capital is currently 100,000 ordinary shares of £1 of which 60,000 shares are in issue as set out in Schedule 1, column (2).
The number of shares in issue may be increased if shares are issued pursuant to the share option scheme.
2.
It is understood that the companies set out in Schedule 2, are, other than ABC GmbH and ABC Corp, wholly owned subsidiaries of ABC and will remain so at the time of the acquisition of ABC.
The companies are to be treated as shown below.
There are no other trading companies which are under the common ownership of the vendors.
COMPANY BEING ACQUIRED
PRICE
The consideration for the purchase of the whole of the Adjusted Share Capital of ABC would be £ []million plus or minus (as the case may be) an adjusting amount.
The adjusting amount to be an amount equal to the difference between the net assets as disclosed by the consolidated audited accounts for the period from []to completion (‘Completion Accounts’) but after:
(i)
deducting taxation, costs of buying minority interests and of implementing the share option scheme, extraordinary losses and dividends;
(ii)
adding []; and the net assets of £ [x]as disclosed by the Company's consolidated balance sheet for the year ended [date].
The total consideration shall not exceed £ []million.
The consideration is to be satisfied in cash in two stages.
The first stage on completion and the second following the results of the completion audit.
The consideration payable at stage 1 will be £ []million.
£ []million of this is to be released immediately and the balance of £ []million will be held in escrow and released following agreement of the completion accounts.
Interest on the moneys held in escrow will follow the principal.
The allocation of the consideration is based on the assumption that ABC's estimate of the net assets at completion is a minimum of £ [x].
If ABC's estimate is less than [x]the consideration payable at stage 1 and the amount to be released immediately will be reduced £1 for £1.
The pension fund loan and loan stock are to be repaid immediately following completion provided their terms allow for repayment on completion.
The completion accounts at the completion date shall be audited by ABC's existing auditors,[name]and prepared on a basis consistent with prior years in so far as these are in accordance with accounting standards and generally accepted and adopted United Kingdom accounting practices for companies carrying on similar businesses save as defined in the purchase and sale agreement.
Full definition will be included in the purchase and sale contract of the accounting standards and policies that will apply to the Completion Accounts, which will be those accounting standards and policies adopted in the accounts for the year ended [date]but as amended by any discussions between the parties following due diligence, in order to avoid subjective judgements.
The Vendors shall deliver to the Purchaser [Purchaser's advisers]audited completion accounts not more than six weeks after the end of the period.
[The Purchaser]shall then have a further two weeks to agree the accounts with the Vendors.
In the event of disagreement after a suitable period,(a further two weeks) the president of the Institute of Chartered Accountants in England and Wales shall be asked to appoint another firm acting as expert.
The vendors may wish to take a dividend prior to completion.
The maximum net dividend would be limited to the lower of:
a)
the available distributable reserves; and
b)
[75/25]of the amount of Advance Corporation Tax (‘ACT’) which could be utilised against Group taxable profits for accounting periods ending before or on [date]as reduced in respect of the profits for the period from completion to [date]and to the extent that the dividend reduces the audited consolidated net assets at completion below [x]the consideration will be reduced £1 for £1 by the deficiency.
The net assets at completion should include the amount of the ACT recoverable in respect of the dividend payments, provided that the total ACT recoverable included in the net assets at completion shall not exceed the amount which can be utilised against Group taxable profits for accounting periods ending on or before completion to [date]as reduced in respect of the profits for the period from completion to [date].
1.
[]Plc's advisers,[Name of advisers], subject to the vendors and ABC receiving confidentiality undertakings from the Purchaser in terms reasonably satisfactory to the vendors, will have access to the records of ABC and its subsidiaries with a view to preparing a due diligence report on ABC and its subsidiaries.
2.
[]Plc's solicitors,[Name], subject to the vendors and ABC receiving confidentiality undertakings from the Purchaser in terms reasonably satisfactory to the vendors, will review the legal affairs of ABC and its subsidiaries [including leasing documentation]and report to []Plc on their findings.
3.
[]Plc's professional advisers will confirm that there are no obligations of ABC outstanding other than in the completion accounts in respect of the directors' pension fund or any other pension scheme of ABC and its subsidiaries and will have access to any records they reasonably deem necessary.
4.
Minority shareholdings of []% in ABC GmbH and []% of ABC Corp are held by the local managers.
ABC will acquire these minority holdings prior to completion.
The goodwill arising from these transactions shall be written off against reserves prior to completion.
The details of this transaction have yet to be agreed with holders of minority interests.
5.
The three main shareholders will procure to purchase the shares issued pursuant to the share option scheme of ABC or any of its subsidiaries prior to completion.
To the extent that such shares have not been purchased all shares of ABC issued pursuant to share option schemes of ABC or any of its subsidiaries prior to completion will be sold to []Plc at completion for no extra consideration.
ABC will prior to completion procure the release of all share options which would otherwise subsist at completion over issued or unissued shares in ABC or its subsidiaries.
Any expense incurred by ABC or any of its subsidiaries in obtaining such release will be deducted from the net assets at completion.
Any increase in shareholders funds resulting from the exercise of any options prior to completion will be included in net assets at completion.
PRIOR TO CONTRACT
EXCLUSIVITY
On signing these heads of agreement the shareholders of ABC shall not enter into discussions with any other party relating to the disposal of their interests in ABC for the period of 45 days unless the party to these heads of agreement withdraws or delays unreasonably progress towards completion.
CONFIDENTIALITY
Not withstanding that these Heads of Agreement are headed ‘Subject to Contract’ and are expressed not to be legally binding, all parties agree as a legally binding commitment that they will treat in absolute confidence the terms of this agreement and discussions in general.
OTHER TERMS
Net assets at completion
Consolidated net assets at completion will not be less than net assets of [£x]shown in consolidated audited balance sheet at [date], without the prior agreement of []Plc.
Guarantees
The purchaser will use its reasonable endeavours to obtain the release of any personal guarantees made by the Directors in respect of ABC and its subsidiary companies' existing obligations relating to the business of ABC and subsidiaries (which after investigating such guarantees and terms of release it agrees to obtain the release of) and pending such release will indemnify the Directors against any claims under such guarantees.
WARRANTIES/INDEMNITIES
The vendors will give warranties and indemnities in respect of ABC and each of its subsidiaries which are appropriate to companies and a transaction of this nature all subject to such limitations as shall be agreed.
In particular, it is acknowledged that a de minimis level for warranties and indemnities will be included.
The total exposure of the vendors under the warranties and indemnities shall be limited to the consideration paid and (if higher) the consideration that would have been paid if a dividend and any other non trading transaction (e.g. pension fund contributions, compensations for loss of office, etc.) had not been paid between [date]and completion but will not exceed £ []million.
To the extent that there are shareholders with shares issued under the share option scheme at completion, these vendors will enter into the contract purely as vendors of the shares and all warranties and indemnities will be assumed by the principal shareholders of ABC.
EMPLOYEES
A list of key directors is set out in Schedule 3.
Directors are to be given 1 year service agreements with ABC.
The following terms shall apply as to remuneration:—
(a)
An annual salary as set out in column (4) of Schedule 3 starting from the date of completion.
Reviewable upwards only annually.
(b)
A motor vehicle as currently provided and then, when subsequently replaced, one in accordance with the []Plc vehicle policy.
(c)
Other benefits as set out in column (5) of Schedule 3.
(d)
Mr. C's service contract will allow him to work one day a week on non —[]Plc/ABC business, provided he does not work in an employment in competition with []Plc or ABC or their subsidiaries.
Mr C to provide full disclosure of the nature of the business which employs him.
In the event that []Plc reasonably deem the business which employs him to be in competition then Mr C's service contract will be terminated, without compensation, provided suitable transitional arrangements are made.
1.
The entire issued share capital of ABC being sold by the Vendors as beneficial owners free of all liens, charges and encumbrances and together with all rights attaching thereto.
2.
The purchaser and the vendors shall bear their own legal and other professional fees and costs and no such fees shall be charged to ABC or any of its subsidiaries other than has been provided for in the net assets at completion.
The completion balance sheet will include a provision for the audit of the completion accounts.
3.
These Heads of Agreement may consist of one of more copies hereof signed by or on behalf of one or more of the parties hereto.
FURTHER TERMS
These Heads of Agreement represent the intentions of the parties and do not constitute a legally binding contact.
Agreed       
SCHEDULE 1
SCHEDULE 2
SCHEDULE 3
SCHEDULE 4
[]PLC
PROPOSED ACQUISITION OF ABC
LIST OF ADVISERS TO THE PARTIES
KPMG PEAT MARWICK
[DATE]
PLEASE NOTE: KNOWLEDGE OF THE PROPOSED ACQUISITION IS RESTRICTED TO THE THREE DIRECTORS.
1104.2 Example heads of agreement.
(shorter version)
See 0610.1
Draft No:…
Date…
Subject to contract heads of agreement for the acquisition of the whole of the issued share capital of ABC HOLDINGS LTD [’ abc’]
These Heads of Agreement between [purchaser]and the shareholders of ABC (‘the Vendors’) set out the understanding between the parties for the purchase by [purchaser]from the Vendors of the whole of the issued share capital of ABC.
Neither these heads of agreement nor their acceptance by the Vendors will constitute a binding contract between the parties nor a restriction on any further terms which may be included in that contract, but, subject thereto, it is intended that they form the basis of instruction to lawyers for the drafting and completion of a legally binding agreement between the parties.
A schedule of the vendors and their shareholdings in ABC is set out in Appendix I.
The parties agree that, subject to legal and accounting due diligence, the [purchasers]will purchase for cash the issued share capital of ABC from the Vendors for the sum of £ [X]a share, making a total of £ []for 100% of the shares.
Net assets provided will be £ []million, as disclosed by ABC's consolidated balance sheet for the year ended [31st December], 19[].
The balance sheet at that date will be prepared by the Vendors on a basis consistent with prior years and audited by the existing auditors of ABC, DEF & Co., Chartered Accountants.
The Vendors undertake to grant an option, expiring on [Date], to the [purchaser]for the sum of £ []to purchase the company for the above sum of £ [].
One year service contracts are to be agreed with Mr []and Mr [].
On expiry of the service contracts [number]year consultancy contracts with Mr []and Mr []will be agreed.
Three year rolling service agreements are to be drawn up for the other directors and senior employees as set out in Appendix II.
The name of ABC and its subsidiary ABC (Europe) Limited are to be changed within 3 years of completion to a name which excludes reference to the ABC family.
The change of name applies only to the company and its subsidiary and is not intended to affect the rights to any trade name or mark or the reference to ‘ABC’ on the product.
Suitable fair warranties and indemnities will be granted for taxation and other specific matters and will be limited in aggregate amount, time of liability and by a minimum aggregate amount before any claim can be made.
Individual claims will be restricted by a minimum amount.
The subsidiaries of ABC, House Limited and Clothes Limited, will be transferred out of the Group prior to exchange and will not be included in the sale of ABC.
The guarantee given by ABC in respect of the lease of the premises of House Limited will be warranted by the Vendors.
The purchaser and the vendors shall bear their own legal and other professional fees and costs and no such fees shall be charged to ABC or any of its subsidiaries other than has been provided for in the net assets at completion.
The completion balance sheet will include a provision for the audit of the completion accounts.
Notwithstanding that these Heads of Agreement are headed ‘Subject to Contract’ and are expressed not to be legally binding, the parties agree as a legally binding commitment that they will treat, unless required by law or regulatory authority, in absolute confidence all terms of this agreement, the purchase and sale agreement and discussions in general.
Any press release must be agreed between the parties prior to issue.
Appendix 1
VENDORS
Holding of ABC's
Vendors ordinary shares  
Appendix II
SERVICE CONTRACTS
[Directors and senior staff.]
1104.3 Example net asset definition statement — stock and fixed assets
See 0610.3 
STOCK
Each item comprised in Stock and Work in progress shall be valued at its cost as specified in paragraph (i) below or its net realisable value as specified in paragraph (ii) below, whichever is the lower.
Valuations shall be made in accordance with(a) SSAP 9 revised and (b) the practice adopted by the Vendors for the 1989 Audited Accounts.
Where, for the purposes of the Completion Balance sheet, a conflict arises between the valuation of items of stock and work in progress under a) or b) above, the lower valuation shall prevail.
Stock and work in progress shall exclude any element of profit and should reflect only those items counted at the formal stocktake undertaken and observed by the Auditors and the Purchaser's Accountants on 31 December, 1990.
(i)
The cost of an item shall be its cost of material (excluding VAT) on a First In First Out (‘FIFO’) basis plus attributable direct labour plus an amount to cover an appropriate proportion of related production overhead expenses, based on the normal level of activity.
(ii)
The net realisable value of an item shall be determined by:
(a)
making due provisions in the case of items which are not readily saleable by reason of obsolescence, age, damage, or other factors;
(b)
assuming that each item comprised in the Stock and work in progress could be sold in the ordinary course of business and allowing for estimated costs required to complete the items and for estimated selling costs on that assumption; and
(c)
excluding VAT
The general principle should be that in assessing potential obsolescence actual stock levels should be compared with expected future usage.
Future usage should where possible be estimated from a review of present and recent past usage.
Past usage will not be a reasonable guide to expected future usage in the following circumstances:
i)
the finished product has already been, or will be discontinued in the foreseeable future;
ii)
the finished product has been re-designed such that different materials and components will be used;
iii)
a new product is being introduced and a normal sales level has not yet been achieved;
iv)
the stock itself is no longer usable through deterioration, in which case full provision should be made;
v)
service contracts no longer exist for items of equipment for which services stock is held, in which case full provision should be made.
Depending on the type of stock, as indicated below, stock which is in excess of the relevant number of years' usage should be provided against as follows:
Work in progress which is for a specific contract or customer order would not require provisions unless circumstances so indicated.
Work in progress for items to be taken into finished stocks should be included in the review of finished stock levels.
Components in this context means parts of a product being held with a view to incorporation in a finished product.
Spares service stocks means spare components for sale to customers to repair and service products previously sold by the Company or for use under services contracts.
Materiality
Where the Auditors and Purchaser's Accountants disagree as to the valuation of an item and, where the disputed element of the valuation is less than [£1,000]for an individual item, or the aggregate value of all disputed elements of valuation within the stock and work in progress are less than [£10,000]both parties shall agree to accept the Auditors' valuation.
FIXED ASSETS
Plant, machinery and other tangible fixed assets, whether owned or acquired under finance leases, are to be valued at net book value as included in the audited balance sheet as at 31 December 1989.
Depreciation should be (a) calculated on the same basis as in the audited accounts for the year to 31 December, 1989, and (b) charged on all assets on a monthly basis, with no upward revaluation of assets in the year and with due regard being paid to the carrying value of any assets and the length of the asset's expected useful economic life to the Business, having due regard to the incidence of obsolescence and future requirements of the Business.
Where, for the purposes of the Completion Balance sheet, a conflict arises between the valuation of items of fixed assets under a) or b) above, the lower valuation shall prevail.
Depreciation is to be calculated on the straight line basis to write off the net book value of fixed assets over their expected useful lives at the following annual rates, starting from the month that the asset was purchased.
Materiality
Where the Auditors and Purchaser's Accountants disagree as to the valuation of an item and, where the disputed element of the valuation is less than £1,000 for an individual item, or the aggregate value of all disputed elements of valuation within fixed assets are less than £3,000 both parties shall agree to accept the Auditors' valuation.
1105 Fee structure examples
See 0306 and 0502.5
The following paragraphs may be inserted as appropriate in proposal letters or used as the basis of a stand alone letter on our fee structure.
1105.1 Time basis with minor add-on
Fees
Our fees will be based on the time taken at our normal hourly scale rates appropriate to the level of expertise required.
I estimate that our costs for involvement up to the stage of sending out all of the profiles but excluding any meetings with interested parties and subsequent negotiations and structuring will be approximately £ []excluding VAT and outlays.
1105.2 Time basis with low quote and major add-ons
Fees
As I previously indicated to you, our fees are based on time taken at our appropriate scale rates.
Costs will increase if there are a number of interested parties since the process takes more time.
Against this additional time cost, one would hope that, with additional parties, one can achieve a higher realisation figure.
It is our practice to render a fee on account at the time when the Heads of Agreement is signed and a final fee at completion.
In order to give you an estimate of likely costs and by way of illustration I would anticipate that, on the basis of a single interested party, fees in addition to the £ []already billed, will be of the following order:—
At the signing of the Heads of Agreement, a payment on account of £ []then a final fee of say £ []payable at the completion meeting concluding the deal.
A total of £ []excluding outlays and VAT.
I have not included in this estimate any involvement by us in assisting your lawyers with the preparation of the contract and disclosure letter which is usually a time consuming exercise.
Although drafting of the formal document is normally the responsibility of your lawyers, in many instances they will require our assistance on commercial matters as well as taxation and accounting.
We would be happy to provide such assistance; however I have not included it in my fee indication since in our experience, time at this stage is very much dependent upon the skill of your lawyer and the complexity of the issues, which are not known at this stage.
In addition to our time based costs, I would anticipate that, in the event there is a foreign buyer, more costs will be incurred due to the need to involve my overseas offices.
In such an event I anticipate an additional fee, over and above the fees indicated above, of £ []payable at the conclusion of the contract.
The above fee illustration does not include costs of work required by your lawyers or KPMG's other services such as tax advice (particularly with the purchase of minorities and installation of the share option scheme) or indeed any work your auditors are requested to conduct by the prospective purchaser.
The above is stated an illustration and I would intend to keep the progress and costs closely under review.
In the event that:—
(a)
at any time you and your colleagues decide that you wish to opt for an alternative option other than sale or;
(b)
the status of X Ltd being materially different from that as disclosed in the Information memorandum, then we should close the assignment and I would render a fee based on time to date at our scale rates.
For the avoidance of doubt, the above fee illustration excludes VAT and outlays.
Our fees will have to borne on a joint and several basis amongst you.
I trust that the above is acceptable to you and I should be grateful if you and your colleagues would sign a copy of this letter…
1105.3 Time basis with fail/success adjustments
Our work will be based on the full range of advice and assistance set out in my letter of [date].
We will, however, tailor our services to meet your needs in the light of the offer you have received from [ABC]and the potential offer from [DEF].
In this regard, we will only contact a limited number of potential purchasers and it will be critical to act quickly so that[ABC]and [DEF]do not go ‘off the boil’.
We will therefore not use a full Information memorandum and our total workload will be reduced.
In the light of your comments concerning the £ []deposit, we will adjust our terms of charging for our services.
A deposit will not be required but our fees will be charged on a time basis at [say, 150]% of our standard mergers and acquisitions rate.
This rate will only apply if a sale is successfully completed.
In the event of a sale not being completed we will charge at [say, 60%]of our standard mergers and acquisitions rate.
We will commence our work as soon as we have had confirmation of these terms from you.
1105.4 Contingent basis
Fees
[I have given further consideration to your counter proposal to my initial fee proposal and believe it does provide an acceptable basis.]
In summary, the fee arrangement which you have proposed and which is acceptable to me is as follows:
Fee
The fees are contingent on a sale save for necessary outlays, eg printing costs and travel, a fee of £ []which will be payable after we have conducted the review of the company and a further £ []on the signing of heads of agreement.
The balance would be payable only, if and when completion is achieved with credit for the above amounts.
The above fees are exclusive of VAT and do not include the cost of advice which we may provide separately from the sale of the company.
We have not discussed one particular aspect before but it has happened that a client has withdrawn a company from sale for reasons other than the lack of an acceptable (to the client) buyer.
Clearly we feel it inappropriate to carry a risk where matters beyond our control lead to withdrawal of the company for sale.
In such circumstances therefore we would expect that our time and outlays would be underwritten.
1105.5 Commission basis
Fees
We are prepared to offer either a time based fee or a fixed fee.
Our discussions with Mr A have indicated that you have a preference for the latter.
The fee for our services on that basis will be as follows:
The fee range outlined above is given subject to the following provisos:
That this proposal is accepted within [say, 6]weeks of the date of despatch.
That prior to despatch of the Information memorandum we have the right to renegotiate the fee scale triggers should it be apparent that there has been a significant decline in land values.
In the event that we cannot agree an acceptable revised fee scale then we withdraw from the sale.
The fee for the preparation of the sale packages will then be levied and become payable.
The fixed fee element above is not contingent on a deal being completed.
Should the transaction cease for any reason then you will be liable for outstanding costs, which will not exceed the fixed fee amounts quoted above.
The above fee basis will cover all of the steps outlined above including the involvement of an International M&A network.
It does not include detailed tax advice regarding the structuring of the proceeds in the investment.
We have based our estimate of fees for the preparation of the memorandum on the facts that the UK document will be far more detailed than the US document and be based on the report of [Date].
[The US report cost covers not only the preparation of the document by a joint US/UK team but also covers the co-ordination time which will be so necessary to ensure an orderly sale.]
The above fee quotes excluded VAT and assumes that the majority of meetings will be held in the UK.
If this subsequently turns out to be incorrect, since we would not wish to feel constrained by the set fee, we will charge for outlays incurred.
The Information memorandum fee will be presented once the document is ready for despatch.
The balance of the fees are payable at completion.
1106 Other letters
1106.1 General report disclaimer
See 0504.31
This disclaimer should be attached to any long form type report prepared by KPMG and distributed beyond those who commissioned it.
The credentials of the intended recipients should be established by the advisers controlling the distribution.
This disclaimer is not appropriate if either the report is an Investment Advertisement under the Financial Services Act 1986 or if the client itself authorised under the FSA.
In all cases, staff should check that the report is not an Investment Advertisement before using the disclaimer below.
‘The report in which this notice to reader is incorporated does not constitute an offer or invitation to any section of the public to subscribe for or purchase any securities in Growing Business Limited.
This report is confidential being for use only by the persons to whom it is issued, who have acknowledged that they are a person falling within Article 9(3) of the Financial Services Act 1986 (Investment Advertisements)(Exemptions) Order 1988.
It must not be copied, disclosed, or circulated, or referred to in correspondence or discussion with any other person, except a person to whom it has also been issued.
This report has been provided by KPMG Peat Marwick and has been prepared solely for the purpose of providing selected information on a confidential basis to professional investors.
There may be other issues of importance to individual prospective investors, who must make additional enquiries as they see necessary.
This report has the limited scope identified within it.’
1106.2 Example cold contact letter — family company
See 0606
This example letter is suitable for contacting a potential vendor of a targeted business (a non-client) on behalf of a prospective purchaser, our client.
Strictly Private & Confidential — Addressee only
[Either home address or company registered or trading address]
[Date]
Dear [Either majority shareholder or Managing Director],
I am writing to you, on behalf of a client of this firm, to enquire whether you and your fellow shareholders would consider disposing of your holdings in [Company name]Limited.
I have not written to any other directors or shareholders as I presume you are in a position to pass on this enquiry.
If this proposition were to be of interest I would arrange for you to be put in contact with my client, who will reveal his identity at the appropriate stage.
Please let me know whether this proposition is of interest either by writing to me or by telephoning either myself or my colleague [NAME].
Once again I would stress that neither my client nor I have made any approach to the company apart from this letter.
Yours sincerely,
[MAS Partner]
Partner
NOTE: YOUR ATTENTION IS DRAWN to the extent of ‘Cold calling’ permitted by the regulations of the Financial Services Act 1986 and the ICAEW — see Section 0407.3.
These are particularly relevant on joint deal management and investigation assignments.
1106.3 Example cold contact letter — subsidiary
See 0606
Example cold approach for contacting a group holding company regarding the sale of one of its subsidiaries
Strictly Private & Confidential — Addressee only
[]Esq
Managing Director
[Group name]plc
[date]
Dear []
[subsidiary name]Limited
I am writing to you, on behalf of a client of this firm, to ascertain whether your Group would be interested in holding preliminary discussions regarding the disposal of the above named subsidiary undertaking [division].
You will appreciate that, at this stage, my client wishes to remain anonymous but clearly if you are agreeable to holding such exploratory discussions, then their identity will be revealed.
I should be grateful if you or a member of your staff would contact, in confidence, either myself or []a [senior]manager in our Merger and Acquisition Services Department.
I would add that as far as I am aware neither our client nor any other person in this firm has made any approach regarding this matter to the company, its managers or staff.
Yours sincerely
[MAS Partner]
Partner
1106.4 Confidentiality letter to vendors
See 0602.5
Requests from vendors for confidentiality letters: our standard engagement letter (see 1101.2 and the Corporate Finance Manual) includes a paragraph dealing with our duty of confidentiality and in normal circumstances this is the proper place to establish the level of confidentiality to be observed, not only in dealings with third parties but also between the various parties involved.
There is, however, an increasing trend in corporate finance assignments for clients to request accountants and other professional advisers to sign confidentiality agreements as a precondition of their involvement as advisers on proposed transactions.
The broad concept of confidentiality agreements is unobjectionable but care is needed to ensure that such agreements do not impose limitations in the scope of our work such that it would be impossible to report in accordance with the terms of engagement.
Furthermore, a common provision in such agreements is that all documents, copies of documents and extracts of documents obtained during the course of our work are to be returned if the transaction does not proceed.
In certain circumstances this may place the firm under an obligation to surrender all supporting material for our long-form report and other letters and advice provided during the course of the negotiations.
As a result of these problems, it is our preferred policy to use the specimen letter set out below as an alternative to confidentiality letters generated by clients' Solicitors.
In cases where clients are reluctant to accept our standard letter, and for further advice generally, reference should be made to Corporate Financial Services Unit.
The Directors
Prospective Target Limited
[and the Vendors]
18 October 19X5
Dear Sirs
We are acting for [Prospective Purchaser].
In consideration of your disclosing to us on your own behalf [and on behalf of the vendors]the confidential information listed in the memorandum issued by []dated []concerning the proposed disposal of [the share capital]/[business]of Prospective Target, we undertake [both to you and to the vendors]that we shall:
1.
treat the information as being strictly private and confidential and shall take all precautions to maintain its status as such;
2.
us the information solely for the purpose of the assessment of [the business of]Prospective Target with a view to its proposed disposal;
3.
Not at any time disclose or otherwise make available to any third party without your prior consent any of the information other than:
(a)
to those of our partners and employees who are required in the course of (and solely for the purpose of) such assessment to receive and consider the information (and we agree that any such disclosure is on the basis that such partners and employees are made aware of and accept the strict provisions of this undertaking); and
(b)
to our professional advisers (as may be notified to you);
4.
Upon receipt of a written demand from you return the information (as reduced to writing) to you together with any copies in our possession except to the extent required to support the professional advice given by us.
This undertaking shall not apply to any information which we are required by law to disclose or which is in or hereafter enters the public domain otherwise than through our default.
This undertaking is subject to English law and jurisdiction.
Yours faithfully
KPMG Peat Marwick 1106.4 Confidentiality letter to vendors
See 0602.5
Requests from vendors for confidentiality letters: our standard engagement letter (see 1101.2 and the Corporate Finance Manual) includes a paragraph dealing with our duty of confidentiality and in normal circumstances this is the proper place to establish the level of confidentiality to be observed, not only in dealings with third parties but also between the various parties involved.
There is, however, an increasing trend in corporate finance assignments for clients to request accountants and other professional advisers to sign confidentiality agreements as a precondition of their involvement as advisers on proposed transactions.
The broad concept of confidentiality agreements is unobjectionable but care is needed to ensure that such agreements do not impose limitations in the scope of our work such that it would be impossible to report in accordance with the terms of engagement.
Furthermore, a common provision in such agreements is that all documents, copies of documents and extracts of documents obtained during the course of our work are to be returned if the transaction does not proceed.
In certain circumstances this may place the firm under an obligation to surrender all supporting material for our long-form report and other letters and advice provided during the course of the negotiations.
As a result of these problems, it is our preferred policy to use the specimen letter set out below as an alternative to confidentiality letters generated by clients' Solicitors.
In cases where clients are reluctant to accept our standard letter, and for further advice generally, reference should be made to Corporate Financial Services Unit.
The Directors
Prospective Target Limited
[and the Vendors]
18 October 19X5
Dear Sirs
We are acting for [Prospective Purchaser].
In consideration of your disclosing to us on your own behalf [and on behalf of the vendors]the confidential information listed in the memorandum issued by []dated []concerning the proposed disposal of [the share capital]/[business]of Prospective Target, we undertake [both to you and to the vendors]that we shall:
1.
treat the information as being strictly private and confidential and shall take all precautions to maintain its status as such;
2.
us the information solely for the purpose of the assessment of [the business of]Prospective Target with a view to its proposed disposal;
3.
Not at any time disclose or otherwise make available to any third party without your prior consent any of the information other than:
(a)
to those of our partners and employees who are required in the course of (and solely for the purpose of) such assessment to receive and consider the information (and we agree that any such disclosure is on the basis that such partners and employees are made aware of and accept the strict provisions of this undertaking); and
(b)
to our professional advisers (as may be notified to you);
4.
Upon receipt of a written demand from you return the information (as reduced to writing) to you together with any copies in our possession except to the extent required to support the professional advice given by us.
This undertaking shall not apply to any information which we are required by law to disclose or which is in or hereafter enters the public domain otherwise than through our default.
This undertaking is subject to English law and jurisdiction.
Yours faithfully
KPMG Peat Marwick
1106.5 Example exclusivity and confidentiality letter from buyer to seller
See 0602.5
The following is an exclusivity and confidentiality letter which may be requested by the purchasers.
[]Plc,
[Address]
[Date]
Dear Sirs,
In consideration of you instructing your advisers to carry out a due diligence investigation of ABC Holdings Limited (‘ABC’) and its subsidiaries to enable you to further consider purchasing all of the issued share capital of ABC we the undersigned, being all the owners of the legal title, all the registered holders and all the principal beneficial owners of all the issued shares comprised in such share capital (‘the Shares’), each agree as follows:—
1.
That we will not during the period of 45 consecutive days immediately following the date of this letter enter into discussions with any other person relating to the disposal of our respective interest in the Shares unless you withdraw from negotiations for such purchase or unreasonably delay such negotiations; and
2.
That we will keep all information of a confidential nature about []Plc and []Plc's business and financial affairs which come to our knowledge during negotiations for the sale of the Shares to you confidential and accordingly we will not disclose any such information to any person or use any such information other than wholly in connection with such negotiations except to the extent that it is, already when we receive such information, or becomes thereafter, public knowledge through no fault of any of us.
Yours faithfully,
1106.6 Public offer — Bank Guarantee
See 0606.1
This letter is required where the firm is leading an agreed public offer (i.e. subject to the Takeover Code) and is required to be satisfied that our client is able to implement the offer
Our ref 
Dear Sirs
Guarantee
In consideration of your agreeing to make an offer, on behalf of our customer,[client name]for the whole of the issued share capital of a company known to both of us under the code name []', we,[name of Bank]London Branch,[address of Bank], hereby guarantee that our customer,[client name]have available to them funds up to a total amount of £ [].
We undertake to reimburse you upon your first written demand any sum or sums not exceeding a maximum aggregate amount of £ []should [client name]fail to make available to you this sum within the stipulated date required by yourselves, but no later than [date].
This Guarantee is conditional upon receipt by us at this office of your first written demand, no later than [date](the Expiry Date), whereupon our liability shall cease.
On the Expiry Date this Guarantee must be returned to [name of Bank]for cancellation.
Yours faithfully for and on behalf of[]London Branch.
Authorised signatory 
1107 Valuations
1107.1 Share valuation report
See 0806.2
This specimen sets out the form of report to be issued where a formal valuation report is required.
The Directors
Family Business Limited
[Address]
30 March 19X6
Dear Sirs,
In accordance with the terms of our engagement letter dated 17 March 19X6 we have valued Mr. A. Brown's holding of [1000 ordinary shares of £1]in Family Business Limited as at 15 March 19X6 for the purpose of a sale of these shares to the other shareholders.
On the basis of the information given to us, we are of the opinion that the value of this holding is…per share (£…for the holding of…shares).
This valuation is solely for use, on a confidential basis, in connection with the sale referred to above, and is not to be quoted or referred to, in whole or in part, in any other context without our prior written consent.
Yours faithfully,
KPMG Peat Marwick 
1108 Buy register
1108.1 Accountants' Business Network Investment Overview forma
See 0306.2 and 0505.47
This format is appropriate when sending out a Investment Overview in response to an enquiry from another member of the ABN.
Standard Investment Overview paper with the firm's name, MAS logo, responsibility statement (see following page) and introduction fee arrangements on the reverse should be used.
Business Opportunity
NOTES: PLEASE CONTACT [NAME OF MAS CONTACT], KPMG LONDON ON [TEL]OR [NAME OF MAS CONTACT]ON [TEL].
GUIDE PRICE: NEGOTIABLE
NEG.
STATUS:
[MAS LOGO HERE]
YOUR ATTENTION IS DRAWN TO THE Responsibility statement and Introduction fee arrangements applicable to this opportunity given overleaf.
Further details of this opportunity will be supplied to your, subject to the vendor's agreement on application to KPMG Peat Marwick Mergers and Acquisition Services,[[1 Puddle Dock, Blackfriars, London EC4V 3PD.
Telephone: 071-236 8000 Telefax: 071 832 8252.]
Authorised to carry on investment business by the Institute of Chartered Accountants in England and Wales.
The reverse of the Investment Overview should contain the following wording:
RESPONSIBILITY STATEMENT
This company does not constitute an offer or invitation to persons to subscribe for or purchase any shares or other securities in any company or for persons to enter or offer to enter into an investment agreement or to exercise any rights conferred by an investment to acquire, dispose of, underwrite or convert an investment.
The investment overview contains basic information, statements, estimates and projections provided to KPMG by the Group and its shareholders and its management.
Any person including any proposed acquiror of securities of the company referred to in this document or any business or assets referred to herein must satisfy himself as to all matters relating to that company or such business assets including all the information and statements contained herein.
KPMG on behalf of itself and all other members of KPMG does not accept responsibility for any information contained herein and disclaims all liability to any person or entity arising out of or in connection with such information.
FEE ARRANGEMENTS
Other than by special arrangement in the event of a transaction being completed, the following scale of introduction fees will be payable to KPMG Peat Marwick (‘KPMG’) by the acquiror on completion.
Note: The consideration for the purpose of calculating our fee shall include:
The total amount receivable on the sale of the Company's share capital or its business plus repayments of intercompany indebtedness, dividends (including tax credits) and any other form of structuring used to affect the price;
Special emoluments or other benefits paid at the time of the transaction;
Amounts earned under contingent formulae;
Deferred consideration or amounts paid into escrow;
Amounts paid for assets;
Where the consideration consists of securities, the value of the securities if quoted shall be their mid market value; if not quoted then as agreed between us.
Exceptions to the above will be made where the opportunity has been obtained by KPMG from another intermediary, in which case his scale of charges will be substituted and KPMG's interest, if any, in such a charge will be notified to the acquiror.
The above fee scale does not cover any other assistance KPMG is able to provide within the field of M&A support.
1108.2 Example ABN listing
See 0505.47 
1108.3 Example ABN Newsflash
See 0505.47
KPMG Peat Marwick have a client who wishes to dispose of a general haulage company based in the West Midlands, due to forthcoming retirement.
Audited results for the year ending 31 March 1990 show turnover £6.9m, PBT £246k and net assets £379k.
The business operates 133 vehicles including 80 bulk tippers from a 4.5 acre site with an in-house maintenance/repair facility.
For further information contact [].1108.4
Buyer's Input Form
See 1004.5
All fees should be agreed when the Buyer's Input Form is sent to a client for completion.
1108.4 Buyer's Input Form page 21108.5 Transmittal letter for Buyer's Input Form
See 1004.5 
letter sending our buyer's input forms to clients
[Name]
[Address]
[Date]
Dear []
In response to your enquiry, we have pleasure in enclosing a copy of our Buyers Input Form input document.
We maintain a computerised database of potential acquirers against which we screen all opportunities that come to our attention.
We make no charge for including your requirements in this register.
However, if we introduce an opportunity which results in their completing an acquisition we would charge an introduction fee.
Our scale of charges is attached.
If you wish to be included on our database would you please complete the Buyers Input Form and return it to [name]at the above address.
If you have any further queries do not hesitate to contact Mr [name].
Yours sincerely
[MAS Partner]
Partner
Enc.
1108.6 Transmittal letter requesting update of buyer's record
See 1004.5 
This is a standard record update letter to be sent to a client
[Name]
[Address]
[Date]
Dear []
In order to ensure that the information on our M&A Database remains current we propose to review each entry every six months.
The attached printout is our record of your current acquisition criteria.
If we are to be able to select the most appropriate selling opportunities, the information on our database must be as comprehensive as possible.
Therefore, may I request that all fields on the record are completed and updated and that all your acquisition criteria are included.
I would also appreciate a brief summary of the number and size of acquisitions your company has made in the last three years.
Please send the form and information to []M&A Dept at the above address before [date].
If we do not receive your update instructions by the above data it will be assumed that you are no longer seeking acquisitions and the record will be deleted from our database.
Yours sincerely
[MAS Partner]
Partner 1108.7 Transmittal letter for cold approach with opportunities
See 1004.3 
Any attachments should be sent as an Investment Overview and should include a responsibility statement as given in 1103.1 or 1108.1.
[Name]
[Address]
[Date]
Dear []
I attach a brief details of two sites for sale [which have planning permission for a golf course and country club].
According to the acquisition criteria on our database these could be of interest to you.
If, having considered the document, you would like to obtain further details it may be necessary for me to disclose your identity to the vendor's agent before I am able to obtain further information.
If you have any queries do not hesitate to contact my colleague[] or myself.
Yours sincerely
[MAS Partner]
Partner
1108.8 Transmittal business opportunity
See 1004.3
[Name]
[Address]
[Date]
Dear []
I believe that the attached information on the [sports and outdoor leisurewear company]may be of interest to you.
The information was received from [K.Thompson Associates], an ‘acquisitive, management and search consultant’.
They guarantee to provide further information upon receipt of a signed non-standard confidentiality letter.
Should you actually purchase the business we would require an introduction fee (see attached schedule) to be paid by you, and the vendor would pay a fee to [K.Thompson Associates].
If you are interested please contact myself as soon as possible and a confidentiality letter will be sent to you.
Yours sincerely
[MAS Partner]
Partner 
1109.1 CLIENT MEETING INFORMATION SHEET
See 0502.22 and 0602.22
This document is intended to be an aide-memoire to ensure that certain key details about the client are established at an initial meeting.
1109.2 Acquisition contracts — aide memoire See 0702 and 0703
These are suggestions of areas of potential conflict or misunderstanding.
KPMG advice on these can be given to the client or the client's lawyers.
It is not KPMG's role to undertake the drafting of legally binding contracts; all drafting should be carried out or reviewed in detail and approved by the client's lawyers.
We should however be prepared to provide detailed drafting assistance on financial or similar aspects of a contract where a client requires ‘expert’ financial or accounting knowledge.
In such cases, careful consideration should be given to the appropriate internal review.
For example, if recently introduced accounting standards, contentious topics or complex technical issues are involved, it may be appropriate to consult PPD-TA and/or CFSU.
It is an aid to guide the reviewer of a contract towards those areas of an acquisition contract which are of accounting significance and which might be sources of dispute in the future — it is not a comprehensive guide to analysing every acquisition contract.
At all stages you should be asking the questions:
1
Is it clear?
2
Is it what my client wants?
3
Is it in my client's best interests?
1
Is every definition self-explanatory?
Is there any doubt about the meaning of words?
Do all parties use the same words to mean the same thing (eg do management accounts include a balance sheet or cash flow statement)?
2
Are there definitions elsewhere in the agreement apart from the definitions section?
Make sure all are considered.
3
Are all accounting terms clear?
(a)
Avoid specific terms unless they are further defined (eg using definitions at 1102.22)
(b)
Are completion accounts to be prepared in the same way as management accounts or as quasi-statutory accounts?
Definitions
Completion accounts
Preparation
1
Is it clear who is to prepare completion accounts?
2
What are the completion accounts to comprise: balance sheet, profit and loss account, or both?
3
What format will the completion accounts take: management accounts, statutory accounts or some special format?
4
Will consolidated accounts be prepared, or will some form of combined accounts be required?
5
Are there any special procedures for matters such as property valuation, stock quantities, stock valuation, debtor provisions, accruals, balances with the vendor, dividends, off balance sheet items?
6
What accounting policies are to be applied?
Do they cover all material items?
a
Is the agreement clear on the difference between a policy (eg providing depreciation over the estimated useful life, providing for doubtful debts) and the application of that policy (eg plant has a lifetime of 8 years, doubtful debts are provided in full)?
b
Is consistency with prior periods required?
What if a new accounting standard has come into force since the last statutory accounts but before the completion accounts? c Which takes precedence: consistency, prudence, purchaser's accounting policies, strict SSAPs?
Audit
1
What form of audit report is required?
a
If ‘true and fair’ can that opinion be given without full disclosure?
b
If ‘accurate’ how is materiality to be dealt with?
c
Remember that accountants can report or give opinions but often cannot certify.
2
Is the mechanism for auditing completion accounts clear?
a
Who are the auditors?
b
To whom do the auditors report?
c
Will the other party's accountants participate in the audit?
If so, as joint auditors or with the right to review the audit?
d
When do the auditors have to report?
e
Are the auditors bound to report?
Note that the contract cannot bind those who are not party to it.
f
What happens if the auditors fail to report?
If joint auditors cannot agree on the accounts, what is the basis for the resolution of the dispute (see below)?
g
Who pays the audit fees?
Who pays the review fees?
3
Are there any special audit procedures to be undertaken, for example on stocktake attendance or property valuation?
4
Are there any matters where auditors' opinion is agreed to be set aside in favour of valuation agreed between the parties?
1
Is there a mechanism for both parties' accountants to report on the completion accounts?
Should they prepare a joint report or separate reports?
2
What happens if one firm refuses to sign a report?
Is the dispute resolution procedure invoked?
3
Who can invoke the dispute resolution procedure and how?
Is your client clear of, and satisfied with, its rights?
4
Is there a timetable for reaching agreement, with failure to agree invoking the disputes procedure?
5
If an independent person is required to determine the dispute, should that person be acting as expert (less formal, procedures agreed between parties, decision almost impossible to challenge) or as arbitrator (quasi-litigation, procedures defined by law, can be appealed to courts)?
6
Should the independent person be an accountant, or are there circumstances in which another professional might be preferable?
7
Will the outcome of the expert's or arbitrator's determination be binding on all parties?
1
Are adjustments required to calculate the consideration from the accounts?
2
Are the adjustments clearly defined?
3
Who is responsible for calculating them?
4
Do the accountants have to report on them?
Consider dispute points above in relation to the consideration calculation.
1
Is there an earn-out provision?
Are each relevant year's accounts covered by the auditing/reporting and dispute resolution process?
2
Will earn-out payments be governed by audited accounts or are adjustments required?
3
Is the earn-out based on pre-tax or post-tax profits?
If post-tax, are provisions required for avoiding manipulation of the tax charge?
4
Is there control over the purchaser's actions?
Can the purchaser exercise control over the business?
What effect will this have on the earn-out?
5
How will changes in business practice, or accounting law or practice, be dealt with?
6
How will purchaser group relationships (eg management charges, directors remuneration, group relief payments) be dealt with?
What constitutes an arm's length management charge?
7
Is vendor management remaining in place?
With what powers?
8
Who controls the business (eg management remuneration, expenses, capital expenditure)?
Agreement of dispute
Effect on consideration
Earn-outs
Warranties and indemnities
The inclusion, style and completeness of warranties is, of course, the outcome of a negotiation process in which each party has its own goals.
The following series of questions will need to be carefully considered from the point of view of your client, bearing in mind the negotiation process — clearly it will include matters which your client wants to be excluded from the agreement as well as matters that it wants included.
Inclusion
1
Are all matters of concern raised in the investigation report covered by warranties?
2
Are there general warranties over the disclosure of information (covering eg completeness and accuracy)?
3
Are there warranties over accuracy or fairness of previous, disclosed, accounts?
If some companies are incorporated in (for example) Spain, Italy, Germany or Finland which set of accounts are to be warranted: the legal (tax-based) accounts or the internal management (business-based) accounts?
4
Are there warranties over conduct of business between exchange and completion?
5
Are there warranties over performance of business from last balance sheet date to exchange?
a)
Are terms such as‘material adverse change’ or ‘material deterioration’used?
Is it clear what they mean?
i
What is material?
ii
Does it cover a change in view rather than a change in facts?
iii
What does an adverse change in financial position mean: adecrease in net assets, a decrease in specified ratios (eg liquidity), a reduction in available overdraft facilities?
iv
Is adverse change in profit measured against last year or last few months?
v
What constitutes an adverse change in sales?
Is emphasis on quantity or value?
Does margin matter?
b)
Are there exclusions for circumstances outside the vendor's control?
6
Is the vendor giving warranties on matters over which the purchaser has control (eg collection of debts, realisation of stock)?
1
Are penalties for breaches of warranty defined?
And measurable?
2
What remedy is available for a breach: damages only?
Breach
1109.3 Warranties checklist
The purpose of this section is to illustrate some of the purposes of standard warranty clauses.
The following pages set out an extract from a typical (asset) sale agreement.
These clauses are merely extracts; they are not intended to form the basis of a precedent and should not be used as one.
The arguments which ought to be used by each side to explain why they support or reject these provisions are set out opposite.
What people sometimes fail to realise is that standard provisions are fine as a general guide but that they often have to be amended (or even dropped altogether) to allow the transaction to make ‘commercial sense’ on both sides.
One can only start to amend, delete or even discuss the relevance of particular standard' provisions once their basic purpose is understood.
Only if you understand what the clause is supposed to do, can you assess whether or not it is terribly important to your side and negotiate accordingly.
There are suggestions of areas of potential conflict or misunderstanding.
KPMG advice on these can be given to the client or the client's lawyers.
It is not KPMG's role to undertake the drafting of legally binding contracts; all drafting should be carried out or reviewed in detail and approved by the client's lawyers.
We should however be prepared to provide detailed drafting assistance on financial or similar aspects of a contract where a client requires ‘expert’ financial or accounting knowledge.
In such cases, careful consideration should be given to the appropriate internal review.
For example, if recently introduced accounting standards, contentious topics or complex technical issues are involved, it may be appropriate to consult PPD-TA and/or CFSU.
A. WARRANTIES
A.1 The Vendor warrants and represents to and undertakes with the Purchaser that, save only as and to the extent disclosed to the Purchaser in this Agreement or in the Disclosure Letter, each of the Warranties:—
A.1.1 is now and shall be at Completion true and accurate; and
A.1.2 is not to be affected or limited by any previous or other disclosures, express or implied, to the Purchaser, its officers, representatives or professional advisers.
A.2 Each of the Warranties, indemnities, covenants and undertakings set out in this Agreement is separate and independent.
VENDOR'S ARGUMENTS
A. WARRANTIES
A.1 Why should the Vendor give any warranties at all?
The Purchaser should investigate the Business, if it has not already done so 
PURCHASER'S ARGUMENTS
Even the most thorough investigation cannot be sure of uncovering problems.
The Purchaser can only see what the Vendor makes available: it may not disclose everything.
The Vendor should not be required to give representations, as opposed to warranties.
Representations are statements made, almost gratuitously, to induce the Purchaser to enter into the agreement.
The Purchaser is however insisting on certain statements being made before he agrees to buy — and they are more accurately termed warranties.
Besides, there are different remedies for a misrepresentation — eg rescission, tortious measure of damages.
(Where there is more than one Vendor or in the case where a company is the Vendor and the Purchaser requires warranties from the directors) only Vendors/directors who have been most closely concerned with the Business, should give the warranties.
This is not an unreasonable request, unless of course there have been ‘true’ representations — eg an information memorandum about the Business — which may well have induced the Purchaser to start negotiations.
The Purchaser will normally expect warranties from all Vendors — whether or not they worked or will work in the business.
Warranties are concerned with the allocation of risk — not knowledge.
It is irrelevant to the Purchaser whether or not the Vendors know the warranties are right or wrong so long as they accept the risk.
Notes:
Joint or several liability
The question of whether warranties should be given on a joint and/or several basis is less likely to be relevant when dealing with an asset sale (where the contracting vendor will usually be a company) as opposed to a share sale (when individual shareholders will often be asked to give warranties).
It may however be relevant where the vendor is a partnership in which case each partner will be asked to provide the warranties and, in such circumstance, the purchaser will want them to be given on a joint and several basis.
It may also be relevant where the vendor is a company and the purchaser requires warranties from the individual directors.
It should be noted that notwithstanding any risk allocations that may (or may not) be agreed in a separate Deed of Contribution, the Civil Liability (Contribution) Act 1978 provides that any person liable in respect of damage suffered by another person may recover contributions from all the persons liable in respect of the same damage (whether jointly with him or otherwise).
Under the Act it is possible for the purchaser to seek a court order against the vendors and the amount recoverable from any person shall be such as the court holds is just and equitable.
The court is likely to take into account the proportion of the consideration received by each vendor.
VENDOR'S ARGUMENTS
On what basis should the Vendors give warranties:
Joint and several?
(The Purchaser may sue all and any)
.
Joint?
(All Vendors together are liable: but the release of one will prejudice action against the others).
Several?
(Each Vendor is liable for all the warranties up to the maximum).
Several, but limited to their respective proportions of considerations?
PURCHASER'S ARGUMENTS
The Purchaser will want a joint and several basis so that it can sue all or any of the Vendors.
It is up to the Vendors to allocate the risks amongst themselves via a separate Deed of Contribution.
Note:
Joint and several liability unlikely to be an issue in an asset sale.
Under Civil Liability Act 1978, liability can be shared without reference to contract provisions.
VENDOR'S ARGUMENT
Warranties to be given on the basis of the Vendor's knowledge, information and belief.
The Vendor may then wish to counter this argument and limit the warranty by stating precisely what enquiries it has undertaken.
PURCHASER'S ARGUMENTS
Knowledge in general is an irrelevance.
Warranties are concerned with risk.
Purchaser may agree subject to Vendor making due and diligent enquiries.
Warranties to be limited to events occurring after the Vendor acquired the Business.
This is an alternative to the knowledge test and for the same reason is therefore irrelevant.
Possible compromise:
If the vendor has the benefit of warranties given as a result of that eariler acquisition and they are assignable, then the purchaser could seek such an assignment.
If they are not, then the purchaser should argue that it should be able to enforce warranties against the vendor for such matters for which the vendor may subsequently be able to enforce (via its own warranties) against the third party who originally sold to the vendor.
The Purchaser should at least accept that certain warranties should be given subject to the Vendor's knowledge — eg those warranties which seek to anticipate what a third party might do in the future.
Reasonable in principle.
It depends on what warranties are to be subject in the limitation.
A.3.1 The Vendor will forthwith notify in writing to the Purchaser any matter or thing which may arise or become known to any of them after the date of this Agreement (whether or not prior to Completion) which is inconsistent with any of the Warranties or which is or may reasonably be anticipated to be material to be known by a Purchaser for value of the Business.
VENDOR'S ARGUMENTS
A.3.1 The Vendor can only warrant facts as at exchange: they should not be repeated at Completion.
PURCHASER'S ARGUMENTS
The Purchaser wants to know that when he takes control of the Business at Completion, it accords with what he had previously been told.
It is for Vendor to take the risk of ‘intervening events’— unless the Vendor is prepared to allow the Purchaser to assume control of the Business at exchange.
If the Purchaser is simply concerned with the question of risk, then it need only have the option to withdraw from the deal if material warrant breaches become apparent prior to completion.
But it ought not to be able to choose either to rescind or complete and preserve its right to claim damages.
That choice would effectively enable the Purchaser to re-negotiate price by threatening one course or the other.
In some cases rescission may not be an adequate remedy for lost expectations.
And how do you assess whether a breach is ‘material’ especially when the pre-completion period is relatively short?
In other cases a damages claim would be an unattractive proposition.
Why should the Purchaser have to complete and then try to recover damages?
The Vendor objects to being required to notify the Purchaser of breaches which may come to light between exchange and completion.
It is impractical to expect any party to draw trouble on himself by notifying the other of a potential claim.
How could the Vendor subsequently defend itself if it has effectively admitted a breach?
Finally, if the Vendor failed to notify, what right or remedy (in addition to the basic breach of warranty) would the Purchaser have?
Purchaser would expect Vendor to deal in good faith; failure to notify might amount to fraud and would prejudice Purchaser's rights of rescission (if any).
Suggested Compromises: The Purchaser to have the right of rescission for breaches which are ‘so material’ that they effectively change the nature of what the Purchaser thought it was acquiring; any such compromise should ideally specify the measure of materiality either by reference to a specific amount of money or a percentage of the value of the business to be acquired although this may be felt to be impossible to quantify; or
the Purchaser to have the right to withhold part of the consideration at completion (up to an agreed maximum) but not the right to rescind; or
the Vendor to have the right of rescission to avoid massive damages claims — save for‘self induced’ breaches.
This last option need to be considered carefully and the ‘self induced’ breach clearly specified.
A.3.2 Any matter or thing so notified shall not be and shall not be deemed to be a disclosure for the purpose of qualifying or limiting the liability of the Vendor pursuant to this Agreement.
A.3.3 In the event of any such disclosure, or if the Purchaser becomes aware of any breach of the Warranties the Purchaser shall be entitled by notice in writing to the Vendor to rescind this Agreement.
A.4 Any rights of rescission expressly granted to the Purchaser in this Agreement shall be in addition to and without prejudice to any rights of the Purchaser of whatsoever nature under the Misrepresentation Act 1967 or any other enactment or at law.
Any failure to exercise such rights shall not constitute a waiver of any other rights of the Purchaser arising by reason of such breach.
VENDOR'S AND PURCHASER'S ARGUMENTS
A.3.2 If the Vendor notifies the Purchaser of a ‘breach’ prior to completion but the Purchaser decides to proceed nonetheless (ie he does not rescind) then the Vendor should not still remain liable for damages; the Purchaser has foregone the opportunity to get out of the deal if he does not like it any more.
The Purchaser may still wish to buy the Business but be compensated for the damage which has come to light.
Suggested Compromise:The Purchaser to retain rights to claim damages, unless the Vendor rescinds for a material breach — other than a breach which is ‘self inflicted’.
B. BREACH OF WARRANTY
B.1 Without restricting the rights of the Purchaser to claim damages on any other basis open to it, if it shall be found that any matter which is the subject of any of the Warranties is not as warranted, represented or undertaken then the Vendor shall on demand either:—
B.1.1 put the Purchaser into the position which would have existed had such matter been as so warranted, represented or undertaken by paying to the Purchaser a sum equal to the amount by which the value or amount at Completion of any assets or liabilities of the Business (computed for this purpose on the basis that full provision was made for the facts and circumstances in relation to which such breach arose) was less or (as the case may be) more than the value or amount at Completion of such assets or liabilities (computed on the assumption that the facts and circumstances had been such as to involve no such breach) together with all costs and expenses incurred or any other loss or damage suffered by the Purchaser as a result of such breach; or (if the Purchaser shall so elect).
B.1.2 pay to the Purchaser an amount equal to the diminution caused thereby to the value of the Business.
VENDOR'S AND PURCHASER'S ARGUMENTS
B. BREACH OF WARRANTY
The Vendor objects to the indemnity basis of calculating damages.
The Purchaser should rely on the normal contractual measure of damages to compensate for any breach of Warranties — ie the difference between what the Business would have been worth had the warranty been true and what it is actually worth in the light of the breach.
The indemnity basis is a completely artificial measure of damages which has no relevance to the effect of the breach on the value of the Assets.
It is difficult to assess market value particularly in relation to goodwill; much time can be spent in arguing about the measure of damages when the parties ought to simply concentrate on establishing whether or not the breach occurred.
If the Business has an undisclosed liability which has been passed to the Purchaser, the Vendor should be required to pay over at least the amount of the undisclosed liability.
If the contractual measure of damage was the only measure to be applied the Vendor could argue that the value of the Business was not necessarily reduced by the full amount of the undisclosed liability.
Alternatively the Vendor may argue, particularly where the price includes a substantial element for goodwill, that the Purchaser's only remedy will be to have damages assessed on the ‘indemnity’ basis.
The purchaser is buying a collection of assets to which it is ascribing individual prices.
If, for example, the plant and machinery is not as warranted then the Vendor will pay an amount to represent that loss — but it should follow that the Purchaser should be compensated for its goodwill payment as well — which could be a consequence of the contractual measure of damages.
VENDOR'S ARGUMENTS
PURCHASER'S ARGUMENTS
Alternatively it would be unfair if the only measure of damages was the indemnity basis — because the Purchaser might never be able to recover its goodwill payment.
It is only prepared to make that payment on the assumption that the Business is a going concern without too many problems.
If it finds that the plant is not working that could have serious repercussions, beyond the straight forward cost of replacement.
The profitability of the Business may be affected and merely replacing the defective equipment may not sufficiently compensate the Purchaser.
If what the Purchaser says is fair, why does it reserve the right to apply the indemnity basis without prejudice to its right to apply the contractual measure as well?
Because the indemnity basis may produce unfair results in certain cases.
For example, if a breach were to affect the profitability of the Business, it would be unfair to compensate the Purchaser by simply paying back the lost profits when the Purchaser has paid a price calculated by reference to a multiple of profits.
The Purchaser must be able to elect which measure of damages is most appropriate.
Contrary to the Purchaser's earlier argument therefore the indemnity basis does not simplify matters; it brings an additional complication.
The Purchaser seeks to have the best of both worlds.
Furthermore, as drafted, the Agreement would allow the Purchaser to claim damages on the tortious measure as well(essentially the difference between what the Purchaser paid and the market value of what it got in return) because the Agreement incorporates not only warranties, but representations as well .
The Vendor's liability should be restricted to one measure of damage only.
VENDOR'S AND PURCHASER'S ARGUMENTS
Compromise:each side needs to assess which measure is likely to suit it best.
Broadly speaking:—
if the Purchaser believes it is paying more than market value, it would be better off claiming damages in tort rather than contract; and vice versa;
if the Business is particularly difficult to value, an indemnity basis might be preferable to either of the alternatives — it makes a settlement easier to negotiate, although the amount might be smaller (or may be greater).
C. LIABILITY FOR BREACH OF WARRANTY
Notwithstanding any other provisions contained in this Agreement:—
C.1 Time limit
the Vendor shall be under no liability in respect of any of the Warranties unless the Vendor shall have been given written notice by the Purchaser of a specific breach of the Warranties prior to the second anniversary of Completion;
C.2 Maximum liability
The aggregate liability of the Vendor in respect of all claims for breach of any of the Warranties shall not in any event exceed the Consideration;
C.3 De minimis
the Purchaser shall not make any claim or claims against the Vendor in respect of the breach of any of the Warranties unless the amount of each individual claim shall exceed £; and the aggregate amount of such claims shall exceed £;
VENDOR'S AND PURCHASER'S ARGUMENTS
C. LIABILITY FOR BREACH OF WARRANTY
The Vendor should not be liable for claims:—
C.1 which are brought after a certain period because the Vendor would otherwise have a contingent liability for six years which is unacceptable; the Vendor wants to know after a reasonable period that it is free from any further claims.
The Purchaser ought to know whether there are any problems after, say, one or at the most two complete audits;
Reasonable but depends on the nature of the Business, the state of the Vendor's records and the type of claims which could arise — some problems may take longer to come to the surface than others.
C.2 which exceeds a certain sum, e.g. net tangible assets, or the Consideration, because the Vendor does not wish to have to repay more than it received;
If it is likely that the Purchaser has to inject money into the business it could end up losing more than it paid if there is a total disaster and the Vendor's liability is limited in this way.
It is also vital to remember that the Purchaser may be assuming liability for the creditors — and whether or not that liability is described as part of the Consideration, it is in fact part of the ‘price’ which the Purchaser is paying.
The Purchaser will therefore wish to be able to recover damages up to the amount of any sums paid (or payable) to creditors, as well any cash paid to the Vendor if there are major warranty claims.
C.3 which are trivial (de minimis);
Inappropriate in a ‘net asset’ deal.
because it is not worth litigating or suing for claims below a certain sum;
That should be the Purchaser's prerogative to decide.
VENDOR'S AND PURCHASER'S ARGUMENTS
because there are bound to be certain breaches in view of the comprehensive nature of the Warranties and the complex nature of the Business;
The Vendor should be diligent in their disclosures.
because there must be some give and take in the deal and the Purchaser would probably proceed on the same terms even if it knew of a few minor breaches — the Purchaser should not be able to bring a claim after completion for those kinds of problems;
It depends on the price.
C.4’ Swings and roundabouts’
in the assessment of damages for the breach of any of the Warranties full credit shall be given for the amount by which as at Completion the value of any current assets of the Business was greater or any current liability of the Business was less than the figure at which it was stated or provided for in the Accounts;
C.5 Voluntary acts by Purchaser
no liability shall arise to the Vendor and the Purchaser shall not have any claim whatsoever against the Vendor in respect of any breach of any of the Warranties if and to the extent that such breach or claim would not have arisen but for any voluntary act, omission, transaction or arrangement after Completion of the Purchaser;
VENDOR'S ARGUMENTS
C.4 where there is a corresponding surplus arising from some other matter — e.g. over provision of liabilities (swings and roundabouts);
PURCHASER'S ARGUMENTS
On similar assets only (‘like for like’).
The Purchaser will not be happy if the Business consists of all the wrong kinds of assets (peas instead of beans) even if they are worth the same as the price paid.
If this is not the case then the purchaser may face arguments from the vendor by way of defence relating to completely different matters (eg a bad debt provision is in fact excessive as a defence to a claim relating to non-payment of PAYE) and detailed accounts may need to be drawn up every time there is a breach of warranty (ie in order to see if there is some surplus which compensates).
A ‘like for like’ comparison (eg bad debts being compared against bad debts and tax liailities with tax liabilities) should be the most agreed to by a purchaser.
Without this the purchaser may be sidetracked into calculations on a whole host of other matters which are not strictly relevant.
May not be suitable where a substantial payment has been made for goodwill.
Also it depends on the way in which price has been calculated; may be suitable to a net asset deal — but not necessarily.
C.5 which would not have arisen but for acts of the Purchaser after Completion;
Quite often this defence can be misconceived.
The Warranties generally require confirmation that a state of affairs exist at a certain date, eg Completion.
What happens subsequently is irrelevant in determining whether or not the Warranty was true at Completion.
It is only where Warranties look to the future — eg the payment by debtors, the loyalty of customers — that this type of defence is relevant.
Even then it should not apply where all that the Purchaser does is to carry on in the ordinary course of the business.
C.6 Control of claims
If the Purchaser shall be in receipt of any claim, or any fact or circumstance comes to the notice of the Purchaser which might constitute or give rise to a liability pursuant to any of the warranties the Purchaser shall forthwith notify the Vendor giving full details so far as practicable and shall not make any admission of liability or settle or comprise any such claim without the prior written consent of the Vendor such consent not to be unreasonably withheld or delayed (subject to being indemnified and secured to its reasonable satisfaction against all costs and expenses incurred or for which it may become liable);
C.6.1 take such action as the Vendor may reasonably request to avoid, dispute, resist, appeal, compromise or defend any such claims; and
C.6.2 if so required by the Vendor in writing within 60 days following it being notified, retain solicitors chosen by the Vendor to proceed on behalf of the Purchaser in accordance with the instructions of the Vendor and give to such solicitors all and every assistance and information as they may require.
VENDOR'S AND PURCHASER'S ARGUMENTS
C.6 The Vendor wishes to control any actions which give rise to a breach of warranty.
Otherwise the Purchaser has a ‘blank cheque’ to settle the relevant problem in almost any terms and then claim from the Vendor.
The Purchaser must be free to run the Business as it thinks fit: there will be a conflict between the Vendor — who will no doubt wish to settle the claim for the minimum possible — and the Purchaser, who will wish to try to preserve goodwill.
Compromises:the Purchaser to be obliged to consult fully with Vendor and take its (reasonable) recommendations into account;
the Vendor to run the relevant actions unless the Purchaser reasonably asserts that the problem materially affects the goodwill of the Business.
1.1
All information, matters and circumstances relating to the Business which are or would on reasonable enquiry be known to the Vendor and which are material to be known by a purchaser for value of the Business have been disclosed in writing to the Purchaser.
1.2
All statements of fact and information contained or referred to in the Disclosure Letter are true and complete and are not misleading in any respect, all statements of opinion therein have been made after due and careful enquiry and are reasonably believed to be correct and nothing has been omitted from the Disclosure Letter which renders any of such matters misleading.
1.3
All statements of fact and information contained or referred to in the Information Memorandum dated []prepared by [Merchant Bank]on behalf of the Vendor are true, complete and accurate and not misleading in any respect.
1.1
The Vendor cannot give a ‘sweeping up’ warranty.
If the Purchaser wishes specific matters to be warranted it should set them out in detail.
The Vendor cannot be expected to anticipate what is and what is not material to a Purchaser.
The Vendor has a much better idea than the Purchaser of the Business.
It knows whether there is a material factor affecting the Business which has not been dealt with in a warranty.
The Vendor ought to act in good faith and disclose any such matters.
WARRANTIES
1.
GENERAL
VENDOR'S AND PURCHASER'S ARGUMENTS
1.
WARRANTIES
Compromise:In extremis the Vendor may be prepared to give such a warranty ‘so far as it is aware’.
The general vendor position should be to get the purchaser to specify matters of concern.
1.2
There is no need to warrant the accuracy of the Disclosure Letter.
That is a document which is effectively given for the protection of the Vendor.
If it were not given the Vendor would be liable for any breaches of warranty.
How and why is it intended that the Vendor's liability should be increased by delivering an inaccurate Disclosure Letter?
The Disclosure Letter is likely to contain a great deal of information on which the Purchaser will rely.
It is common practice to deal with specific facts affecting the Business in the Disclosure Letter rather than in the Agreement itself.
The Purchaser ought to be entitled to rely on the details of the Business which the Vendor has volunteered.
1.3
The Vendor cannot warrant the Information Memorandum.
That was prepared merely to give a general picture of the Business in order to help potential Purchasers decide whether or not they wished to enter into more detailed negotiations to acquire the Business.
VENDOR'S ARGUMENTS
PURCHASER'S ARGUMENTS
The Information Memorandum was the very thing which made the Purchaser interested in acquiring the Business in the first place.
Whilst the Purchaser can accept that the Memorandum has not been prepared with the precision of a legal document (and accordingly the warranty may require some modification) nevertheless the core of the information contained in it has been relied on by the Purchaser in agreeing to buy the Business and to the extent that it does not appear in any of the other information which is being warranted by the Vendor, it should be warranted in its own right.
The Accounts:—
2.1.1
have been prepared in accordance with the historical cost convention [and generally accepted accounting practices and standards];
2.1.2
comply with the requirements of the Companies Act, all other relevant statues, and all current FRS's applicable to a United Kingdom company; and
2.1.3
are true and accurate and properly reflect and give a true and fair view of the financial position of the Vendor and of the Business as at the Balance Sheet Date; and
2.1
The Vendors do not need to give any warranties in relation to the Accounts: the Purchaser can sue the auditors if the Accounts are wrong.
The Purchaser is dealing with the Vendor: not the auditors.
If there are any problems it wishes to recover damages from the Vendor.
In any event, the auditors will probably not be liable to the Purchaser.
(See the Caparo case).
Furthermore, the auditors can only report on the information which they have been given by the Vendor and if that information is inaccurate (causing the Accounts to be wrong) the auditors will not be at fault.
2.1.2
No accounts can be said to be ‘true and accurate’.
It is unrealistic to expect that they would.
All they can do is give a ‘true and fair view’.
To that extent that there is any material deviation from the ‘true and accurate’ standard Vendor is already protected by the ‘de minimis’provisions.
2.
THE ACCOUNTS
VENDOR'S AND PURCHASER'S ARGUMENTS
2.1 THE ACCOUNTS
Although it may be correct to say that when the Accounts were audited they ‘gave’ a true and fair view of the company's financial position it is difficult to say whether or not they now ‘give’a true and fair view.
That would effectively require another audit to establish the position, because the Vendor would effectively be warranting that even in the light of events which have occurred prior to the Balance Sheet Data but which have come to light up to completion the Accounts still give a true and fair view of the Business's financial position.
The risk of events occurring prior to the Balance Sheet Date but only coming to light after the Accounts have been signed off should be placed on the Vendor.
They are being paid on the basis of the results shown by the Accounts and they should bear the risk if those Accounts are wrong.
2.1.4
set out accurately and contain proper provisions or appropriate notes in respect of all assets and liabilities (whether actual or contingent, quantified or disputed) of the Business as at the Balance Sheet Date.
2.2
The debts shown in the Accounts relating to the Business (less the amount of any provision or reserve calculated on the same basis as that applied in the corresponding accounts for the preceding three financial years) were good and collectable in full in the ordinary course of business and have or will realise the net amount thereof.
2.3
All accounts, books, ledger, financial and other records of whatsoever kind of the Vendor relating to the Business are in the possession of the Vendor and give and reflect a true and fair view of all transactions entered into and of the financial and contractual position of the Business and of its assets and liabilities in accordance with generally accepted accounting principles and standards and statutory requirements.
2.1
It is unrealistic to expect that accounts can contain ‘full’ provisions for the Businesses's liabilities.
That presupposes that at the date of the accounts all the relevant liabilities are known.
There may be facts that are not known to the warrantors which give rise to that liability.
All the Vendor can confirm is that ‘proper’ provision has been made.
Furthermore, it is not necessarily the case that all assets will be shown in the accounts — eg goodwill, trade names.
This argument assumes that warranties are concerned with knowledge — whereas they deal with risk.
VENDOR'S AND PURCHASER'S ARGUMENTS
2.2
The Vendor cannot be expected to underwrite the credit worthiness of the Business's debtors which is the effect of this warranty.
This warranty is essentially aimed at the past: the Vendor ought by now to know whether the debts shown in the latest audited Accounts have been good and collectable.
It does not require the Vendor to underwrite those debtors.
The Purchaser wishes to assess how good a ‘risk’ the present customers of the Business are.
2.3
If the Vendor is warranting the audited accounts, why it is also necessary to warrant the accuracy of the other books and records of the Business.
This warranty does no more (really) than repeat the statutory duty which a company already has to keep it books and records in good order.
Furthermore, whilst the audited accounts may provide comfort in relation to the overall financial position of the Business, the Purchaser needs to be able to rely on the past records of the business for all sorts of other reasons — e.g. past levels of turnover, proper recording of information, etc.
Furthermore, in some cases there may be no separate accounts for the Business, and the accounting records may be the only way of assessing its financial and trading position.
2.4
The profit and loss accounts and balance sheets of the Vendor relating to the Business for the two financial years ended on the Balance Sheet Date give a true and fair view of the financial position of the Vendor and of the Business during and at the end of such years.
VENDOR'S ARGUMENTS
Why is it necessary to warrant accounts earlier than the Balance Sheet Date?
PURCHASER'S ARGUMENTS
In order to assess how ‘fair’ the warranted Accounts are and to verify or compare profit/and/or net asset growth it is useful to be able to assume that previous accounts have been drawn up on a similar basis and that, for example, the Vendor has not unfairly weighted the profits for the warranted Accounts.
3.1
Stock and Equipment
3.1.1
The stock is, to the extent that it has not already been used or sold in the ordinary and normal course of trading in good condition and working order and capable of being used or sold in the ordinary and normal course of trading.
3.1.2
All plant, machinery, vehicles and other equipment used in connection with the Business is in a good and safe state of repair and condition and is not in need of renewal or replacement.
3.2
Debtors
No debt of the Business which may be owing at Completion is overdue by more than eight weeks and the amount of such debts (less the amount of any provision or reserve calculated on the same basis as that applied in the Accounts and disclosed in the Disclosure Letter) will be recoverable in full in the ordinary course of business and in any event not later than eight weeks after Completion and none of the said debts is subject to any counter-claim or set-off except to the extent of any such provision or reserve.
3.
SALE ASSETS
3.1
The Purchaser should inspect the stock and plant and machinery to satisfy itself that these items satisfy the required criteria.
It is unnecessary for the Vendor to give these Warranties.
It may be impractical to carry out a stocktake or inspect the plant and machinery (particularly if the Vendor wishes to keep the transaction confidential from the work force).
In any event, the Purchaser will wish to be satisfied that it is acquiring a viable Business which has the right amount of saleable stock and working equipment.
VENDOR'S AND PURCHASER'S ARGUMENTS
3.
SALE ASSETS
3.2
This warranty effectively requires the Vendor to underwrite the credit worthiness of their debtors — which is unreasonable.
But it is not unreasonable for the Vendor to repay any price paid by the Purchaser in respect of debts which turn out to be bad.
Otherwise the Vendor is making an unjustified windfall.
The payment by debtors depends on a number of factors — how well they are served, how vigorously they are pursued, how stable their respective financial standing is.
The Purchaser assumes all these risks when he buys the Business.
Possible compromise:
If at the end of the eight week period since completion, debts remained unpaid, the vendor should have the right to buy back [at an agreed discount]the debts which it may then seek to enforce (as vigorously as it wishes) in order to seek payment.
Without such a compromise, the vendor cannot easily recover this sum and the purchaser would have no real interest in pursuing it.
4.1
The Listed Intellectual Property Rights are all the Intellectual Property Rights owned, used or required by the Vendor in connection with the Business.
4.2
The Vendor is the beneficial owner free from liens, charges, encumbrances and adverse claims and (wherever possible) the registered proprietor of the Listed Intellectual Property Rights and such rights are valid and enforceable.
4.3
The Business as now carried on does not infringe any Intellectual Property Rights of any other person (or would do so if the same were valid).
4.1
This warranty is too wide; all the Vendor can do is warrant that the intellectual property rights listed in the relevant schedule are used in connection with the Business.
It is unreasonable to expect them to anticipate what additional rights they ought to have.
Again the question is one of risk.
If the Vendor does not know what intellectual property rights it should be using, how can the Purchaser?
4.
GOODWILL AND INTANGIBLE ASSETS
VENDOR'S AND PURCHASER'S ARGUMENTS
4.
GOODWILL AND INTANGIBLE ASSETS
4.2
The Vendor cannot warrant that intellectual property rights are ‘valid and enforceable’.
There is always the risk that some third party will claim, for example, to have copyright in the Vendor's works.
The warranty should be limited to the Vendor's knowledge.
Again the question is one of risk.
If the Vendor does not know what intellectual property rights it should be using, how can the Purchaser?
4.3
This is an alternative to 4.1 and again it requires the Vendor to anticipate what additional rights the Business should be authorised to use.
This is an argumentation — not an alternative to 4.1.
If rights are being infringed the Purchaser will need to know so that it can restructure the Business to avoid further infringements.
5.1
Since the Balance Sheet Date:—
5.1.1
there has been no adverse change in the financial position or prospects of the Business;
5.1.2
the Business has been carried on in the ordinary and usual course and in the same manner (including nature and scope) as in the past and no unusual or abnormal contract differing from the ordinary contracts necessitated by the nature of its business has been entered into; and
5.1.3
no asset has been acquired or disposed of on capital account or has been agreed to be acquired or disposed of and no contract involving expenditure by it on capital account has been entered into by the Business.
5.2
The net tangible assets of the Business are at the date of this Agreement and will pending Completion be no less than at the Balance Sheet Date and the profits of the Business from the Balance Sheet Date to the date of this Agreement and pending Completion are and will be proportionately no less than the profits for the previous financial year.
5.1
The word ‘prospects’ should be deleted: the Vendor is not warranting the future.
The Purchaser is entitled to be told if something has already occurred which might prejudice the future.
5.
FINANCIAL POSITION AND PROSPECTS
VENDOR'S AND PURCHASER'S ARGUMENTS
5.
FINANCIAL POSITION AND PROSPECTS
The phrase ‘adverse change’ is not terribly clear.
All the Vendor can do is disclose the latest management accounts of the Business and leave the Purchaser to judge the position for himself.
This solution might be acceptable if the Vendor is prepared to take some responsibility for the accuracy of the management accounts — because otherwise the Purchaser will not know where he is
5.2
If there is to be a completion audit and the consideration is to be assessedor adjusted based upon this audit — which is often the case with an asset sale — what is the point of this warranty?
The value of the net assets will be assessed during the audit and presumably the Purchaser will pay less if the net assets fall below the parties expectations.
The Purchaser may be expecting to take over a Business of a particular size — this warranty will reassure him that he is.
More importantly, any disclosures made in relation to this warranty will highlight fairly accurately whether the Business has been trading at a loss since the Balance Sheet Date — which if true might seriously affect the Purchaser's willingness to buy the Business.
5.3
The factual information contained in the report from [KPMG Peat Marwick]to the Purchaser dated []in agreed terms is at the date hereof in all material respects true and accurate and not misleading.
VENDOR'S ARGUMENTS
Factual content of the whole report is to be treated as disclosed since the Purchaser knows its content at completion.
Vendors can only confirm accuracy ‘to the best of their knowledge and belief’ and if it is based on a review of the report.
May also want to limit this to certain named Vendors only.
PURCHASER'S ARGUMENTS
It is up to the Vendors to provide full disclosure information.
The due diligence report is confidential to the Purchaser.
Possible compromise:Vendor warrants the factual content of the report.
Would normally exclude at least the Executive Summary.
If the Vendors also going to warrant the accuracy of all disclosures, care should be exercised before suggesting or agreeing to this compromise.
6.1
The Vendor is not party in relation to the Business or subject to any contract, covenant, commitments or arrangement of an onerous, unusual or long-term nature or having any provision which might reasonably be regarded as material for disclosure to a purchaser for value of the Business nor is it party to any contract likely to be unprofitable or to any contract made otherwise than in the ordinary and usual course of business as now carried on.
6.2
There is no offer or tender or the like given or made by the Vendor in relation to the Business which is still outstanding and capable of giving rise to a contract merely by the unilateral act of a third party.
6.3.1
All the Contracts are valid and binding and in full force and effect and neither the Vendor nor any other party to any such Contract has breached any provisions of or is in default under the terms of any such Contract.
6.3.2
All obligations falling due for performance from the Balance Sheet Date under the Contracts have been observed and performed.
6.3.3
The signing and completion of this Agreement by the Vendor will not violate any provision of or result in the acceleration of any obligation under or the termination of any such Contract.
6.1
The phrases used are not clear — what is an ‘onerous’ or ‘unusual’or ‘unprofitable’contract.
If these terms cause difficulties, alternatives can be suggested once the kinds of contract which the Business normally enters into become clear to the Purchaser.
6.
CONTRACTS AND COMMITMENTS
VENDOR'S AND PURCHASER'S ARGUMENTS
6.1 CONTRACTS AND COMMITMENTS
The Purchaser wants to know:—
(a)
what contractual commitments the Business has; and
(b)
whether or not they are likely to lose money.
The Vendor cannot say whether any contracts contain a provision which ‘might reasonably be regarded as material for disclose to a purchase of the value of the Business’.
This is the same as the ‘sweeper up’ warranty discussed earlier (see 1.1).
It may be possible to delete this provision if the Purchaser can be satisfied that it has had all the Business's contracts disclosed to it one way or another.
6.2
The Business is constantly engaged in negotiations which may or may not lead to a contract.
It would be impractical (and misleading) to list them all.
The warranty does not require such information.
What is required is details of arrangements which, if they are unilaterally accepted by a third party, will immediately impose contractual obligations on the Business.
6.3
These warranties require an inspection of each contract.
The Purchaser can be given access to the documents and take its own view.
First, that is not so.
The warranties require the Vendor to confirm that it is not in breach of any obligations; that is not something which the Purchaser can confirm.
But it may be reasonable to put on the Purchaser the onus of investigating the contracts — thereby reducing the need for Warranty 6.3.
6.4
The Vendor is not in relation to the Business a party to any agreement, practice or arrangement which contravenes or is subject to registration under the Restrictive Trade Practices Act 1976, the Resale Prices Act 1976 or the Competition Act 1980 or which contravenes the provisions of the Fair Trading Act 1973 or which would or might either result in a reference to a ‘consumer trade practice’ within the meaning of Section 13 of the Fair Trading Act 1973 or to the Consumer Protection Advisory Committee under Part II of that Act or contravene any of the provisions of Articles 85 or 86 of the Treaty of Rome or any other anti-trust or consumer protection legislation.
6.5
No person presently doing business with the Vendor nor any customer or supplier who is in the habit of purchasing from or selling to the Vendor (as the case may be) in relation to the Business will within twelve calendar months from Completion cease so to do or otherwise substantially reduce its purchase from or supplies to the Business.
VENDOR'S AND PURCHASER'S ARGUMENTS
This clause is too wide in its scope.
The Vendor cannot possibly be expected to have a view as to whether or not the Business is a party to any agreements which fall within these categories.
It is unlikely to be possible easily or cheaply for the Purchaser to come to its own conclusions as to whether or not these Acts apply even if it has access to the contractual document.
In some cases, for example, whether or not a particular statute applies will depend on the market place and the significance of the contract within that market.
Since the Vendor will have entered into the relevant contracts in the first place it is for the Vendor to take the risk as saying whether or not the contracts fall within these categories.
6.5
The Vendor cannot predict whether its customers and suppliers will continue to do business with the Purchaser.
In any event there are various matters to be excluded — such as the state of the economy, the industrial sector in which the Business operates and the future financial position of the customers and suppliers.
At the very least the Purchaser will expect the Vendor to give this warranty so far as it is aware.
The Business is being purchased (partly) for its goodwill and it is reasonable for the Vendor to be asked (in effect) whether there are any significant risks which would adversely affect that goodwill by virtue of the sale.
It will, however, be reasonable to exclude matters over which the Vendor has no knowledge or control.
The question of the level of enquiry to be adopted by the vendor needs to be ascertained.
In this instance the purchaser is unlikely to want the vendor to make any enquiries.
7.
LITIGATION AND LEGAL PROCEEDINGS
The Vendor in relation to the Business is not and has not since the Balance sheet Date been engaged in any legal proceedings (civil or criminal) or arbitration as plaintiff, defendant or otherwise howsoever (except as plaintiff in normal debt collection and in respect of which the aggregate amount of debts due to the Vendor and for which the Vendor is engaged or likely to become engaged in proceedings prior to Completion does not exceed £500) and there are no circumstances likely to lead to any legal proceedings or arbitration (whether against the Vendor or by the Vendor any third party).