

Cover photography
Black and white portraits by David Eustace (BA Photographic Studies, 1991) include the actor Brian Cox, former Sex Pistol John Lydon and playwright John Byrne.
Colour photographs of diacetylene liquid crystals synthesized as part of the new materials research programme into materials for photonics; a field concerned with optical data display, recording and processing, described as the technology of the twenty-first century.
Courtesy of  and  of the Department of Applied Chemical and Physical Sciences.
The Red Triangle is published by the External Relations Unit, Napier University, Edited by .
Designed by  Edinburgh Printed by .
Opinions expressed are those of the contributors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the Alumni Office or Napier University
EDITORIAL
The Red Triangle is one year old and is back with news of University events and of former students.
News, too, of changes in the Alumni Office — Tracey Francis left in the summer for pastures new and I arrived to take her place in September.
I have enjoyed reading all your letters and look forward to continuing the two-way communication that has developed over the past year.
Thanks to all of you who returned the Alumni Update questionnaires — even as I write, they are still coming in!
Your new addresses and details have been entered into our database and the process of analysing your reunion needs has begun.
An overwhelming number of you are keen to attend formal reunions and so I will make it a priority to get them off the ground.
The number of alumni living abroad is also staggering and it looks likely that more Napier groups could be set up around the globe.
The contacts page, in this issue, deals exclusively with alumni abroad — perhaps you'll find friends you've lost touch with are in America, Australia or Africa!
All the people mentioned in this issue of The Red Triangle , and thousands more besides, are listed on our database — if you have lost contact with old friends or colleagues, drop the Alumni Office a line and we'll try to reunite you!
From your letters, it is clear that you enjoy the magazine and like what we are doing.
I hope that you continue to enjoy it and that you will send me your comments, your thoughts and your news.
NAPIER UNIVERSITY — LIVING UP TO THE TITLE ‘NAE PEER’
— a message from the Principal
1992 has been a truly historic year for Napier and we are delighted to share with you, our former students, some of the moments which have seen us metamorphosing into a university.
I say metamorphosing because it is our firm intention to continue the natural development process which has been going on in recent years, rather than make any radical changes just because we are now a university.
The range of vocational courses, in a number of disciplines, will still be the same sort which you took when you were at Napier.
Two developments are, firstly, that we are adopting a modular system, which we feel gives our students greater flexibility and, secondly, that through the Enterprise in Higher Education Initiative, we are building into all our modules transferable skills such as team building and presentation.
These will ensure that our graduates emerge with the versatility and professionalism to back up their academic knowledge and give them the edge in the market place.
Another feature of the Enterprise Initiative is the development of employer partnerships, to work on ‘live projects’.
These projects involve students, individually or in groups, in work concerned with meeting a real need, identified by an outside employer.
This offers students an opportunity to test their knowledge and skills in the real world, at the same time as offering employers the chance to get to grips with a problem or task that they might not have the time or resources to tackle.
Perhaps your company has a project that could benefit from such a partnership — if so, our Enterprise Development Officer will be happy to discuss it with you.
In gaining the title university, Napier has been recognised as a leader in higher education.
With the support of you, our friends, we will live up to our university name ‘Napier’, ‘Nae Peer’, ‘No Equal’.
ROYAL VISIT IS A UNIVERSITY FIRST
Her Royal Highness the Princess Royal enjoyed a warm welcome as Napier University's first royal visitor in October.
Members of the royal family have visited Napier in the past but this was the first visit since the title ‘Napier University’, was adopted.
Many of you will remember Her Majesty the Queen's visit in 1984 when she opened the Queen's Library at Sighthill, and perhaps a few of you will recall the Duke of Edinburgh's visit in 1965.
The Princess Royal spent two hours on a tour of the Merchiston and Craiglockhart campuses and met staff and students from the gamut of the Napier community.
The Princess was met at Merchiston by Napier alumnus, the Lord Provost, Norman Irons and welcomed to the University by Mr Tony Bridge, Chairman of the Governing Body, and the Principal, Professor Turmeau.
Her first stop was Merchiston Tower, once home to our name-sake, John Napier, where she met members of the Governing Body, staff and the Students Association.
As a special memento of her visit, the Princess was presented with ‘Napier's Bones’— not the real ones, of course, but a set of calculating rods, made in the Department of Design.
She met students at work in the Department of Mechanical, Manufacturing and Software Engineering, and staff and post-graduate students from Computer Integrated Manufacturing demonstrated their research work on the use of robots in a manufacturing environment.
The innovative work of the Department of Design caught the Princess' eye — in particular, the model by graduate Elaine Mossman of a an integrated postal service machine or Mailing Access Point and the Satellite Guided Grass Mower designed by 1991 graduate Alan Kitchen.
Before leaving Merchiston, she was presented with a bouquet of flowers by first year Hospitality Management student, Louise McLernan; she discussed, with Louise and her class-mates, the level of commitment needed to give up work, as some of them had done, and devote themselves to full-time study.
The second part of the Princess Royal's visit took her to Craiglockhart.
In the library she saw an exhibition dedicated to the war poets and plans for the library extension; she met students and researchers using some of the library's on-line and interactive computer systems.
Then it was on to the chapel, where work from other faculties and departments was on show.
The Department of Biological Sciences gave an energetic demonstration of aerobic measurement, involving a treadmill and computer monitoring equipment — a project they hope to develop commercially to measure fitness levels in sportsmen and women and in people working in fields where physical stamina is of particular importance.
The Napier Business School gave the Princess a video demonstration of the range of courses, research and services that they offer and she saw new materials developed by the Department of Applied Chemical and Physical Sciences.
The Departments of Mathematics, Biological Sciences, Computer Studies and Electrical Engineering all showed exhibits of their work including Dr Crerar's ‘Ball, Box, Star’ microcomputer application for the rehabilitation of stroke victims and Dr Mincher's DNA research work that it is hoped will play a key role in the treatment of such diseases as cancer, herpes and AIDS related diseases.
Before she left, the Princess Royal became the first signatory to the new Napier University Visitors Book and on her departure, one of Napier's youngest ‘students’, four-year-old Kirsty Hutton who had come with other children from Napier's crèche to wave goodbye to the Princess, presented her with a posy.
It was a visit enjoyed by all.
DOUBLE EXPOSURE IN DEVELOPING SHOWCASE
David Eustace and Mike Wilkinson both graduated with distinction from Napier and since then their careers have taken two very different directions.
Their work came together at a recent exhibition in Napier's new KJP Gallery .
reports.
In an exciting new venture, Napier opened its doors on the KJP Gallery in October.
The gallery, sponsored by Europe's leading photographic suppliers, will provide a showcase for professional photography and Scotland's young photographers.
The new gallery is only part of the deal with KJP.
The main focus of their sponsorship is totally to re-equip the department's studio with state-of-the-art electronic flash and tungsten lighting equipment; in exchange, KJP have a distribution site on campus, serving the Lothians, and a showpiece setting in a real studio situation.
‘KJP's presence in Napier is an excellent example of a cooperative venture between the University and the photographic industry,’ said Professor Turmeau, in his opening address.
It was fitting that the gallery's exhibition featured the work of two Napier graduates — David Eustace and Mike Wilkinson.
David Eustace works largely in the field of fashion and advertising photography.
His work has been published in The Scotsman, The Daily Record and GQ Magazine, amongst others.
He feels that art directors often have such set views about the subjects he photographs that his own creativity is suppressed.
He always tries, however, to get at least one shot for himself and the photographs shown here fall into that category.
‘I can't stand all that c**p!’ says David as he rejects the notion that growing up in Glasgow's East End was hard.
‘Maybe it was — but if you don't know anything else, it doesn't seem hard.’
He is passionate about his work, his life and his family.
He worked as a sports salesman, a bingo hall caller and a fruit seller before joining the Royal Navy.
It was an exciting time, a chance to experience the ‘glory and excitement’ of war, detached from its purpose.
During the Falkland War, he was stationed off Gibraltar.
The two friends with whom he joined up were not so lucky; their deaths brought David face to face with the human cost of war and his naive teenage thoughts of glory changed to fear and loathing of war.
After leaving the Navy, he joined the Scottish Prison Service as an officer at Barlinnie Prison, Glasgow.
Experiences, there and in the Navy, have shaped David Eustace the man and the photographer.
As a student, he was jointly awarded a bursary by Agfa, the photographic materials manufacturer, and represented Napier at an international photography conference in Poland, held by the Polish Academy of Fine Arts.
He graduated in 1991.
In between assignments, David finds time to pursue his own projects.
He is currently working on a series of photographs of buskers — he simply approaches them in the street and asks them to come to his studio.
So far he hasn't had too many problems but doubtless he could recount some interesting tales!
Mike Wilkinson didn't choose to become a press photographer — it was one of those things that just happened.
Shortly after graduating in 1987, the opportunity arose to work with former Napier student, Tom Kidd.
Tom is an established press photographer and founder of the Image Scotland Agency.
At first Mike worked as Tom's assistant but he soon moved on to his own assignments.
He regularly has work published in Britain's national newspapers including The Times, The Sunday Times, The Sunday Telegraph, The Independent and The Guardian.
He has followed political campaigns, the Lockerbie disaster and recently joined members of Greenpeace on their boats on the Clyde during the International Whaling Conference, in Glasgow.
When I met Mike, he strolled into the office and apologised for bringing half a farm yard with him.
He'd just spent the morning on one of his more unusual assignments — photographing pigs with a ‘food ball’.
Generally, Mike is commissioned by a paper or magazine to cover an event but, in the case of Tom Leppard, he read about his subject in a Sunday tabloid and raced off to Skye to get the picture.
With over 99 per cent of his skin covered in leopard spot tattoos, Tom Leppard's name appears in the Guinness Book of Records.
He travelled the world with the Army before retreating to Skye where he lives alone in his converted stone sheep shelter, two miles from the nearest road.
He was delighted to receive visitors but charged Mike £50 for the opportunity to photograph him.
Mike completed a foundation course in Leeds before moving to Edinburgh in 1982, to study photography at Napier.
He was awarded an Agfa bursary to develop ideas on impressionistic colour photography.
He experimented with light, its quality and ‘feel’, to achieve on film, effects similar to those of the Impressionists on canvas.
The resulting work was shown in an exhibition at the National Gallery in London, in 1987.
His understanding of the use and quality of light, gained from his experiments at Napier, bring a subtlety to his work; something rarely achieved within the confines of press photography where speed, deadlines and catching that fleeting moment all work against you.
Dedication, a mobile phone and an addiction to adrenalin seem to be the clues to success in this field.
Mike goes ‘almost nowhere’ without his telephone; its absence could mean the loss of an assignment but more than that — the loss of an opportunity.
‘You never know when the next big story will break.’
Thank you to both David Eustace and Mike Wilkinson for their time and the use of their photographs.
The Napier Case contains four bottles of each of the following wines:
Cotêtes de Saint-Mont Blanc, VDQS 1991 Cuve Tradition, Producteurs Plaimont Aromatic bouquet of peach and apricot, full, fruity and long-flavoured
Cotêtes de Saint-Mont Rouge, VDQS 1991 Cuve Tradition, Producteurs Plaimont Dark ruby colour, full, round and complex
Cotêtes de Saint-Mont Ros, VDQS 1991 Cuve Tradition, Producteurs Plaimont A delicious rosé, bursting with fruit and full of flavour
THIS IS THE BEGINNING
Napier celebrates its new university status.
By .
The cameras clicked, the reporters reached for their notebooks, the Principal and Lord James Douglas-Hamilton ascended in a crane to unveil a sign and descended to be met by ‘Alison’ the Kissogram girl, toasts were made, balloons set off and Napier University was born on 15 June 1992 in an atmosphere of razzmatazz and celebration.
The day began cold and blustery, in contrast to almost two weeks of uninterrupted warm sunshine, but not even darkening skies could dampen the spirits of a crowd of over 700 Napier staff, students, guests and friends who had gathered at Napier's Merchiston campus to witness a truly historic moment in Scotland's history — the birth of a university.
As the Principal and Vice-chancellor of Napier University, Professor William A Turmeau said to the packed courtyard at Merchiston: ‘Our institution opened right here as Napier College in 1964 and this is a really great day, for all of us.
When I look towards the Merchiston Castle here, I wonder what John Napier who lived here from 1550 to 1627 would have said could he see us today.
He was a man of great vision and he would, I feel, not have been greatly surprised that this old castle might one day be part of a seat of learning and a university, but he would I am sure have been very proud, that it carries his name ‘Napier University’.
A name that will endure hundreds of years into the future.
What a wonderful privilege to be here at the beginning of it all!
We are very proud today.’
Lord James Douglas-Hamilton the Minister for Education and Housing at the Scottish Office not only ascended in a ‘cherry picker’ with the Principal to uncover the Napier University sign at Merchiston but also unveiled a plaque and addressed the crowd, praising the contribution of the Scottish ‘Techs’to Scottish education and to the local and national economies.
He said: ‘The five Scottish ‘Techs’ have shown over and over again that they can achieve the same high academic standards as our eight universities.
Outstanding institutions like Napier will soon be able to confer its own degrees and from September Napier's students will be able to claim with pride, on completing their courses, that they are graduates from Napier University.’
He went on to say: ‘Student numbers in Scotland have increased by a remarkable 25 per cent since 1983 to nearly 110,000 and we fully expect by the end of the century that more than 40 per cent of young Scots will enter higher education.
This is a magnificent achievement of which institutions like Napier can be very proud indeed.’
Mr Tony Bridge, Chairman of the Governing Body proposed a toast: ‘Napier University’ and this was the signal for hundreds of balloons to be let loose from the parapet of Merchiston Tower.
The morning celebrations were only the start of an eventful day for Napier University.
A service of dedication was held at Morningside Church, Napier's newly acquired campus, which was led by Rev Alan Brown the chaplain, with readings by Mr Bob Rankin (Department of Computer Studies), the Principal, Professor William A Turmeau and Mr Stephen Crawford (Student's Association Sabbatical Officer).
In the evening the focus of attention shifted downtown to the Assembly Rooms in George Street where a grand reception for all Napier's staff was held.
The Assembly Rooms were packed, over 1,500 staff and their partners were able to attend, and an evening of celebration and entertainment was enlivened by the Napier Big Band, the Gordon Cruickshank Quartet, pianist Pete Seaton, assorted magicians and a clarsach player.
All those associated with Napier will remember 15 June as a big day.
As the Principal said: ‘Napier's success has been due to its staff.
You have had an enthusiasm and a willingness and a loyalty and a dedication to Napier that is our hallmark and that is certainly the mainstay of our success.
I salute you all and I thank you all.’
THE NAGS TEE OFF
On a bright and chilly Saturday in November, Napier Alumni Golfing Society teed off with their inaugural meeting, at Gullane Golf Club.
After several cups of coffee in The Golf Inn Hotel, the golfers set forth onto the links.
Peter Brown (BA Business Studies, 1992) won the event with a score of 71 and was presented with the Craiglockhart Cup — a gift from the Alumni Office to the Society on its inception.
The day was rounded off with high tea and a tour of Edinburgh's hostelries!
The Society plans to meet twice a year, with the possibility of matches and other events being organised, subject to demand.
All former Napier students are welcome, whatever their standard of golf, and irrespective of when they left Napier.
The next event will take place in April, at a venue that has yet to be arranged, but will probably be in the Lothians.
Any former students who would like to play, or who are interested in finding out more about the Society, should contact the Secretary, Napier Alumni Golfing Society, c/o the Alumni Office.
STILL FRIENDS AFTER ALL THIS TIME
Ten years on and the former students of HND Hotel Management and Catering Class of ‘82 are still in touch.
Their reunion, in August, was a great success — lunch in The Potting Shed in Bruntsfield was followed by an evening at the Edinburgh Festival.
It was a gathering thoroughly enjoyed by all!
Annette Chinnery, one of the reunion organisers, has set about the task of compiling a year-book.
She has received many contributions but does hope to include more.
The year-book is due to be ‘published’ this spring, so if you have not yet submitted your entry, please send it now to the Alumni Office or directly to Annette Chinnery at  .
Copies of this group photograph are also available from the Alumni Office.
NAPIER PRESENTS OVERSEAS SCHOLARSHIPS
Napier University awarded its first overseas students' scholarship certificates to seven students, in November.
‘This year over seventy new overseas students have come to study at Napier University,’ announced Professor Turmeau, at the reception held to mark the occasion.
He acknowledged that the students may at first find difficulties in adjusting to the Scottish education system, the language, the weather and life in Edinburgh, and said that he hopes that these awards will remind overseas students that the University has confidence in them.
MORTGAGES
Buying a house is probably be the biggest financial transaction of most peoples lives.
Not only does it involve large sums of money but, for the vast majority of us, most, if not all, of the money has to be borrowed.
Everyone considering buying a house should seek professional advice but it is easy to get lost in the jargon.
Here are a few points that might make the process easier…
The Source — Building societies have always been the traditional source of mortgage finance, however, banks finance companies and specialist lenders have also moved into the market and now provide major competition to the building societies.
The Cost — All lenders charge interest on their loans and this is the major element in the cost of the finance.
It is not always easy to directly compare the interest rates between different lenders because of differences in the way the charges are calculated — a good guide is the APR rather than the basic rate — and always bear in mind the possible arrangement or setting up fees!
Security for the Loan — All lenders will require the borrower to mortgage the house to them — this means that the legal title to the property is assigned to the lender, however, the borrower still retains the right to live there.
When the loan has been fully paid up the lender has to reassign the house to the borrower.
Tax Relief — Only interest on the first £30,000 of the loan is eligible for tax relief.
Most borrowers obtain tax relief under the MIRAS scheme, which means that the borrower pays the net amount and the lender recoups the tax from the Inland Revenue.
What type of mortgage?— There are four methods of paying a mortgage.
With a Repayment Mortgage the capital borrowed and the interest due upon it are paid to the lender, however, with Endowment, Pension and Personal Equity Plan Linked Mortgages only the interest is repaid to the lender, with the capital being repaid by a separate investment contract or life insurance policy.
Mortgage Protection — Whilst it is not compulsory, it may be advisable to ensure that in the event of death before the loan is repaid, funds will be available to pay off the loan.
It is also possible to obtain cover to pay off the mortgage on the diagnosis of certain critical illnesses.
Coveyancing — This is the procedure where all legal matters of the property purchase are dealt with.
It is very complexed and probably better left to a qualified solicitor.
Please note that: YOUR HOME IS AT RISK IF YOU DO NOT KEEP UP THE REPAYMENTS ON A MORTGAGE OR OTHER LOAN SECURED ON IT.
All mortgages are subject to status and valuation and are not available to persons under 18 years of age.
The lender will require a charge over the property Written quotations are always available on request.
THE NAPIER UNIVERSITY MASTERCARD
In November, many of you will have received a mailing about the Napier University MasterCard.
We first brought it to your attention in January last year and we were delighted with your response.
The card is a valuable source of income for the University, with every penny raised going towards refurbishment costs of a new students' union.
If you did not receive the mailing and are interested in applying for the card, please write to the Development Office, External Relations Unit,.
INTRODUCING TWO NEW COURSES FOR INDUSTRY
Napier now offers a unique qualification, designed to bridge a gap in the training of supervisors and middle managers in the manufacturing sector.
The course, originally designed by Paisley University for IBM at Greenock, proved so successful that it was adapted to meet the needs of manufacturing in the east of Scotland by Napier University and Lothian and Edinburgh Enterprise Limited (LEEL).
The resulting three-year HND in Manufacturing Technology and Management is taught at Napier, one afternoon and one evening a week.
Assistant Principal, Professor John Darby, believes that ‘the course offers a unique blend of technical, managerial and interpersonal skills development that will greatly benefit the individuals taking part and the companies who employ them’.
Following the success of Napier's part-time Chartered Institute of Marketing (CIM) Diploma, the Napier University Marketing Group, in conjunction with the CIM, is to run an intensive CIM Diploma designed specifically for senior managers.
Until now, this highly successful course was only available at the Institute's headquarters in Cookham, and in Manchester.
The course is offered in five residential weekends, over a period of five months, and will be held at the Stirling Management Centre.
For further information on these, or any other courses offered by Napier University, contact the External Relations Unit at Craiglockhart.
Library In Trust
Work will begin this spring on the proposed extension to the library at Craiglockhart, subject to planning permission, thanks to the generosity of the Robertson Trust.
In July, we reported that the Trust had donated £400,000 towards the cost of improving library facilities at the University.
The architects plans were, however, more ambitious than originally foreseen and the cost had more than doubled!
The Development Office set about the business of fundraising and, in November, we were delighted to receive news that The Robertson Trust wished to increase its support for the extension, leaving the University with a fraction of the bill to pay.
The construction programme, which was to go ahead in two phases, can now be accomplished in one.
The Robertson Trust supports a wide variety of projects throughout the UK.
It was set up by three sisters with funds from their family's whisky business.
The eldest sister died five years ago and up to the age of eighty-two she drove her Aston Martin from Duns to Glasgow, twice a week at eighty miles an hour, to take an interest in the family business.
Since her death, the trustees have gone public — anonymous gifts have been replaced by open ones in memory of the three sisters.
FORTHCOMING REUNIONS
Calling all 1970s Catering Students
Michael Duffy (HND Catering and Hotelkeeping, 1976) is organising a reunion for everyone who started a catering course in the 1970s.
It will take place in a central Edinburgh hotel (e.g. The Caledonian, The George, Scandic Crown, The Sheraton), on a Friday or Saturday night, in October or November.
The estimated cost, for dinner and a dance, is £25–30 per head.
Please send a stamped addressed envelope to the Alumni Office for further details.
Write the name of the course and the years you studied here on the back of the envelope.
Michael can arrange hotel accommodation, baby sitting and much more for you.
This looks likely to be an occasion to remember!
HND Secretarial Studies with Languages (1981)
The students of HND Secretarial Studies with languages are spread across Europe, but are planning to make it back to Edinburgh for a reunion in the summer.
This will be coordinated by Morag Ottens (née Smith) and Rhona Armstrong.
BSc Technology with Industrial Studies (1986)
Lyndsey Murphy and James Murray are organising a reunion to coincide with the Festival in August.
Plans are afoot for an informal dance or ceilidh.
BSc Technology with Industrial Studies (1988)
John McDermott is planning a reunion in March to mark 5 years since graduation.
The reunion will take the format of a drinks reception at Merchiston followed by dinner in an Edinburgh restaurant or hotel.
The invitation is open to course members and their partners.
BSc Quantity Surveying (all years)
The seventh annual reunion will take place in March (provisionally).
HND Journalism Studies (1988)
Stewart McConnel and Paul Carnahan are hatching plans for a reunion in the summer to mark the fifth anniversary of your departure!
Further details will be sent out in due course but please lodge your interest early to help them plan the event.
BA Catering and Accommodation Studies (1986, 87 and 88)
Andrew Abram (1987) is arranging a summer reunion for all BA Catering and Accommodation Studies graduates from 1986, 1987 and 1988.
For further details of any of these reunions — or if you would like to organise one for your class — please contact the Alumni Office, Napier University,.
FOND FAREWELL FOR CATERING COURSE
One of Napier's longest-running courses has been phased out after 24 years.
The HND in Hotel Catering and Institutional Management course was the first of its kind in Scotland when it started life as the HND in Catering and Hotelkeeping.
More than 700 students have qualified from the three-year course, which was renamed in 1983.
Their impact on the industry has contributed greatly to the regard in which the Department of Hospitality Management is held.
The course is replaced by a two-year HND in Hospitality Management, to meet the changing needs of the industry.
CONTINUED OFFERS
The AA are continuing to offer Napier alumni Personal Membership with Relay for just £57.00 (normally £70.00) and by completing a direct debit mandate for next year's subscription payment you will also qualify for a free Associate Membership, open to any named person living permanently at your home address.
If you don't wish to take advantage of the Associate Membership you can opt for a free road atlas, worth £12.75, instead.
Application forms appeared in the July issue of The Red Triangle — if you no longer have this please contact the Alumni Office at Napier University for an application form.
Napier alumni qualify for reduced membership rates at the university's libraries.
If you wish to make use of this valuable resource please contact Mr A R McElroy, Chief Librarian, Napier University, with proof of attendance at Napier.