

ASPECT
Capital transfer tax ‘Sodom in reverse’?
On 13th March 1975 an Act came into force whose provisions immediately operated retrospectively to 26th March 1974.
The Bill in the course of its transit through Parliament had been radically altered so that the eventual enactment bore little resemblance to the Bill which was originally drafted.
The poor citizen, bewildered by its ever-changing complexities, finds himself the victim of the muddled thinking and uncertain  draftsmanship of the legislators who have multiplied words without knowledge, and must try to understand and then live with an Act of which he has suffered great difficulty and delay in obtaining a copy.
It can be argued that the rates of tax on death are less oppressive than under the old estate duty rules.
This is so.
But the new Act requires the keeping of expensive records — from the time of the first gift of over £1,000 till death carries one off to the happier place, where neither thieves nor the tax-gatherers break through and steal.
Every step which reduces a person's wealth gratuitously is an occasion for the operation of the tax, and each taxable transaction is aggregated; the dossier builds up; and the rich man can quickly find himself hemmed in so that gifts are too expensive to make and death will present him a prey to the plunderers.
For with ‘grossing up’ he is deemed to have given away both the gift and the tax on it so that his total giving reaches quickly to astronomic heights.
No greater incentive can be given to enter on a life of extravagant and riotous living which the sumptuary laws used to forbid, social conscience to deplore and socialist politicians to inveigh against.
Yet, faced with the harsh fact that saving will benefit neither himself nor his family and frugality be of profit to none of his prospective beneficiaries, a rich man who has been generous in life will be encouraged to a prodigal standard of living.
The strength of the economy has been founded on small family businesses and farms built up over the years by hard work and self-denial.
It is such businesses that will be particularly imperilled by the Act.
The founder's desire is usually to hand on to his children a more prosperous business than he inherited, and under the latest provisions it will be extremely difficult to do so.
Admittedly, gifts during life will be taxed less heavily than bequests, provided that the donor survives the gift by four years, but even so it will be almost impossible for a thriving business or a farm of economic size to be handed down to the next generation.
Such businesses or farms have no spare cash to pay the taxes which will be exacted, and the possibility of paying by instalments will be useless if the profits are not sufficient, after corporation tax or income tax, to build up to the capital transfer tax exigible.
With inflation the cost of stocking a small farm, quite apart from the value of the land itself, is so high that the tax imposition will make it virtually impossible for a farmer to pass on a flourishing farm to his son.
And with inflation increasing at 20 per cent or more a year it is ridiculous that all tax levies and exemptions are not indexed to the purchasing power of the £ so that inflation itself does not become the most grievous tax-gatherer of all.
Trusts are a particular object of attack, as if all trusts had as their purpose the aim of tax avoidance.
While one of the original purposes of trusts is believed to have been to avoid forfeiture for treason or escheat on a conviction of felony, the modern trust has been evolved as a useful instrument for protecting the weak and guarding the assets of those susceptible to stupid actions on account of age or facility.
It is unfortunate that the considerate father who aims to prevent his daughter becoming the victim of a faithless fortune-hunter or the testator eager that his possessions should not fall into the hands of his widow's second husband rather than his own children should find that the trust he sets up may well bear double liability to tax, both when the funds are settled in trust and when they are paid out.
Certainly with the additional liability of a periodic tax every ten years no truster will settle funds in a discretionary trust if he can achieve his aims in any other way.
The exemption of gifts and bequests between spouses is certainly to be welcomed, and the amended regulations which provide reasonable scope for gifts to charity are a belated honouring of the promise in the White Paper that charities would be at least as well off as under the old estate duty.
The permitted limits of £1,000 a year in total for gifts, and the exemptions of as many small gifts of £100 a year as the donor may choose and of all gifts out of surplus income are not unreasonable for ordinary individuals; and the raising of the exempt gift on marriage to £5,000 per parent will probably exceed the capacity of most parents, particularly that of the bride's parents saddled with the cost of the reception as well.
None of these exemptions, however, will help the businessman or farmer of whose plight mention has already been made.
No attempt has been made to deal in detail with the Act's provisions, but they are a classic example of the Inland Revenue's neurosis with tax avoidance and the use of the principle described in the Financial Times as ‘Sodom in reverse’.
While the Almighty was prepared to spare that wicked city if fifty righteous men could be found within its walls and haggling induced him to promise pardon if a mere ten righteous men were discovered, the Inland Revenue are willing to discourage saving and to destroy the whole economic system and social structure to prevent five tax avoiders squeezing through a loophole.
If Professor Wheatcroft is correct in saying that a tax system breathes through its loopholes, the new tax system has been throttled at birth.
notes
The taking of evidence Certificates of good repute Reciprocal enforcement of maintenance orders Agricultural rent restrictions Freedom of the burgh
The taking of evidence
The Evidence (Procedure in other Jurisdictions) Bill, which received its Second Reading on 24th January, and has now reached the Committee Stage, sets out a comprehensive code for the taking of evidence by courts in the United Kingdom on behalf of other courts.
It re-enacts the existing law on the taking of evidence by courts in England, Scotland and Northern Ireland for the purpose of civil proceedings in a court in another part of the United Kingdom, a Commonwealth country or a foreign country.
It also makes some changes in the existing law to remedy shortcomings revealed by experience, and contains some new provisions designed to enable the United Kingdom to ratify the Hague Convention on the Taking of Evidence Abroad in Civil or Commercial Matters of 1968 (Cmnd 3991 of 1969).
The legislation which has been repealed and re-enacted by the Bill is primarily that contained in the Foreign Tribunals Evidence Act, 1956, and the Evidence by Commission Acts, 1859 and 1885, as applied or extended by later enactments.
New powers introduced by the Bill include the obtaining of evidence for the purpose of proceedings which are in contemplation as well as those which are pending, authority to have evidence taken otherwise than on oath or affirmation, and extended powers to secure the attendance of witnesses anywhere in the United Kingdom.
The Bill deals with evidence in criminal matters only to the extent of preserving provisions of the Acts now to be repealed and re-enacted which apply to criminal evidence as well.
The Council has welcomed the principles of the Bill, and has made representations on certain technical matters therein.
Certificates of good repute
Since the note on this subject was published in the November Journal at p 372, the Home Office have advised English JPs that they cannot issue a certificate of good repute and of no previous bankruptcy as such, and that all they can do is to take a statutory declaration of good repute, etc, from the individual concerned.
The reason is that such certificates might be regarded abroad as given after an official check of records.
To clear up any doubt, therefore, Notaries Public in Scotland are advised that while they may take and duly sign a solemn declaration of good repute, etc, they cannot issue as such a certificate of good repute and of no previous bankruptcy.
Reciprocal enforcement of maintenance orders
The attention of members is drawn to the Reciprocal Enforcement of Maintenance Orders (Republic of Ireland) Order, l974 (SI 1974/2140), which came into operation on lst April 1975.
This Order gives effect to an agreement for the reciprocal enforcement of maintenance orders between the UK and Eire, which agreement was signed in London on 4th December 1974.
The Order and the agreement are based on the relevant provision of the EEC Convention on Jurisdiction and Enforcement of Judgments in Civil and Commercial Matters.
The Order is the first Order in Council made under Section 40 of the Maintenance Orders (Reciprocal Enforcement) Act, 1972
Agricultural rent restrictions
It was announced in the House of Commons on 26th February 1975 that the current restrictions on agricultural rents should cease to operate from 28th May 1975.
The current restrictions are set out in the Counter-Inflation (Agricultural Rents)(No 2) Order, 1973 (SI 1973 No 1717 as amended).
With minor exceptions, landlords have been permitted since 5th November 1973 to collect only the rent applicable before 6th November 1972, plus half the difference between that rent and any higher rent agreed between the parties at normal rent reviews, or settled by arbitration, or otherwise determined.
Rent increases payable for new improvements by landlords have not been affected.
Freedom of the burgh
Mr George Shaw Storm, the Town Clerk and Burgh Chamberlain of Nairn, is to be given the freedom of the burgh before the Town Council go out of existence.
Mr Storm has been Town Clerk of Nairn for forty-two years.
The Nairn Town Council have always guarded very closely their right to confer the freedom.
It has been granted only twice previously this century — to Lord Finlay of Newton in 1902 and to Sir Alexander Grant in the 1920s.
Mr Storm has had a family link with the Council since 1908 when his late father, Mr Alexander Storm, was appointed Town Clerk.
Interest on clients' money Surveyor negligence Sheriff Court Rules Council Sickness benefit
Interest on clients' money
In Northend (Inspector of Taxes)v White and Leonard and Corbin Greener and Others (The Times , 26th February 1975), a firm of solicitors receiving interest on a general client account with a bank was held in this case not to be entitled to earned income relief in respect of the interest because it had not been earned in return for professional services and was not ‘immediately derived’ from the carrying on of their profession.
Mr Justice Templeman so held in allowing an appeal by the Crown from a decision of the General Commissioners that income from such interest received by White and Leonard and Corbin Greener was subject to earned income relief under Sections 211 and 525 (1)(c) of the Income Tax Act, 1952.
It is understood that there has been a difference in practice within the profession in relation to this matter.
Some firms have claimed and been allowed deposit interest as earned income while others have had their claim disallowed and the interest has been treated as unearned investment income.
Surveyor negligence
It was reported in The Times of 6th March 1975 that Mr Toffrey Reeves, a surveyor for the National House Owners Association, which is a cut-price conveyancing group operating in England, was ordered in the High Court on 5th March to pay £3,000 damages to a client for failing to detect structural defects in the house he bought.
The damages were awarded to an electrical engineer who paid £1 to become a member of the National House Owners Association and £6 for a survey, which stated that there were no serious defects.
Shortly thereafter cracks began to appear in the house both internally and externally and the purchaser had to have the house underpinned at a cost of £1,444 and had obtained estimates of between £1,500 and 12,000 for repairs to the superstructure.
Sheriff Court Rules Council
Lord Emslie, Lord President of the Court of Session, has appointed Sheriff Principal F. W. F. O'Brien, QC, Sheriff Principal of North Strathclyde, as the new Chairman of the Sheriff Court Rules Council.
The Lord President has also appointed Sheriff Principal W. J. Bryden, CBE, QC, Sheriff Principal of Lothians and Borders, as a member of the Council.
Another new member of the Council is Mr R. Brodie, Deputy Director, Scottish Courts Administration.
Mr Brodie has been appointed by Mr William Ross, QC, Secretary of State for Scotland, who is responsible for appointing one member to the Council.
The following members have been reappointed by the Lord President: Appointments to the Council are for the period until December 1977.
Sickness benefit
A member of the Society has drawn attention to a point which arises in connection with the payment of sickness benefit under the National Insurance Acts which may be of interest to other members of the Society.
The point is that men in receipt of sickness benefit who attain the age of 65 and women in receipt of sickness benefit who attain the age of 60 are entitled to elect to continue to draw sickness benefit for five years in lieu of retirement pension.
The amount is identical but the former is tax free and the latter is not.
The member who brought this matter to our notice stated that had he known about this in one particular case, a capital gains tax assessment due by a client would not have become payable in consequence of the option available to pay at one-half the taxpayer's rate of income tax.
Redemption of feuduties Reorganisation of Sheriffdoms
Redemption of feuduties
It has been suggested that guidance should be given to the profession relating to receipts which are being issued for redemption money on the redemption of feuduties in terms of Section 4 of the Land Tenure Reform (Scotland) Act, 1974, the section which provided for voluntary redemption of feuduties at the terms of Whitsunday and Martinmas.
Most solicitors are finding that a number of receipts issued by superiors or their agents are not completed by being signed in terms of Form 2 of Schedule I prescribed by the Act for redemption receipts.
It is found that receipts are stamped with a firm's name and merely initialled by a cashier or other employee.
It is clear from the terms of Form 2 of Schedule 1 that a requirement for the receipt is that it should be signed by the superior or his agent.
It seems to follow from this that (1) in the case of a company, the receipt should be signed on behalf of the company by a person authorised,(2) in the case of a partnership, it should be signed by a partner who would either adhibit the firm's signature or his own, and (3) in the case of an individual superior, the individual in question should sign.
It is difficult to project one's mind to a subsequent sale where the receipt has to be produced, but one can visualise difficulty where the solicitor for a purchaser objects to the receipt and refuses to settle until a receipt in conformity with the Form provided is produced.
It might not always be possible to trace the superior or the agent concerned.
It is suggested that defective receipts should not be accepted, but should be sent back to be corrected.
Alternatively, solicitors paying redemption money should send to the superior or his agent a form of receipt in the wording of Form 2 indicating how it should be executed.
Recording of receipts
Section 8 of the Feudal Casualties (Scotland) Act, 1914, provided that the superior in receipt of compensation payable on redemption of casualties was bound to discharge all right to the casualties redeemed.
This he could do by granting a Discharge in the form set forth in Schedule B to the Act or in a similar form.
The Discharge operated on its being recorded in the appropriate Register of Sasines.
The statute, however, did provide an alternative.
At the option of the proprietor of the feu, he was entitled to receive from the superior a receipt which did not require to be tested or holograph and was effectual without being recorded.
Section 4 of the Land Tenure Reform (Scotland) Act, 1974. contains no such alternative and subsection 4 of that section provides for a receipt which, like its prototype in the 1914 Act, is not in its simplest form a recordable document.
On the redemption of a feuduty it is always open to parties to execute a deed similar in style to the Discharge provided for in Schedule B referred to above.
The essentials, from a recording point of view, were and are a tested (or holograph or adopted as holograph) deed, the designation therein of the parties and a description or reference description of the relevant lands.
With regard to a description not by reference, the Keeper, in order to make ‘public and patent to his hienes lieges’(1617 Act, c 16), is entitled to be provided with a common law description which at a minimum should be the postal address of the property (eg, ‘subjects 3 High Street, Ayr’) or, in the case of flatted property, the identification of the particular house (eg, ‘the north house on the first flat above the street flat 3 High Street, Ayr’)— and whether or not the Keeper really likes such minimum descriptions he has no option but to accept them!
Reorganisation of Sheriffdoms
As members will be aware, the Local Government Regions and Districts have been known for some time, and the areas of the Sheriffdoms were published at the beginning of the year.
Some members have expressed anxiety that the Sheriff Court Districts have not yet been made known or published.
The Society is keeping in close touch with the appropriate authority and full information will be published as soon as possible.
In the meantime and excepting certain problem areas which are causing difficulty, it can be said that the Secretary of State's general policy is to align the new Sheriff Court Districts with the existing Local Government Districts, or a combination of these, unless good reason is shown to him to the contrary as a result of representations made to him or to the appropriate Sheriff Principal.
The ultimate decision lies with the Secretary of State.
Details of the Local Government Districts by areas, under reference to the administrative area prior to reorganisation of local government, are available on pages A34 to A65 of the Scottish Law Directory , 1975.
The Rehabilitation of Offenders Act, 1974, and Children's Hearings Statutory havering
It was at one time said that statutes were drafted in such a way as to be intelligible only to lawyers.
That irreverent assertion may, with some justification, be amended to read mat statutes are now drafted in such a way as to be intelligible not even to lawyers.
My attention has been drawn to the complex and inelegant Rehabilitation of Offenders Act, 1974, and, in particular, to its possible consequences for children's hearings.
It has been put to me that when the Act comes into force on 1st May 1975 it will make a nonsense out of the children's hearing system.
This view, while erroneous, is an understandable construction of a statute that defies any simple interpretation.
Certainly, the general intention of the statute is entirely laudable.
In supporting the Bill at its Second Reading in the House of Commons, the Minister of State at the Home Office, Mr Alexander Lyon, explained the Bill's overall purpose thus: ‘If a man has committed an indiscretion that brings him before the courts and results in his being convicted and penalised, it must be right that after he has served the penalty and lived it down by a substantial period of good conduct thereafter, it should be without meaning for most people of good will.’
The sponsor of the Bill, Mr Piers Dixon, cited the heart-rending case of one Robert, a man whose promising Academic career was seriously impaired by the discovery by a potential employer of a criminal record in Robert's distant youth.
Mr Dixon estimated that there were about one million people in Great Britain with previous convictions, who, he considered, would be potential targets for blackmail and, also, understandably reluctant to act as witnesses.
Yet, despite its lofty aims, the Act had an odd, somewhat shoddy, legislative history.
An almost identical Bill was introduced as a private member's Bill in the 1973–74 session and successfully completed its passage through the House of Lords, when it fell at its Second Reading in the House of Commons on the dissolution of Parliament.
It was reintroduced in early 1974, again as a private member's Bill but with government backing.
The Minister of State at the Home Office said: ‘The Government accept fully the principle contained in the Bill.
We were ourselves considering whether we should introduce a Government Bill to this effect.
Bearing in mind the Hon Gentleman's lucky place in the Ballot, we are happy to use his Bill as a vehicle for a full discussion of the many difficulties….’
While the government later indicated that it had merely given drafting assistance, it is abundantly clear that its influence on the Bill was much more than one would normally associate with drafting assistance.
The government laid down extensive amendments at both the Committee and Third Reading stages of the Bill, such that one MP considered that there had been a ‘complete rewriting of the whole Bill’ and another that it ‘has become virtually a Government Bill’
There can be little doubt that the government's ‘take-over’ of the Bill during its passage through the House of Commons contributed to its textual defects.
Sadly, for a number of reasons, Parliament was unable to exercise adequate control over the contents of the Bill.
The government put down numerous extensive amendments to the Bill.
At the Third Reading, for instance, at a stage when one would expect very few amendments of any substance, some thirty-two amendments were put down on only twenty-four hours' notice.
And the government was content to push the Bill through the Commons without the allocation of more Parliamentary time to it, despite the fact that it was a more substantial and complicated measure thanks to government intervention.
The net result was that Parliamentary control over the terms of the Bill was less than adequate.
The Bill's application to children's hearings was something of an afterthought.
At the Third Reading, the UnderSecretary of State for Scotland, Mr Robert Hughes, laid a number of amendments to make it clear that the Bill was intended to apply to children's hearings.
He indicated that, without specific application to children's hearings, the nature of the children's hearings system ‘leaves [it]outside the benefit of this Bill’, and he added: ‘It would be wrong to deny them the benefit of the Bill when, if they had committed serious offences and appeared before the courts, they would have had its protection.’
Given the general background of the Bill's legislative history, and its late application to the children's hearings system, it is hardly surprising that there is an apparent, though fundamental, ambiguity in its provisions in relation to children's hearings.
Section 4 (1) of the Act reads:
‘Subject to sections 7 and 8 below, a person who has become a rehabilitated person for the purposes of this Act in respect of a conviction shall be treated for all purposes in law as a person who has not committed or been charged  with or prosecuted for or convicted of or sentenced for the offence or offences which were the subject of that conviction; and, notwithstanding the provisions of any other enactment or rule of law to the contrary, but subject as aforesaid —
‘(a) no evidence shall be admissible in any proceedings before a judicial authority exercising its jurisdiction or functions in Great Britain to prove that any such person has committed…any offence which was the subject of a spent conviction; and’(b) a person shall not, in any such proceedings, be asked, and, if asked, shall not be required to answer, any question relating to his past that cannot be answered without acknowledging or referring to a spent conviction or spent convictions or any circumstances thereto;…’
A rehabilitated person is one who has been convicted of and sentenced for an offence or offences and who has not committed a further offence or offences during the appropriate rehabilitation period and that period has expired.
The original offence or offences are then considered as ‘spent’.
The length of the rehabilitation period varies according to the severity of sentence imposed; it does not depend, incidentally, on the seriousness of the original offence or offences, except insofar as that is reflected in the sentence.
The rehabilitation period for a child subject to a supervision requirement is one year or until the termination of the supervision requirement, whichever is the longer.
References to a supervision requirement in the Act include references to a requirement made in substitution for an existing requirement.
So if a child is kept under supervision in the community for, say, three years, by his original hearing and two review hearings, then the rehabilitation period in respect of him is three years.
Where a child appears before a children's hearing and the hearing decide not to impose a supervision requirement, the rehabilitation period is six months.
It is clear from the Act that ‘proceedings before a judicial authority’ can be taken to include proceedings before a children's hearing: a children's hearing is a ‘tribunal, body or person holding power’under statute ‘to determine any question affecting the rights, privileges, obligations or liabilities of any person, or to receive evidence affecting or determining any such question’.
The duty not to ask and the right not to answer relates to the actual spent offence and, in terms of section 4 (1)(b), also to any circumstances ancillary to it, including the conduct that constituted the offence, proceedings preliminary to sentence, the sentence itself and any review or appeal proceedings.
Reading section 4 of the Act with the other relevant interpretative sections, it is hardly surprising that a number of people connected with the children's hearing system saw the Act as a major handicap to their work.
The very essence of the children's hearing system is that a hearing, once it has jurisdiction in respect of a child, is empowered to examine the child's entire social background in arriving at a decision as to disposal in the child's best interests.
Yet section 4 seems to place severe limitations in some circumstances on the exploration by a children's hearing of a child's entire social background.
For example, assume that a child is a rehabilitated person within the meaning of the Act: in other words, he has been subject to a supervision requirement and that requirement has been terminated or a year has elapsed since the date of the hearing that imposed the supervision requirement, whichever is the longer, and he has committed no further offences during the rehabilitation period; or he has appeared before a children's hearing which has decided not to impose a supervision requirement on him and six months has elapsed during which time he has committed no further offences.
In both these cases, should the child appear before a children's hearing again, then, reading section 4 as it stands, no questions can be asked and no answers received on the earlier offence or the previous hearing or any review hearings or the disposal.
So, on this interpretation, for the rehabilitated child, a children's hearing might be able to look into his social background until the spent offence and after the rehabilitation period is completed, but would be unable to investigate the offence, the previous hearing or hearings, and the child's response to supervision or training.
There would be a gap of anything from six months to a number of years over which a veil was drawn.
It is not too much to say that this interpretation of what appears the plain meaning of section 4 of the Rehabilitation of Offenders Act, 1974, would make a farce out of the children's hearing system.
If a child has been made the subject of a supervision requirement following a referral to a children's hearing on an offence ground, and that supervision requirement has been terminated and the child reappears before another children's hearing, the main factors that the later hearing will need to consider to perform their statutory functions are why the child appeared before a children's hearing, the reasons for that hearing's disposal and, most particularly, the child's response to the disposal; in short, a children's hearing would want to know the very things section 4 appears to prevent it ascertaining.
Moreover, the Act contains inherent inconsistencies.
A child may come before a hearing on an offence referral and be made subject to a supervision requirement for a number of reasons, of which the offence may be only one; the child may on review be kept subject to a supervision requirement, even though he may have committed no further offences, because of, say, inadequate parental care.
Yet, for this child, the rehabilitation period will be the length of time he is subject to a supervision requirement.
A situation can be envisaged where a child commits an offence at the age of eight and then offends no more, but is kept subject to a supervision requirement for a number of years for his ‘care or protection’.
Such a child might be subject to a rehabilitation period of ten years — the same period as for an adult sentenced to from six months' to thirty months' imprisonment, the longest period covered by the Act.
The implications for the children's hearing system of section 4 of the Rehabilitation of Offenders Act, 1974, appear at first sight to be far-reaching and disastrous.
However, assistance is at hand in section 7, to which section 4 is expressly made subject.
Section 7 (2) provides:
‘Nothing in section 4 (1) above shall affect the determination of any issue, or prevent the admission or requirement of any evidence, relating to a person's previous convictions or to circumstances ancillary thereto —
‘…(e) in any proceedings before a children's hearing under the Social Work (Scotland) Act 1968 or on appeal from any such hearing;…’
Thus, the Act has no effect in the internal workings of children's hearings: there is no question of ‘rehabilitation’ as that term is understood in the Act applying so as to prevent a later children's hearing exploring the circumstances of an earlier offence or hearing or disposal.
What the Act will do  is to ensure that the child offender who is dealt with by a children's hearing may not be asked, and if asked need not answer, questions about ‘spent’ offences in, for example, applications for employment.
But it was generally thought that the disposal of a children's hearing would not be treated as a conviction.
A child may appear before a hearing for reasons other than offences; and he will have a disposal tailored to his needs for care rather than to the seriousness of the offence; and a child may not only be put under a supervision requirement for reasons other than an offence, but he may remain under such a requirement for a period of years for reasons completely unconnected with breaches of the criminal law.
In short, it was thought by many that the nature of the children's hearing system would make it unnecessary to enact rules for ‘wiping the slate clean’.
However, insofar as it purports to strengthen that belief, the Rehabilitation of Offenders Act is to be welcomed.
The sad aspect of the Act is that people connected with the children's hearing system — people certainly not lacking in intelligence or application — have been unable to unravel the mysteries of the statute.
In view of the understandable difficulty that this inelegant and complex piece of legislation presented to these people, one must stand in awe at what one Member, Sir Michael Havers, had the temerity to say at the Third Reading of the Bill: ‘One of the great ambitions of successive Parliaments is to simplify the laws that they pass and make them more readily understood.’
Book case
FORENSIC SCIENCE: AN INTRODUCTION TO SCIENTIFIC CRIME DETECTION.
(2nd Edn.)
H. J. Walls.
Sweet & Maxwell.
£5 00.
Forensic science grew (like many of the sciences) out of medicine.
A century ago there were few professional scientists — and most of them were medically qualified.
More recently, the balance has changed.
The last thirty years have seen the vigorous development of new techniques (often derived from chemistry, physics and biology) for the investigation of crime.
The forensic scientist — as distinct from the forensic pathologist — has come into his own.
One of the most eminent practitioners of the new science — and certainly the most articulate — is Dr Walls, formerly Director of the Metropolitan Police Forensic Science Laboratory.
The first edition of his textbook, intended mainly for lawyers and police officers, became widely popular also among scientists and technicians interested in forensic problems.
The new edition, largely rewritten, aims ‘to combine a complete and scientifically acceptable coverage of the field with sufficient elementary explanation to make this comprehensible by readers without a scientific training’.
The author succeeds in this difficult task, mainly because he takes the trouble to understand a topic thoroughly before writing about it.
In describing laboratory methods he offers a clear account of the underlying scientific principles and practical techniques, followed by relevant material from case histories and objective assessment of advantages, limitations and future possibilities.
The book does not deal with forensic pathology but gives a lucid and knowledgeable account of the work of a forensic science laboratory.
The chapters on alcohol and the driver, toxicology and drug identification and fires and explosions are outstandingly good, but other chapters on contact traces, offences against property, personal identification, firearms, documents, chemical methods and biological techniques are also excellently done.
Forensic science occupies a small place in the realm of criminal justice, since laboratory assistance is sought in regard to only 2 per cent of all offences recorded.
But many of these offences are serious or sophisticated crimes, with importance out of proportion to their numbers.
At a time when criminals often seem more skilful in the use of technology than the law enforcement agencies, it is well that forensic science should flourish.
There is no better introduction to the subject than Dr Walls's authoritative yet eminently readable text-book.
THE PRIVATE SECRETARY.
A. G. McBain.
Shaw .
£1.00.
Readers of this Journal who have read the author's contributions to its pages will be prepared for a book which is interesting, informative and occasionally dogmatic.
His expectations will be realised.
This is a useful book for the private secretary, and even ‘the boss’, to use the author's own words, may find entertainment as well as information if he can make time to read it.
Space does not permit citation of the examples which might give some idea of the useful quality of the book.
Upon the use of ‘Esq’ or ‘Mr’in addressing communications — a choice which Mr McBain is content to leave to instinct — perhaps one might direct his attention to the response of an old Ayrshire lady who received the suggestion that she should address a local worthy as ‘Esq’with some bewilderment.
‘Esquire?’ she said.
‘Esquire o’ what?’
BRITISH INDUSTRY AND EUROPEAN LAW.
Edited by G. W. Keeton and S.N. Frommel.
Macmillan .
£6.95.
Time was when the European Communities were, according to one's views, but a shaft of sunlight or a thunderstorm on the horizon.
Time was when there were few books in English on the law of the Communities.
Time was when such books as existed in English were general and non-specific in nature, treating Community law in a superficial and introductory way.
Time was when such books could expect reasonable sales.
Sadly for Professors Keeton and Frommel these days are now past.
The euphoria of the immediate pre- and post-entry days has gone, and those who are concerned with Community law realise that they require a precise and detailed analysis of its rules.
Those who work in, or advise, British industry will find little of use in this book, despite the enticing title.
British Industry and European Law emerged from addresses and discussions of a conference held at Brunel University as long ago as November 1972.
It is unfortunate that papers presented a couple of months before our entry to the Communities should only appear in print some eighteen months after Community law began to have effect in the UR.
The book contains some unhappy defects, of which only two of the more serious need be mentioned.
The editors begin their Introduction by agreeing with Professor David Walker's statement in the Scottish Legal System that Scottish legal history is closer to that of the Continent than its English counterpart.
One's hopes are raised that Scots law is to get at least some adequate mention, but these hopes founder on the title of the very first chapter, ‘The Incorporation of European Community Law into English Law’.
Talking of Chapter 1, Mr Zaphiriou's account of the relationship between Community law and UR law is far from impressive.
Mr Zaphiriou seems to state that the whole of the Treaty and all regulations are directly applicable in this country (p 4), yet sec 2 (1) of the European Communities Act, 1972, makes it abundantly clear that only those rules of Community law, be they derived from the Treaty or the acts of the institutions, which are directly applicable under Community law have direct effect in this country.
On the question of the paramountcy of European Community law over UK law, Mr Zaphiriou misses the point that sec 2 (4) of the European Communities Act, 1972, can be taken as providing that Community law is to prevail over both previous and subsequent British legislation (p 11).
After the poor chapter on ‘The Legal Framework’, there are sections on company law, corporate taxation, competition policy, patent law and insurance, with an impressive list of contributors.
Yet, one cannot help feeling that a book of this type, whatever its particular merits, has been overtaken by events and by other writings.
THE INTERNATIONAL CIVIL ENGINEERING CONTRACT.
A Commentary on the FIDIC International Standard Form of Civil Engineering and Building Contract.
I. L. Duncan Wallace.
Sweet & Maxwell .
£9.00
This is a highly specialised work but, within its confines, one ventures to think an indispensable one.
It takes the useful and practical form of a general introductory chapter, a second chapter presenting the form of tender and form of agreement both with commentary, an extended chapter 3 which presents the conditions of the International Civil Engineering Contract (5th edition — 1973) with a running commentary not in every case clause by clause but certainly confining the commentary where it is not upon an individual clause to a small group of related clauses, and a final chapter dealing with conditions of particular application.
The book is supplied with an index and a short table of cases.
This is a most useful addition to the literature on the complicated subject of building and engineering contracts.
Taken together with the author's Building & Civil Engineering Standard Forms (1969 with 1970 and 1973 Supplements) and the tenth edition of Hudson's Building and Engineering Contracts (1970) which is edited by the author, this book gives the practitioner sound and practical assistance on virtually any problem which may confront him in this difficult and increasingly important area of law.
Not only so.
The book, along with the other two volumes on the standard forms of contract, is not addressed exclusively to the lawyer.
Though they are in no sense elementary in their approach they are designed to be read with benefit by all who have ‘some experience of the industry and of the administration of engineering contracts’.
From the preface it also appears that the design of the book is to assist the reader who is concerned with a specific problem and who ‘has read carefully and understood (so far as the draftsmanship will permit him to understand) the clause on which he requires guidance.
The stricture implicit in the parenthesis within that quotation is justified and Mr Wallace explains those implications in more detail in his introductory chapter when he criticises the draftsmanship of the contract in condign terms.
The curious, at times seemingly perverse, ambiguity in which the terms of the contract are from time to time expressed is an added reason why no one who has to wrestle with the problems which abound in this area should fail to arm himself with this book.
SELECTED JUSTICIARY CASES.
VOL III.
Edited by Sheriff J. Irvine Smith.
The Stair Society .
£7.50.
This welcome volume, edited as was Volume II by Sheriff Irvine Smith, completes the project of the Stair Society of publishing a selection of the Justiciary Cases 1624–50, the inception of which was signalised by the publication in 1953 of the first volume under the editorship of Sheriff Stair A. Gillon.
In making manifest to a waiting public the final accomplishment of that ambitious design, Sheriff Irvine Smith has had to contend with vicissitudes of health to which he refers in his Introduction and from which all his many friends are rejoiced to see him recovered.
His modest apology for tardiness in producing this volume is unnecessary in any terms, considering the magnitude of his task, and when in addition one realises that he has pressed on with the completion of the work during his convalescence from a serious illness, it is clear that his apology should be replaced by the public's commendation.
Again it is unnecessary for him to explain his reluctance to respond in the circumstances to the hope of this reviewer that he would again delight us with an introduction of the wide sweep of brilliance with which he embellished Volume II.
It is enough to say that, having adopted the character of Oliver Twist, I have been fortunate in meeting with a kindlier and less formidable response than he; and while anyone who knows the editor's capabilities must realise that it is not beyond his powers to write a further introduction of  the same delight as that preceding Volume II, it would be unreasonable to complain that in his assessment of the situation the needs of prompt publication have been put first.
But what Sheriff Irvine Smith has, with compelling cause shown, denied us in his Introduction he has amply redeemed in the justiciary cases he has placed before us and in his commentary thereon.
The reader will find the delights he experienced in the introduction to Volume II dispersed throughout the pages of Volume III.
His own interests will be his guide in this and will not remain unrequited.
If those interests are engaged with the law respecting the poor wretches who were arraigned for sorcery and witchcraft, he will find the law and the social background most luminously expounded in the prefatory note to L.A. contra Agnes Finnie (pp 627–636).
If his pleasure is to envisage some favoured spot in his own sentiment and predilection, here again he will not be disappointed.
As one with wide, if not indeed indiscriminating, predilections of this sort throughout Scotland (with some reservations which it would be unseemly to dwell upon here), I found the cases of Johnne Brughe of Fossiway (pp 597 et seq),Bruce of Clackmannan contra Merschell (pp 603 et seq),Stewartis contra Merser (pp 563–571) and John Thomesone & utheris contra John Scott (pp 783–785) of clear and cogent delight to read, while the plangent record of time long byegone in James Swan (pp 742–743) where the worthy cautioner of the accused was ordained to make good the ‘payne of one hundred merkis’ imposed for the unlawful taking of salmon on the River Cart inspires thought too deep to utter.
Sunt lacrirnae rerum et mentem mortalia tangunt .
Sheriff Irvine Smith has again displayed to us through the cases themselves and through his own deft and inhumane commentary, the continuing mores of the Scottish nation.
If the more rural areas show up on the whole slightly better than the more populous places that is perhaps a feature that occurs in other aspects of Scottish life; and let the indwellers in those backward centres of population not repine.
There is plenty of interest in this book even for them.
DEVELOPMENT GAINS AND FIRST LETTINGS TAX.
Clifford Joseph Oyez .
£2.50 THE 1974 DEVELOPMENTS TAX.
Philip Lawton and David Goy.
Sweet and Maxwell .
£3.20.
The new development gains tax, introduced by the Finance Act, 1974, represents the latest attempt to impose what might be considered as an adequate tax on gains which result from the to development or potential development value of land situated in the United in the Kingdom.
Whether the new tax will have the desired effect and whether it will have an effective life-span (there is in already a White Paper on ‘Land’(Cmnd 5730)) are questions which can only be answered in the future.
In the meantime, practitioners who are concerned with transactions in land will wish to be adequately informed as to the of impact of the new tax and of the pitfalls be associated with it.
In outline the tax is simple.
Where any disposal of any interest in land takes place after 17th December 1973 and gives rise to a chargeable (ie, capital) gain it is necessary to consider what part, if any, of that gain constitutes a development gain.
If any part does constitute such a gain, then that part is taxed as income and not capital.
If no development gain arises, then the matter remains entirely one of capital under the capital gains tax rules.
Difficulties arise because transactions in land are frequently sophisticated in form and the legislation which reflects this is complex.
There is also the further of point that the new tax extends not only to actual disposals but to deemed disposals where, after 17th December 1973, a chargeable building is first let or occupied to a material extent after the commencement of relevant development, ie, there may thus be a charge to tax not only on realised gains but also on unrealised gains.
How then do these two books meet the challenges imposed by essentially complex legislation?
Both, in their various ways, provide the sort of information which is of real value to practitioners.
The book by Clifford Joseph is in a sense the more readable and will perhaps be in more readily appreciated by the none-specialist in tax matters who wishes to understand the essentials of the tax but is not necessarily concerned with an exhaustive treatment of the subject.
On occasions, the author puts an unfortunate gloss on a point, such as at page 9, where (in commenting on the capital gains tax) he states that an individual may ‘claim as a concession’ to be taxed on capital gains under what is known as the ‘half-income’rule whereas section 21, Finance Act, 1965, makes it clear that M where the rule operates in favour of the individual, then the tax is to be computed as that basis.
The subject-matter is developed in a reasonable and attractive manner and there are numerous worked examples.
In all, a most useful book on a complex subject.
The second book, by Philip Lawton and David Goy, is more a book for the practitioner who is familiar with many of the details of tax law and who expects both a thorough and a comprehensive treatment of the subject at an appropriate high technical level.
The authors are indeed to be congratulated on producing such a clear and authoritative treatment of their subject in so short a time.
It is not so much a book for reading as a book to which reference can confidently be made both on general matters and on points of detail.
Again, an the subject is developed logically and there are plenty of good worked examples.
Particular mention should be made of the way in which the new legislation is consistently placed in the context of existing law.
TAXATION OF COMPANIES.
Richard Bramwell.
Second Cumulative Supplement.
Sweet & Maxwell .
65p.
In this supplement to Mr Bramwell's useful book on the taxation of companies the statement of the law is updated to 1st October 1974 and this has enabled the author to notice the relevant provisions of the Finance Act 1974 and their effect upon the subject-matter of the book.
The supplement is very modestly priced and will be indispensable for those who use Mr Bramwell's book.
There must be many who since the appearance of the original work on corporation tax by Messrs Talbot and Wheatcroft, on which the present book is based, have found the original book and its successor useful aids to company taxation problems.
Capital Transfer Tax (IV)
The transition
This article was written prior to publication of the Finance Act and is, therefore, subject to any amendments appearing therein.
Generally the provisions affecting settled property properly so-called — where the property is held by trustees for administration in accordance with the terms of a deed of settlement — are framed round the conception of the trust beneficiary as the transferor of the property involved in any transfer of value which takes place in consequence of any dealing with the property by way of advances out of the capital or disposal of his beneficial interest or termination of that interest by surrender or on death.
It is to his circumstances that attention is directed in fixing the rate of tax to be paid.
Where there is no trust beneficiary who has a beneficial interest in possession in the property, of course, some other way of fixing the rate has to be found; and in the case of Gartside v IRC (1968) AC 553 the House of Lords has held that where there was a discretionary trust with a power to accumulate income, the interest of the group of beneficiaries did not constitute an ‘interest in possession’ for the purposes of estate duty.
A fortiori , the interest of an individual member of the group did not constitute such an interest.
A settlement made on divorce which is in satisfaction or partial satisfaction of a claim for maintenance is not, to that extent, a chargeable transfer.
The provisions for charging CTT on settled property do not apply to a settlement for charitable purposes only.
–here property has been settled on terms which provide for one or more beneficiaries to become entitled to an interest in possession in it on or before a specified age which does not exceed twenty-five but meantime no such interest in possession subsists and the income so far as not applied for maintenance education or benefit of any beneficiary is to be accumulated, neither a payment made out of the property nor the arising to a beneficiary of an interest in possession in it is to be treated as a chargeable transfer.
Excluded property which is not to be included in the estate of a person (which means the aggregate of all the property to which that person is beneficially entitled including settled property in which he has an interest in possession) immediately before his death embraces for CTT purposes:(a) settled property situated outside the United Kingdom unless the settlor was domiciled in the United Kingdom at the time the settlement was made; and (b) securities issued by the Treasury subject to the condition that they shall be exempt from taxation while in the beneficial ownership of persons neither domiciled nor ordinarily resident in the United Kingdom provided in the case of settled property either that such.
person is beneficially entitled to an interest in possession i them or that only such persons can benefit under the settlement.
The death of a member of the armed forces of the Crown as these are defined for purposes of the tax while active service or other service of a warlike nature does no give rise to a transfer of value.
Estate duty reliefs carried forward to CTT include freedom from tax where an interest in settled property comes to a end during the settlor's life and the property then reverts to him (unless, of course, the reverter is by reason of his purchase of the reversionary interest); and an allowance analogous to the old Quick Succession Allowance where within four years there has been more than one chargeable transfer il which the value transferred has been determined by reference to the value of the same settled property in which an interest in possession subsists.
Where the transferor became entitled to his interest on a death in connection with which the settled property bore estate duty, then for the purposes of the latter allowance the four-year period can be regarded as beginning with that death.
It will be recalled that Section 37 of the Finance Act, 1969 provided for the ascertainment for the purposes of estate duty of the ‘slice’ of the property in which the interest of; beneficiary who was entitled to less than the whole of the in come or who had a joint interest in property which was no income-producing subsisted.
Similar provisions are made for CTT with this difference, that in calculating the value of the ‘slice ‘the property is to be deemed to produce income a such a rate as may from time to time be prescribed by the Treasury with the proviso that the value of the’ slice’as so ascertained is never to exceed the value of the whole property.
A complicating factor in making the provisions relating t settled property has been the inordinate delay between the time when the intention to impose the tax was announced and the date of its becoming law.
In conjunction with the necessity to provide for the transition from estate duty to CT.
these considerations have produced provisions governing events which take place during the interim period which are to say the least of it, complicated.
The account of them which follows is based on the print of the Bill which is dated 19th February 1975.
The Bill is bound to be extensively amended before it reaches the statute book — at the time of writing 16, amendments have been put down by the Government and 25 of them are of major importance — but it is believed that few if any of these amendments will affect settlements under which there is subsisting an interest in possession.
A Settlements in which there is an interest in possession subsisting
(1) Settlements made before 26/3/74:
(i)
Advances of capital and determinations of interest during the life of the beneficiary which have taken place before 26/3/74 can give rise only to a claim for duty or tax in connection with the beneficiary's death (a) If the death takes place before 13/11/74 any claim for estate duty must be made under Section  2(1) (b)(i) or (ii) of the Finance Act, 1894, and all the present estate duty rules apply.
(b) If the death takes place after 12/11/74 and before the passing of the Finance Act, 1975 , any estate duty is to be claimed under the said Section 2 (1)(b)(i) or (ii), but the duty is payable at CTT rates, any agricultural relief is given on full estate duty terms, there is no timber relief but taper relief can be claimed, and in the case of a surviving spouse the exempting provisions of Section 5 (2) of the Finance Act, 1894, can apply; and the persons accountable for the duty in terms of Section 44 of the Finance Act, 1950, can pay such as relates to qualifying property by instalments.
(c) If the death takes place after the passing of the Finance Act, 1975 , but within seven years of the advance or determination, then in ascertaining for the purposes of CTT the value of the deceased's estate immediately before his death there is to be included the value of any property which would have been chargeable with estate duty had Section 2 (1)(b)(i) of the Finance Act, 1894, still been in force (ie, after the application of any taper relief), unless the deceased was the surviving partner of a marriage which had been terminated by the death of the other spouse before 13/11/74 and the exempting provisions of Section 5 (2) of that Act would have applied had they still been in force; and the persons accountable for the tax are those who would have been accountable under Section 44 of the Finance Act, 1950, for any estate duty that would have been chargeable.
(ii)
Where the beneficiary's interest determines on his death before 13/11/74 estate duty is payable under Section 2 (1)(b)(i) of the Finance Act, 1894, and all the present rules apply.
Where the death happens after 12/11/74 but before the passing of the Finance Act, 1975 , the termination of his interest is not a chargeable transfer.
Estate duty is payable under the said Section 2 (1)(b)(i) but at CTT rates, any agricultural relief will be on the full estate duty basis but there is no timber relief, the exempting provisions of the said Section 5 (2) can apply and the duty on qualifying property can be paid by instalments by the persons accountable for it in terms of Section 8 (4) of the Finance Act, 1894.
(iii)
Where the beneficiary's interest comes to an end to any extent or is in any way disposed of during his lifetime after 25/3/74, then unless he becomes at the same time beneficially entitled to the property in which the terminated interest subsisted or to another interest in possession in it CTT is prima facie chargeable in respect of its value.
The determination or disposal is treated as a transfer of value by the beneficiary and the rate of tax payable is arrived at by reference to the total of it and any previous chargeable transfers by him unless the determination or disposal took place before 10/12/74 when, in implement of the undertaking in the White Paper (Cmnd 5705) that in these circumstances any tax chargeable would be no greater than that which would be due if the trust were an individual who had made chargeable gifts equal to the capital becoming chargeable, the rate is arrived at by reference solely to the total of the determinations or disposals which have taken place in the trust since 25/3/74, if by so doing the amount of tax payable would be reduced.
This latter provision does not prevent the determination or disposal from being taken into account as a transfer of value by the beneficiary in arriving at the rate of tax payable in connection with all subsequent transfers of value by him.
The value transferred is to be reduced by the value of any other interest in possession in the property to which the beneficiary becomes entitled at the same time or by the amount of any consideration in money or money's worth which he has received in respect of the determination or disposal.
The persons liable to pay the tax are the trustees, although the beneficiary is otherwise treated as the transferor.
If the interest which terminated subsisted in a fixed sum or specific property so that the tax comes out of the property remaining in settlement, the value transferred will have to be grossed up to include the tax.
(iv)
If the beneficiary dies before the passing of the Finance Act, 1975, but after a determination or disposal of his interest which has taken place after 25/3/74, then that determination or disposal does not constitute a chargeable transfer.
It is estate duty that is leviable in respect of it under Section 2 (1)(b)(i) of the Finance Act, 1894.
If the death has taken place before 13/11/74 all the normal estate duty rules apply.
Death after 12/11/74 attracts estate duty at CTT rates; if the determination or disposal was before 13/11/74 any agricultural relief is as for estate duty, there is no timber relief but the exempting provisions of Section 5 (2) of the Finance Act, 1894, can apply; and the duty on any qualifying property may be paid by instalments by the persons accountable for it under Section 44 of the Finance Act, 1950.
(v)
If the beneficiary dies after the passing of the Finance Act, 1975, then of course for CTT purposes any determination or disposal of interest which has taken place since 25/3/74 has constituted a transfer of value and in addition if he is entitled at his death to a beneficial interest in possession in any property remaining in settlement that property falls to be included in the aggregate of the estate immediately before his death, a transfer of value of which he is treated as having made at that time.
(2) Settlements made after 25/3/74:
Prima facie either the settlor has made a chargeable transfer which has attracted CTT on the value transferred (unless his death before the passing of the Finance Act, 1975, has prevented his disposition from being a chargeable transfer by giving rise to liability to estate duty under Section 2 (1)(c) of the Finance Act, 1894) or, in the case of a mortis causa settlement, either estate duty or CTT has been paid on his testamentary estate.
(i)
Where the beneficiary's interest comes to an end to any extent or is in any way disposed of during his lifetime, then unless he becomes at the same time beneficially entitled to the property in which the interest subsisted or to another interest in possession in it CTT is to be charged as if he had made a transfer (Continued on page 129) of value at that time and the value transferred had been equal to the value of the property in which the interest subsisted.
The rate of tax payable is arrived at by reference to the total of that value and the value of any previous chargeable transfers made by the beneficiary, but that value is to be reduced by the value of any other interest in possession in the property to which he becomes entitled at the same time or by the amount of any consideration in money or money's worth which he has received in respect of the termination or disposal of the interest.
The persons liable to pay the tax are the trustees of the settlement and when the interest that is terminated has subsisted in a fixed sum or specific property so that the tax comes out of the property remaining in settlement, the value transferred will have to be grossed up to include it.
(ii)
If the beneficiary has died after the determination or disposal of his interest and before the passing of the Finance Act, 1975, that determination or disposal does not constitute a chargeable transfer.
It is estate duty that is payable in connection with his death under Section 2 (1)(b)(i) of the Finance Act, 1894, and the consequences will be as stated at paragraph 1 (iv) above.
Death after the passing of the Finance Act, 1975, has the effect stated at paragraph 1 (v).
Conveyancers' notes
Complete plain words
One of our largest seed firms recently redesigned its packets and rephrased the planting instructions in basic English.
Instead, for instance, of saying a plant was ‘biennial’, it was explained that you plant the seeds this year and they will flower next year.
The result, apparently, was a dramatic increase in sales, and no doubt a hidden bonus of contented customers who could actually understand in autumn why nothing had happened to ‘those blasted seeds’ they had planted in the spring.
‘Amazing,’ you may say, ‘but what has this to do with conveyancing?’
Surprisingly enough, it may have a great deal to do with conveyancing.
Horticulturists appear to have joined the legion of defectors from the practice of assuming that their customers or clients are all dedicated part-time classicists, with comprehensive dictionaries at their elbows.
This would seem to leave the legal and medical professions in an isolated position.
By custom, the legal profession is given a partial, if rather grudging, exemption from being readily intelligible in its written words.
Sir Ernest Gowers, in The Complete Plain Words , 2nd Edn, 1973 (revised by Sir Bruce Fraser), Pelican Books — a splendid book which could profitably be read by all legal draftsmen — states:
‘Legal drafting must therefore be unambiguous, precise and largely conventional.
If it is readily intelligible so much the better; but it is far more important that it should yield its meaning accurately than that it should yield it on first reading, and the Legal draftsman cannot afford to give much attention, if any, to euphony or literary elegance….
By normal standards of good writing legal drafting is usually both cumbrous and uncouth.’
It is submitted, however, that this does not give the legal profession a dispensation to produce incomprehensible deeds and writings without making at least some attempt to frame the intentions in intelligible, if not elegant, English.
It might not be a complete oversimplification to state that many of the profession's difficulties with the lay public stem from the public's basic incomprehension of what we write; and yet is it not the particular beauty of the English language that the most appreciated and elegant words are in fact the simplest and most easily understood?
To take a sentence chosen almost at random from the Authorised Version of the Old Testament:
‘Whither thou goest, I will go; and where thou lodgest, I will lodge: thy people shall be my people, and thy God my God’(Ruth 1.16).
Without the use of anything but the simplest words, this sentence leaves its meaning entirely clear, and yet it still has an emotional quality that cannot be forgotten.
Perhaps it is repetitive, but not for the sake of repetition, as each phrase carries a different emphasis and builds on to the prior phase for effect.
This should be distinguished from mere repetition of the same concept in different words to an unnecessary and confusing extent.
Does the phrase ‘I Do Hereby exoner, acquit and simpliciter Discharge’ mean any more than ‘I Do Hereby Discharge’or even ‘I Discharge’, or does it leave the layman wondering if the words contain some qualification to or extension of an absolute discharge, slipped in by a crafty lawyer to defeat the ends of justice?
Members of the legal profession are highly educated and have the good fortune to have a firm and unambiguous language at their service.
It is submitted that in these circumstances they do not do well enough with the written word.
(The writer claims no superiority in this matter.)
While the practising lawyer never quite achieves the joyful incomprehensibility of the Parliamentary draftsman, who takes most of the abuse on our behalf, the legal profession is none the less largely guilty of producing deeds that carry no thought for the people who instruct and finance their preparation.
The average commercial lease is a good case in point.
It contains pages and pages of difficult, surplus and repetitive language.
The layman who reads this document is left with little or no idea of what he is undertaking.
It may be, of course, that the intention is to numb his senses before he gets to the umpteenth and penultimate clause which requires him to foot the bill for the monstrosity.
Such leases are generally either very badly converted English leases or else in the form of stale Scottish styles, unchanged by time or circumstance.
A draft lease recently shown to the writer required the tenants to decorate the outside of a modern factory in the following terms:
‘The tenants will paint in a proper and workmanlike manner all the outside wood, iron and stucco or cementwork of the said subjects and all other exterior parts as might properly require to be so painted with three coats at least of good oil and white lead paint….’
(Continued on page 129)
Dismissal of Employees Convicted of Crimes
Social and economic considerations
Few of us will go through life without transgressing some rule of public law, the result of which will be the imposition of a financial penalty or perhaps, in more severe cases, deprivation of liberty.
Such transgressions range from the socially acceptable parking on the ubiquitous yellow lines to the stigmatising drunken driving and eventually to offences which are generally regarded as morally reprehensible.
As many practitioners know only too well, many pleas in mitigation would hardly get off the ground if they were not able to point to the possibility of the accused losing his job if he were sent to prison or were to have his driving licence suspended.
The purpose of this paper is to indicate — by reference to cases coming before the industrial tribunals — that dismissal of a convicted and imprisoned employee is far from always fair and that some industrial tribunals ensure that employers are discouraged from adding a further punishment to the one already imposed by the proper authorities.
It is neither socially nor economically desirable that convicted employees should generally be dismissed.
Socially, the employee dismissed following a conviction will — whether the dismissal was fair or otherwise — find re-employment difficult, though it is worth noting that at least one tribunal has decided that such an employee is not bound to disclose the reason for his dismissal to a prospective employer (Mackin v J. Carr Ltd, 1974 IRLR).
Economically, in only a few cases will the conviction materially alter the performance of the employee or indeed those with whom he works.
Consequently, dismissing because of the principle involved may, in the short term, result in a diseconomy.
There is perhaps a need for employers to be educated to adopt a more pragmatic approach rather than treating cases with an ‘it's the principle of the thing’ attitude.
The relevant legislation (Schedule 1, Part 2, Trade Union and Labour Relations Act, 1974) and the provisions of the Code of Practice give little guidance to tribunals as to how they should approach the problem of dismissal following on a conviction, and it is to be questioned whether firm guidelines would be beneficial.
In this particular area, so much depends on the facts, eg, the nature of the offence, the nature of the job, the type of penalty, previous convictions, etc, and the Tribunal's discretion should not be limited.
Even in cases where the employee is imprisoned after trial, the employer cannot be advised that any dismissal would be fair.
Of course, as is illustrated by the decision of the NIRC in Hare v Murphy Brothers Ltd, 1974 KIR 57, a sufficiently long prison sentence will constitute a unilateral repudiation of the contract by the employee.
(On appeal to the Court of Appeal it was held that the imprisonment was not a repudiation but a ‘self-induced frustration of the contract’Quaere , would an election to go to prison instead of paying a fine constitute a breach (repudiation) of contract no matter how long the prison sentence, or would the Court of Appeal put this conduct within the category of ‘self-induced frustration’ also?)
In this case a twelve-month sentence for unlawful wounding terminated the contract of employment on the first day of imprisonment.
However, deprivation of liberty for a shorter period does not have such an effect.
Thus, the Dundee tribunal has decided in the unreported case of Cox v Dundee Corporation (1974) that a man dismissed following a conviction in the Burgh Court for breach of the peace, for which he was sentenced to thirty days, had been treated unfairly.
He was awarded compensation of just over £900 which was reduced by one-quarter because he had contributed to his own misfortune.
The tribunal was influenced by the facts that the offence was unconnected with his job and he was given no opportunity to state his own case because he was in prison at the time of the dismissal decision.
Also, the tribunal referred in its reasons to the fact that the employee had convictions for similar offences in the past and the employer had given no warnings that repetition could lead to dismissal.
Reading between the lines, the tribunal may have suspected that the employer was merely using the sentence as a convenient excuse for getting rid of a man whose record was not unblemished.
The employer was forced to admit that no replacement had been engaged, which tended to indicate that a redundancy might have been in the offing.
Similarly, in Moore v Central Electricity Generating Board, 1974 IRLR 296 — the facts of which may cause those interested in civil liberties some concern — an employee who had been held in custody for one month pending trial was dismissed after being convicted not of the original charge preferred but of related offences.
After receiving a twelve-month suspended sentence he was dismissed.
The industrial tribunal (Huntingdon) held the dismissal unfair, taking into account the shortness of the absence and his previously unblemished record.
In addition, the offence was not in any way concerned with his employment and seems to have been fairly trivial,viz , causing damage to the windscreen-wipers on his girlfriend's car.
The case of Donson & Frudd v Conoco Ltd, 1973 IRLR 258, also makes it quite clear that a conviction does not permit the employer unlimited freedom in dealing with employees.
The case further indicates the need for employers to adopt the most appropriate type of disciplinary measure in each case.
Donson and Frudd — tanker drivers — were convicted of  thefts not related to their jobs.
They appealed against their convictions and, while their appeals were pending, were permitted to continue working, although their employer decided that in the event of the appeal failing they would have to be dismissed.
Their appeals did in fact fail and they were dismissed because (1) they were employed in a position of trust which involved very valuable cargoes and (2) relationships between the company and its customers would be adversely affected.
However, the tribunal rejected the employer's reasoning, holding that if such reason were to be valid after the appeals it would have had even greater validity before.
Even though the reason for permitting the employees to continue work pending the appeals may have been born out of a sense of leniency, the proper course of action would have been to suspend the employees pending the hearing of the appeals.
Failure to do so seems to have been fatal to the employer's case.
In many instances, whether dismissal is fair depends on the severity of the offence and its relation to the employee's job.
Accordingly, it has been held to be unfair to dismiss a man convicted of one isolated act of incest for which he received a probationary sentence.
In Bradshaw v Rugby Portland Cement Ltd, 1972 IRLR 8, although the offence was of a serious nature, the tribunal recommended re-engagement because (1) the offence had nothing to do with his work,(2) he was not brought into contact with female staff,(3) the nature of the offence was unlikely to upset his relationships with his workmates — a gang of men — and (4) it did not expose anyone to ‘moral danger’.
The sentence imposed by the court was obviously influential.
Perhaps Bradshaw suggests that the question of the relevance of the misconduct/offence to the employment can be easily determined.
From that particular point of view, of course, no case is truly representative.
However, the case of Creffield v BBC, 1974 IRLR 23, is perhaps a better indicator of the difficulties which face tribunals in such cases.
Creffield, a film cameraman, was convicted of indecently assaulting a thirteen-year-old girl (it was a technical assault only; it took the form of taking indecent photographs of the girl who, being under age, was unable, in law, to consent).
Creffield was suspended on full pay until his conviction, whereupon he was dismissed with three months ‘notice.
While it was held that the dismissal was fair, one of the members of the tribunal dissented and considered that the ‘BBC had not acted reasonably in dismissing the applicant’.
The reasons put forward by the majority and the dissenting member are equally convincing.
The case highlights, therefore, the difficulty of advising employers in such situations.
The case is also interesting from the point of view of the reason shown for the dismissal.
There was a contractual term dealing with summary dismissal for gross misconduct.
On its attention being drawn to this particular clause, the tribunal responded: ‘It seems to us that’ misconduct ‘there refers to some misconduct in the course of the applicant's employment.’
However, the tribunal agreed that the applicant's conviction could be regarded as ‘some other substantial reason’.
What is significant is that the tribunal did not appear to think that the reason for the dismissal related to ‘the conduct of the employee’.
That is to say, the tribunal seemed to say the reason for the dismissal was the conviction and not the conduct leading up to the conviction.
Did the tribunal, merely by an oversight, fail to deal with ‘conduct’ as a reason recognised by the legislation?
Or did it regard ‘conduct’, used in the legislation, as being qualified in the same way as’ misconduct ‘in Creffield's contract of employment?
(The fact that no answer can be given to those questions poses a more serious one: ‘Did the tribunal give reasons for its decision?’)
Assuming the tribunal would not be so careless as to make such an oversight, it is submitted that if it did consider that the words’ conduct of the employee ‘in Sec 24 of the Industrial Relations Act, 1971 (now Schedule 1 Para 6 (2) of the 1974 Trade Union and Labour Relations Act) were impliedly qualified by something like ‘in the course of his employment’, it was quite wrong.
If, on the other hand, the implied qualifying words were agreed to be something like ‘having regard to the position held or the work done’, it is submitted that such a qualification would be quite appropriate.
However, if the tribunal had implied similar words into Sec 24 it is difficult to see why it found the reason for the dismissal was, in fact, ‘some other substantial reason’,viz , the conviction.
Clearly, it is important from the practical point of view.
If appearing on behalf of a respondent in such a case it would be essential to argue the alternative reasons when showing what was the reason for dismissal.
Even within types of offence, it has been held by the NIRC (Hudson (Birmingham) Ltd v Winsper, 1973) that there are ‘grades’ of criminality.
The result of this decision necessitates that tribunals look not just at the nature of the offence but also at the severity or leniency of the punishment.
Thus, since many types of conduct are subsumed in ‘dangerous driving’ the penalties can be extremely variable.
It was, therefore, unfair to dismiss Winsper after his conviction for dangerous driving because the court had refrained from suspending his driving licence and had imposed a fine of only £20.
Such matters as the nature of the offence and the type of penalty are obviously matters falling within the ‘circumstances of the case’— Schedule 1 Para 6(8) 1974 Trade Union and Labour Relations Act.
However, it is possible for the employer to create circumstances which the tribunal will be required to consider.
Such action on the part of the employer can deprive the tribunal of the opportunity of considering the factors already referred to.
Thus, according to the NIRC in Winsper , an employer can provide that ‘any conviction for dangerous driving — regardless of the circumstances — will lead to dismissal’.
While it is appreciated that the contract — as contained in the works' rules, etc — can contain such a provision, one wonders whether industrial tribunals should feel bound by such a provision.
The task of the tribunal is to ascertain, according to‘reasonableness’ and ‘equity and the substantial merits of the case’, whether the dismissal is unfair, not to decide the issue having regard for contractual terms which, themselves, sometimes seem inequitable.
In Fowler v Cammell Laird Ltd, 1973 IRLR 72 — although the circumstances of the case make it clear that no injustice was done in holding the dismissal fair — the tribunal was obviously impressed by the fact that the company rules provided for instant dismissal of those convicted of theft on the company's premises.
It would seem to be patently unfair to dismiss a driver with a perfect record prior to a momentary lapse which results in a court imposing a penalty, simply because the works' rules are so rigidly drawn that the employer is deprived of exercising a discretion.
It is worrying, therefore, that the NIRC in Hudson (Birmingham) Ltd v Winsper opined: ‘If they [the employers]want to make it absolutely certain that no tribunal will dissent from their dismissing the driver who is convicted of dangerous driving, then they should, in fairness to themselves and the driver, post a notice or otherwise bring it to the attention of all their drivers that any conviction for dangerous driving, regardless of the circumstances which give rise to it, will lead to dismissal.
Had they done that we have little doubt that the tribunal decision would have been otherwise than it was.’
It is submitted that the approach of the industrial tribunal in Fowler v Cammell Laird Ltd is preferable.
In that case, the tribunal made it quite clear on what basis it arrived at its decision: ‘We are amply satisfied that in all the circumstances including the nature of the misconduct and the position of the applicant [he]was not dealt with unreasonably.
We reach this conclusion in the light of the evidence that notwithstanding the rules as to dismissal for theft as applied in the first place…each case can be and is reviewed on the intervention of the security officer who…will make an appropriate recommendation where the case does not warrant dismissal.’
Quite clearly, the tribunal was-not prepared to decide the case by reference to the company rules as apposed to its merits.
If, however, the approach of the NIRC were to gain favour, the industrial tribunals could well be required to adjudicate on the validity of certain provisions of company rules.
Although such examination might improve the drafting of the rule books — and that would be (procedurally) beneficial — it could have the unfortunate and fundamental consequence of inducing tribunals to determine what is or is not a fair dismissal by reference to what has been agreed between the parties instead of by the yardstick laid down by Parliament.
The industrial tribunals at present have no jurisdiction to decide breaches of contracts of employment, and if the statutory protection against unfair dismissal is to retain its advantages over common law it is essential that tribunals decide cases according to reasonableness and not contract.
At first sight, the dictum — though not the decision — the NIRC in Hudson (Birmingham) Ltd v Winsper appears to be inconsistent with the spirit of Schedule 1 Para 32 of the Trade Union and Labour Relations Act, 1974, which provides, ‘…any provision in any agreement (whether a contract of employment or not) shall be void insofar as it purports to exclude or limit the operation of any provision of this Act….’
If the approach of the NIRC in Winsper is followed, the detailed provisions of rule books will seriously limit the operation of sections dealing with protection against unfair dismissal.
The Glasgow tribunal was alert to the problem of company rules attempting to oust the yardstick of reasonableness in Unkles v Milanda Bread Co, 1973 IRLR 76.
A company rule provided for the instant and automatic dismissal of anyone found smoking on the premises.
Having referred to the apparently absolute rule, the tribunal concluded: ‘Nevertheless our duty is to apply the tests laid down in the Act in Section 24 (6) and to take the Code of Practice into account.
So doing, we come to the unanimous view that the dismissal was unfair.’
Of course, the terms of the contract are relevant when considering the reasonableness of the employer's decision.
They cannot, however, be allowed to arrogate to employers powers to dismiss unreasonably.
(Continued from page 125)(Continued from page 126) This clause is a bland repetition of an old style, reproduced with little regard to advances in paint technology.
The last time the writer heard of lead paint was in connection with an offensive toy from behind the Iron Curtain.
It cannot be stressed too strongly that a great deal of the blame for unsatisfactory deeds must lie in the failure of the Scottish legal profession to provide itself with a service for new styles.
Our English counterparts have experts preparing Encyclopaedias of Precedents (styles) and text-books are revised to include new styles.
Even weekly magazines carry styles to match developments in the law.
We in Scotland must make do with such styles as we can accumulate in our professional careers and, by and large, the only other source of styles for non-statutory deeds is the Encyclopaedia of Scottish Legal Styles .
This is a wonderful work, but the part which deals with leases is now nearly forty years old, and frankly is not sufficient to cover post-war developments.
Probably the worst example of an incomprehensible deed, however, is the standard Trust Disposition and Settlement.
This document purports to carry out the last mortal wish of the testator, except that he will probably go to eternity without being entirely sure that the document he signed actually said what he wanted, because he was quite unable to read it.
The writer would like to consider this document in some detail at a later date, but could perhaps close with two questions:
(I)
Why do most draftsmen prepare testamentary deeds in one continuous paragraph?
(2)
Why, for that matter, do they prepare these deeds in one continuous sentence, interspersed with a myriad of semicolons and finalised with a colon?
The correct use of a colon is shown in the quotation from Ruth.
It is certainly not shown in the average legal deed.
(Contributed article)
Parliament House
Great Scott!
The memory of Sir Walter Scott pervades Parliament House today just as universally as 50, 100 or 150 years ago.
It is not merely that there are portraits of him at every turn, for there are almost as many of Inglis, nor could it be claimed that he was the greatest lawyer, for he had many rivals for that title even in his own generation, yet it is beyond argument that he was the most influential advocate ever to walk the floor of Parliament House.
That influence, far from being confined to the former graveyard of St Giles', has spread and is spreading in every corner of the world.
The 1972 Annual Bibliography of Scottish Literature lists thirty-seven books and articles about Scott published in that year at places ranging from Frankfurt, Sewanee and Port Washington to Glenrothes.
Even Robert Burns could only score eighteen titles.
This is some slight measure of the diversity of Scott's interests as poet, novelist, historian, antiquary, Sheriff, patriot, landowner, book-collector and much else.
But any investigation into his biography seems infinitely more satisfying by reason of his virtue, his courage and his devotion to duty.
He was not without fault, foolish in his commercial life, reactionary sometimes in his political belief, nevertheless he is entitled no more to the title of the Great Unknown, but now to that of the Great Scotsman.
In collecting books Scott, unlike his only rival in the ranks of Scottish legal book-collectors, Dr David Murray, adopted a practical policy.
The bulk of his library of about twenty thousand volumes, consists of historical and literary works.
He did not purchase the bulky illustrated books of the period, neither the insipid engravings of Lord Mayor Boydell, nor the delicate aquatints of Rudolph Ackermann, nothing from the needle of Piranesi.
There are however two of the volumes of Daniell's Voyage Round Great Britain , those favourites of the book-breakers' trade.
The historical collections are centred on a large number of pamphlets, mainly political but partly religious, of the period from 1689 to 1750.
Some of these were collected for Scott's edition of Swift.
Of the many works in French, German and other languages the most remarkable in appearance are the fifteen folio volumes of Montfaucon's Antiquities presented to Scott by George IV and richly bound in red morocco.
Another gift were the variorum set of classical authors in one hundred and forty volumes given to Scott by Archibald Constable.
Though Scott was not particularly interested in early editions he nevertheless owned several.
Notable among these is the editio princeps of the Liber Physionomiae of Sir Michael Scott, the thirteenth-century Scottish philosopher and reputed wizard made more famous by the Lay of the Last Minstrel .
Other famous works are the first editions of John Florio's translation of Montaigne (1603), the 1498 Hortulus Animae , a popular German devotional work of which the Council of Trent did not wholly approve, and the 1514 Paris edition of Saxo Grammaticus' twelfth-century History of Denmark .
Among more modern works he owned Garrick's copy of Drayton's Polyolbion , a 1550 Piers Plowman, and the first edition of the works of Taylor, the Water Poet.
The Kilmarnock Burns is in the library, and, for good measure, the manuscript of Tam o' Shanter .
But the collection is not limited to literary and historical works; there are, for example, copies of Robert Stevenson's Bell Rock Lighthouse , Lunardi on Ballooning , Patrick Miller on Steam Navigation , Sir William Hillary on Lifeboats , Robert Stevenson on canals and railways, and Elizabeth Cleland's New and Best Method of Cookery , a rare Edinburgh work of 1755.
There are also unique association copies, the Office for Holy Week in the version of Urban VIII which belonged to James VII, and Swifts' Bible .
In his collection of the works of contemporaries Scott's policy was more erratic.
Perhaps he kept such books at Castle Street, or read them in the Advocates' Library.
He had large collections of books by Sir Samuel Egerton Brydges and Robert Pearce Gillies, which were possibly gifts, but nothing by Keats or Shelley, of whom he probably did not approve.
But Robert Southey, Byron and Goethe are strongly represented.
Burns and Lockhart each provided ten works, and Wordsworth four.
There is, somewhat surprisingly, a copy of Leigh Hunt's Story of Rimini , and the ladies of the period are suitably to be found in Jane Austen, Joanna Baillie, and Mary Shelley's Frankenstein .
Scott had no interest in philosophy and owned nothing by Hobbes, Hume, Hutcheson, Reid or Monboddo.
There are many printed plays, and The Fashionable Lover was placed close to The Fatal Divorce .
There are also books of a less serious character, such as the Oxford Sausage , and An Exaltation of Christmas Pye .
The great novelist might relax with The Groans of Samuel Sensitive and Timothy Testy ,Two Thousand Paradoxes merily argued , and such aesthetic exercises as The Art of Courtship and the Art of Wenching .
Or else, in different mood, he could choose from a Modest Defence of Public Stews ,or an Essay upon Whoring , a Dissertation on Wheedling ,Flash Songs , etc., a Dissertation upon Pissing ,The Costly Whore ,a comical history , and The Sad Effects of Sin .
It is an assemblage of books of a diversity and fascination almost as great as its maker, and a memorial to his Greatness.
Forum
Speed limits
Sir: Reference is made to the recent case in which Sheriff Muir Russell at Stonehaven Sheriff Court refused to endorse a licence because of an offence of exceeding the 50 and 60 miles per hour ‘political’ speed limits which he is reported as describing as having been ‘introduced for inflationary and balance of payments reasons, nothing more’.
May I please support the Sheriff's stand on this matter as the speed limit legislation seems to be based on remarkably little logic?
As we live on a rotating planet, we are all of us, because of this alone, always travelling at about 1,000 miles an hour all the time even though we appear to be stationary.
Speed is therefore a relative phenomenon and not in itself objectionable.
The purpose of the speed limit acts is presumably to minimise the danger to those travelling on or using the roads.
There are two reasons why the present blanket speed limits, though easy to operate, are illogical and unsatisfactory:
1
The cause of injury at a time of accident is the momentum of the vehicle or vehicles involved in the accident.
Momentum is a physical quantity which may be roughly defined as the product of the weight of the vehicle and its speed.
This means that a 40 ton lorry travelling at 70 miles an hour has 53 times the destruction power and maiming power that is possessed by a 0.75 ton sports car travelling at the same speed.
As the sports car is likely to be designed with relatively better braking and steering to control this momentum and hence the danger inherent in it when it is moving, this difference in ‘inherent dangerousness’ is probably considerably greater.
The longer people spend on the roads, the greater, presumably, the congestion and also probably the greater the accident rate: the slower traffic moves, the greater is the number of man lives spent on roads and this must have some place in the equation of national activity and productivity.
This is clearly an absurdity and speed limits should have some dependence on the weight of vehicles and their controlability.
2
Blanket speed limits applied to all vehicles must be set at such a low figure as to ensure reasonable safety with the most badly designed vehicle when it is in the worst acceptable state of maintenance.
Such a speed limit must be unnecessarily low for a well-designed vehicle when well maintained.
Such speed limits result either in widespread disregard of the law as at present, ‘which’ is bad because it is habit-forming, or they allow the police an undesirable discretion as to which laws they enforce and against whom they enforce them.
They also tend to lead to bunching of traffic on main roads, which in itself can lead to accidents.
Moreover, if vehicles move more slowly than is necessary, talking nationally, the number of man hours wasted is very large indeed.
There would therefore seem to be a considerable need for a fundamental s review of our speed limit laws with a view to making them more closely reflect their presumed purpose, that of increasing e road safety, without unnecessarily interfering with personal freedom or unnecessarily wasting time.
Dunfermline
National Insurance Tribunals
Sir: I read with interest the article by Mr Leslie Aitcheson on the operation of National Insurance Tribunals (Journal , February 1975).
As a fellow Chairman of these Tribunals I find myself in general agreement with him, although is until some way is found to eliminate obviously frivolous appeals from the Local Appeal Tribunal's decisions I doubt the practicality of having appeals to a Tribunal of Commissioners and blanch at the thought of their Lordships of the Court of Session's comments if asked to deal with some of the material placed before a single Commissioner at present.
As it happened, just before reading Mr Aitcheson's article, I had attended a Tribunal involving five unemployment benefit cases where not one of the five appellants attended and indeed one did not even acknowledge receipt of his set of Tribunal papers.’
When one considers the amount of time, effort and money involved in the preparation of those papers and the hearing of them it is, in my opinion, becoming essential to ensure that the number of frivolous appeals (some of which are perhaps made out of‘cussedness’ to cause the officers involved as much trouble as possible) is reduced.
I, would suggest that a deposit of, say, £2 might be lodged with the notice of appeal which could be returned to the appellant immediately after the hearing.
This might not only reduce the number of vexatious appeals but might also perhaps ensure that the appellant took the trouble to attend the hearing, even if only to collect his 2.
Ayr
Scottish Young Lawyers' Association
Sir: Young lawyers, like myself, will have received a circular letter from P. G. Malone enclosing a very laudable programme o events and lectures which his Committee has organised, and for which all credit is due.
However, some of the remarks in Mr Malone's letter cause me some concern.
I am open to contradiction, but so far as I understand, the Association as such, played no direct part either in the recent increases in apprentices' salaries, which were reviewed automatically, nor in the revival of their indenture, which is the result of a tortuous and painfully slow consideration by the Law Society.
It may not matter very much what claims the Association makes for itself but one would hope that co-operation and not confrontation is to be its approach, and the making of false claims can only antagonise the Law.
Society,: hinder the advancement of the Association's aims, and put in doubt its honesty and integrity.
Anyone who heard some of the more extravagant pictures of apprenticeship painted by some of those at the original Edinburgh meeting, must feel slightly uneasy that the Association could turn into a Don Quixote tilting lances at imaginary windmills, pursuing ‘causes’ that are not a reality, and being antagonistic for the sake of it.
Accordingly, while congratulating the Association on its endeavours, may I make a plea to the members of its Committee to restrain themselves from the political tactic of eyewash and puff and to conduct themselves, so far as the Law Society are concerned, in a straightforward, honest and co-operative manner?
In that way, the Association can retain credibility as a representative body.
South Queensferry 
Burgh Representation and the Boroughmonger
The situation before the Reform Act
At a time when we are on the threshold of change, indeed very considerable change, in local government and when our burghs which have been with us since the earliest times are about to disappear, it may be of interest to look at the burghs of Scotland prior to the passing of the Reform Act and their position in the election of Members for the Westminster Parliament.
In an earlier article in this Journal , I dealt with the county representation to Westminster over the same period and showed the abuses to which the elections by the Freeholders gave rise.
Bad as were the irregularities of the Freeholders' elections, the irregularities in the burghs were, if anything, worse, one of the reasons being that while the county representative needed only one election meeting to be appointed, the burgh representative had to be successful in two elections before he could get to Westminster.
The right of electing the representative or representatives of each burgh to the Scottish Parliament was vested directly in the Magistrates and Council, and this persisted from the Union until the Reform Act, but only in the case of the City of Edinburgh.
The other Royal Burghs were, as a result of the Treaty of Union, divided into fourteen Districts, each District returning one member.
If one aspired to enter Parliament as a burgh representative, other than for the City of Edinburgh, one had first to be a Burgess and elected to the burgh council, thereafter to be chosen by one's fellow Councillors as the burgh nominee to the District of Burghs.
Having been accepted as the burgh nominee, one still had to obtain a majority of votes in the District Election.
All Districts were composed of either five or four burghs, and in the case of those with four, an element of chance as to who was elected frequently arose.
In case of equality of votes, it was provided by the Act 1707 c8 that the presiding commissioner should have a casting vote, besides his own as commissioner, and that the commissioners from the different burghs should preside, in turn, in the order in which their burghs were called in the roll of the Scottish Parliament.
It was later provided that if the commissioner from the presiding burgh should be absent, or refuse to vote, the commissioner from the burgh which presided at the last election should have the casting vote and so backwards in rotation.
It was further provided by Statute that, in supplying a vacancy occurring during the sitting of Parliament, the burgh which presided at the election of the former member should preside at the new election.
Element of chance
An illustration of the element of chance is shown in the last re election before the Reform Act in the Clyde District of Burghs.
Glasgow was linked with Dumbarton, Renfrew and Rutherglen ir and in 1831 the meeting was held at Dumbarton, where the er delegates of the four burghs attended.
The candidates were Kirkman Finlay, the well-known Glasgow merchant, and d Joseph Dixon of the glass-making firm in Dumbarton which bore his name.
The Dumbarton delegate, whose turn it was s' to preside, gave his vote for Dixon and, in case of equality, g, his casting vote for Dixon.
Dixon was elected — an example e-of how the chance of presiding could decide the election.
d, If it had been the turn of Glasgow to preside and there had been an equality of votes, the Glasgow delegate would no doubt have given his casting vote to Kirkman Finlay and he es would have been elected.
Both Kirkman Finlay and Dixon were Whigs, the Tory nominees in the Burgh Councils not having obtained the burgh nomination, and there was the curious position of two candidates from the same party contesting the same Parliamentary seat.
This election must have been one of the last in Scotland where open bribery took place.
The Rutherglen Councillors were bribed by the Glasgow candidate's supporters, as were their wives with presents of dresses and finery, but the Dixon supporters among the Rutherglen Councillors were invited down to Dumbarton and entertained for a period of ten days, including a cruise on Loch Lomond, a climb to the top of the ben and a stay at the inns at Dumbarton, Tarbet, Luss and Port of Menteith.
At the summit of Ben Lomond, the following declaration was signed: ‘Top of Ben Lomond 14th May 1831 4 o'clock.
Convened the electors of Rutherglen…[there follow eight names]…who pledge themselves to return Mr. Joseph Dixon as their representative in Parliament on 20th curt.’
A most remarkable document, which was produced and spoken to before the select committee in London.
The meeting at Rutherglen for the choice of commissioner with the authority of the Burgh's vote was on the evening of 20th May at seven pm and the Dixon agents were so keen to keep their influence to the very end and not let Kirkman Finlay's agents have an opportunity to exert influence that they were hard pressed to get the Councillors to the meeting at seven pm.
The inevitable result was that the Dumbarton element in the Rutherglen Council prevailed and their representative at the district meeting was for Dixon, although the Council was split.
Kirkman Finlay who was represented by an advocate at the district meeting complained that his opponent had been guilty of bribery and corruption and had thereby disqualified himself.
The matter was referred to a committee of the House of Commons where the evidence which I have mentioned came out.
It all however came to nothing as the entertainments and payments were proved not to have been made by Dixon but by his father, the Provost of Dumbarton.
Subversion
The following are examples of the petty attempts at subversion which one finds in the old books on election law.
On the death of Sir Harry Erskine in 1765, the election of a burgess to serve in Parliament for the District composed of the burghs of Anstruther Easter, Anstruther Wester, Pittenweem, Crail and Kilrenny, showed three of these burghs to be in the interest of Mr Alexander, Merchant in Edinburgh, and the other two in the interest of Sir John Anstruther.
Pittenweem was one of the burghs which favoured Alexander, although if it had favoured Anstruther, it would have been three to two.
Anderson, the Clerk to the meeting, who was strongly attached to Sir John Anstruther, when he was called upon to attach the seal to the commission returning Alexander ‘pretended that it had been abstracted from him’.
He hid it, presumably in the hope that it would preclude Alexander's election.
The seal was eventually recovered, but Sir John appears to have been returned, in spite of a Petition by Alexander to the House of Commons and a complaint to the Court of Session against James Christie, Writer in Edinburgh, Anderson's successor, for his conduct in the proceedings.
Among other devices, the minority would separate from the majority at the annual election of the Magistrates and Councillors, and each faction would make separate elections.
This produced double sets of office-bearers in the same burgh, with the result that commissions were given to two different persons as commissioners for electing the burgess to represent the District in Parliament.
The remedy for this was an of Parliament, declaring that every election made by any Magistrates or Councillors, in opposition to the majority, were ipso facto null and void and that every Magistrate or Councillor concurring was to be fined £100 sterling.
As a result of the rebellion in 1745, there was no election in the burgh of Montrose, and indeed there may well have been no elections in a number of other burghs, but Montrose stands out for the following reason.
The minority party, realising that they could take advantage of the troubles, persuaded the Duke of Cumberland to issue a warrant against three of the former Councillors for treason and they were committed to Perth prison.
The result was that the minority party carried the election, in the absence of the three former Councillors who were in prison.
As one would expect, a complaint was preferred to the Court of Session to the effect that the warrant for imprisonment had been fraudulently obtained.
Boroughmongers
In the years immediately before the Reform Act, frequent reference is made in Scotland to Boroughmongers, although, as the spelling shows, the term was of English origin.
In England these were the buyers of boroughs and seats in Parliament, and although it was not possible to do this in Scotland, as there were never any ‘rotten boroughs’ in the English sense, those who arranged and meddled in the burgh elections were called ‘Boroughmongers’after the English traffickers in boroughs.
They brought down on their heads the same abuse from the reformers as their counterparts in the county — the paper freeholders — suffered.
By the early nineteenth century, the term ‘Boroughmonger’, at any rate in Scotland, had come to mean anyone who was anti-reform, and indeed the whole Tory party at the time were branded as Boroughmongers by the radical reformers.
The Collector of Taxes in Glasgow in 1831 was one Blair, and the Loyal Reformers' Gazette , a radical publication of the time, has a letter addressed to him in the following terms:
‘Sir — You are an Anti-Reformer — and therefore we have a few words to say to you — When the news reached Glasgow of the defeat of the Reform Bill, did you attend the Royal Exchange Rooms?
Did you then and there take off your hat, and throw it up and cheer with joy in consequence of that defeat?’
Lists of the so-called Anti-Reformers or Boroughmongers were set out in the radical press, and as the electors were so few and were persons of standing, their views were really known in advance and the outcome could be predicted accurately — contrary to the modern opinion polls which so often are at variance with the result.
Although the Commissioners from the counties required to be possessed of a freehold within the county which they represented, there was no necessity after the Union for a person who represented the City of Edinburgh, or any of the fourteen Districts into which the other burghs were divided, to be possessed of any property within the burgh.
This was not the case in the sixteenth and seventeenth centuries, and the Convention of Royal Burghs passed several Acts prohibiting any persons from being chosen as Commissioners from Boroughs to the Parliament, except freemen, merchants and traffickers.
In 1681, the Burgh of Selkirk, having chosen Sir Patrick Murray, who did not reside in that burgh, to be their commissioner to Parliament, a charge was given both to the burgh and to Sir Patrick for payment of the penalty imposed by the of Convention.
On a bill of Suspension the Court of Session found that the town of Selkirk had contravened the King's letter and Act of the burghs made thereon — which discharged the burgh to elect any to represent them but actual trafficking and residing burgesses — and fined the burgh.
Spelling
When researching into literature dealing with burghs in the eighteenth and nineteenth centuries, one finds that much of the material uses the English spelling, ‘Borough’.
The Acts of Parliament, although applying to Scotland, use the English spelling, as do the various forms laid down in the Acts in connection with the representation at Westminster.
Wight, the eighteenth-century author and authority on election law, together with Bell and Connell, who both wrote books on election law at the beginning of the nineteenth century, used the English spelling.
One wonders whether the explanation of this may be that the Parliamentary draftsmen immediately after the Union were English lawyers, and that it was not until well on in the nineteenth century that Scottish draftsmen came to draft bills applicable to Scotland and the spelling ‘Burgh’ was adopted in Statutes applying to Scotland.
Wight, Bell and Connell were all Advocates, Bell being the well-known lecturer in conveyancing, and as they were dealing with and considering Statutes and the forms attached to them, they had to follow the spelling of the Statute and not substitute their own spelling.
The indices of these three authors' works do not contain the word ‘Burgh’ but make reference to ‘Borough’.
This, I would think, encouraged the English spelling in Scotland for many years.
There were variations in the spelling of ‘Burgh’ in earlier times, and Hope in his Minor Practicks written before 1634 says at item 228: ‘Of the Burrows of Scotland, some are Royal, some Burrows of Regality and some Burghs of Barony.’
In his Major Practicks , when quoting the fifteenth-century Acts of the Scottish Parliament, he uses the spelling ‘Brughs’, which presumably is an even older spelling.
It was not until the Local Government Act of 1889 and the Burgh Police Act of 1892 that the Scottish spelling ‘Burgh’ became universal and firmly established in Scotland.
(Contributed article)
Petronius
There is a curious facility possessed by some writers, often those not of the first rank, which consists of an ability to create characters who step out of the surroundings in which they occur and enter the popular imagination.
Such figures may come to have their independent existence either as an archetype of a particular characteristic or quality or an inhabitant of that shadowy half-world where real and unreal live in harmony.
‘The popular imagination’ is, perhaps, a loose and misguiding expression; any survey will show that there are those among our fellow citizens who believe that the Prime Minister is a man called ‘Mr Churchill’, that the Poet Laureate is an effete young person with golden curly hair and that Dr Findlay is alive and well and practising in Tannochbrae.
Why this should be, why our minds contain such a clutter of half-digested information, of misleading truths and mystifications, is hard to determine.
In his novel The Human Age , D. B. Wyndham Lewis postulates the theory that after death, as we stand on that other shore, at the gate of eternity, we will each one assume the shape and form which we had at the time when we best realised our essential selves.
Thus one man is never better, never more himself, than when he captains his school cricket team; another reaches his perfection as a seedy forty-year-old lounge bar philosopher; another is meant throughout his life for ear-bending retirement.
The essence of this theory might be borrowed and adapted in this way.
We find it useful to have someone available as a stock figure to represent or stand for certain kinds of person.
To some extent, this is because it enables us to indulge in a form of mental shorthand which is convenient, if unimaginative, for communicating with others.
It is easier, for example, to say ‘Jezebel’ than to go into a particular description of a certain sort of woman.
Likewise, the circumlocution necessary to avoid describing someone as a ‘Jekyll-and-Hyde character’ is a considerable argument in favour of the cliche.
These expressions, and those like them (Uriah Heep, Job's Comforter, Don Quixote come immediately to mind) involve a character who is used for a particular, and rather limited, purpose, namely the personalisation of a distinct quality.
Characters and countries
Other characters who exist astride their primary source are more difficult to analyse.
When one comes to consider a creation like, for example, Long John Silver, how can the perennial fascination be explained?
It is not possible to think of any literary antecedent, nor of any later development of the character, apart perhaps from the curious Captain Hook, himsclf overshadowed by the sinister and disturbing Peter Pan.
It seems that once such a figure has been established there is no need for duplication, but that the necessity for such figures, typical of something larger than themselves without being limited to illustrating a single characteristic, is undeniable.
The cumulative effect is not unlike those children's books which herd on the cover a mad whirl of characters — Red Indians, Cowboys, Kings and Queens, Soldiers, Pirates — all cluttered up together.
This cast of characters — historically incompatible but emotionally united — form a curious hotch-potsh of mental lumber, like a room full of furniture from every age, miraculously blended.
Guy Fawkes, Gulliver, Heathcliff, Robinson Crusoe, Charlie Chaplin, Tarzan, Sherlock Holmes, Flora Macdonald — the list goes on, the cast assembles, though heaven knows what performance they would put on between them.
The greatest creator of characters was, of course, Charles Dickens, but there is a peculiarity about his creatures.
Think of any of them and it is probable that they will be static, caught like a photograph in a position that somehow typifies them.
There is Sydney Carton with one foot on the steps of the guillotine; Oliver Twist with his empty plate held out; Micawber with his back to the fire (and to the wall) enunciating his economic philosophy; Uriah Heep, hunched as he rubs one humble hand over the back of the other.
For this reason, Dickens's creatures are somehow disqualified from the company of great characters, existing rather on the level of caricature.
At the other extreme, I suppose, one has those authors who create a landscape recognisable from book to book, regardless of the subject.
Graham Greene does this so thoroughly that the country of his imagination has been dignified by the name of ‘Greeneland’.
This ability to create a coherent world, recognisable as such but differing from the reader's experience, but above all involving no false note or anachronism, is an essential of all great novelists, but of itself it is not a recipe for success.
There is a unity about the fictional world of Lawrence Durrell, but, to this reader at any rate, a meretricious one.
Further, what could be more homogenous than the creations of C. P. Snow?
Yet a certain Scottish poet was not far wrong when he described finishing one of that author's novels as being like emerging from a thin shower of dandruff, unenlivened by even the slightest flash of mediocrity.
The Parliamentary Agent II Private legislation procedure
(Continued from the March issue)
I propose to say something now about the principal functions of a parliamentary agent in the promotion of legislation.
In doing so I must make it clear that these are only the main functions; there are of course many exceptional occurrences during a session, but time does not permit of my dealing with that here.
Initially, then, on being approached to promote an order, it is the task of the agent to confirm that the order is in fact viable, that is to say, that the objects of the order cannot be achieved without an order confirmed by parliament — that it cannot be done by other means.
To take a somewhat unlikely example, if application were made to the Secretary of State for an order under this procedure to give planning permission for a single project the response would be that there is a complete planning code of public legislation to cover that requirement, and in the absence of exceptional circumstances recourse should be had to that code.
The next stage in promotion is that the agent would normally consult on the content of the proposed order, on the likelihood of opposition to the order, and on whether the Secretary of State would be likely to accede to the powers sought.
Such a discussion might well range over tactics and procedure.
It may also be that the agent would be asked to advise on the cost, and, as with civil legislation, costs in parliamentary matters can in appropriate cases be taxed under the House of Commons Costs Taxation Act, 1847, and the 1849 Act on similar lines for the House of Lords, the only difference in Scotland being that taxation is done by the Auditor of the Court of Session.
The next step is to furnish a first draft of the proposed order and to settle the draft in due course, and in drawing the order the agent has particular regard to the value of precedents and a number of model clauses promulgated by the model clauses committee in parliament.
In the case of an order which will authorise the construction of works — these are normally referred to as ‘works orders’— it is also necessary to approve plans and sections required under the General Orders and there are a variety of orders covering meticulously the requirements as to such plans and sections.
This can present a difficult timing problem, because it is often not sufficiently appreciated that because of the many requirements as to these documents it may be necessary to have two or three drafts before lodging the plans.
For the benefit of the clients, and also for the orderly conduct of the promotion, the agent will normally supply a table of steps, setting out clearly the various procedural steps required by the General Orders, in chronological order, and showing who precisely will be responsible for each step; most of the steps are taken by the agent, but in some cases local newspaper advertisement and local service is undertaken by the client.
The order has to be deposited by the due date, and, as I mentioned, there are two dates involved (in November and March).
The order is normally deposited very near to the last day, the reason being that this allows of last-minute alterations.
The order is deposited with a short petition, in standard form, prepared by the agent.
Both order and petition have of course to be printed.
There are sundry procedural steps which immediately follow the deposit of the order, and a number which in fact precede it (for example, the local authority resolution under the 1973 Act and the deposit of the plans I have just mentioned).
Next it is necessary for the agent to attend before the Examiners in parliament to satisfy them that the General Orders have been complied with, and this constitutes a heavy responsibility because the effect of non-compliance can be serious.
The petitioning period expires, in the case of a November order on 22nd January and in the case of a March order on 23rd May, and the agent would normally then report to the client on petitions received, examine the petitions and advise on the action taken to settle them or to meet them in the inquiry.
The main activity, of course, centres round the various types of oppositions, which can take the following forms.
First a request, and no more than a request, for an amendment to the order or some sort of assurance concerning its implementation; these tend to be few in number.
By far the most common is a demand for amendment with the object of petitioning against the order if the demand is not met.
Petitions may be either for the outright rejection of the order or its amendment.
A further category of ‘opposition’, which requires careful attention, commonly arises from the fact that the various government departments on whom copies of the order have (by requirement under the General Orders) been served will frequently raise sundry points of concern to them.
Having ascertained what types of opposition to the order exist, there follow correspondence and meetings with petitioners and departments to resolve the difficulties.
In the end, if the order is unopposed the agent will satisfy Counsel to the Secretary of State on points of concern to the Scottish Office and to government departments — points of principle, points of law, etc.
It may, for example, be said that the order contains provisions involving an unnecessary or unjustifiable  infringement of rights, and that there is not sufficient evidence of need for the powers sought.
A further example is that the provisions in question are against the principles contained in public Acts; and yet a further example is that the provisions do not conform to previously accepted models, precedents, etc, from the point of view of drafting.
Again if the order is unopposed it-is necessary to prove its Preamble.
This is a formal step which may be taken by the agent or by the local solicitor.
When the order is made it is scheduled to a confirmation Bill and introduced into parliament.
At the confirmation stage the agent really has very little function because the necessary steps are taken by the Secretary of State.
If the order is unopposed it is deemed on introduction into the First House to have passed the committee stage and so the procedure is quite short; it is repeated in the Second House.
On the other hand, if the order is opposed, the usual action must be taken to retain and brief counsel, to settle precognitions and to arrange for a hearing before the commissioners.
At the hearing there is a right of audience for counsel or for the agent — usually exercised only by counsel, and indeed sometimes the parliamentary agent is not even involved at the inquiry stage.
However, on an opposed Order, without going into details, it can be said that there is a right, when the Bill is introduced for confirmation, to petition within seven days against the Bill, and a Member of Parliament can if he wishes move.
that the Bill be referred to a Joint Committee of both Houses.
There is a further variation on the above procedure, which is that under section 2 of the 1936 Act steps can be taken at an early stage on grounds of the novelty and importance of the order, or because it deals with matters outside Scotland, to convert the order into a substituted Bill, in which case it goes through both Houses as a Bill and is not dealt with under the standard 1936 procedure.
There have been several examples of this recently, the main ones being the Zetland Order, the Orkney Order and the Ross and Cromarty Order, which were all in some degree similar and promoted by local authorities.
In the role of opposition to an order promoted by someone else, the functions of the parliamentary agent are as follows.
Where the agent has a retainer of the type which I have previously mentioned he will at the beginning of the session report to the clients on the latent, as well as the obvious, dangers to that client of a-particular Bill or order.
This may result in instructions from the client to oppose, though quite frequently direct instructions are received without any report having been made.
The reason for this is that (in many cases) the client becomes aware of the proposed legislation either because he has been served under the General Orders with a notice as being directly affected, or because he has seen it in the local newspaper or Gazette advertisement.
The agent will examine the offending order and discuss it with his clients, in particular as to the precise grounds of objection and whether the client indeed has a locus standi to object.
He will then draft the petition and settle it and, as I mentioned before, the petition must be deposited not later than 22nd January (in the case of a November order) or 23rd May (in the case of a March order).
The petition can be signed by the parliamentary agent himself, and this is of value because last-minute instructions are frequently received, and I have known cases where the client has not even seen the petition until after it was deposited, although he has of course cleared the content by telephone.
In passing, it is interesting to note that the General Orders require explicitly that the grounds of objection be ‘distinctly stated’; notwithstanding this, it is most unusual to find a petition which does not say that the petitioner objects to the order ‘for the reasons, amongst others, hereinafter stated’, and it is very common for the petition to end with a statement to the effect that there are divers other provisions of the Bill to which objection is taken.
A petition, when ready, will of course be lodged by the agent; they are frequently printed, but can certainly be deposited in typescript or duplicated form.
There will usually follow some negotiations with the promoters and these may lead to an amendment to the order, to the insertion of a protective clause to meet the various objections, or, quite frequently, to an undertaking being given apart from the order in consideration of the withdrawal of the petition.
Lastly, if opposition is to be maintained, there will be the action of retaining and briefing counsel and arranging for evidence to be given before the commissioners.
Following the outcome of the inquiry (if successful) it is of some importance that the parliamentary agent follows the order through its-final stages so as to report that amendments, etc, have indeed been implemented.
I hope that the foregoing has served to give some idea of the private legislation procedure from the point of view of a parliamentary agent, and I think in conclusion that it would be useful if I were summarise a few of the problems which appear to affect solicitors, executive officers and advisers locally.
First, there is the obvious point that the very existence of private legislation procedure may not necessarily be recognised.
It may not in all cases be sufficient to advise a client that the action which he desires to take is not possible under the existing law; circumstances may arise in which the proper answer is that if the law does not allow the action to be taken then the law itself should be changed.
The second point I would make is as to timing.
I have already mentioned that November and March are the two periods relevant and it is advisable to give the earliest convenient general alert to a parliamentary agent of the necessity for an order and not to wait until the details have all been thrashed out before contacting him.
It is not necessary to draft the proposed legislation locally; this could be helpful but may well be abortive because of precedents and subsequent developments on the legislative or departmental front.
Agents are particularly aware normally of departmental views on clauses and on the relationship of the proposed provisions to public legislation.
Where it is necessary for a company, for example, to pass a resolution to promote legislation, it is useful to include an authority for one or two persons to settle drafting points, and this is especially necessary at the committee stage before commissioners, when decisions sometimes have to be made on the spur of the moment.
It has in the past happened that a client has been advised by the agent to amend an order, has entirely agreed with that advice, but has at the same time pointed out that his authority does not extend to giving a final decision, and this can be awkward.
The next word of warning is that in negotiations with opponents it is usually prudent not to give commitments without a package settlement.
In other words, a settlement should be achieved by means of a formal undertaking or agreement executed expressly in consideration of the  opposition being discontinued; this may seem obvious but it is surprising how often it is ignored.
The desirability of ‘tying up’ a settlement in one parcel sometimes give rise to a problem for the parliamentary agent in drafting the legislation, the question being whether to put in a protective clause at the outset, or to omit it and negotiate a settlement of such a clause for insertion at a later stage.
In connection with the opposition to private legislation, care should be taken about accepting mere assurances of good intentions or generalised statements that the client is not affected.
This again may appear to be perfectly obvious, but I recall a case not long ago where the agent was induced to halt action on a proposed petition, and it transpired only subsequently (and after the legislation had been enacted) that the client had given these instructions on a mere general assurance which was not in fact implemented.
Finally, for those of you who are involved in local government legislation, a brief word about the effect of the reorganisation consequent upon the Local Government (Scotland) Act, 1973.
As you are aware, section 225 of the Act provides for certain laws to lose their effect at the end of 1979, and a recent circular has been issued by the Secretary of State in this connection.
The equivalent period in England will last until 1984, but there the process of replacement law has already begun.
The effect of the disappearance of such local legislation in 1919 is that it would be unwise to leave off drafting replacement legislation until 1978, since if an order for the purpose met with any setback it might be too late to correct it before the present law disappears.
This means that it would be advisable to deposit such an order in 1911 and that in turn seems to point to the desirability of making a start on the drafting process not later than 1976 or 1975.
QUOTATION MARKS
‘Be your own lawyer and you'll have a fool for a client’, is an adage that calls for another: ‘Employ a lawyer and he'll have a pauper for a client’—Sunday Times .
Motorists in West Malling near Maidstone, Kent, are enjoying a week free of parking tickets.
The only two traffic wardens in the village married at the weekend and are on honeymoon in Wales —The Guardian .
The book [on Law Reform and the Law Commission]by J. H. Farrar is inefficiently critical, particularly of Parliament which is making a mess of the law far quicker than any Law Commission can improve or restate it —Scots Law Times .
Readers of Forum , a small magazine devoted to the liberated discussion of sexual relations, have in recent months been able to enjoy a crossword about sex.
It is the brian-child of Barbara Hall who can fairly claim to be the most versatile crossword compiler in the business.
She is crossword editor of the Sunday Times .
She has produced one full of legal terms for the Guardian Gazette , the Journal of the Law Society; one on the stock exchange for Investors' Chronicle ; one for the Vegetarian in which she was required to make propaganda against meat eating.
She even had one on the police for the South African Police Gazette —The Times .
Mr John Bates for the prosecution [when six football supporters were charged]said: ‘While a football match years ago used to be regarded as one of the perks of the job by the police, it is now the reverse.
When they go to a match they are as a matter of course spat upon and jostled, threatened and assaulted’—The Times .
Litigation in this country [England]is stili cheaper than in any other country in Western Europe —Mr E. H. S. Singleton, President of the Law Society (England), quoted in the Sunday Times .
West Midlands County Council, based in Birmingham, has advertised for 25 solicitors at salaries totalling about £137,000 —The Times .
It is a curious phenomenon, often noticed, that the temper and philosophy of the Court of Appeal and the House of Lords are seldom in accord —New Statesman .
It helps nobody if a law is seen to create myths —Contract Journal .
It is still an offence to use obscene, profane or indecent language in an Aberdeen street.
The legality of the charge was upheld in Aberdeen Burgh Court yesterday —Scotsman .
Courts of the tartan sheikdom —caption of article on the law in Scotland, appearing in The Observer Magazine .
Not for many years has the complacency of the legal profession about the state of our legal system been so severely jolted as by the series of lectures delivered in the last fortnight by Sir Leslie Scarman, a distinguished Lord Justice of Appeal.
Sir Leslie has in effect concluded that our mistress, the Common Law of England, is no longer as vigorous as she was and is incapable of any kind of rejuvenation.
A new role for the courts has to be fashioned out of our system of parliamentary democracy —Justinian .
Women with troublesome children find their cases [in Glasgow Sheriff Court]being taken early —The Scotsman .
In a 4,000 word decision, the Californian Court of Appeal ruled that in some instances the threat of homosexual rape is fearsome enough for a prisoner to seek justifiably to escape from jail —The Times .
Divorced couples often end up feeling more bitter about their lawyers than they do about each other—Laurence Marks .
In the Court of Session, Clerk, L.J., speaking seventy years ago, said:…—Taxation, Volume 94, No 2462 .
Many rational people, who would walk under a ladder without blenching, back superstitiously away from making a will —Joanna Slaughter .
Even worse than the executor who dies, a solicitor told me gloomily, is the one that refuses to —Joanna Slaughter .
COURT REPORT
Mutuality in contracts
Fixby Engineering Co Ltd v Auchlochan Sand & Gravel Co Ltd, 1974 SLT (Sh Ct Reports) 58
This case arose from a contract under which the pursuers, an engineering company, were to supply and install a conveyor belt system at the premises of the defenders, a brickmaking company.
The price was £3,450, and the terms of payment were 15 per cent on acceptance, 75 per cent on delivery and 10 per cent on completion.
The pursuers made delivery and began installing the system.
The defenders paid the deposit on acceptance but made no further payments.
It appeared that they wished to have the system completed and in operation before paying further.
The pursuers, having had no response to their requests for payment, treated the defenders' failure in payment as discharging the contract and withdrew from the site, leaving the installation in an uncompleted state.
The pursuers sued the defenders for 75 per cent of the price as damages, and the Sheriff found the defenders liable in damages.
The defenders appealed to the Sheriff Principal, who refused the appeal.
The defenders were unsuccessful in their arguments on the interpretation of the clause in the contract which provided for payment of 75 per cent of the price on delivery.
It was held to be unambiguous and that, in the context, ‘delivery’ meant delivery of materials and not delivery of a completed operable system.
The case was pleaded and argued before the Sheriff, and on appeal, on the basis that in addition to establishing the defenders' breach of contract as a material breach, the pursuers also required to show that they were entitled to rescind the contract, leaving the system in an incomplete state.
It was submitted that the intention of the defender to repudiate the contract must be proved.
Reference was made to Gloag on Contract (2nd edn), pp 617 and 618, which respectively state: ‘Stipulations as to time of payment are not treated as material conditions of the contract, except in very special cases’, and, ‘[The]question is whether the conduct of the party in default is such as to indicate that he intends to repudiate his contractual obligations.’
The Sheriff was of the opinion that the pursuers' right to damages arose at once upon the default of the defenders, as every breach gave rise to a claim of damages irrespective of whether it was a breach sufficiently material to justify rescission.
Accordingly, he held that the defenders' intention was irrelevant.
This was a mutual contract and the breach by the defenders was a material one, which entitled the pursuers, at their option, to insist on performance when due or accept the repudiation and treat themselves as free from further liability — Turnbull v McLean & Co (1874) 1 R 730, LJ-C Moncreiff, p 738.
The Sheriff Principal, in referring to the views of the Sheriff, expressed some doubt as to the entitlement of the pursuers to recover 75 per cent of the contract price if they had no legal justification for refusing to complete the installation.
In considering whether the pursuers' decision to rescind the contract was justified, the Sheriff Principal stated at p 63: ‘…the test is not the defenders’ reasons for their failure to pay, but the effect which, objectively, their conduct was likely to have upon the minds of the pursuers, on the assumption that the pursuers were reasonable men.’
Reference was made to Collard v Carswell (1893) 20 R (HL) 47, Lord Chancellor Herschell, at p 48, and to Forslind v Bechely-Crundall, 1922 SC (HL) 173, 1922 SLT 496, in which Lord Shaw of Dunfermline, at p 509, said: ‘The accent of the psychology is not upon the mind of the person who is defiant or heedless of his obligations, but, as Lord Herschell put it, upon the mind of the person who is suffering from the defiance.’
In view of the importance of the stipulation to pay 75 per cent of the price, and the failure of the defenders to pay or to respond to demands for payment, the pursuers were entitled to infer that the defenders did not intend to fulfil their obligations and pursuers were entitled to rescind.
This case illustrates the principle of mutuality in contracts and it is also of particular interest with regard to the question of the right of the innocent party to rescind the contract.
The right of the pursuers to rescind the contract arose from the principle of mutuality and the materiality of the defenders' breach, but the intention of the defenders is also relevant.
The conduct of the defenders and the effect of such conduct on the minds of the pursuers are significant factors from which it may be inferred that the defenders intended to repudiate the contract.
Rents why bother?
Brecker Grossmith & Co v Canworth Group Ltd [1974]3 All ER 561
The problems of agency are of themselves by no means insignificant in the professional preoccupations of any lawyer endowed with a respectable commercial practice.
When these anxieties are ministered to by the products of the instant government under which we now with remarkable acquiescence  subsist and are abetted by draftsmanship of the esoteric kind sometimes adopted by our professional brothers south of the border, we may expect to be confronted by problems of dimensions quite disparate to the simple issues which are essentially involved.
In this case the plaintiffs, a firm of estate agents, were employed by the defendants to find for them and to negotiate a lease of office and shop accommodation.
They accepted that employment upon the terms as to remuneration laid down in the scale of the Royal Institution of Chartered Surveyors whereby they would receive 10 per cent of one year's rent defined as ‘the rent reserved by letting’ plus any additional service charge.
Let us not pause to envisage, let alone to attempt to solve, what may be comprehended within that phrase of comforting generally, a ‘service charge’.
There are difficulties enough for us to cope with when we seek to discover what is ‘the rent reserved by the letting’ and these are the difficulties which exclusively engaged the attention of the court in this case.
The facts in issue may be briefly stated.
The estate agents negotiated a lease at a rent of £20,000 a year.
That figure may slightly nonplus a reader nurtured in these Caledonian climes; and his bewilderment will not be lessened when he discovers that £600 was the annual rent charged for the same accommodation in 1912.
Well, let us face it.
We in the law, like other denizens of these blessed isles, have perforce come to terms with the disagreeable factor of inflation.
We may even have earnestly studied and attempted to evaluate the varying utterance from the sublime to the ridiculous which emanates from a number of sources for our education.
In a series of estimates which have ranged from 25 or even 30 per cent to 8½ per cent(was that really said?) there is obviously material to suit almost every taste.
Any precise quantification in the present muddled state of our economy is an obvious chimera and even approximation to the truth is so occluded by political utterance as itself to become unattainable.
Nevertheless, lawyers may be difficult to convince, even upon the persuasions of members of the RICS, that inflationary trends may justify an increase from £600 yearly in 1972 to £20,000 yearly in 1913.
Let us not, however, stand abashed in wonderment at what the estate agents achieved.
For the government at this stage took a hand in the affair.
Under the Counter-Inflation (Business Rents) Order, 1913, it had in the neat figure of speech, or of jargon, employed by politicians ‘frozen’ the rent of £600 for those obviously highly desirable premises situated in London SW3.
The lease negotiated was for twenty years at a rental of £20,000 subject to possible increases up to a maximum of £22,000.
It was dated 14th June 1973.
On 16th April 1973 the estate agents had written to the defendants drawing attention to the existence of the counter-inflationary measures then in force and concluding with the sentence: ‘I would also confirm that should you be successful in acquiring these premises then it will be necessary for us to look to you for payment of our fees as based on the commercial scales of the Royal Institution of Chartered Surveyors.’
It must be confessed that the passage quoted from the letter in the report does not explain the situation with great lucidity, but this defect must have been cured elsewhere in the letter, since Nield, J, observes: ‘It was realised by all parties (and indeed later in the letter plainly stated) that only £600 a year would be payable during the currency of the counter-inflationary measures.’
The RICS scale provided for a commission of 10 per cent, but upon what figure was that percentage to be calculated?
The plaintiffs contended that the operative figure was the rent of £20,000, entitling them to £2,000.
The defendants argued that the operative figure was the rent of £600 actually payable, when the plaintiffs' commission would be £60.
To both figures VAT at the appropriate rate fell to be added.
The defendants argued in effect that ‘lent reserved’ meant no more than ‘rent’and that ‘rent’meant the rent which is payable.
On the other hand, if ‘rent reserved’ has a more specific and discriminatory meaning it is not a phrase which instantly yields up that meaning to a Scots lawyer, untrained in the techniques of English conveyancing.
Counsel for the estate agents assigned to it the meaning, ‘rent agreed between the parties’ at the time of entering the lease.
Nield, J, searched the authorities on this point and we in Scotland need not follow him too closely through his careful examination of decisions which themselves turn upon the construction of terms unfamiliar in Scottish conveyancing.
It is, however, of interest to trace the origin of ‘reserved’ to one of the older Latin words favoured as apt to create ‘a return that was not in the lessor before ‘— the words reddendo ,reservando ,solvendo and inveniendo .
Of these,reservendo , according to Uthwatt, J,’ appears to have captured the ear’(Samuel v Salmon & Gluckstein [1945]2 All ER 520).
The result reached by Nield, J, is that ‘rent reserved’ means ‘the rent agreed between the parties at the time of the demise’.
If, as is all too common, Scots lawyers have to apply in their own system a document imperfectly adapted to their own familiar terms, such as is the RICS scale in this particular, it may be of some advantage to know what ‘rent reserved’ means, at least in the country in which it originated.
The defendants' case was not entirely met, however, by the interpretation of ‘rent reserved’ as meaning the rent agreed and not the rent actually payable.
The defendants also contended that the lease provided for payment of a rent which pro tempore at least was illegal under the Counter Inflationary (Business Rents) Order, or, if the court found against them in that, then it was illegal under the Counter-Inflation Act, 1973, s 17.
As to the former of these points, Nield, J, held that the effect of the Order was simply to prohibit payment of rent in excess of the ‘standard rate’(ie, £600 per annum) during the time when the Order was in force.
The Order strikes not at the creation of the obligation but only at the performance of it while the Order is in force.
There is therefore nothing in the Order which renders the lease unlawful and invalid.
The alternative contention of illegality under the Counter Inflation Act, 1973, fared no better.
It was argued that since any payment above the standard rent would be illegal and indeed a criminal offence under section 17 of that Act, the lease itself was unlawful and accordingly the agreement for commission fixed upon the amount of the rent stipulated in it was also illegal and irrecoverable.
Nield, J, was unable so to hold for two reasons —(1) since the Counter-Inflationary Order made under the powers of the Act preserved the lease as lawful and valid though prohibiting payment of rent above the standard rate, and (2) since even if it had been otherwise the plaintiffs' contract for payment for professional services was not an agreement collateral to the lease so as to be tainted by any illegality in the lease if such illegality had existed.
The extent of liability
Robinson v The Post Office [1974]2 All ER 737
One situation which is becoming notorious is the fire which broke out in Sydney Harbour on 1st November 1951.
On the ninth anniversary of the incident the Privy Council was discussing the consequences in the case usually called The Wagon Mound [1961]AC 388.
Fifteen years after the incident the issue was again before the Privy Council in a case inevitably to be known as The Wagon Mound (No 2)[19671 1 AC 617.
The first Wagon Mound case denied the distinction between culpability and compensation.
It decided that the criterion for liability for damage was the reasonable foreseeability of the injury.
In re Polemis [1921]3 KB 560 was wrongly decided because it had held that once liability was established, a person was responsible for the direct consequences of his acts even though these were not foreseeable.
The result was that text-books had to be rewritten.
It became apparent, however, that apart from being only a highly persuasive authority,Wagon Mound would not apply in all situations.
In Smith v Leech Brain & Co Ltd [1962]2 QB 405, Lord Parker, CJ, applied to a personal injury the rule which is inaccurately expressed in the phrase, ‘the wrongdoer takes his victim as he finds him’.
That exception to Wagon Mound has now been approved by the Court of Appeal.
In the present case a post office worker sustained an injury on his left shin.
This injury was due to the negligence of his employers.
In the course of medical treatment he was given an injection of anti-tetanus serum as a result of which he contracted encephalitis.
This disease is a known risk of anti-tetanus injection.
His employers argued that the onset of this rare and serious illness was not reasonably foreseeable and, therefore, they should not be liable for the consequences.
In holding the employers liable, the court concluded:
‘The principle that a defendant must take the plaintiff as he finds him involves that if a wrongdoer ought reasonably to foresee that as a result of his wrongful act the victim might require medical treatment he is, subject to the principle of novus actus interveniens , liable for the consequences of the treatment applied although he could not reasonably foresee those consequences or that they could be serious.’
This case is yet another blow in the Polemis and Wagon Mound controversy.
It will not be the last.
Indeed it raises a further problem by applying reasonable foresight to one element of the issue of remoteness of damage, that is, to the need for medical treatment.
It may be that this reflects the lack of distinction between reasonable foresight as a criterion on the one hand, and, to use the more favoured phrase in Scotland, natural and direct consequences on the other.
Some day the House of Lords may tell us.
What every partner knows
Campbell v McCreath, 1975 SLT (Notes) 5
‘Notice to any partner who habitually acts in the partnership business of any matter relating to the partnership affairs operates as notice to the firm, except in the case of a fraud on the firm committed by or with the consent of that partner.’
So provides section 16 of the Partnership Act, 1890, and the words have a comfortingly assured ring about them even though long and intimate acquaintance with that Act suggests that comfort will be impaired if here as at other points in the Act one indulges in deeper reflection; and reflection need not go very deep before one becomes uneasy, because if one takes the words of section 16 into unqualified acceptance and seeks to apply them in practical situations, one does not have to envisage a great number of such situations to find some where the uncritical acceptance of section 16 will lead to manifest absurdity.
It is just one such situation that arises in the case under comment.
Mr Campbell sued Mr McGeath for implement of missives of sale of a farm.
The missives had been concluded between the solicitors for the purchaser, Messrs Ferguson & Forster, and the solicitors for the seller, Messrs Macfie & Alexander.
The partners in the first firm of solicitors were also partners in the second.
Prior to completion of the missives a meeting took place at the farm when an offer was made to purchase it from the defender at a price of £65,000.
The defender said he would sell at a price of £70,000.
The pursuer's son, who was present at the meeting, said that he would instruct Messrs Ferguson & Forster to submit a formal offer to the defender's solicitors, Messrs Macfie & Alexander.
The defender averred that as a result of that announcement he telephoned Macfie & Alexander, speaking to Mr Rae, one of the partners, and told him to expect an offer of £70,000 from Ferguson & Forster and that he instructed Mr Rae that when the offer was received, he (the defender) would consider its terms and if he found them satisfactory he would instruct Mr Rae to accept the offer.
The defender further averred that on or about 21st May 1973 Macfie & Alexander wrote to Ferguson & Forster offering on behalf of their client, the defender, to sell the farm to the pursuer; that the offer was dispatched by Macfie & Alexander without informing the defender and contrary to his instructions as telephoned to Mr Rae.
He further averred that the fact that he had not instructed Macfie & Alexander to send the offer to sell was known to the pursuer's agents, Ferguson & Forster, since Mr Rae and Mr Alex D. Forster, the partners of Macfie & Alexander, were also the whole partners of Ferguson & Forster.
The pursuer pleaded that the defences were irrelevant and that decree should be granted as craved.
Disposing of the case, Lord Stott analysed the ‘legal fiction’ upon which the defence was based in terms of the three steps of imputed knowledge involved:
(1)
Rae's knowledge that he had no authority to offer the farm for sale is to be imputed to his firm of Macfie and Alexander and to Forster his co-partner in that firm;
(2)
Since Rae was a partner in Ferguson & Forster his knowledge must also be imputed to that firm and to Forster as a partner in it;
(3)
The knowledge thus imputed to Ferguson & Forster must be imputed to their client, the pursuer, also.
It was conceded by pursuer's counsel that if the first two propositions were correct, then the third would necessarily follow.
While the law as to imputing to a principal the knowledge acquired by his agent in the course of the business about which the agent is employed is at points confused (see Bowstead,Agency , 13th edn, Article 112 and pp 356–7), it would have been difficult in the circumstances of the case to withhold the concession.
If the knowledge was acquired by Ferguson & Forster at all, then it was acquired by them in    
Registers and Records of Scotland
Ordering of extracts from Sasine and other Registers
The office of Keeper of the Registers and Records of Scotland existed for only twenty years, terminating in 1948.
That year, therefore, saw the re-establishment of a principle which had existed in Scotland for centuries, namely ‘the arrangement by which the formation of the records is committed to one set of officers and the custody of them to another’(Conveyancing Lectures , Menzies, 2nd Edn, 1856, p 165).
Section 1, subsection 2 of the Public Registers and Records (Scotland) Act, 1948, states:
‘There shall be transferred to and vested in the Keeper of the Registers of Scotland the whole functions of the Keeper of the Registers and Records of Scotland with regard to the framing of the General Register of Sasines, the Register of Hornings, the Register of Inhibitions and Adjudications, the Register of Entails and the Register of Deeds, together with the powers and duties transferred to the said Keeper from the Director of Chancery under section seven of the Reorganisation of Offices (Scotland) Act, 1928.’
Subsection 3 of that section states:
‘There shall be transferred to and vested in the Keeper of the Records of Scotland, the whole functions of the Keeper of the Registers and Records of Scotland with regard to the preservation of the public registers, records and rolls of Scotland.’
On the completion of Sasine and other Record Volumes by the Department of the Registers of Scotland they are transmitted to the Scottish Record Office for their preservation.
Requests for extracts should therefore be addressed to  unless the deed has been recorded only recently (for both Sasine and Books of Council and Session registrations, within the last five months).
For extracts of such recently recorded writs requests should be made to 
Although the office of Keeper of the Registers and Records has not existed for twenty-seven years we still receive mail in the Register House addressed to that official, as well as mail addressed to the wrong Keeper.
This has no great significance at the present moment when both Departments are housed within the Register House complex and only small inconvenience and delay result.
The position will be otherwise when the Department of the Registers of Scotland moves to Meadowbank House later in the year and solicitors are advised to ensure that requests for extracts and other information are correctly addressed in order that we can provide the most efficient service.
Search Sheets for each Division of the Register of Sasines are in the custody of the Keeper of the Registers of Scotland as they are being updated continually and are consulted by his staff in the registration of every deed presented for registration.
Public inquiries
New code
A draft code of guidance designed to make public inquiries quicker, more efficient and cheaper has been issued by the Secretary of State for Scotland.
The code, which is to have immediate effect, will mean more informal inquiry procedures, and will aid decision-takin by the Secretary of State.
It will, however, retain the fundamental principles of openness, fairness and impartiality considered essential by the Franks Committee.
It is issued in the form of a Memorandum of Guidance, and follows discussions between representatives of the Scottish Office, the Faculty of Advocates, this Society and the Scottish Committee of the Council of Tribunals.
It will apply to all inquiries held by the Secretary of State for Scotland.
The Scottish Development Department states, in an accompanying circular, that the code draws together the best elements of current inquiry practice.
Stress is laid on the following methods of bringing about improvements:
(1)
There should be full advance discussion and explanation of proposals by developers to improve public understanding.
(2)
As much written material as possible should be circulated by all parties before the inquiry, and the use of surprise evidence discouraged.
(3)
The Reporter is given a crucial role in directing and controlling proceedings to ensure that all questions are fully discussed, but repetition discouraged.
(4)
Proceedings should be informal so that no one need feel inhibited from taking part even if not professionally represented.
(5)
Where proceedings are delayed through unreasonable or time-wasting behaviour by one of the parties involved, the Reporter should feel free to make a recommendation, on which the Secretary of State will place considerable weight, that the expenses of other parties be awarded against the party responsible.
Comments will be invited from local authorities and other interested parties on how the recommendations work in practice and on possible further improvements.
The Secretary of State can then consider whether further or amended guidance is desirable.
The Secretary of State regards the Memorandum and its accompanying Circular as an important step in the work of reviewing planning procedures generally.
The great bulk of planning applications are processed quickly and without difficulty — 41,000 planning decisions are taken each year of which only around 250 involve an inquiry, with only a minority of these attracting adverse public comment.
It is accepted that there is scope for further improvement.
The Secretary of State is therefore increasing from four to eight the number of full-time inquiry reporters in the Scottish Office Unit, the setting up of which has in itself reduced the time involved in arranging inquiries and submitting reports.
He also proposes to initiate discussions on planning procedures, within the context of the new statutory planning and local government systems.
These would be with the association of new local authorities and also with representatives of other interested bodies.
Any interested members may obtain a copy of the Memorandum of Guidance by writing to the Secretary.
Value Added Tax
Travelling expenses
The attention of members is drawn to the decision of the Divisional Court of Appeal in the case of Rowe & Maw v Commissioners of Customs and Excise decided on 6th March, and reported in The Times of 8th March.
This brief note cannot do justice to all the facts and arguments involved.
Very briefly, however, solicitors rendered two bills to different clients, the first of which allocated £17.10 to travelling fares, and the second of which allocated £34.20 for air fares from London to Rotterdam on behalf of the second client.
The question was whether reimbursement of these fares by the clients was a consideration for the supply of services and, if it was, whether it was liable to Value Added Tax.
The appellants submitted that reimbursement of their outlays was not part of the consideration for their services, but the court did not accept that argument.
The Divisional Court held that the travelling was a necessary part of the service performed and that the consideration was in respect of an entire service.
The appeal therefore failed.
The disbursements were liable to VAT.
While the above judgment confirms what the Society and, presumably, its members have understood all along, it is right that members should be notified about the matter.
It is however believed that the Divisional Court said that if the only consideration for a payment by the client was a disbursement by his solicitor, different considerations might apply.
Until the full text of the judgment is available, this opinion should be treated with discretion.
Scope and coverage
The attention of members is drawn to the new edition, revised to February 1975, of Public Notice 701, which contains a wealth of information about exemption, zero-rating and many other matters.
Special schemes for retailers
The attention of members is drawn to a new Public Notice, 727, dealing with various new VAT schemes for retailers, which may well be of interest to the clients of many members.
The new schemes described therein will come into force on a later date to be announced by HM Customs and Excise, whereupon the Notice 727 will then replace the existing Notice 707.
Inland Revenue
Capital transfer tax
The Financial Secretary to the Treasury announced in the Committee Stage debate on Clause 15 of the Finance Bill on  13th February a special relief for Discretionary Trusts in existence at 26th March 1974:
1
A number of representative bodies have pressed upon the Government the desirability of a transitional provision in relation to discretionary trusts where the settlement was made before 26th March 1974.
The majority of suggestions have been on the lines that there should be a one- or two-year period in which it should be possible for the capital of discretionary trusts to be distributed tax free provided the settlement was made before 26th March 1974 and the result of the distribution was that there would be either absolute entitlement to the property or an interest in possessing it.
There are a number of amendments to Schedule 5 which are directed at the same broad objective though they go somewhat further than the suggestions I have described.
2
The Government have come to the conclusion that there is a good case for relief in this direction.
We do not accept that the provisions in Schedule 5 will operate harshly or unfairly on property held on discretionary trust which has been settled since 26th March 1974.
The objective of the Government, as we have said before, is not to penalise property held on discretionary trust — or other settled property — but simply to ensure that property held in this form does not continue to have the capital tax advantages it has in practice enjoyed with estate duty by comparison with property beneficially owned by individuals.
We have provided in the Finance Bill that where property held on discretionary trust were settled before 26th March 1974 a different — and almost invariably more generous — basis of charge will apply.
We have some sympathy, however, with those who have said that where property was settled before 26th March 1974 the trustees should have the opportunity, for, a limited period, to distribute the capital absolutely to individuals or create an interest in possession so that the rules set out for discretionary trusts will not apply.
We have been influenced here by the consideration that there are a number of discretionary trusts of long standing where tax avoidance was not the main motive in the settlor's mind when he established the trust.
In these circumstances we accept that it is reasonable that some trustees may feel that in the new situation produced by the tax the right course would be for the settled property to cease to be held on discretionary trust.
We have also been influenced by representations about the position of privately owned companies held on discretionary trusts.
Substantial assets are held in this way, and the Government do not think it would be right for this to pass to individual beneficiaries entirely tax free.
It should be borne in mind here that many trustees would be able to appoint the capital to relatively young beneficiaries so that the property might not be subject to a further charge for a relatively long period.
We therefore propose to introduce at Report Stage a Government amendment which will provide for discretionary trusts which were in existence on 26th March 1974 to rearrange their position, if they so wish, at rates of charge which will be substantially below the rates that would otherwise be chargeable.
The broad outline of the relief the Government propose is as follows:
I
Rate of charge on capital distribution Where the property was held on discretionary trust before 26th March, capital distributions of the settled property to individuals who became beneficially entitled to it will be charged only the following fractions of the tax that would otherwise be charged on capital distributions of the settled property: These reliefs will also apply where an interest in possession comes into existence in property previously held on discretionary trust.
They will not apply, however, where the beneficiary of the capital distribution is a company or is an individual resident or domiciled outside the United Kingdom.
2
Anniversary date for the periodic charge The Government think it right as a corollary of the introduction of these reliefs, that the first anniversary date on which the periodic charge under paragraph 12 of Schedule 5 to the Finance Bill will be payable is the anniversary date next after 31st March 1980.
This will not necessarily affect the annual charges on property where the trustees are resident outside the United Kingdom under paragraph 12 (2) of Schedule 5.
3
Rates of CTT chargeable on the coming to an end of an interest in possession during the lifetime of the beneficiary On a separate matter, it is right that I should inform the Committee, for the avoidance of doubt, that the lower rates of CTT announced by the Chief Secretary on 5th February which would apply to transfers of value occurring during the lifetime of the transferor will also apply where an interest in possession comes to an end during the lifetime of the person beneficially entitled to that interest.
Capital gains tax
Owner-occupied houses
Where an owner-occupier puts his house up for sale and moves into a new house, exemption or relief from capital gains tax is given even though the owner did not actually live in the house in the twelve months immediately preceding its disposal.
The Financial Secretary to the Treasury has announced in answer to a Written Question that while current market conditions continue the Board of Inland Revenue will in certain cases allow a modest extension of the twelve-month period.
The following is the text of the Financial Secretary's statement:
‘To meet the case where an owner-occupier puts his house up for sale and moves into a new house but cannot at once find a buyer for his old house, the 1965 Finance Act provides for exemption or relief from capital gains tax even though the owner did not actually live in the house for a period of up to 12 months immediately preceding the date of sale.
This period of grace has in normal market conditions given the house owner adequate time in which to find a buyer.
As a result, however, of the market conditions that have applied over the past year the 12 month period of grace has in some cases proved insufficient.
Whilst these conditions prevail the Board of Inland Revenue will allow a modest extension of the 12 month period if there has been a continuing intention to sell.’
Stock dividends
In answer to a Parliamentary Question:
‘To ask the Chancellor whether he proposes to take any action to counter the growing practice by companies of granting shareholders the option to receive dividends in the form of stock instead of cash, so enabling some shareholders to obtain a tax advantage.’
The Chief Secretary to the Treasury gave the following Written Answer:
‘My Rt Hon Friend intends to bring forward proposals in his next Budget to tax a stock dividend received in lieu of cash following the exercise of an option by a shareholder.
The recipient will be chargeable to higher rate income tax and to the investment income surcharge on the amount or value of the dividend’ grossed-up ‘at the basic rate of tax.
This charge will not be limited to the straightforward case where a shareholder elects to take scrip in place of a particular cash dividend, but will also cover other arrangements which achieve a similar result, for instance by the issue of a separate class of shares carrying the right to a stock dividend.
It will apply to all such stock dividends received on or after 6 April 1975.’
Double taxation
United Kingdom/Spain
Discussions were held in London from 25th to 28th February 1975 at official level between representatives of the United Kingdom and Spain about the conclusion of a double taxation convention between the two countries.
A wide measure of agreement was reached and further talks will be held later this year.
Publications
Leaflet IR16.
Share Acquisitions by Directors and Employees .
This leaflet is now available free of charge from the offices of HM Inspectors of Taxes.
Legal Aid
Legal advice and assistance in English or foreign matters
Section 2 of the Legal Advice and Assistance Act, 1972, provides in effect that legal advice and assistance may be given on the application of Scots law to a particular matter.
The giving of legal advice and assistance in relation to matters arising in England and in foreign countries has been considered by the Central Committee and they take the view that standing the provision in the Act, all a Scottish solicitor is entitled to do is to give the client preliminary advice on his legal position and the course of action open to him.
The following notes amplify the position.
English matters
In English cases, the English correspondent should theoretically apply for legal advice and assistance or legal aid in England, and any further work necessary in Scotland should be done by the Scottish solicitor as correspondent of the English solicitor.
This may be satisfactory in a matter where there is substantial work involved, but in many cases, such as minor motoring offences, where the client, after being advised, may wish to plead guilty, there may be more trouble in having the English forms completed than in assisting the client.
To overcome the difficulty to some extent in this kind of situation, the Central Committee will allow the Legal Advice and Assistance Scheme reasonable charges to the Scottish solicitor for meetings with the client, including minor correspondence, but not an account of an English solicitor as an outlay.
If the matter is unlikely to be disposed of with a minimum of advice and assistance, then legal advice and assistance or legal aid in England should be sought.
In matrimonial matters there may be cases in which a minimum of investigation is required to establish whether Scots or English law falls to be applied.
In such cases the Central Committee will allow under the Legal Advice and Assistance Scheme, meetings and precognitions to establish domicile, but solicitors should be cautious of incurring extensive charges until this preliminary point has been established.
Where matrimonial proceedings are raised in England against a spouse resident in Scotland and these are not to be defended and the only questions arising relate to aliment, custody and access, which can be disposed of with a minimum of meetings and correspondence, the Central Committee will allow modest charges under the Scheme for that purpose.
On previous occasions a notice has been inserted in the Journal warning Scottish solicitors that under the English Legal Aid Scheme no payment is allowed out of the Legal Aid Fund to any solicitor, English or otherwise, for any work done prior to the granting of a Civil Aid Certificate.
This warning is also repeated in the Practice Notes in the Parliament House Book.
The English form of application for legal aid (which has no accompanying memorandum) is so devised that it can be, and often is, completed by the applicant without the intervention of any solicitor.
Legal Aid in England, due to the difference in rules of evidence, may be granted on little more than an ex parte statement by the applicant.
The obtaining of corroborative statements, etc, is not done until after the Civil Aid Certificate is granted.
Members are again advised that when they are consulted by a client who requires legal aid for the purpose of proceedings in the English courts, they should (subject to the above observations about legal advice and assistance on English matters) confine themselves to assisting the client to complete the English form of application (the Central Committee hold a supply of these).
The English form requires the applicant to specify the name of an English solicitor to act for him in England.
The English solicitor, if advised of the Scottish solicitor's interest in the case, will normally ask the Scottish solicitor to assist if further evidence is required after the Civil Aid Certificate is granted.
The Scottish solicitor's account of expenses is then treated as an outlay in the English solicitor's bill of costs against the Legal Aid Fund — see McCullie v Butler (1961) 2 All ER 554.
Scottish solicitors' accounts in English legal aid cases are not normally taxed by Taxing Masters in England, but under an informal arrangement are referred for scrutiny to the Central Committee Taxation Department.
Matters arising in foreign countries
Where matrimonial proceedings are raised in a country other than England (eg, Canada, Australia or USA) against a spouse resident in Scotland and these are not to be defended and the only questions arising relate to aliment, custody and access, which can be disposed of with a minimum of meetings  and correspondence, the Central Committee will allow modest charges under the Scheme for that purpose.
Where divorce proceedings are raised in a country other than England (eg, Canada, Australia or USA) against a spouse resident in Scotland, which the spouse wishes to defend or where a spouse resident in Scotland wishes to raise divorce proceedings in one of these countries, all a Scottish solicitor is entitled to do under the Scheme is to give the client preliminary advice on his or her legal position and the course of action open.
In these cases, however, the Central Committee will also allow reasonable charges to the Scottish solicitor for meetings with the client and minor correspondence to ascertain the availability of legal aid for the proceedings in the particular country involved.
International Legal Aid Association
Nearly all advanced countries have Legal Aid Schemes, though some are not as comprehensive as in Scotland and the financial eligibility tests may be more stringent.
In general, the cost of the action in the foreign country will be borne by the Legal Aid Scheme in that country, but the position of the charges of the solicitor in Scotland seems to vary and should be ascertained from the Legal Aid authorities in the country concerned.
In some foreign countries the hearing on aliment is dealt with at a separate subsequent diet after divorce has been granted but before the decree is formally pronounced.
Local Legal Aid Secretaries are occasionally asked for information about the availability of legal aid in foreign countries for residents in Scotland.
This information can most readily be obtained from the International Legal Aid Association Directory .
This directory is very voluminous and copies are held by Legal Aid Committees in Glasgow, Dundee and Aberdeen.
Any member wishing information may obtain this from the Secretary of one of these Committees or from the Legal Aid Central Committee.
Northern Ireland
There are Legal Aid Schemes for civil and criminal proceedings in Northern Ireland similar to Scotland.
Legal advice and assistance is envisaged but has not been introduced owing to difficulties in obtaining legislation.
The above proposals for England and foreign countries will apply to Northern Ireland so far as appropriate in the particular circumstances of the case.
Legal aid in criminal causes
New application form
It has been felt for some time that the procedure and forms relating to the granting of legal aid in criminal causes could be improved, and the introduction of legal aid in the District Courts has led to the position being scrutinised and a new procedure and application form introduced.
At the present time the procedure involves three forms — SCLA 2 (Application for legal aid with declaration of means); SCLA 3 (Intimation by Clerk of Court to Local Secretary that Court has granted legal aid); and SCLA 5 (Intimation by Local Secretary to nominated solicitor, the accused, the Clerk of Court and Fiscal).
When the Sheriff Clerk completes SCLA 3 he inserts thereon certain details which are already on the application form.
When the Local Secretary completes SCLA 5 he also inserts thereon broadly the same details.
The present forms differ in size and the same information appears in each form in a different order, which makes for difficulty in copy-typing.
The new procedure is simple in that it involves an application form having three parts on the front of it (the declaration of means being on the back), first the information about the applicant and the charge, second a part to be completed by the Sheriff Clerk, and last a part to bc completed by the Local Secretary.
The application form will be completed and submitted to the court in the usual way.
The Sheriff Clerk, instead of completing the separate SCLA 3, will indicate on the application form whether legal aid has been granted or refused, photo-copy it (or make a typewritten copy) and pass the photo-copy to the Local Secretary who will add on to the photo-copy the intimation to the nominated solicitor and send copies thereof to the nominated solicitor, the accused and others.
The procedure will involve photo-copying at two stages and cut out typing forms both for Sheriff Clerks and Local Secretaries.
In preparing the new form, suggestions made by members of the Society, Local Secretaries and Sheriff Clerks have all been taken into account.
It seeks to present the information in a more meaningful way and give additional information useful to Sheriffs, Sheriff Clerks and others, and is designed to be used with a window envelope.
The new form (white in colour) will be introduced on a trial basis in the Sheriff Courts serviced by the Glasgow, Aberdeen and Dumfries Local Committees.
It is proposed that it should be used in those Committee areas for about a month so that difficulties can emerge and be dealt with.
It is hoped that the new procedure and new form may be introduced generally by 16th May when the new District Courts come into operation, but further information on this will be given next month.
Applications for legal aid by HM Forces
Declaration of means
In applications for legal aid by Service personnel, an additional form, Ll (HMF), must be completed and sworn.
It is not always easy for an applicant to attend on a person to administer the oath and it has been agreed with the Department of Health and Social Security that the swearing should be dispensed with and the signature witnessed by the Commanding Officer or an officer appointed by him to do so.
The witnessing officer will normally have some knowledge of the man concerned and will be able to make a scrutiny of the document.
Vacational employment in legal firms
The Council of the Society has been considering whether a scheme should be introduced whereby a young person proposing to enter law as a career could obtain some preliminary experience of the workings of a law office either before commencement of his university studies or during vacations.
This could be achieved if solicitors were prepared to take young people into their offices on a temporary basis.
As a preliminary, the views of Local Societies and Faculties were canvassed.
Reactions have varied — some were in favour of operating such a scheme, while others either doubted its feasibility or were unable to participate.
The Council has therefore reached the view that a formal scheme should not be introduced at this time but that members  should be encouraged to take young intrants into their offices if they are able to do so, and the Council therefore recommends members to consider whether they can offer this facility to young people in their areas.
In some instances members may wish to offer employment, perhaps for a month or two, at an agreed wage.
In others, it may be thought appropriate to arrange merely a casual introduction to the office for a couple of weeks or so at a nominal remuneration.
It is not thought likely that this would give rise to any greater risk of breach of confidentiality of clients' affairs than that involved with the rest of the staff.
The object is to give the intrant an opportunity of acquiring some familiarity with the running of a law office, so that when he later hears a reference to ‘title deeds’ or the ‘Sheriff Clerk's Office’he will have some notion of what is meant.
Society for Computers and Law Limited
The Annual General Meeting of the Society for Computers and Law Limited was held at the Council Chamber of The Law Society on Tuesday, 4th March 1915.
Sir Leslie Scarman was re-elected President and took the chair.
The Chairman, Mr A. T. Woods, reported on a successful year with 115 members and the conference at Oxford.
He also gave advance information about an evening meeting on computer contracts on Friday, 16th May, and a one-day conference with an associated exhibition on computers and conveyancing on 24th October 1975, both events to take place in London.
Sir Leslie Scarman spoke of the new computer-usable Statutes in Force and of the Statute Law Committee's subcommittee on the impact of computer technology on statutory material, and looked forward to the day when lawyers will be able to search the statutes in computer-usable form, as well as relying on their traditional book material.
This was followed by an interesting talk by Mr N. J. Bellord on his experience with a computer in a solicitor's office, and a number of valuable hints as to how to get the best out of the system and avoid technological pitfalls.
Solicitors' Discipline (Scotland) Committee
George Loudon Allan
On 27th November 1974, on a Complaint by the Council of the Law Society of Scotland, the Solicitors' Discipline (Scotland) Committee found George Loudon Allan, Solicitor, 33A Queen's Avenue, Edinburgh, guilty of professional misconduct on several charges which included the fraudulent conversion of clients' monies and breaches of Rule 4 (1)(a) of the Solicitors' (Scotland) Accounts Rules, 1952, as amended.
The Committee ordered that the name of Mr Allan be struck off the Roll of Solicitors in Scotland.
Mr Allan was also found liable in the expenses of the Complainers and of the Committee as the same might be taxed on a Solicitor and Client basis.
John Duncan Haward Soper
On 27th November 1974, on a Complaint by the Council of the Law Society of Scotland, the Solicitors' Discipline (Scotland) Committee found John Duncan Haward Soper, Solicitor, 48 Great King Street, Edinburgh, guilty of professional misconduct in respect of his failure to discharge his joint and several responsibility along with his former partner to keep proper books of a trust and in respect of his failure to comply with the provisions of Rule 4 (1)(a) of the Solicitors' (Scotland) Accounts Rules, 1952, as amended.
The Committee censured Mr Soper and imposed a fine of £250.
Mr Soper was also found liable in the expenses of the Complainers and of the Committee as the same might be taxed on a Solicitor and Client basis.
Public Service and Commerce Group
‘Social Work and the Role of the Children's Panel’
On 5th March a successful meeting of the Group was held in Glasgow when Mr F. J. Kennedy, Reporter to the Children's Panel, Glasgow, gave a most interesting and inspired talk on his experience over the last few years.
He explained the detailed attention which was paid to the background of a child appearing before the Panel and pointed out that it was often revealed that the children concerned came from large families, which were poor and in which there was an absence of adult male guidance.
He felt that it was important that the rest of the community should be considering why the children concerned were in trouble.
Miss Beti Jones, Chief Social Work Adviser, Social Work Services Group, then spoke on the social work aspect.
Reporters and Panels had taken care to concentrate on the actualities rather than technicalities.
The fact that real issues were being talked about was often sufficient to cure the problem.
The benefit of the system was that it demanded that society intervened for those who were under great pressure and could not take the stress.
Another factor which she considered significant in preventing problems arising was the availability of attractive leisure-time activities.
Annual Dinner
As previously announced, the first Annual Dinner of the Group will be held in the Albany Hotel, Glasgow, on Friday, 2nd May, at 7.30 pm for 8 pm.
Mr Harry Ewing, MP, Parliamentary Under-Secretary of State, Scottish Office, and Sir James Falconer, MBE, JP, Town Clerk, Glasgow, have kindly agreed to propose the toasts of the profession and the Group.
Replies will be given by Mr Henry Herron, Procurator Fiscal, Glasgow, a member of the Group Committee, and Mr J. D. Wheelans, MBE, the President of the Society.
Members are invited to bring wives or husbands and other guests.
Applications for tickets at £4.75 per person should be made to the Secretary of the Group at the Law Society's Hall.
Rates of interest
The following three forms of rates of interest may be regarded as suitable for use where it is envisaged that the rate of interest should fluctuate from time to time according to market rates:
(a)
The rate of interest on loans recommended from time to time by the Building Societies' Association (which is at present 11 per cent).
(b)
The rate of interest fixed by the Commissioners on Landed Securities (which was fixed at 11 ½ per cent for the six months from and after Martinmas 1974 and which will continue at that rate for the six months from and after Whitsunday 1975).
(c)
The rate of interest payable on compensation after entry in respect of land compulsorily acquired (which was 14 ½ per cent but which was decreased to 13 ½ per cent as from 4th March 1975).
It is understood that the formula used by the Building Societies' Association when recommending their rate of interest is as follows,viz :
‘That the rate of interest on new offers of advance made on the security of private dwellings (occupied solely by the owner and members of his family) be 11 per cent per annum forthwith.’
Property Centres Group
At a General Meeting of the Group held in Edinburgh on 27th February 1915, Mr David Semple retired as Chairman in terms of the Group's Constitution and Mr Stewart Y. Marshall of Edinburgh was unanimously elected Chairman in his place.
Mr W. M. Haggarty of Ayr was unanimously elected Vice-Chairman in place of Mr C. Smith who also retired at this time, and Mr A. D. Lamond of Perth was unanimously elected to the Committee.
It was reported to the Group that their request to the Council of the Law Society to commission a firm of management consultants to make an examination of the property market in Scotland had been remitted to a Special Committee of the Society comprising representatives of its Purchase and Sale of Heritage and Professional Practice Committees.
This Committee had instructed consultants to make a survey and put forward proposals.
The firm's recommendations were in course of consideration by the Council.
Mr A. D. Williams of Dundee, Chairman of the Group's Sub-Committee responsible for the issue of statistics, reported to the meeting that a system had been devised for the collection of statistics from the various Centres.
In the discussion which followed, it was agreed that while the statistics formed a useful starting point, insufficient use was being made of them for publicity purposes, and the Secretary was instructed to ascertain the form in which figures would be most useful to property correspondents.
It was suggested that every effort should be made by the Centres to comply with the form required in order to establish the Centres as the major selling agency in Scotland.
It was also agreed that Press Releases should be issued whenever appropriate.
The following Press Release was issued at the close of the Meeting:
‘At a general meeting held in Edinburgh today solicitors representing the fourteen Property Centres throughout Scotland agreed that contrary to recent statements in the Press there is no insurmountable difficulty in getting mortgages for clients who wish to purchase a house at the present time.’
Property Centre returns for 1974 show that property to the value of over; £142 million was sold through the Centres.
This-represents sales of more than 15,000 properties.
‘The statistics also show that property in the North of Scotland fetched the highest average prices during the year.’
Twelve entries were submitted for the Group's Competition for the design of a symbol for use by all the Centres.
These entries were displayed and a design entered by Mr G. F. Williams of Dundee received the majority of the votes cast.
A copy of the design is shown below.
It was decided that each Centre should display the emblem and that, wherever possible, the Centres should incorporate it on their notepaper, literature, leaflets, advertisements.
etc.