

Administrative Assistant (Acquisitions)(AA)
Job Description
Specific duties:
1.
Responsibility for the running of the library loans system, including the maintenance of loan records, and the issuing of loans using paper & computer systems.
Assistance will also be provided on the transfer of existing loan records from paper slips to the computer system.
2.
Responsibility for the circulation of reserved books to staff, and for the maintenance of circulation records.
3.
Responsible to the Acquisitions Librarian for checking the library catalogue prior to ordering new books.
4.
Responsible for the printing and despatching of purchase orders.
5.
Responsible for receiving deliveries of new books, for unpacking and checking deliveries, and for maintaining records of receipt.
6.
Responsible for book jacketing and labelling.
7.
Handling the distribution of a Library Bulletin when this is produced.
8.
Photocopying for library staff and for other approved users.
9.
Together with the Serials Assistant, responsibility for the shelving of returned loans (daily), for shelf tidying (weekly), and for clearing the readers' tables (daily).
10.
Together with other Library staff, responsible for reader assistance and helping with reader enquiries.
11.
Absence cover for the Serials Assistant, including mail opening and serials routines.
12.
Other clerical and administrative duties as required by the Acquisitions Librarian and the Chief Librarian.
March 2, 1992  Dear Sirs,
We accept the terms set out in the administrator's letter (Ref: ARDJ/SBR/LIF/Scot.100/250).
Yours faithfully,
Librarianship/Information Management
Indexing (Cat, Class, Thesaurus Constr)
Bibliographic/Reference Studies (Incl.
Abstracting)
Organisation & Administration (marketing, user studies, services, loan systems)
Records Management/Archives
Serials Management
Non-book material
Information Sources
Special Libraries
Public/National Libraries
Buildings/Equipment/Furniture
Careers/Education/Training
Legislation (Copyright, Data Protection, PLR)
Publishing/Book Trade
Automation of Libraries
Software Packages
Hypermedia
Computer Hardware
Telecomms, E-mail, LANs
CD-ROM
Online Hosts & Databases
Online Search Techniques
Business Card
I regularly receive visits from overseas librarians, from computer consultants, and other people with whom an exchange of business cards is normal practice.
In addition, I frequently attend meetings with EC contacts and scientists in other institutions.
I ran out of printed business cards over a year ago, and I've now run out of my stock of the blank cards (which in view of my handwriting have a rather negative impact in any case).
Is there any chance of getting a new supply of printed cards please?
Names for bands
Annie's Wig
Standard Handfull
Mrs Nolan's Kedgeree
Fast Food Fantasy
Business as Usual
Social Work Department
Report of a Board to recommend the appointment of an Administrative Assistant in the Library, held 14 October 1993.
The Board interviewed five candidates (listed below) and unanimously agreed that while all were suitable for the post, it recommended that Miss Valerie Muirhead be offered the post, to be taken up as soon as possible, at a salary two points below the maximum of the AA main scale.
With regard to the internal candidate, the Chairman further recommends that while she interviewed adequately, it would be beneficial to Miss Harraughty's future career development if she could be offered training in interview skills.
 Marisa,
I'd like to book one or other of the Conference Rooms for the following dates, for meetings of the Computer Management Group.
All meetings are scheduled for 10 — 12, but 10 — 12.30 bookings preferred to be on the safe side.
If there are any problems, please let me know.
Many thanks
Library Notice.
For Staff Bulletin
The Library's Online Public Access Catalogue (OPAC) is now up and running.
Catalogue entries from 1986 to the present are now computerised, as are analytical and monographic index entries from 1991 to date.
Please register in the Library for training, which will be carried out in small groups over the next few weeks.
Future developments will include automated circulation lists, and a paperless loan system, which will be much easier to use, more secure and more efficient.
The card catalogue closed in 1991, and at present there are no plans to convert card data retrospectively, except for the Monograph Index, which we propose to capture by scanning.
For Staff Bulletin.
Health and Safety — Display Screen Equipment.
The workstation assessment which forms part of the EC Directive on Health and Safety has now been completed.
The co-operation and rapid response of staff to the assessment procedure has been greatly appreciated, and will enable us to proceed with the implementation of the Directive with all of the necessary facts to hand.
A full analysis of the information collected will obviously take some time, but I will be presenting a Report to the RBGE Health and Safety Committee at its next meeting in March.
Preliminary analysis has established that the PCs in use meet the standards, but that some additional equipment (screen filters, document holders, footrests) is needed for some individual workstations.
Additionally, some of the chairs in use at workstations are not adjustable, and will require replacement.
Changes in furniture layout with respect to windows, working space, etc will be required in other areas.
Two of the issues which stand out most clearly from staff responses to the assessment are (i) that we must provide training in the health and safety aspects of workstation use, and (ii) that we must provide information to staff on the procedures for eyesight testing for those staff who spend long periods in front of display screens.
It is the view of the Computing Sub-Group that the Directive should be implemented here as soon as possible.
Those Departments and projects considering purchase of display screen equipment should note that, as from 1st January 1993, the workstation environment (including furniture, lighting, layout etc.) must fully meet the standards laid down in the Directive before any new workstation is installed, and that the workstation environment costs should be added to the costs of any hardware being considered.
The assessment has included RBGE equipment, plus that owned or operated by BTC, SAPS, research projects, and Edinburgh University students on RBGE premises.
Workstations in the specialist gardens will be assessed during February.
Management Group
Staff Reprints
The procedures for ordering reprints were set out in RBG Office Notice 15/91 [numbered 15/90 in error], dated February 27 1991.
All such orders are now authorised by the Acquisitions Librarian and processed through the Library's ordering system.
As per a subsequent Management Group decision, orders for up to 50 copies can be processed in this way, provided funds are available (this to be cleared with the Librarian in advance).
Costs are set against an annual Library estimate, currently totalling £500, of which some £285 has been spent so far this year.
Mr Burtt has asked my advice on payment of the enclosed invoice for £690 for an order raised by Mrs Gregory which did not go through the agreed procedures, and which exceeds the total amount available for all staff.
I am prepared to raise a Library order for the remainder of this year's reprint budget (£215), since I am not aware of any other potential reprint requirements, but I cannot meet the full costs of the invoice.
Could this be discussed by Management Group please?
Capital Equipment — Computers
Jane Daly has just given me a copy of the new Capital Equipment RTP forms.
The procedures look fine for the purchase of one-off and novel items, but it occurs to me that it would save time and effort if we established ‘preferred suppliers’ for standard PCs, printers, and peripherals, so that we don't have to obtain multiple quotes and give reasons for supplier choice each time we order an off-the-shelf system.
This sort of procedure is well established in other organizations, such as the University, and provided the preferred suppliers are properly chosen in the first place, and alternative source prices are kept under review at regular intervals, I think there are economic advantages in standardising suppliers.
Should we table this for discussion next Computing meeting?
The other ‘grey area’ is software.
I'm never sure if this is capital or recurrent, and I know I have a fund account under the Library cost centre through which I purchase software for Library use.
Can we clarify?
To:
Finance Dept
Library Purchases for other Departments, 1991/92
The Soutron package can identify orders for books requested by individual cost centres, in addition to those bought for general staff use.
No individual budgets have been allocated to Departments, but I thought it might be int-eresting to see the spread of demand.
Work continues on the Journals exercise.
Royal Botanic Garden Edinburgh
This is to certify that…has successfully completed an advanced training course in the following subjects: Information Management, Plant Information Systems, Database Design and Construction, Word Processing, and Personal Computer Operating Systems; and that he has demonstrated his abilities in these subjects by constructing a database of the Economically Useful Plants of India.
Signed Professor D S Ingram, Sc.D., F.I.
Biol., Regius Keeper (Director), Royal Botanic Garden Edinburgh
Assessors 
WHY MANAGE INFORMATION?
Information is one of the primary assets of any organization.
Information management is concerned with the methods used to control the flow, storage and handling of the information resource within and between organisations.
WHAT CAN BE DONE WITH INFORMATION?
Information can be:
Created
Collected
Stored
Distributed
Retrieved
Manipulated
Output
Disposed of
Management techniques can be applied to any of these processes, to serve the overall needs of the organization.
WHAT ARE THE BENEFITS OF INFORMATION MANAGEMENT?
Improve the quality of information for policy makers and planners.
More effective discharge of operational functions and higher quality of service to the public
Produce more accurate, cost-effective management information
Reduce expenditure on collection, duplication, communication and storage of unnecessary data
Better focus information
Make better choices of information technology investment
HOW DOES INFORMATION MANAGEMENT WORK?
INFORMATION MANAGEMENT — LINKING RESOURCES TO USERS
Resources Uses
Libraries Internal
Databases Visitors
Illustrations Enquirers
Staff knowledge Publications
Scientific data Education
Horticultural info Exhibitions
Management & support data Promotion
WHY DATABASE?
Compactness.
No need for voluminous paper files
Speed.
Retrieve and change data far faster than a human can.
Less drudgery.
Mechanical tasks are always better done by machines.
Currency.
Accurate, up-to-date information is avaliable on demand at any time.
WHAT IS A DATABASE?
A collection of data relevant to some project/organization or enterprise.
WHAT IS A DATABASE MANAGEMENT SYSTEM (DBMS)?
Computerised record-keeping system or
Electronic filing cabinet or
Repository for a collection of computerised data files
WHAT CAN BE DONE WITH DATABASES?
Adding new (empty) files to the database
Inserting new data into existing files
Retrieving data from existing files.
Deleting data from existing files
Removing existing files (empty or otherwise) from the database
Annual Report for 1992 — Computing Activities (General)
The Strategic Plan for Information Services was accepted as the initial blueprint for developing computing activities within the Garden, and much of the work within computing was concerned with the implementation of individual sections of the Plan.
A network strategy was developed, establishing three functional segments — administrative & financial, scientific & horticultural, and bibliographic — operating specialised applications software on three file-servers linked to form a single Ethernet network.
Following severe network problems, one of the fileservers was replaced during the year.
Staff changes and an increased workload led to the identification of the need for a Computer Support Officer to provide user support, fault diagnosis, preventative maintenance, and supplier liaison services.
A part-time appointment was made in July.
Computing is organised by the Computing Sub-Group of Management, chaired by Dr C.D. Will, with input from the Computer Users Group, chaired by Dr D.F.
Chamberlain.
Day-to-day management is carried out by Mrs G. Lomas, Dr R.J. Pankhurst, and Dr Will.
The payroll system is now run on-line from Chessington via the Government Data Network.
Communication involves the use of a dedicated kilostream line and X-25 communication protocols.
Problems have arisen during the year on the operation of some of the Garden's laser printers.
The Computing Sub-Group agreed to move towards sharing such resources over the network.
A review of the Garden's options for the use of information technology over the next five years was carried out and made available for staff comments.
Photocopiers
I estimate that between 80 and 90% of the photocopying done on the Herbarium machine is from books and journals.
Some of this will almost certainly be in contravention of the 1988 Copyright Act, but a lot will be legitimate copying similar to that which goes on in all universities and public libraries.
The type of copier installed here, with its rigid lid and document feeder etc, is appropriate to business use, but not for a scientific/ educational establishment.
Can I suggest that, rather than a draconian ban on book copying (which will be ignored by Herbarium staff anyway), we try to replace this machine with one with a flexible lid to cut down on light ingress, as found in most libraries & universities?
Temporary employment, Library
Ms Jean Cox, who is currently on placement with us one day each week from Telford College, has asked me if there is any chance of her being employed on a temporary basis in the Library during her Easter break, from 5th to 16th April (8 days work).
On the AA scale for age 20 this would amount to £199.58 in total.
I would be very glad to have her here full-time for this period if it was acceptable to you.
She would be employed specifically to enter journal subscription data into our computer system — the job which Paul Ainsworth failed to complete last year due to absences.
Willow Symposium — personal comments.
Initial request from Douglas McKean
When Douglas asked me to take this over, he said initially that my job would be to book the excursion bus, and liaise with the caterers.
I did not know what had been done beforehand, and what still required to be done, until Douglas handed over the papers to me on 12 September.
I was still finding out some of the things which hadn't been done during the symposium itself.
Speaker
One of the speakers, Dr Margaret Collinson, wrote to Roy on 17 September to the effect that she hadn't been told the venue, date or time of her paper.
I replied to her immediately.
No other speakers seemed to have had problems.
Session chairpersons were still being canvassed by Douglas during the week before he left.
I had to approach Roy to chair the Saturday morning session.
Excursion
Mr Braithwaite wrote to Douglas saying that he hadn't been contacted since February.
I made contact, and the arrangements were firmed up over the next week.
I drove round the proposed route on 17 September to check suitability for a coach.
I then booked the bus, sent the company a marked map and itinerary, and priced the excursion to cover costs.
Registration arrangements.
Julia had been asked to undertake registration.
I borrowed a copy of a registration chart for a previous symposium from Norma Gregory, and Julia used this as a model for this one.
Neither Julia nor I had realised that some delegates would be registering on the Saturday morning for the first time — we hadn't covered this.
Maria registered delegates on Saturday morning.
Signs
I borrowed signs from Norma Gregory.
Lecture Theatre
Projectionists had not been arranged.
Julia, Ruth & I did this between us, but none of us had had any experience running the projectors, sound or lighting equipment beforehand.
Debbie White gave us a crash course on the Friday morning.
Ruth projected on the Saturday evening, Julia covered on the Sunday afternoon, and I handled Friday afternoon and evening, Saturday morning and afternoon, and Sunday morning.
Poster Session
The room had not been booked for this.
Roy had given Paul Nesbitt a note of the board requirements — horizontals and verticals — in early September, but the information had not gone to Harry.
The room had not been cleared — the students’ chairs were still there, and the room had not been cleaned.
Roy had asked that the boards be numbered, so that they could be erected in sequence.
This had not been done — Harry and I put the boards up, and asked posterers to pick a board and help themselves.
Fixings had not been organised.
I tried to get drawing pins from the office, but Peter McCormick & Bill Nicholson were both away, and apparently no-one else can get access to the stationery cupboard — I bought pins from a local shop.
I dismantled the boards on Monday morning.
Sherry Reception
We used the Garden's Oddbins account, and arranged sherry on a ‘sale or return’ basis, together with the loan of glasses.
I purchased ‘nibbles’ locally, and borrowed bowls from Heather Paul.
The event went smoothly and pleasantly.
When I came in early on the Saturday morning, I was very surprised to find that Mr Jimmy Mackenzie — patrolman — had washed all the glasses for me — unasked.
Catering
I did not sample any of the catering so I cannot comment on quality and value, but the everything was ready on time, and the queues seemed to move reasonably well.
Julia's voucher system seemed to work very well.
Computing Sub-Group
Minutes of meeting held 28 June 1993
Present:
Apologies:
1.
Minutes and Matters arising.
Husky rugged machine had been demonstrated, and had favourably impressed all who were present.
Agreed to purchase one machine initially, JF to be responsible for booking it out to Garden Departments.
The use of such equipment for on-site data collection is likely to result in considerable efficiency savings, by eliminating unnecessary duplication of effort in writing out temporary records and re-keyboarding data.
Taxonomic Computing lap-top has been ordered.
Further machine requirements to be kept under review.
The Photo-CD system was to be ordered.
Four copies of Reeference Manager Professional Edition to be ordered.
JF requested virus checker software — CW to provide.
Transfer of computer consumables to be arranged between CW and Bill Nicholson.
YBG PC to be uplifted by A Hall.
2.
Network Progress
RP spoke to his paper which summarised the present situation.
We are currently dealing with Computacenter, DCS, McCall Information Systems, Pipex, and Edinburgh University (Scott Currie) on various aspects of network development and external communication facilities.
We would hope to have received definite, costed proposals by the end of July.
Copies of RP's paper to be sent to RMG and GMG for information.
RP is checking the possibility of using fast modems to link to the specialist gardens.
MP to check quotes for DAT drives.
3.
Any Other Business.
DM is concerned over lack of disk space on his PC.
MP to check if SCSI card fitted, and if not to discuss specifications for a new machine.
Agreed that the 386 server (former Admin server) would be suitable for BG-BASE use.
JF mentioned slow rate of working of BG-BASE at the end of the network.
CW said that we had only just discovered how inefficiently the network had been set up by the previous company, and that the speed would be substantially improved by the network upgrade.
MP and JF to get together in the meantime, to see if any short-term improvements are possible.
DM stressed the need for future-proofing whatever network development work is to be carried out.
BG-BASE upgrade prices (to AREV-3) not yet available.
MP to attend Advanced Netware course.
DFC advised data input backlog still under review.
CW to check status of Apricot upgrade order.
Printers in Computer Room to be made serviceable wherever possible.
Modems in Computer Room had been found to be incompatible with our telephone system and should be disposed of.
A full inventory of equipment will be maintained.
CW has an inventory of PCs and printers only.
Plant Records have no requirement for long-carriage paper.
CW to investigate possibility of moving line-printer out of Computer Room.
Estates
Computer Projection Panel
I enclose a quote received from Scotia UK plc in respect of the 3M Model 4800 Display Panel.
The quote also covers a Video Projector (Sharp XV730H) which Scotia are proposing to demonstrate here in the next week or so.
I used the 3M Display Panel to deliver a slide presentation to the M.Sc.
class this week.
My impression of it was that it is not as powerful or flexible as the one which Audio Visual demonstrated to myself and Dr Chamberlain recently.
In detail:
The 3M machine produced a uniform pink glow on the screen, in areas which should have been white.
This made DOS screens difficult to read.
It also distorted the colours in the presentation — they were not the same as those on the monitor.
This, coupled with the fact that the 3M machine offers fewer colours in any case, would limit its use.
In addition, the screen refresh delay time is significantly higher on the 3M machine.
In essence, this makes the mouse pointer disappear disconcertingly when the pointer is moved on the pad.
For these technical reasons, the Audio Visual machine is much more advanced, and would not have to upgraded within a relatively short time, as I would fear with the 3M machine.
Health & Safety — EC Directive on Display Screen Equipment Work.
As part of the Garden's mandatory assessment of display screen equipment, all PC users are asked to complete the attached Self-Assessment Checklist and return it to me as soon as possible.
Follow-up visits will be carried out over the next three weeks, to obtain additional information on equipment, software, and your immediate working environment.
As per Office Note 82, your full co-operation is requested.
I will be very happy to answer any questions you may have, and the full Directive is available in my office for reference purposes.
Any additional comments you may have are welcome, but please note that this Directive is mandatory within the UK.
Professor Ingram
Edinburgh Journal of Botany (EJB)— Bibliometric analysis
You asked me to give you a note on my interest in bibliometric research on the Journal.
Whilst looking into potential performance indicators, I suggested that the following measures might be used to analyse the contribution of EJB to the Garden:
A: Proposed research
1.
Establish the ranking of EJB in comparison with other taxonomic journals.
Since none of these appear in Journal Citation Reports , this would have to be assessed by a combination of factors:
a)
Circulation figures.
b)
Spread of circulation (establish internationality).
c)
Count of papers/year.
d)
Count of pages/year.
e)
Journal-to-journal co-citation clustering (identifies those journals highly cited by other journals).
2.
Establish the proportion of internal/external authors in EJB.
3.
Assuming staff publications list in Quinquennial Report accurate, establish proportion of internal/external publications by staff, & determine proportion published in highly-ranked journals (from 1).
4.
Citation count on staff publications, differentiating between EJB papers and others.
5.
Author co-citation mapping to identify networks of researchers and influences.
The above research could be carried out in SSL or EML using Biosis & Science Citation Index on CD-ROM.
(I can't justify the very high costs of these services in-house).
I estimate that it would take about 2 months using -day of my time per week.
To date I have only managed to work on Objectives 1c, 1d, and 2, but I think that even this work is significant.
B: Preliminary results
1.
Contents.
Volumes 47 (1990) and 48 (1991) together contained 42 papers, publishing 745 pages (excluding book reviews etc.) 34 papers (81%) were systematic or floristic.
There were 60 authors, of whom 29 (–50% by number) had RBGE affiliation.
On a page count basis, the proportion of RBGE affiliated authorships is much higher.
585 pages (79%) had some RBGE affiliates as authors, and a weighted count (number of pages x %RBGE authorship) gave a figure of 557 pages (75%) RBGE affiliate authorship.
The average page length is 18 pages, but the page length distribution is extremely uneven.
Ten papers (25% by number) were five pages long or less; ten papers (25%) were 20 pages long or greater, and two papers (35% of total length) occupied more than 100 pages.
It is suggested that the extremes of page lengths indicate confusion over the objectives set for the journal, between the publication of shorter papers and monographic articles.
There is scope for splitting the title into two series, reflecting these objectives.
The series might well have different target markets and be published to different standards.
Additionally, there would be the potential for widening the scope of the ‘shorter-paper’ series by including more non-systematic papers, which would increase its appeal to the academic community.
I am thinking here of topics which still reflect our interests but might include more on, say, conservation, microscopy, taxonomic computing, and other new areas we might be moving towards.
[I intend pursuing the other objectives this Autumn.]
1.
Description of the Proposal
The Royal Botanic Garden, Edinburgh is the UK's second oldest botanic garden, having been established in 1670.
On its Edinburgh site it holds a living collection of around 30000 accessions; a Herbarium containing some 2 million dried plant specimens from a world-wide range; and a research library holding 75000 volumes books and over 1500 current scientific periodical titles.
Scientific equipment includes two new electron microscopes — one scanning and one transmission — and a range of research microscopes.
Other laboratory equipment includes facilities for thin-layer chromatography (TLC) and other analytical protocols.
A micropropagation unit is being set up, partly to assist research in endangered plant species, and other cultural facilities are used for cryptogams and higher plants.
Other laboratory facilities are being built.
The Garden, under its Director Professor D.S. Ingram, specialises in taxonomic botany, which serves as a backbone to studies of biodiversity, biotechnology, and applied botanical research, as well as to plant physiology, genetics and many other plant-based sciences.
The Garden has particular strengths in a range of studies of cryptogamic plants; these strengths rarely being brought together in other institutions.
Current cryptogamic research areas include: diatoms, algae, fungi, lichens, bryophytes and ferns.
One of the aims of diatom research is the production of a British Marine Diatom Flora, which will include many species common to other North Sea and North-west European coasts.
This NERC-funded research is being carried out by researchers of international standing led by Dr. D.G. Mann in co-operation with other European centres, including the Alfred-Wegener-Institut fr Polar- und Meeresforschung in Bremerhaven, Germany.
Diatoms have particular relevance to studies of marine pollution and global warming, and are also used as palaeoecological, palaeoclimatic and palaeoenvironmental indicators.
The collection in Edinburgh is the UK's second most important, and one of Europe's major, taxonomic resources in this field.
One line of the research is to produce an image database of authenticated diatom species which will be of international significance.
Training is available in diatom taxonomy and material preparation, and input from visiting researchers would contribute significantly to the international value of the database.
Future developments include image analysis and culturing facilities.
Lichen research is carried out on a world-wide collection which is particularly good on European crustose lichens.
Consultancy, training and enquiry work has been undertaken on a trans-European basis.
Staff strengths include, as with many other RBGE scientists, fieldwork, particularly in habitat assessments and biodiversity surveys.
The senior lichenologist, Dr. B.J. Coppins, is also involved with lichen nomenclature through the International Association for Plant Taxonomy, and has recently contributed as a major author to the Lichen Flora of Britain and Ireland , published in 1992.
With regard to the fungi, Edinburgh has one of Europe's most important mycological herbaria, and its research library is of a similar ranking.
Research staff, led by Dr. R.J. Watling, have an international reputation for the identification of: fungi forming ectomycorrhizas, especially Boletaceae; Bolbitiaceae (a world authority); hallucinogenic and toxic fungi; fungi of northern Atlantic islands and western montane communities; and the fungi of Western Europe.
RBGE publishes the British Fungus Flora , and researchers contribute to many scientific publications on a world-wide basis.
Several staff have skills in bryophyte taxonomy, and the international collection is widely used.
Fern research is concerned, among other things, with the development of a spore bank of pan-European species to aid in taxonomic research and fern conservation.
The Garden's conifer conservation programme, led by Dr. C.N. Page, is an international collaboration involving, among others, scientists from the Netherlands, Italy, Spain, Portugal, Germany and France.
The Herbarium collection of higher plant material is of international importance, and is used by researchers world-wide.
The Rhododendron collection, together with plants in the living collection, forms part of an existing EC Biotechnology research programme (Development of rapid molecular and cellular tools for the screening and evaluation of genetic diversity in plants).
The SW Asian collections are relevant to studies of the Eastern Mediterranean, including Turkey, and also to the Flora Hellenica , a project with which the Garden has links, and which is currently centred on Copenhagen as an existing EC large-scale facility.
Proposed research includes collaboration with Coimbra in Portugal on the taxonomy of Bromus species, an important European grass genus, and a pan-European research programme, in association with the University of Edinburgh, on the Cruciferae, a family with many important food-plant members.
Floristic research includes studies of biodiversity and conservation in Himalayan, Chinese, Arabian, South-East and South-West Asian, and Brazilian habitats.
Edinburgh also houses the editorial offices of the European Garden Flora , a taxonomic and nomenclaturally validated checklist and identification Flora of plants cultivated in Europe.
The living plant collections include plants cultivated in three additional specialist gardens which have the particular climatic and soil conditions necessary for the cultivation and study of plants unsuitable for growing in Edinburgh.
There is also research glass space in Edinburgh for the cultivation of tender and tropical species for research, and quarantine facilities for the treatment of wild-collected material.
An integral part of the management structure is an information management policy, which ensures that scientific information is collected, stored, retrieved and disseminated in a controlled manner, integrating the research work with the library and other information resources, and with scientific publication.
Taxonomic and other advanced database software is being developed by Dr. R.J. Pankhurst, one of Europe's leading plant taxonomic computing specialists, who is responsible for the creation and development of the PANDORA plant taxonomic information system.
Training and consultancy services in database design and information management are provided for researchers.
Edinburgh is responsible for the management and development of the Flora Europaea database.
The Library is administered by Dr. C.D. Will, a specialist in information management and evaluative bibliometrics.
New users of the facilities could be accommodated within any or all of the existing lines of research as described above, or such new lines as may be agreed with the Garden's Research Management Group.
Innovative research in plant taxonomy is encouraged, and the adoption of multi-disciplinary approaches in proposals, linking classical taxonomy with molecular and genetic inputs, will be viewed positively.
2 The European dimension of the proposal.
2.1
The Garden has, since its inception, collaborated on a European and indeed a world-wide scale.
Research staff are involved at all levels of scientific training, from undergraduate teaching through post-graduate supervision to post-doctoral research.
On our own account and in co-operation with many UK universities and research establishments, RBGE scientists have made major contributions to our knowledge of the European flora.
The special fieldwork skills of our scientists have identified areas of conservation need and environmental risk within Europe, most recently in the case of the sinking of the MV Braer in Shetland, where scientists used diatom collections as indicators of environmental damage.
Such studies depend critically upon a knowledge of the total baseline flora in particular environments.
We hold such information in our collections, and our staff have the necessary skills to interpret this information, to recognise its significance, and to impart the knowledge to others throughout Europe.
Taxonomic skills have contributed to the characterisation of plant species and varieties of interest to agriculture, horticulture, and to the biotechnology programme of the Community.
2.2
By using this large-scale facility, young scientists will be assisted in the acquisition of taxonomic skills through training, consultation, and the ‘hands-on’ use of very large, internationally important collections of living and preserved plants, a specialist research library, and the information technology needed to exploit these resources.
Established researchers in the Community will benefit from increased opportunities to consult the collections and to discuss their research with internationally recognised scientists on RBGE staff on an individual basis, and through workshops, seminars and conferences.
The multi-disciplinary approaches to plant taxonomy being encouraged in Edinburgh will contribute in future to European developments in plant sciences, agriculture, horticulture, biotechnology, renewable resource management, environmental conservation and risk assessment, through an increased understanding of the existing plant biodiversity within Europe.
Increased use of our scientific, communication and training skills will enable us to play an even more active part in Community research in future years.
2.3
Our existing funding arrangements do not enable us to provide assistance to visiting researchers from the Community or elsewhere.
The Garden is concerned to facilitate such research, and to provide the means by which our knowledge resources can be communicated and utilised throughout Europe.
We receive grant-in-aid to cover our basic running costs from the Scottish Office Agriculture and Fisheries Department, and additional income from individual research grants, both private and public, but such income does not allow us to fund visiting scientists.
By covering the marginal costs of making our facilities available to visting EC researchers we will be able to provide such visitors with access to an internationally important resource of equipment, resources, and scientific staff.
Our collections are a very important European resource, and have the potential to be useful for scientific purposes to all Member States.
2.4
The Rhododendron collections, of both preserved and living material, are being studied as part of a Cost-shared Project within the EC Biotechnology Programme (Development of rapid novel molecular and cellular tools for the assessment and evaluation of genetic diversity in plants).
Other research lines, as described above, form part of the RBGE's grant-aided research, funded by Scottish Office.
The diatom research is partially supported by the UK Natural Environment Research Council (NERC).
Contributions to other research programmes come from NERC and other research funding organizations, either direct or through university collaboration.
The degree and nature of any interaction between the proposal and existing research programmes would depend totally on the needs of each individual submission made to us by visiting researchers, and cannot be foreseen at this stage.
2.5
The impact of the proposal on the Community would be that, by increasing the accessibility of our facilities, resources and scientific skills, we would hope to spread the high level of taxonomic expertise already here among a much wider range of the Community's scientific manpower, whether in existing taxonomic institutions, or in laboratories dealing with plants as subjects for other research.
Novel inputs from visiting scientists would in turn increase the value of our taxonomic work to other European institutions.
3.
Management and the Dissemination of Results.
The ‘Selection Panel’ for proposed researchers would consist of the currently existing Research Management Group, which is chaired by the Deputy Director, Dr. D.G. Mann, and which consists of the heads of all of our major current scientific research programmes.
Proposals, submitted through the Co-ordinator, would have to be assessed by the Group to ensure that they met a number of criteria.
Among these criteria would be the following:
The proposed research or training is of a high standard, and is worth pursuing.
The research or training would be in the interests of the Community, particularly the Human Capital and Mobility Programme.
RBGE is the most appropriate institution for carrying out the research or training.
We have the facilities needed to support the research or training at the time required.
We have the staff needed to carry out the required training.
The training or research will not adversely affect existing research programmes.
The visitor has the appropriate skills to be able to benefit from the use of the facility and its services.
We would propose, in the first instance, to accept annually three visiting scientists for one year each, or more for proportionally shorter periods.
On acceptance, the proposed visitor will be assigned to a particular research group, and a detailed schedule for the visit will be drawn up by the Co-ordinator and the head of the research group concerned.
The research or training outcomes will be clearly delineated, and the programme devised to ensure adequate monitoring of progress, use of the facilities, and the eventual attainment of the objectives.
The Garden produces the Edinburgh Journal of Botany , which publishes research on plant taxonomy and other botanical sciences.
This is an externally refereed journal with a circulation of over 500 copies, and which has a world-wide reputation for excellence in the quality of papers published.
Visiting researchers will be given the opportunity of submitting papers arising from their work here to this journal, or to other journals, with the advice and assistance of supervising scientists, and with in-house editorial assistance from trained and experienced staff.
4.
Access offered.
4.1 Amount of access.
New users will be given access to the whole of the Herbarium collection, to the living plant collection, to the Library, to the laboratories, and to the networked computerised information system.
The use of the specialised advanced laboratory equipment, including research microscopes and electron microscopes, will be dependent on the user acquiring the relevant skills through training, and on time being scheduled for work on this equipment.
Each new user will be allocated a supervisor, who will ensure that the requisite facilities — workspace, computing, scientific, administrative, editorial and other services — are provided when required.
Edinburgh is served by its own airport; a railway station on the UK East Coast main line; and by an extensive network of roads.
Within easy reach of the Garden there are a number of guesthouses offering bed and breakfast accommodation to existing and future visitors, and the Garden has its own catering facilities.
4.2 Financial support.
a)
Travel and subsistence.
As an example we would cite one visitor who has already expressed an interest in using the facilities, Dr. F. Sales, Coimbra, Portugal.
One year at 3248 Ecu/month = 38976 Ecu
We would propose three visitors per year, so the total travel and subsistence costs would be in the region of 111000 Ecu per year.
b)
Bench fees (including administrative costs) 2500 Ecu per annum 
c)
Upgrading the facilities would primarily involve an extension to the computer network to service three additional visitors per year, at a cost of 4500 Ecu, and the provision of an additional research microscope if the proposed visitor were to be considering diatom research, at a cost of 45000 Ecu.
5 User Groups.
Management Group
European Community Research
1.
Our application:The Royal Botanic Garden Edinburgh — a large-scale facility for plant taxonomy was unsuccessful.
I have been advised this week that out of 18 UK applications for this section of the Human Capital and Mobility Programme only three succeeded.
I have not yet been given any reason for our lack of success on this occasion, and I do not yet know which were the successful applicants.
Southern Europe appeared to be the major beneficiary of this round.
Alf Game (UKRHEEO) is attempting to get more information for me, but suspects a political dimension to the decision.
2.
I attended a meeting in Manchester hosted by British Council on behalf of UKRHEEO concerned with EC research assistance to Eastern & Central Europe and the Former Soviet Union.
During the meeting I was able to make new contacts with UK and EC institutions, but I concluded that of the major EC formal programmes, PHARE and TACIS are not relevant to us, but that the next call from PECO might have something marginal in it.
This call will be focussed, but I have registered an interest with the DG XII official who is currently planning the round.
3.
EC Information continues to flood in from UKHREEO and be directed from the Library to relevant RBGE staff.
Copies of UKRHEEO Annual Report attached for information.
Enquiries from the public.
I share John Main's concerns, as reflected in MG Minutes of 7. ix.93, over the volume and nature of public enquiries coming in to the Garden, because many of them are now being directed to the Library.
These seem to have increased in number since the Support Services Review, and some have only tangential relevance (if any) to the sorts of enquiries which my staff can routinely handle.
In many cases, they are being handled badly by individual Support staff.
There are, as the Minutes point out, no easy answers, but I'd like to offer my own thoughts on the subject.
Some enquiries are relatively simple — what facilities are available, and how can they be accessed; what are our hours; what regulations exist; what functions/exhibitions are currently on, or are planned.
Others demand a bit more interaction from the enquiry service — what does the Garden do; how long has it been doing it; can staff answer enquiries on particular topics.
These first groups of questions I would classify as ‘Directory'-type queries, and could be answered from updateable directories held at information points — telephonists, E & W Gates.
For those enquiries demanding specialist knowledge, the directories should contain information on staff specialisms and availability to answer queries, this latter being a policy matter.
I would point out that within the Scottish Office, enquiries are initially handled by a Central Enquiry Unit, composed of telephonists, receptionists and directory staff, under the administration of the Chief Librarian.
This seems to me to be an eminently sensible arrangement, and I think this sort of structure could also work here.
Letters not specifically addressed to individuals or departments should also pass through this unit, and could be logged, if response monitoring were to be extended from the current obligation we have to log ‘environmental’ enquiries (which we should also talk about).
I envisage us being able to give a fairly detailed set of written procedural instructions, backed up by training, to enquiry staff (who should be specifically designated).
We should also be looking at the types of enquiries which we would not deal with.
My personal view, and I must emphasise that I haven't discussed it with John, is that we should not be offering a general horticultural advice service to all and sundry, but that we should restrict this to areas where we have recognised expertise — Alpine & Rock Gardens, Arboriculture, Glasshouse cultivation and others.
Similarly, within science & library, we should stick to enquiries where we are the experts or where we have the resources of information and staff time, and refer other enquiries to the relevant specialist agencies.
This is what I try to do in the Library, and I've had very good feedback from outside users.
There is no point in library staff researching rose varieties for an enquirer, for example, when we can give them the address of the National Rose Society, which we know to be helpful.
There are other issues which need further work — commercial enquiries, plant identifications, phytopathological enquiries, toxicological service, and so on— which I would suggest others might think about.
EC Directive on the Provision of Environmental Information.
DOE has sent out a Circular on this EC Directive, with a cover letter which states that ‘…the Regulations place [on relevant bodies]a duty to make arrangements for dealing with requests for environmental information…
’. Under Para 10, the Royal Botanic Gardens are specifically mentioned, so it is clear that we are expected to comply with this Directive.
The full version is available in the Library, but the main provisions as they affect RBGE are as follows:
1.
Definition (Para 14).
Information relates to the environment if it relates to ‘the state of any water or air, the state of any flora or fauna, the state of any soil, or the state of any natural site or other land’; and also to any activities which adversely affect, or are designed to protect, these states.
2.
Scope (Para 15).
Information held by a body, whether or not obtained in pursuit of our statutory activities, and collected at any date.
It includes information held in written, aural, visual or database form.
3.
Range (Para 18).
There is no geographical restriction; the information may relate to any part of the world.
4.
Accuracy (Para 21).
We must protect ourselves by issuing a disclaimer on our liability for the accuracy of any information released, since the source data may be unreliable.
5.
Publicity (Para 23).
We must review and state the principal areas in which we hold environmental information — this could be done in our Annual Report.
We should publicise the name and address of a contact point or ‘information coordinator’ for enquiries and assistance.
6.
Published Reports (Para 24).
We are not obliged to publish such information, and when we do we are entitled to make a reasonable charge.
Where we are commissioned by outside bodies to produce reports on the environment, we should seek to ensure that the copyright rests with us (Para 25).
7.
Personal requests (Para 27 — 29).
We are obliged to correspond or allow access to records.
We may recover costs.
We must respond as quickly as possible, and at the latest within two months, by either providing the information or by refusing.
Refusals must be given in writing and must state the reason(s) for refusal.
We must monitor the timeliness of response by devising appropriate methods for logging and monitoring written requests, telephoned requests, and requests made in person.
8.
Charging (Paras 30 — 35).
We can make charges which do not exceed the costs reasonably attributable to the supply of the information.
We can't make a charge for advising on the availability of the information.
9.
Monitoring (Para 36).
DOE will make requests for information on the numbers of requests made under the Directive.
10.
Who can ask?
(Para 39).
Any person who requests environmental information, regardless of nationality, regardless of the reason for the request.
11.
Refusals (Paras 40 — 70).
There are too many grounds for refusal to list each one here.
They include:-requests which place an unreasonable burden on us; requests which are too general; legal proceedings; internal, confidential deliberative information; preliminary data; commercially confidential data; personal information (i.e. relating to persons); information which could lead to damage, such as locality/habitat information.
Categories of user, and appropriate facilities.
Library staff have expressed concern over the numbers of ‘new’ library users, attached formally or informally to RBGE, coming into the library without being introduced.
We do not know which of the library's facilities and services should be offered to these different categories of user, and we would like the Committee's guidance in codifying procedures.
For convenience, we list below some of the users and services involved:
At present the catalogue is in two parts; a card catalogue for items up to 1991, and the computerised records from 1986 to the present.
Plans for converting the catalogue to an integrated electronic system were initiated by my predecessor in 1987, when he obtained costings for manual keyboarding of the records from Saztec Ltd, one of the largest such organizations.
Their estimate at that time of over £80,000 more or less ruled this option out.
Earlier this year, however, I learned that Kew had contracted with the world's largest bibliographic data supplier, OCLC, for conversion of their catalogue.
Since OCLC already have records from Missouri and New York Botanic Garden Libraries, I realised that a large proportion of our records would therefore already be in the OCLC system, and buying-in existing data is much cheaper than creating it as new records.
I approached OCLC, and sent them copies of randomly selected catalogue cards, and they have now prepared a costed proposal for retroconversion.
The proposal contains two elements; the RETROCON service for monographic (in the bibliographic sense) works, and a Keying Service for our analytical entries.
As hoped, the monograph sample produced a very high hit-rate (91%), and has resulted in a low unit price for electronic records.
I enclose photocopies of the relevant pages of the proposal, copies of the whole document will be supplied on request.
Several comparable Government-funded libraries have recently been successful in obtaining ‘one-off’ grants from Scottish Office Departments for retrospective conversion, and I now recommend that Bob Crossman and I work together on putting forward a request for such funding from SO:AFD.
 Dear Gordon,
Many thanks for your fax of 17 Feb.
I have been leaving messages with Craig and others over the last four weeks asking for you to call me back, but have had no response.
Even on Wednesday and Thursday of this week I left messages for you.
However, to the point at issue.
Could you please contact Mike Prior (Assistant Garden Secretary) on Monday or Tuesday of next week to arrange a date to work on the Admin file-server software transfer — I think it's better if you deal direct with our Finance Department rather than through me.
I'm away next Wednesday and Thursday, otherwise I'll be around any time that suits.
The situation with Stephen Marshall is that he is now working his notice, and is no longer Computer Support Officer.
I'm trying to keep things ticking over meantime, until we can appoint someone else.
I've got a small networking job which needs doing quickly in Dr Pankhurst's room — basically it's to network in two additional PCs, one of which already has a network card.
Can you look in next week and check this out please?
Could you also please let me know how to get Dr Alexander's machine connected to the network.
I've been trying to generate IPX files using SHGEN, but I'm obviously doing something wrong.
I don't know if Craig has told you, but I've been given authority to extend our maintenance contract with you for a further year, without going to tender.
I'll want to add some more PCs to the contract and renegotiate terms accordingly, and I intend doing this in March.
Cheers,
Mr P Nesbitt
Friends of the Royal Botanic Garden Edinburgh
Inaugural Meeting 30th October
At a meeting of the Steering Committee it was suggested that the corridor area between the foyer and the lecture theatre could be used to display some of the ‘behind-the-scenes’ activities of the Garden.
I was asked to co-ordinate this.
What I have in mind is a small selection of visual material with a minimum of caption text.
I thought that the following might be interesting:
1.
Rhododendron research — Vireyas and Chinese material
2.
Tropical research — Gingers, ECTF, Cerrado
3.
Flora of Bhutan
4.
Flora of Arabia
5.
Diatoms
6.
Bryophytes & Lichens
7.
Macro/microfungi
8.
Education — Living in a rain forest
9.
Recent exhibitions — posters/cards
10.
Herbarium & Library
11.
Research Collections/plant propagation/quarantine etc.
Can I therefore ask you:
a)
Does this sound reasonable?
b)
Is there already in existence sufficient illustrative material to put on display boards (suggest 1 each) for some or all of these suggestions?
We do not want to incur additional costs in putting this corridor display together.
It could, however, form the basis for longer-term displays of our less-well-known activities.
c)
Can we get together soon to discuss this?
Friends Committee through Mr G Anderson
Library Projects
There are two projects in the Library which I consider appropriate for the involvement of the Friends.
1.
Archive Indexing Project.
I intend microfilming our collection of historical archives in the interests of conservation and improving access, and simultaneously indexing the contents.
The indexing part of the project might appeal to some of the Friends who have interests in the Garden's history.
2.
Illustrations Conservation Project.
The Library's collection of about 250,000 cuttings will be moved into a purpose-built room within the new extension.
As part of the preparations for the move, we need to identify and separate the original artworks from the printed material, assess the conservation needs for this category, and list as much information as we can on each item — artist, illustration type, plant name, date.
These projects are the sorts of things which Friends of other Gardens, particularly American, undertake in co-operation with their Libraries.
We know that we cannot carry out this work using existing staff, and that we will be unable to take on extra staff.
The work would therefore not conflict in any way with our normal duties in the Library.
Both projects are, in the medium and long term, going to make the resources of the Library available to a wider group of users, and to facilitate more detailed research work which at the moment cannot be undertaken, because of the state of the collections.
These very important projects are both within the Garden's draft Strategic Plan for Information Services, which is currently under discussion.
As to timescales, I have estimated that Project 1 will take one year full-time equivalent, and Project 2 will take three years full-time equivalent.
If you require further information, I will be pleased to provide it.
For Vitis
‘Friends’ launched
The inuagural meeting of the Friends of the Royal Botanic Garden Edinburgh was held on 31st October.
Nearly three hundred turned up for the meeting, which was chaired by Lord Bute, and a video link was set up between the Lecture Theatre and the adjacent room to accommodate the overflow.
The Regius Keeper, Dr David Ingram, outlined the background to the creation of the organization, and Mr Bob Mitchell, Honorary Curator of St Andrews Botanic Garden, spoke about the Friends group at St Andrews.
Had it not been for the enthusiasm and energy of the St Andrews Friends, that Garden might well have had to close, but now it is a thriving and greatly appreciated asset to the town and to a wider community.
Bob offered us some very stimulating ideas, and encouraged us to think internationally.
Sir Peter Hutchison mentioned the support of the Trustees for the establishment of the Friends, and paid tribute to the hard work and commitment of Lady Margaret Elliot in steering the idea of the Friends through to its successful launch.
Lord Bute read the motion that the Friends be formally established, and this was carried unanimously.
The Executive Committee, comprising Lady Elliot (Convener); Mr A Currie (Deputy Convener); Mr P Barclay (Hon. Treasurer); Mr J Aitken (Hon. Secretary); Professor N Robertson; Mrs A Buxton; Dr M Chamberlain; Mrs R Buchanan; Mr I Wall, was then voted into office.
A member of the Board of Trustees and two members of RBGE staff will also be invited to serve on the Committee.
Lady Elliot thanked Marjorie MacFarlane, and many members of staff, including Gillian Lomas; Norma Gregory; Colin Will; Dennis Simmons; Ian Lawrie; Keith Pirrie; Marisa and John Main; Jackie Roberts; Sheila Geddes, Sid Clarke and all the others who had contributed their efforts in the run-up to the launch.
She announced that the first meeting of the Friends will be held on 13th November (further details in the Calendar), and she stressed that all members of staff will be particularly welcome at all Friends meetings.
To: Herbarium Staff
From: Colin Will
Fumigation — Effects on leather-bound books
You may be aware that methyl bromide, which is to be used in fumigating the Herbarium, can have deleterious effects on leather bindings and other animal products.
Whilst we can take suitable precautions within the Library to protect books, we are unable to protect publications on loan to staff, or indeed staff's own copies of leather-bound books within the Herbarium.
We intend making arrangements for the safe keeping of such material in a room which will not be affected.
Mrs N Gregory
A contact in Spain has managed to acquire a scarce publication which we were looking for, and has given the Library a copy.
We'd like to show our gratitude in some way, but we're limited in the sort of material we have access to, and he has no need of the Notes or EJB .
Would it be possible for us to send him a copy of 4 Gardens as a gesture of goodwill?
Could you release a copy please?
Library Subscriptions.
I've just built a spreadsheet to show how much we spent on subscriptions in 1991/92 and 1992/93.
The paper is going up to the Library Advisory Committee with a request for suggestions for cuts, and I enclose a copy of the last page with its summary for your information.
It explains, I think rather vividly, why the Library overspent last year, because we have no idea in advance what the publishers are going to charge us for journals.
It also indicates the very real difficulties I'm faced with this year, because unless I get the go-ahead to cancel before the end of May, we're stuck again with having to pay whatever the publishers demand this year.
The only leverage I have to make the users act rationally is to show them the effect these price hikes have on my book fund, about which they are just a tad sensitive.
No need to reply, but if you do have any suggestions, I'd welcome them.
April 15, 1993
Grading of Chief Librarian Post
In general terms, the Job Description presents a fair and accurate reflection of the position.
There are one or two errors, however, some differences in emphasis, and some points where more detailed expansion is required to clarify some of the activities and responsibilities of the postholder.
The following points have been arrived at with the agreement of Dr Will:
Para 4.2 The research element has been understated.
This could well form a separate main activity, since it encompasses goal-directed research (preparation of lectures, tours and exhibitions; enquiry answering), research involved with the supervision and teaching of information management, bibliography and research methodology to our own students, M.Sc.
students, and externally funded researchers; and bibliometric research on taxonomic literature (including our own publications) which Management has asked Dr Will to undertake, based on his previous research on scientific output measures.
Para 4.4 This section should reflect the requirement for the postholder to be able to evaluate publications within the RBGE's specialist fields, using previously acquired specialist knowledge and skills.
It should also mention that it requires the application of an acquisitions policy which balances the strategic needs of RBGE staff with the longer-term ‘national heritage’ aspects included in our statutory objectives.
Para 4.5 We suggest ‘…the postholder's subject specialisms and handling…
’[The specialisms of most value to members of the public include plant classification, but those of value to staff include botanical literature, botanical history, botanical illustration, databases and other software, and bibliographic subjects]
Para 4.6 The ‘…other RBGE computing services.’
covers the full range of computing work, including scientific, plant records, taxonomic, statistical, financial, personnel, educational, and other computing.
The postholder is directly involved with the evaluation of management, image and geographic information systems.
Within Section 4, there is no specific place for Archives management.
This is a specialist area requiring knowledge of conservation techniques, and a thorough knowledge of RBGE's institutional history, in order to fulfil our statutory objectives of preserving the archives and making the collections available to all.
Para 5.1.1 We suggest adding at the end ‘…is treated equitably within the constraints of corporate and strategic planning .
Para 5.1.2 We suggest altering the final line to read ‘…postholder's subject specialisms which include botanical literature, botanical history, information management, database and other software.’
Para 5.2.2 After ‘…his professional staff’ add and other RBGE staff 
Para 5.2.3 Under the provisions of the Garden's Corporate Plan, the postholder will chair the Information and Central Services Planning Unit, which will cover the planning aspects of the Library, Photographic Collection, Computing, Staff Communication, Visitor Information, Public Relations, Publicity, Publications, Administration and Estates, within the Garden's planning cycle.
Para 5.2.6 We are not clear as to the meaning of the final sentence in this paragraph.
Could you clarify or reword please?
David — Job Description — some suggestions from Gillian
5.1.3 ‘The organisation operates a networked computer system, providing access to library and other databases throughout RBGE.’
5.2.5 ‘…as Staff Welfare Liaison Officer he regularly discusses with the Regius Keeper and the Garden Secretary general issues of staff management, including staff morale and effectiveness, and he prepares and submits papers on these issues to Management Group.’
5.2.6 This whole paragraph is very weak and indistinct.
GL doubts that the position would be recoverable, or if it was, it would require scientific staff time as well as library staff.
5.4.2 ‘up to and including the Director.’
Display Screen Equipment
The EC Directives on Health and Safety come into effect on 1st January 1993.
The one on Display screen equipment work obliges us to carry out an assessment of each workstation (computer, software suitability, accessories, peripherals, and the immediate working environment, including furniture), to ensure that all new workstations meet the criteria, and to bring existing stations up to the required standard.
The assessment will be carried out over the Christmas and New Year period as a consultancy, reporting to me.
Garden Guide Handout — The Library and its work.
The Royal Botanic Garden Edinburgh was founded as a ‘Physic Garden’ in 1670 by Sir Robert Sibbald and Sir Andrew Balfour, for the growing and study of medicinal plants for the use of the physicians of the town.
Balfour & Sibbald were co-founders of the Royal College of Physicians of Edinburgh, and Balfour is also credited with being responsible for the introduction of the paper-making industry into Scotland.
Sibbald published his Scotia Illustrata , a natural history of Scotland, in 1684, and one of the plants he described and figured was later named after him.
Sibbaldia procumbens L. is one of Scotland's native alpines which formed the design for the Garden's logo.
The first garden was planted at St Anne's Yards in Holyrood Abbey grounds, probably where the Palace coach park now stands.
Patrick Murray, Laird of Livingston, was a keen plant collector, in correspondence with many European growers with whom he exchanged seeds.
He set off on a ‘Grand Tour’ of Europe, following directions and advice from his friend Andrew Balfour (later published posthumously as Letters to a Friend ).
Tragically, Murray took ill and died at Avignon.
Balfour and Sibbald rescued several hundred of Murray's plants from the Peel estate grounds in Livingston, and brought them to Edinburgh.
Very soon after its establishment, the founders appointed James Sutherland, an ‘industrious and studious youth’ as the Garden's first ‘Intendant’.
Sutherland was so successful that he established two additional Gardens, and was awarded a Royal Charter as King's Botanist (and Regius Keeper of the Royal Garden) by William III in 1699.
He was also appointed by the Town Council to teach Botany in the ‘Tounis College’, the institution which was later to form the University of Edinburgh.
From its earliest beginnings, the Garden has been one of the central features in Scotland's scientific history.
Few of the million or so visitors who take advantage of the Garden as a public amenity each year are aware of the scientific heritage behind the Garden, or indeed of the high level of scientific work which goes on behind the scenes today.
The Garden's main objective, set out in the Natural Heritage (Scotland) Act of 1985, is to carry out research in plant sciences, and the particular branch which Edinburgh specialises in is plant taxonomy — the classification of plants.
To do this, one needs large collections in order to make comparisons.
The Herbarium in Edinburgh holds about two million dried plant specimens, and the living collections in the Garden represent about 15,000 species, not to mention varieties and cultivars.
The third major pillar of the research effort is the Library, which contains published descriptions of the plants of the world, illustrations, and archival information.
The close integration of Herbarium, Garden and Library is one of the great strengths of the Royal Botanic Garden and helps to account for the high quality of its scientific, educational, and horticultural activities.
The results of our researches are published in the Edinburgh Journal of Botany and in other scientific and horticultural publications.
Sutherland published the first catalogue of plants in the physic garden, the Hortus Medicus Edinburgensis , in 1683.
The Garden's Library has one copy bound in contemporary calf by Scott, and others in later bindings.
The earliest book in the collection is a Latin Herbal dating from 1486, and the collection also includes herbals by Turner, Gerard, Fuchs, Parkinson and others.
The herbals describe the medicinal uses of plants, and indeed most of the early Professors of Botany were also medical professors in the University.
The Library itself has a fascinating history, described by M.V. Mathew recently in his History of the Royal Botanic Garden Library Edinburgh (Edinburgh, HMSO, 1987).
Delving in the archives one is struck by the frequent references to shortage of funds, a situation which, unfortunately, still applies today.
Early Regius Keepers, who were also required to teach in the University, were seldom provided with the wherewithal to buy books for themselves or their students.
On retirement or death in office (botanists tend to be long-lived but not quite immortal), their book collections were frequently sold off to defray debts or to provide a settlement for their widows.
The library thus grew very slowly until the mid-nineteenth century, when the Treasury injected additional funding for book purchases, and the Botanical Society of Edinburgh (now the Botanical Society of Scotland) very generously donated its library of one thousand volumes of books and journals.
Since then growth has been sustained, until today when, with 75,000 books, and about 200,000 volumes of journals, it forms Scotland's largest reference library on botany, and one of the finest specialist collections.
The Garden is governed by a Board of Trustees, and funded by grant-in-aid from the Scottish Office Agriculture and Fisheries Department.
In recent years increases in grant have not been sufficient to compensate for inflationary costs, particularly books and journals, and so additional sources of income have had to be found, in the form of sponsorships, grants, bequests, and donations.
Among the historical archives in the Library there is a volume of 57 water colours painted in 1795 by Mungo Park, the explorer.
The lecture notes of Charles Alston, Regius Keeper and Professor of Materia Medica, are preserved in a little manuscript volume written by Alston himself in 1724.
The writing is idiosyncratic (which means I haven't yet deciphered it) but fascinating.
His successor, John Hope, in his lectures and writings, was one of the leading exponents of the Linnean system of plant classification according to flower structure, and of naming plants using Genus and Species.
In one of his 1778 lectures, as noted by one of his students, there is the suggestion that Hope was already aware of the effect of plants on our atmosphere, long before today's concern over environmental issues.
The Library also holds some diaries of eminent plant collectors, among which those of Joseph Rock are particularly interesting.
This Austrian-born American explored widely in China and Tibet in the 1920s, collecting plants and seeds, and recording details on local languages and ethnography.
His photographs, which are also held in Edinburgh, are stunningly crisp and evocative of the places and people he visited.
The glass plate negatives of Falkirk-born George Forrest (an ‘Indiana Jones’ character) taken in China and Burma between 1905 and 1932, are currently undergoing conservation work.
The Garden's Library is open to the general public as a reference library (no borrowing facilities are available) from Monday to Friday, between 9 am and 5 pm (4.30 pm on Fridays).
It is in the Herbarium building behind No. 20 Inverleith Row — about 200 yards past the public entrance.
Whilst the bulk of the Library's stock is available for consultation without appointment, the rare books are kept in secure, controlled environments, and special conditions apply to their use in the Library.
Apart from these restricted categories, all of the Library's books and journals are freely available for reference, together with a ‘Cuttings File’ containing many thousands of botanical illustrations.
Some of these will form an image database, one of the major research projects currently being set up.
Botanical illustration is not confined to the professional.
Many of the interesting books of flower paintings in the Library have been donated or bequeathed by plant lovers who are looking for a good home for their paintings.
The Royal Botanic Garden Library is always delighted to accept such gifts.
The warmth of feeling many Garden visitors have for the place is greatly cherished by those of us who work in it, and we deeply appreciate the feelings of all who wish to be associated with our activities.
‘Hands-on-Plants’ is coming soon.
Until then, HANDS OFF, KEEP OUT, and leave us aloon!!!
Royal Botanic Garden Edinburgh
The Library
The library exists primarily to serve the needs of the Garden's scientific and horticultural staff.
As one of the UK's largest botanical libraries, it is also open as a reference library to any member of the public who needs to consult the specialist botanical literature which it holds.
Publications are not available for loan, but photocopying within the terms of copyright law is available.
The library staff cannot offer horticultural advice, but an enquiry service mainly dealing with botanical and horticultural literature, plant illustrations, and the ‘quick-reference’ type of question is provided.
Subject coverage:
The library specialises in taxonomic botany (plant classification and relationships), and it also has material on amenity horticulture; garden history and design; landscaping; conservation; botanical illustration; botanical travels and exploration.
A major feature of note is the very large collection of national and regional Floras.
As well as flowering plant systematics, the section dealing with non-flowering plants — fungi, lichens, mosses and liverworts, ferns and other cryptogamic plants — is of international importance.
The main stock consists of 150 000 volumes of scientific periodicals, and 75 000 books, including many early printed works,(from 1486) on botany, medicine, agriculture, and horticulture.
Some 1 500 periodicals are currently taken; these reflect the wide range of scientific activity carried on in the Garden.
With the historical archives, illustrations, and other specialist material, the collection is an integral part of the Garden's scientific and horticultural resource.
Special collections:
The library incorporates the botanical libraries of the Botanical Society of Edinburgh (now the Botanical Society of Scotland)(1872); the Wernerian Society (1856); the Plinian Society of Edinburgh (1841); John Hope (1899) and Cleghorn Memorial (1941).
The archival material consists of manuscript and printed material relating to the history of plant sciences and particularly to the Garden (from 1670), and to the Botanical Society of Edinburgh (from 1836).
Among the contents are correspondence, biographies and portraits of early botanists and horticulturists; the Minute Books of the Royal Caledonian Horticultural Society, and diaries, correspondence and photographs relating to plant collectors, including George Forrest, Joseph Rock, Reginald Farrer and others.
There is also a ‘Cuttings File’ of some 100 000 items, which contains several thousand botanical illustrations, many of which are original artworks.
Many other notable botanical illustrators, including Lillian Snelling, are represented in the collections of botanical art and illustration.
Access to a slide library of 40 000 botanically named colour slides is also provided.
Health and Safety — HSE/EC Directives
Display screen equipment work
All RBGE workstations have now been assessed under this Directive.
New workstations installed after 1st January 1993 must comply fully from the outset, and all others must be brought up to the standard by December 31st, 1995.
The sum of £5000 was transferred from Computing cost centre to Estates in FY 1993/94 to purchase furniture and other equipment (chairs, copy-holders, wrist supports, screen filters etc).
This is insufficient to meet all requirements immediately, and so priorities are being agreed between Computing Sub-Group and Estates.
Two of the areas outstanding are in user information and in user training.
We are required under the terms of the Directive to inform staff of the provisions of the Directive, and to train staff in the health and safety aspects of workstation use.
These are areas which the full Health & Safety Committee might wish to discuss.
My own recommendation would be that we purchase multiple copies of a booklet currently available at under £1, and distribute it to users on a one-per-room basis.
Training could easily be video-based at low cost also.
Discussions are currently under way between M Prior and a firm of opticians on the provision of eye and eyesight testing to workstation operators.
Image Analysis
We think that it is now time to review past demonstrations and to decide on the next steps.
Accordingly, and I'm sorry it's such short notice, I've booked the Board Room for 11 am on Friday 8th October, and I'd be grateful if you could attend.
If I've missed anyone off the list, could you please let them know.
Colin Will, Richard Pankhurst
October 6, 1993
Distribution:
ADMINISTRATIVE OFFICER (Serials)(AO)
Job Description
Specific Duties:
1.
Responsibility for opening and distributing the Library mail each day.
2.
Responsibility for checking in and recording journals and other serials, as they arrive, using a) computer system b) manual Kardex system as appropriate.
3.
Operation of journal circulation procedures (computer/manual).
4.
Sending and recording claims for journal/serial parts not received, including a regular monthly check of all outstanding claims to ascertain those which require to be reclaimed.
5.
Responsibility for the selection, preparation, recording and receipt of journal parts to be sent for binding each month.
6.
Data entry to the Image Database.
7.
Sending out ILL requests received from other libraries, including recording the loans/photocopies (computer/slip and book), chasing overdue loans and the compilation of monthly statistics for the Serials Librarian.
8.
Responsibility for the photocopier cash box.
9.
Ordering and monitoring stocks of Library stationery.
10.
Together with the Acquisitions Assistant, responsibility for the shelving of returned loans (DAILY), for shelf tidying (WEEKLY) and for clearing the readers’ tables (DAILY).
11.
Together with other Library staff, responsibility for reader assistance and help with enquiries.
12.
Absence cover for Acquisitions Assistant including running the loans system.
13.
Undertaking other duties as required by the Serials Librarian and the Chief Librarian.
Mrs G Lomas
Annual Leave — Carry-over.
I currently have 10 days Annual Leave entitlement outstanding, and with the present staffing situation in the Library it is unlikely that I will be able to take any leave in January.
Could I therefore request that I be allowed to carry over 1 days in addition to the 9 days normally allowed?
Student Lecturettes, 1993.
Report of Assessors.
The overall standard of talks this year was very high; even the lowest mark was higher than many in previous years, and reflected a very high standard of presentation.
The assessors are looking for evidence of attainment of high levels of verbal communication skills, and this was quite clearly shown by all of this year's speakers.
The speakers have chosen their own topics, based on their own interests and enthusiasms, and it is important that they convey their zest for the subject to an audience, preferably establishing at the outset that the subject deserves the audience's attention.
All of the highest-marked speakers this year began their talks in just this way, with eye-catching first slides, with sound, or with both.
The use of the microphone by some students this year undoubtedly helped those students who lacked confidence in their ability to project their voices, and it is suggested that more students should try using the sound system to gain experience for the future.
It is important to address an audience directly, using eye-contact, speaking to all sections of the room, and changing speech rhythms and levels to maintain attention, as well as adding touches of lightness from time to time, in the form of humour.
Most speakers did this, but some still persisted in reading from a prepared script without raising their heads from the lectern.
What comes across is a spoken version of a written communication; the words tend to sound stiff and formal.
The use of OHPs continues to give problems.
Some were taken off far too quickly for the audience to take in the information presented.
Some contained far too much textual information; some were read out (there's no need for this — the audience can read too); and some speakers turned their backs on the audience to read from the screen.
The use of mid-point summaries was very useful in several cases.
If subjects are difficult intellectually, this can be recommended, as a way of demonstrating what has been covered, but speakers should always make sure that they really have covered the points properly.
In summary, the talks this year demonstrated maturity, confidence, intelligence, presentation skills, and above all, enthusiasm.
The assessors wish to record their thanks to all who took part in what has been, as always, an enjoyable, educational, entertaining, informative, and character-building exercise.
It is an essential part of the DHE course, and the skills learned in carrying it out will stand all students in good stead in the years to come.
M J Barrett
He paced his talk well, and his use of live models caught the attention, but he failed to capitalise on this by describing exactly what the models were demonstrating.
This talk lacked information content, and was too short.
The speaker clearly knew a great deal more than he told us, as shown in his very good question-answering, but he should have told us much more in the actual talk.
G S Buchanan
A confident speaker, but the talk provided insufficient background, and was somewhat unstructured.
He had clearly worked hard, but not perhaps in a focussed way.
Plant information was good.
Slides were used to punctuate the talk, as well as to illustrate points, but he had a tendency to look at the screen while speaking, which is distracting.
The questions were not particularly well answered.
C S Collins
An obvious enthusiast, with a strong sense of humour which did not detract from his very informative presentation.
The use of sound was imaginative and appropriate, and caught the audience's attention.
All of his slides were chosen for a purpose, and were of high quality, although we would have liked a garden plan.
His question-answering demonstrated an analytical ability, and respect for the questioner and for his audience.
An outstanding performance.
P J Desmond
Clearly demonstrated the complexity of the issues in a well-argued presentation which suffered at times from being a little unfocussed.
The talk was a little on the short side, but even so did not hold the attention as well as it might have.
All points seemed to be given equal emphasis.
The questions were very well answered.
D J Fazackerley
Put the audience at their ease extremely well at the outset.
Voice quiet but very clear.
The aims were set out very clearly at the beginning.
Excellent slides, some of which were flashed through too quickly; correct use of OHPs.
In , all visual aids were used for a purpose.F B Inches
A good narrative, well-delivered, but seldom raised eyes from lectern.
The use of the microphone helped to project her voice.
From a nervous start, she seemed to grow in confidence towards the end.
She did not focus on the actual wording of the questions, and as a result answered them in a rather uncritical way.
A more analytical approach was needed.
M A Jocelyn
A good attempt at a structured presentation, but not all sections were equally strong; the middle part being perhaps the weakest.
In treating such a philosophical topic, the underlying principles should have been expanded on, rather than just being described.
Her eyes were too often down on the lectern.
Her slides were well chosen, and she answered questions very fully.
J G Jones
This presentation would have benefited from being delivered out to the audience, rather than down to the lectern, and he should practise opening his mouth wider when talking — he was sometimes difficult to follow.
His use of humour was good, and not overdone.
This was a narrative which at times verged on hero-worship rather than a critical assessment, but his enthusiasm was obvious, and he had clearly researched well.
Slides flashed past too quickly.
Questions not answered critically.
S C D Lee
Overcame nervousness well.
Kept making eye-contact with the audience, and used voice modulation well to retain audience attention.
Good slides, poorly handled — more rehearsal needed.
Tendency to read out OHP captions.
Experiments very interesting, and well-described.
Questions half-answered.
More use of the live plants which he had assembled would have been preferred.
Longer preparation generally would have improved this very interesting talk.
J S McBrier
An excellent introductory section, imaginatively using sound and images.
A clear, confident speaker, who kept his head up and conveyed his enthusiasm to the audience.
Very good slides.
Thoughtful and honest answers to questions.
An extremely good presentation.
G M Miller
A highly structured talk on what was probably the most challenging topic in this year's list.
Given the very high target he had set himself, he managed to achieve most of his objectives, conveying to the audience the complexity of his subject, and the reasons for its interest.
This was a very informative, intelligent and thoughtful presentation, with slides which were mostly well chosen.
Knowing when you've said enough in answering questions is a skill which improves with practice.
P Redshaw
He delivered an extremely enthusiastic presentation on a highly specialised and narrow topic.
Kept his head up well, and spoke to all sections of the audience.
Would have preferred more botanical detail on the plants shown on the slides, which were good.
The use of the blackboard showed confidence.
Summed up at intervals during the talk — this was well done.
Answered questions carefully, but tended to go on too long.
The speaker presented a useful outline on screen initially, but far too frequently turned his back on the audience to read from the screen.
This was a very limited topic, and suffered from a lack of research, and from a paucity of botanical or horticultural information.
The presentation was too short, and rather shallow.
R Whiteman
A very wordy presentation, which would have benefited from the use of more slides, particularly at the beginning.
A very confident performance, which would not have been out of place as a university seminar, but which was not, perhaps, geared to this audience.
Highly informative and very well prepared.
Description of research methods novel and interesting.
Correct use of OHPs as pointers and summarisers.
Mature and intelligent.
I have known Mrs Taylor for over three years.
I supervised her professional training while she was working at the Macaulay Land Use Research Institute at Penicuik, and appointed her as an Assistant Librarian at the Royal Botanic Garden Edinburgh just over a year ago.
I was rather devastated when she told me she was moving to Crieff, as she made major contributions to the work of the Library here; she had a long-term future, and her personality made many friends for the Library among our users.
She took on two alternating roles here, working for six-month periods as Acquisitions Librarian and as Serials Librarian, alternating with our other Assistant Librarian.
In both of these jobs she proved to very hard-working and reliable, well able to function on her own but always working as a member of a team.
She supported me enthusiastically in bringing in new work practices in the interests of efficiency, and in introducing new services and extending others.
Her own approach was innovative in its own right, and she often made valuable suggestions for improvements in services.
Turning to your job description, Mrs Taylor is highly experienced in automated library systems, albeit the Soutron system as distinct from BookShelf, but the two are not too dissimilar.
We use our system for Acquisitions, Cataloguing, Serials (1600 current titles), and Circulation, and Mrs Taylor has completed training on all of these modules.
She has also functioned as an extremely efficient troubleshooter on our system, identifying problems and very patiently liaising with our software suppliers when problems have arisen.
She is highly computer-literate, and good at explaining the use of the system to other staff and to our Library users.
She had responsibility for training and managing her own Administrative Assistant, and she did this work with sensitivity, skill, patience and determination.
I have no doubt that her organisational ability would fit her well for arranging staff training, and for undertaking training in her specialist areas.
The same skills will also help in the development of non-book services.
An example I can cite is that I asked her to research and write up (unsupervised) an application to the Carnegie-Mellon Foundation for the microfilming of our 100,000 items in the Archive Collection.
Her Report, finished just before she left, is clearly written, well argued, and, I hope, gives us a good chance of receiving funding.
Mrs Taylor fitted in well with our users, who include scientific and horticultural staff, students and researchers world-wide, and the general public.
She has a pleasant, cheerful manner, and was well liked by all who came in contact with her.
She is totally reliable, conscientious and very hard-working, intelligent, and a good communicator.
I commend her to you without reservation — she is an outstanding professional with excellent career prospects, and will be an asset to any library authority.
Special Bulletin
Library Subscriptions
This notice is to inform staff of the background to the decisions on recent cuts in library subscriptions.
As a result of the disastrous combination of publishers’ inflationary price hikes and the pound's devaluation last year, our subscription costs rose by 27.8% last year to £44,000, resulting in an overspend.
The projected increase this year is a further 25% over 1991/92 prices, and since the Library's budget this year is the same as last year, drastic cuts in subscriptions were essential to avoid further damaging our bookfund, which has already been substantially eroded over the last three years.
The consultation exercise involved supplying members of the Library Advisory Committee (LAC) with copies of our current list, and asking them for suggestions for cuts.
The same procedure was followed with the Research Management Group (RMG).
Suggestions for cuts were then circulated to LAC and RMG members, to other senior staff and Associates, and copies were posted in the Library inviting staff comment.
The Edinburgh University Union List of Serials was also checked to ensure that wherever possible we did not cut significant titles which were unique to this Library in the Edinburgh area.
The process had to be completed by the end of May so that our agents could ensure that cancellations took effect from the earliest possible date.
Even so, the effects of these cuts will not be fully felt until financial year 1994/95, and some further reduction in our book-buying and binding will still be necessary this year.
The over-riding priority in deciding on cuts was that our essential core-funded research activities should not be harmed in the short or longer term, and I am satisfied that this objective has been met.
It remains the case that library materials are subject to inflation rates well above the national indicators used by government, and the effects of this on the Library's activities continue to be the subject of discussion between the LAC and RBGE Management.
One of the factors which must be taken into account is that we have to be responsive to changes in our scientific activities in order to provide the necessary Library support for them.
Ideally, we should build some flexibility into the Library's financial management systems to cope with changes, but at present we are so tightly constrained by cost factors that we have no room for manoeuvre.
We remain committed, not just to maintaining library standards, but to delivering improvements in services to all users in the most efficient and economical way possible.
There once was a young man from Surrey,
Whose chest was incredibly furry.
He met a gay bear
Who fancied his hair
So he shaved himself in a great hurry.
The great thing about Derek Young
Is that he is rather well hung.
On his privates he dangles
Swedes, turnips and mangels
While carrots hang down from his tongue.
Suggested Maintenance List 1993/94
Terms 4-hour response max, rest 8 hrs/following w/day, payment starting 1/4/93, quarterly.
Staff Management
I raised with David Ingram at my JAR a matter which I've been mulling over for a while, arising from my role as Welfare Officer.
David advised me to sound you out on it.
Do you think it would be a good idea to hold a meeting of staff managers (project heads and above in Science, GS and above in Horticulture, Department heads in Admin, etc.) to discuss in general terms issues of staff management within RBGE?
I'm thinking of looking for suggestions to improve practice and set standards in areas like communication, delegation, supervision, team-building, time management, financial planning, project management and so on.
I feel that it would be much better to talk about the issues internally first, with due reference to our own training budget and other constraints, rather than just to send staff out on external management training courses.
I think, and David agreed with me, that he should stand back from this initially.
I think that all other managers, including yourself (as Chair?),
Gillian, and John Main, should be encouraged to participate.
On other JAR matters, the Library staff restructuring has pushed a lot more work down on to the front desk staff, and I'm sure that the effects will be noticed in future.
I also told David that I think there is a substantial difference between my vision of the Library and that of some other staff, and that this factor is the cause of much of the perceived difficulty between myself and others.
I would hope to be able to spell out my vision, and outline some proposed developments, at a future Library open meeting sometime soon.
Basically, coming in from outside, I found a Library which the Herbarium staff regarded as ‘theirs’, whereas I see it as much, much more than that — it's primarily a Library for the staff, certainly, but it's also a local, national, and international resource.
November 12, 1992
Crinan
1.
M.Sc.
Synopsis
For info, p3, para before ‘Publications’, Deni Bown's book is ‘4 Gardens in One’(1992)
Could I change the title of my (tentatively) 13th January talk to:
The management of information in taxonomic institutions; data collection, storage, processing and retrieval, using libraries and computers.
2.
Library Workshop, 28 October 1993
Timetable:
M.Sc.
Workshop on research methodology, bibliography, citations, etc.
Morning session in 007 with CW, afternoon in Library with Anne Welsh
9 — 9.30 Intro, determination of special interests
9.30 — 10.30 How to find out.
Primary, secondary & tertiary sources, meta-sources
10.30 Break
11 — 12.30 — How to write a dissertation
Citations and references, including practical session
2 — 4.30 Library — Practical session, including the use of journals, reference books, abstracting & indexing journals, textbooks, microfilm, CD-ROM, online sources, library catalogues, holdings lists.
This session taking account of the students’ specific subject fields.
M.Sc.
Problem Question.
You work in ‘Dunselectin’, a small botanic garden on the west coast of Ireland.
The Garden has a botanical library of 5,000 volumes, and a reasonable stock of periodicals.
It also has three heated public glasshouses and a small propagation unit which concentrates mainly but not exclusively on bringing on plants for amenity planting.
The scientific staff have six personal computers (which are not networked), and telephone and postal links to other institutions.
One of your main projects is to publish a flora of Mexico.
Your subject specialism is in the Agavaceae and other Liliales, and your four colleagues have expertise in Compositae, Salicaceae, Umbelliferae and Acanthaceae.
A group of ornithologists has just returned from an expedition to an arid area in Mexico in which you are keenly interested.
They have brought you a collection of 500 packets of seeds, each packet containing seed from several individual plants — which appeared similar — in a single locality.
The place-names are recorded.
No flowers were present on any of the plants from which collections were made.
1.
Describe the nature of the seed information you have to hand, its taxonomic relevance, and its limitations.
2.
How would you deal with the material to gain the maximum amount of taxonomic information, in relation to your existing resources?
3.
If your organization were to inherit a large amount of money, outline and discuss areas in which investment in information management and information technology would make the most difference to the outcome of your project.
Regius Keeper
Record of a meeting held Friday 26th February 1993 between Mr Malcolm Beasley, Botany Library, Natural History Museum (NHM), and Dr Colin Will, Royal Botanic Garden Edinburgh (RBGE) Library.
Both Librarians agreed that the current level of informal co-operation between the two libraries was excellent, and worked to the advantage of staff in both organisations.
There are, however, further areas where co-operation is possible, but which require agreement on policy at a higher level, and yet other possibilities which would involve additional institutions.
1.
Online access to catalogues.
RBGE has the Soutron Library System, with catalogue records available online from 1986 onwards, and plans for retroconversion, possibly using OCLC.
NHM has the URICA system, and is considering using JANET or its successor for electronic data exchange.
We both believe that mutual access to each other 's catalogues would be of benefit to staff in both institutions, but we recognise that there are practical problems and questions of policy which would have to be addressed.
In particular, the systems in operation have different user interfaces and modes of use which derive from their underlying programming, and which are therefore likely always to be different.
Additionally, the bibliographic records owned by both Libraries are in themselves commercially valuable.
It would be relatively easy to download catalogue records from a broadband system like JANET, but such an action would negate the possibility of our institutions receiving income from the transactions.
National Heritage (Scotland) Act, 1985.
The Board of Trustees is charged with the following duties:
a)
to carry out investigation and research into the science of plants and related subjects and disseminate the results of the investigation and research;
b)
to maintain and develop collections of living plants and preserved plant material, books, archives and other related objects;
c)
to keep the collections as national reference collections, and secure that they are available to persons for the purposes of study;
d)
to provide advice, information and education, in any manner which seems appropriate to them, in relation to any aspect of the science of plants or of any related subject;
e)
to provide other services (including quarantine) in relation to plants, and
f)
to afford to members of the public opportunities to enter any land occupied or managed by the Board for the purposes of gaining knowledge and enjoyment from the Board's collections.
Friends Office — for information
Botanical Watercolours
The Library is exhibiting the first of series of paintings produced by members of Eve Bennett's RBGE Botanical Painting Course.
For a few weeks at a time, staff and Library visitors will be able to see a succession of paintings from this talented group.
The first painting,Nigella damascena , painted by Evelyn Hay, is now on display in the Library foyer area.
Personnel/Staff Welfare
1.
I have had a meeting with Craig McDevitt of the Student Advisory and Counselling Service, during which we discussed the Garden's staffing structure, re-structuring, effects of economics, and other matters affecting staff morale.
Craig said that SACS will be happy to conduct workshops on stress, interviewing skills, performance appraisal and other subjects which we feel are needed.
He suggests that it will be better if we can tell him what our priorities are, so that they can tailor their service to meet our requirements, both as to content and to timing.
2.
The University Computing Service networking specialist, Scott Currie, will be visiting us on 27th November at 2 p.m.
I'd like him to look specifically at Personnel's computing problems among other things.
3.
Margaret and I were discussing Payroll computing options today.
There are a number of questions which relate to the computing aspects of each option, and I'd like to discuss them with you.
Since all three of these matters relate to Personnel, I was wondering if you, Margaret and myself could get together soon to discuss them?
 John,
Pesticides publications.
We have standing orders for multiple copies of both publications, as follows:
1.
Pesticides 1993 — 7 copies
Library
Curator
Laboratory
YBG
Dawyck
Logan
AD Supervisors
2.
UK Pesticides Guide — 10 copies
Library
Curator
Laboratory
YBG
Logan
Dawyck
AD
GD
Pesticide Store
AD Supervisors
The Library's budget is very tight this year, and there have already been questions over whether the Library should be carrying the cost of the large number of pesticide-related publications we currently take.
As Pesticides adviser, can you help me to rationalise the situation and make sure that we are making the most efficient use of our limited resources.
Thanks
Regius Keeper & Deputy Keeper — in confidence
Telephone System
I note that the Telephone system has been tabled for discussion at the next Whitley.
As you know, I am unable to be present at this meeting.
For your information, however, my thoughts on the effects of the system on the Library's operations are as follows:
1.
It appears to us all that there has been a significant drop in the numbers of telephone enquiries coming in to the Library since the new system went in.
I have no quantitative evidence for this, and the reasons are a matter for speculation, but the difficulties some users have in getting through to us show that a remarkable degree of persistence is sometimes demanded.
2.
I have had complaints from several enquirers who, not knowing our telephone extensions, have had to wait an inordinate length of time before being connected to the operator.
Many have been disconnected before reaching the operator.
One enquirer said that she could hear the Messengers talking while being unable to speak to them.
3.
Several calls have been eventually connected but are suddenly dropped by the system for no apparent reason.
4.
Some external callers have failed to be connected to the switchboard at all for considerable periods.
A member of my staff for instance, trying to report sickness absence, told me yesterday that she dialled our number and had to wait more than four minutes before being answered.
I regard this as unacceptable.
5.
We have all experienced difficulties in transferring calls and in remote pickups, which we use routinely.
Transferred calls have subsequently been found to have been dropped, necessitating the caller dialling again.
I'm sorry to send you this catalogue of woes, but I do agree with the sentiment of the Whitley paper, that the system has damaged our public image, and equally importantly it is inefficient in handling our internal and external communications.
I would like to hope that these are teething troubles, but I remain to be convinced.
On point d) of this paper, which I regard as a separate issue, I have already made the point at Research Management that Library staff are receiving many more non-Library enquiries now, referred from Exhibition Hall staff, from Shop staff, and from new Support staff on the switchboard.
I feel that this reflects inadequate training and/or briefing of such staff on the work of different sections of the Garden, and I am sure that this can be overcome relatively easily by providing adequate induction courses for all the RBGE, BTC and others who have contact with members of the public.
Estates Dept.
Power supply work — Computer operations.
Please ensure that in future, if any planned power supply work is to be carried out affecting the supply to the computer room, I am informed well in advance, so that I can make arrangements to safeguard the file-servers and inform users.
I should not have to find out by accident, as happened this morning.
Research Management Group
Minutes of Meeting held Tuesday 31 August 1993
Present: D Mann, H Sluiman, B Coppins, J Main, C Will, D Chamberlain, J Ratter, C Alexander.
2.
Minutes of 29 June meeting approved.
3.
Matters arising.
Plant Science Research Centre.
The Group minuted its thanks to A Bennell for chairing the two ‘brainstorming’ sessions.
The meetings had been very positive, and minutes were expected imminently.
The Herbarium photocopier was still giving cause for concern in respect of a lack of information and instruction on its use.
Costed proposals for enhancing and extending the computer network are expected by end September.
Several staff had responded to the request for ‘Dark Mornings’ training sessions.
CW reported that he was working with Bob Crossman on planning matters affecting the Library.
Chairman reported:
Mary Mendum had begun working full-time in Tropical Biology and as Botanical Artist.
Kerry Walter was now expected to transfer BG-BASE to Edinburgh in October.
DM suggested that contact between Kerry and ECTF staff should be arranged at the earliest opportunity Marisa Main and Gillian Malcolm had assisted Tony Miller with his work to complete Flora of Arabia vol.1.
J Nyberg had now returned from sick leave.
The ‘palaeobotany’ post job description had been agreed with National Museums of Scotland, and was shortly to be advertised in nature.
A Science Group staff meeting has been arranged and the date is to be announced shortly [September ‘].
G Anderson is to give a talk on 27 October on ‘how to give a talk’.
BC reported on continuing discussions with publishers on possible commercial publication of the Edinburgh Journal of Botany.
In-house publication was also being considered.
4.
Reports
a) Library.
CW reported that H Smith had been offered a place at Liverpool University, and would be leaving the Library in September.
A Welsh and M Davidson had drafted revised job descriptions, re-balancing job loadings, adjusting responsibilities, and allowing for grading differences, for both library assistants (AA & AO), and CW had obtained approval for the changes from existing staff.
As notified in a recent Staff Bulletin, the Library Advisory Committee (LAC) has been expanded, and two of its four annual meetings would be open to all staff.
Among the agenda items for discussion in September will be the loans system, retrospective catalogue conversion, and a discussion on the services and facilities to be offered to different categories of user.
CW pointed out that Library staff were often not made aware of the status of people using the Library, and wished to codify the access, loan, inter-library loan, and other facilities which are appropriate.
DM advised that staff should introduce all potential library users, whether voluntary workers, contract staff, interns, Ph D students or otherwise.
CW offered to send copies of his background papers on all of these issues to Group members, and to receive comments, advice or criticism from any member at any time.
The December meeting will be open.
b) Herbarium.
DFC reported a draft Acquisitions policy document will be ready for the next meeting.
A course on Herbarium Curation & Management is being considered; this will include the mounting of Herbarium specimens.
The first batch of duplicate Herbarium specimens was complete, and the process of tidying duplicates was continuing.
A few duplicates would be retained for future exchange purposes.
The Group recorded its appreciation of Marisa Main's efforts in this area.
A Taiwanese visitor is expected soon; he will be working on Gesneriaceae, but he will also be discussing possible exchanges of material.
Discussions will be initiated on P Woods’ duplicates.
The label program is up and running, hopefully leading to bar-coding of Herbarium specimens with implications for loan procedures.
DFC felt it is now necessary for the Garden to take a policy decision on the standards to adopted for plant names.
He had found 250 generic names in BG-BASE which were not the same as the recent Kew list.
It is desirable that plant names used in PANDORA, BG-BASE and the Herbarium database should be compatible, and should be based on an agreed list.
Discussion was deferred until the October meeting.
Cabinets for the spirit collection are expected to be delivered soon.
c) Laboratories.
HS reported that advance booking of laboratory space and facilities is desirable to optimise use.
Anna Bradshaw is starting as ASO on a 2-year appointment.
The old TEM has been removed, but some cabling and ducting is still to be removed.
The old SEM is still in use, until new owners can be found.
The EM Technician advertisement was very successful, over 50 applications having been received.
Room 006 is to be used for the MSc students, with Room 33 being converted as a Laboratory.
One of the Laboratories in this wing would then be available for potential molecular research.
Six new stereo microscopes have been ordered.
A concertina partition has been installed in the EM suite, and some further work continues.
Work on the canteen corridor is progressing.
The area will be divided into six working spaces, for spirit collection, drying room, cold room, incubator/growth chamber, cold film store, plastics and glass store, with a bin store at the end.
A liquid nitrogen storage facility has been ordered for EM preparation and cryo-preservation.
The micropropagation accommodation is not yet complete.
Faith Nelson has recently attended a course on cryo-preservation and micropropagation at Dundee.
Part of the Potting Shed is to be converted to a facility for weaning and hardening micropropagated material.
Additional scientific equipment to be acquired included satellite locators, vibration-free benching, molecular equipment, video attachments for microscopes, water purification equipment, and systems for image archiving and processing.
DM briefed the group on the potential for establishing, in the short term, a facility for molecular taxonomic work.
He felt that the investment needed was not particularly high compared to other activities, and that there would be a good chance of staffing such a unit on a small scale.
It was agreed that library support for such work could not be provided on short notice, and that the journal collection of the University should be used, at least initially.
d) M Sc Course.
CA thanked RBGE staff for their participation and assistance in the first year of the course.
The Group recorded its appreciation of Crinan's work in helping to create, launch and run the course.
A meeting of those at RBGE involved with the Course is being organised for late September.
The timetable for the second course is currently being written.
It is thought that the first week will be devoted to Orientation, Introduction and Training.
On the University side, the Course will be within the Institute of Ecology and Resource Management.
150 enquiries had been made this year, and potential students are now seeking funding.
JAR advised that mechanical stages for the M15 microscopes are currently held and are available for use.
It was agreed that it would be desirable for students to meet ECTF staff to establish contacts which might later prove mutually worthwhile.
All students had passed their exams and were now working on projects, N Sinclair has succeeded in obtaining a post at Kew.
The financing of the Course is still under negotiation.
DM informed the Group that he had received a letter from the Open University, who have taken over the CNAA's role in validating research degrees undertaken outside the academic sector.
This has potential for future research work carried out at RBGE, and for existing research programmes.
5.
‘Quality control’ of staff reporting in science.
There are difficulties over apparent differences in reporting standards between different Reporting Officers.
A Staff Committee had been mooted as one way of overcoming these difficulties.
DM outlined the system which has operated successfully at Kew for some years.
Meetings of all RO's marking particular grades are held, at which pencilled Reports are read out and discussed by all present.
DFC was asked to check with his IPMS counterpart at Kew on the working of the scheme.
CW said that as Staff Welfare Officer he welcomed the proposal.
DM to draft a discussion paper.
6.
Kew visit.
DM and HS had recently visited Kew, for discussions with a number of staff.
Their discussions at all levels had been friendly and useful.
Differences in grade between equivalent staff at E and K should not be allowed to determine the level at which contacts and discussions are established.
We should see our respective institutions as having equal status, and our individual functions as equivalent regardless of grade.
7.
Species Plantarum.
DM reported on progress of the project.
D Long will report back after the Tokyo meeting.
RBGE is represented on a relaunched Steering Group.
8.
Mounting of Herbarium Specimens.
DM outlined Management Group policy on this question; policy being that the Curator and his Committee should determine operational policy on curatorial practices.
9.
Internet.
CW spoke to his paper on the desirability and practicality of connecting our computer system to external computers.
It was agreed that on R Pankhurst's return from leave, he and CW would get together and draft a paper for Management Group.
CW's paper to be expanded and attached to a Staff Bulletin for information.
10.
Any other business.
JAR advised a forthcoming Brazilian visitor, Dr Arnildo Pott.
Mark Watson to be asked if he could arrange for Dr Pott to give a seminar.
DFC announced that Roger Hyam is, subject to confirmation from Bristol, likely to be appointed to the EC-funded Rhododendron project Ph D post.
Jim Parks from North Carolina will be working on ferns using electrophoresis.
He will be using our facilities, but will pay for consumables.
DM reported that, because bulk-loaded film is half the cost of pre-loaded film, it was now being bought for photographic work.
As a temporary measure, the loader is in his room, until procedures have been arranged [now transferred to R Hollands].
Apart from M Sc and ECTF Belize projects, no other applications under the first round of the Darwin Initiative programme had been submitted.
Staff were asked to consider applying for subsequent rounds.
Current Contents
The Library now receives Current Contents on diskette as well as paper copies.
This service lists the contents pages of journals received by the Institute for Scientific Information (nearly 7,000 titles in total) on a weekly basis.
The diskette service offers staff the possibility of browsing, searching, and running automated searches based on stored personal-interest profiles.
The results of searches can be saved to floppies for import into word processing or bibliographic software.
Staff who would like to use the service should contact Colin Will, who will provide training over the next few weeks.
Management Group has recently agreed to an increased membership and some modifications to the way the Committee will function.
The Committee will meet four times each year, in September, December, March and June, and will report to Research Management through its Convenor, Colin Will.
The December and June meetings will be open to all members of staff who are free to attend.
These meetings are intended to act as foci for the exchange of views and information between library staff and users, as well as to assist in library policy making.
All staff are invited to suggest (in writing please) topics for discussion at any meeting, provided these are submitted well in advance.
Alternatively, your ideas may be discussed in advance with any member of the Committee, who represent the Garden as a whole, not just a particular user ‘constituency’.
The first meeting of the relaunched Committee will be 27th September 1993.
Membership: George Anderson; B.L.
Burtt; David Chamberlain; Brian Coppins; Bob Crossman; Mary Davidson (Secretary); Sabina Knees; David Mann; David Mitchell; Henry Noltie; David Paterson; Evelyn Turnbull; Anne Welsh; Colin Will (Convenor).
2 items for next Staff Bulletin 
Staff Welfare.
An open meeting has been arranged for 20th January, between 12 and 2 in Conference Room 1.
Staff from Edinburgh University's Student Advisory and Counselling Service (SACS) will be attending.
We would like to discuss staff welfare generally and to outline the services currently provided.
We also wish to hear staff views on the sorts of services which they wish to see provided.
Workshops and other such activities will also be discussed, and we would welcome suggestions from staff as to how these might be organised.
All staff are welcome to attend, subject to line manager approval.
Library Seminar
There will be an open meeting in Conference Room 1 on Monday 25th January, between 12.15 and 1 pm.
The meeting will take the form of a review of library issues — problems, progress, setbacks and achievements — over the last five years, with a look forward to the future.
After the formal presentation, there will be an opportunity for questions.
For Staff Bulletin
Library Books
A book which had been issued to a former student, now left the Garden, has been found in the Potting Shed.
It had been severely damaged by water and dirt, to the extent that it is unusable and will have to be replaced.
Staff and students are reminded that it is their responsibility to ensure that all books on loan to them from the Library are kept securely, in good condition, away from harmful environments, and readily accessible to Library staff in the event of their being required for other readers.
Library Notes
1.
Reprints.
Where a publisher does not provide free reprints, the Library will purchase 50 reprints for staff use, provided funds are available, and provided also that the reprint orders are accompanied by an official Library order form.
2.
Loans of floras.
The Library issues floras on loan to staff on condition that they remain in the building, and accessible to other Library users during normal working hours.
Occasional overnight and weekend loans for home use are possible in individual cases by permission of the Librarian.
3.
Environmental conditions for loans.
When books or journals are on loan to staff, they should be kept secure, and in good physical conditions.
Do not leave books/journals etc in direct sunlight.
4.
Readers tables — South side of Library.
Following concerns expressed by the Visiting Group, a consultant has made a report on environmental conditions in the Library.
The tables on the South side of the Library are unsuitable for the consultation of colour illustrated books, and for leather bound books, until UV screening can be applied to the windows.
In addition, these tables will be cleared each day.
Staff who wish books to be left out may only use the North side tables for this purpose, and then only for limited periods by arrangement with the Library staff.
February 26, 1992
Lack of leadership & direction
1.
Discover what jobs people do, why and how they do them.
2.
Establish what services are expected to be provided.
3.
Determine how these services will be provided efficiently and well.
Serials Librarian
Criteria for selection
Experience in serials collection management 5
Knowledge of’’’ 4
Experience in computerised library systems 5
Knowledge of’’’ 4
Experience in special libraries 4
Knowledge of’’ 3
Botany or other science degree 4
Evidence of individuality (short of eccentricity) 4
Evidence of team-working ability 4
Evidence of commitment (few unavoidable short moves) 3
Communication skills 3
Any other relevant factors 3
Space has to be found, unperdictably, for new journals — need much looser, more flexible shelving arrangements — allow 10% extra per bay for new titles.
Synopsis
Introduction
There are many reasons for undertaking research in Scottish geology.
The complexity of Scotland's rocks and structure — both at the surface and at depth — and the large age range of geological Systems represented in Scotland's rocks, give rise to questions which are of intrinsic interest to researchers attempting to unravel Scotland's geological history.
Then too, the solutions to some problems exemplified can be applied elsewhere.
Scotland's universities are in reasonably close proximity to exposures of rocks of different ages, origins, types and compositions.
The same cannot be said of some other British universities, whose students are sometimes obliged to travel considerable distances to observe the raw materials to which their research relates.
The total number of theses produced in UK universities between 1960 and 1983 was approximately 180,000[00], of which 3632 were on the physical earth sciences — some 2% of the total.
Seven hundred (19%) were on Scottish earth sciences, and 550 (15%) of these were doctorate theses.
This is disproportionate, both in terms of the total Scottish population, and of the Scottish student population.
The data
The present study [00]concentrated on these 550 theses, derived from the lists published by Rolfe [00]and Will [00]in this journal.
Masters degree theses were excluded because the smaller numbers made them unsuitable for analysis.
Some other higher degree theses, not published in the Rolfe or Will papers, are also listed as omissions in Appendix 4 of Will 1991.
These were found by inspection of Laming[00], which was published after the initial thesis selection had been made.
Institutions
Research in Scottish geology has been carried out in 21 institutions, but has been concentrated in rather fewer.
The major centres (those depositing ten or more theses between 1960 and 1983) are listed in Table 1.
Table 1
Major research centres in Scottish geology
The six Scottish universities with Scottish geological research interests undertook more than 40% of all research in the field over the period, and Table 2, ranked in order of the proportion of Scottish research, suggests a high degree of concentration on local issues within Strathclyde and Dundee.
It is argued (Will 1991) that these two Departments in particular were successful in attracting funding for training overseas students, but that their theses produced fewer consultations, citations and derived publications than other Departments.
Proportionate research in Scottish geology
(The universities of Bath, Bradford, Brunel, Ireland, Loughborough, Salford, Sussex, Ulster, Warwick, and York have also supported geological research, but fewer than five theses were deposited in the years studied, and none were on Scottish subjects.)
The large numbers of research theses from Edinburgh reflects its position as a centre of above average research [UGC Earth Science Review]in more than one earth science sub-field, notably geology and geophysics.
Growth
The growth of geological research is discussed by Craig (1971) and Menard (1971).
Menard's study made use of several bibliometric techniques pioneered by Price, published as a collection in his 1983 book.
Within the period 1960-65, an average of 17.3 theses on Scottish geology were produced each year (all universities).
The period between 1972 and 1977 saw a rapid increase to 26 theses per year.
This increase continued at a slightly reduced rate, to reach 29.5 in the period between 1978 and 1983.
If such research is indicative of UK research effort in geology as a whole, then the figures suggest that in the early 1970's, the numbers of students entering the field increased substantially.
Two external factors suggest possible reasons for the increase in numbers.
The first is what Hallam[00] has termed the ‘Revolution in the earth sciences’(the word ‘revolution’ in his title implying a Kuhnian view of the transformation): the acceptance of plate tectonic evidence for the movements of continents, and the opening and closing of oceans.
Such an imaginative concept, involving the realisation that the earth is a dynamic planet, made geology a much more attractive and stimulating subject than it had seemed earlier, and many more graduates wanted to pursue careers in such an exciting field.
Simultaneously, the discovery of the North Sea's oil and gas fields in the late 1960's and early 1970's increased the UK demand for trained geologists and geophysicists.
The universities and Research Councils were able to satisfy the demand for increased research, but the employment boom was temporary, and the problems of the 1980s were those of shrinkage, entrenchment, over-supply and departmental mergers.
The Universities Funding Council
The average growth rate is 2.9% per annum(equivalent to about 3 additional theses per year).
When this is compared with the growth rate of 4% per annum for all UK theses, derived from inspection of the Aslib list, it is clear that Scottish geology is not one of the research areas showing rapid growth.
The critical factors in determining the growth in the present study are all external; none are intrinsic to the science itself.
These factors include funding sources, the employment market for successful graduates, and the costs of running university departments.
It is possible to predict therefore, given the funding pressures of the late 1980's and early 1990's, that the numbers of successful graduates in the field will start to level off under the influence of market forces, until the next major theoretical advance, or the next rise in the value of those resources which geologists can be of assistance in exploiting.
Geographical coverage.
Using title scanning, specific localities or wider areas for 286 of the 550 Ph D theses were plotted on a 1:625 000 geological map of Scotland (Will 1991).
A diagrammatic simplification is reproduced as Figure 1.
The numbers refer to the list of theses presented in Will 1991.
(A copy of the List, together with the List of derived publications, is deposited with the British Library Document Supply Centre as SUP [000000]).
The distribution is clearly non-uniform, reflecting concentrations of effort on particular problems, such as Lewisian geochemistry and chronology, Tertiary igneous geology, the Moine Thrust zone, and others.
There are also large tracts where, it would appear, no University research has been undertaken.
It is suggested that one of the reasons for this may be a cyclical process, whereby some research supervisors set their students problems in areas where they themselves undertook their own Ph D research.
It is hoped that this map, together with the Lists may provide scope for research planning between NERC, BGS, and individual Departments.
Publications
The role of the scientific journal has not changed much in the 300 years since the first was published, although greater dependence is placed on it than ever before, according to Osburn[000].
Journals are used to keep up-to-date; to follow developments in other fields; to get ideas for future research; to identify similar individuals; to screen out the irrelevant, and to find the relevant; and to minimise cost, time, and inconvenience in retrieval.
Publication in journals establishes intellectual ownership; gains recognition (which leads to career mobility); establishes personal contacts; fulfils contracts; shares information; and educates new practitioners.
The journal is so fundamental that Menard (1971) was able to say that:
‘Defining ‘science’ as the content of scientific journals…’
Counts of published papers have been used, on their own or in combination with other bibliometric output measures, for a variety of purposes.
In the present study (Will 1991), they were used to determine the most significant journals in the field; to examine the journals in which different Departments preferentially presented the results of their research; and to establish ‘productivity’ ratings for researchers.
1.
Journals
The journals in which researchers published the first paper relating to their research are shown in the following ranked table.
It will be noted that 68 of the authors published their first related paper in the Scottish Journal of Geology.
This represents nearly 21% of the total, with Nature publishing a further 11% 
2.
Departmental preferences
A detailed analysis of those authors publishing first in the Scottish Journal of Geology shows the following distribution of universities:
Table 11a Scottish Journal of Geology
University PhDs Papers Percent Rank
This journal was founded in 1965 by the geological societies of Edinburgh and Glasgow, each of which had published their own series of Transactions in previous years.
The Councils of both Societies decided that high-quality papers on Scottish geology should form the major part of the publication.
It is hardly surprising, therefore, that the Scottish universities feature so prominently in the above list, and that Liverpool and London, which have long-standing interests in Scottish geological research, have published large numbers of thesis-derived papers.
Similar analyses have been carried out for the other major journals, and the full results are available in Will 1991.
3.
Productivity
Dundee, Aberdeen and Strathclyde show both low average total productivity, and a smaller proportion of first papers published in highly-ranked journals within the field.
Cambridge and Oxford show both high total productivity and high levels of achieving publication in the major journals.
Bibliometrics
3.1 Publication counts
The counting of published papers is a crude method of measuring the productivity of research workers, but it has been used in some studies, such as that carried out by Vlachy 232 .
These somewhat simplistic approaches have been the subject of just criticism, e.g. by Dixon 56 , who urged caution on raw citation searching as proof of productivity, but who expressed overall support for its use in conjunction with other measures.
Criticism by many research workers has led to the development of ancillary measures, involving more sophisticated techniques.
It is no longer enough to make a simple count of publications; some attempt must be made to look at the informational content (bibliographies), peer group assessment (citations), and long-term value to the academic community (review articles).
Citation measures will be described in more detail in Chapter 5.
It has been clearly expressed (Anon 1970)4 that merely counting ‘publication rate would not distinguish between the fluency of genius and the loud noises of empty vessels.’
On the other hand, Menard 142 says (p. 25), that:
‘we need merely determine the amount of material published at various times to establish a growth curve.’
Clearly this is simplistic, if not mischievous, but on the other hand, we can only measure the measurable, and if science as a subject cannot be studied using scientific methods — deduction and induction, prediction and experiment — then measures of its output, in the form of scientific publications, have no logical validity.
Anderson et al 1978 3 combined peer ratings of universities with the numbers of publications produced by these universities within 10 scientific fields: Developmental Biology, Zoology, Pharmacy, Physiology, Mathematics, Microbiology, Psychology, Chemistry, Biochemistry, Physics.
They found high rank correlations between these two measures.
They developed a measure of the ‘average influence’ per paper, based on citation frequencies, and established a ‘total influence of the university’, defined as the product of the numbers of papers and the influence per paper.
The correlation of peer ratings with total influence exceeded the correlations with qualitative assessment or publication counts alone.
Thus authors who are highly regarded by their peers tend also to be those who publish frequently, and whose papers are highly cited.
The UFC 1989 Review 225 admitted that the numerical totals of publications were not found to be helpful in the assessment process, and their panels were agreed that quantity did not equal quality.
Their views may have been coloured by the fact that they found evidence of significant misreporting of publication data in some areas, to the extent that they suggest automatically lowering research ratings as a penalty for discovered deliberate misreporting.
The errors found involved reporting abstracts and correspondence as full papers; co-authorship represented as sole authorship; papers only tenuously ‘in press’ reported as having been published; falsification of publication dates so as to appear within the review period; and totally fabricated references.
It is little wonder then that they say that ‘bibliometric analysis was as yet a very poor substitute for peer review’.
What they failed to consider, however, was that their source bibliographic data was gathered as reportage from correspondents, rather than as objective data files from established, reputable bibliographic sources.
3.1.1 Methodology
The American Geological Institute (AGI) began publishing its Bibliography and Index of Geology (BIG) in 1934, as an annual publication.
For a period in the 1950s and 60s, North American geology was indexed in a separate publication by the United States Geological Survey as Bibliography of North American Geology (BNAG), which does not concern us in this particular study, with the AGI's publication changing title to Bibliography and Index of Geology, excluding North America (BIGENA).
The two series rejoined and resumed the title Bibliography and Index of Geology , under which it continues.
The published monthly bibliography and its annual cumulations (which now run to 8 large volumes each year), have an online equivalent — GeoRef — which, at the time of initial searching covered all years from 1969 to the present.
It has since been retrospectively enlarged, going back to 1754 for North America, and progressively completing coverage for other countries, particularly European geology.
The original intention in the present work was to use GeoRef for checking the publication history of the thesis research.
An objective assessment of geological database coverage by Tenopir 218 confirmed that Georef was the preferred database for searching, of the two which then currently existed.
(The second, GeoArchive, lapsed in 1986, but was relaunched on Dialog in 1989).
Tenopir used two research methodologies — a bibliographic method, and a subject profile method.
In the first, she used specialised bibliographies or review articles in a specific subject area.
She then looked for these citations in the databases.
Databases which had higher percentages of these citations were considered to have more extensive coverage.
The second method used subject terms to construct profiles, which were then run against the databases to be tested.
Review articles on volcanology were selected from Science Citation Index (SCI).
Two thousand, two hundred and fifty-four (2254) citations were retrieved, from which a sample set of 305 citations were checked against the two databases.
One hundred and eight (35%) were found in both databases.
GeoRef retrieved ‘5 of the citations (74%), of which 117 (38%) were unique to GeoRef.
GeoArchive retrieved only 115 of the citations (38%), 7 of which were unique to GeoArchive (2%).
Seventy-three citations (24%) were not found in either database.
Several reasons can be put forward for this gap, but the single largest factor is presumed to be the date coverage of the databases.
At the time, GeoRef covered the period from 1969 onward, and GeoArchive from 1974 onward.
Tenopir concluded that GeoRef has the edge in coverage per year, as well as in total coverage.
GeoRef assigns more subject headings for each record, and so has potentially higher recall by subject search.
On checking the journal coverage of BIG, it was found that all of the core journals, and the vast majority of the remainder, were covered by BIG and GeoRef, which in 1983 (in both published and online form) scanned 7,700 journals, and accordingly, the bibliographic checking was carried out solely in these sources, rather than GeoArchive.
AGI, which produces BIG, also collaborates with the national French bibliographic services of the Bureau de Recherches Gologiques et Minires (BRGM), and the Centre National de Recherche Scientifique (CNRS), so that its European coverage is considered virtually complete for the present data set.
Burk 25 supplies a non-critical listing of source and reference databases in the earth sciences, defining source databases as non-bibliographic (mostly in-house or private), and he uses the term ‘reference’ to mean bibliographic.
The numbers of ‘core'journals for this study is limited (see below), and the rigorous quality control imposed by strict refereeing policies of these journals ensures that very high scientific and editorial standards are applied.
For a paper on Scottish geology to be published in such journals is in itself a peer-group assessment of the value of that research to the scientific community.
Conversely, whilst there may in a few cases be valid reasons for a high quality paper not being submitted to such journals, it could be argued that in some cases publication outside the core represents a negative value judgement on the quality of that research.
3.1.2 Bibliographic searching.
For those authors completing theses before 1969, for the most prolific authors, and for ‘problematic’ authors (e.g. those whose citations contained some variations in forenames or initials, so that unambiguous attribution of authorship necessitated further investigation), manual searching of BIG was carried out, and for other authors GeoRef was searched online.
Since the thesis bibliography is an author list, and since BIG and GeoRef index all authors of papers, the search was conducted by author.
Both printed and online forms of the bibliography are exact equivalents when conducting author searches.
Analysis of the retrieved papers was then carried out to determine which publications were related to the author's thesis.
The titles of papers in geology are almost always invariably informative and precise.
In the case of areal geological research, the place name is invariably included both in the thesis title and the related paper(s).
Sources of errors in searching mainly involve failure to find related papers due to inconsistencies in the use of personal names.
Spelling errors in names was recognised as a potential problem, but in practice only two mis-spellings in citations were found.
Indexing inconsistencies caused a problem with searching the printed record.
Authors whose surnames begin with Mac, or Mc, were dealt with in different ways under differing editorial policies operating at different times.
In one period, all were placed together as if spelled out in full as ‘MAC’.
During another period, each variant was filed separately in strict alphabetical sequence, thus separating McDonald from Macdonald.
In a study dealing with Scottish subjects, the prefix occurred rather frequently, and necessitated great care in searching.
It is also possible that some research is directed towards developing a technique, methodology, computer program, or piece of equipment which has wide applicability, but whose initial testing was carried out within some field of Scottish geology.
Papers subsequently published by such researchers may show no obvious Scottish connection in their titles, but it cannot be assumed that the work is unrelated to their thesis topic.
As an example, Thesis number 9 was on mine waste contamination in Scotland and Wales.
This author's subsequent papers made no mention of Scotland, but made use of techniques developed during the course of his fieldwork.
The frequency of occurrence of such theses within this present work was very difficult to estimate, but is likely to be very low.
Most often, related papers are easy to determine because of the specificity of titles in the field, and unrelated papers are very obviously unrelated.
The problems posed by author's names are much more difficult to overcome.
In the case of BIG and GeoRef, indexing policies have changed over the years, with the result that all possible permutations of authors’ forenames and initials had to be allowed for whilst searching.
This was relatively easy in the published bibliography, but made for many tiresome expansions online.
For Arabic names, and other names with prefixes, it was found that there were inconsistencies in indexing: Al-Haddad appeared correctly in one instance, and on another occasion as Haddad; El-Batroukh appeared in full in the first reference, then as Batroukh, and also as Batrouk.
Moed & Vriens found, in their study of inaccuracies in citations 146 , that the largest single cause of discrepancies was the method of dealing with compound names, such as van, van der, de, Mac, and hyphenated names (some authorities cite under the first part, some under the second, some ignore the hyphen).
The end result is that in some cases, different authors having identical initials have been found.
It is, however, very unlikely that two authors with the same initials would be working within the field of Scottish geology, or of any other small, restricted field of knowledge, so that the figures for related papers are still likely to be reasonably accurate in these cases.
Only the figures for total references published will be in error on such occasions, whilst the figures for related references will be accurate.
The problems posed by authors changing their names are thought to be very limited.
It has been found that all of the women researchers who completed theses under their own names subsequently published under these names.
It is general that, in geology at least, women use their own names professionally.
In two cases, women students married before their theses were completed, used their married names in their theses, and subsequently published under these names.
One author adopted a new name for religious reasons, both being listed on his thesis, but a search of the bibliography under both names failed to discover publications under either.
3.2 Multiple authorships
The extent to which research results are published as jointly-authored papers has exercised a number of workers.
Vlachy 1970 232 , in his study of publication characteristics of research establishments, defined total and fractional productivity, the latter simply derived by dividing joint papers in the ratio of the numbers of authors.
He concluded that those authors who collaborate with others most often, are by far the least prolific.
Vlachy's sample made no distinction between types of researcher, so it is not possible to determine how many of his sample population of papers were derived from theses.
Abelson 1 noticed an increasing trend toward multiple authorship, deriving from the increasing size and cost of large science projects, such as space science and particle physics, where large numbers of people in multi-disciplinary teams are involved in carrying out relatively small numbers of experiments or observations.
The problem of assessing which of the team members has made a large enough contribution to the result to warrant their name appearing in the author list for the published paper is rather difficult.
A count of the related papers from Appendix 5 shows that, of the total of 621 derived papers, 259 were jointly authored (42% of the total).
Restricting the count to the researchers’ first derived papers, the figures are 326 derived papers, 152 jointly authored,(47% of the total).
There is thus a 5% difference in the extent of collaboration between an author's first and subsequent publications.
Looking at this second set, in 82 cases, the researcher is named as first author (54%), whilst in 70 cases, the supervisor is the first author (46%).
The choice seems to depend very much on the individual preferences of the supervisor.
Some supervisors invariably put their own name first in joint publications with their research students, whereas others adopt the opposite style.
It is not possible to identify the proportional contributions of student and supervisor to the publication, in terms of information content, but in the case of mapping assignments, it would be logical to assume that the student performed most of the fieldwork, deriving theoretical insights in later discussion with the supervisor and others.
First papers derived from mapping theses should, if this is the only consideration, either be singly authored, or should cite the researcher first.
This is true in 80% of the first related papers in Appendix 5, where a total of 97 papers (30%) appear to derive from field mapping.
Evans (1989)61 proposes that co-authorship should be restricted to those who have made more than 50% of the contribution to the Ideas, Experimental, or Publication phases of research.
Figure 7
(Evans also suggests in his original diagram that some unscrupulous scientists proceed directly from nascent idea to the writing up, without carrying out the experimental phase).
He ignores the fact that the major argument for including the supervisor's name in papers to which he or she has not made such a contribution is that it is the supervisor's reputation which has attracted the research grant or ensured publication.
Such a contribution cannot be assessed, but assuredly, the research could not take place without it.
Hay & Maddock 93 found joint authorship in only 6% of their sample of thesis-derived research on human geography, which does suggest a different pattern of publication in geography to that in geology.
3.3 Derived and Related Publications
Three hundred and twenty-six authors (59%) published papers which appear, by inspection of their titles, to be related to their theses.
(Abstracts and correspondence were not counted as scientific papers).
Hay & Maddock 93 , in their study of human geography theses, found that 26% of their sampled items were produced as the outcome of postgraduate research, but that eventually 50% of theses lead to publication of their results, including publication in book form.
The slightly lower figure may relate to the more discursive nature of the subject.
Initially, it was hoped that publications directly deriving from theses could be unambiguously identified, but this was not possible.
Too many titles contained terms which were clearly related to terms contained in thesis titles, such as common geographical and stratigraphical names; or regional studies including narrower geographical areas previously studied, but whose precise relationships to the Ph D research became more and more uncertain.
For this reason, the term ‘related publication’ is used for all publications bearing an identifiable relationship to the original research work.
The 326 authors produced a total of 621 related papers, an average of 1.9 related papers per thesis.
This is a much lower figure than Hand 91 found for his sample of 65 entomological theses.
Forty of his theses had led to the publication of 144 derived articles, an average of 3.6 papers per thesis.
The extent to which entomological publication rates are typical of the whole field of biology is unknown, however, and so it would be unwise to use his figures to compare biology with the earth sciences.
It would be desirable to compare lengths of papers in these two fields, and also to determine the extent of repetition or overlap of contents.
The figure is also lower than that derived by Hughes 100 for her single chemistry thesis, where she found elements of the thesis research in five subsequent papers.
This single value cannot be used statistically when comparing chemistry with geology, but it does suggest that some elements of PhD research are diffused into the literature in a much more widespread manner than could be expected by simple inspection of the titles of papers.
By using the chapter and section contents of her chemistry thesis, she listed each piece of information contained in the thesis, and then compared the list with each of the author's published papers in a similar way.
The 36% of the thesis information not published included unclear results, negative results, or information which could neither be slotted into the papers nor aggregated to make a whole paper.
(As with the Hand thesis 91 , an online search of the LISA database failed to find any evidence that Hughes has as yet published her extremely worthwhile research).
The largest number of related papers in the present study is 9.
One hundred and fifty-three authors (47%) produced a single related paper.
The full table follows:
Table 9 Related papers
The staggering fact that 41% of the original researchers have not published papers relating to their original research should lead funding authorities to question the extent to which the research programmes which they sponsored were worthwhile undertaking in the first place.
If the primary purpose of the thesis is to add to knowledge, then failure to publish suggests that nothing new has been added.
If, however, the primary purpose is to train scientists, then the criteria used to select candidates might in future be based on peer review of the departments, and a personal assessment of those candidates, rather than on the putative scientific value of the projects submitted for consideration.
Given that such a view is unlikely to be acceptable to the scientific community, it is suggested that the funding authorities should give consideration to the fundamental purposes underlying Ph D research, and to output measures of the value of such work to the community.
Since publication is one such measure, and one which is relatively easy to determine, a study of the factors leading to non-publication is of potential value to funding bodies.
Some of the factors are described in Section 3.7, which deals with productivity in general.
3.4 Journal of First Publication.
(Abbreviations as per Appendix 5)
Fourteen journals published a total of 2 thesis-related papers each, and 40 Journals published one paper each.
Of the high-ranking journals,Nature is a general scientific journal, and could not be considered a ‘core’ geological journal.
The distribution shows a scattering pattern consistent with Bradford's Law of Scattering, with 50% of the total papers being published in 5 journals, the next 5 journals containing 25%.
One rearrangement of Bradford's Law predicts that 50% of the literature of a subject will be contained in ‘n’ journals, 50% of the remainder in 2n, with successive remainders forming an arithmetic series.
(Useful recent summaries of Bradford's Law and other bibliometric distributions are given by Soyibo and Aiyepeku 209 , and by Bookstein 13b, 13c ).
A chart of the distribution is reproduced as Figure 8.
A very small number of journals publish the bulk of the output from Ph D theses in Scottish geology.
Two-thirds of such derived papers are published in just eight journals.
Excluding Nature , which publishes papers in all of the sciences, this core set of journals is specifically geological, but not specifically Scottish, apart from SJG .
Figure 8 Distribution of publications
3.5 Changes with time
The list of journals was examined by date of publication, to see if there were any trends in journals publishing theses authors’ initial scientific contributions.
This is charted as Figure 9,Journal of First Publication .
It is clear that the relative positions of Geological Magazine and Proceedings of the Geologists Association have declined in the proportion of thesis-related material published, and that the Scottish Journal of Geology became the primary vehicle for first publication of research results derived from Ph D theses in Scottish geology as soon as it began publishing in 1965.
There is no measurable trend in the proportion publishing in specialist journals or in other ‘one-off’ publications, such as conference proceedings and books.
About one-fifth of all theses result in papers which are on subjects considered inappropriate for the ‘core’ journals.
Figure 9 Journal of first derived publication.
In the nineteenth century, and in the early years of the twentieth century, there was a high output of geological publication in the form of irregular monographic serials (Menard 142 ).
Later, at least in the United States, State and Federal Geological Surveys published a proportionally greater number of papers.
Thus the 1927 study by Wentworth & Apfel 237 , and the 1931 study by Gross & Woodford 86 , both of which listed the journals most frequently used by American geologists, contain relatively small numbers of journals which still occupy the same high standing in the profession today.
(Although Haner 92 found in 1985 that citations of US Geological Survey journals averaged 16% of all citations in seven American geological journals).
Similarly in Britain, the early literature consisted of learned, academic books, which later gave way to the many systematic publications of the Geological Survey, only now superseded by research published in commercial scientific journals.
Craig 43 , conducting a survey of 30 Scottish geologists, found that one-third of the papers considered most important in geology were major reviews, rather than primary research papers.
The abundance of such papers, estimated by the American Geological Institute, was at that time (1969) between two and five per cent of the geological literature, whereas their impact on readers was about ten times higher.
3.6 Correlation of University and Journal.
The following tables attempt to show correlations between the researcher's university and the journal which first publishes his or her research.
(The tables relate only to those universities which have produced more than 10 theses on Scottish geology).
Table 11 — analysis of individual journals.
Table 11b Nature
Edinburgh, Oxford, Cambridge and Durham published most ‘first’ related papers in Nature .
On examination of the papers, it would appear that many of these Nature papers are geophysical in subject.
This aspect will be discussed further in Chapter 6.
Table 11c Geological Magazine
University PhDs Papers Percent Rank
This journal has a long and distinguished history, publishing mainly shorter papers on a wide spread of subjects.
Liverpool and Glasgow published in this journal preferentially.
Table 11d Journal of the Geological Society (of London)
University PhDs Papers Percent Rank
Sheffield, Cambridge, Liverpool and London, appear to prefer to publish first in this Journal.
The Geological Society of London is the largest geological society in the UK, and its journal, through its antecedent titles, can claim to be the world's oldest geological journal.
Its subject coverage is mainstream geology, and its geographical interests are world-wide.
The editorial policies admit of no bias towards publishing papers on the geology of the British Isles, and so the high proportion of papers on Scottish geology reflects the intrinsic interest of the subject.
Table 11e Mineralogical Magazine
Mineralogy is a rather specialist sub-field within the earth sciences, dealing with the description of minerals.
London is the major university for mineralogical studies on Scottish rocks, whereas Oxford and Cambridge, both of which have Departments of Mineralogy, tend to research in other geographical areas.
Table 11f Proceedings of the Geologists Association
University PhDs Papers Percent Rank
London's students published extensively in this Journal, but the proportion has declined with time, as the Association's rle has changed.
It seems now to be less concerned with the publication of primary research results, and more involved with papers which reflect the interests of the membership, which includes undergraduates, teachers, and lay members.
The data can also be sorted by university, and journal, to show differences in publication patterns.
The following table ranks the major journals (publishing five or more of the researchers’ first related papers), within each of the major research centres in Scottish geology.
Table 12 University publishing priorities in Scottish geology (numbers of first related papers in brackets)
The Scottish Journal of Geology is the highest ranking journal for publication of researchers’ first papers within the Scottish universities, and it is also the highest ranked at Liverpool University, and the Colleges of the University of Wales.
It is the second-ranked journal in London.
In contrast, it is one of the lowest-ranked of the major journals at Durham, and Sheffield's students have not yet published any first papers derived from PhD research in it.
Nature is the highest-ranked journal at Cambridge, Durham, Newcastle and Oxford.
Edinburgh, London and Oxford have the largest amount of subject spread within the listed journals.
Each of these universities has produced published research in geography, geology, palaeontology, and geophysics.
This reflects the overall size of these departments, and the fact that all of them appear to have the resources to cover all of the earth science sub-disciplines in depth.
Geophysics is a strongly featured subfield in Durham, and palaeontology at Newcastle.
The small number of first papers published in high-ranking journals by Dundee and Strathclyde universities suggests either that both departments place relatively limited importance on publication in such journals, or that the work itself was not suitable for publication in them.
In view of the numbers of theses produced by both universities, it seems that the latter hypothesis is the more likely.
Unsuitability might mean that these universities are researching in areas not covered by the mainstream journals, but inspection of the thesis titles does not support this.
This data, together with the data on productivity described below, suggests that the research work carried out in the geology departments of these universities is of a lower standard than that of the other Scottish universities.
3.7 Productivity
3.7.1 Publications
One hundred researchers (18%) have not, as yet, published any papers since the completion of their theses.
Defining categories as Unproductive (Total References = 0); Low productivity (1-5 papers within 5 years of completion); Medium productivity (6-15 papers within 5 years of completion); and High productivity (16 or more papers within 5 years) without being judgemental (there are, after all, many factors involved), it is possible to determine which Universities have produced the most productive, and which the least productive, researchers.
Productivity varies widely, one researcher having produced more than 100 papers, with 77 (14%) publishing a single paper, and 105 (19%) writing more than 20.
This Table (Table 13) is also reproduced graphically as Figure 10 using 100% stacked bars (chosen to make proportional comparisons easier).
Cambridge produces the highest proportion of Highly-productive researchers in the field, whereas Aberdeen, Newcastle, Dundee, St Andrews and Strathclyde produce the highest proportion of Unproductive and Low-productivity researchers.
As Hagstrom 88 has stated, publications are the most important predictors of departmental prestige.
Whilst peers may not read everything written in their field, they do at least know who is writing.
Craig 43 in his 1969 study, found that, in an experiment conducted in three Scottish geological departments, 76% of papers were read by title only, whereas only 4% of the papers were read in full.
Crane, however, argues 45 that affiliation to a prestigious university is more likely to lead to recognition for a scientist than higher productivity.
The above data suggests that there is a positive correlation between the prestige of a university and the productivity of its researchers.
Gaston 70 came to similar conclusions in a study of peer review, although he cautioned that the relationship between productivity and recognition is not straightforward.
The complication here is that the total time period is more than 20 years, and obviously the earlier workers will have had time to publish many more papers than those finishing their studies in recent years, but the dataset is so large that such effects will be the same for all universities, i.e. they will be self-cancelling.
Cole and Meyer 35 found that early productivity is a good rough predictor of later productivity.
It is therefore likely that Unproductive and Low-Productivity researchers will remain so throughout their scientific careers, and that the Highly-Productive earth scientists from Cambridge will continue to publish more papers than average in the course of their work.
Table 13 — Productivity
Figure 10 — Output measures — Productivity (publications)
Table 14 Productivity — Publications per researcher per year.
Oxford, Cambridge, and Durham researchers tend to be more prolific than the others.
These results can be cross-tabulated with the journal ranking lists in Tables 11a to 11f, to show that the high productivity correlates with the ranking of the journals in which such students first publish their results.
Oxford, Durham, Cambridge, Newcastle and Edinburgh (in that order) publish high proportions of first papers in Nature , and these universities are also amongst the highest scoring in terms of productivity.
Speculations on the reasons for such a correlation include the following possibilities:
1.
these universities may have higher intake standards for research workers;
2.
their supervision and training methods result in higher pressure to publish;
3.
the research topics lend themselves to publication in Nature rather than to other journals;
4.
the university departments concerned may be perceived by the journal's referees to have higher status than others; or,
5.
some combination of the above factors makes them different from the rest.
Menard 142 says that a typical rate for productive scientists is three papers per year.
It is not clear, however, whether he was referring to his own (earth science) field, or to an average value for all the sciences.
In a whole career, he states that:
‘a specialist in a slow sub-field…is required to write 20 papers to qualify as an ordinarily productive scientist, and more than 80 to be considered prolific’
Abelson 1 regards a reasonable rate of publication for an established investigator as an annual rate of two to three papers, rising to four or five when ‘a hot field is discovered’.
The 550 researchers in the present study published a total of 6490 papers over the total period covered.
This produces an average of 11.8 papers per researcher, but because the papers were published over different time periods, an average annual publication rate cannot be calculated from this figure.
Additionally, most published publication counts refer to active practitioners, rather than to Ph D students, many of whom cease to be active in the subject field of their training.
For the 448 researchers who have published papers traced in the bibliography, i.e. excluding those who have not published any papers indexed in this source, the average annual publication rate is 1.06 papers per year; this figure being obtained by averaging the values of ‘References per year’ in the database.
One of the major bibliometric distributions for publication data is Lotka's Law, which relates the numbers of authors,f  , to the numbers of papers they publish,y  , to establish productivity figures.
A simple plot of f against y is reproduced as Figure 11.
(Three authors publishing more than 100 papers each have been omitted from this graph).
Plotting log (f  )vs .
log (y ) should produce a straight line graph (Bookstein 13a, 13b ).
In the present case, when this was attempted using the figures for total publications by thesis authors in the present study, Figure 12 was obtained.
The scatter at the high end — small numbers of authors publishing large numbers of papers — is so large that a straight line cannot be fitted to this graph with any degree of confidence.
Restricting the data to the related papers listed in Table 9 does, however, produce a straight-line curve, Figure 13.
This suggests that Lotka's Law has limitations at the extremes, but since the Law is related to Normal Distribution statistics, this should perhaps have been expected.
The extremes of a statistical distribution represent unpredictably rare individual events, which have very low values of statistical probability.
Most productivity measures, such as Lotka's Law, depend on size-frequency distributions (Hubert 99 ), based on numbers of authors.
Hubert has suggested that a rank-frequency model, based on ranked tables of authors according to their productivity, should give results which are independent of the total size of the population sampled.
In the present study, it has not been possible to create equal size-classes of productivity values, for the purposes of preparing such rankings.
(An alternative expression of Lotka's Law derived by Kyvik 114 is that the number of scientists producing n papers is proportional to 1/n 2 .
Applying this variant would reduce the scatter at the high end, since the values of log (1/n 2 ) would be approximately half those of log (1/n), but the scatter is still too large to permit an unequivocal statement that the data fits a Lotka distribution).
Figure 11 Papers against authors
Figure 12 Lotka distribution — Logarithmic plot
Figure 13 Lotka distribution — related papers only
3.7.2 Reasons for low productivity
Most researchers complete a Ph D and then go on to take up full-time employment.
For those who move to teaching posts in universities, their research time, and their access to libraries and other facilities, often enables them to rewrite their thesis research into a form suitable for journal publication relatively quickly, and to then have it published.
In 1986, however, only 31% of all newly qualified Ph D graduates took up university employment (Anderson 2 ), and the boom period for academic jobs was around 1965, when 53% of all such researchers found employment in universities, so that it may be that the majority of successful Ph D researchers over the period have not had access to those facilities which would have helped them to publish.
Craig 43 argues that a thesis should be succinctly written in the form of a scientific paper, so that it can be published without delay, after refereeing.
(His views derived from his experience in two roles, as a Professor of Geology at Edinburgh University, and as the editor of scientific journals).
Such a situation could only come about if researchers are encouraged to at least prepare for publication, if not to actually publish, papers on their research whilst they are still in the environs of the university.
If it is left until later, the chances are that external pressures will reduce the possibilities of publication.
3.7.2 .1 Career moves
For those researchers going into industry, or moving abroad, becoming unemployed, taking career breaks for family reasons, or going into unrelated fields, the situation is much more difficult.
The pressures of a full-time job, and the lack of availability of research facilities such as libraries, computers, personal contacts with academics, as described above, inevitably result in some degree of non-publication of thesis research.
Some of the returns from Taylor's questionnaire 216 drew attention to these problems, one in particular reporting that another year of full-time work would be required to bring the thesis work up to standard and up to date.
Scientists in the academic community achieve recognition, advancement, and success in attracting funding by publication, whereas some of those working in industry or defence are neither encouraged nor expected to contribute to the publicly available literature (Gilbert 1978 74 ).
Whilst geological studies were employed during the last War, in surveys of landing beaches, roadway planning, water supply, bridges etc., the number of geologists involved was very small, and the situation today is unlikely to be greatly different, although for security reasons the numbers are not published.
Industrial geologists, however, form a larger part of the pool of geological manpower.
Many are involved in hydrocarbon (oil and gas) exploration and development; a number in coal geology; whilst many others are involved in other mineral extraction industries.
Even if such geologists are still employed in areas related to their university research, there can be commercial pressures not to publish.
Where commercial advantage is possible, patents are normally the means by which such information becomes publicly available, albeit in a form not typical of conventional publication in scientific papers.
If geologists in industry are slow to publish, relative to academic geologists, then in most cases the reason will be pressure of work.
The fact that so many do publish, as evidenced by the numbers of papers in the Bulletin of the American Association of Petroleum Geologists, or Geophysical Prospecting, indicates the close ties between their current work, and the need to advance their careers by publishing papers related to that work, rather than to their previous research.
For those moving to different countries, there is also the problem of lack of access to the study area — so important for checking findings.
The University Grants Committee said in 1987 226 that there are 200 new earth science PhD students each year in the UK, and that 50 of these students were from overseas.
It would be unrealistic to expect the majority of researchers from overseas to maintain their UK research interests when they return to their country of origin, or move elsewhere, as many of them do, to the extent that they would wish to complete a paper or papers based on their UK findings.
A large proportion of our researchers are therefore unlikely to make major contributions to the literature of their research area.
It is wholly admirable that this country can provide research facilities and educational expertise to overseas students, but the value of their work to this country may consist solely of the funding which they bring with them, the esteem in which they hold this country's institutions when they have returned home, and their subsequent contacts and consultancies.
It is suggested that such students should be encouraged to publish during the tenure of their studentships, so that new findings may be incorporated quickly and permanently into the literature of the subject.
Within Scotland, the largest proportions of overseas researchers on Scottish geology are in Strathclyde and Dundee, and it may very well be that the difficulties such researchers experience in publishing their results account in part for the low productivity of these departments compared to those in other universities.
3.7.2 .2 Rejections
Undoubtedly, however, some papers are written and subsequently rejected by the editors of journals as being of an insufficiently high standard.
Papers published in this country are generally refereed anonymously, and many editors are reluctant to publish acceptance rates for papers submitted to their journals.
Assuming, however, that since the highest-ranked journal for the publication of Scottish geological research is the Scottish Journal of Geology (SJG), then that journal's rejected papers do contain some derived from thesis research.
Discussion with the publisher (Grant, D.,pers. comm .)
revealed that, of almost 1000 papers submitted since 1964, 72% had been published.
This is, by any standard, a very high rate of acceptance.
On the other hand, for a non-specialist journal such as Nature , the average figure is closer to 10% acceptance (Maddox, J.,pers. comm .),
with the proviso that some subject areas, such as the earth sciences, have higher acceptance rates than others.
The American journal Science , which in many ways occupies a similar position to Nature , has an acceptance rate of 18% (Abelson 1 ).
The prime reason for non-acceptance is given as the cost of publishing, which in 1990 was approximately $1000 per page.
MacRae 128 states that high institutionalization of the ranking criteria in a given discipline may be inferred from low rejection rates.
Thus, in the case of Scottish geology, we are probably considering a very rigid and tightly circumscribed subject area, within which research programmes lead to publication in a very limited number of journals.
Rejected manuscripts are often re-submitted to different journals, and Abelson 1 , who was editor of Science for 23 years, found that 85% of such papers, rejected by Science , appeared elsewhere within two years.
It is suspected that such a high figure would only apply to non-specialist journals such as Nature and Science , which rapidly report results at the forefront of science, and that the rejected papers were later accepted by specialist journals publishing less urgent research.
The average rejection rate per journal could be used as a weighting factor in assessing the impact of a particular thesis, or indeed paper, but it would be difficult to be totally certain that the comparison criteria had objective validity.
Because of the differences in objectives, content, specialisation, publication frequency, readership and circulation sizes, among other factors, it would not be valid to compare measures of acceptance rates between Nature and the Scottish Journal of Geology to infer the relative impacts of papers published in these two journals.
Personal prefernce plays a significant part in the choice of journal to which papers are submitted.
Holmes, for example, whose textbook ‘Principles of physical geology’ was used by generations of geology students, once had a paper rejected by the Geological Society of London, and thereafter refused to submit any papers to any of that body's journals, throughout a very long and prolific career.
To return to the theses, even in the case of the 68 thesis-derived first papers appearing in SJG , this is still under 10% of the total content of the journal over the time period.
It is felt that this is too small a sample to give a meaningful impact weighting factor derived in this manner, since, if the rejection figure for thesis-derived papers is the same as for all papers, this would only amount to two or three papers (27% of 10%).
Impact factors for citation measures will be discussed in Chapter 5.
3.7.3 Non-related publications
Six thousand, four hundred and ninety papers had been published by the thesis authors up to the end of 1987.
Of these, 621 were related to their theses (nearly 10%).
One hundred and twenty-two researchers have published papers which are not related to their PhD theses.
This is ‘% of the total number of researchers.
It would be reasonable to assume that such researchers had adopted new research interests, had changed occupations, or had moved to different localities.
In all of these cases, the failure to publish the results of their research would be due to changes of circumstance which are quite understandable.
It could be argued, however, that if a PhD really is expected to be in part a contribution to knowledge, then this factor should be built into the system, so that the information gathered in such a costly fashion should be published in some form before completion, as is expected in some other European countries, such as Germany and the Netherlands.
Sir Peter Swinnerton-Dyer, Chairman of the UGC, said in 1983 213 that:
‘…there are many Ph Ds whose working career has borne little relation to the subject of their thesis, however potent the contribution of research training has been to their intellectual and practical development.’
3.7.4 Non-publication
One hundred and two researchers (18.5%) published no papers at all(or at least none were recorded in the bibliographies searched) in the period between 1960 and 1987.
The following table shows the proportions of non-publishing researchers at the universities which have a major interest in Scottish geology.
Table 15 Non-publishing researchers
University Non-publishers Proportion (%)
In the cases of Newcastle, Strathclyde, Aberdeen and Dundee geology departments, more than one-third of the students who have undertaken Ph D research in Scottish geology have not published any papers, related or otherwise, in the time period under review.
This output measure suggests that there are factors operating in these departments which are very different from those operating in Durham, Oxford, Birmingham, Wales, and Cambridge, all of which have produced less than 10% of Unproductive researchers.
Differences in research funding, project selection, resources and their allocation and management, intake standards, supervision, training and assessment standards, and emphasis on publication, are factors which may be affecting productivity.
3.7.5 Non-submission.
Anderson 2 states that 42% of students supported by the Science and Engineering Research Council (SERC) on three-year studentships fail to submit a thesis within four years.
This has led the funding bodies (SERC, NERC, Agricultural and Medical Research Councils) to introduce a sanctions policy, whereby departments will be penalized, by the withholding of research grants, where more than a given proportion of their students fail to submit theses.
3.7.6 Productivity — Summary
Almost one-fifth of the sample have failed to publish any papers on any subject after completion of their PhD, and another fifth have not published anything related to their research areas.
These figures are for those researchers actually finishing their work and submitting a successful thesis, and they do not include those who failed to complete their research, or who failed to reach the required standard for the granting of the Ph D degree.
At some stage a funding body has assessed the potential worth of a project, and research grants have been made available for it, but the lack of incentive to publish, or the difficulties encountered in preparing work for publication, have resulted in the fact that two-fifths of the work has not been made use of by the scientific community, except possibly through consultations of the original theses,(which will be discussed in Chapter 4).
The 41% of theses which do not lead to publication compares with Hand's 38% for entomology 91 .
Hayes 94 draws attention to the importance of the American PhD programme in creating an environment that encourages publication.
If the rates for non-publication in entomology and in the present study are so similar, then extrapolation to other scientific disciplines within the UK university system suggests that far too little importance is attached to the dissemination of research results in this country by the bodies funding such research.
3.8 Delays.
Sixty-three per cent of papers derived from theses in chemistry were published in the year following the deposit of the theses, according to Bottle 14 .
He further states that in agricultural science, the mean publication delay was 12 months.
Delay figures extracted from the present databases showed that in 82 cases,(25%), related papers were published before the date of completion of the thesis.
The modal value is one year after completion (48 theses — 11%), which is also very close to the mean value of 1.3 years.
This proportion is lower than that in chemistry, and reflects a slightly larger spread of values about the mode in geology.
The histogram (Figure 14) follows a Normal Distribution, with a Standard Deviation () of 2.9.
Eighty-two per cent of the papers are published within one standard deviation on either side of the mean.
For comparison, Hand 91 used a nine-year period, with four years on either side of the thesis year.
The current study shows that Hand is likely to have retrieved the vast majority of derived papers, and it is suggested that studies in other subject fields would be statistically safe in limiting themselves to similar time periods.
Hay & Maddock 93 , in their study of theses on human geography, found that the modal value was 0, i.e. the largest number of thesis-derived papers were published in the actual year of thesis deposit.
Those theses with related papers being published several years before submission were presented for the degree of D Sc, which, as previously described, is granted on the basis of a scientist's record of published work in a subject field.
Figure 14 Time between thesis date and the date of the first related paper.
The following table shows differences in average delay between universities.
Table 16 Delays in publication
There appears to be no correlation between productivity and publication delays across universities, indeed some of the low-productivity departments have smaller average delays than some highly productive centres.
It is more likely that delays are specific to the journals to which papers are submitted, and that if there are differences in publishing ‘behaviour’ between departments (See 3.6 above), then these are probably the major factors influencing delays.
Society and other academic journals tend to have longer periods between acceptance of their papers and publication than commercial journals.
Commercial journals, particularly the weeklies and monthlies, can take rapid decisions, and have a faster turn-round time.
Science, for example, has an average publication delay period of 14 weeks (Abelson 1 ).
The one anomalous department in Table 16 is Sheffield, where the mean value is negative, i.e. more researchers publish before completion of their theses.
The reasons could perhaps only be determined by interview, as supervisor pressure may well be the factor operating here.
Increasing publication delays encourage the proliferation of journal titles because of the frustration of scientists, due in some part to their increasing need to demonstrate productivity through publication in order to attract funding.
If there is sufficient agreement amongst members of specialist interest groups (‘invisible colleges’) that delays in publication within their fields are at unacceptable levels, then commercial publishers are generally willing to establish new journals which will reduce overall delays by increasing the total numbers of papers published.
If journals become too large, they may split, in a process called twigging, to produce new specialist journals.
Garfield has described twigging as the inexorable result of realignments in the organization of disciplines 67 .
Geology as a whole has experienced literature growth in line with the other sciences.
The development of new sub-fields by division due to increased specialisation, and by the merging of fields to produce multi-disciplinary studies, has resulted in the publication of new journals which reflect the changes in the ways in which the science has developed.
The Journal of the Geological Society published less than 300 pages annually until 1956, but by 1985 the same journal was publishing 1200 pages per year (Lebas 121 ).
(The page size was constant during this period, but changed, along with the frequency of issue, after that year).
The literature of Scottish geology, however, whilst it has grown in terms of numbers of papers, has not resulted in any increase in the numbers of journals devoted to it (except for the Scottish Journal of Geology ), but has grown by taking up more space in existing journals, and by expanding into areas covered by new, multidisciplinary journals, such as Precambrian Research, Chemical Geology, Tectonophysics, and similar publications.
The pressures to publish in science have led to the publication of series of fragmentary reports on research (Abelson 1 ) and to the production of new journals to contain such reports, which have been termed the ‘least publishable units’.
Averaging delay statistics over the same four equal time periods used in Chapter 2, Table 3, provides clear evidence for a reduction in publication delays in recent years.
Table 17.
Average publication delays.
Attention has already been drawn to one of the objectives in establishing the Scottish Journal of Geology in 1965, which was the rapid publication of results of research in Scottish geology carried out in universities, so that this may account in part for the halving of the average delay period after 1965, but subsequent reductions must be due to other factors.
Pressure to publish is accepted as a normal feature of research work, but publication of Ph D results before or very soon after completion of the thesis has increased considerably in the period after 1977.
Changes in research management and research funding are the likeliest causes of the changes in publication patterns.
Inversnaid
This darksome burn, horseback brown,
His rollrock highroad roaring down,
In coop and in comb the fleece of his foam
Flutes and low to the lake falls home.
A windpuff-bonnet of fawn-froth
Turns and twindles over the broth
Of a pool so pitchblack, fell frowning,
It rounds and rounds Despair to drowning.
Degged with dew, dappled with dew
Are the groins of the braes that the brook treads through,
Wiry heathpacks, flitches of fern,
And the beadbonny ash that sits over the burn.
What would the world be, once bereft
Of wet and of wildness?
Let them be left,
O let them be left, wildness and wet;
Long live the weeds and the wilderness yet.
Gerard Manley Hopkins, 1844-1889
Title Page:
Hortus Medicus Edinburgensis: or, A Catalogue of the Plants in the Physical Garden at Edinburgh, containing their most proper Latin and English names; with an English alphabetical index.
By Mr James Sutherland, Intendant of the said Garden.
Edinburgh, Printed by the Heir of Andrew Anderson, and to be sold by Mr Henry Ferguson Seed-Merchant, at the head of Black-Friar-Wynd, and at the Physical Garden by the Author, Anno DOM.
1683
Dimensions: Height 171 mm, Width 110 mm
Binding: Rebound in modern brown leather, raised bands, gold lettering.
The book has a Royal Botanic Garden Library stamp on the inside end-paper which also bears the hand-written class-mark F39A
Proposed Journal Cuts
In addition to any proposed cuts, I'd like to suggest the following amendments to our Acquisitions Policy:
1.
Staff may wish to consider passing on to the library copies of any newsletters which they receive as part of society memberships.
In general, the library will not subscribe to newsletters or other ephemera without good scientific justification.
2.
The Library will not provide multiple copies of books or journals, for individual Departments on the Inverleith site, but will purchase only Library copies.
If Departments need additional copies of publications, they should make their own purchasing arrangements.
Duplicate copies for the specialist gardens are not affected.
 Sheila 
Scottish Training Week
In addition to the note I gave you about the AO Development course, we've been discussing the range of courses available, and we've come up with the following ‘wants list’.
Mary Davidson: Time Management 8th September £95
Kate Kloyd: Customer awareness, 7th Sept, £45 ea.
Hannah Smith:
Thanks
For Staff Bulletin
SERIALS LIBRARIAN
Following the resignation of Mrs Lesley Taylor, there is a vacancy in the Library for a Serials Librarian (Assistant Librarian grade).
The post is open to Chartered or otherwise qualified librarians (Associateship of the Library Association or post-graduate qualification in librarianship).
Written applications, together with a CV and the names of two referees, should be sent to the Garden Secretary by 15th December.
Interviews will be held in January.
Further details are available from Colin Will.
Visitor Survey Database.
I have checked my PC thoroughly, and I confirm that there is no trace of the above database on it under PARADOX.
I have concluded that either a) the database was saved only to a floppy disk and taken away by your student, or b) it was a WORKS database and was irretrievably lost when my hard disk crashed last year.
Either way, I don't have it, and I have no way of checking, since, as you will recall, your student only did the work when I wasn't around, out of hours and when I was on leave.
I can't seem to find a copy of any report which was produced as a result of this survey, and I have no recollection of ever having received a copy, but presumably it would contain enough data for your new placement student to re-input.
Sorry if this sounds hopelessly vague and unhelpful, and unlike my (I hope) usual efficient self, but these are trying times.
Welfare Services
Staff are reminded of the following welfare services available to them:
1.
Welfare Liaison Officers
Staff may seek a confidential interview with Colin Will (ext 267) or Sheila Geddes (ext 263) concerning personal problems which may be affecting their work.
These officers can provide basic counselling and assessment services, and they also have the contacts to refer staff to external welfare services where professional services are needed.
They can also assist when staff are referred by line managers in the event of known or suspected personal problems which may be affecting work performance, time-keeping, attendance, and morale issues.
Confidentiality is assured, unless the interviewee requests the Welfare Officer to liaise with line or other management staff.
The range of personal problems which these officers can assist in is not restricted, and it includes bereavement, illness, drug and alcohol dependence, relationships, depression, gender issues, and debt counselling.
2.
Garden Secretary
For information and queries concerning sick-absence, pay advances, special leave, official complaints, discipline, and all other institutional personnel matters, contact Margaret Gallagher (ext 254).
Mrs Gallagher is also the contact point for referrals to the Scottish Office Occupational Health Service.
Formal disciplinary matters and complaints are dealt with by the Garden Secretary.
The services to be provided are as follows:
1.
To provide a confidential counselling service to staff and students of the Royal Botanic Garden Edinburgh (RBGE).
2.
To assess and provide onward referral for individuals to specialist agencies, where it is reasonably considered that the individual's personal difficulties adversely affect their functioning at work.
3.
To be available for consultation by RBGE Welfare Liaison Officer and other staff with managerial roles.
4.
To advise on the systemic effects of organisational management.
5.
(new) To advise on suitable training programmes for RBGE counselling staff, and on general staff training as it affects staff welfare.
The conditions under which the service is to be provided are as follows:
1.
The content of individual sessions must be kept confidential.
2.
Opinion on an individual's functioning can only be given to others with that person's consent.
3.
Contact with the service cannot be used in disciplinary proceedings.
4.
RBGE is interested in the well-being of its staff and students, and in their functioning in the Garden.
If individuals have personal difficulties that do not impinge on their functioning at work they can be assessed under this agreement: the individual would then be referred to an appropriate specialist agency for ongoing work outside the agreement, on a personal basis and without commitment on RBGE's part.
Health and Safety — Workstation Assessments
A new EC Directive on ‘Display screen equipment work’ comes into force on 1 January, 1993.
We are required to carry out an assessment of all workstations, and this work will be carried out during December 1992 and January 1993.
(The Regulations define a ‘workstation’ broadly as display screen equipment, accessories, peripherals and the immediate work environment around the equipment).
All new workstations installed from 1st January 1993 will have to comply with the Regulations from the outset, and pre-existing workstations must be brought up to the standard by the end of 1996.
As part of the formal assessment, which is complex and thorough, all workstation users are asked to complete the attached Self-Assessment Check-list and return it to C Will by 31 December.
You will then receive a follow-up visit from the person carrying out the assessment, who will also carry out a hardware and software inventory at the same time.
Health & Safety — Workstation Assessments.
We have now completed the assessment of actual workstations, but as you will be aware, many of the PCs in Garden Departments are multi-user machines.
To complete our user records, which the EC Directive also obliges us to keep and up-date, could you please, as Horticultural representative on the Computing Sub-Group, co-ordinate a response from AD, GD and HD as to the names of all operators who are estimated to spend at least one hour per day working at a multi-user PC as part of their normal duties (I've already got user names for single-user machines).
I am sending similar notes to David Chamberlain and Stephan Helfer in respect of their multi-user communities.
Can I suggest the end of February as a closing date?
Please let me know if this will cause any difficulty.