

One
She disgusts me.
I can't help it.
She sits in that bloody chair and drools like a baby and makes as much sense.
I'm the one who makes sure food gets in one end and I'm the one who has to clear up at the other.
She's my own mother and she disgusts me.
I know I shouldn't feel this way.
She brought me up and I should be grateful and not mind about all this.
It's only doing what's right.
But at least she knew her kids were going to grow up: I know nothing's going to change for the better with her.
She's a great leech, sucking all my energy out and I can't stand it.
I wish she'd die.
There, I've said it.
I suppose I should say that it's because it would be best for her but of course it isn't, it's because it would be best for me.
I know she only dribbles because of the stroke, I know that, but it doesn't help.
I clean her up but she just gets in a mess again.
More and more I don't bother — she doesn't know and there's usually no-one else to see so what difference does it make?
This morning it had snowed and there were fat pillows of it weighing down branches.
You could see little footsteps where next-door's cat had crossed the garden and gone over the fence.
My breath was like dragon smoke as I filled the kettle.
The kitchen radiator doesn't work and the Calorgas fire hadn't warmed the place up yet.
I began to wonder about how long hypothermia takes to kill someone, I mean what if I left Mum there overnight — would that be long enough?
I could say that she must have gone wandering.
She does that sometimes, or at least she did until I started locking her door.
I could always hear her moving around; her stroke left her clumsy in the house she's supposed to know.
Last night she banged on her door, slurring her words like a drunk; demanding to be let out, I thought.
Just occasionally she has these lucid moments where she's suddenly there again but it doesn't mean anything, it's just a chance set of connections in what's left of her brain that soon gets lost.
This wasn't one of those, though.
‘It's time to get up,’ she was saying, ‘Come along, I'll not tell you again.
You'll be late for school.’
When she stopped her feeble battering I took her some tea topped up with a couple of powdered sleeping pills.
She was sitting calmly in bed like that's where she'd been all the time.
‘I've brought you a lovely cup of tea, Mum,’ I said.
‘Drink it up now, you know you like it nice and hot.’
‘I do not,’ she said and pushed at me as I put the tea down.
A lick of tea stung the back of my hand.
I grabbed her wrist.
‘What do you think you're up to?’
I demanded.
Her bones felt light and brittle.
‘Ooh, let go me arm,’ she wailed, ‘You're hurting!’
I let go and gave her a clip round the ear.
‘There,’ I said, ‘That'll give you something to think about.’
She looked at me and I thought I saw something stirring in her watery blue eyes but it was just a random current fizzing somewhere.
‘Drink up, Mum, you know you like it nice and hot,’ I said.
She drank it in that irritating slurpy way, dribbling tea onto her nightie.
I tucked her in and took the empty cup to the kitchen.
I caught sight of myself in that reflected window world that you can only see when it's dark outside.
I wondered if there was anyone out there looking in.
I make sure Mum looks presentable on Mondays and Thursdays.
That's when Mrs Marsh from over the road comes and sits with her while I get to the shops.
Mrs Marsh thinks Mum's ‘a real lovey’.
She thinks I'm ‘a real angel’.
She'll be here soon and I still have to decide what to wear today.
I'm only forty odd and I really don't look too bad when I make the effort.
Not that any man would be interested in me with a handicap like Mum.
But out there no-one knows.
I like moving in anonymous crowds of people: then I can be anyone I want.
Before I go to the supermarket, I usually stop off for a drink; I sit at the bar and watch the real world go by.
The barman is a dish — broad shoulders, twinkling eyes.
He talks to me nicely, like he really sees me.
I'll wear the blue dress with the lace trim and pretty pearly  buttons.
Upstairs, I lay my things out ready.
There's something in one of the pockets.
I don't believe it — it's a bit of half-chewed meat with peas mixed in with it, and the lump is covered with a fine hairy mould.
The pocket's all stained and that's mouldy too.
I must have left my door open, and I'm usually so careful.
I feel like she's done this deliberately, though she probably didn't even know where she was.
I know there's an explanation and it's that she isn't responsible.
But I want to scream and scream and smack her stupid face away, just wipe her out and have my things to myself.
I must be calm now or I won't enjoy my outing.
I put on my black wool suit and my best silk blouse as consolation — might as well, before she somehow manages to ruin that, too.
The bell rings and as I approach the front door I can see Mrs Marsh through the frosted glass.
She blocks out most of the light, she's so fat.
‘Hello dear,’ she wheezes, ‘And how are you today?’
Same as I always bloody am.
And that living, breathing, empty shell is the bloody same too.
‘Not so bad, thank you,’ I reply and lead the way through.
I can hear her breathing and the sound of her monstrous thighs struggling past one another.
‘And how's my lovey?’ she says.
Mum smiles vaguely and then says to her, ‘Aren't you going to introduce your friend, then?’
‘Oh come now, lovey,’ chortles Mrs Marsh, ‘You know your own daughter.’
‘Yes, I do,’ says Mum.
‘But who's this?’
This could go on for hours.
‘I have to go,’ I say and go to the hall for my coat.
I can't face going back in.
‘I'll see you later,’ I call.
‘Ta-ta, dear,’ says Mrs Marsh.
I can hear Mum's voice wittering in the background.
I'm finally walking away from the house.
These shoes aren't very practical but they go so well with the suit.
I just have to be careful as I pick my way past the grubby piles of snow at the edges of the pavement.
My skin feels surprised at the sharpness of the cold.
At the bus stop the breath of the queue is like a row of factory chimneys.
The walk to the town centre is long enough to invigorate me and short enough to avoid getting miserable from the cold.
The pub's reasonably quiet.
Jack's pulling a pint and I nip into the loo.
My nose is pink but a bit of powder soon fixes that.
Some lipstick, a quick squirt of Chanel and I'm ready.
‘You look very nice,’ he says.
‘Something special lined up?’
Yes, you.
I dress for you when I come to town.
I want you to notice me.
‘No, no,’ I reply, ‘It's just what came to hand.’
‘And very nice, too.
Now what can I get you?
The usual?’
I watch him while he fetches it.
He's wearing a crisp white shirt that makes him look tanned.
He sets my gin and orange down.
‘That'll be one pound thirty please.’
To prolong the moment I fish about in my purse like the amount is a surprise.
‘How's your mum?’ he asks.
‘What?’
How does he know that about me?
‘Your mum.
I hear you look after her at home.
I hope everything's okay.’
Oh you hear it, do you?
Jesus Christ.
I can see Jack looking at me across acres of bar, waiting for a reply.
My cover's blown; that woman's ruined everything for me just as sure as if she was standing next to me dribbling down her front and complaining about ration books.
‘Yes,’ I manage to squeeze out.
‘Thanks for asking.’
‘Well, we must look after the old folk,’ he says fatuously and I notice he's sweating.
He's running to fat, too.
‘Indeed we must,’ I say.
I take my drink to a table and sit staring at my shopping list as though it's the most fascinating thing in the world.
I notice a greasy smear on my glass.
They can't even serve you a drink in a clean glass: I don't think I'll come here again.
When I get home Mrs Marsh has polished off half the biscuits in the tin and the teapot is all but empty.
Mum is fast asleep in her  chair.
As Mrs Marsh unwedges herself from her seat, Mum wakes up and looks at me sharply.
‘Well?’ she says as though she's been waiting a long time.
‘Aren't you going to introduce me to your friend?’
When Mrs Marsh has gone I make Mum something to eat.
‘It's all cold,’ she complains, then two minutes later she's back eating it like she just sat down at the table.
When it looks like she's finished, I sit her in front of the television.
She usually keeps quiet while she's watching, which suits me fine.
Of course the ideal place for her is in a home but it's a question of money.
Davey sends something every month but he's got his own family to support so he can't afford much.
Little Davey, Mum's favourite: he leaves her to me now.
Every six months or so he turns up to see how his precious money's being spent.
He's afraid to be alone with her.
‘What if something happens?’ he says.
It's not her dying while he's there that panics him, I reckon; it's the thought of something messy or perhaps her dipping into another decade and making him one of the period characters.
When she talked to him as though he was our father, demanding to know when was he going to mow that lawn, he kept looking at me, appealing to me to do something: but that's the whole point, Davey boy, I thought, there's nothing to be done.
I left the room.
I didn't see why he shouldn't suffer a bit.
Men are such babies when it comes to anything awkward.
My husband was the same; really squeamish about nappies and such.
We started courting when I was sixteen.
He was eighteen but still a lad, awkward, like his arms and legs were longer than he could cope with.
The first time we went out was to the pictures and we didn't say a word to each other all night.
I was like that because I was shy but that was how George was: taciturn would be a generous description.
His proposal was typically economical.
We were walking past the church one Saturday afternoon where there was a wedding going on.
‘D’ you fancy that then?’he said.
I nodded and that was it.
For years we plodded on: bought a house, had two kids, never really knew what the other was thinking.
When I did find out what he was thinking, I must say I was surprised.
He finished his tea one night, pushed the plate away and said, calm as anything, ‘I've met a woman.
So all in all it's best if I leave.’
Seriously, that was it.
I could almost see him ticking me off the list of people to inform of his change of address.
We're divorced: I never see him.
Well, it's not like we ever had anything much to talk about.
Mum thought my divorce shamed her.
She's one of the ‘one partner for life’ brigade, man and wife in the eyes of God forever and ever a-bloody-men.
The world she's in now is as about as realistic as that.
‘I've been with your father through thick and thin as God intended a wife should,’ she said.
‘You should follow our example,’ she said.
‘I know the Lord would want you to,’ she said.
The blind trying to lead the sighted, I thought.
At about nine o'clock I start putting Mum to bed.
Tonight she doesn't want to take her tablets.
‘I can't manage them.
Like horse pills they are,’ she says and presses her lips firmly together.
I've already broken each in half to make it easier.
‘Come on now,’ I coax.
‘How are you going to grow up big and strong if you don't eat your greens?’
She looks at me.
‘You're cracked,’ she says.
If only I was they could lock me up somewhere quiet and take care of me.
I go on.
‘You know they make you feel better.’
Who knows if they do or not.
Whatever they do, it can't be the placebo effect: she'd need to remember that she'd taken something.
‘Is that right?
I've never had a day's illness in my life, thank you very much.’
Your life is an illness, you old witch.
‘Well, it's up to you, Mum.
I'll just leave them here and you can have them when you're ready.’
Or I could just stuff them down that wrinkled old gullet.
The nightly rigmarole of getting her settled is finally over.
She looks quite sweet all tucked up.
‘Night night then, Mum,’ I say.
There's a long pause and she looks confused.
‘I ought to get up,’ she says.
‘I can't stay in bed all day.
But I really do have a terrible head.’
‘Poor thing, I'll fetch you some aspirin.’
I add a couple of sleeping tablets to the other two pills and she swallows them quite happily.
‘You're a good girl,’ she says and pats my hand.
I lock the door on my way out.
I have a look at what's on television.
There's a documentary on about some disease.
Rats in cages have been injected with it and now the scientists are waiting for them to get ill so they can try and cure them.
One of the rats is just sitting in the corner and I wonder if maybe it's smart enough to be depressed.
My brother had a hamster when we were kids.
I didn't much like it, mice and such like have always given me the creeps, but I did feel sorry for it being shut up.
Once it had this raw patch on its nose and I went with Davey when he took it to the vet.
‘Oh, nothing to worry about,’ said the vet, ‘It's just where his little nose rubs on the bars of his cage when he bites them.
Most of them do it, he must have been at it quite a bit.
He's a fit little fellow though, he'll be fine.’
I watched the hamster closely after that and the vet was right, it spent a lot of its time chewing away at the metal.
I decided to let it go.
I took the cage into the garden and opened the door.
It came and sniffed around the edges, and gradually came all the way out.
It looked very small outside.
Then it turned around and went back for a drink of water.
And started again on the cage.
Maybe it had got used to it; maybe it had got used to its sore nose, too.
There's a noise from upstairs.
I can hear Mum's thin voice.
‘I need a wee,’ she's saying.
That means she's had one and has realized that she's wet.
Why isn't she asleep?
Those sleeping pills should have sent her right off.
The doctor told me they were strong: in fact he prescribed them for me but it seems more logical to give them to Mum since it's her that stops me sleeping.
I go upstairs.
She'll  insist on going to the toilet, despite the fact that it's too late.
‘Oh dear, I'm bursting,’ she says, ‘I need the toilet.’
As we pass the top of the stairs the thought hits me for the thousandth time.
She could have a fall: would a fall from the top kill her?
Even if it didn't she'd be in hospital for ages.
Maybe she'd die there.
They do, don't they, from pneumonia, from complications?
But for the thousandth time I don't do anything and we get to the bathroom safely.
Inevitably she says, ‘Oh dear, false alarm’ and we go back to her room.
I change the incontinence pad and put her back to bed.
‘Night night, Mum.’
‘These winter mornings are so dark.
It must be time to get up.’
‘Not yet, you just go back to sleep and I'll call you.’
‘You're a good girl, Rose.’
‘Night night.’
Who's Rose?
Katie rings on Saturday but the conversation is a bit strained; I don't think she knows what to say to me.
She's a kind girl, though, and at least she rings me now and again which is more than can be said for her brother.
‘You ought to get out more, Mum,’ she says.
‘Yes, well, that would be very nice but who'll look after Gran?
Mrs Marsh already helps out but I really couldn't ask her to do any more.’
And if she adds any more biscuits to the regular quota she won't get through the door anyway.
‘What about taking Gran to a day centre?’ asks Katie, ‘Lucy's grandmother goes to one and she loves it.
She always winning little things on the bingo.’
‘Gran's not up to that,’ I say.
‘She's a lot worse than when you last saw her.
That's nearly two years, mind.
It's just not possible.’
‘Well, I know she's a bit forgetful…’
‘Forgetful?
It's a bit more than that, Katie.’
She's forgetful alright, she's lost about thirty years somewhere.
‘Poor Gran.’
Poor Mum, you mean: at least I know what's going on.
‘Could I have a word with her?’
Katie asks.
She's never asked before.
‘There isn't a lot of point, to be honest.’
‘Well, I'd still like to.’
‘Honestly, Katie, I don't know why you're so insistent all of a sudden.
Never mind, I'll get her.
Hold on.’
The phone lead is long enough to reach into the living room.
Mum is watching the football results.
Or rather she's looking at the screen and that's what happens to be on.
‘Guess what, Mum?’
I say.
‘It's Katie.
She wants to say hello.’
I'm not going to give her any clues.
Let Katie find out what she's like for herself.
Mum looks at the proffered phone in a slightly puzzled way.
‘It's Katie,’ I say again.
‘Ah.’
She takes the phone.
‘Hello?’…
‘Oh you know, can't complain.’
…‘I expect it has been a while, yes.’
…‘Does she?
That sounds fun if you like that kind of thing.
No, no, I have plenty of company.’
…‘I suppose so, but I think I'm a bit young yet for that sort of thing.
Come back in a few years, eh?’
She laughs.
I've not heard that for quite a while and its unfamiliarity makes it sound strange.
It's a wheezy kind of gurgling and she starts to cough.
‘Thank you for calling,’ she says when she's recovered a bit.
‘Goodbye.
God Bless.’
And she drops the receiver back into its cradle.
‘Katie, is it?‘she says.
‘Bit of a do-gooder but nice enough.
Dear me, she thought I was some old biddy needing bingo.’
She goes back to watching the television.
I pick up the receiver.
Katie's still there, as she made the call.
‘What happened there?’ she says.
‘Gran put the phone down.’
‘She sounded OK to me.
Says she's too young for the day centre.’
‘That's because she doesn't know how old she is.’
‘I think you're exaggerating a bit.
She really sounded OK.’
‘Well, why don't you come up and take her out for the day.
It'd give me a break.’
Then you'd find out all about it, madam.
‘I've got a hell of a schedule, you know what it's like.
I will try.
It'd be nice to see you, too.
I'll try and work something out, and I'll give you a ring.’
And how many times have I heard that?
Still, she doesn't owe it to me — I just wish she wouldn't lie.
On the other hand it'd be difficult to say well mum I just don't want to see you and that smelly old woman, I'm sure you'll understand.
‘Yes, love,’ I say, ‘That would be nice.’
We say goodbye.
I'm alone again with Mum.
One thing Mum doesn't seem to forget is hymns.
On Sunday I put on Songs of Praise and she's right in her element.
She quavers along with the congregation and is all rapt attention when the vicar does his bit.
Her faith dominated my childhood.
She did everything by The Book.
She used her religion as a way of not ever speaking for herself.
It was all ‘God this’ and ‘Our Lord that’and her belief had no room for questions.
My father, on the other hand, never went to church though he never denigrated my mother's choice and approved of his children being raised as God-fearing.
Christianity got me young and inculcated me with fear of devils, and with guilt, and with a notion that God spied on me always, and that I was a worthless shit because Jesus had been killed.
I retain some of these feelings but know it's because of indoctrination not because it's necessarily true.
I can't judge for myself because the child was never allowed to.
Dad knew how to manipulate the effects such feelings for his own ends, particularly fear.
It's ironic that he chose a Sunday to first exercise his power.
Mum and Davey had gone to the morning service; I stayed at home recovering from a bad cold.
I must have been about twelve, I suppose.
Dad was doing some gardening.
We never heard the last from Mum about God's bounty from the vegetable garden; it made Dad seem like some kind of honorary clergyman.
I was sitting in bed, reading about Lot's wife as Mum had told me to, when Dad came in.
‘How are you feeling?’ he asked.
‘Much better,’ I said.
‘I'll be going back to school next week.’
‘That's good,’ he said, sitting on the edge of the bed.
‘What are you reading?’
I showed him.
‘We could read it together, couldn't we?’ he said.
That surprised me since we didn't usually do things together.
And now he was offering: I thought it was great.
We squashed side by side in the small double bed which I shared with Grandma when she came to stay.
Davey and I were lucky: we didn't have to share a room.
I had heard Mum say to Grandma that it wasn't healthy for a brother and sister to share, and it seemed to be true because Davey hadn't caught my cold.
Dad got me to read aloud to him and then offered me a barley sugar.
Mum didn't let us have sweets except at Christmas.
He put a finger to his lips and said, ‘It'll be our secret, eh?’
We were conspirators in a delicious plot and we sat together and sucked our sweets.
‘Well,’ he said finally, ‘I've a few more things to do in the garden.
Give us a hug, love.’
I remember those words exactly; they sounded strange to me because we weren't a physical family at all and we didn't use endearments.
But I hugged him.
I thought it would be nice; he'd asked me specially.
But I was crushed into his shoulder and felt like I couldn't breathe.
Then he pushed up my nightie and put his hand down between my legs.
He smelt of outdoors and of secret barley sugar.
I could hear the rapid beat of his heart and him breathing all funny.
Quite suddenly he let go and sort of pushed me away at the same time.
He didn't say a word.
He just got up and left without looking at me.
Dazedly I got back into bed and tried to figure out what had happened.
It didn't stop there.
He would come into my room at night.
I could never tell when it was going to happen.
Weeks would go by and he would leave me alone and then it would happen a lot.
‘You know you're a bad girl,’ he would say, ‘Doing those things.
You're evil, do you understand?
If anyone knew how evil you were you'd die.
A wicked Jezebel, that's what you are.’
I didn't feel I really was evil.
I just felt dirty; dirty because of him.
But I couldn't help  feeling that maybe he was right, otherwise why would something so bad happen to me?
He made me feel like I was mad.
In front of everyone else he was the same as always and it was like those nights were a bad dream.
But dreams I couldn't possibly have had without his having really done those things.
I didn't have a clue about anything physical.
How could it be in my head?
Around and around all the fear and confusion went.
I couldn't look at him; it got to the stage where I couldn't look at anyone otherwise they'd know all about how disgusting I was.
One time Grandma was coming to stay but didn't in the end because she had flu.
I cried and cried.
Mum told me not to be so silly.
‘But with Grandma in my bed I'm safe’, I wanted to shout.
Instead I wedged a chair under the door handle so he couldn't get in.
He tried, I heard him; he couldn't make a fuss, Mum would have heard.
The next day I was hanging out some washing and he walked past me.
‘Don't you ever do that again,’ he said, without looking at me or breaking his stride.
Standing there in the garden I prayed to fall down dead.
One afternoon when Dad and Davey had gone fishing, Mum sat me down in the kitchen.
‘I'm so worried about you,’ she said.
‘You've changed so much and you used to be such a happy child.
What's wrong?
Won't you tell me about it?’
She was being so kind.
How could I tell her — my own dad — how could I?
I just looked at her.
I didn't know what to say.
‘If you have a problem, you should pray.
God understands.
He will help you.
But I'm your mother, you can tell me.’
God.
I felt such a hypocrite in church, knowing that He knew about me, knowing that no matter how much I washed I was still unclean, unfit to stand in His house.
I had prayed to Him.
I wanted Him to kill my father.
That's not the sort of prayer He is going to listen to.
‘I'm fine, Mum.
Really, I'm fine.’
She wasn't fooled for a moment.
She took my hand.
‘It's alright, whatever it is you can tell me.
Is it school?’
I shook my head, miserable.
I wanted to pull my hand away.
I didn't want her to touch me.
‘Is it a young man, then?’
That was a brave question for her.
She and Dad had made it clear that ‘young men’ would not be countenanced until I was at least sixteen.
I shook my head again and took my hand away.
I couldn't look at her.
‘What then?’
She was trying hard not to show her impatience.
We sat there.
Then she reached over and gently tilted my chin up so that I had to look into her eyes.
I felt my bottom lip beginning to tremble.
I could feel so much warmth and concern coming from her.
I decided to try.
‘It's Dad,’ I said and stopped, looking down at the table.
I had no idea how to say it.
She seemed relieved.
I felt her relax a little.
‘And what about him?
Has he been a bit short with you?’
Perversely I wanted to laugh.
If only that was all.
‘He…he touched me.’
I could sense her confusion.
‘You mean he hit you?’ she said, sounding incredulous.
‘No, I mean he touched me.’
I wanted to stop this, I wished I'd never started.
Why couldn't she have left me alone?
‘I see,’ she said.
Her voice was different.
‘Where?’
She sounded almost casual.
I could only manage a whisper.
‘Down there.’
There was a huge yawning silence.
I looked up.
She was white and her lips were compressed into a pale line.
She had a bright red patch on each cheek.
Her eyes burned into mine.
‘God forgive you,’ she said.
Each word was forced out like something that tasted bad.
‘How can you be so wicked?
Evil, evil lies.
My own daughter, God preserve us from such wickedness.’
Her voice was getting louder and louder.
My God, she didn't believe me.
She'd tell Dad what I'd said.
Oh God, oh God, I want to be dead.
She grabbed my wrist and hauled me upright.
‘Mouths which speak such foulness must be cleansed,’ she spat.
‘Foul, foul lies.
You're an evil child, evil.’
She hauled me out of the room and virtually pulled me up the stairs: I thought my shoulder would come out of its socket.
She was berating me the whole time.
I had never seen her so angry.
All I had done was tell the truth.
God's truth.
We got to the bathroom.
‘Run the tap.
Take the soap and lather it up,’ she hissed, standing, arms folded, in the door way.
I was trembling so much I kept dropping the soap but I did what she said.
‘Wash your mouth out,’ she ordered.
‘I want to see you do it.
Do it now!’
I hesitated.
She lunged forward and snatched the soap from me.
I just stood there.
She grabbed hold of me and rammed my head into the crook of her arm and tried to force the bar into my mouth.
‘You're foul-mouthed, foul-mouthed.’
She was saying it over and over like a chant.
I was gagging.
I was terrified; I thought I was going to choke to death.
She was mad and so strong.
I peed myself; I could feel it burning down my legs.
We were going round and round in a weird dance and nearly slipped over in the pee that was splattered on the floor.
Then, suddenly, she let go.
We were both panting.
She put the soap back in the dish and straightened her clothes, leaving a white smear of soap on her skirt.
Her bun had come undone.
‘Let that be a lesson to you,’ she said.
‘I don't want to hear that kind of filth again, you hear me?’
She didn't wait for an answer.
I heard her bedroom door shut and the murmur of her voice.
She was praying.
I knew it was a waste of time.
Tea-time that day was hideous.
Mum was acting normally, but I could see it was a strain.
When was she going to tell him?
I couldn't bear to eat, it felt like my mouth was full of earth.
‘Eat up now,’ Dad said.
‘Waste not, want not.’
‘I'll have hers,’ Davey piped up.
‘She's too fat anyway.
Fatty, fatty, all cross-eyed and batty.’
‘Quiet!’ snapped Mum, ‘Or it's early to bed for you.’
Davey shut up, eyes wide.
She was usually so indulgent with him.
Despite it feeling strangely slowed down, the meal went much too quickly.
Davey and I went off to our rooms.
I squashed in under my  desk, trying to make myself as small as possible.
I waited all evening for the shout of anger, for him to come bursting in and beat the evil out of the liar.
Nothing happened.
I stayed under my desk; I couldn't chance coming out.
I dozed off.
It was about three o'clock when I was awoken by my door being opened oh so quietly.
He buggered me for the first time that night, reaching round and putting his hand over my mouth, tearing me in two.
He wasn't angry, though.
She hadn't told him.
I was relieved — I hated myself for it, but I was relieved.
At school the next day I hurt so much I could hardly bear to stay sitting down.
I kept going to the toilet, positive that I must be bleeding to death.
There were only a few spots of blood and all I could think about was how Mum mustn't see them.
Our teacher took me aside at break.
‘Are you alright?’
‘Yes, Miss.’
‘It's just that you've been out a few times this morning.’
‘Gippy tummy, Miss.’
‘Oh dear, would you like to go home?
Perhaps that would be best.’
‘No, I can't.’
It came out more vehemently than I meant it to.
Miss Hawthorne looked at me for a long moment.
‘Is everything alright?
At home, I mean.
No problems?’
‘No, Miss, no problems.
Thank you, Miss.’
I'm dying, Miss.
‘Well off you go outside then.’
‘Yes, Miss.’
And I walked as normally as I could into the playground, my private pain overcome for fear of discovery.
Songs of Praise is finishing.
Mum is singing along with the last hymn.
She looks quite happy; perhaps she thinks she's in heaven.
Show her an old man with white hair and a long flowing beard and she'll really think she is.
‘Do you remember when I told you about Dad?’
I ask her.
‘Told me what?’ she says.
She's got that look of knowing where she is.
She even dabs at her own dribble; daintily she does it, like she's just finished dinner.
‘The time you washed my mouth out with soap.
Surely you remember.’
She frowns.
‘Was it dirty?’
‘What?’
‘Your mouth, was it dirty?’
‘You thought so.’
‘Was it chocolate?
You know you weren't allowed to have it.’
‘No, not chocolate — truth.
But I wasn't allowed to have that either, was I?’
‘You're confusing me.
What are we talking about?’
‘Me, mum, we're talking about me.
About me and Dad to be precise.’
‘You mean ‘Dad and I’.
Your speech has always been sloppy.
You should pay more attention.’
‘Like you did to me?
To what I told you?’
‘Well, I'm sure I've always given you every attention.
You and Davey had a good upbringing.’
‘Don't get off the subject.’
‘You've made me lose track now.
Remind me again.’
‘It's about the time you washed my mouth out with soap.’
‘Was it dirty?’
She doesn't realize we've just done this bit.
I want to hit her.
She loses interest and goes back to the television.
Lionesses organizing themselves around a herd of food; yellow eyes, long grass, heat haze.
I go and pour myself a generous gin from the bottle I bought on Thursday and add a dash of orange for colour.
I sit and watch Mum.
I can feel the alcohol's heat trickling down.
Why doesn't she close her mouth?
She looks like a particularly stupid tortoise.
I close my eyes; just the sight of her is riling me.
Gin was the first alcohol I ever had.
At the church youth club Christmas party George Jennings handed me an orange squash.
‘Don't knock it all back at once,’ he said and winked at me.
Which, I later discovered, was most forthcoming for George but he'd already had a couple of orange squashes himself.
No-one had ever winked at me before.
The squash had an undertaste that I couldn't identify but it  wasn't unpleasant and I happily drank it.
After a couple of squashes I felt very happy and my face was glowing.
I discovered later that it was only the orange squash that had been spiked with gin.
The lemonade hadn't been touched.
So half the room was tiddly and the other half looked a little confused at the amount of noise the others were making.
I go and top my glass up.
Mum gazes at Africa.
George invited me out to the cinema that night, and so it began.
My parents seemed to approve.
They would have been hard pushed to find anything wrong with good old mild-mannered George.
I ought not to sneer at him.
It's only the hindsight speaking.
He was a gentle lad and always treated me well.
When we started courting my Dad left me alone.
I married George because he represented safety to me.
Not only did my Dad stop but George didn't try doing anything like that to me.
He respected me.
At least I was still a virgin, technically speaking.
Dad had too much sense to risk getting me pregnant.
Things took their course and all the arrangements for the wedding were made.
George was earning well and we were to move into a little two-up two-down.
I was the closest to being happy that I can remember; my escape was in sight.
Mum had been civil to me since the soap episode but something had gone between us.
I was a big disappointment to her all round.
Not only had I proved myself a liar but I'd not been much good at school and didn't even get my leaving certificate.
The only thing I could do well was cook.
I usually cooked Sunday lunch after we got back from church.
I fantasized about poisoning it and killing us all, even Davey, even little, innocent, favoured Davey.
My needlework was laughable.
My fingers seemed too big.
When I tried embroidery I was ashamed that I could only produce ugliness from the beautiful silks.
Knowing my shortcomings, Mum had taken charge of making curtains for George's house and a week before the wedding she went to the market to find some fabric for the last pair.
I was in my room sorting out what I was to take with me when I heard the front door.
It seemed early for Mum to be back but I didn't think anything of it.
I heard her come up the stairs.
When I turned round it was my father I saw standing in the doorway.
It was the middle of the after noon, he should have been at work.
My heart began to pound.
He looked at the piles of things scattered around my room.
‘You'll be gone soon then,’ he said, walking into the room.
‘Looks like you're nearly ready.’
I backed away a couple of paces.
‘You're back early,’ I said.
He ignored me.
‘I'll bet you'll be glad to leave, eh?’
What could I say?
I just looked at him.
‘That George, he's a good lad.
Too good for you, though I expect you know that.’
He was closing in on me.
I stumbled over a couple of boxes on the floor.
‘Steady now,’ he said, ‘We don't want you hurting yourself.
Got to keep you in one piece, eh?’
He picked up a doll from the bed and stood there idly stroking her hair.
‘It might be too late, though’ he continued.
‘You and him, you must have done…things.
Bad things.’
I knew what he meant.
I felt like I was suffocating.
‘Tell me about it,’ he said, dropping the doll and looking at me.
‘Tell me what you do with him.’
‘Nothing.
Really, nothing, I swear.’
‘A bad girl like you?
That's hard to believe.’
I was against the wall now, nowhere left to go.
All I could do was shake my head.
He put his hand on my breast and squeezed.
I defended myself for the first time: I pushed him away.
‘You should know better than that,’ he said and slapped me.
‘I bet you let George do it.
And more, eh?’
I pushed him again as hard as I could and ran for the door.
He caught me around the waist and flung me to the floor.
I could see him above me undoing his belt.
I thought for a moment that he was going to beat me.
But only for a moment.
Then he was crushing me and I understood.
He held my wrists in one hand as easily as a bunch of flowers and I was pinned beneath his bulk.
And all I could think  about was George, about how I had nothing at all left for George now.
And about how I was going to kill my father.
‘I'd love a nice cup of tea,’ Mum says suddenly.
Africa has given way to a sit-com's happy mum, happy dad, happy kids.
That's too much: I use the remote control to change channels.
An black man, his face streaming with blood, shouts at a group of white men.
More white men, this time in uniform, drag him away.
Mum looks momentarily surprised; I think she's trying to integrate this with the plot of Happy bloody Families.
I change channel again to see what she'll do.
‘It all rests on this final question!’ shouts the game show host maniacally.
The contestant grimaces and plucks uncertainly at her dress.
I look at Mum: she's smiling.
I turn back to the white man's earnest justification and go and make a cup of tea.
I fetch myself another gin while I'm up and pour a bit in Mum's tea while I'm about it.
It'll help her sleep.
Katie was born nearly exactly nine months after we married.
When I held that tiny baby in my arms it was so hard to believe that something so beautiful could come from such a sordid act.
At night George did what you'd expect a husband to but I didn't mind.
I was his wife, he had the right.
Everyone remarked on how she'd taken after my side of the family but I could see George in her, I was certain of it.
Of course I didn't kill my father but I made sure that Katie was never, ever alone with him.
Then Christopher came along, the image of his father.
Being the mother of George's children made me feel important.
I felt strong; there was a point to a life that had seemed pointless.
My father never touched me again.
I hated him but I didn't fear him any more.
That went gradually, as I saw the cancer beating him, saw his skin stretched over his bones, saw the pallor creep over him.
When he died I didn't feel glad, I didn't feel anything.
There was just an empty space where my hatred had been.
I couldn't remember what he had looked like.
I couldn't hate a blank.
I must be precise here: the woman forgot how to hate him — the child feels it as keenly as ever.
We live in different worlds but they  overlap.
I don't ignore her.
She only has me.
I can't help her but I can listen.
‘This tea tastes funny,’ Mum says accusingly.
‘Mine's alright.’
‘You haven't got a cup.’
Very astute.
‘Well, I've finished mine.
It was fine.
Drink up, you know you like it nice and hot.’
‘But it tastes funny.’
‘Try it again.’
‘But it tastes funny.’
‘I'll get you another then.’
I take the cup into the kitchen together with my glass which I top up; the alcohol is making my body hum.
A quick blast in the microwave for Mum's tea and it's back to the living room.
‘Here you are, a nice hot cup of tea.’
‘Why, that's very thoughtful of you.
Just put it down here.’
She sips it.
‘That's grand.’
She smacks her lips but she doesn't say anything.
She's got tea on her cardigan again.
There's a film on now, ‘a gritty piece set in a Welsh mining community’ according to the Radio Times.
‘Contains language which some viewers may find offensive’ says the announcer.
Mum will certainly find it offensive then, if she pays attention.
I leave it on.
I didn't go to my father's funeral and Mum didn't speak to me for about a year.
She didn't send me a Christmas card.
I was rather relieved since they always smacked a little too much of blood for my taste.
Then Davey moved quite a long way away for his work and she hardly saw him.
Some sense of duty remained and I visited her quite regularly.
She didn't object; she seemed to look forward to it, in fact.
She appeared to have forgotten about my not going to the funeral but that was before she started to lose the steps to the attic, so to speak, so it just meant that she chose to not mention it.
She began to be harmlessly forgetful.
Then it started to get worse, dangerous: the leaving the front door wide open, setting the electric kettle down on the gas hob kind of dangerous.
I kept Davey informed on the phone.
‘What can I do, stuck here?’ he would wonder.
‘You will make sure that she's okay, won't you’‘I can't be there all the time,’ I said once.
There was a silence.
Then he said, ‘Well, why not?
You live on your own, you've no responsibilities.
Couldn't you —’‘I wouldn't live on my own if she was here, would I?
And I do have responsibilities, Davey, I have a job that I enjoy.
It took me a long time to find it, too, with no qualifications and a lifetime of being a housewife.
No, I couldn't.’
‘But your job isn't really important, is it?
It can't pay much, what with you being unskilled.
And you'd be doing something worthwhile.
I'd help out financially as much as I could.
What alternative do we have?’
That ‘we’ was rich.
‘No.
I'm not going to argue about it.’
‘That's it?’
‘That's it.’
Brave words.
But of course when Mum had the stroke someone had to look after her.
I knew moving into her house wouldn't be temporary, I could see what had happened.
I gave up my unimportant, worthless job.
I let my house.
And now I'm here, waiting for her to die.
She might go on for years; I could be as old as she is now before she finally gives up the ghost.
I can't let that happen, I just can't.
She's nodded off.
The Welsh miners are upset about something, hanging about menacingly at the pit gates.
I decide to do the washing-up before I start putting Mum to bed.
She wakes up as I start moving around and peers at the screen.
The mob is getting ugly.
She starts looking interested.
I finish the dishes and pour one last gin.
Mum's calling so I go  through.
‘I've not had a cup of tea all night,’ she says.
‘I'm parched, I really am.’
‘Let's get you upstairs and I'll bring you a cup.’
So begins the ritual.
She clings on to me as we go up the stairs and we have to rest a couple of times on the way.
She's a dead weight clamped onto me.
Finally we're in her room.
She doesn't co-operate as I'm trying to get her jumper off.
She's really beginning to annoy me but I have to get the job done: I just want to go back downstairs.
I thought my shoulder would come out of its socket.
I force her skinny little arms into the position I need and ignore the sharp intake of breath.
She's exaggerating; it was only a little push.
As I get her into a fresh pair of rubber knickers I feel something cold on my face.
That really is the limit: there's a string of her spit linking my cheek and her chin.
‘Why can't you bloody well wipe it off before it drips on me?
You're a disgusting old woman, do you hear?
Disgusting.’
God Almighty, she's not even listening.
She's humming a tune behind her silly smile.
I get hold of her shoulders and give her a good shake.
She focuses on me and then says, ‘Fuck the lot of ‘em, that's what I say, fuck ‘em’.
With the unmistakable lilt of the South Wales coal miner.
It's so incongruous it stuns me for a few seconds.
‘Well really, Mum, fancy coming out with something like that.’
‘What's that then?’
‘Naughty words, Mum.
Not very lady-like at all.
What would Davey think?’
‘I don't know any naughty words.’
‘If you don't know any, how do you know which words are naughty?’
This is a bit advanced.
I'm in danger of losing her.
‘Well, you seem to know at least one of them,’ I say.
‘I know no such thing,’ she says indignantly.
‘Yes you do.
You just said it.
I heard you.’
‘I did not.’
‘Yes you did.’
‘No I didn't.’
‘There's no point in denying it.
It was as clear as day.
Don't you believe me?’
‘Absolutely not, it's all nonsense.’
‘No it isn't.’
‘Yes it is.’
‘No it —’ This is so pointless.
The futility of it all fills the room.
I'm right, I know I'm right, so why won't she admit it?
It's simple enough.
I feel the anger rush into me.
‘You're just a liar, you useless old bag of wind!’
I bellow into her wrinkled face.
‘A fucking liar, do you hear?’
She cowers away from me.
This makes me even angrier.
‘I'll show you.
I'll teach you to lie to me.’
I haul her off the bed and half carry, half drag her into the bathroom.
There's an open bottle of shampoo on the edge of the bath.
I grab it and squirt it at the gape of her frightened mouth.
Some of it misses and there's suddenly a livid green stain around her mouth and down her front.
She's making little whimpering noises and her eyes are large and uncomprehending.
She starts to cough and there's faintly green foam around her mouth.
I catch sight of us in the mirror and see from the outside what I'm doing.
She's trembling violently and she starts to retch, leaning against me for support as the heaving racks her.
Her knickers are hobbling her skinny legs where I abandoned them.
I want this not to be happening, I can't believe what I've done.
‘Come on now,’ I hear myself say, ‘Let's clean you up.
That's it, get it all out.
Lots of water, that's what we need.’
And so on, as I get her to the bedroom and changed again and into bed.
I go down to make some tea.
I'm shaking and finish the gin left in my glass to steady me.
I don't want to think about it; I don't want those puzzled eyes locked on my face seeing the madness spilling out of me.
I take her the tea.
‘Drink up now,’ I say, ‘You know you like it nice and hot.’
‘You're a good girl,’ she says.
‘What was your name again?’
Two
NEIGHBOURHOOD WATCHING
I used to see the woman next-door at night standing in her kitchen, looking blankly out of the window.
I'd skirt around the light cast from the windows and sometimes I'd sit and watch her to see if she would do anything interesting.
She never did but it's always worth watching a human, just in case.
I watched from under the hedge when one day two big black cars came.
Two men carried a long box from the house to one of the cars and put it inside.
Some more people came out of the house and got into the other car, and both cars drove away.
Not long after that day a big van came and some men filled it up with furniture.
After that there was no-one living in the house.
The garden gradually got all tangled and interesting and took a little longer to patrol since the other cats took advantage and tried to be clever, creeping in when they thought I wouldn't notice.
The tabby a couple of houses away on the other side is a cheeky sod and was due a lesson next time I found him walking around like he owned the place.
One morning I hopped up on the fence to have a good look around and there, sunning herself in the patio window of the empty house, was the most gorgeous long-hair I'd ever seen.
This beautiful tortoiseshell stretched, licked a languid paw and sat up.
Exquisite yellow eyes blinked, then focused on me.
I must have cut a handsome figure up there, black and glossy, and she could hardly fail to have been impressed.
But I gave her a cold stare and fluffed my fur out; I couldn't have her thinking I was a pushover.
She turned as a woman with long red hair walked up behind her.
Casting a self-satisfied glance at me Shelly allowed herself to be picked up.
Dead nonchalant, I leapt from the fence in one graceful bound to check the garden out: business must go on even in the face of the queen of my dreams.
And she was mistaken if she thought she was getting her paws on this patch, I'd worked bloody hard to make it mine and that's how it was going to stay.
I'd let her use it, I thought, if she earned it.
I kept my eyes open over the next few days and although I saw her  sitting in the window she never appeared outside.
I knew she hadn't been in the garden, I would have been able to smell her.
What kind of cat doesn't go outside?
It could only be a matter of time, though, before we got together.
After all, she couldn't fail to have been taken with me — I'm one good-looking animal.
I'd wait and take my chance when it came.
I was sitting under Marcus's chair in the garden on one of those days when he stays at home when I heard this noise from next door.
I strolled over to have a look.
Through the gap in the fence I could see the red-haired woman hacking away at the tangle of greenery with a large silver blade that flashed in the sun.
What the hell's she doing with my patch, I thought.
She was making a nice neat pile of the stuff she'd cut down, while she made a right mess of the pathways I'd so carefully set up.
Marcus snorted and woke up.
He lay there for a minute scratching at the pitiful amount of hair on his chest and then he came over.
At the fence, he suddenly sucked his stomach in and puffed his chest out.
Attaboy, I thought, you show her otherwise she'll be making free with this bit as well.
His voice didn't sound at all unfriendly though, not like that tone he uses when he catches me up on the table eating the butter.
Maybe he needed some moral support: I jumped up onto the fence and glared at the woman.
He laughed and said something that included my name — it stands out from his other noises: blah blah Killer blah blah.
The woman came over to the fence and put her hand out to me.
I jumped off and retreated under Marcus's chair — you can't be too careful.
She and Marcus looked at me, she shrugged and they talked for a while.
I saw his feet go past the chair and he went into the house.
He reappeared carrying two glasses that tinkled with ice and passed one over the fence to the woman.
I dozed off to the sound of their voices droning through the warm afternoon.
Next morning I was sitting on the garage roof watching starlings squabbling on the lawn and wondering if they were too busy to have noticed me, when they suddenly took off with a great rush of wings.
Marcus appeared in next-door's back garden which surprised me as last I knew he'd been snoring under the duvet.
He strode towards what was left of the undergrowth and started cutting it down.
He was at it for quite a while.
His bare back began to look very red an d he kept waving his arms at the insects which he was disturbing.
The redhead brought out some glasses and he drank the liquid down in one go.
He stood and watched her walk back to the house and then he went back to his work.
Presently he stopped and sat under the apple tree.
I went to have a look at what he'd been doing.
Lopped off brambles lay around and the long grass was all trampled.
There was a shoe in the flowerbed that I hadn't known about.
Marcus was sitting with his eyes shut.
He smelt very strongly of…well, Marcus.
I gave a little meow to get his attention and he opened his eyes.
He began talking to me: blah blah Killer blah blah Women.
That was a familiar sound.
I'd sit on his lap and he'd stroke me and rabbit on, and this sound would crop up with a kind of sighing and sometimes his voice would have an edge to it, too.
He seemed alright at the moment, though, and his stroking was even and relaxed.
I heard a door open and close, and then the redhead was coming towards us.
She stopped when she got quite close and crouched down, putting her hand out to me.
‘Killer, Killer.’
She made some squeaky noises with her mouth.
I was downwind of her and the strong perfume nearly knocked me over.
I sneezed twice and got out of there pronto.
I dashed past her and, stopping a safe distance away, I had a quick wash and watched her and Marcus.
I thought about that scent; there was something about it, something extra besides the smell that reminded me of Marcus's bathroom.
Clear undertones of cat, that's what it was.
Shelly — who else?
Frustrating or what — it had been so faint and so brief.
Marcus and the woman were just sitting there grinning at each other and talking so I went to track Shelly down.
She wasn't in the window.
I went and sniffed around the edges of the frosted glass back door: a good, clean, slightly sweet smell.
Definitely cat.
A shape moved beyond the glass and then disappeared.
I waited but didn't see any more movement.
I moved along to the patio  window.
And came nose to nose with the tortoiseshell.
We both leapt back and stood there looking at each other through the glass.
I looked into those golden, liquid eyes and no doubt she was impressed with the clear green of mine.
Cautiously we both inched forward and she delicately sniffed the glass.
Pointless, of course, but elegantly done.
I sat down and began switching my tail from side to side to let her know that I was constantly alert and maybe a little unpredictable.
Females like a moody male, a bit of a mystery.
Then she yawned, blinked, turned her back and walked off into the house.
She liked me, I could tell; otherwise why would she make such efforts to demonstrate that she wasn't interested?
It was just a matter of time before she showed her true feelings, I was sure of that.
Females — honestly.
I was having a nap by the gas fire one evening when I was woken up by the doorbell.
I heard Marcus open the door and then two voices, his and the redhead's.
‘Killer, Killer,’ she cooed as she came in.
She smelt like she had in the garden but with one important difference: I could smell Shelly's invitation to sex on her.
Very potent, very come and get it.
I let her stroke me so that I could analyze the scent.
No doubt about it — Shelly had the hots for me.
I noticed with alarm that the woman had long red claws.
Shit, I thought, the least she could do is keep them sheathed when she doesn't need them.
But then she scratched me between the ears and I started purring despite myself.
With her other hand she rubbed me under my chin — my other weak spot.
Any minute, I thought, I'm going to start dribbling with pleasure.
And all the while Shelly's smelly libido was wafting up my nose, calling me to her.
What a heavenly dilemma: I wanted to stay and go at the same time.
The woman solved it for me by stopping and following Marcus out of the room.
I lay there for a minute recovering my cool and then headed for the back door.
The table in the room next to the kitchen looked different.
It was covered in a white cloth; there were some flowers, plates, the metal things that Marcus picks his food up with, sparkling glasses.
There were also some strange red rods sticking up in the air  from a holder.
An investigation was called for.
I jumped up and picked my way across the table.
The red things had a small piece of string poking out of the top and they smelt vaguely of the stuff Marcus sometimes puts on the furniture.
‘Killer!’
Marcus shouted from the doorway in that distinctly unfriendly tone of his and clapped his hands hard.
I jumped straight off the table and ran through his legs out of the room.
What is it with this guy, I thought, I didn't go near any bloody butter.
Straight away I went over to Shelly's house.
Sniffing around the back door it occurred to me that the last time I'd missed something: there was no cat door.
She must have to rely on the woman to let her in and out.
But as far I could make out she hadn't been outside, at least not in the garden where you'd expect her to go.
That was strange but my main concern now was how to get to her, since she obviously wanted me.
It was a test, I decided, with one hell of a reward if I managed to pass.
What a minx.
And then I saw my chance: a small window that could have been made for me was open.
I made it up there and scrabbled through into the bathroom.
Through the crack under the door I could smell Shelly loud and clear.
The door was only pushed to, though it still took some fancy paw-work to haul it open.
Finally there was a big enough gap and Shelly's scent came flooding in.
Finding her was easy enough, I just followed my nose.
She was asleep on a chair in the living room and I decided the most effective way to wake her would be to sing.
I was feeling very romantic, quite worked up at the sight of her and the room was full of the scent of her desire.
She would be putty in my paws when she awoke to see me with my superb physique and elemental masculinity, not to mention my irresistible voice.
In fact, she leapt onto the back of the chair and swore at me.
Playing hard to get, I thought, but it was obvious to me that she didn't mean it.
I took a few paces towards her, filling the air with the sweet music of my song.
She launched herself off the chair and I was thinking oh yes, this is it, come to me you gorgeous creature.
Then she swiped me right across the nose, claws at full stretch.
Well, that took me by surprise, I can tell you: my eyes were watering but my loins were telling me to persevere with this fiery female.
She wanted me — how could she not?
It was when she took a chunk out of my shoulder and nearly bit my damn ear off that I got the message.
I was out of my depth: she was a lot heavier than me and a bloody sight more determined.
There was no dignified way to deal with this: I turned and fled to the bathroom and out of the window.
I wondered what her problem was.
Why did she lure me in there if she didn't intend to come across?
Imagine that — passing up the opportunity for a little hanky-panky with yours truly.
She's never going to get anywhere if she tries to beat up on males, especially a catch like me.
Why, I only restrained myself because she's a female, she should think herself lucky.
One thing was for sure: if she showed her face outside she was in for a shock.
I wouldn't be so lenient next time round.
Bloody females.
I cleaned myself up and checked out my patch, hoping I'd find that tabby trespassing.
Nothing much was doing, though, and eventually I went home for a bite to eat and a well-deserved kip.
I finished the food in my bowl, feeling quite kindly disposed towards Marcus for always giving me real meat.
Once he put an incredibly hard, cold lump of what was obviously meat in my bowl and then stood there and watched while I sniffed at it.
When I looked at him, he laughed: blah blah Killer blah.
I was hungry but had to wait while he fiddled with a saucepan and then made me endure the smell of the meat coming from it.
He gives me all different kinds and though I don't know what they actually are, they all taste good and I appreciate the variety.
Very occasionally he's given me tinned stuff and pretty naff it is, too: bland and soft, like something you'd give a kitten.
When I'd finished I thought I'd go to the living room to curl up by the gas fire.
Marcus and the redhead weren't in the room with the cloth on the table but they had been.
The plates still had some food on them but although I found some meat, it had a strange gloopy liquid on it so I gave it a miss.
There was no butter around so I jumped down and went to the living room.
It was softly lit and there was  music with a man trying to sing: I could have shown him a thing or two.
Marcus and the redhead were sitting on the settee and seemed quite happy with the racket.
At least it wasn't very loud so it was bearable.
I lay down on the rug in front of the fire and dozed off.
Something woke me.
Marcus and the woman were all entwined on the settee.
Then I realized that she was trying to push him away.
He let go and she stood up, waving her arms and not sounding at all pleased.
He stood up as well and held out his hands, talking all the time in a soft, friendly tone.
She stopped waving her arms about and he quite suddenly put his arms around her and pressed his face against hers.
She brought her knee up between his legs and he gasped and doubled over, pushing her away from him.
She stumbled backwards and I darted out of the way as she fell over.
There was a dull crunch and she lay still.
Marcus moaned and clutched at the front of his trousers.
Then he went quiet and knelt down by the redhead.
He put his ear to her chest and then sat up, rocking back and forth.
After a while he went out into the hall and I heard him pick up the thing that makes noises and which he talks into when there's no-one here.
I crept out from under the chair and smelt the dark liquid which had formed a pool on the hearth and soaked into the rug.
I lapped at the warm, rich blood; very nice, very fresh.
Marcus put the thing down without doing any speaking and came back into the room.
‘Killer blah,’ he said in a strange tone of voice that I took to be a warning so I went back under the chair.
He turned the fire off and sat down on the settee, looking at the woman all the while.
She wasn't doing anything interesting at all so I couldn't see what the fascination was.
She seemed to have gone to sleep.
Marcus patted his lap and I went to him for a stroke.
I fell asleep and remember him lifting me off and putting me on the settee cushion but I'd had a tiring evening and hardly stirred.
I did hear him moving around but when I woke up later neither he nor the redhead was to be seen.
Nor for that matter was the rug.
I stirred myself and went upstairs, and crawled under the duvet to wait for him.
When I woke up it was light but Marcus wasn't in the bed.
I found him downstairs, snoring on the settee.
I went to the kitchen for something to eat but I'd finished my food the night before and he hadn't given me any more.
I went and meowed at him until he woke up.
He sat upright very quickly, rubbing his face.
I went and stood ready by my bowl, my mouth watering.
But he went upstairs and I heard water running in the bathroom.
I waited for a while but he didn't show any sign of appearing so I went outside.
The morning was damp and I licked some dew from the lawn.
I hooked up a wriggling worm and ate it: it tasted alright, earthy and slightly gritty, but I would rather have had a proper meal.
I was feeling a bit pissed off: I was sore where the fickle Shelly had left her mark and I was distinctly peckish.
I heard Marcus in the kitchen and ran back inside.
He glanced at me but carried on splashing water into the sink and clattering plates.
I meowed but he ignored me.
I got up and pawed at his trousers.
He shouted at me so I sat under the table and waited for him to put some food down.
When he'd finished at the sink I came out and wound myself lovingly around his legs but he shut me in the kitchen.
I heard the machine that he rubs across the floor start up with that horrendous howl that makes my teeth curl.
My meal was obviously not as important to him as it was to me.
I decided to go the house a few gardens away where a few pitiful meows brings some food from the woman.
She smells strange and the nosh is tinned but it was better than nothing.
When I'd had a bite and patrolled the area, I went back home to sit on the garage roof and have a leisurely wash.
Marcus was inside banging around.
He sometimes spends whole evenings in there making a lot of noise, coming out smelling of wood.
The sounds were muffled from up on the roof but they still bugged me so I went indoors.
The floor machine was in the living room, the long black thing that Marcus rubs on the carpet snaking in front of the sofa.
I gave it a wide berth and went to sit on the rug, but of course it had gone so I sat on one of the chairs instead, had a good long wash and settled down for a nap.
Later on Marcus came in, took a bag from inside the  noise-maker and dropped it in a large crackling black bag.
Then I heard the front door close and the sound of his car going down the road.
I felt restless and took a turn round the garden.
From the fence I surveyed the area, sneaking a look to see if Shelly was lying in the window.
In fact she was walking up and down and I could see her mouth opening and closing as she meowed, though I couldn't hear her.
I went up for a closer look.
She's imploring me to return, I thought, she's realized what a mistake she's made.
When she saw me, she gave me a haughty stare and carried on meowing.
So it wasn't for my benefit.
Maybe she was hungry: I knew how she felt.
On the other hand, she deserved whatever she got.
I went and sat in the sun on the garage roof, now that it was quiet.
It was nearly dark when I woke up to the sound of Marcus calling me.
Food at last!
Afterwards, I sat on his lap while he drank some of that funny-smelling liquid and stared at the moving pictures in the corner.
There was a different rug on the floor but without the fire on it's much warmer to curl up on a human.
And rugs don't scratch you just so between the ears.
After a couple of days I saw Shelly outside.
She was in one of those things Marcus puts me in sometimes to carry me about.
I could see her paws sticking out through the wire door and she was making one hell of a racket.
Most undignified.
A woman put her in a car and drove away and I didn't see Shelly again.
Well, it was no great loss: I mean, standing up for yourself is one thing but that female was downright vicious.
She'd led me on, I didn't think she deserved my sympathy after that.
From the window ledge in the living room I saw men dressed in dark clothes and wearing dark hats knocking on all the doors in the street.
When people came to the doors they stood on the step talking and looking over at our side of the street.
I heard Marcus putting food in my bowl and hurried out to the kitchen.
The doorbell rang and Marcus and a man in those same dark clothes came into the kitchen.
I don't like strangers at the best of times and particularly not when  I'm eating.
The man sat down at the table and Marcus put water in the kettle.
I waited outside until the man had gone and I could get on with my food.
As I came in, Marcus scooped me up and hugged me: blah blah Killer blah blah blah!
I leapt out of his arms.
It's interesting when humans do something you don't expect, but I wish he wouldn't interfere when I'm trying to eat.
To stay looking this good I need my nourishment.
A few days later I returned from a lengthy scout round the area to find a woman in those dark clothes in the kitchen putting cups on the table.
I wanted to find Marcus but the door was shut.
I meowed a couple of times and steeled myself as she came over.
But she opened the door just like I wanted and I shot through to the living room only to encounter more men in dark clothes, too many for me to tolerate.
There was no sign of Marcus.
I went back to the kitchen.
I'd been out all day and was ravenous, but the strange woman made me nervous of settling down to eat.
I approached my bowl warily, keeping my eye on her.
I must confess I gobbled the meat down and I didn't notice the bone until it was too late.
It stuck in my throat and I had to cough and cough to dislodge it.
I vomited up most of my half-chewed dinner as well.
It was a strange looking bone, sort of an oval shape with a red coating on it.
It was slightly curved at the end like a large claw.
I thought I'd seen something like it before but the woman came over and I had to move away before I could look at it more closely.
From under the chair I watched as she scooped up the mess into a cloth, and dropped it in the bin.
She crouched down and spoke to me softly and coaxed me out.
Talking all the time she opened a few cupboards, then got a tin out and fiddled around with it.
She held the open tin under my nose: tuna — oh boy.
I love tuna.
Marcus hadn't given me any since I threw up in the hall and he stepped in it when he came to see what the matter was.
It wasn't the tuna, it was the fur ball: any idiot should have known that.
She put the tuna on a plate and set it down and I ate the lot.
It was absolutely delicious and a welcome change from  the meat Marcus had been giving me lately.
It was alright but I just hoped that there wasn't much more of it.
After all, I can only eat so much of the same thing.
Three
FEAR OF THE UNKNOWN I.
In a Different Place
The van's interior was as stuffy as breath.
One tiny window up high showed that it was light outside.
Surely they wouldn't make them go the whole distance in the dark?
Marcus shifted from one numb buttock to the other.
The other man had been chain-smoking since the doors closed, his rich cough gurgling between pulls on the cigarette.
The blades of the small extractor fan were still.
His damp back plucked at his shirt, and his legs prickled in the heavy trousers.
He wondered if he should speak to the other man but, not knowing the system's etiquette, he stayed silent.
All he wanted was for him to put out the cigarette; he knew he would just go on suffering the strangled air.
There were voices at the doors and then blinding sunlight sprang into the van.
‘Put the fag out, Gleeson!’ snapped the officer.
‘No smoking.
Got it?’
Marcus greedily breathed in the fresh air.
The officer looked at him.
‘Move back away from the doors.’
Two officers climbed in, the engine started up and fluorescent tubes striped into life.
The fat officer oozed his bulk down onto the bench.
His thin companion folded his limbs like an insect as he sat down.
Laurel and bloody Hardy.
‘What a surprise to see you again, Gleeson,’ said Hardy.
‘No room in the old lady's bed?
Fancied a bit of B & b at Her Majesty's pleasure, eh?’
Gleeson picked at a bloodied hangnail.
He looked across at Marcus.
‘What're you staring at?’
‘Nothing, I —’‘No talking among the prisoners,’ said Laurel, ‘You know the  rules, Gleeson.
Mustn't lead…
‘He consulted his clipboard.
‘…
Manderley astray.
That includes smoking.
You know that rule, too.
Hand them over.’
Gleeson tossed the packet to Laurel, who looked inside.
‘Nearly full, too.
Who'd you nick these from then?
Come on, give us the light as well.’
The van moved off.
Gleeson tilted his head back and closed his eyes.
He had pointed features and protruding yellow teeth.
Now that the smoky fug had cleared a little, Marcus could smell the peculiar decay and soap combination coming from Gleeson.
Gleeson opened one verminous eye and he looked quickly away.
He stared at the intricate tooling on his shoes, at the weave of the laces, at the scuff on the left toe.
He wondered how long it would take to get there.
He clasped his hands as the tears pushed at the back of his eyes.
Gleeson farted and bared more of his teeth at Marcus.
A cough snatched at him and he rocked in its grip.
‘You want to lay off the fags, Gleeson,’ said Hardy, ‘You'll ruin your health.’
His wheezy laugh squeezed its way out.
Laurel's snigger sounded like a rusty hinge.
Hardy produced a pack of cards and, after dividing Gleeson's box between them, he and Laurel played for the cigarettes as the van lurched and swayed away from the court, through the town centre and out to H.M.
Prison Goldenhurst.
In the icy smack of the delousing shower Marcus caught Gleeson looking appraisingly at his body.
A queer then.
But Hardy had mentioned a wife.
Prison does that to some men, though, he'd heard it on a documentary.
Not me, he thought, they make me sick.
Dislike of Gleeson's predatory gaze overrode his fear.
‘Looking at something?’ he sneered, glaring at the startled man.
Gleeson gave a brief, whinnying giggle.
He shook his head and looked away.
That had shown him.
Probably a child molester, probably couldn't get it up for anything normal.
Embezzlement paled in comparison with whatever horrible crime Gleeson had committed.
Well, they'd called it embezzlement but it was only taking what was his by right.
They had brought in some greasy foreigner as partner when all along it had been promised to him.
And if the police hadn't investigated him because of that stupid bitch Caroline he'd have quietly taken what was his and still looked clean.
He was good at his job, after all.
Had been.
God, it was like someone had died.
Four and a half years, four and a half sodding years.
All for money — yet if he'd got legless and run someone over and killed them, he'd have got away with some poxy little sentence.
You'd get a lot more for outright murder, even if you hadn't meant to do it.
He wasn't in for murder, though.
He smiled.
‘What you grinning at, Manderley?’ barked the officer in charge.
‘Having a good time, are you?’
Screw.
Must use the lingo.
He wiped the smile off his face.
Marcus supposed he was lucky to share the cell with only one other person.
Blake was a doughy man with a big belly.
His glasses glittered at Marcus from the top bunk.
‘First time?’
God, did it show that much?
Marcus looked around for somewhere to put his toothbrush.
‘You can call me Pete.’
‘Marcus.’
Stupid bloody name.
His mother had read classics at Oxford and didn't it show.
His chemistry degree from Exeter had been a disappointment to her but, she sighed, at least it was a university.
If she hadn't been dead already the shock of his going to prison would have killed her.
That cheered him.
He waved the toothbrush at Pete.
‘Where can I put this?’
‘Now there's a leading question.’
Oh great, a wit.
‘No, only joking.
The shelf there, to your left.’
Above the shelf was a photograph of a fat woman and two fat children.
A fat dog lolled in the foreground.
‘Is this your family?’
Had to be.
And he'd have to look at it every day.
‘Yep.
My Beryl and the kids.
She's a wonderful woman.’
‘Lovely.
You're a lucky man.’
‘And don't I know it.
My kids write to me all the time.’
Hopefully he wouldn't feel compelled to talk about them all the time as well.
‘You married?’ asked Pete.
No way.
Play the field and score as often as possible.
Jesus, all that time ahead without a woman, any woman.
He could be out in three years if all went well.
Thirty six months.
One hundred and fifty six weeks.
One thousand and ninety five days.
He'd be twenty nine when he got out.
And if things didn't go well: fifty four months, two hundred and thirty — Marcus lay on the bunk and looked up at the sag that was Pete.
‘No, I'm not married.’
‘Girlfriend?’
What was it with this guy?
Maybe he was trying to find out if he was gay.
Surrounded by queers.
‘Yes.
She's a lovely girl.
She's a vicar's daughter but it's alright, he's praying for me.’
Swallow that and he'll swallow anything.
‘Got any pictures?’
Good grief, he went for it.
‘No, no pictures.
She's um…going to send me one.’
He was going to have to keep track of his lies.
‘How long?’
‘I'm sorry?
How long what?’
‘How long you in for?’
‘Four and a half years — on paper, that is.’
‘You'll be out in three, then.
Me, I've got three to go.’
Would he really have to spend three solid years with this guy?
At least he seemed harmless enough.
He wondered what Pete was in for.
He had the notion that it wasn't done to ask; that's what Fletch on  Porridge had said.
The small talk had petered out.
Only another one thousand and ninety four days, twenty three hours and —‘So, what brings you here?’ asked Pete, like they'd just met socially.
as if they would move in the same circles.
He probably thought a financial adviser was someone who told you to hand over the wallet or you'd get your throat cut.
‘You mean, what am —’‘Yeah, what you in for?’
‘Embez —’‘Fingers in the till, eh?
Tut tut, a posh bloke like you an’ all.’
If Pete kept interrupting him, he could spend the next three years never finishing a sentence.
Ho ho.
‘What about you?
How —’‘How did I end up in here?
Bad planning.
And skipping the Weight Watchers classes the missus put me in for.
Aggravated burglary.
Got in the door, punter comes home, I can't fit my sylph-like frame through the window and I panic.
Fractured skull — hit him with a Spode statuette.
Beautiful piece, one of the earliest I've seen — but he must've had a hard head, ‘coz it broke.
Shame really.
Would've gone nice with me collection.
Except the filth ‘ve got that now an’ all.’
A brash bell rang and Pete swung down from his bunk.
The gut swayed in front of Marcus before Pete hit the ground and sent shudders through the fleshy mountain.
‘Dinner time,’ said Pete.
‘Tastes like shit but it fills you up.
If you don't want any of yours, you give it to me.
Come on, shake a leg, old son.’
Nausea swept over him.
One thousand and ninety five days of Pete.
One thousand and ninety five days of staring up at Pete's mattress.
One thousand and ninety five days of a stinking bucket in the corner while Pete looked forward to dinner.
Keys jangled and the door swung open.
‘On your feet, lads.
Get a move on!’
In the canteen queue, Marcus was startled to see that the two men in front were holding hands: a lumbering man in his twenties and a boy who didn't look old enough to be in prison, who was as pretty as a girl.
Surely he was wearing lipstick?
Marcus watched the shapely red lips.
He felt a rush of revulsion and indignation.
Why didn't somebody do something?
They ought to be stopped.
How could they have the nerve, surrounded by all these real men?
He looked at Pete.
He wore his usual benign expression.
‘Hiya, Pete,’ said the beautiful boy.
His eyes were a deep blue.
Was that mascara as well?
‘Hello there, Jimmy.
How's it going?’
‘Oh fine, just fine.’
Jimmy laughed.
‘Very well, in fact.
This is Sean.’
‘Pleased to meet you, Sean.
You seem to have brought a bit of colour to our Jimmy's cheeks.
It's nice to see him cheerful again.
Jimmy, Sean, this is Marcus.’
Marcus looked from Jimmy's soft gaze to Sean's foolish grin.
He swallowed.
‘Er…’
‘Oi Blake,’ said the man in front of the lovers and as he turned, Marcus saw FUCK THE POLL TAX tattooed on his throat.
‘Mr Carter wants a word.’
Jimmy patted Pete's arm.
‘Hurry back, your banquet awaits.’
He looked at Marcus.
‘You can sit with us, if you like.
I know it's not easy at first, so you just stick with us.
We'll look after you.’
Marcus moved out of patting range.
Pete shouldn't be long, surely.
Pete approached a grey haired man already seated with his meal.
As they spoke Pete glanced at Marcus but the grey haired man didn't even look up from his food.
Either side of him sat a large, so lid man: one caught Marcus's eye and he began an earnest inspection of the floor.
A subdued Pete returned to the queue.
Jimmy looked enquiringly at him and Pete just shrugged his shoulders.
Jimmy went back to his conversation with the tattooed man, his thumb now resting casually in Sean's belt loop.
There was no room with Jimmy and Sean, and Marcus and Pete moved on to a different table.
‘Jimmy's a good lad,’ said Pete as they sat down.
‘Son of a mate of mine, as a matter of fact.
Would you credit it — father goes straight and his son's doubly bent.
Counterfeit's his line.
His work's as sweet as the birds, a real artist he is.
Should have gone to college, really, with a talent like that.’
‘But…’
Pete's overloaded cheeks bulged.
His question squeezed past the food, bringing a splash of gravy with it.
‘But what?’
Pete licked the gravy from his hand.
‘Don't you mind?’
‘Mind?’
‘In a place like this, I wouldn't have thought it would be tolerated.
Not when it's so blatant.’
Pete's face cleared.
‘Him and Sean, you mean.’
He laughed.
‘Well, they're happy ain't they?
Not much happiness about in here, got to grab it when you can.
And there's no getting away from it, he's a real looker.
Just as well he's that way inclined, I'd say.
Sean's got a lot of competition.
Not that he'd have any trouble himself, mind you.’
But it's unnatural, thought Marcus.
How can you stand to see it going on?
He looked down at the food on his tray.
His stomach heaved again.
‘You'll be sorry later if you've given that to me.
Nothing after this till breakfast, mate.’
Maybe he would feel better if he had something.
He put a forkful in his mouth.
It was cold.
He ate it anyway.
One thousand and ninety five days — he needed to keep his strength up.
‘You play chess?’ asked Pete on the way back to the cell.
‘I do, as a matter of fact.
Do you have a set?’
‘Yeah, just a little travel one.
No white king but if you don't mind a bit of macaroni stuck into some Plasticine instead, I'll give you a game.’
It would be five minutes' work to beat this ignoramus.
Maybe it would shut him up for a while.
‘I look forward to it.’
‘I'll tell you what, I'll set up the board when we get back.
How about something to make it more interesting?’
Ravioli for pawns?
‘What did you have in mind?’
‘Oh you know, a little wager perhaps.
Just to spice it up a bit.
What d’ you say?’
Bet with a criminal?
‘I think I'll give the chess a miss if it's all the same to you, Pete.
I've had rather a hard day — well, I'm sure you can imagine.’
‘Well, another time.
You'll have to give me plenty of notice, mind, me social diary's chocka.’
Pete laughed and then belched.
He patted his chest daintily with his sausage fingers.
‘Blimey, those beans working already?
Well, here we are again, home sweet home.
Be it ever so humble it still smells of shit, eh?’
The cat loomed.
The purr was deafening.
‘Bugger off, Killer.
Go and hassle a dog or something, you useless animal.’
Killer head-butted his chin, purring like a chainsaw.
A chainsaw?
Marcus opened his eyes.
Dark.
Quiet.
Then Pete's gravelly snore.
How could anyone's in-breath be so long?
The frame of the bunk vibrated.
For a moment Marcus remembered his cat's soft fur, the soft tickle of his breathing.
He ached for the animal's warmth.
Pete snorted and spluttered into silence.
He relaxed.
Pete snored again.
Marcus pulled the meagre pillow over his head.
Pete was barely dimmed.
He bit into the pillow and groaned.
He wedged a finger in each ear and lay listening to the seashore thud of his pulse, the distant motorboat of Pete buzzing faintly.
As he began to sink back into sleep, he relaxed the plugging and the motorboat zoomed in closer and he was awake again.
Tears pricked at his eyes.
Shut up, shut up, shut up.
At an especially porcine snore he punched Pete's mattress, taking pleasure in the pain as the wire scraped skin from his knuckles.
‘Sorry, love,’ murmured Pete and turned over.
Marcus could hear some shouting far away and close boots clanking on the metal walkway.
The door's observation panel slid open, closed, and the screw's footsteps passed on.
He turned to the wall and cried silently into the pillow.
He woke as Pete heaved himself from the bunk.
The mattress support gave a twanging sigh.
Pete pissed into the bucket, then began to scratch vigorously.
The rasp of his fingers was distinct in the stillness.
Marcus waited for him to climb back to his bunk.
Then he became aware that Pete was very close to him.
A hand touched his shoulder.
Marcus jerked away from the contact and lashed out, pushing Pete onto his backside.
‘What are you playing at?’ hissed Marcus.
‘Don't you touch me, do you hear me, don't you ever touch me.’
He was getting louder.
‘Keep your voice down or you'll have the screws in here,’ whispered Pete.
‘It's not what you think.
I was just —’‘I know what you were ‘just’.
I warn you, don't you come anywhere near me.’
‘I'm sorry if I made you jump, son.’
‘Don't ‘son’ me, you pervert.’
He should have known, the way Pete had drooled over that Jimmy.
Pete climbed back onto his bunk.
The bed settled to the task of holding the accused.
The sky was beginning to lighten.
In a low voice Pete said, ‘Really, it's not what you think.’
Marcus didn't respond.
He was thinking about twenty hours a day locked up with him.
Presently, Pete began to snore.
By morning Marcus had made a decision.
He was disgusted by Pete, but they would have to share the same space for years.
The air had to be cleared.
Pete dressed without looking at Marcus.
‘About last night,’ Marcus said.
‘I told you, it's not —’ Pete began.
‘That's neither here nor there.
I suggest we forget all about it.
It's bad enough being stuck in here without our not getting on as well.
We both know where we stand.
It's history, OK?’
He stood up.
‘Let's shake on it.’
He held out his hand.
Pete glanced at it and up at Marcus, and looked uncomfortable.
‘Alright’ said Pete, finally, and they shook hands.
‘It's history, like you say.’
His small smile lay thinly over his serious expression.
‘Perhaps we could have a game of chess later, eh?’
‘Perhaps,’ said Marcus, flinching inwardly at the contact with Pete, wanting to wipe away the touch of his sweaty hand.
‘When you get back from seeing the Governor maybe.’
‘Why would I —’‘New boy, see.
He has all the new lags in for a talking to.
You'll be alright — you probably went to the same school.
Blimey, a chat with old Fanshawe and a shower all in the same day.
Ain't you the lucky one.’
‘What's this about a shower?’
‘The weekly sluice down is today.
You just have to hope that they put our wing in early otherwise there'll be no hot water left.
It depends who's on duty, the order we go in.’
The bell rang and the sound of doors being unlocked and the thunder of boots were like a mushrooming echo.
‘Breakfast?’
Marcus asked.
‘Slopping out, then breakfast.’
Pete picked up the bucket as the door was unlocked.
‘I'll be mother.
You just bring your toothbrush.’
As they queued for breakfast, three screws pushed meal trolleys from the kitchens.
‘Where are they taking them?’ asked Marcus.
‘Up to C Landing West — that's where they keep the Rule 43's.
Rule 43 is where they can keep some lags separate from others for their own safety, like.
Even lags have morals, you know, scum like nonces — sex offenders — ain't tolerated.
A lot of us have kids of our own, wives, girlfriends — you know.
There's a couple of blokes  with AIDS up there, too, no-one ‘ll go anywhere near them.
We don't want to use the same cutlery an’ that.’
‘You can't catch it like that, though, it's —’‘You can't be too careful, though, can you?
They don't really know that you can't catch it like that.
Better safe than sorry, that's what I say.’
Mr Carter and the two large lackeys walked to the head of the queue.
‘Who is this Carter?’ said Marcus, watching the man sit down with his breakfast.
‘Mister Carter to you, son.
He's got interests in just about everything you can imagine.
You just show him respect and you'll be alright.
He tells you to do something and you do it, no arguing.
Or you're likely not to be able to do anything at all.
You get my drift?’
‘He spoke to you yesterday.’
‘That's right.
And we'll leave it at that.’
Carter reminded Marcus a little of his old house master.
‘He doesn't look like a…
‘Marcus ground to a halt under his lack of tact.
‘Like a criminal, you mean?
No, you're dead right.
He's been in the business a long time but believe it or not this is the first time he's been inside for over twenty years.
And he's only here ‘coz the tax man came sniffing around.
So, three years for tax evasion.
Not a bad record for someone as…busy as him.’
Breakfast was cold porridge, cold toast, cold tea.
Keeping his strength up was going to be hard work.
On the way out of the canteen Carter came alongside Pete.
‘Well?’ said Carter.
‘No,’ said Pete.
‘Ah,’ came the reply and Carter dropped back.
Marcus didn't ask any questions.
Back in the cell Pete began a letter to his wife.
Marcus thought about writing to his father but knew he didn't have anything to say to him.
For the last few years they had only discussed their respective businesses and he had listened to his father's bitter complaints about hunt saboteurs.
He decided to keep a journal.
He wrote the date and underlined it.
And stared at the blank page.
‘Had breakfast’?
The trouble was that the things he wanted to write about were too big to fit into the exercise book.
And in order to write about those things that upset him he would have to think about them.
He closed the book and lay down on the bunk, staring up at the bulge Pete made.
‘Is there a library?’ he asked.
‘Yeah, but you can only use it once a week and you have to get permission.
Tuesday's our day.’
Four days to go.
‘You can borrow one of mine if you like.’
Anything would do.
‘I'd like that.
What do you have?’
‘Take a look on the chair, see what you fancy.’
An Agatha Christie novel and Kafka's The Trial (isolation in a dehumanized world — great).
‘Have you only these two?’
‘Two a week is all you're allowed.
Personally, I thought Kafka's handling was a bit heavy-handed.
These Eastern types — you know, Czechs, Ruskies, that lot — do tend to be a bit morose but their hearts are in the right place.’
Good God.
Pete must have watched a lot of Open University programmes on the outside.
The last thing he needed was a lecture from a criminal.
‘Now take your Dostoevsky,’ continued Pete, ‘He —’‘What did you think of the Agatha Christie?’
‘Haven't read it yet but you're welcome to it.
I saw it on the telly before I was banged up.
And I can tell you, it wasn't the butler what done it.’
Marcus took the Agatha Christie to his bunk.
Should he ration the number of pages he read per day or should he just read the book straight through?
The door clattered open.
‘Shower,’ said the screw.
‘Come on, chop chop.’
The changing area immediately adjoined the showers.
Identical blue clothing lay in individually built mounds under worn number plates.
The showers were big, easily holding thirty or so men.
It was like a concentration camp; the absurd vulnerability of the nakedness all around, the screws' blank expressions as they monitored the shuffling of the caged.
A strutting commandant glared beneath the swoop of his peaked hat: ‘Right you lot, this isn't a holiday camp.’
Gee, thanks for reminding me, I nearly forgot.
‘You've got three minutes.
Make the most of it.’
A full-breasted woman clambered over the shoulder of the man in front of Marcus, a rose clenched between her teeth, her curves undulating with the ripple of the man's back.
Pete rubbed the steam from the glasses he didn't want nicked and said, ‘Nice one, John.
Ain't seen that one before.
Had it long?’
‘Hello, Pete!
Haven't seen you since — well, The Park, wasn't it?
Yeah, I had old Rosie here done when I got out.
Well, you know how it is.
At least she's finished.’
Talk ceased as the men came under the shower's flow.
Too soon they were being ordered out.
Marcus joined the line to collect a towel which turned out to be just big enough to wrap around and tuck in.
He combed through his hair with his fingers and headed back to his clothes.
Then he became aware of Carter's two henchmen on either side of him.
‘Mr Carter would like a word,’ murmured one.
‘Now,’ said the other.
And Marcus came to be walking between them to a partitioned corner of the changing room.
Carter watched them approach.
‘Ah,’ he said, ‘Manderley, isn't it?’
He had the careful enunciation of the self-improved speaker.
His face was curiously unlined and his wide blue eyes emphasized his boyishness.
Marcus didn't reply, and waited for Carter to continue.
‘Marcus Manderley.
Sounds like a matinee idol from the forties, don't you think?’
The two muscle men smirked.
Marcus shrugged.
What could Carter want with him?
‘The silent type, I see.
Perhaps you don't care for my conversation?’
He spoke quietly and unhurriedly but Marcus began to feel very afraid.
He looked around.
The screw at the other end of the room held his gaze for a moment and then looked away.
Marcus understood that he was alone.
The minders moved a little closer to him and the partition shut out his view of the rest of the changing room.
‘I — no — that is…
I'm sorry, what was the question?’
‘It isn't required that you speak, really.
I like my meat fresh, not talkative — you understand?
Drop the towel.’
In the summer of his second year at university he worked at a butcher's.
Mr Cavendish adapted the hymn with great enthusiasm: My meat's fresh and flavoursome, All creatures great and small, All things roast and barbecued, The Lord God made them all — and bang! down came the cleaver and the blood trickled away down the special channel.
‘There's something you should see,’ said Carter conversationally.
He reached into his shirt and withdrew a slender leather case.
The knife glinted briefly from its sheath and was concealed again.
There was a loose thread on one of Carter's shirt buttons.
His hands were pink and neatly manicured.
The two minders were either side of Marcus now and the floor jumped at him.
He could see his hand clenched against the grimed crack of the white tile.
He felt the touch of Carter's turn-up against his leg and heard Carter spitting, and the succulent sound as he rubbed his hands together.
He struggled against the nightmare grip that paralysed him.
Then his eyes snapped shut against the agony tearing at him.
Carter rammed into him, ripping at a silent, screaming centre.
Pivoting on the slow death fulcrum, he felt the hot sting of his own blood spilling from him.
He heard Gleeson's whinny, wild and excited, and willed the runt's head  between his hands, to be crushed, destroyed, all the brains and blood running away down the marble butchering block.
He felt Carter's breath gasping on his back and his hands horribly, incomprehensibly, gentle on his shoulders.
The floor lurched into his body, snatching his breath away.
He died for hours, shattering, fragmenting, spinning away over the tiles.
Then all movement stopped and he was funnelled haphazardly into a whole again and dumped on the floor.
He tumbled through a blackness shot with scarlet, fighting against a movement now absent.
Opening his eyes he saw the blood flowing from his arm, from his own bite, blossoming against the snow.
He saw the screw's boots, too, and struggled to his knees.
Looking up he saw it was a different man from the one who had chosen not to see.
‘Had a bit of trouble, have we?’
‘Fell over,’ Marcus said thickly, clutching his towel to him.
‘Oh yeah?
Look, you'll have to wait a minute while I get some gloves.
I can't clean you up till I get some gloves.
Use the towel to wipe the blood off your arm and get yourself dressed a bit.’
Marcus looked tearfully at the piles of clothes.
He was dizzy; the room was swaying.
The number — he couldn't remember his number.
He looked around and saw Pete about to go out the door.
Marcus caught his eye and spread his hands in confusion.
‘Fifteen!’
Pete called out as he and several others were herded out.
Marcus found his number and pulled on his trousers, the material stumbling against his slimy thighs.
The screw returned wearing plastic gloves.
Daggers of antiseptic stabbed at Marcus's arm, cutting away the last of the blood.
‘You sure you did this?’ asked the screw.
He nodded.
‘I don't know exactly how it happened but yes, it was definitely me.’
His tongue felt too large for his mouth.
‘Are you hurt anywhere else?’
‘No, nowhere else.
I'm fine, thank you.’
‘Isn't there anything you want to report?’
‘Everything's OK, just a little accident.
Really, everything's fine.’
‘Whatever you say, son.
You be more careful in future.’
Marcus was escorted back to his cell.
‘Fancy a cuppa?’ asked Pete without turning round.
Marcus sat carefully on the bunk, feeling that the walls were a long way away and that he was very small.
The pain was big, much bigger than him, crying blood, a spike with every movement.
Pete sounded muffled.
and as he turned Marcus noticed that he too had a loose thread on his shirt.
He stared down at his hands and examined his fingers and then noticed that there was a thread loose on one of his own buttons.
He struggled with the notion that all these loose buttons had some connection.
He watched his tears drip onto the floor and wondered from a great distance why he could not feel them running down his face.
Pete put a hand on his shoulder and he knew there was a reason why he should not have but he was so tired, so bone-achingly weary, that he could not summon the strength to remember.
He saw the mug in Pete's hand, saw the steam rising.
He didn't want tea, he wanted to lie down, to escape from the pulsing pain as its waves crashed through him.
He curled up and covered his head with his arms and waited for the dark to absorb him.
‘On your feet, Manderley, the Governor wants to see you.’
Marcus blinked up at the screw.
It was Wilson, the one that had cleaned his arm up.
‘What for?
I told you, nothing happened.
I just had a little—’‘It isn't that.
It's because you just got here.
You are new at this, aren't you?’
‘Oh, I see.
Yes, I am.
I hardly imagine that I look like an habitual criminal, anyway.’
‘There's no way of telling just by looking, Manderley, any more  than you can tell most of the gays from the straights, or Catholic from C of E. Let's go.’
Marcus rolled his sleeve down as they walked along.
He flexed his fist and the pain in his arm punched back.
His head was throbbing and his body was a bruise radiating from a single abscess of pain that cut through him at every step.
They reached a door and he waited during the ritual unlocking and locking and chit-chat between the screws.
They passed through several more doors.
It was a lucid dream, with him walking down infinite identical corridors, all painted the same pale blue, all leading to endless identical doors.
He was sick of the sound of keys and worn down by the slicing pain.
Finally, they passed into a carpeted corridor and then through a regular wooden door into a small office.
Gleeson's ferrety face darted a look at him.
The little man made a noise in his throat and his glance leapt from Marcus to the three screws and back.
Anxiously, Marcus scanned Gleeson's shirt: no loose threads.
Maybe he had changed his shirt.
Marcus grappled with elusive connections.
He felt that if he could only solve the button problem something else would be explained.
The task was too much.
He concentrated on the little man instead, pictured breaking Gleeson into pieces, imagined him crumbling like polystyrene, or starved of air, deflating —‘Inside, Gleeson,’ ordered one of the screws.
Following him, Gleeson scuttled through the door marked ‘Governor's Office’ but the air still held his shape.
‘What's he in for this time?’
Wilson asked the other screw.
‘Cars to order, you know the kind of thing,’ said the man with the bushy moustache.
‘I'm surprised he was given it at all, really.
Maybe Carter's —’ He stopped and looked at Marcus.
‘Anyway, it's hardly a surprise that he's paying us another visit, is it?
Makes no difference what for, he's always doing the bad penny act.’
Stealing cars?
That was Gleeson's crime?
No, no, it wasn't sordid enough.
What about the children he must have messed with?
It had to be.
Marcus didn't care what Wilson said, you only had to look at the guy.
His anger welled up and flushed over his cheeks.
‘Are you feeling alright?’ said Wilson.
‘Gleeson…‘said Marcus faintly.
‘That's right.
You'd best steer clear of him, Manderley, he's a nasty piece of work.
Don't want you falling in with the wrong types, do we?
A posh bloke like you.
I'll bet you're a graduate.
Am I right or am I right?’
Marcus nodded wearily.
Wilson laughed.
‘And now you're in here costing the taxpayer even more money!
Really, with all your educated brains you ought to know better.
People like you usually arrange it so that people like Gleeson take the rap.
Still, you'll know better next time, eh?’
‘There won't be a next time.’
‘That's the spirit, son, just what the Parole Board like to hear.’
Footsteps went past in the corridor and then the door to the Governor's office opened.
‘Inside, Manderley.’
He stepped into the large office and stood in front of the desk.
There was a print on the wall of a man in hunting pink on a chestnut stallion.
He looked down at the shining pate of the man behind the desk who was leafing through a file.
‘Stand behind the line,’ said the screw.
Marcus saw there was a strip of green tape stuck to the floor and he positioned himself behind it.
The man looked up.
‘Now then,’ he said and paused.
He sounded just like Marcus's father.
‘Pass the port, old chap.’
'I'd have them flogged.’
‘I am Governor Fanshawe.
You're Manderley?’
‘That's right.’
‘Sir,’ said the screw.
Fanshawe looked expectantly at Marcus.
‘That's right, sir,’ said Marcus.
The prefect twisted his ear harder.
‘And you'll remember to use my correct title from now on.’
‘As a first offender, you'll find Her Majesty's Prison Goldenhurst a salutary lesson in —’
Fanshawe swept one hand after the other over his baldness and narrowed his eyes.
‘Good God.
You're Elliot Manderley's boy.’
‘Yes, sir.’
‘Well, well.’
He stopped.
Then, ‘Well, well, well.
Yes, I heard about your case.
Poor show, Manderley.’
‘Yes, sir.’
‘Your father's a good man.
However, your being in my prison won't bring you any special treatment.
You've broken the law and you deserve to be punished.’
‘Yes, sir.’
My arse is in shreds, sir.
Isn't that enough, sir?
‘Though if you should hear anything that might be — how shall I put this — um, useful I'm sure your co-operation will be most favourably looked upon by the prison staff as a whole.
Do we understand one another?’
‘Yes, sir.’
‘Come on, Manders, spill the beans’.
I won't tell them, I won't.
‘Everything alright, though, is it?
We run a tight ship, but a fair one.’
The perfect host.
‘Do have a cigar’‘Yes, sir.
Thank you, sir.’
‘Well, off you go then.
You'll be out before you know it.’
Detention, again.
‘Thank you, sir.’
He was taken straight to the canteen and given stew and something concealed under custard.
He sat watching them get colder.
He wanted to look around for Carter despite his fear that he might see him.
He was sure he would damage Gleeson if he saw him.
Something glowed white in the brown gravy.
He poked at it.
It had an internal look, something sinisterly tubular running through stringy meat.
Bile stung his throat.
‘Nearly missed the high point of the day, eh?’ said Pete, squeezing onto the bench beside Marcus.
‘Do you not want that?’
The spikes twisted into Marcus again as he moved up.
He shook his head and slid the food to him.
The functional lump he had seen was the first to disappear into Pete's mouth.
Marcus drank the cup of lukewarm water to stop himself being sick.
‘Visit with old Fanshawe go alright?’
‘Yes.
He didn't say much, really.
What is there to say, when you think about it?
I see you're in prison, old boy.
Ten out of ten for bloody observation.’
‘Probably sees you as a bit of a traitor.
I mean, people like me are the sort he expects to end up in the nick, not blokes he'd invite to one of his do's.
You expect the servants to nick the silver, not the guests.’
‘Yes, well, it's as Wilson said this morning, you just can't tell by appearances.
Or accents.
Though I suppose they can tell you something.
I'm hardly the type to rob a bank with a sawn-off shotgun and a stocking over my head — I'd more likely do it using a computer or something.
Same result, different method.
It does have the advantage of the computer not going off in the heat of the moment and hurting some innocent bank clerk, though.’
Pete had given up on the stew and was eating the pudding.
‘Was that your game, then, computers?’
‘In a way.
I'm not a software expert or anything but I had discovered some interesting loop holes in procedures.
One small thing led to another bigger thing and so on and so forth until — well, here I am.’
‘I'm not one for computers, me.
Me eldest's got one but I never could get used to it.
Mind you, it had a chess program that he'd load up for me but it just ain't the same as a human being.
Too bloody good, too.
Which reminds me — how about we have that game when we get back?
No wager or anything, just a game for the hell of it.’
‘Yes,’ said Marcus, ‘I'd like that.’
He was surprised to find he meant it.
‘Check,’ said Pete.
‘Shit,’ said Marcus.
‘I didn't see that one coming.’
‘You need to keep your eyes open in here.’
His voice seemed loaded with meaning but when Marcus looked at him he was scanning the board.
‘I came in the same van as someone called Gleeson,’ said Marcus.
‘Yeah.
I was lucky to get you.
I don't fancy padding up with that creepy little bastard.’
‘What sort of thing is he into?’
‘Allsorts.
Bit of this, bit of that.
Cars this time.’
‘What's his connection with Carter?’
The name was profane.
It lay heavy in the air and would not go away.
Marcus's arse burnt beneath him.
‘The Man may be inside but that doesn't stop him controlling his interests.
He says who does what and Gleeson was doing what he was told.
Badly, as it happens, but it's no skin off the boss's nose, Gleeson getting done.
And inside, the rat finds things out — though Christ knows how, no-one in their right mind would pass the time of day with him — and reports back to The Man.’
Marcus considered what Gleeson might have known about him.
Only that he objected to being scrutinized in the shower.
What would Carter make of that?
That he was straight.
‘It's your move, you know,’ Pete said.
Marcus moved a bishop to block the check, and continued pondering.
So, Carter would know he was straight.
But would he?
Gleeson was so repulsive that surely no-one would be interested in him.
Carter would have to have some other way of figuring out Marcus's preferences.
Pete.
He'd spoken to Pete twice, once on the first evening and again at breakfast.
Pete lifted his knight but changed his mind and put it back on the board.
Marcus thought about the previous night.
It had shown — what?
That Marcus was straight?
That Pete was a prison queer with a wife and kids on the outside?
‘No,’ he'd said to Carter.
No, he's not interested.
Pete moved a rook and took Marcus's knight.
Marcus took a pawn.
‘It's not what you think,’ Pete had tried to tell him.
He was finding out for Carter.
It was important to Carter to know whether Marcus was straight.
‘Checkmate,’ said Pete.
‘You're not queer, are you?’ said Marcus.
‘Last night — that was a fact-finding mission, wasn't it?’
Pete's little smile of triumph faded.
‘I didn't have any choice, son.
I've got a family to think about.
I just do what I'm told, it keeps me healthy.’
‘So if I'd been queer, what happened this morning wouldn't have?’
‘That's about it.’
‘Carter's a queer that only goes for straights?’
‘He's not taking any chances — you know, AIDS and that.’
‘It isn't only queers that get AIDS you know.
Anyway, surely someone like him could get hold of condoms if that's what he wanted.’
‘Oh sure, rubbers ain't a problem.
He has those as well.
He has this thing about going bareback, though.
And a nice clean straight like you, you know, young, only seen a needle down the doctor's — well.
I'm sorry, son, I really am.’
‘It's not your fault.’
He said the words and knew them to be mostly true but couldn't believe them.
He was churning with the desire to get Pete back.
He wanted to beat that stupid moony face to a pulp and then apologize —‘Oh sorry mate, I didn't have any choice, I know you'll understand’.
Pete had sacrificed him to save his own worthless skin, holding up his fat family as some kind of excuse.
Pete could have done something.
He could have told the screws and…what?
Special protection for Marcus Manderley on the say-so of some con — oh sure.
Pull yourself together, Marcus.
Well, a warning then.
He could have at least given a warning.
To what end?
Would knowing have made any difference?
I could have gone to the authorities, he thought, asked for help.
But there it was again: protection for Marcus Manderley on the say-so of Marcus Manderley, certified untrustworthy citizen.
Would I believe me?
Would I even care?
It was futile to try to apply logic from the outside here.
This was a different place with upside down rules and no justice and prison officers who take the nod from criminals and look the other way.
Naturally the criminals also looked the other way, it was in their interest to.
You're a bastard, Pete, he thought, a selfish fucking bastard.
He still couldn't spare him a drop of real hatred, though — Carter was the one.
He would squeeze the life out of that child-faced maniac, let him breathe enough to plead for his life and then choke the air off until his cold fish eyes popped and his tongue arced down to his Adam's apple.
He relished the image, saw it clearly, felt the tendons on Carter's neck snapping under his fingers.
But there was no chance of doing any damage with the muscle Carter kept around him.
Carter could do what he wanted, when he wanted.
He had all the power.
The more Marcus thought about it, the more he realized that he would have to seek help from Fanshawe.
He couldn't go through that hell every time Carter fancied shafting the posh boy.
‘Another game?’ asked Pete.
Marcus looked at Pete blankly for a moment.
Then, ‘Uh…yes, why not.’
He rubbed clenched fists along his thighs, then open palms, and finally clasped his hands together.
‘And I'll beat you this time.’
‘We'll see about that.’
Pete began to set the pieces out on the board.
‘He'll not bother you again, you know.’
‘What's to stop him?
He can do whatever the fuck he wants and no-one will do anything to prevent it.’
‘This Carter is odd — I mean, even odder than you've got reason to think.
He likes them fresh but they've got to be like virgins — you know, untouched.
I mean once he's had you, he loses interest.
You'd know what to expect next time — that doesn't do it for him, you know what I mean?’
Pete finished putting the pieces out on the board and swivelled it around.
‘Your turn with the macaroni king,’ he said, pressing the pasta more firmly into the Plasticine.
‘I'll tell you what,’ said Marcus.
‘If you win you get to eat my pudding tonight.’
‘And if I lose?’
Marcus smiled thinly.
‘You get to eat my pudding tonight and tomorrow.’
The next morning he received a letter and a photograph of a smiling young woman with dark hair.
He didn't know her, nor did he recognize the handwriting.
Darling Marcus, You have been a naughty boy, haven't you?
I don't want you to worry about me out here — you know you can trust me.
I can't bear to visit you in that place.
I know you'll understand.
I'll wait for you, darling — I think about you every day.
You'll see me the moment you're released, I promise.
Love always, Cleo was Caroline's nickname, Caroline who was responsible for his being at Goldenhurst.
But it was impossible that she should write to him.
There was no address on the letter.
He looked at the photograph: an attractive woman with high cheekbones and large dark eyes, her hair haloing in sunlight.
It certainly wasn't Caroline.
He read the letter again.
This didn't make any sense.
Caroline had disappeared but it had been shown that it was nothing to do with him.
They'd suspected him, but of course he had made sure that there was no evidence and anyway he hadn't any motive.
But they'd had a thorough look through his life just to be sure and hit the jackpot entirely by chance.
Damn her, she'd deserved —‘That your young lady?’ asked Pete.
‘Uh, well, she —’‘She's a cracker.
You good-looking blokes, you have all the luck.
Right out of my league.
Don't get me wrong, I love my Beryl and all that but, you know, you can't help looking.
When's she going to visit?’
‘Um, difficult to say.
She's…she's abroad so it's…well, you know.’
God, why doesn't he just shut up, stop poking his nose in?
‘Well, you'll have something to look forward to, won't you?’
‘Mm, that's right.’
‘D’ you want some Blue Tack?’
‘I'm not sure I want to —’‘As you like.
Give us a shout if you want some.’
‘I'll do that.’
All the time the same questions.
Who sent the letter?
Who was the girl in the photograph?
Someone was trying to get at him.
They were succeeding.
He dreamt of Caroline.
He was trying to embrace her but each time his arms closed around nothing.
He became tangled in the red strands of her hair.
The more he struggled to break = free, the less he was able to move.
He found Carter's knife in his pocket and began hacking through the silky bonds.
He cut the last of them and followed the red thread back to its source.
He realized it was blue and saw the loose thread writhing at the button of the prison shirt worn by the smiling dark haired girl.
She blew him a kiss and removed the shirt, revealing an identical one underneath.
She blew him a kiss and removed the second shirt, exposing the shirt beneath it.
She began to undo the third shirt.
Then she paused and peered down at the writhing thread.
She put the end in her mouth and moistened it to a point.
Then she picked his file up from the desk, pulled out a needle and threaded it.
She plunged the needle into his hand again and again: one thousand and ninety five days, one thousand and ninety four, one thousand and ninety three — He was suddenly awake, sweaty and breathless.
I'll wait for you, darling.
Love always, Cleo.
Bloody bitch.
It was Caroline's fault that he was in here.
She was trying to control him, like all women he had known.
Or rather, using her, someone was trying to control him.
It had to be a woman, whoever it was was being so devious.
You'll see me the moment you're released.
What did they want?
Were they the woman in the photograph?
Who was she?
What did she know?
His fear was the only thing he was  certain of.
Fear on the inside and now fear on the outside as well.
You'll see me the moment you're released.
Was that a threat?
A warning?
Was there a difference?
‘A visitor?’
‘That's what I said.
What a shame you didn't know, you could've put your glad rags on.’
The screw winked at him.
His shoulders sloped at an alarming angle so that he looked like a pyramid wearing a hat.
‘Well, who is it?’
Creston raised his eyes theatrically.
‘You'll be wanting a nice engraved invitation next.
Bring your DJ with you, did you?’
He laughed noisily and winked again.
‘I don't know who it is.
I haven't been told anyone is coming.’
Creston's tic squeezed his eye into an especially prolonged wink.
Everything he said seemed conspiratorial, punctuated with these abrupt closures.
‘You should've been told already.
I don't know, you just can't get the staff these days.
The silver hasn't been polished for weeks.’
Marcus didn't respond.
This was one of Creston's favourite games.
Creston looked at his clipboard.
‘Since you've asked so nicely, Manderley, I am pleased to announce the imminent arrival of one Miss C Grayson.
You can ask her to your coming out party.
When is that again?’
His left eye winked solemnly.
Twice.
Who?
Grayson?
Who the hell was that?
C…
He couldn't think of any C's.
Except Cleo.
Cleo's surname wasn't Grayson.
But Cleo wrote letters though it wasn't humanly possible that she should.
It seemed the letter writer had decided to pay him a visit.
‘You've gone quite pale,’ said Creston.
‘Perhaps you've been an even naughtier boy than we know about.’
Marcus looked at him quickly.
Could he be in on this?
‘Nanny would have a thing or two to say about  that, wouldn't she?
Maybe even a spanking.’
It hadn't been irony; Creston wouldn't be able to contain himself.
The wink travelled from one eye to the other and back again.
‘Come on, then.
Time to see your lady friend.’
He scanned the room through the glass.
Two women with dark hair.
One middle-aged and fat; the other's hair spikey and tipped with purple, an anarchy symbol shaved to the scalp.
No woman from the photograph.
He tried to imagine what the woman with short hair would look like with it long.
Could it be her?
FUCK THE POLL TAX kissed her and sat down.
They held hands across the table.
‘Table 4,’ said Creston.
‘And very nice, too.
The in-breeding of the upper classes doesn't show at all.’
The blonde girl stood as Marcus approached.
She was familiar but he couldn't quite place her.
Slim.
Grey eyes, large dark pupils.
Wide mouth, shiny lips.
‘Surprise,’ she said.
‘Yes.’
They stood awkwardly looking at one another.
She stepped forward and kissed his cheek.
A gentle honeysuckle fragrance summer-kissed the air, opened the memory.
He had taken her to the woods and she sucked his cock and he screwed her on a bed of moss and soft earth.
‘Oh Marcus,’ she said and wrapped her smooth legs tight around him.
‘Oh Marcus.’
A good fuck.
What was her name?
What was her bloody name?
An erection was stirring.
‘Let's sit down, shall we?’
She clasped her small white hands together.
Glossy nails bled elegant ovals at her fingertips.
What did she know?
‘Why have you come?’
C. It began with a C. Catherine…
Coral…
‘It was in the paper.
There was a photograph and everything, and I thought, well, you know, last summer and well, you know.’
She hadn't been strong on words.
She wasn't slow but slowed-down somehow.
Carol…
Celia…
It had been very relaxing.
She wasn't in a hurry.
Camelia…
Cherry — getting close.
‘I remember…’ here it is, here it is, ‘Candy.
You've gone to a lot of trouble.’
Was she waiting for him to say something about the letter?
‘It was in the paper.
I, like, recognized you.’
She gave a slow smile.
‘You're famous now.
I thought I'd come and, you know, see you.
You don't mind, do you?’
‘N-o-o but — how did you know where I was?
I didn't think the papers said that sort of thing.’
She blinked, leisurely, like a cat.
She was very still.
He could see two little Marcuses reflected in the black of her pupils.
‘I know, you know, someone at the court.
I got him some…thing.
He owed me, you see, so he told me.
And here I am.’
She's come to gloat, he thought.
Rotten little cow has something on me and she's come to gloat.
Typical fucking woman.
‘What does the letter mean?’
Might as well come straight out with it.
‘Who's the woman?’
‘What?’
Candy sat back, stroking down the sleeve of her green velvet top.
She admired her fingernails.
Her gaze wandered back to Marcus's.
She really was a dozy bitch.
‘I don't know what you're on about.’
‘The letter.’
‘The letter.’
She was leaning forward again now.
The dark cleft between her breasts sucked at him.
‘Yes, the letter.’
‘I still don't know what you're talking about.’
She must have deliberately worn that top, knowing how good she looked.
Knowing he couldn't do anything.
Bitch.
Her thighs were smooth, her breasts firm.
Bitch, bitch, bitch.
‘And I suppose you don't know anything about the woman either?’
A frown ambled onto her face.
‘I don't, no.
What's your, you know, problem?
This place must be doing your head in.’
She was telling the truth, he was sure.
One thing he remembered about Candy was her transparency.
She'd wanted him and she'd let him know.
Lying would be too much of an effort for her.
‘I think it is, Candy, I think it is.
So, why have you come?’
Apart from the kick of waving your tits around at a caged man.
‘You were in the paper.
We, you know, in the woods.
I thought it might be nice to —’‘What do you want — my bloody autograph?
Celebrity fuck, is that it?’
Her grey-rimmed pupils floated on tears.
Oh God, here we go.
They always go for the heartstrings, don't they.
Well, this one's a miss, lady.
‘I'll go then, if you, like, don't want me here.’
A tear plopped onto the table.
She sniffled a couple of times and looked at him.
Her eyes were weird enough as it was without being bloodshot as well.
‘I think you've got what you wanted, so you might as well leave.’
And don't think I'm going to watch your tight little arse wiggling out that door.
I've done too much of what you expected already.
I've still got my pride.
She stood.
‘I won't come back.
You've been, like, really horrible.
I only wanted —’ He stared at the table.
‘Goodbye, Candy.’
Her shoes trip-tropped across the room.
He watched her, drinking in the curve of her buttocks, and her long, long legs.
He saw Creston watching her, too.
Creston's tic fluttered.
Marcus winked back.
In the middle of the following month he received an identical letter and photograph.
And again the next month.
And the next.
His bafflement was unbearable but had to be borne.
He had trouble sleeping.
His head was full of it.
There was no-one he could tell.
Around and around he went with no answers.
For all his thinking he came to a sole conclusion.
He was safer inside than out.
At the beginning of the fourth month, a young man who had been in only a few days attacked Carter with a knife.
Carter toppled over and lay pumping his blood onto the canteen floor.
The beautiful boy moved to help him but his lanky companion pulled him back.
The boy hid his face in the other man's shirt and allowed himself to be drawn away.
In the surprise-hushed room everyone could hear Carter's whimpers.
Then there was a flurry of screws, and rubber-gloved stemming of blood, and the removal of the young man.
And, avoiding the area, now shiny with disinfectant, where Carter had fallen most prisoners finished their lunch.
Although all the blood turned his stomach, Marcus was exultant.
He hoped fervently that Carter would die.
He prayed for it.
The attacker claimed that Carter had threatened him with the knife and when he tried to take it from him, Carter had been wounded.
Although everyone somehow seemed to have been looking the other way at the time, the young man's explanation was accepted and written down in his file to make it true.
Carter didn't die.
After a couple of days in hospital outside he was transferred to the prison hospital.
The young man waited for Carter's return to prison life, knowing that once he was back in control there would be a suitably messy reply.
Then rumours began to circulate.
‘They say Carter's ill.
He's caught some bug and has to stay in bed,’ said Pete.
‘I hope it kills him.
Wishful thinking apart, it's more likely that he's making the most of a nice soft bed and reasonable food,’ said Marcus, trying to find a creative way out of the check Pete had put him in.
‘I don't think so,’ mused Pete.
‘It doesn't do for someone like him to be away from the reins for too long.
Specially when he was taken out of commission by a nobody.
He'll either have to off the lad or get him to work for him.
He got round his minders, after all.’
‘Hmm,’ said Marcus, ‘Have you been moving these pieces about when I wasn't looking?’
‘Bloody cheek!’
‘It's probably the hospital diet that's his problem.
Could your system cope with warm food after what you've been used to?
You must have moved something, Pete, I can't be about to lose again.
I planned my campaign so carefully this time.’
‘Ah well, the Pete Blake play has been perfected over the years.
Who says time in the nick can't be well spent.’
‘I was paying my taxes for you to acquire your skill, I'll have you know.
You might at least drop a game now and then to show your gratitude.’
‘Nah, you've got hundreds of years of peasant servitude to make up for.
Let's see you suffer a bit.’
Cells being unlocked and the banging of metal doors announced the progress of the screws along the wing.
Pete glanced at his watch.
‘Dinner already?
Blimey, at this rate we'll be having our dinner before we've finished lunch.
‘Well, look on the bright side — it might actually be hot if they did that.’
‘Yeah, and they'll get a chef in from the Savoy an’ all, I suppose.’
They joined the queue behind Billy Martin, the man with the tattooed neck.
He claimed he was inside for not paying his poll tax.
In fact, he'd beaten the crap out of two bailiffs and then been caught in possession of several extremely valuable and extremely stolen computers.
Marcus sympathized.
As the queue edged forward, the trolleys for the Rule 43's were wheeled past.
‘There'll be an extra one on there tonight, eh?’ said Billy.
‘We got someone new in then?’ asked Pete.
‘Blimey, haven't you heard?
They've got Carter up there now.’
‘They protecting us now?
Do me a favour.’
‘No, no.
He's got AIDS — you know, HIV positive and that.’
‘They ain't the same.
Marcus here —’‘Yeah, yeah, whatever — he maybe hasn't got it yet but it's as good as.’
Marcus was thinking: if Carter is positive, and if he was when he got to me, then I am.
He must have been.
They say it takes three months or so to show up.
So if he'd only got it recently, it wouldn't have been found.
Jesus Christ.
‘I heard they gave him a blood transfusion up the hospital,’ said Billy.
‘Must have done some tests, I suppose.’
Marcus saw realization and fear shifting behind Pete's eyes.
Oh God, don't say anything to anyone.
I couldn't take going up there with all the nutters and the rapists and the child molesters.
I'd die.
I'll die anyway but Christ, Pete, please don't say anything.
‘Yeah well,’ Pete said slowly, ‘He brought it on himself, didn't he?
His brand of…activity is bound to get you in trouble sooner or later.
He's fuckin' weird, the sort of thing he's into.
He's no loss, is he, let's face it.’
I'm going to die.
It can't be true.
‘Bloody right,’ said Billy, peering with distrust at his stew.
‘There'll be someone to take his place soon enough but with any luck they'll just stick to violence.’
I don't want to die.
‘Yeah, a return to good old traditional values,’ replied Pete sarcastically.
He prodded a lump in his serving of stew.
‘Here, this has got tubes and stuff sticking out of it.’
Oh sweet Jesus, how can this be happening to me?
‘They just put those bits in to make you think you're really getting meat,’ snorted Billy, ‘You know, like eggshells in the war.’
‘Before my time,’ said Marcus.
How can I even listen to this stuff, let alone join in?
Fuck it.
‘Before mine, too, thanks very much.
I remember my dad telling me stuff though.
And they still had ration books when I was a kid.
Times were hard.
You don't know you're born, your generation.’
‘Don't be hard on the lad,’ said Pete, ‘They got different problems, that's all.’
Fuck, fuck, fuck, I can't handle this.
I feel like I'm falling down something dark.
Smooth sides.
Give me something to hold on to.
Someone help me.
Marcus lay awake.
I don't want to die.
Time after time he defended himself from Carter, time after time  the screw intervened, again and again he wasn't pushed to the floor.
Again and again he despaired at the truth.
His heart pounded, wild with life.
Cold blackness grasped at him, fingering its way through his warm blood, just waiting its moment.
I don't want to die.
He saw his flesh rotting and twitching with maggots, his eye sockets empty, his face eaten away.
Or coming to consciousness in the coffin, tons of silent earth pressing down, his own lungs sucking away the last of the air.
Scratch marks on the inside of coffins.
Skeletons twisted and agonized.
I don't want to die.
No chance of being buried alive, not with this.
Some consolation.
Tumours erupting on his body.
A killing cold.
Weakness.
Helplessness.
Alone.
Death.
A closing down, a shutting off, nothing more.
He'd always said so.
Something more?
Beyond all this?
Clutching at straws.
I don't want to die.
That it should happen here, it made a cage inside a cage.
Last thing ever seen bars and institutional blue.
They'd let him out, they'd have to.
Freedom to die.
Prison to hospital.
Emaciated and bedridden, stick-like arm shaking hands with the Princess of Wales, smiling up weakly.
Dying for the media.
I don't want this, I don't want to die.
What would she know about it anyway?
Pampered little cow, with her public bleeding heart.
Posturing while she checks her lip gloss.
Photo opportunity with the dying.
I won't do it.
How long have I got?
How long?
He couldn't remember how long HIV carriers might take to develop AIDS.
How long?
He looked for signs of illness.
Nothing.
His muscles flexed, strong, strong.
How long?
Pete putting his mug and toothbrush away.
Even moved the photo.
People would think he was a queer, they were the ones that got this.
What the fuck did that matter, better a live queer…
Would he see his mother when…when…
How long?
Mother.
She'd got so thin, dry and brittle, her coffin light, like it was empty.
Who will cry for me?
He hadn't cried for her.
She hadn't allowed him to inconvenience her when she was alive, so he didn't let her do it when she was dead.
Would he be punished for not being sorry?
Where will I go?
Will I go anywhere?
She used people.
She chose a man to leech from.
The bitches all do that.
Get a man and mould him to their own design — onto their personal potter's wheel he goes, all the unacceptable bits gouged out.
So play their game, go along with it till they give out the goodies, maybe play a little longer if the taste is good — then when the designer glint in her eye gets too bright, move on.
If you hadn't moved on, someone would care now.
But they're all users, moulders, deceivers.
Anyone to care would be something, surely.
And if they did, so what?
It's me that's…
Dread was filling his mouth, constricting his throat, blocking his nostrils.
He gasped around his horror.
I want to hurt everyone.
Everyone should feel this.
Why should I be alone?
It's her fault, that bitch Caroline with her red hair and her expensive perfume — he wouldn't be here if it wasn't for her, it was her that had killed him.
Her and Candy and all the rest of them.
All those gloating women looking down into his grave, whispering their sisterly secrets behind their sly smiles.
He lay in the dark, admiring the logic of his sudden conclusion.
He would take them with him.
As many as possible.
He would stay strong.
He had purpose.
From the day he got out, he would apply himself to spreading the invisible killer.
He had nothing to lose and they had everything.
Let this Cleo impersonator, this writer of letters, do what they liked.
I'm not afraid of you any more.
I have just one thing to fear and I will show it to you.
One thousand and four days.
And counting.
Dressing to Please They won't miss me for a morning.
I don't think they like me much in that office but then, I'm not keen on them either.
I'd rather be at the dentist, like they think I am, than with them.
The fact is, I cancelled the appointment so now I have a morning at home to myself.
There is one girl, Lisa, that's alright.
She dresses nicely, she's really feminine.
She wore this lovely flowery dress last week though I felt too shy to ask where she got it.
I have trouble finding clothes I like, I'm very choosy.
On the other hand, I wouldn't want to just copy someone.
I like to create my own image.
I have a look to see what I might wear today.
The red blouse perhaps?
I couldn't resist buying it, it's so well made and the fabric is cool and smooth.
I could wear that with the black skirt and the red shoes.
Mind you, the red shoes go well with that dress I got in the sales.
Decisions, decisions.
I'll do my make-up first, something fairly neutral so I can choose what to wear later.
I take trouble with my appearance though God knows why when the office is full of philistines.
It was bearable when Marcus was still there.
I sat opposite him at the Christmas do and he spent ages talking to me.
I remember he laughed and I noticed properly for the first time what a lovely blue his eyes were and a little thrill went through me.
He held my gaze for just a fraction longer than you'd expect, and I was certain then that underneath his professional front he was interested in me.
He even put his arm around my shoulders when he wished me a merry Christmas.
But Marcus got himself into trouble, silly boy.
I'm a loyal person, though, and he can rely on me even if he has hurt my feelings.
I settle myself down at the mirror.
I love the smell of cosmetics, it's so definitively feminine, and the silky brushes and fluffy powder puff are so soft on the skin.
It always fascinates me, the way my other self appears as I carefully apply concealer and foundation, shader and blusher, eye shadow and liner.
The lips come last; I outline them first and then fill in with a brush.
I did my  hair first thing, so now I untie the ribbon and shake it free.
I have to say that I look pretty damn good.
Marcus would think so, I'm sure.
I wonder what kind of underwear he would go for.
You can't miss with black lace: I'll wear that today, as a gesture.
I got in a bad way.
I couldn't take my eyes off him at the office and five o'clock was such a wrench — all those hours before I would see him again.
Though there was some subtle flirtation between us it wasn't enough for me.
I couldn't let him know the strength of my feelings — I was afraid it might frighten him off.
One afternoon I summoned up my courage and as casually as I could I invited him for a drink after work that evening.
‘I can't tonight, I'm afraid.
Prior engagement,’ he said, giving me a meaningful look.
Well, I was a bit hurt, as you can imagine.
And jealous, oh yes, I was jealous alright.
‘Another time maybe,’ I said.
‘Yes, another time.’
I was beside myself.
I couldn't stand the thought of him seeing anyone else and so I did the only thing I could think of: I decided to spy on him.
Somehow if I could only know what he was doing and who he was seeing, that gave me some kind of control over the situation.
It wasn't logical but that was my reasoning.
I put on the black basque and the lacey-topped stockings.
The basque makes me feel like I'm being hugged.
I slip on the red shoes and have a look in the mirror.
I practice a few poses for Marcus.
I could have been a model, I reckon, though at twenty five I suppose I'm too old now.
I look good enough for one of those men's magazines.
Some women make such a fuss about them but they're wrong, really they are.
The female form is a thing of beauty and ought to be looked at.
I have a few copies of quality magazines; the girls are just gorgeous.
It's important to know what a man likes.
I've even had a go at taking some photos of myself.
I set up my camera on a tripod and use the self-timer, do a lot of measuring to get the focus right.
I have a little darkroom and do my own  developing.
I was going to send some pictures to Marcus in prison but I don't suppose they would let him have them.
Instead, I sent him one of me that I took one weekend, with the sun coming in the window and shining on my hair.
I got the angle just right and it's very flattering; you almost wouldn't recognize me.
It'll soon be time for me to write again.
After all, I wouldn't want him to forget me.
I know something about him that he doesn't know I know.
Whenever I think about it I get a fluttery feeling in my tummy.
He'll be so glad it's me that knows and it can only bring us closer together.
How I know this thing is all tied up with the decision to spy on him.
The night that he said no to my offer of a drink I went home feeling really down.
I had to know what he was doing without me.
When it got dark I drove over and parked around the corner.
I dressed in black to reduce the chance of being seen and couldn't believe my luck when I found that the house opposite his was unoccupied, with big bushes in the front garden that I could hide behind.
After a while Marcus came to his window and it seemed he stared straight into my eyes.
Even from where I was I could see how good he looked.
It was just too galling, seeing him all dressed up for someone else.
He closed the curtains and I waited for him to come out to his car.
I didn't drive to work, so he wouldn't recognize my car when I followed him.
I had a camera with me, too, loaded with film that could take pictures in low light conditions.
As I waited, a woman in a light coloured dress and a short dark jacket came out of the house next door to his.
When she passed under the streetlight I could see her long, curly hair was red; its rich hue glowed like fire, despite the way the artificial light stripped the colour from everything else it touched.
When I saw her go up Marcus's path my heart was banging so loudly I'm amazed they didn't hear me.
Somehow I managed to have the presence of mind to photograph her going into the house.
I waited again for them to come out but nothing stirred.
Maybe they'd got straight down to it.
Dirty little whore, tempting a man as red-blooded as Marcus.
What was he supposed to do?
He could hardly  turn her down, it would hurt her feelings.
He's such a nice man, I could imagine him getting unwittingly manipulated into a situation like that.
I must have stood there for a couple of hours, getting more and more fed up as my imagination worked overtime.
No lights came on where I figured the master bedroom probably was; that comforted me a bit.
But what on earth were they doing?
When I couldn't stand it any longer I dashed across the road and crept round the back.
Through the window I could see the remains of a meal on a table set for two.
Candles.
Very romantic.
There was no sign of them.
I had a quick peek into the kitchen but it was empty.
I sneaked round the front, thankful for the thick hedge.
The curtains were rucked up, leaving a little triangle to look through.
I'd come in in the middle of something.
Marcus was doubled over and I saw the woman tumbling backwards.
She caught her head on the corner of the hearth.
I stepped on a twig which made a noise that seemed as loud as thunder and I ran back across to my hiding place.
I waited for the ambulance to arrive.
But it never did.
I dress in the red blouse and black skirt, and watch myself do a twirl in the mirror.
I fetch the wide black belt and put it on.
That's better, the waist is accentuated now.
The skirt is lined and rustles against my legs as I move, like a comforting whisper.
The colours go well together, but my nail varnish is the wrong shade — it would go better with the dress.
I decide to change, it's easier than painting my nails again.
As I undress, I catch sight of my mirror self again.
If only they could see me in the office now I'd turn more than a few heads.
The thought pleases me but what they think is irrelevant really; it's Marcus that I'm saving myself for.
When no ambulance came I tried to think things through.
Maybe she was alright, maybe things looked worse than they were — even min or cuts to the head bleed a lot.
What had Marcus been dragged into by that tart?
He obviously hadn't been willing: maybe she'd taken offence and attacked him.
Yes, that sounded plausible: he wouldn't take it just because it was offered to him on a plate.
He's more  discerning, he'd prefer a slow build-up, like him and me.
I had to have another look.
Back across the road I went and peeped through the gap.
Marcus was standing looking down at the woman.
Then he bent down and began to roll her up in the hearth rug.
I began to realize the implications of what had happened.
Of course I wanted to help but didn't want to startle him by suddenly appearing.
I knew then that I loved him and I would do anything for him, no matter what.
He lifted the rug easily, and I could just imagine the muscles rippling under his shirt.
I crept around to the back of the house and watched as he carried her through the kitchen and into the garage.
After a few minutes he came back and locked the door behind him.
He switched off the kitchen light on his way out.
I sat down and leant against the wall, trying to decide what to do.
I waited maybe an hour and he didn't reappear.
I went and looked through the gap in the curtains.
Bless him, he was fast asleep on the sofa.
I got the garage window open, and shone my little torch inside.
The window was immediately above a big table and I quickly clambered in.
I could smell sawdust in the cold, damp air and hear the buzz of the freezer.
I saw the rolled-up rug under the workbench and it was a few seconds before I realized that she wasn't inside it any more.
I shone my torch around but couldn't see her.
And then I cottoned on.
I opened the chest freezer.
She looked very peaceful, like a girl I once saw who had drowned.
They laid her on the grass and her wet hair was shiny, like it was slick with grease.
The redhead's hair sparkled with tiny ice crystals.
It was quite beautiful.
I knew what I had to do but it took some courage to switch that light on, I can tell you.
Marcus could have turned up at any moment.
I photographed her, the rug, the interior of the garage, the woodworking equipment and electric saws laid out on the workbench beside the handbag and folded blue jacket.
I put out the light, climbed out of the window and pushed it to.
There was no-one out in the street and I hurried to my car.
I kept doing these funny little laughs all the way home and while I was developing and printing the  film.
I was happy because this had brought Marcus and me closer together.
I couldn't wait to tell him on Monday.
The dress is very nice but once I've got it on I realize I'm just not in the mood for it.
I walk around in it for a while anyway, watching myself approach in the mirror and admiring the way the skirt moves as I walk.
No, it will have to be something else.
The cream dress I bought last week.
Yes, that's it.
The fabric is soft and light on my body though the style is quite tailored, almost severe.
I giggle a little as I fetch the little dark blue jacket I bought at the same time: it was rather extravagant to buy both but they seemed to belong together.
And then I had to get the shoes, too, but the overall effect is just right.
I'm sure Marcus will love it.
Maybe I could do something different with my hair.
Put it up, perhaps?
No, that's not it.
Some highlights would liven it up.
That's more like it.
Something warm, something much more red.
I could take some colour photos of myself in the whole ensemble and maybe send Marcus one.
I might just do that; it would give him a nice surprise.
On the Monday I got to work early.
I kept hugging myself as I imagined over and over telling Marcus what I knew and reassuring him that it wouldn't make any difference to us.
It was so wonderful that we had a secret to seal our relationship.
The girls started to arrive and I looked busy with a pile of papers so that I wouldn't have to talk to them.
Nine o'clock came and went and there was no sign of him.
I started to feel really low, certain that something awful had happened.
Ten to ten.
I was fiddling blindly with files, my eyes full of terrible possibilities.
Marcus lying bloodied and broken, at this very moment being lifted into an ambulance, the red blanket being pulled up over his beautiful face.
A tear dripped onto my desk.
Or he could be lying in hospital, his life hanging in the balance, an electronic bleep pulsing in the hushed room.
I had to be at his side as he opened his eyes and saw me there in my lonely vigil…
‘No Marcus today?’ the new girl asked Lisa.
‘No, he's got meetings with clients all day.
He'll be in tomorrow.
Take a message when anyone calls.’
Joy flooded through me.
Every thing was alright, though it rather took the wind out of my sails to know that I wouldn't get to speak to him after all.
I decided to phone him in the evening.
But when the time came, I couldn't do it.
I needed to see his expression as he realized how much I meant to him.
The next day they moved me up to the second floor to work with Mr Perkins, a weird old guy who smelt of dogs and cleaned his ears out with the lid from his ballpoint pen.
That night I was really depressed.
The whole world was conspiring to come between us.
I was to work for smelly Perkins for a whole week.
I knew Marcus needed me and it was breaking my heart.
I sat at home that night and cried and cried.
I even took some photographs of myself crying so that I could show them to Marcus later and he could see how upset I had been.
I knew he wouldn't want me to be pushy and, hard though it was, I decided to wait until the end of the week and then invite him round for dinner.
I spent the time making the house look nice; I wanted him to know just what a lovely home I could build for us.
I bought an expensive photograph album with a padded cover and gold curlicues on it and spent ages arranging the photographs I had taken at his house so that they were in just the right order.
I was really proud of the master stroke which made the album something special.
I interspersed my self-portraits throughout the collection and they gave the whole thing a lot of impact if I do say so myself.
When I got into work on the big day I found out he'd been arrested at the weekend.
And what's more, for the second time in a week!
The first time was in connection with disappearance of one Caroline Farringdon — Cleo to her friends.
Of whom there were more than a few I would imagine, thinking of how she had thrown herself on the poor defenceless Marcus.
‘That came to nothing,’ said Lisa, ‘though it makes you think.
I mean, there must be something behind it for the police to go that far.
And he seems so, well, normal.
Not the kind of bloke that would…well, you know.’
‘I'm sure it was all some dreadful mistake,’ I said, wanting to smack the pursed lips off her silly face.
What did she know about him, anyway?
She was getting a kick out of the whole thing, I'm sure of it: her big cow eyes were bright and she was all breathy when she talked about it.
‘Still…’
She paused, for effect.
It was all I could do to stop myself from shaking her until her neat white teeth rattled.
She looked at me.
‘Go on,’ I said, with a weedy kind of smile, ‘I'm all ears.’
‘Well,’ she said, ‘It turns out he's been syphoning money off the firm.
They've taken away the master computer file and charged him with, well, we don't know exactly what but it involves an awful lot of money.
They've remanded him in custody.’
She said the formula with a nauseating mixture of self-consciousness and self-satisfaction.
‘Is that it then?’
I asked.
‘Well, yes,’ she said, looking hurt that I wasn't more impressed.
I was upset, naturally, but I was damned if I was going to let it show.
‘Nicking the company's money isn't all that terrible, is it, when you think about it.
It's only money at the end of the day.
It's not like murder or something.’
‘But that's just it.
I mean, it could have been.
It might have been, in fact.’
‘But it wasn't, was it?’
I said, and went and sat down.
So now Marcus has been made an example of and locked up, and all for some crime committed from behind a desk.
It's not right, it really isn't.
But as I say, I'm a loyal person and I'll wait and make his life worth living when he comes out.
This cream dress is creased, it ought to be ironed before I wear it.
There isn't time now; I have to leave for the office soon.
And the lace on this basque is making me itch — I think I'll change it for something more practical.
As I undo the hooks, I catch a fingernail and it dangles from my own by a thin string of adhesive.
They only get in the way when you're using a keyboard and anyway they're easy to  get off because the glue's not up to much.
I pull them off, rubbing nubs of glue off my own nails.
I get a sudden pain in my left eye and it starts streaming.
I can't keep the eye open and I fumble my way to the bathroom to clean my contact lens.
A little black flake of mascara's got trapped behind it.
My tears have washed a lot of the make-up from that eye and there's a black streak running down my cheek.
It'll be easier to clean the whole lot off than to try to repair the mess.
In any case, in the harsher bathroom light I can see that I've put it on too thickly.
I'll wear my glasses today to give my poor bloodshot eye a chance to recover.
In the bedroom I get changed for work.
Flat black shoes, a white shirt and the grey two piece suit, I think.
It's well cut and made of high quality fabric that hangs beautifully, although it's a little staid; just the thing for the office.
Time is getting on; I must go.
I lift the long curls from my head and brush some life back into my flattened hair.
I pop my tie into my pocket.
Frankly, I don't much like wearing them — however, it is expected so I'll put it on when I get in.
Until I get there, though, I can please myself.