

CHAPTER 61
The day following the recapture of Louise Wyatt, Angel One felt he was once again in full control of his destiny.
The organisation he had so painstakingly built up had successfully weathered several crises over the past week.
Threats to their security from absconding members, and interfering snoopers had been dealt with satisfactorily.
They had even absorbed and beaten off a full-scale attack on their street distribution structure by a powerful enemy.
Later that same enemy had been bloodily counter attacked and neutralised as a threat for the foreseeable future.
The double consignment of heroin had been secured, despite a surprise attack, albeit by one demented man, and Tiger Control in Chicago had taken delivery of their merchandise the previous day.
The other four divisions of Dragon Control had received their consignments that day.
This success had earned him the approval of the Director.
Lastly, he had attended personally to the reprisal attack on Grant's girlfriend and the recapture of the Wyatt girl.
The firebombing of the Sherman & Grant office premises had underlined the lesson, while taking care of the possibility that the elder one may have kept the severed finger he had been sent as a warning.
Now only one problem remained to be dealt with.
The Prophet.
And that was being attended to that very night by his oriental colleague, Angel Four.
Yes, things were running smoothly once more.
He spent the remainder of the day arranging and supervising the cutting, packaging and distribution of his own section's share of the heroin consignment.
His mind touched briefly on the two defaulters who were awaiting their fate in the basement cells.
Miller and Wyatt.
But he dismissed them for the time being, having more important matters to be dealt with.
Business before pleasure, as the westerners' saying ran.
But Angel One's confidence was misplaced and his self-congratulations premature.
Through the darkness of that chill November evening, the patchwork army of Grant and Springfield was mustering.
Singly and in groups, in a variety of motorised transport, ranging from thirty-ton sixteen wheelers to private cars, they were converging on their Operations HQ — which just happened to bear a remarkable resemblance to the County Sheriff's office in Rockford!
CHAPTER 62
The early part of the day following the attacks on Pam and the firm's office passed uneventfully for all concerned.
But it was the false calm of the eye of the storm — and the storm was to break out anew with renewed fury when darkness fell.
That night, even as Grant's and Springfield's combined troops were mustering in Rockford for their council of war, the Prophet returned to his luxurious city apartment from the final meeting of his latest highly successful and highly profitable crusade.
As usual, he was accompanied by his personal retinue of sect heavies.
He was still high on the adrenaline generated by the mass hysteria he had whipped up, then fed on, like a vampire sucking the tainted blood of its own unclean offspring.
His euphoria was further fuelled by a delicious anticipation of pleasure still to come.
Because tonight he would punish Detective Lieutenant Curtis for daring to offend him.
Tonight he would butcher one of his surveillance team.
The very thought stirred him sexually, and fanned the smouldering coals of his insane bloodlust into flickering life.
Now, in the privacy of the bedroom of his personal suite, swiftly and silently he began to change into the black clothing he wore when prowling the night for victims.
As he prepared for murder, he was doing so to the incongruous background of the Mormon Tabernacle Choir's rendering of The Battle Hymn of the Republic .
It was a favourite of his, because he identified with the third line of its first verse —He hath loosed the fateful lightning of His terrible swift sword .
In his sick mind, he was the terrible swift sword of the Lord — chosen by Him to cleanse the world of the sin of whoredom.
As he strapped the cleansing blade to his left arm, a thrill of carnal excitement shuddered through him at the prospect of another kill, as the bloodlust took full possession of him, banishing the last vestiges of sanity from his sick mind.
Again he experienced the heightened awareness and sharpening of the senses, which always accompanied his bestial transformation into a primal killer.
He had just completed his preparations —dressed to kill would have been an apt description of his appearance — when suddenly he froze, head cocked in a listening attitude.
Below the soft throb of the music, his increased sense of hearing had picked up the quiet click of the outer door to his private suite being closed.
Someone had violated the privacy of his lair.
Reflexively he flicked off the ceiling light, leaving the room dimly illuminated only by the soft glow of his bedside reading lamp.
Like a cornered animal at bay, his eyes swept the bedroom seeking a place of concealment.
Angel Four stood for a moment with his back pressed to the closed door of the Prophet's private suite.
He examined the long split-level room stretching away from him to the tall windows at the far end.
It was unoccupied, as he had expected it to be.
Taking advantage of the cover provided by the soft throbbing music, he glided along the line of the wall until he stood outside the door of the private bedroom.
Pressing his ear to the edge of the door, he listened intently, while a full three minutes ticked past.
His ear confirmed what the electronic bug had told him shortly before he had entered the suite, namely that there was no sound of movement from within the bedroom, or its adjacent bathroom.
Satisfied his intended victim was asleep, he gripped the door handle and turned it slowly.
He had taken the precaution of oiling its mechanism along with the door hinges earlier that day, so as to avoid any noise that would alert the occupant of the room.
Angel Four eased the door open enough to allow him to slip quickly into the room beyond.
He stopped then, staring perplexed at the empty bed.
The covers were undisturbed, showing that the bed had not been slept in.
His eyes searched the room rapidly, then fell on the door leading to the connecting bathroom.
He crossed the floor silently and listened at the closed door.
Nothing.
Puzzled now, he opened the door quickly.
The room beyond was in darkness.
He flicked the light on, and the greenish glow reflecting back from the tiled interior showed it to be empty of human occupation.
His puzzlement gave way to a momentary unease, at the possibility that the Prophet may have somehow managed to slip out of the apartment undetected, as the detective lieutenant had suggested.
But the thought only lasted a second.
He knew it was impossible for the Prophet to have left the apartment.
He had set double guards to prevent any such attempt.
Then another probability occurred to him.
Could his intended victim have somehow guessed, from an unguarded look perhaps, that he had been marked for death?
If so, he would try to hide in his panic, never thinking how easily he would be discovered.
Again his eyes quartered the room for the most likely hiding places.
There was the bed, of course, he could be cowering under it, or maybe in the spacious built-in wardrobe.
He was about to cross to the wardrobe, when his eye caught a slight movement of the heavy floor-length curtains over to his right.
A little smile of triumph touched his mouth.
Mystery solved.
Crossing the room as though he were heading for the wardrobe, Angel Four suddenly changed direction, took two swift paces to his right, seized the curtains with both hands and jerked them open.
As he did so, a black gloved hand shot up through the suddenly exposed gap and rammed a razor sharp six-inch blade hilt-deep under his ribcage.
Angel Four grunted once in agony as the cruel steel sliced straight up into the pulsing muscle of his heart.
His dying brain barely had time to process the fading image of his killer and recognise the black-clad form with the glowing eyes as the Prophet, before its circuits closed down permanently.
As he fell, the Oriental's hands were still convulsively gripping the heavy drapes.
His dead weight pulled the curtain rail from its mounting and the thick material cascaded down over his corpse, providing it with a ready-made shroud.
CHAPTER 63
The Prophet stepped out onto the short balcony and slid the glass door closed behind him.
He found the weather had turned foggy again.
It was not as thick as it had been on the night Mary Lou Evans had died, but it was still sufficient to reduce visibility to about 30 -40 yards.
It was ideal for his purpose.
An ideal night for murder.
Within minutes he had unclipped and set up his ladder bridge and negotiated the crossing to the fire escape platform with his customary ease.
He descended to the fourth floor platform and stopped to scrutinise the dimly lit, fog shrouded alley below, searching keen eyed for signs of the hidden watcher he knew would be there.
He quickly located his man in the deep doorway where he had positioned himself, by the intermittent glow of his cigarette.
Having done so, he settled himself to wait with the patience of a hunting predator on the stalk, until the prey presented an opportunity for the kill.
Motionless, unmindful of the cold or the swirling fog, he watched the man below, waiting for boredom to slacken his concentration and make him careless.
In the end, it was none of these things which gave the Prophet his chance.
It was much simpler and more basic.
It was the call of nature.
He had almost resigned himself to the fact that this cop was too cautious to be caught out like the one he had almost jumped five nights previously, when without warning the man below stepped out from the shelter of the deep doorway.
The Prophet drew back and watched his quarry through the trellis work of the platform at his feet.
The cop peered up at the towering fire escape for several seconds, then, satisfied it was deserted, he walked across the alley to the opposite wall.
This placed him almost directly under the fire escape's raised bottom platform.
The Prophet leaned cautiously over the platform's side rail, and made out the cop's dim figure in the deep shadow cast by the iron staircase.
The man was urinating against the alley wall.
Exultation coursed through him in anticipation of an easy kill.
Moving soundlessly on his thick rubber soles, he ghosted swiftly down to the lowest platform.
He was now a mere ten feet above the urinating man's head.
The cruel blade slid smoothly from its sheath into his right hand.
Swinging lightly over the top rail he glanced down, measured the drop to the shoulders of his unsuspecting victim below, and stepped into space.
As he did so, the silence was shattered by a warning shout from further up the alley.
‘Joe, look out!
Above you!’
As he dropped towards the startled, dodging man beneath him, the Prophet realised his mistake.
There were two cops on duty in the alley.
For some reason, the watch must have been doubled by his hated enemy Curtis.
In fact the reason was quite simple.
Curtis, fully aware that this was the last night of the Prophet's current crusade, had anticipated that he might choose it for a last hunting expedition, before retreating to his lair upstate.
Accordingly, he had indeed doubled the surveillance team, detailing two men to each side of the Eldorado apartment block.
In addition, the lieutenant himself, accompanied by another three men, was parked not far from the eastern end of the alley, providing an instant backup for any point of action.
In the alley itself, Detective Gary Lomax had been keeping watch on the towering fire escape.
He had positioned himself in a narrow doorway, in the vain hope it would provide him with some shelter from the biting cold.
Some thirty yards further up the alley, huddled in another doorway nearer to the fire escape, was his partner, a young black detective name of Joe Foster.
as if the cold wasn't enough to put up with, Detective Lomax's disgust and discomfort were increased by the damp clinging fog, which was gradually thickening and reducing visibility.
Bored and fed up, he was straining his smarting eyes to pierce the swirling murk to keep the fire escape in view, when his attention was drawn to his colleague moving out from his surveillance position.
He watched him move quickly across the alley, and make for the patch of deep shadow under the iron stairs.
Evidently he was going to empty his bladder, and had chosen to do so in the concealment of the shadow cast by the fire escape, rather than foul up his doorway.
Suddenly Lomax caught a suggestion of movement on the fire escape platform, directly above where Foster was standing straddle-legged facing the alley wall.
Then a momentary thinning of the swirling fog revealed to his horrified gaze the alarming sight of the black garbed figure sliding over the platform rail to drop on his unsuspecting colleague.
It was at that point Lomax had leapt from the doorway, wrenching out his gun, and bellowed his frantic warning.
Foster's nerves had been on edge all through his tour of duty in the alley.
Lieutenant Curtis had made it very clear to the surveillance team how mentally unbalanced and dangerous he considered the Prophet to be.
He had also warned them that the guy was physically strong, and that he had a kink for cutting his victims.
It certainly wasn't Foster's idea of an easy tour, lurking in a cold, draughty doorway in a poorly lit service alley, in weather conditions more suited to a horror movie set.
His nervous tension, allied to the freezing cold, combined to fill his bladder to the point where it became decidedly uncomfortable.
When he could no longer contain the need to relieve himself, he decided against pissing in the doorway.
The cold and damp were bad enough to put up with, without adding the stink of stale piss to his overall discomfort.
Nor could he bring himself to stand with his back to the fire escape.
Instead, he would use the wall directly alongside it.
That way he reckoned he would hear anyone descending the iron stairs.
The last thing he expected was an attack from above.
In the event, his nervousness saved him.
He was so keyed up, his reaction to Lomax's warning shout was instantaneous.
Without thinking, he ducked and started to turn, at the same time snatching for his gun.
His speed of reaction was such that instead of his attacker landing square on his back as intended, his half turn meant that the plunging figure crashed into his right shoulder, knocking both men off balance.
The downward stab of the razor-sharp blade missed its intended target of the soft hollow at the junction of neck and shoulder, and instead sliced his right arm, bone deep, from shoulder to elbow.
Foster screamed in panic as he felt the cruel steel slice his flesh, and he threw himself bodily away from his attacker, hitting the ground in a rolling break-fall and spraying himself with his own urine as he did so.
He fetched up on his back and forced up his gun hand, ignoring the tearing agony of the slashed muscles of his upper arm.
In horrified disbelief he stared at his empty hand.
He had dropped his gun!
It had tumbled unnoticed from his grasp when his arm had been cut.
He was helpless to defend himself against the terrible gleaming weapon in the fist of the menacing black figure looming over him.
The Prophet, having missed his first killing strike, realised he would have to move fast to avoid capture by the trap set for him by his hated enemy.
Recovering his balance with uncanny speed, he snarled and launched himself after the still tumbling figure of his intended victim.
He could see the whites of the fear-filled eyes in the black face as he leapt at him.
In that same instant, the deafening crash of gunfire filled the narrow confines of the alley.
He heard the clang of metal on metal, and a ricochet whined viciously past his head.
Then a hammer blow struck him below his left shoulder blade, and he was punched violently to the ground by the heavy .32 slug.
As he fell, the knife clattered from his grasp.
His brain exploded with fury and he was about to force his numbed body onto its feet again, when his right hand fell on something hard and metallic.
It was a gun.
With the cunning of the insane, he closed his hand over it, lay still and listened to the footsteps which were approaching at a run.
He waited till they slowed to a stop a few feet away and a voice said, ‘Joe?
You okay?’
Then he rolled over, pointed the gun at the bulky figure and pulled the trigger twice in rapid succession.
The Prophet's lack of expertise with a gun saved Lomax's life.
Jerking the trigger instead of squeezing it with a steady pressure, meant the gun muzzle being pulled slightly down and left for the first shot.
As a result, the slug hit Lomax low in his right side, inflicting a painful flesh wound rather than a fatal chest shot.
The impact knocked him spinning to the ground.
The second shot, fired while the gun was still bucking from the recoil of the first, went wild.
Behind the Prophet, Foster had fumbled out his personal radio with his left hand, his right now refusing to function due to the injured muscles of his upper arm.
Keying the transmit button he spoke rapidly, his voice shrill with fear and panic, covered by the noise of the gunfire.
‘Foster…the alley…it's him…he's armed…’
Then, remembering the pre-arranged code word, he added hastily, ‘Armageddon!
Armageddon!
Get th'fuck in here!’
The Prophet scrambled to his feet.
He was hatless, his silver hair awry, his eyes glowing with insane fury.
His upper body felt curiously numb, but he could feel a burning pain deep within him when he breathed.
Swaying on his feet and feeling light-headed, he looked around for his knife.
The holy weapon with which he did the Lord's work, cleansing and punishing the fornicating Jezebels of the night, and with which he had punished the sodomite.
It had more holy work to do this night.
More sinners to dispatch to everlasting hellfire.
Before he could find it, the whoop of fast-approaching sirens filled the night.
Next moment the swirling fog in the alley was suddenly lit to a brilliant white by the head lamps of the car which came roaring in at the far end.
Animal instinct warned him that the car's appearance meant more enemies that he could handle in his present condition.
Baring his teeth in a soundless snarl of frustration and fury, he turned and ran for the opposite end of the alley, away from the oncoming car.
The billowing white fog, reflecting back the glaring head lamps, swallowed him up.
CHAPTER 64
Curtis had told the driver to park the unmarked police car as near as possible to the alley entrance at the rear of the Eldorado apartment block.
The driver had found them a parking slot some forty yards distant, and there the four man back-up team had begun their long vigil.
To pass the time, the conversation had ranged over a variety of topics, from sport to current affairs, then had finally settled after some time on shop-talk — inevitable when any group of cops got together anywhere in the world.
Throughout all this, Curtis contributed least, for the most part staring moodily out of the window.
He felt sure in his bones that their man would try something tonight.
But he was understandably apprehensive in case anything should go wrong.
Twenty years of police service had convinced him that Murphy's law applied especially to police operations — no matter how meticulously they were planned, if it were remotely possible for something to fuck up, then it would!
Not that he would have admitted it to his men.
He was aware that their confidence in him was in part based on the myth that he was devoid of any of the normal human weaknesses such as fear or self-doubt.
‘Ol’ gravel guts' and ‘Ol’Stoneballs' were two of the more complimentary nicknames his men attached to him.
Curtis knew this, and was secretly proud of his image.
It was into this quiet atmosphere of cigarette smoke and casual conversation that the sudden crackle of Foster's radio transmission sounded.
The hysteria in their colleague's voice would have been enough by itself to ensure their prompt response, but the unmistakable background of gunfire added urgency to the situation.
Even before Curtis's barked order of ‘Get this fuckin' heap movin'!’ the alert driver had already flipped the car into gear and begun to swing into the traffic stream.
As they accelerated towards the alley mouth, siren screaming, the lieutenant was calling into his pocket transmitter.
‘Curtis to all units…
Armageddon…repeat Armageddon…location four…
Units One an’ Two, seal off west end of alley…
Unit Three join seal off east end…suspect is armed an' dangerous…move in now!’
They took the corner in a skidding turn, and rocketed into the dark mouth of the alley only a few yards ahead of the second police car, which was racing up from the opposite direction.
Lights blazing, their car cannoned off the kerb, tyres squealing in protest, then they were roaring along the alley.
Curtis, craning forward, left hand braced on the dash, right hand clutching his gun, was straining to see ahead through the swirling fog, with the aid of the car fog lights.
Then, they were braking to a skidding halt as the towering framework of the fire escape loomed up out of the mist.
Minutes later the alley was sealed off and thoroughly searched., including the fire escape, discovering the Prophet's means of exit from the apartment.
From the two wounded men Curtis had the full story of what had happened, but of the Prophet there was no sign.
He had obviously managed to make the far end of the alley and slip out under cover of the fog, scant seconds before the other cars had arrived to seal it off.
Fuming with rage and frustration, Curtis called in immediate reinforcements, and ordered a full-scale manhunt in the vicinity of the apartment block.
He also put out a city-wide A.P.B.
on their man, warning that he was armed and dangerous.
From Lomax's claim to have hit him, backed up by Foster, he was able to add to the suspect's description the fact that he was reportedly injured by a gunshot wound, probably in the upper body.
Out of the whole mess, Curtis took consolation from two factors — wounded and losing blood, the bastard wouldn't get far on foot, and into the bargain he had lost his knife — already on its way to Forensic, who would doubtless prove it to have been the murder weapon with which he had butchered his victims.
The Prophet sprinted from the alley exit scant seconds before the first of the police cars roared out of the fog and screeched to a halt at the dark gap he had just left.
Instinctively he had turned in the opposite direction from the Eldorado block.
It would be the first place his enemies would check.
He did not run far.
Very quickly he found it increasingly painful to breathe.
His left lung felt as though it was on fire.
About half way along the block, he dropped thankfully to a walk.
Just then a wave of nausea engulfed him, and he swayed on his feet like a drunk man.
A darkened shop doorway appeared on his left, and he ducked into it for a moment till he recovered and regained his breath.
The numbness in his shoulder was beginning to wear off now and he was aware of a sticky warmth on his back, hips and legs, and that the needling pain in his upper back was intensifying.
Deep in his sick brain his survival instinct warned him his injury was serious.
He had to seek shelter — somewhere to lie up and heal.
From the concealment of the doorway, his feverish eyes examined the street as far as he could see.
The lighting was brighter than in the alley and the fog was thinner out here, patchier.
Suddenly a coughing fit seized him and a stab of agony lanced through him from back to front.
He felt as if something had torn inside him.
It had.
The upper lobe of his left lung, punctured by Lomax's bullet, had just ruptured under the explosive pressure exerted by his coughing.
He spat blood, and a thin trickle painted a red line from the corner of his mouth to his jawline, whence it dripped onto his coat lapel.
He wiped a hand across his mouth, and stared at the scarlet smear on the back of his black glove.
Shelter.
He had to find shelter.
So he could rest up and heal.
He must hide from his enemies while he was weak.
When he had regained his strength he would go hunting again.
Then they would pay for hurting him.
In blood!
He pushed away from the wall against which he was leaning and staggered out onto the sidewalk again.
As he made his unsteady way along, one or two people glanced curiously at him.
They saw what they took to be a wild-eyed drunk, well dressed and bleeding from a blow on the mouth.
Then they saw the gun he was clutching down by his side, and they averted their eyes and hurried past.
City dwellers, they knew that curiosity didn't only kill the cat like the old proverb said, it could also kill people!
A block and a half from the alley, he saw the solution to his problems.
Temporary shelter — and the means of gaining the secure refuge of his lair upstate, Bethlehem House.
A bespectacled, smartly dressed man was struggling to open the front passenger door of his parked car, while clutching a large paper bag of purchases from the all-night drug store he had just left.
The man succeeded in unlocking and opening the door, then leaned in to release the catch to deposit his bag on the passenger seat.
Having done so, slammed the door shut, walked round the front of the car, opened the driver's door and began to climb in behind the wheel.
Triumph sent a surge of new strength through the Prophet, and he crossed the broad sidewalk at a lurching run, shouldering an indignant passer-by out of his way, jerked open the rear door of the car and half climbed, half fell, onto the back seat.
Before the astounded car owner could react, the Prophet had pulled the door shut, reached over the back of the driver's seat and jammed the muzzle of the gun into the man's neck.
‘Drive!’ he snarled.
The man was petrified with fear.
He was a family man and, despite being a native New Yorker, he had never been closer to real violence in his whole life than on the TV. screen of his comfortable suburban house in Richmond.
In his rear-view mirror he could see the glaring eyes and twisted blood smeared mouth of his assailant, and he could feel the pressure of the gun muzzle behind his right ear.
He was acutely conscious of the fact that his life hung on a twitch of his captor's trigger finger.
His fear focused his whole concentration on the tiny circle of steel pressed against his flinching neck, and on the white-knuckled finger he could imagine curled round the little half moon of metal — the least movement of which would blast him out of existence.
Then the gun muzzle prodded him painfully, and the order was repeated louder, more insistently.
‘I said Drive!’
Fumbling, leaden footed, clumsy with fear, he stalled the car twice before succeeding in pulling jerkily away from the kerb.
As he did so, he frantically searched his mind for something reassuring to say to the maniac in the back.
Something that might save his life.
On TV. he had heard so-called experts pontificating on how to deal with terrorists in hostage situations — how the hostages should try to establish a rapport with their captors.
He gave it a try.
‘Listen friend,’ he began tremulously.
‘I'll do whatever you want.
I won't give you any trouble.
I have a wife an’ four kids.
If it's money you want, I don't have much with me, but what I got you're welcome to.
Take the car too, if you want…’
His pleading was cut off by another painful jab of the gun muzzle and by the snarling, thick voice from behind him.
‘Shut up and drive!
Head north.
You hear me?
North.’
So much for the experts and their fuckin' theories, the driver thought bitterly.
He nodded miserably and headed north.
Negotiating a turn to accomplish this, his eyes momentarily met the eyes of his captor again in the rear-view mirror.
Terror gripped him anew, and he tore his eyes away from the insane glare he met there.
He began to sweat.
He also began to pray.
CHAPTER 65
It did not take long for Curtis to establish what had happened.
Witnesses were found and coerced or bullied into telling what they had seen, by the simple expedient of sealing off the entire area for blocks around and threatening all-night interrogation sessions, unless information was forthcoming.
Within half and hour, Curtis learned his man had been driven off in a green Cadillac by the unfortunate owner of the car, whom he had taken hostage at gun point.
An A.P.B.
was flashed to all mobile units across the city — with the added instruction that no attempt was to be made to stop the car while the driver's life was being threatened.
Instead it was to be tailed and kept under observation, until the arrival of Curtis and his squad.
Curtis was standing beside one of the unmarked Homicide cars parked outside the Eldorado apartment block, absent mindedly toying with a clear plastic production bag.
In the bag were four spent cartridge cases, which had been found at the locus of the attack on Foster and Lomax.
Standing alongside him was Turner.
While anxiously awaiting the first sighting report of the wanted man, they were watching with some satisfaction the handcuffed members of the Prophet's entourage being bundled none too gently into the waiting paddy wagons by grim-faced uniformed cops.
The body of the murdered oriental had been discovered when the Prophet's private suite had been forcibly entered and searched.
A sizeable quantity of drugs, including heroin, had been found and seized also, along with a veritable arsenal of guns and ammunition.
It occurred to Curtis that if this was the amount of weaponry the sect maintained the Prophet's city suite, then Grant could run into some heavy firepower out at Bethlehem House later that night.
A shaft of light suddenly pierced his thoughts…
Bethlehem House…of course…that's where the Prophet would be trying to make for, if anywhere.
He should have thought of it before.
If the wounded fugitive reached the sanctuary of his upstate lair, and if Grant failed in his audacious plan to close it down, then the crazy sonofabitch would be free to kill again…and again.
He would have to be stopped.
Curtis came to a decision.
He handed Turner the production bag and indicated the prisoners.
‘Tex, take over here, willya?’ he said.
‘Get this lot down to the precinct an’ throw the book at ‘em.
I'm takin' this car.
Tell Flaherty to relay any sightin' reports to me.
I've had one of my famous hunches, an’ I'm gonna follow it up.
I need you to cover me fer a couple of hours at th'most.
If Devlin asks, jes' tell him I'm followin' a hot line of inquiry, okay?’
Turner shot a quizzical look at his chief.
‘You figure y'know whar’ he's headin'?’he asked quietly.
When Curtis nodded, the younger man looked troubled.
‘You goin' after him y'self, Chief?’
He was answered by another nod.
‘You think that's a good idea?’
Curtis met the younger man's eye and held it.
Slowly he nodded his head.
‘That's exactly what I think, Tex.
Listen, this bastard's gotta be stopped.
But he ain't some two-bit punk on the run after blowin' someone away.
Someone y'kin talk into givin' himself up when he finds himself cornered and surrounded by armed cops, an’ he gits to feelin' scared an' sorry fer himself.
‘We're dealin' here with a fuckin' serial killer , who's too insane to feel fear.
An’ he's got a hostage.
If we corner him, he won't negotiate.
The crazy fucker'll blow the poor slob away.
So, I reckon I'm the only chance the guy's got of comin' outa this mess alive.
Because the moment our man makes a wrong move, I'll take him out!
An' I won't git the chance, if we've got half the fuckin' NYPD an' the CBS Newsnight cameras lookin' on.’
Turner made to speak, but Curtis held up a hand to stop him.
He glanced round to make sure no-one was within earshot, then continued.
‘Tex, I ain't askin' you to approve.
All I'm askin' is that you stall fer a couple of hours.
You don’ know where I'm at…or why.
I jes' ordered you t'take charge of the prisoners, told you I wuz goin' t'check on somethin', an' took off.
Okay?
Your ass is covered.
Whaddaya say, pardner?’
The younger man nodded his head with obvious reluctance.
‘Heck, I ain’ worried about coverin' my ass.
I'm with you all th'way, Chief.
Always am, y'know that.
But I don' like it.
It's yore ass that's on th'line here, not mine.
Y'got yore two hours.
I jes' hope y'know what you're about.’
Curtis reached out and clapped Turner on the shoulder.
‘Thanks Tex.
You're a solid guy.
An’ you're a good partner t'have, though I hate t'admit it.’
He grinned fondly at the younger man.
Turner returned the grin.
‘Flattery'll git y'anywhere.’
‘That's what I'm countin' on,’ Curtis retorted as he ducked into the car.
He settled himself behind the wheel, pulled the door shut and looked up at Turner through the open window.
‘Oh, by th'way, I nearly forgot t'mention.
I filed a recommendation today fer you t'be promoted to detective sergeant at th'next board.
Devlin's backin' it too.’
The grin on Turner's face disappeared for a startled moment.
Then it returned, extending delightedly from ear to ear.
‘Hey thanks, Chief…but I reckon this could be a blatant attempt to influence a police officer in the execution of his duty.’
‘Too fuckin' right it is!’ retorted Curtis, and gunned the car away from the kerb.
Turner watched his tail lights disappear round the far corner of the block, his amusement tinged with concern.
He liked Curtis and he fully sympathised with his motives in going after the crazed killer on his own.
Mad dogs were best put down, not caged in kennels from where there was always the chance they might escape to bite again.
He just hoped Curtis would be okay.
The Prophet was insane and a remorseless killer.
He was also wounded.
And wounded animals were always at their most dangerous when cornered.
How much more dangerous a wounded mad animal?
Thirty minutes of fast driving, involving quite a few near collisions in the fog shrouded streets, had finally brought Curtis's quarry and his unwilling chauffeur clear of the city.
Even now they were travelling through sparsely inhabited country as they headed further upstate.
The driver knew that the further north they progressed into the wild untamed uplands, the more remote the oases of human habitation would become, and the less likely the chance of any assistance in his plight.
Out here he fog bank which hung over the city had thinned to non-existence.
A large sign swooped towards them out of the night, its message glowing luminously in the beam of the headlights.
LAST CHANCE FILLING STATION 2 MILES UP AHEAD.
YOUR LAST CHANCE TO FILL UP FOR 30 MILES it read.
The driver glanced at his fuel gauge.
The needle was hovering just over the red.
His hopes of a chance to escape soared.
He half turned his head and addressed the slumped figure in the back, directly behind him now, the menacing gun held low and pointing straight through the upholstery at the middle of his back.
‘We're nearly outa gas.
The sign said this fillin' station we're comin' to is the last one for thirty miles.
If we've got much further to go, we'd better fill up.’
There was a grunt of agony as his captor leaned forward to check the fuel gauge.
The driver tapped it nervously with a forefinger to guide the man's eyes to it.
Apparently satisfied, the man leaned back, stifling a choking, coughing fit.
After a moment of wheezing, bubbling breathing, his voice grated out thickly.
‘Very well…stop and fill up.
Just remember…one wrong move…and you die!’
The driver nodded.
‘No tricks.
I promise.’
He decided to try to provide himself with a little more scope for an escape bid.
He cleared his throat.
‘How about the toilet?
You could go with me.
I need to go real bad.’
Although he was hoping to use it to get away from his captor, his bladder was indeed uncomfortably full.
‘No!’
The barked refusal brought on another bout of painful, quickly stifled coughing.
Then, breathlessly, the voice rasped out, ‘No toilet.
Relieve yourself where you sit, if you must.
If you attempt to leave the car, I will kill you.
I will shoot you in the spine through the back of the seat.’
The driver stiffened as he felt the gun muzzle jab him in the small of his back through the upholstery of the seat.
His heart sank, his faint hope of creating an opportunity to escape crushed.
As he pulled the car off the highway into the gas station forecourt, it occurred to him that his only chance now would be if the pump attendant noticed something amiss and called the police after they'd gone.
He pulled up at the pumps and the attendant, a young black wearing green coveralls and cap bearing the petrol company's logo, approached and leaned down to the open window.
‘Fill ‘er up?’ he inquired.
‘Please.’
The driver nodded jerkily.
‘What's y'star sign, m'man?’ the young black asked.
‘Huh?’
The driver was mystified, his mind on other things — specifically on the gun only inches from the base of his spine.
At that moment, a warning pressure reminded him of its menacing presence.
‘Y'star sign…y'know…what grade you wantin'?
Don’ mind me, it's my li'l joke.’
The attendant explained with a friendly grin.
‘Oh, I see…uh…four star please,’ the driver replied vaguely.
He tried to catch the attendant's eye but the man was already turning away and reaching for the nozzle of the pump hose.
The driver sat drumming his fingers nervously on the steering wheel while the attendant busied himself filling the tank, checking the oil and radiator, and wiping the windscreen.
All the time, the silence in the car was broken by the harsh, rattling breathing of the occupant in the back seat.
When he'd finished, the attendant stuck the chamois leather in his belt with a flourish and leaned down again to the driver's window.
‘That'll be fifteen-forty,’ he announced, presenting his palm for the money.
‘You wan’ Green Stamps?’
The driver shook his head dumbly, as he fumbled out a handful of crumpled bills and loose change from his pocket.
His mind was racing now, beads of sweat standing out on his forehead, as he desperately tried to think of some way of alerting the pump attendant to his predicament without endangering them both.
Another warning jab of the gun through the seatback made him start, and he dropped a couple of coins at his feet.
The attendant looked at him, suddenly curious.
‘You okay, m'man?’ he asked.
‘If you'll pardon the expression, you look kinda white.’
Again a friendly grin split the black face.
The driver mumbled a non-committal reply and thrust a ten and two fives at the attendant.
‘Here.
Keep the change.’
As the attendant took the bills with a delighted, ‘Hey, thanks man,’ the driver caught his gaze and held it.
He flicked his own eyes towards the rear seat, and his heart leapt as the black man's eyes narrowed slightly then glanced at the figure in the back.
The driver felt sure the attendant had caught on, and hoped he would now walk away without showing it.
The streetwise young black would have done just that, had he been given the chance.
He had indeed caught on from the bad vibes the driver had been giving out — the nervousness, the pale sweat-beaded face, the rapid eye movement towards the back seat — that something was bothering the guy.
When his eye travelled casually over the man's shoulder, the reason became clear.
He saw the gun first, held against the back of the driver's seat in the extended fist of the hunched dark figure in the rear.
Then his startled gaze met the glowing eyes above the white patch of the handkerchief the man was holding at his mouth.
Suddenly the pump attendant wanted nothing to do with this.
He dropped his gaze from the burning orbs in the dark interior of the big car…and he saw the gun again.
It was pointing straight at him now.
It was the last thing he ever saw.
The bullet took him right between the eyes, blowing his brains out through the back of his head.
His lifeless body sunfished backwards, arms outflung, slammed into a display rack and crashed to the ground in a cascade of oil cans.
When the gun roared deafeningly behind him, the driver felt the heat of the muzzle blast searing the side of his face.
He screamed in fear and panic, threw his weight frantically against the door, grabbing for the handle as he did so.
He never made it.
In his desperation to escape, he fumbled the lever and the door jammed partly open.
The gun roared angrily again and the inoffensive family man slumped sideways against the treacherous door, minus the top of his skull, which had been blasted out through the open side window.
The Prophet sat for a couple of minutes, gathering his strength.
Then he opened the rear door and painfully eased himself out to stand, swaying, alongside the car.
His back and chest were on fire.
He kept his breathing shallow, every breath was agony now, the desire to cough harder to suppress as he bled internally.
And each cough that forced its way past his throat brought with it more of the bright frothy blood, which dribbled from the corners of his mouth faster than his red-soaked handkerchief could mop it up.
Any normal person would long since have collapsed.
Only his raging insanity was keeping him going.
Disjointed thoughts kept floating to the surface of his sick mind from somewhere deep within its murky depths.
He had to keep on the move…to Bethlehem House…and safety…from pursuit…from his enemy…from the pain…
The clear image of Curtis's hostile face which flickered on the screen of his inner vision, sent a tide of rage surging through him, lending him strength to overcome the pain.
He reached down, gripped the limp corpse of the driver by the blood-sodden collar of its coat, and heaved it clear of the car one-handed.
Then he lowered himself into the driving seat, slowly and painfully, and pulled the door shut.
Seated again, his back supported, the worst of the agony eased, leaving only the continual pulse of fire deep within his chest with every rasping breath he took.
With the choking warm liquid continually bubbling at the back of his throat, it was as though his body was a seething volcano of agony, threatening to erupt and spill a lava flow of his life's blood from the crater of his mouth.
Another racking fit of coughing seized him, doubling him over and ending only when he retched up a gush of phlegm and blood.
When the spasm passed, it left him weak and sweating, his chin resting on his chest.
After a time he raised his head.
He felt curiously calm.
His pain had receded a little, as though this latest bout of agony had overloaded some circuits of his brain's pain-response centre.
He felt clear headed enough to tackle the remainder of the long journey north.
He reached for the ignition, started up, selected gear and eased away from the pump rack and the sprawled forms of his latest victims.
As he pulled out of the gas station exit onto the highway, he drove carefully at first, getting the feel of the big powerful car.
Soon he was picking up speed as his confidence increased and, cruising at a steady 80 m.p.h., his whole mind centred on the one burning goal of reaching the sanctuary of the distant Bethlehem House.
CHAPTER 66
Ten minutes after the tail lights of the stolen Cadillac had dwindled to nothingness up the long straight highway, Curtis pulled into the deserted forecourt of the isolated gas station.
Deserted — except for the sprawled corpses of the two murdered men, lying where death had struck them down.
Death, in the person of the Prophet.
Climbing from his car, Curtis surveyed the carnage wreaked by his enemy — for that was how he regarded the Prophet now — his enemy.
He knew he had gone down the road no cop should take, namely that of allowing the pursuit of a criminal to become a personal vendetta.
But his initial anger at finding the latest two victims of the insane killer's bloodlust, blazed into an all-consuming hatred of the man who had done it.
A quick glance was sufficient to tell him both victims were beyond all medical help.
Not unless someone had discovered a way of reviving someone who had lost most of his brain matter and half of his skull.
So Curtis decided his first priority was to resume the chase.
He stared north for a moment, thinking out his next move.
It would not be long before some driver would chance on the scene and phone the local police.
In the meantime, the slight delay would allow him to run down his quarry.
Before the mad bastard killed again.
His decision made, he turned towards his open car door, then paused.
He spun on his heel and surveyed the forecourt in the area of the pumps, searching for something he thought he had seen lying there.
Spotting what he was after, he walked quickly over to the object and picked it up.
It was something he felt might come in very handy.
A few minutes of brief activity later, he was on his way again, the needle climbing steadily till it was hovering on the 120 m.p.h. mark.
Less than twenty minutes later, he had sighted the red pin-points of his quarry's tail lights far up ahead.
He steadily closed the gap, clawing back the miles between their speeding cars, until only a fast diminishing couple of hundred yards separated them.
Soon the car in front was brightly illuminated by his headlights, and he could see the head and shoulders of the Prophet starkly outlined against the windscreen.
Deliberately he kept his lights on full beam as he drew inexorably closer, to dazzle the man and destroy his night vision.
Only thirty yards or so separated them, when Curtis saw the Prophet lift a hand from the steering wheel and knock the rear-view mirror out of alignment to avoid being blinded by the glare.
He decided to launch his attack right away, while the other man's night vision was still impaired.
Pressing the gas pedal to the floor, he swung the car out and began to overtake.
When he was running alongside, he eased off the gas and matched his speed to that of the other vehicle.
He glanced to his right and saw the handsome, leonine profile of the silver haired killer he had spent the past five years hunting down.
In that same instant, the other man turned his head to face him, and for a brief moment their eyes met and locked in a bond of mutual hate.
For the space of two heartbeats the two protagonists, hunter and quarry, glared at each other across the intervening gap of a few feet, while hurtling through the night at better than 80 m.p.h.
Then the Prophet's lips drew back from his teeth in a soundless snarl of triumph, and the next thing Curtis knew, he was staring down the muzzle of the gun the other had levelled at him from point blank range.
Reacting instantly, Curtis jerked the wheel hard over and sideswiped the other car, at the same time jerking his foot from the gas pedal.
In the same timeless instant the gun bucked in the Prophet's fist, and Curtis flinched as the passenger window imploded, lashing his right cheek with stinging fragments of glass.
He felt the heat of the bullet as it whined angrily past, missing his forehead by a hairsbreadth, and exited via a starred hole in the driver's window by his side.
By the time he regained control of the wildly swerving vehicle, the Prophet's car had drawn some forty yards ahead again.
Curtis's hand was reaching into his coat for his own gun, when he paused and made a rapid assessment of the situation.
He had to avoid shooting the Prophet, if possible.
That could be made to look like abuse of his authority at a subsequent inquiry.
He was miles outside his own police area.
Out here, he was only Bernard Curtis, citizen, with no authority to chase and apprehend anyone, let alone gun them down.
The proper procedure would be to make contact with the local force, and turn over the situation to them.
Quite apart from the threat of legal proceedings from sect appointed lawyers, he also had Deputy Commissioner Elrick eagerly awaiting the slightest slip on his part, to pounce and nail his ass to the wall with a disciplinary hearing.
The solution had been in the back of Curtis's mind from the moment he took off in pursuit of the crazed murderer.
Finding the bodies in the gas station forecourt had only served to convince him his way would be best for everyone — as well as making the world a safer place.
He intended forcing the killer off the road, in such a way as to make it look like he had lost control of his car, overcome by loss of blood from his bullet wound.
But Curtis in his eagerness to catch up with his man, had momentarily overlooked the fact that the Prophet had picked up Foster's gun.
This, despite the fact that he had not long seen the evidence of its use with his own eyes, in the shape of the two sprawled corpses at the gas station.
His mental blank had almost cost him his life.
He did a rapid calculation.
At least five shots had now been fired from Foster's Police Positive, and being a revolver it held six rounds.
That left only one shot.
If he could make the Prophet fire and miss once more, the gun would be empty…always assuming the man had acquired no further ammunition.
It was risky.
But it was worth a try.
Determinedly Curtis pressed his foot to the floor, and once more the gap between the two cars narrowed.
Then he pulled out and began to overtake again.
This time, however, as soon as his front wing was level with the rear wing of the other car, he swung the wheel hard over.
The resultant collision caused both cars to swerve violently, but Curtis was first to recover control of his vehicle, the Prophet being weakened and handicapped by his severe wound.
The lieutenant noticed the difficulty his enemy was having in regaining control, from the Cadillac's still swinging rear end.
He seized his chance and slammed into its rear wing again.
As he did so, Curtis was unaware that the Prophet had twisted half round and was aiming the gun over his shoulder directly at him.
The crunch of the impact between the two wings smothered the crack and whine of the bullet, which drilled through the windscreen before his face.
Curtis felt a searing pain lance across the right side of his neck, and saw a small starred hole appear in the glass in front of him.
Then his vision blanked out completely, as the whole windscreen went suddenly opaque.
Instantly he slackened speed and punched out a sizeable hole in the shattered glass with his clenched fist.
Despite his decreased speed, he had to squint against the onrush of the slipstream buffeting through the ragged hole before him, in order to catch sight of the other car.
He was swearing steadily and obscenely as he did so, realising that the windscreen damage inflicted by the near miss would make it well-nigh impossible for him to engage in a high speed chase now.
But his frustration was unfounded.
The same collision that had spoiled the Prophet's aim, had also smashed his car out of his one-handed control, much as had happened to Sherman two nights previously.
Before Curtis's bleared but exultant vision, the big green Cadillac swerved completely out of control at the end of a hundred yard, rubber-shredding skid, when the front nearside tyre blew out.
The car lurched to the right, mounted the grass verge, and ploughed through the safety barrier.
Bouncing and bucking down the rough, uneven scrubland of the sloping ground beyond, it finally fetched up hard when it smashed head-on into a rocky outcrop.
Curtis pulled over, doused the lights and parked on the wide verge next to the break in the barrier.
Climbing out, stood for a few seconds to let his eyes adjust to the pale moonlight, then he stepped through the gap and began to pick his way carefully down the uneven terrain of the slope, towards the crashed car below.
Dangling from one hand he carried the object he had brought from the corpse-strewn forecourt of the gas station.
As he approached his defeated enemy, he felt no sense of triumph, which surprised him after all the frustrating years of hunting him down.
Instead, he felt only a strong desire to bring the whole thing to a finish…to do what he had come to do, risking life and limb in the process.
Reaching the silent wreck, Curtis walked up to the open driver's door, which was hanging askew on one twisted hinge.
He stood for a minute or so gazing down expressionlessly at the pale, bloodless face of the Prophet.
Eyes closed, his strong features were peaceful in repose.
Starkly outlined against the pale skin of his lower jaw, a thin trickle of blood was running from one corner of his mouth.
Curtis found it hard to believe that he was looking at the killer of at least twenty people.
Twenty known victims, that was.
How many others he may have slaughtered during his one-man mission to cleanse the city streets of prostitution, God alone knew.
The irony was, thought Curtis bitterly, it had all been done in His name.
The Prophet was leaning back, his head cradled on the head-rest of the driving seat.
He was still alive, as was evident from the harsh rattling breathing, which was forming a bloody froth on his pale lips.
The steady trickle of blood from the corner of his mouth was dripping from his chin onto his coat front.
Lomax must have scored a lung shot, Curtis observed clinically.
He regarded the mortally wounded man with no pity in his heart.
All too clearly, he remembered the long procession of terribly mutilated corpses, stretched out on cold mortuary slabs over the past five years, in the wake of the man's bloodlust.
He hoped the bastard had suffered from Lomax's bullet.
He was going to suffer some more before he went!
Just then, Curtis's thoughts were interrupted when the injured killer's eyes flickered open.
Dull with pain and shock, they were unfocused for a few seconds.
Then they cleared, registered Curtis's presence, and looked up to meet his implacable gaze.
The Prophet's bloody lips drew back from his teeth in a silent snarl of hate, and he began to speak.
The words came haltingly, with frequent pauses for gasping breaths, which rattled in his throat.
‘You!…
I knew it was you…the whore lover…spawn of the Pit…you need not think…that you have defeated me…the Lord is my strength…
He will bear me up…in the face of mine enemies…
I am His chosen instrument…
I will return…when He has healed me…made me whole again…
I will return…for you…
I will destroy you…
Curtis-s-s !’
The name was spoken with a malevolent hiss, as though he were spitting it from his blood-smeared mouth, so hateful was its foul taste to him.
Curtis held the stare of the glowing, hate-filled eyes.
Then he slowly held up the object he had carried from the car — the object he had found in the gas station.
It was a gallon can of gasoline.
The Prophet's gaze switched to it and his eyes widened as he saw what it was by the light of the moon.
Slowly Curtis began to unscrew the cap.
‘Mister, if you return from where I'm sendin' you,’ he said grimly, ‘they won't call you a Prophet.
They'll call you Lazarus!’
Stepping forward, Curtis tipped the can and began to pour its contents over the wounded killer's clothing and into his lap.
The stink of gasoline filled the air and the Prophet's eyes widened in shocked disbelief.
His expression quickly changed to horror, then fear.
‘What are you doing?’ he croaked.
‘No!…you cannot do this to me…you are a police officer…you dare not…no!…my God, no!…’
He struggled ineffectually to extricate himself from behind the wheel, but his maimed body had been pushed beyond its limits of endurance.
That, and the steady loss of blood from the massive internal damage inflicted by the passage of Lomax's bullet through ribs, muscle and lung, rendered him too weak to escape the prospect of the horrifying death he now faced.
Impassively, relentlessly, Curtis continued to soak the ranting man's clothing, ignoring his pleas.
When the can was half empty, he pulled open the rear door of the car, leaned in and liberally splashed most of the remaining gasoline over the spacious interior.
Leaving the door open to create a better fire-draught, he stood again in front of the still babbling, gasping Prophet.
The mortally wounded killer was alternatively pleading and threatening now, his insanity having paradoxically deserted him, in circumstances which would have driven others to the brink of madness.
His raving was suddenly choked off in a fit of agonised coughing by the stinging, acrid fumes of the gasoline which cascaded down over his head and shoulders, as Curtis upended the almost empty can and poured the dregs down over him.
Stepping back, Curtis waited till the racking coughing fit ended in a sudden gush of bright red blood, which spilled down over the dying killer's slack lower jaw.
Then the Prophet's eyes snapped open again and the pleading was gone.
In its place was naked hate once more, and something else — contempt.
As though he had suddenly realised that Curtis was bluffing him, frightening him into pleading for mercy in a pathetic attempt to humiliate him — or perhaps to force from him a confession of what the lieutenant claimed were his crimes against the whores he had exterminated.
He swallowed to clear his mouth and addressed his enemy scathingly.
‘Your bluff has failed…lieutenant…as it did before…you threaten and bluster…but you don't have the guts…to carry it through…like the rest of your breed…you are hidebound by your petty laws…the same laws…which would condemn me…for ridding the world of human filth…the same human filth…you and your kind protect from me…me…the Scourge of God…
His Chosen One…
The Lord's Anointed…’
‘Mister, last time we met you accused me of bluffin'.’
Curtis's cold voice cut across the demented killer's ranting.
‘On that occasion you were right.
This time you're wrong.
This ain't no bluff.’
His merciless tone brought a spark of uncertainty back into the eyes of the Prophet.
The uncertainty blossomed into fear again, and he cringed before the icy whiplash of Curtis's tongue, as he continued scathingly, ‘You know somethin' else?
You're one lousy prophet, too.
You couldn’ even prophesy your own death, when it wuz standin' right in front of you.
An' I ain't a cop any more after tonight, mister.
Wrong again!
Soon as I finish here an' git back, I'm turnin' in my shield.
This is my last assignment.
My swan song, y'could say…an' yours.
An' we're both goin' out in a blaze of glory!’
Before the Prophet's increasingly terrified gaze, Curtis stepped back another few paces and pulled a box of matches from his pocket.
He watched in horrified fascination as the lieutenant took out a single match and poised it over the striking strip.
A sudden breeze rustled the dried grasses and surrounding scrub.
To Curtis's ears it sounded uncannily like the faint clapping of a ghostly audience.
He cocked his head towards the sound.
‘You hear that, mister?’ he demanded.
‘That's all them poor bastards you cut up, applaudin'.
An’ this is fer them…’
He struck the match and applied it to the heads of all the other matches in the partly open box.
They flared into hissing, spluttering life, and to the accompaniment of the Prophet's hoarse scream of ‘No-o-o-o!’ he tossed the angrily flaring box onto his gasoline-soaked lap, spun on his heel and walked quickly away in the direction of the road.
As he went, his path was lit by the sudden brilliance of the flames which leapt up in his rear, their hungry roar almost drowning out the agonised shrieks of the writhing human torch in their midst.
Almost…but not quite.
Before he had ascended the lengthy slope and reached his parked car, the shrieking had stopped, but the flames were burning fiercer than ever, fuelled as they now were by melting human fat.
Curtis settled himself behind the wheel and laid the empty can on the passenger seat.
He fished out his crumpled cigarette pack and lit up.
Sucking in a deep lungful of smoke, he looked back at the fiercely blazing funeral pyre for the first time.
He felt no satisfaction.
He felt no regret.
He felt drained…empty.
He watched impassively, occasionally drawing on his cigarette, until a dull roar and sudden flare announced the explosion of the fuel tank.
Then he crushed out his stub, lit a fresh cigarette, and started the engine.
U-turning, he drove off in the direction of the distant city, without so much as another backward glance.
About half way back, he made a brief stop and flung the empty gasoline can far into the night.
CHAPTER 67
Unaware of the death of the sect's figurehead leader, Grant, Springfield and their patchwork assembly of troops were preparing to take on the real power behind the throne — the sinister oriental who was using the organisation as a front for his Triad drugs network.
As an enemy, he was still very much an unknown quantity to them.
The only thing they could be certain of was his propensity for violence.
They did not even know his true identity.
Known to Grant and Springfield as Doctor Sung, to the sect membership as Archangel Michael, to his fellow sect leaders as Angel One, and to his Triad masters as Agent Red Sixteen, he was truly a shadow warrior of many guises.
However, they were not going in entirely blind against the occupants of Bethlehem House.
An earlier phone call to Springfield from Curtis had seen to that, when the lieutenant had passed on his suspicion that the sect could in fact be a front for a Triad drugs operation.
He had pointed out that Bethlehem House was conveniently sited to act as a reception point for a trans-border drugs run from Canada.
Curtis had ended his call by suggesting that a Triad involvement would explain the apparent fanaticism and brutality displayed by the sect heavies, and warning his old friend to be careful.
At half past midnight, Springfield drew the council of war to a close by pushing back his chair and standing up behind the big desk, where he had been sitting flanked by Grant and Deputy Fenton.
The tall sheriff looked round the assembled faces in the crowded office and cleared his throat.
‘One last point.
I know I've told you this place might be run by these Chinese Triads, but I want everyone t'remember we're dealin' mainly with kids here.
These chinks have recruited their so-called Apostles an’ Disciples from the streets an' trained 'em to use violence.
But Brett here's told you the only ones that'll give any trouble will be the goons wearin' joggin' suits of black, grey or brown.
They're the muscle who keep the others in line.
We'll refer to these as hostiles, to distinguish 'em from the ordinary members, who all wear them fancy coloured robes an' don't present any threat at all.
‘We'll be movin' in fast an’ hard once Brett an' Pete take out their Control.
Now, when we flush 'em out, I don' want anybody gittin' trigger-happy.
We ain't fightin' World War Three here.
There won't be no medals for a body count.
Return fire if y'come under fire y'self, an' any hostile carryin' a gun will be a legitimate target.
But if y'have t'shoot, aim to disable rather than kill, if that's at all possible without puttin' y'self at risk.’
He settled his Stetson squarely on his head.
‘Okay, I guess we've covered everythin'.
You all know your details, so if nobody's got any questions, I suggest we git our asses in gear an’ move out.’
The meeting broke up quickly as the other men in the room rose from wherever they had found to sit, some on chairs but most cross-legged on the floor, picked up weapons and equipment, and began to file out.
The weapons consisted mainly of shotguns, many sawn off, and the sheriff had issued a plentiful supply of cartridges loaded with birdshot.
It had been anticipated they would be operating mainly among the trees surrounding the estate, so the object was to go for maximum noise and shock effect while inflicting the least injuries possible.
To this end, Springfield had also issued each man with ten Thunderflash stun grenades, guaranteed to disorientate anyone near whom they detonated, especially at night.
Grant watched them go, chatting amiably and swapping friendly banter as they went, easing their inner tensions as they moved nearer to zero hour.
He was pleased to see how well they had all mixed, even though they had admittedly come together with a common purpose.
In answer to Grant's summons, Larsen had turned up accompanied by ten well muscled companions.
Four were the same burly sidekicks who had helped so willingly in the rescue of Louise Wyatt.
Having heard the account of her recapture and the sadistic reprisal inflicted on Pam, they were doubly eager to have another go at the sect heavies, and had recruited a further six of their own mates and invited them along to the party.
Grant's other ally, Rocky O'Rourke, had also answered the call and enlisted the willing aid of nine other truckers.
Three of these were his fellow truckers from the night Jim Miller had stumbled into them at the gas station.
Rocky introduced them as Carl Wood, Jubal Cantrell and Austen Parker, but Jim Miller would have recognised the latter two as Jube and Red, the pair who had baited him and given him such a hard time before Rocky's intervention had rescued him.
Along with his deputy Cal Fenton, Springfield had mustered the aid of the local Fire Chief, an amiable square-jawed giant of a man named Bob Wallace, along with his entire crew of five fellow volunteer fire-fighters.
Big, raw-boned farm hands, they looked to Grant as though they spent their working time wrestling bulls — and winning!.
Thirty men in all, by Grant's head count.
They would be pitted against the sect's estimated strength, obtained from his questioning of Louise, of the twelve main heavies, known as Apostles, and a further forty to fifty lesser nasties in the bullying hierarchy, who gloried in the title of Disciples.
Regardless of their fanciful biblical titles, there was nothing remotely Christian or charitable about them.
They were all young, fit and well trained in martial arts by the four Orientals who ran the sect as a front for their Triad drugs ring.
It was also to be assumed the four Orientals themselves would have to be faced, as they had no way of knowing that two of them were already dead, thanks to the actions of Sherman and the Prophet himself.
However, when one of the assembled men had suggested that they could have used more men, Springfield had assured them their numbers would be quite sufficient for the job in hand, adding enigmatically that he had a few aces up his sleeve which would reduce the odds against them.
There was one further known obstacle.
Louise had also confirmed Jim Miller's assertion that the grounds were guarded by a killer pack of Dobermans, ten in number she said.
The pack was released each night after ten o'clock curfew, after which time anyone who disobeyed orders and remained outside the safety of the house, did so at their own peril.
As they filed out of the building onto the sidewalk, Grant eyed the sheriff's broad back and wondered what Springfield was holding back.
In addition to the remark about ‘having a few aces up his sleeve’, something else the big sheriff had said was puzzling Grant.
During the meeting, Grant had raised the possibility of the sect's operating an armed outside patrol to circle the perimeter fence, in view of the large drugs shipment Sherman had seen on the night of his suicidal attack.
Further, Curtis had informed Grant that the word on the streets was that the recent outbreak of violence and killing had been all about a territorial dispute between rival Triad and Mafia gangs.
So it was a fair assumption that their oriental antagonist would be on his guard against any further attacks by the Mob.
Grant had suggested that the first action of the night should be the despatch of two armed groups from the road outside Bethlehem House to circle the perimeter fence in opposite directions.
Their purpose would be to seek out and capture any such sect patrol.
Springfield, however, had surprised Grant by replying that this would not be necessary as ‘it had been taken care of.’
As the big sheriff had volunteered no further explanation, Grant decided to wait and see exactly what Springfield was up to— or more accurately had been up to .
The plan of campaign was to be kept simple and direct.
Grant and Larsen would be the first to go into action, their mission to break into the house itself, having penetrated the enemy territory via a gap cut in the fence.
Once inside, their objective would be to make directly for the basement as speedily as possible, to seize and hold the Control Room, thus preventing the detonation of the fire bombs.
On the success or failure of this part of the operation would depend the lives of the hundred or more ordinary inmates of the building, because whether or not Control was successfully captured, phase three, an all-out assault by the remainder of Springfield's troops would be launched.
This final phase would be triggered either on receipt of a signal from the two inside — or when the house erupted in flames.
Outside the sheriff's office, the men dispersed to the line of assorted vehicles of all shapes and sizes which were parked there.
Soon the silence of the sleeping township was temporarily disturbed by the slamming of doors and the revving of engines.
Then the line of vehicles pulled away one by one, forming a loose convoy as they moved off along the deserted main street, heading for the edge of town.
In fact, their departure was watched with quiet satisfaction by a surprising number of Rockford residents from behind curtains and various vantage points.
News travels fast on the gossip grapevine in any small community, and the watching townsfolk that night thoroughly approved that their sheriff was at last taking steps to deal with the unfriendly and unwelcome strangers who had secluded themselves at ‘the ol' Bentsen place up th'road’.
As the sound of the engines receded northwards, curtains and shutters twitched shut again and peace descended on the rural town's main street once more.
Heading the seven vehicle convoy was the Sheriff's car, carrying Springfield himself, Fenton who was driving, Grant and Larsen.
Next came the three fire-fighting vehicles of the town's volunteer force, two big fire tenders and a turntable ladder.
Each vehicle was crewed by two men, with Fire Chief Bob Wallace himself in the cab of the lead one.
Bringing up the rear of the convoy behind the fire tenders were three huge sixteen wheeler trucks driven by Rocky, Chuck, and Red.
In the rear of the lead sixteen wheeler rode Jube and the six other truckers who had been recruited by Rocky.
Two of the rigs were to provide transport for the ordinary sect members, after their release.
The third was to contain the sect heavies, once they had been overpowered and captured.
It was crewed by Larsen's ten burly mates.
Within half an hour of leaving Rockford, the convoy had reached its destination and were drawn up on the verge alongside the perimeter fence, just short of the big front gates of Bethlehem House.
Standing beside the sheriff's car, Grant eyed the broken cloud cover overhead with mixed feelings.
Intermittent intervals of moonlight would mean not having to use flashlights, when he and Larsen entered the enemy's territory.
But it could also prove hazardous if they were caught crossing the extensive open ground surrounding the house itself, which he and Springfield had noted on their visit.
Now that their operation had actually started everyone was keyed up and eager to go, and the whole force quickly gathered round the sheriff's car for a final briefing.
Springfield held up his hand for silence and the low murmur of talk died away completely.
He raised a radio transmitter to his mouth and spoke into it.
‘Ranger One to Ranger Two.
Are you receivin' me?
How's the huntin'?
Over?’
As he released the button the receiver hissed into life.
‘Ranger Two receivin' you loud an’ clear, Ranger One.’
The tinny voice carried to the whole group, despite its low volume.
‘The huntin's pretty good.
Four bucks so far.
I kin see your party from our position.
Do you want us to join you?
Over.’
‘Roger, Ranger Two.
Come right ahead.
Out.’
Springfield slid the aerial down and directed a relieved grin at the quizzical expressions on the faces of his watching companions.
‘You'll remember my sayin' I had a few aces up m'sleeve, when we discussed our lack of numbers an’ the possibility of these people operatin' outside patrols?’
His quiet voice carried clearly to the assembled company.
‘Well, I reckon it's time to play ‘em.’
Turning away, he faced across the highway to the north of where they were standing.
Following the direction of his gaze, Grant and the others saw movement among the trees there, some fifty yards away.
To their surprise several figures, Grant estimated about twenty, filed out from the dark treeline onto the overgrown verge and began to move towards them.
The faint moonlight glinted on the barrels of the guns most of them were carrying.
Grant shot an amused glance at Springfield.
‘Your decks always have that many aces?’ he asked.
‘Only when the stakes git a little too high fer my likin',’ Springfield responded.
From behind them, someone said, ‘Tell y'one thing — you've played y'last hand o’ poker in Rockford, y'ol' fox!’
A murmur of quiet laughter greeted this aside.
For his part, Grant felt better about the whole operation.
Thanks to the big sheriff's guile, the odds were considerably shorter now.
It was now up to Larsen and himself to carry out their part of the night's operation successfully.
If they failed, the price would be terrible.
For the brutal oriental still held one ace up his sleeve, should they give him the chance to play it.
That card was the ace of spades — the death card!
CHAPTER 68
As the advancing figures crossed the highway towards them, it became evident that four of them were unwilling members of the group.
This quartet, clothed in black from head to foot in commando style woollen caps, roll-neck sweaters, trousers and combat boots, had their hands cuffed behind their backs, and were being escorted at gun point.
It was also evident that they had resisted capture.
A couple of them sported bruised faces, and one was limping.
A third had a bloodstained rag bound round his forehead like a sweatband, from under which blood was seeping and trickling down the left side of his face.
Their captors were clad in an assortment of gear, army camouflage being predominant.
They also sported a variety of headgear, baseball and long peaked golfing caps being favoured, a few wearing ex-army flop brimmed jungle hats or woollen caps similar to those of their captives.
They gave the impression of being a hunting party — not far from the truth, Grant thought, but for the fact that many carried baseball bats and all had their faces heavily smeared with camouflage cream.
The entire party of newcomers came to a halt on the verge facing Springfield's assembled men, and the two companies eyed one another in silence for a long moment.
Then one of those holding the captives at gun point nodded familiarly to the sheriff.
‘Hi, Nate.
We're right on schedule.
You were right about them operatin' an outside patrol, as y'kin see.
We picked up these four…’ the speaker indicated the four sullen captives with a jerk of his hunting rifle, ‘slinkin' around armed to the teeth.’
He jerked his head and two of his companions stepped forward and deposited an assortment of weaponry and equipment on the ground in front of Springfield.
The sheriff ran his eye over the pile of guns, ammunition pouches and knives, till it came to rest on a radio transmitter.
He prodded it with a toe.
‘They git a chance to use this?’ he inquired of the man who had addressed him.
The other shook his head.
‘No.
We took 'em by surprise,’ he assured the sheriff.
‘Oh, they put up a fight when we jumped ‘em, but the one with the radio head butted a baseball bat an’ called a time-out.
It took us five minutes t'bring ‘im round again.
Ain't that right, sunshine?’
He gave a short barking laugh and prodded the bandaged captive with the muzzle of his hunting rifle.
‘Sunshine’ rewarded him with a look of sullen hatred.
‘Okay boys, you've done well.’
Springfield acknowledged their success with a nod.
‘I hope the rest of the night goes as smoothly.’
Then, over his shoulder to Grant and the others of his own company, he continued, ‘These're some friends o’ mine, as you've prob'ly gathered.
For their own reasons, they prefer t'remain anonymous, so we won't be usin' names, okay?’
At this, one of the captives spat at Springfield's feet.
‘That won’ do you no good, ya buncha pricks!’he burst out angrily.
‘You're in deep shit right now.
But you go in there, you're way over your fuckin' heads!’
‘When I want your opinion I'll ask fer it,’ Springfield cut coldly across the sneering voice.
‘Till then, you'd best keep y'mouth shut an’ think o' how y'gonna answer charges o' drugs runnin', kidnappin', unlawful imprisonment an' aggravated assault…maybe even murder!’
‘Go fuck y'self!
You'll never make any of that crap stick, an’ you know it,’the sect thug snarled back defiantly.
‘How about unlawful arrest?
Ain't that against the fuckin' law?’
‘Unlawful arrest?
How about this little lot fer starters?’
Springfield nodded at the pile of weaponry.
‘You gotta licence t'carry firearms?’
‘We were guardin' private property,’ the other replied sullenly.
Springfield jerked a thumb towards the chain-link fence.
‘In there might be private property.
Out here ain't.
An’ you were caught on this side of the fence,’he retorted.
‘Fuck you!
You're gonna git y'fancy tin badge rammed up your ass before you ever git near a court, muthafucka!’ the other burst out heatedly.
‘You an’ th'resta these cop bastards!’
‘What cop bastards would that be?’
Springfield asked innocently.
‘I don’ see any other cops here, apart from myself an' my deppity.’
‘Listen lawman, I wuz brought up on the streets.
I kin smell pig a mile away, an’ these cunts…’the sect thug indicated his captors with a jerk of his head, ‘…got the same stink about ‘em!
An’ how d'you explain the bracelets?…’
He twisted half round to display the handcuffs on his wrists.
‘Only cops carry these.’
Springfield shrugged.
‘Don’ prove nothin'.
Anybody kin mail order these things,’ he said dismissively.
Then, before the other could reply, he turned away and nodded to Fenton.
‘Cal, lock 'em up.’
Fenton moved forward, signalling to four of Larsen's burly mates to accompany him.
Taking hold of the captives they dragged them away, struggling and still mouthing threats, in the direction of the ‘prison’ rig.
As they watched them go Grant nudged Springfield and grinned.
‘Y'know, I think I can smell pig too.’
Springfield smiled back.
‘In your case, I'd say y'nose is too near y'butt!’
Grant laughed, then turned serious again.
‘I take it these anonymous friends of yours will be stayin' for the rest of the party?’
‘Damn right.’
Springfield nodded.
‘They'll give us the extra numbers we'll need, when it comes to roundin' up the rest of these Triad Jesus freaks.
‘Specially if they manage to fire the place an’ have a secret bolthole that comes up outside the line of the fence.’
Grant stared at him, surprised.
‘You mean a tunnel ?
Are you serious?’
‘Sure, why not?
The V.C.
used 'em in ‘Nam.
Dug hundreds of miles of ‘em,’ Springfield replied seriously.
‘See, I got to thinkin' about what the chink said when he showed you the firebombs.
You told me when you called his bluff 'bout blowin' the place to hell, on the grounds he an’ his goons'd burn with it, he said that they wouldn't be there by then.
Right?’
‘Yeah.’
Grant's face darkened as his memory flashed back to when he'd stood before the fearsome incendiary device in the basement of Bethlehem House.
Again the harsh voice sounded in his inner ear, ‘…should it ever become necessary to activate this device, I assure you that both I and my staff will be well clear of its effects.
No doubt you are disappointed to hear that.’
‘You're right, Nate.’
Grant nodded slowly.
‘An’ the bastard even went on to confirm that the bombs are set on time fuses, just sufficient to allow him an' his staff to escape, but not enough to allow them to be de-activated, or to evacuate the ordinary members from the building…an' most of them are just kids.’
‘Exactly,’ Springfield agreed.
‘Well, like I said, I got t'thinkin' about how our Triad friend would go about gittin' himself an’ his goon squad clear, if the buildin' wuz surrounded by a hostile force.
That's when the idea of an escape tunnel came to me.
I reckoned it'd have t'run' from the house to a point outside the perimeter fence, cuz that'd take 'em clear of anyone who wuz in control of the grounds.
‘Next I got to wonderin' where it'd be most likely to come out.
I took a trip into Albany an’ looked up the architect's plans of the house an' its estate.
I discovered an interestin' fact…namely that the house don't lie dead centre of the estate.
It's sited only about a quarter mile from the northern boundary fence.
If there is a tunnel, then I reckon it'll come out in the woods somewhere to the north of the fence an' close to it.
‘So, I propose to position a cordon at the north-western corner of the boundary fence, while you an’ Pete are tryin' to take out their Control.
That way, if the worst happens an' they fire the house an' make a run fer it, we'll drive most of 'em back towards the highway, where we'll have a reception committee waitin' to meet ‘em!
You git my drift?’
Springfield looked from Grant to Larsen, and waited for their verdict.
Grant shook his head and laughed.
‘Nate Springfield, you're an’ ol' fox.
I can see why you an ‘Ben teamed up, you're two of a kind.’
He turned serious again.
‘But I think you could be onto something.
It's certainly an angle worth coverin', although you'll have your work cut out to round 'em up.
Another thing, while all this is goin' on, what about the danger of passin' traffic gettin' caught in crossfire?’
‘You let me worry about that part of the operation,’ Springfield replied.
‘Anyhow there won't be any passin' traffic.
That's bein' diverted till later in the mornin'…due to road repairs.’
Before Grant could respond to this, Springfield glanced at his watch.
‘Now I suggest we move on to phase two.
An’ that means you an' Pete are on now…’
CHAPTER 69
It was zero hour for the well armed and equipped two-man penetration team.
Like the captured enemy patrol, Grant and Larsen were dressed from head to foot in dark clothing, only in their case it was less military in style.
They were both bareheaded, but had smeared their faces with camouflage cream, and wore dark coloured zip-up windcheaters, denims and trainers.
Each man was armed with a pump-action shotgun with a shortened stock and a sling attachment to allow them free use of their hands, a handgun in a hip holster, and a sheathed knife.
Each was also equipped with a Very pistol and two flares, one green one red, a torch with the glass masked by sticky tape to leave only a pencil-thin beam, and a radio transmitter tuned to a master receiver in Springfield's car.
In addition, slung across his shoulder, Grant carried a coiled rope knotted every two feet to facilitate climbing.
Attached to the rope was a four-pronged metal grapnel.
Springfield and Fenton pulled back the flaps of the cut they had made in the chain-link fence, allowing Grant and Larsen to duck through into hostile territory.
The two lawmen wished them luck and with a wave of acknowledgement, Grant and Larsen turned and made their way quickly and silently into the thick trees.
Holding their shotguns at the ready, they threaded their way cautiously through the closely packed trees following the thin beams of their torches.
They had travelled only a few yards into the dense timber when the silence of the woods closed in about them, cutting them off from the rest of humanity in a claustrophobic world of towering trunks and patches of thick underbrush.
Straining his ears over the slight sounds of their careful progress for any alien noises in the night, Grant found his thoughts increasingly filled with unsettling images of leaping dark shapes and gleaming fangs.
By design they had entered the grounds quite close to the front entrance, and they angled their progress so as to bring them into contact with the main driveway as quickly as possible.
To their combined relief, it was not long before the two men arrived at the driveway and stepped cautiously out onto its surface.
They began following its twisting route, keeping close to the cover of the trees in case they should meet with any oncoming sect vehicle going to relieve or check up on their outside patrol.
One behind the other, Grant leading, they moved at a fast walk.
The only sound in the night was the soft rustling of the trees in the night wind, but to their nervously attuned hearing even that carried a note of underlying menace, especially with the thought of the prowling killer pack uppermost in their minds.
Both men had pocketed their torches to allow them a better grip on their shotguns, and a couple of times they interrupted their progress to stand straining their ears into the whispering darkness around them for any sound of the fearsome dogs.
The second time they did this, it suddenly came home to Grant just how terrified Jim Miller and his pal must have been, unarmed and defenceless, the night they had made their escape bid.
Here were Larsen and himself, grown men, well armed and equipped, and yet they were more than a little uneasy at the unwelcome prospect of meeting with the savage beasts.
Then they rounded the last sweeping curve of the driveway and saw the dark bulk of the big house squatting in the near distance, dimly outlined by the fitful moonlight.
Grant stopped as soon as the house came in sight and, signalling for Larsen to follow, he moved quickly into the darkness of the trees to their left.
Moving away from the driveway they threaded their way through the trees, until they reached the fringe of the woods where they bordered onto the wide expanse of neatly mown lawns, dotted here and there with beds of flowers and shrubbery.
The two men stood side by side a few yards in from the edge of the treeline, examining the layout of the ground between them and the house.
They had arrived at a point opposite one corner of the house, but once they left the trees there was no more cover until they reached the broad belt of shrubbery which ran parallel to the side of the house.
This shrub bed was a full sixty yards from where they now stood, but just over half that distance from the treeline away over to their left.
Grant checked his watch.
It had taken them only ten minutes to reach this far.
He tapped Larsen on the arm and pointed off to their left to a spot in the dark encircling woods directly across from the side of the house.
He spoke softly.
‘How about we make our way round there?
Less chance of being spotted from the house when we break cover.’
Larsen cleared his throat.
‘Uh…
Brett…listen.
If it's okay with you, I'd rather we wait till the moon goes in again, an’ take a chance on crossin' from here…instead of goin' all the way round there in the trees, I mean.
It's these fuckin' dogs.
I can't stop thinkin' about the bastards.
Fact is, comin' here from the fence I fuckin' near shit myself each time you stopped.
If they do come at us, I'd rather face 'em out in the open.
Know what I mean?’
Grant considered for a moment then nodded.
‘Okay, Pete.
We'll go for it.
If we do run into the dogs, we'll prob'ly have to use these…’ he raised the barrel of his pump-action, ‘…so we're as well bein' where we can see to hit ‘em.’
‘Yeah…an’ where we kin see to avoid hittin' each other!’agreed Larsen drily.
Grant plucked the transmitter from his pocket and extended the aerial.
He spoke into the set.
‘Pathfinder One to Rearguard.
Do you read me?
Over.’
The mike hissed softly into life.
‘Rearguard receivin' you loud an’ clear, Pathfinder One.’
Springfield's reassuring drawl sounded faintly from the tiny speaker.
‘How's things in the badlands?
Over.’
‘All quiet so far.
No signs of enemy activity,’ Grant reported.
‘We're about to break cover to head for Fort Apache.
Will let you know when we're in position.
Out.’
Grant slid the aerial back into its socket and replaced the little transmitter in his breast pocket.
As he did so, it crackled into life again briefly.
‘Good luck, Pathfinder One.
Rearguard standin' by.
Out.’
Their eyes scanning the looming dark bulk of the house for any signs of life, the two men moved forward to the edge of the trees.
But as they did so, they unknowingly broke the invisible beam linking two electronic eyes set in the surrounding trees.
High overhead, its soft hiss merging unnoticed with the night breeze, an ultrasonic whistle triggered into life, beaming its urgent summons to the killer pack.
Blissfully unaware of the impending danger, Grant stood under the outer canopy of the treeline and eyed the cloud cover overhead, in time to see the moon slide out of sight.
He turned to Larsen.
‘Okay, Pete.
Let's go!’
Ducking low, their two dark figures sped across the intervening grass at a crouching run, heading for the belt of shrubbery which ran along the south side of the big house.
Had they but known, these were the same bushes in which Jim Miller and his pal Tom Sheppard had sheltered at the start of their ill-fated escape bid.
Reaching their goal, the two men crouched panting in the cover of the rustling shrubs, their eyes and ears straining into the darkness for evidence of enemy activity…two-legged or otherwise!
Nothing stirred.
Their luck was holding.
Now only another thirty yards of lawn separated them from the side wall of the house.
Grant's eyes swept up the massive three storied building to the roof.
He smiled in satisfaction as he saw what he was looking for, tapped Larsen's arm and pointed upwards.
‘There's where I'll hook the grapnel.
That big chimney stack.
It looks solid enough to take our weight,’ he murmured.
Larsen licked dry lips and nodded, his eyes returning quickly to their constant sweep of the outer darkness and the encircling black treeline, searching for movement…for sign of the dogs.
In actual fact he had a deep-seated aversion to all dogs, almost amounting to a phobia, which increased in direct proportion to the size of the breed.
He hadn't admitted this for fear it would disqualify him from this part of the mission, and anyway he had thought he would feel safe behind the comforting protection of a pump-action.
Now, however, crouched out here in the dark, rustling bushes, he did not feel at all secure.
But he was doing it for his little girl, his Karen, and for her mother, his wife Ruthie.
He just hoped the dumb bitches appreciated it.
Dumb bitches…with big teeth…all the better to eat you with…oh shit!…there he went again…couldn't get fuckin' dogs out of his mind…
It was at that precise moment the killer pack picked up their trail back in the woods, having arrived hotfoot in answer to the summons of the ultrasonic whistle.
Satan, in his accustomed place in the lead, came to a stop as he picked up the first trace of man-scent.
Excited, the dogs spread out, noses questing the surrounding area for more scent clues.
Confusingly at first, the trail stretched in two directions, back towards the perimeter fence and in towards the driveway.
Satan ran back and forth on the line a few times, snout quivering as it tasted the delicious scent trace.
Quickly his canine smell sense detected that the trail was stronger on the inward line.
Seconds later, white fangs glistening with saliva at the prospect of yet another easy kill and of having their lean bellies filled with delicious human flesh, the Hellhounds were hot on the trail of their unsuspecting prey…
Grant, satisfied that the wide expanse of lawn between them and the dark treeline remained comfortingly deserted, and no light showed in any of the blank windows of the house, slipped the coiled rope from his shoulder.
He tapped Larsen on the shoulder to gain his attention and signalled for him to stay hidden while he went forward to hook the grapnel.
From his present position, Larsen would be better placed to keep a lookout for trouble and provide backup.
Larsen raised a thumb and nodded in acknowledgement, with hardly a pause in his intense surveillance of the surrounding night.
Taking a deep breath, Grant darted forward from the concealment of the bushes, keeping as low as possible without actually going on all fours.
Immediately he felt nakedly exposed.
It seemed impossible he would escape detection, and with each yard he covered he expected the alarm to be raised from within the house.
But seconds later he was crouched in the deep shadow under the wall.
Making sure the grapnel was free, he swung it loosely in his right hand, retaining the coiled rope in his left.
Standing up, he whirled the triple-pronged metal three times to gain momentum, then let it go on the third upswing.
The hooked missile soared aloft, the rope snaking after it as the loose coils flicked rapidly from Grant's left hand.
There was a faint rattle and a metallic clink from high above and Grant sank back into a crouch, waiting with baited breath to see if the slight noise had alerted anyone.
A long minute crept by.
Then another.
He straightened up slowly and tugged cautiously on his end of the rope.
He had aimed to hook the grapnel round the massive chimney stack at the crown of the gable and it seemed he had succeeded, for the rope went taut as he pulled down on it.
He tugged harder, but it was caught fast.
It seemed Lady Luck was still smiling on them.
He hoped she wouldn't turn fickle when he was half way up the wall.
Placing a foot against the wall, Grant leaned back on the rope.
Then he lifted his other foot from the ground and set it firmly on the rough stone surface too.
Now his full weight was on the rope, but it held.
Bracing himself, he began to walk up the wall, his hands using the knots which were tied at two foot intervals to aid his grip.
Half way up he rested for a minute or so to rest his straining arm and shoulder muscles, then continued his exhausting climb.
Grant had always prided himself on his fitness and worked out regularly in his health club gym, but by the time he made it to where the stone coping of the sloping gable joined the chimney stack, he felt as though every muscle of his arms and shoulders were on fire.
His fingers were also going numb from the strain of gripping the rope and taking the weight of his body.
But he made it.
A last burst of effort heaved him over the stone edge of the gable to sprawl thankfully on the slates.
As he lay for a few seconds recovering from his efforts, Grant ran his eye along the expanse of the steeply sloping roof.
About half way along its length, he located the barred skylight window he had noted as a possible means of entry, during his recce of the house the day of the interview with Jim Miller.
Rolling over, he assumed a sitting position and used his heels to push himself up the slates on his backside until he was seated astride the apex of the roof.
From this vantage point he had a panoramic view of the grounds within his field of vision.
Nothing was moving.
Leaning over, Grant pointed his torch down in the direction of the black mass of shrubbery where he knew Larsen was crouched, and flashed the pencil beam twice.
Immediately a dark form shot from the cover of the bushes and darted quickly towards the house.
Grant got the impression that Larsen must have been waiting for his signal, like a sprinter crouched in his blocks waiting for the starter's gun to launch him into motion.
The rope beside Grant went taut and began to give off creaking noises of friction at the point where it disappeared over the edge of the stone coping, as it took the weight of the climbing man below.
Just then a ripple of movement far out in the grounds caught the left edge of Grant's vision.
He glanced in that direction and stiffened with alarm.
Several sinuous black shapes were ghosting swiftly over the grass from the treeline opposite the front of the house.
The killer pack was coming.
Noses to the ground, the dogs were coming on at an fast, distance-consuming lope.
They were heading straight for the belt of shrubbery where he and Larsen had taken cover, and which Larsen had just vacated.
The beasts had obviously picked up their scent and were now following their trail.
The rope was still thrumming and protesting tautly as Larsen hauled himself up its length.
Quickly Grant slid a few feet down the slates and leaned carefully out round the edge of the massive chimney stack, until he could peer over the coping.
Larsen was already a good twenty feet clear of the ground and making steady progress as he inched his way upwards.
At that moment Larsen stopped for a breather, glanced up and caught sight of Grant's head outlined against the night sky.
He blew out his cheeks in an exaggerated gesture of effort and grinned, his teeth gleaming whitely against his blackened features in the darkness below.
Grant glanced out beyond the dangling figure.
Thirty yards away, the pack were even then thrusting their way in among the strip of bushes.
The last thing he wanted to do was panic Larsen, but he had to warn him before the dogs spotted him and gave tongue.
That would definitely panic him worse than anything Grant could say.
Cupping his hands round his mouth, he called down in a loud whisper.
‘Pete, keep movin'.
The dogs're comin'.
But don't worry, they can't reach you.
You're quite safe.’
Larsen's reaction was immediate.
His head jerked round and he was just in time to see the pack stream out from the bushes only thirty yards away, noses still glued to the invisible trail they were following, and lope swiftly towards the house.
When his head jerked back to look up at Grant again, it wasn't his teeth that were gleaming in the dark now, it was the whites of his eyes, wide with fear.
For a sickening moment he swung wildly on the rope and one of his feet slipped a few inches down the wall.
Grant's heart leapt into his mouth and he was convinced Larsen was going to lose his nerve, then his grip on the rope, to plummet down to an unthinkable death.
But then the other man seemed to regain control of himself, for the next moment he was shinning up the rope as though he had just realised his life depended on it — quite literally!
Seconds later, Larsen tumbled breathlessly over the edge of the stone coping, helped by a strong one-handed pull on his collar from Grant.
As he did so, the dogs reached the end of their scent trail at the foot of the wall and milled around uncertainly, growling their confusion.
‘Thanks Brett,’ Larsen panted, spreadeagled on the slates.
‘That was too close for comfort.
I tellya one thing, I don’ give a shit if this turns out t'be Castle fuckin' Dracula, I ain' goin' back down there!’
Before beginning his climb, Larsen had tucked the end of the rope into his belt.
So even although the dogs' questing noses sniffed at the scent trail on the wall as high as they could reach on their hind legs, there was no dangling rope to draw their attention upwards to the figures on the roof.
But the scent was so fresh, it was obvious the beasts would be unwilling to leave for a while, so Grant decided to ignore them and push on with the next stage of their operation.
What it did mean was that the presence of the killer pack effectively cut off that particular escape route if it were needed.
The two men made their way silently along the roof, until they were seated on either side of the skylight looking down into the deserted corridor below.
Working quickly now, they took screwdrivers from their pockets and began loosening the screws that secured the steel bars to the window frame.
Laying these aside quietly, they then prised up the thin lead sheathing from round the edges of the glass and gouged out the putty holding the pane in place.
They were ready to enter now, whenever they chose.
Again Grant took out his transmitter and contacted Springfield, keeping his voice barely above a whisper.
‘Pathfinder One to Rearguard.
High ground taken.
Pluto showed up but made no contact.
He's still around, so be on guard when you come in.
We're about to enter Fort Apache.
Deadline ten minutes from now.
If no further contact by then, gatecrash the party.
Over.’
Grant's receiver hissed into life and Springfield's drawl sounded faintly on the night air in reply.
‘Rearguard here.
Message received an’ understood, Pathfinder One.
Ten minutes to lift-off.
Countdown startin' now.
Standin' by.
Good luck.
Out.’
CHAPTER 70
Carefully removing the long pane of glass they had loosened from the skylight frame, the two men lifted it clear and Larsen propped it against his knees.
Grant ducked his head down through the gap and checked to make sure the corridor below was empty.
Then he eased himself through the narrow gap feet first, and dropped lightly to the floor.
Larsen then passed the window pane down to Grant, and lowered himself through in turn.
The men were now standing in the long attic corridor containing the sleeping quarters Grant had visited on his recce of the house.
Larsen saw that the skylight through which they had entered was situated at its midpoint, its twin a few feet away on the opposite slope of the roof.
Bisecting the corridor at this point was a short passage leading to the two staircases which descended to either side of the house.
Just then, they heard footsteps running lightly up the stairs nearest to them.
Quickly they moved out of sight, flattening themselves against the corridor walls to either side of the short passage.
Grant unslung the shotgun from around his neck and gripped it firmly across his chest.
Larsen did likewise, and they waited.
The approaching footsteps ran lightly to the top of the stairs and came towards them.
As the figure turned the corner from the stairhead passage into the corridor, Grant drove the shotgun butt hard into his midriff.
The grey tracksuited Apostle, who had come up to make a routine check of the sleeping quarters, doubled over with a grunt of agony.
An instant later, the butt of Larsen's gun slammed down on the back of the man's head, and he crumpled to the floor in a senseless heap.
Larsen grinned at Grant and made a circle of his thumb and forefinger.
‘Now that's what I call teamwork,’ he said.
‘Like shootin' fish in a barrel.’
‘Yeah,’ Grant agreed, then added soberly, ‘Only thing is, these particular fish happen t'be sharks, an’we won't be able to jump 'em all like this.’
Grant listened for a moment for any signs that the slight noise of the brief scuffle had attracted attention from the floor below.
When he satisfied himself that it hadn't, he turned to Larsen.
‘Okay Pete, you wait here an’ cover me,’he said quietly.
‘I'll start wakenin' the kids an’ rousin' 'em out.’
Leaving Larsen on guard at the head of the stairs, Grant began entering each sleeping cubicle in turn, working his way down one wing of the corridor.
Wakening the occupants, he told them to get dressed, wrap up warmly in a blanket.
By way of explanation, the bemused kids were told this was a police operation, and they were to gather in the corridor and wait quietly for further instructions.
A few of the more level headed ones, obviously relieved at the prospect of imminent rescue from the evil sect which had ensnared them, even joined in and lent a hand.
These self-appointed assistants sped swiftly up and down the corridor, wakening their companions and spreading the good news.
Only one factor marred the success of the mission so far.
While Grant was wakening the kids, he discovered to his dismay that most of the cubicles held four occupants, sleeping in bunk beds.
This meant that the final total of kids to be rescued came to around one hundred and twenty.
When they were all sitting cross-legged in the corridor, huddled in their blankets, staring wide-eyed at the two tough looking armed figures he realised they must present, Grant called in one last time to Springfield.
‘Pathfinder One to Rearguard.
Do you read me?
Over.’
‘Rearguard receivin' you.
Go ahead, Pathfinder One.
Over.’
The sheriff's reply sounded clearly in the hushed corridor, impressing the assembled kids and seeming to confirm Grant's claim to be part of an official police operation — if any needed convincing after seeing one of the feared Apostles being dragged unconscious into an empty cubicle.
‘Fort Apache upper level successfully occupied.
One hostile taken out.
All non-combatants ready for evacuation.
Pathfinder Two will stay with them.
I'm about to commence the brain surgery.’
He glanced at his watch.
‘Commence new countdown.
Watch for the fireworks, or gatecrash the party in ten minutes.
Over.’
This was the code telling Springfield that Grant was about to attempt to take out the basement Control Room.
Should they fail to see a green or red flare fired from Larsen's Very pistol within ten minutes, they were to launch the main assault and force their way in.
A green light would indicate that the enemy Control had been successfully taken, and the detonation of the firebombs prevented.
A red light, on the other hand, would mean that something had gone wrong and Bob Wallace's fire-fighters were needed urgently.
‘Message received an’ understood, Pathfinder One,’Springfield's reassuring drawl confirmed.
‘It's green or red fer go, or ten tops.
Stay lucky.
Countdown startin'…now.
Rearguard out.’
The two men checked their watches and looked up.
Taking a deep breath to calm his racing pulse, Grant stuck out his hand on impulse.
‘Okay Pete, this is it.
Ten minutes to lift-off.
No matter what happens, you concentrate on gettin' the kids out.
See you when it's all over.’
With an effort he stopped himself from adding,’ I hope!’
Larsen's handclasp was brief but firm.
‘Good luck, Brett,’ he replied simply.
‘We make a good team.
These assholes ain't gonna break it up.
See ya ‘round, pardner.’
Turning away, Grant walked to the head of the stairs and started down, shotgun held at the ready.
Speed was now important.
He had to reach the basement and take out the Control in order to ensure the success of the entire operation.
Stealthily he slipped down the deserted staircase past the second and third floors without mishap.
It was when he reached the ground floor and was only a few paces from the door leading to the basement that things started to go wrong.
He was half way between the foot of the stairs and the door, when he heard voices and footsteps behind him.
A sudden exclamation told him he had been spotted.
Whipping round, he found himself facing four figures in black military style combat gear and carrying guns and flashlights.
They were the relief night patrol on their way to take over from their colleagues, evidently as yet unaware of their capture.
There was a frozen instant of surprised immobility at his startling appearance, before the four reacted.
The leader's shout of, ‘What th'fuck!…’ coincided with the simultaneous upswing of four gun muzzles.
But Grant's reaction was that fraction quicker.
He had been keyed up, expecting just such a confrontation, where they had not.
In addition, when he had whipped round to face his enemies, his gun was already levelled in their direction.
All he had to do was pull the trigger.
The shotgun bucked in his hands and roared deafeningly in the echoing space of the big entrance hall.
At such close range, the blast from the shortened barrel took out the entire patrol.
The four sect heavies were hurled back, cannoning off the wall at their back, to land on the floor in bloody, twitching heaps.
But as they fell, one of the four convulsively jerked the trigger of his gun.
The weapon, a machine pistol, loosed off a short burst, spraying half a dozen rounds in Grant's general direction.
Five of the stray bullets bracketed him, whining angrily past to star the wall behind him.
The sixth hit him high on the inside of his left thigh.
He felt as though someone had kicked his leg away from him, and he crashed to the floor.
Instantly Grant rolled over and scrambled clumsily to his feet, his left thigh already numb from the tissue shock of his wound.
He worked the pump action frantically to eject the spent cartridge and reload.
However, he saw there was no need to fire again, the four sprawled figures showed no signs of action.
Just then Grant heard shouts and running feet from various parts of the house, converging on the sounds of gunfire.
He would have to get moving before reinforcements arrived.
He felt a sticky wetness on his left leg, glanced down and swore as he saw the bloodstain spreading downwards from around the bullet hole in the denim.
But although it felt numb, the leg was still bearing his weight, so he hobbled quickly over to the door leading to the basement, jerked it open and dived through.
As Grant hurried down the narrow concrete stairs, he felt the first warning stab of pain in his torn thigh muscle.
Just then the raucous clamour of alarm bells sounded from all over the house and from the basement area ahead of him.
Slowed by the blossoming pain in his injured leg, he supported himself with a hand on the rough stone wall and stumbled down the remaining few steps.
Reaching the foot of the stairs, he saw movement off to his right along the corridor, but ignored it and launched himself bodily at the door six feet to his left marked CONTROL .
Depressing the handle, he burst through into the room beyond.
The black tracksuited oriental seated before the electronic console glanced round, startled by this intrusion into the forbidden room.
On this occasion, the rule of fear they had established over the ordinary sect members worked against the Triad leadership.
It was so unthinkable that anyone would dare to enter the Control without permission, that Angel Two was momentarily immobilised by his surprise.
Their eyes met for the space of a long heartbeat, and despite the clean white bandage round the man's forehead and the strip of plaster on one bruised cheek, Grant felt a surge of rage at the thought that he was face to face with the brutal oriental who had hurt Pam.
In that same instant, the Angel Two launched himself out of his chair, the speed of his reaction almost taking Grant by surprise in turn.
As the oriental lunged for him, one hand shot out aiming a lethal spear-hand nukite blow straight at his windpipe.
Had it landed, the blow would have crushed the cartilage and killed him instantly.
But in the split second it took Angel Two to cover the few feet between them, Grant reflexively pulled the trigger of the shotgun.
The blast took the oriental in the right shoulder, knocked him off his feet and hurled him clear across the room, where he crashed to a stop with his head and shoulders propped against the far wall.
Lying in a widening pool of blood, he stared vacant eyed with shock at his severed right arm lying a few feet from his face, still clothed in its black sleeve.
From the corridor outside someone shouted, alerted by the shot.
Spinning on his heel, Grant pumped another round into the breech, pulled the door half open and looked out.
It was then he knew for certain that the oriental he had just shot was not the one from whom he had wanted to exact retribution for injuring Pam — because at the other end of the corridor he found himself looking into the glittering black eyes of his hated enemy, Angel One.
The man was staring straight at him.
To his rear and flanking him were a group of grey tracksuited figures, armed with lethal looking machine pistols.
‘You!
The word hissed from the oriental, his voice sibilant with fury.
The black eyes shifted momentarily to take in the mortally wounded Angel Two on the Control Room floor, then back to Grant.
‘This time you have overreached yourself.
Tonight the Hellhounds will feed on your corpse!’
Suddenly he shot out a blunt finger to point straight at Grant and snarled,Kill him!’
In obedience to Angel One's harsh command, the two Apostles flanking him jerked up their weapons.
Grant leapt back behind the cover of the metal sheathed door and as he did so, pulled the trigger of the shotgun, blasting off a wild shot up the length of the corridor.
The roar of his shot coincided with the answering crash of gunfire from his enemies' weapons.
But their aim was as errant as his own, and the hail of bullets ricocheted off the top half of the door to whine viciously into the ceiling of the room, bringing down chunks of plaster in a choking dust cloud.
Grant felt the partly open door shudder against his shoulder as the rounds hammered against the sheet steel of its surface.
Pumping a fresh shell into the breech, Grant waited till the long burst of enemy fire ceased when their magazines emptied.
‘Sung…
Angel One…whatever you call yourself…listen to me,’ he shouted into the ensuing silence.
‘I didn't come on my own tonight.
I'm part of a major police operation.
The entire estate is surrounded.
They'll be forcing their way in here in a few minutes.
I've taken your Control.
So you can forget about burning the house down.
Lay down your weapons and surrender.
You haven't a chance…’
His words were drowned out by the roar of automatic fire, as another hail of slugs hammered against the metal sheeting of the door and screamed into the far wall.
It was obvious this was the only answer he would get.
This time when the firing stopped, he stuck the shotgun round the door with his right hand and pulled the trigger.
The recoil was so violent it almost tore the weapon from his grasp, but he was rewarded by a cry of pain from one of the enemy.
Working quickly, he reloaded the chamber of the shotgun with fresh cartridges from his pocket and re-cocked it, feeding a round into the breech.
Cautiously Grant peered round the edge of the open door.
Part way down the corridor, one grey clad figure was sprawled motionless on the floor, while a second was painfully belly-crawling back towards the far end.
A head appeared briefly round the corner, then ducked quickly back out of sight as Grant blazed off another shot in its direction.
He had to hold the Control at all costs and discourage the enemy from any further attempt to rush his position.
Working the pump action to reload, he stepped into the gap of the open doorway and swung the gun up to cover the empty corridor.
As he did so, he heard Angel One's harsh voice shout something unintelligible.
Grant was still trying to puzzle out what the man had shouted, when there was a sudden blur of movement at the far end of the corridor and the black clad oriental leapt out to face him.
He was holding one of the machine pistols.
In a split second of surprised immobility, Grant saw the deadly muzzle come to bear on him.
Then he unfroze, pulled the trigger of the shotgun and leapt back into cover, all in the same movement.
Too late.
In that same instant, the oriental fired.
Grant felt a hammer blow strike him on the right breast and a searing pain in his right bicep.
Dazed, he staggered back against the console and heard his shotgun clattering to the floor as it slipped from his nerveless fingers.
Knowing he had been hit, panic seized him.
But when he glanced down at his chest, he saw to his intense relief the smashed casing and circuitry of his radio showing through torn material.
The little set had saved his life by deflecting the bullet onto his arm, but it also meant he was now effectively out of contact with Springfield and the reinforcements outside.
Gritting his teeth against the stab of pain from his wounded leg, he dropped to his knees and grabbed frantically for the weapon with his left hand, expecting every moment that the enemy would burst in to finish him off.
As his fingers closed round the gun, movement caught the edge of his vision and he heard a harsh bubbling moan from behind him.
He jerked his head round and saw something that chilled his blood.
Like some animated corpse in a horror movie, the dying oriental had somehow risen to a kneeling position, blood pumping unchecked from the torn stump of his missing arm.
Before Grant's shocked eyes, the nightmare figure fell weakly forward against the far end of the big console, its remaining hand groping over the surface towards a red button.
Now Grant understood the reason for Angel One's seemingly unintelligible shout.
It had only sounded that way to his western ears — because the words had been Chinese!
Angel One had noticed that his mortally wounded comrade was still conscious.
Gambling on the dying man being able to comprehend, he had ordered him to go for the destruct button, while he himself had kept Grant occupied by an exchange of fire.
Still on his knees, Grant raised the shotgun and, ignoring the protest from his injured bicep, worked the cocking mechanism and fired at the nightmarish, clawing figure before him.
The gun roared deafeningly in the small room, its lethal discharge taking Angel Two in the ribcage, almost tearing him in half as it punched him back across the room.
His mangled body slammed into the far wall, then slumped to the floor, leaving a broad red smear in its wake.
Though momentarily disoriented and deafened by the blast, Grant still felt the floor shake under him and heard the ominous rumble which told him what he dreaded to know.
The appalling realisation burst upon him that he had failed.
With the fanaticism and blind obedience demanded of a Triad warrior, the dying oriental had sacrificed himself to carry out his brutal superior's final order, and had detonated the four firebombs!
CHAPTER 71
Grant scrambled awkwardly to his feet, his aching chest and right arm joining forces with his throbbing leg wound to make his movements clumsy.
A quick check showed the corridor to be empty.
Angel One and his followers had made good their escape.
Just then he heard the door at the top of the stairs crash open and feet clattering down the steps.
Jumping back, he shouldered the heavy metal door of the Control shut, grabbed up the shotgun and levelled it, ready to fire if anyone entered.
But the sound of many pairs of feet charging down the stairs carried on down the corridor without pausing.
Minutes passed till he heard the last racing footsteps fade away, then he cautiously eased the door open and looked round its edge.
The corridor was empty of any enemy figures, but more ominously it was now filling rapidly with swirling smoke.
Pushing the door closed again, Grant limped over to the dead oriental.
Working quickly, he used his knife to cut strips of cloth from the man's clothing.
Lowering his denims to his knees, he winced as the blood soaked cloth pulled free from his wound.
Fresh blood immediately began to trickle down his leg, but he was relieved when his examination revealed that the bullet had drilled cleanly through the big muscle of his inner thigh.
He had been lucky.
The slug had missed the bone and major blood vessels and had not spread during its brief passage, so the exit wound was only slightly larger than the entry wound.
Using three of the strips of cloth, he bound his thigh firmly, staunching the flow of blood.
Turning his attention to his arm, he found the deflected bullet had not penetrated it, but had instead sliced its way across the surface of the bicep.
He bandaged it with the remaining strip of cloth.
When he had finished, he found the pain of both limbs had eased a little with the extra support the strapping provided.
His first-aid completed, he eased the door open again.
The corridor was empty of any enemy movement but now the billowing smoke was thick, stinging his throat and making his eyes smart.
He thought he could hear the faint whoop of approaching sirens.
Springfield's backup must have been summoned by Larsen, either that or they had decided to move in themselves.
Pulling his sweater up over his nose and mouth to filter out the worst of the smoke, he left the Control and made to ascend the stairs.
It was his intention to aid Larsen in evacuating the kids from the upper levels, before they became trapped there by the fire.
Suddenly he stopped.
Trapped by the fire…the Turkey Pens…
Jim Miller and Louise Wyatt would still be locked in them…maybe Karen Larsen too…all condemned to a terrible death…unless he could release them in time…
Moments later, with no thought for his own safety, he was hurrying through the smoke-filled corridors at a limping run.
Then he was passing the metal door with the ominous warning sign, and felt a blast of searing heat from its paint-blistered exterior as he did so.
Overhead he could now hear the dull roar and crackle of fire, as the hungry flames devoured the old house above him.
He could hardly see now, the increasing smoke and heat choking him and making his eyes water.
Stumbling forward blindly, he tried to recall the route the oriental had taken him after his capture on his previous visit.
Then he blundered into the turning he wanted, limped down it and came face to face with the blank grey door leading into the four Turkey Pens.
At that moment the lights went out.
Grant's hand darted for his torch, but even as his fingers touched it, the floor shook under him and he heard a tremendous rumbling crash in the corridor he had just left.
Switching on the torch he swung round in time to see in its thin beam a blast of hot, dust-laden smoke belch past the opening of the short passageway and spill in towards him.
Then the angry dancing glare of fire lit up the darkness from further back along the main corridor.
Shielding his eyes against the dust and heat with an upraised arm, he limped back to the corner and peered round.
The blast of heat from the wall of flaming rubble he saw some twenty yards away, forced him to jerk his head back and retreat to the door leading to the four cells.
Fear and despair gripped him.
Even if he shot away the locks and released the captive kids now, they had nowhere to go.
The upper floor had collapsed into the basement.
They were trapped.
Stunned, he looked down through smoke-bleared eyes at the shotgun in his hands.
Maybe that would be the more merciful way for them…it would certainly be quicker.
Tearing the sticky tape from the front of his torch, he directed its increased light onto the grey metal door.
Stepping back a couple of paces in the roiling smoke, he aimed the shotgun at the lock and pulled the trigger.
CHAPTER 72
When Grant had disappeared down the stairs to take out the Control, Larsen held up his hands to hush the rising murmur of talk which was starting to swell among the excited kids crowding the corridor.
‘Okay, keep the noise down,’ he told them.
‘We don’ wanna warn the goons who run this place, until our main assault group gits here.
It won't be long now.’
Obediently the noise level dropped to a whispered exchange, and Larsen ran his eye over the sea of faces packing the long corridor on either side, trying to pick out his daughter Karen.
But it was impossible.
He suppressed a desire to call out her name.
It was better, he decided, that she didn't recognise him for now, disguised as he was.
The assembled kids would have more confidence in him if they continued to believe him a cop, rather that just the old man of one of their number chancing his arm.
Suddenly from below came the unmistakable sound of gunfire, the roar of a shotgun sounding along with a short sharp burst of a machine gun.
Some of the girls squealed in alarm.
Larsen's heart sank.
The worst had happened.
Brett must have run into trouble.
But he made the effort to sound firm and reassuring as he spoke up again to quell any panic among the assembled youngsters.
‘Easy there.
Everythin's gonna be okay.
Jes’ sit tight an' follow my orders, an' you'll all be safe.’
Swivelling his head left and right like a tennis spectator, Larsen kept watch on both sets of stairs and waited, his gun held ready, barrel pointing towards the ceiling.
From below he heard shouting and running feet, and from further off came the muffled sound of more gunfire.
Then he felt the floor tremble beneath his feet, and a deep throated rumble rose from the bowels of the building.
Dust floated down from the ceiling and the lights flickered.
Several of the youngsters cried out in fright and clung to one another.
The cold hand of dread clutched Larsen's guts.
Despite Brett's attempt to prevent it, the firebombs had been detonated.
Now it was up to him to get the youngsters out, before they were trapped and incinerated.
First he had to quell any panic.
Raising his voice, he shouted over their rising clamour.
‘Okay, can it!
I can't hear myself think.’
This had the desired effect of quietening them again, and he acted while he still had them under control.
Quickly loading the Very pistol with the red cartridge, Larsen aimed it at the open skylight and pulled the trigger.
The bulky weapon bucked in his hand, and seconds later a brilliant crimson star flared into life high in the night sky overhead.
Larsen keyed the transmit button on his radio.
‘Pathfinder Two to Rearguard,’ he barked.
‘It's red fer go.
Repeat red fer go.
Send in the cavalry.
Over.’
Springfield's voice crackled from the receiver in reply, crisp and full of authority now, all trace of the easy-going backwoods sheriff gone.
‘Rearguard to Pathfinder Two.
We read you, an’ we see y'red light.
We're on our way.
Commence evacuation.
Out.’
Turning his attention back to the sea of faces crowding the corridor on either side of him, he addressed them firmly, injecting his voice with a confidence he didn't feel in order to reassure them.
‘Okay troops, keep calm.
Losin' y'cool won't help none.
I want you t'start movin' downstairs.
Make fer the front door.
Hold hands with the person next to you.
Move fast but don't run.
Jes’ stay cool an' we'll all be outa here in no time.
Okay, everybody on their feet, an' let's move it on out!’
Waving a group of the older ones forward, he started them moving first to lead the descent in an orderly manner.
He stood his own ground, deciding it would be better to let those at the rear who were awaiting their turn to descend, see his reassuring presence still with them on the upper floor.
Besides, he reasoned, they all knew the way to the front door better than he did.
It was his job now to maintain order and keep them moving smoothly.
As he stood there, waving them past like a cop directing traffic, he kept up a steady monologue of encouragement.
‘You're doin' fine…help each other along…don't push there…keep movin'…that's the way…go with th'flow…don't stop till you're outside…’
He kept his voice firm and calm, while the first tendrils of smoke began to rise from below, along with the dull roar and crackle of flames.
Things were going well, and he saw that less than half of the youngsters were left.
Suddenly a passing girl suddenly swerved towards him and threw her arms round his waist.
Clinging to him tightly, she buried her face in his chest, her thin shoulders shaking with sobs of relief.
‘Daddy, it's you.
I thought it was your voice.
Oh daddy…
I'm so glad you've come…’
Larsen hugged his daughter to him and stroked her hair comfortingly.
Swallowing to clear the lump in his throat, he murmured, ‘It's okay, princess.
You're safe now.’
Still holding her, he raised his voice again and continued calling into the gathering smoke.
‘Keep it movin'…that's th'ticket…jes’ stay cool…everyone's gonna be okay…’
Then the last of the human tide swept past him and he started down in their wake, guiding Karen with a protective arm round her shoulders.
As they stumbled down the stairs, Larsen's heart was full and his watering eyes were not wholly caused by the thickening clouds of stinging smoke billowing up from below.
CHAPTER 73
While Grant and Larsen were infiltrating the enemy base, Sheriff Springfield organised the main force.
Retaining only a dozen men to accompany the vehicles when they entered the grounds, he divided the remainder into two parties and dispatched them to cover the area north of the perimeter fence.
Following his hunch about a probable escape route from the estate, one party entered the woods and followed the line of the perimeter fence to its north-eastern limit.
Once in position they were to form a cordon, await his radio command, then beat their way back towards the highway, creating as much disturbance as possible with their flashlights and guns to drive any fugitives ahead of them.
The members of the second party lined the edge of the highway facing the woods, forming a trap into which their colleagues would drive the fleeing sect heavies.
Those rounded up in this way would be detained along with the captive patrol in the ‘prison’ rig.
Once his infantry were in position, Springfield had turned his attention to his motorised troops.
Rocky O'Rourke, in the cab of his big sixteen wheeler, was parked about twenty yards north of the gates.
From its rear chassis, two heavy chains were securely attached to the steel bars of the gates.
The engine of the big mechanical monster was ticking over with the deep throb of impatient, reined-in horsepower.
Lined up at the roadside on the southern side of the gates, were the three fire tenders with their two-man crews in the cabs.
On the other side of the highway the second of the big sixteen wheelers was parked, engine running and one of Rocky's trucker buddies behind the wheel.
The third rig, holding Deputy Fenton's four-man guard detail and their captives, had pulled onto the wide verge ahead of Rocky's vehicle and was now awaiting more prisoners to fill its spacious interior, if all went according to plan.
Springfield himself was standing beside the open door of his car, which he had drawn up on the verge opposite the gates, angled so its headlights were bathing them in a pool of bright luminescence.
The watching men saw him duck his head to catch the latest radio transmission from Grant and Larsen.
Next moment every head turned to gaze skywards as a brilliant red star flared into life high above Bethlehem House.
The urgent blare of his car horn drew their attention back to the sheriff's tall figure.
His arm rose and fell in a chopping motion.
He shouted one word across to Rocky.
‘Go!’
In answer to Springfield's signal, Rocky's big rig revved up, belched smoke from its overhead exhausts and began to creep forward.
The heavy chains lifted, straightened and drew taut, and the stout steel frames of the gates began to buckle outwards.
Suddenly they gave under the intolerable strain, ripped free from their mountings and crashed to the ground.
Angling his rig onto the verge, Rocky dragged the mangled gates clear of the entrance and off the road surface.
As he did so, the three fire tenders roared in through the newly created gap.
The leading vehicle, driven by Fire Chief Bob Wallace, reinforced by short lengths of steel girder welded across its front, lost not a yard of its gathering momentum as it smashed through the inner set of gates, flinging them wide to hang drunkenly from their torn hinges.
Then they were through and roaring round the curves of the wide gravel driveway, as they charged towards the enemy stronghold.
Across the highway, the driver of the second rig swung his wheel hard over and accelerated in through the gap in the wake of the three fire tenders.
A few seconds later he was followed by Rocky's rig, the chains linking it to the ruined gates having been released from its rear axle by Springfield.
When the small convoy emerged from the wooded-in section of the driveway onto the final sixty yards of straight approach to the house, the reason for the red flare became clear.
Both ends of the building were on fire, flames pouring from the end windows of all three floors and licking their way hungrily towards the roof.
As they roared towards the burning building, Bob Wallace hit the siren to let the occupants know help was coming.
The two following tenders peeled off to left and right and the three vehicles, sirens whooping, fanned out to cover the entire frontage of the building.
They had no sooner skidded to a halt, than the crews had the hoses run out and were training their jets on the leaping flames.
The two rigs bringing up the rear, swung round in a complete circle, and reversed to sit side by side some thirty yards from the front door.
This was as near as they dared to approach to avoid the risk of fire damage to the vehicles.
Leaping from the cabs, Rocky and his fellow trucker ran to the back of their rigs and threw open the rear doors.
From the rear of Rocky's rig, his crew of four armed men jumped down beside him.
With their help the loading ramps of both rigs were lowered, then the four men immediately moved off to either side to cover everyone from attack.
They had no sooner done so, than the front door of the house burst open and a flood of blanket wrapped kids began to pour out.
All were in a state of confusion, some near to panic.
Waving his arms to attract their attention, Rocky bellowed over the noise of the roaring flames, crying youngsters and throbbing water pumps.
‘Dis way you lot…git aboard…c'mon, move y'selves…we ain’ got all night…’
The milling throng immediately surged forward and began to scramble up the ramps into the spacious interiors.
Suddenly, somewhere off to the rear, came an yell of alarm and the roar of a shotgun going off, followed by three more blasting off in quick succession.
Then someone gave a victory whoop and a voice shouted excitedly, ‘Didya see th'size o’ them bastards?
The fuckers were comin' straight for us, too.’
Rocky, busy waving his charges on board, glanced over his shoulder in time to see a small group of dark shapes disappearing at a fast lope round the bend of the curving driveway.
Four others were scattered motionless on the green turf some thirty yards away.
Satisfied his companions had things well in hand, he turned back to his task of shepherding his quota of stumbling, coughing, bemused refugees into the shelter of the huge container truck.
The floors of both vehicles had been thickly lined with straw padding and the blanket wrapped kids were settling down on it thankfully and in reasonable order.
Off to either side, the pumps continued to play their hissing jets into the rooms within the limits of the hungry flames, in an attempt to delay their spread.
But they were losing the battle.
Remarkably quickly, however, the last of the human tide ran from the house entrance and up the ramps of the rigs, which were now almost packed full.
Smoke was now pouring thickly from the doorway and it had just occurred to Rocky that no enemy personnel had as yet put in an appearance, when Larsen came stumbling out, eyes streaming, one arm hugging his daughter protectively, shotgun dangling from his free hand.
‘Hey Pete, keep comin' straight ahead,’ Rocky yelled at him, waving to catch his attention.
As Larsen reached him, Rocky asked, ‘You da last?’
Larsen coughed to clear his lungs, hawked and spat.
‘Yeah,’ he rasped hoarsely, labouring for breath.
‘I sent 'em all down ahead of me.’
‘Okay, let's git dis lot outa here fast, before da roof goes.’
So saying, Rocky called in the four man crew who helped the driver of the other rig to raise his ramp and close the doors.
Then they clambered aboard Rocky's rig, and Larsen gave him a hand to heave the ramp up into place and swing the rear doors shut on his full load of human cargo.
When he, Larsen and Karen had settled into the high cab, the girl in the middle, Rocky selected first gear and started them rolling slowly forward, following the other rig away from the roaring inferno behind them.
As he did so, he leaned on the horn for a long blast, to let the others know he was clear.
Without delay, the fire-fighters gave up the unequal struggle to contain the leaping flames.
Shutting down their pumps, they began hastily reeling in their hoses, preparing to pull back in their turn.
‘Dis y'gal?’
Rocky nodded down at the girl between them.
Larsen looked down fondly at the gaunt soot smeared features of the hollow-eyed girl and nodded back.
‘Sure is,’ he replied.
‘This is Karen.
Karen, meet Rocky.’
The girl smiled shyly up at the big man behind the wheel and got a friendly grin in return.
‘Pleased t'meetchya Karen,’ he said.
‘Yer old man an’ his sidekick done real well goin' in an' gittin' you out.
Hope you appreciate it, gal.’
She nodded her agreement and glanced up proudly at her father.
But he was not looking at her.
Instead he was staring wildly at Rocky over the top of her head.
‘Jeezus Rocky!’ he burst out.
‘Brett…where's Brett?
You see ‘im come out?’
The big truck shuddered to a halt, spraying gravel from under its locked wheels, as Rocky tramped down hard on the brakes.
‘Hell no, I ain’ seen ‘im.’
His eyes and voice mirrored Larsen's alarm.
‘Christ!
He must still be in dere…’
Next moment, both men were out of the cab and sprinting back towards the blazing house.
The other rig, unaware of anything wrong, kept going and disappeared from view along the driveway.
The fire tenders were pulling away from the doomed building as the two men pounded towards them, waving them down.
The three vehicles jerked to a stop in line abreast and the two panting men halted alongside the one driven by Bob Wallace, the Fire Chief.
‘What's up?’ he called down to them.
‘Brett…you seen Brett?’
The question was flung at each vehicle crew in turn.
Heads shook, negative responses were shouted back.
‘Oh shit!’ groaned Larsen.
‘He's still in there.
I'm goin' in after him.’
And he began running wildly towards the smoke-belching front doorway.
‘Pete, don’ be a fool.
You'll never make it,’ roared Rocky and took off after him with surprising speed for one of his size and bulk.
His years in the ring had left him the legacy of being quick on his feet, and he caught Larsen some twenty yards short of the door.
He seized the demented man round the shoulders and began to drag him back to safety.
At this distance, the heat from the rapidly spreading flames was almost unbearable.
Using his superior strength, Rocky dragged and wrestled the struggling Larsen another twenty yards back, doubling the distance between them and the blazing building.
Suddenly the issue was resolved with terrible finality for them both, as the inner floors gave way and crashed down in flaming ruin.
The flames which belched from every opening caused the two struggling men to fling themselves flat on the ground to escape their scorching blast.
Scrambling to their feet, they stumbled to safety, back to where their comrades had left their vehicles and gathered in a group, staring grim-faced at the roaring inferno.
After a few minutes, someone broke the silence in an attempt to offer a glimmer of hope.
‘Hey, you know somethin'?
We ain't seen any of them crazy sect bastards Sheriff Springfield warned us to look out fer neither.
Maybe they left by the tunnel he was on about…well, maybe Brett coulda gotten out that way too…’
The speaker tailed off lamely.
No-one answered him.
The faint hope he had offered shrivelled and died in the heat of the hungry, leaping flames.
Then the roof caved in, throwing up a huge column of fire and glowing sparks to the night sky.
One by one the watching men turned away and made their way silently to their vehicles.
Last to leave were Rocky and Larsen.
CHAPTER 74
When the fire fighting and rescue detail had regrouped outside the main gates, Wallace, Rocky and Larsen gave Springfield a brief account of their successful operation.
Only two questions remained unanswered — the puzzling absence of any sect heavies and Grant's worrying non-return.
The big sheriff considered their report in silence for a long moment.
He lifted his uniform Stetson, ran his fingers through his iron grey hair and resettled the hat firmly on his head before replying.
‘You've done well, all o’ you,’he started.
‘Gittin' the kids out after those crazy bastards had fired the place, took priority over everythin' else.
Regardin' the non-appearance of the chinks or any of their goon squad, I reckon that confirms my theory 'bout 'em havin' an escape route.
Way I see it, Brett's prob'ly followed 'em an’ used the same way out.’
He paused, then added quietly, ‘…leastways, I hope that's what he's done.’
There was a murmur of agreement from the assembled men, then Springfield asked about the burst of gunfire he'd heard not long after they'd entered the grounds.
He was told this had been to drive off an attack by the dog pack.
‘We got four of ‘em,’ one of the men commented.
‘Big bastards they were, too.
The rest got th'message an’ fucked off.
Didn' bother us again.’
Springfield nodded.
‘Yeah, that's cuz they come out th'gates an’ hightailed it up the road.
Big mean lookin' brutes, right enough.
They turned off into the woods where th'fence ends.
I heard more shootin' right after that, so I reckon it jes' ain' bin their night.’
At the mention of shooting, as though right on cue the faint sound of gunfire erupted on the night wind.
Although muted by distance and intervening trees, it clearly came from deep in the woods to the north-east.
‘Reckon we're startin' Phase Four.’
Springfield's quiet voice drew their attention back to him.
Lifting his radio to his mouth, he keyed the transmit button.
‘Rearguard to Blue Leader.
What's the action?
Over.’
They waited impatiently for a reply, but none seemed to be forthcoming.
The distant gunfire was now interspersed by the faint sound of police whistles and the loud thump of thunderflashes.
Springfield was about to repeat his call, when the receiver crackled into life.
‘Blue Leader to Rearguard.
We got us some good huntin' here, sheriff.’
A few paces away, Rocky raised an amused eyebrow as he recognised the unruffled drawl of his trucker buddy Chuck.
The disembodied voice continued, amidst a clearly transmitted background of gunfire, explosions, whistles and excited war-whoops.
‘So far the bag is two dogs an’ some hostiles.
Unfortunately, only the dogs're permanently ten-seven.
We've taken some minor casualties of our own, but nothin' to worry about, they're all walkin' wounded.
The woods're full of hostiles, an' we're drivin' 'em towards the road, accordin' t'plan.
Hope y'ready for ‘em.
Over.’
‘Rearguard to Blue Leader.
Reception committee's in place'n ready for; em.
Keep 'em comin'.
Good huntin'.
Out.’
Springfield returned the radio to his pocket and turned to the others, who were already checking magazine loads.
He addressed the Fire Chief.
‘Bob, you stay here with your fire crew an’ guard the vehicles.
The rest of you come with me.’
Minutes later they had joined the long cordon of armed men, strung out at five yard intervals on the grass verge opposite the woods, from which the sounds of gunfire, explosions, whistle blowing and yelling were now appreciably closer.
Fenton moved his big prison rig closer too, in anticipation of a fresh intake of captives.
These were not long in arriving.
Soon the first tracksuited figures stumbled from the trees into the waiting dragnet.
As soon as they broke cover, they were immediately dazzled by powerful flashlight beams, then loudly challenged at gun point to drop any weapons they were carrying, and to surrender.
Most of them gave up right away, realising they had been caught in the jaws of a carefully laid trap.
Many were already suffering from pellet wounds inflicted by the shotguns of Chuck's hunters, and the last dregs of their resistance crumbled before the menacing line of armed men.
Only a few tried to be heroes.
Those who did were swiftly cut down, peppered with birdshot, as they raised their guns to fire.
Eventually the flow dried up and a head-count revealed a total of thirty-two, including the original four-man patrol, when the last captive had been locked in the back of the prison rig.
Springfield's satisfaction with the success of the night's operation, was somewhat tempered by the fact that only three of those captured were from the upper echelon of grey tracksuited heavies, the Apostles.
All the others were from the sect hierarchy's lesser rank of Disciples.
He supposed it was only to be expected.
With the exception of their mentors, the black-clad Orientals, the Apostles would be the best trained and therefore the most resourceful members of the sect's command structure.
It was also possible, he reasoned, that some of their number were either away in the city, or casualties of the house assault.
Of the four Orientals themselves, not one had been seen or accounted for.
After the last captive had been secured, the cordon remained in place to bag any stragglers, waiting until their colleagues who had been doing the sweep through the woods arrived to join up with them again.
The gunfire and noise in the woods had been lessening as it drew nearer and the targets became fewer.
Soon an uneven line of bobbing flashlights were seen approaching through the trees, and then the two cordons met up in a noisy reunion of mutual backslapping and congratulation.
The ‘walking wounded’ mentioned in the earlier exchange of radio messages, turned out to be seven in number.
Six had minor gunshot wounds, the seventh had tripped over a fallen tree and broken an arm.
All were given first-aid and patched up until they could receive proper medical attention later.
Springfield organised a quick roll-call to check if anyone was missing, deputing the leaders of each group to count his own comrades.
Rocky had accounted for all his truckers, with the exception of his three buddies, Chuck, Jube and Red.
He was still trying to find them among the milling blackened faces, when a sudden shout drew everyone's attention to a flicker of torch light weaving through the trees towards the highway.
Minutes later, a small group of six figures emerged from the woods.
The two in front were shivering teenagers dressed in thin cotton calf-length robes, a long haired youth and a thin elfin faced girl.
The youth was holding a flashlight and had his arm comfortingly round the girl, who was sobbing quietly, her cheeks wet with tears.
Bringing up the rear were Rocky's three buddies, Chuck, Jube and Red.
Between them they were carrying the sixth figure — the limp, white faced form of Brett Grant.
Jube had his feet, the other two were cradling his upper body between them, his head lolling back against their linked arms.
The small group halted as Springfield and the other ran up and formed a loose throng around them.
Nodding down at their silent, unmoving burden, Chuck answered their unspoken question.
‘We got him away from the Chink.
I think we were too late.
I can't feel his pulse.’
Chuck sounded tired.
He looked round the circle of faces, his eyes coming to rest on Springfield's.
‘I think he's dead.’
The stricken silence which followed this statement was broken only by the sound of Louise's quiet sobs.
CHAPTER 75
It took two shots to blast the lock off the stout, metal-sheathed door.
Dragging it open, Grant stepped quickly through into the clear air beyond and pulled the heavy door shut behind him, blotting out the smoke and heat.
He swept the torch beam round the short passage and saw the two cell doors on his left were ajar.
Fearing the worst, he stepped forward and reluctantly pushed the first door wide open, fully expecting to see a sprawled, lifeless body.
But the cell was empty, except for some crumpled bedding and odd items scattered around.
The second cell was the same.
The two cell doors on the other side of the passage were locked, but a quick check through the Judas holes showed these were also unoccupied.
It looked like the escaping oriental had collected the two captives and taken them with him, as he led his followers to safety.
This puzzled Grant.
Angel One had shown no concern for the safety of all the other sect members upstairs, so why had he seen fit to save these two?
Hostages?
Bargaining counters?
Yes, that could be it.
But how had they got out?
He had seen no-one on his way here.
The question hung unanswered in his mind.
It was academic anyway, for just then another ominous rumble of collapsing masonry shook the foundations, peppering him with flakes of plaster from the ceiling and driving home the fact that he was trapped, with no means of escape.
Suddenly Grant felt drained and aware once more of the increasing ache in his injured arm and leg.
Walking to the far end of the cells passage, he lowered himself to the floor until he was sitting with his back to the wall facing the door with its broken lock hanging askew.
He stared dully at the hole he had blasted with his shotgun, and saw the red flicker of flames beyond the door.
Now smoke was beginning to filter through the hole and round the edges of the door itself.
The heat was building up too, as the fast spreading fire neared the other side of this temporary barrier.
Even as he watched, the paint on the metal surface of the door began to blister.
Grant's eyes and throat were stinging from the thickening smoke, so he decided there was nothing for it but to check the mechanism of his shotgun.
Grimly he worked the pump action to eject the load, closing his mind to the thought of the wall and ceiling smeared with his brain matter, when he put the muzzle in his mouth and pulled the trigger.
He leaned forward to retrieve one of the ejected cartridges now scattered on the tiled floor around his feet.
As he did so, his eye fell on a small brass-rimmed slot barely half an inch long, set into the floor next to the fallen cartridge.
It looked for all the world like a keyhole.
He examined it closer, and it was only then he noticed the faint crack which ran between the edges of the tiles.
A spark of hope was rekindled in him, as his eye traced the faint line and saw it formed a two-foot square.
He was certain he had found a cleverly concealed trapdoor.
If he was right, and he sent up a silent prayer that he was, it could be he had stumbled on Angel One's secret escape route.
His tiredness and despair vanished as though they had never been.
Scrambling to his feet, he tested the floor at his feet by stamping with the heel of his uninjured leg.
He was sure there was a hollowness within the two-foot square, compared to the area around it.
Grabbing a handful of fresh cartridges he began to reload the shotgun, fumbling a couple of times in his new-found haste.
He was further hampered by sweat stinging his eyes, as the heat and smoke built to an intolerable level in the confined space of the small passage.
Then he was aiming the gun down at the brass slot.
In his eagerness to escape the encroaching flames, he worked the action and fired three times in rapid succession.
The acrid stink of cordite filled his nostrils, a dull pain throbbed in his blast deafened ears, and a trickle of wetness on his mouth and chin told him his nose was bleeding.
But the discomfort was all worth it.
Blasted through the tiles at his feet was a ragged hole, six inches in diameter.
Inserting his left hand, Grant took a firm grip and heaved upwards.
The solid trapdoor lifted and crashed over onto the tiled floor, and his heart soared as the torch light revealed the wooden rungs of a ladder descending into the darkness below.
A cool breath of stale dank air assailed his nostrils, but to Grant it smelled sweetly of life and freedom.
Good old Nate Springfield had been right about the existence of a tunnel after all.
Stepping onto the first rung, Grant began to descend the ladder into the shaft below.
Not a moment too soon.
His upper body was still above floor level, when a tongue of fire licked through the broken lock, and next instant the entire inner surface of the door was a sheet of flames as the blistered paint caught.
Grant quickly descended below ground, pulling the trapdoor shut over his head as he did so.
When he reached the foot of the ladder, Grant turned and directed the torch light down the length of the tunnel in which he now found himself.
To his surprise, he could see no sign of its other end, despite the considerable reach of the powerful beam.
He saw that the floor, walls and roof of the tunnel were lined with rough concrete slabs fitted closely together without mortar.
A dull rumble from above shook loose drops of water from between the joints in the roofing slabs, which sparkled briefly in the torch beam.
Realising that this section of tunnel might cave in under the weight of the collapsing building overhead, Grant started forward.
The roof was about six foot high, which meant he had to stoop slightly to accommodate his extra two inches of height as he moved along.
After he had walked a little distance, he noticed that the concrete slabs underfoot were glistening damply in the torch light from the constant dripping of moisture seeping through the joints in the roof from the earth above.
From this he reckoned the underground passage was now clear of the house foundations and heading out towards the outer fence.
Grant shivered as the cold dank air chilled him, and he quickened his pace.
Then, up ahead, he saw what he thought was the tunnel's end.
However, when he neared the blank concrete wall, he saw an opening to his right and found he had merely reached a ninety degree turn, round which the tunnel still stretched as far as his torch beam could reach.
Assuming the Turkey Pens had been situated at the rear of the house, he reckoned he was now heading for the outer fence somewhere off to the north side of the grounds.
Minutes later, when Grant estimated he must have covered a good quarter of a mile, he again saw a grey wall barring his passage in the torch beam up ahead.
This time it proved to be the tunnel's end, and as he drew nearer he saw the shadowy outline of a ladder etched against the concrete.
Arriving at the foot of the ladder, Grant's feet crunched in a sprinkling of fresh soil underfoot.
Looking up, he found he was standing under a short vertical shaft, at the top of which was another trapdoor.
Wincing at the protesting ache from his injured leg, he climbed the rungs until his head was touching the underside of the smooth wooden planking.
Switching off the torch, he pocketed it to leave his hands clear for handling his gun.
In the pitch dark, he ducked his head, mounted another rung of the ladder and pressed his shoulders against the underside of the trapdoor.
A breath of cold, fresh air wafted over his face, as the heavy wooden square eased up a few inches.
At the same time, the sound of distant gunfire, explosions and shouting came to him on the night breeze, somewhere off his right and muffled by the intervening trees.
Raising the trapdoor a little more so he could see out, he cautiously pushed out the barrel of the shotgun and checked for any sign of enemy personnel, as best as he could in his limited field of vision.
In the patchy moonlight filtering down through the latticework of branches above, he could see no lurking figures.
He knew if someone was standing in the blind spot directly behind him, he was in trouble.
But there was nothing he could about it.
So he decided to waste no more time, and thrust the trapdoor up and back with his shoulders.
It was heavy, being covered by a thick layer of turf, and as soon as he could he checked over his shoulder to satisfy himself the area was entirely clear, before climbing stiffly all the way out and dropping the trapdoor shut again.
He stood for a moment, gun held loosely at waist level, trying to get his bearings.
He was surrounded by dark woods, he could see no sign of the boundary fence under which the tunnel had brought him.
The distant gunfire and commotion was moving further off to his right.
He realised this would be Springfield's cordon of beaters driving the escaping sect heavies towards the highway, and he moved off in that direction himself.
The fitful moonlight was bright enough to see by, so he didn't bother to use his torch as he threaded his way forward through the trees.
He had only gone a short distance, when he found himself stepping into a small moonlit clearing, some twenty yards across.
A sudden movement among the trees on the opposite side of the clearing caused him to stop.
He dropped into a defensive crouch and swung the muzzle of his shotgun up.
As he did so, he was all too aware of the ache and stiffness in his injured arm and leg, threatening to handicap him in any confrontation with an enemy.
He was also cursing his luck at being caught out in the open, when three figures stepped forward into the moonlight and stopped facing him across the intervening space.
The two figures in front of the small group were robed sect members.
They were standing side by side and ahead of the third figure, who was positioned directly behind them.
In the clear moonlight, Grant recognised all three.
The two in front were Jim Miller and Louise Wyatt.
The third figure, standing behind them with a hand gripping each of their necks, was the black clad oriental, Angel One.
CHAPTER 76
Time stood still as the two men locked eyes across the eerily moonlit space.
The sporadic gunfire, explosions and shouting in the depths of the forest, seemed to belong to a different world.
Which in a way was true — their enmity was a personal element within the events of the wider conflict.
Grant had to suppress the trickle of fear which ran through him, tightening his solar plexus and quickening his pulse, as he faced this dangerous man.
Fear debilitated, and he would need all his wits and ability at his command, if he was to survive this encounter.
Angel One, for his part, sensed the fear in Grant, and knew he had this hated enemy in his power…once he had disarmed him.
This he would achieve by forcing him into discarding his weapons.
Know your enemy was a prime rule of combat.
Angel One applied this precept now.
From experience he knew Grant had a weakness he could exploit — his concern for the safety of others — and it was a flaw which would now prove fatal.
Grant forced himself to hold the challenging stare of the glittering black eyes for what seemed an age, but what was in fact only a few seconds.
Then the tense silence was broken by a frightened whimper from Louise, held helpless as she was by the paralysing steel-fingered grip on her neck.
The tiny sound of distress broke the spell and spurred Grant into action.
He took an involuntary pace forward and raised the shotgun to point straight at Angel One's face.
The oriental did not flinch, but merely drew the two youngsters close together in front of him, effectively shielding himself by placing them between himself and the killing arc of the shotgun's blast.
Then his harsh voice cut across the moonlit silence of the clearing.
‘I think it is time to trade, Grant.’
Slowly Grant lowered the shotgun to waist level.
He had no choice other than to negotiate the release of the youngsters.
He was certain the brutal oriental intended to kill them no matter what assurances he might give to the contrary, because of the trouble each had caused him.
Their only chance lay in the strength of the Oriental's desire to kill him instead.
He moistened dry lips with the tip of his tongue before replying.
‘Okay, I'll make you a deal.’
He made an effort to sound positive, trying to seize the initiative.
‘Release them an’ you can go.
I give you my word no-one will try to…’
‘You are in no position to offer me any deals,’ Angel One interrupted coldly.
‘I will dictate the terms…and they are not open to negotiation.
Throw away your weapons and face me in combat, and I will release these two.
Refuse, and I will snap their necks and be gone before you can pull that trigger.
Those are my terms.
Do you accept or not?’
Grant eyed his enemy bleakly.
‘So that's why you waited for me to show up!’ he commented grimly.
Angel One gave a derisive snort.
‘You flatter yourself, Grant.
I was merely waiting until your police friends finished their clumsy sweep through the woods.’
He cocked his head, listening to the receding noises, then continued, ‘I brought these two as hostages to guarantee my freedom, should I run into any enemy forces.’
The faces of the two youngsters were screwed in pain up against the pressure of his cruel grip on their necks.
‘But now I can use them for a different trade.’
Grant's mind was in a whirl as he sought desperately for a way out.
He had noticed straight away that Angel One was unarmed, having obviously discarded the gun he had fired in the corridor earlier.
But that made no difference — he knew he stood no chance against the oriental in single combat.
Maybe if he could delay a little longer, Springfield would discover his sweep had failed to capture the ringleader and send men in to flush him out.
‘How do I know you'll keep your word and release them, if I agree and disarm myself?’ he demanded.
‘Why should I trust you?’
‘Because I am Chinese,’ Angel One replied simply.
‘To us a man who breaks his word loses all honour.
But enough time wasting.
Either you accept my terms and face me in combat, or I will leave you here with your weapons…and two corpses!’
‘You've got a strange sense of honour,’ Grant riposted bitterly.
‘You lose face if you break your word, but not if you use defenceless kids as hostages to force an injured opponent into fighting you!’
As soon as he had spoken, Grant could have bitten his tongue off, realising his words displayed weakness.
The oriental glanced at Grant's bandaged arm and shrugged.
‘Very well, you may keep your knife, if that will encourage you to accept my challenge.’
There was undisguised contempt in his voice.
Realising this was the only concession he would be likely to get, Grant nodded his acceptance.
The knife did not tip the scales much to his advantage, but even a slim chance was better than none.
‘Good.
We will begin the exchange,’ Angel One told him.
‘The pistol first.
Then I will release the girl.’
Aiming the shotgun as steadily as he could with his right hand despite the throbbing pain of his wounded bicep, Grant reached down and across his body with his left.
Awkwardly he unclipped the flap of the holster on his right hip and withdrew the pistol, holding the butt between thumb and fingers.
‘Throw it well away from you,’ ordered Angel One.
Grant obeyed, flinging the pistol off to one side with a sweep of his arm.
As the weapon spun off into the darkness, Angel One released his grip on Louise and shoved her stumbling off to one side, at the same time drawing Jim Miller square in front of him to maintain his human shield.
‘Now the shotgun,’ he commanded, his glittering black eyes never leaving Grant's.
Grant hesitated momentarily, reluctant to discard the main weapon in his arsenal.
He now knew Angel One would keep his side of the bargain and release the youth.
But he also knew the moment he threw away the shotgun, he was also throwing away his last hope of survival.
Even fully fit he would have stood little chance against the oriental, who was an expert in martial arts combat.
With a wounded arm and leg, he stood no chance at all.
But his purpose was to save Jim Miller's life, not his own.
With a sudden swift movement, he seized the shotgun with his left hand and sent it whirling off into the night after the pistol.
As the weapon crashed into the underbrush among the trees somewhere off to his left, Grant saw the oriental shove Jim Miller away from him and step forward.
Gritting his teeth against the pain, he made a grab with his right hand and ripped the knife from its sheath.
As he transferred the blade clumsily to his left hand, he knew he wouldn't make it.
He had already witnessed the incredible speed of his lethal opponent, and also of his fellow oriental whom he had shot and killed in the Control Room.
So, he was surprised when he succeeded in drawing the knife and felt its comforting weight in his left fist, before his enemy had managed to reach him.
Then he saw why.
Angel One had not moved.
The man was toying with him and treating him with contempt, by showing just how little he rated him as an opponent.
It was clearly intended to gain a crushing psychological advantage, before a blow had been struck.
Paradoxically, it had the opposite effect on Grant.
His humiliation and fear were washed away by a tide of anger, at this open display of contempt.
Then a flicker of movement caught his eye off to one side of the clearing, and he saw the two youngsters were still hovering there uncertainly.
‘You two get the hell outa here!’ he yelled at them.
‘Make for the road.
Go on…move!’
The anger in him made his voice sharper than he intended.
But it had the desired effect of snapping them out of their indecision and galvanising them into action.
Grant saw Jim Miller grab Louise by the hand and turn away, pulling her after him.
Next moment their wraithlike figures had darted out of sight among the trees like two startled deer.
Now Grant was alone in the night with his fearsome adversary.
Only a few yards of moonlit turf separated them.
He dropped into a defensive crouch, the knife held defensively before him.
The moonlight glinted on the razor edged blade, boosting his morale, even though he knew the weapon gave him only the slightest of chances against the lethal human killing machine facing him.
As a last resort he decided to take a leaf out of the Oriental's book, by using psychological warfare against him.
Making a beckoning motion with the outheld knife, Grant flung out a verbal challenge to Angel One, trying to goad him.
‘Come on then, what y'waitin' for?
I'm the one who's fucked up your entire operation.
I hope I've cost you plenty.
You drug dealers are the scum of the earth.
An’ I bet your Triad bosses won't be too pleased with you, either.
I hear they don't like failure.
An' I'm the one who's made you fail…’
Grant had no idea how close he'd come to the truth, as he taunted his enemy.
Angel One, who was all too aware of the probable consequences when he reported the calamitous events of the night, became irritated despite himself.
Smoothly, menacingly, he dropped into the zingi-tu'ii , the Kung Fu fighting stance, perfectly balanced on the balls of his feet, his hands held open in the double-axe position.
Grant sensed he had succeeded in needling his opponent and tensed himself in readiness.
Even so, he was still almost caught out when Angel One launched his attack, by the eye-blurring speed of its execution.
His own martial arts training had honed his reactions, and these came to his aid now.
Throwing himself to his right, he only just avoided the murderous flying dragon-stamp kick aimed at his face.
As he did so, he struck out reflexively with his knife at the outstretched leg of the flying figure, and had the satisfaction of feeling the blade strike home.
In the same instant, however, Grant was caught a numbing blow on his left shoulder, as Angel One reacted to his move with uncanny speed, chopping down at him as he hurtled past and over him.
The painful blow was hard enough to knock him off balance, and he tucked in his right shoulder, hitting the ground in a flying break-fall.
The stab of fiery agony from his injured arm forced a gasp of pain from his throat, even as he completed the rolling movement to regain his feet.
Instantly he whirled to face his enemy, knife held ready before him.
Now his left shoulder was aching from the lightning fast, iron-handed blow he had taken.
He expected to have to face an immediate follow-up attack, but nothing of the sort happened.
Angel One had firm control of himself again, after his uncharacteristic loss of self-control.
He had been surprised at the speed of Grant's reaction and had received a painful, though superficial flesh wound in his left thigh from the knife thrust.
Holding the crouched, double-axe-hand attack position, Angel One consciously slowed his breathing.
He drew in a deep kapalabhati breath, concentrating his mind on the renewal of his ch'i , the inner energy which increases strength and speed of reflexes, and imparts greater pliability.
When he attacked, he would move with the speed of the striking snake, the power of the charging buffalo, and the ferocity of the hungry tiger.
Grant watched Angel One closely, waiting for the attack to be launched.
He poised himself, blade weaving defensively before him, ready to take instant evasive action.
Yet, when the oriental came at him, the man moved so swiftly that he was once again almost taken by surprise.
One moment Angel One had been crouched motionless as a carved statue, the next he seemed to have been transposed several feet nearer in the blink of an eye, like a faulty sequence in some badly cut movie.
Grant flung himself to one side…but this time he was just a split second too late.
The vicious front snap-kick caught him caught him just above his right hip, instead of square in the groin, but its force knocked him spinning to the ground.
Pain flared in his thigh wound as he landed heavily on his injured leg.
Frantically he rolled clear of any follow-up attack, and as he did so he felt something hard and bulky dig painfully into the small of his back.
For an instant he thought he had rolled over a stone protruding from the turf of the clearing, then he realised what it was and his heart leapt.
It was the Very Pistol.
He had completely forgotten about it, not having considered it as a weapon.
As he scrambled awkwardly to his feet, he switched the knife to his right hand and clawed behind him with his left for the pistol's butt.
Angel One had realised that Grant was lame in one leg, and knew also that his partly landed kick had further slowed him.
He was poising himself to launch a final attack on Grant, intending to finish him off at his leisure.
Suddenly he saw his hated enemy reach behind him.
Next moment Grant's hand reappeared holding a blunt, wide-mouthed pistol.
He had time only to recognise it for what it was — a signal flare gun — before it belched a tongue of green flame at him.
Angel One was saved only by his superb reflexes, honed by years of martial arts training.
He reacted instantly, throwing himself sideways into a diving break-fall.
Even so, the hissing flare passed so close to his face in its fiery trajectory, it scorched his left cheek.
Overshooting its intended target, the flare cartridge smashed into the bole of a tree on the far edge of the clearing, burst into blazing life and dropped sputtering to the ground, giving off clouds of acrid green smoke.
The entire clearing was now lit up as brightly as at mid-day, with an eerie green glow.
Momentarily blinded by the eye-searing blaze of the ignited flare, Grant sensed the avenging form of his adversary closing on him once more.
In desperation he whipped the knife back to his good left hand and lunged forward with the blade extended before him.
A second later he yelled in agony, as the twin bones of his left forearm snapped like boxwood against the rigid bar of Angel One's downward forearm block.
The knife dropped from Grant's nerveless fingers and he staggered back, throwing up his right arm to shield his face.
Next instant his world exploded into rib-splintering agony, as Angel One drove a crushing seiken fist-blow into his chest.
Grant had time only to register the knowledge that he had lost the unequal contest, and with it his life, before the final hiraken knuckle-blow landed, breaking his nose and cheekbones, and smashing him into bloody oblivion.
He was entirely unaware of Angel One advancing to stand over him.
The oriental gazed down at the broken body of his defeated enemy.
He permitted himself a few seconds to savour his revenge, before delivering the coup de grace with a heti'i power-kick, which would snap Grant's neck like a dried stick.
CHAPTER 77
When Grant's shout had spurred him into action, Jim Miller had seized Louise's hand and pulled her after him, as he bolted to safety among the trees.
Safety from Angel One, whom he felt sure had intended to kill them, hadn't it been for Grant's timely arrival.
The oriental had released them from their cells a short time before, and ordered them to precede him down through an open trapdoor into a secret escape tunnel.
There they had joined a large group of sect heavies, some of whom were armed.
The whole company had then made their way along the considerable length of the dripping tunnel by torch light, until they had exited at its other end into the moonlit woods outside the perimeter fence.
The others had been ordered to split up into small groups and make good their escape as best they could and, if successful, to report to pre-arranged meeting places in the city.
All the sect heavies had thereupon melted into the dark gaps among the trees.
Jim and Louise, however, had been forced to remain with their captor alongside the open trapdoor, until he had satisfied himself the coast was completely clear.
His caution had proved right when a short time later the sounds of gunfire, explosions, shouting and crashing pursuit had erupted in the woods, coming from the direction in which most of the escaping sect heavies had headed.
Immediately the two youngsters had been forced to descend back down into the tunnel.
There they had clung together shivering in the dark while Angel One had stood on the ladder, watching through the slit of the partly open trapdoor until the advancing enemy cordon had safely passed, driving the fugitive sect heavies before them.
Re-emerging from the tunnel, Jim and Louise had been gripped firmly by their necks and forced to advance through the trees in silence.
They had not gone far, when they had stepped into a small clearing.
Their captor had instantly pulled them to a stop, his grip tightening painfully on their necks.
The reason was immediately apparent.
There, some twenty paces away across the moonlit clearing, was a crouched figure pointing a shotgun straight at them.
It was not until the oriental had addressed the armed newcomer with the blackened face, that the two youngsters had recognised him as the private detective Brett Grant.
Now, stumbling through the close packed trees in the patchy moonlight, Louise panted, ‘Jim…what are we going to do?…we can't just leave Brett back there with that monster.’
‘Damn right we can't!’
Jim replied breathlessly, without slackening the pace.
‘We're headin' for the guys who're doin' all the shootin' up ahead…the ones we hid from in the tunnel back there…they must be friends of his…maybe cops or somethin'…if Angel One didn't want them to find us…’
‘Hold it right there!’
The sudden loud command brought them skidding to a halt, speared by the beam of a powerful flashlight.
They made out a shadowy form in front of them, by shielding their eyes against the blinding glare.
Then the figure spoke again, and Jim's heart leapt like he would never have thought possible a few nights earlier, as he recognised the nasal drawl of the red-neck trucker called Jube.
‘Waal, lookie heah…if it ain't lil’ Miss Nightin'gown again.
Y'know, flower child, we're gonna hafta stop meetin' like this, or folks'll start talkin'…’
‘Jube!’
Jim burst out excitedly, hurrying forward to him with Louise in tow.
‘Jube, Brett Grant's in trouble.
He got us away from this chink that runs the sect, but he's injured an’ won't stand a chance.
That slant-eyed bastard'll kill ‘im.
Y'gotta help ‘im.
Hurry, please.’
The urgency in Jim's voice got through to Jube.
He lowered the flashlight.
‘No sweat, boy.
Jes’ you lead me to ‘im.’
Turning his head, he bawled over his shoulder for his companions to follow him, and was answered by muffled shouts from deeper in the woods.
Then they set off at a run, Jim and Louise leading the way, Jube pounding along behind them.
The two youngsters found the going much easier this time, with the way ahead lit up by the bobbing light of their new-found ally's powerful flashlight.
Suddenly a bright green glow pulsed through the trees up ahead.
They arrived at the edge of the trees just in time to see Angel One advance to stand over the sprawled figure of Brett Grant.
Jube had witnessed — and taken part in — sufficient bar-room brawls in his life as a trucker to know that a sure-fire way of making certain a felled opponent stayed down, was to heel-stomp him.
He guessed, correctly, that this was the Oriental's intention.
Aiming high for a body shot, so he would avoid hitting the prostrate Grant, he squeezed the trigger.
The click of the misfire, as the hammer snapped home on the dud cartridge, was all the warning Angel One needed.
He whirled round, saw the danger and reacted instantly.
In a sudden blur of motion, he leapt away from Grant and sprinted for the cover of the trees.
In the split second it took the cursing Jube to work the action and fire, his target was no longer there.
Tracking the swiftly moving oriental with the muzzle, Jube worked the action and fired twice more in rapid succession.
He might as well have tried to hit a flitting moonshadow.
Before the thunderclap echo of the last shot had died away, the clearing was empty, except for Grant's motionless body.
At that point, Jube's two fellow truckers, Chuck and Red, burst into the clearing, guns at the ready.
While Jube stood guard over Grant and the two youngsters, the other two truckers spent a fruitless few minutes checking to see whether the dangerous oriental was lurking in the immediate vicinity.
When they found no sign of him, they returned to regroup in the clearing.
It was then that Chuck had carried out a quick examination of the unconscious Grant, to ascertain the extent of his injuries.
He had not liked what he found.
He quickly diagnosed broken ribs and a bad arm break.
The pale, badly bruised face and thin trickle of blood from one ear, suggested a skull fracture too.
Equally serious, his trucker's rudimentary knowledge of first-aid, led him to suspect that the pink frothy blood evident around the badly swollen nose and mouth could mean a punctured lung.
He had seen similar symptoms before on road accident victims.
But what worried him most was the apparent lack of breathing or pulse.
Rising from his kneeling position, Chuck met the anxious eyes of the others grouped around him.
‘I don’ like the look of him, that's the truth,’he announced quietly.
‘Fact is, I think we're too late.
But the least we kin do is git ‘im to a doctor quick as possible.’
At his words, Louise began to sob quietly into her hands.
Jim blinked back tears of his own, swallowed the ache in his throat and put a comforting arm round her shoulders.
‘Here boy, you take this an’ lead the way,’Red instructed him, handing over his flashlight.
‘Head for the road.
We'll follow you an’ carry Grant between us.
If we come across any o' them sect goons, holler out an' drop flat on y'faces, so we kin git a clear shot at ‘em.
Understand?’
Jim nodded.
Slinging their guns over their shoulders ready for use at a moment's notice, the three truckers picked Grant up, Jube and Red linking arms under his shoulders, and Chuck taking his feet.
‘Okay, let's move it.’
On Chuck's order, the makeshift stretcher party set off with the two youngsters leading the way, Jim supporting the quietly sobbing Louise and lighting the way for those behind.
When Angel One raced from the clearing, narrowly evading the lethal hail of screaming metal shot, he avoided the subsequent search with contemptuous ease.
When the two truckers gave up their cursory attempt to find him and rejoined their companions, he advanced to the edge of the clearing to keep them under observation.
As he stood there, his glittering black eyes were the only feature that identified him as a living creature, and not a darker patch of shadow in the benighted forest.
From his vantage point he watched their examination of Grant, and their subsequent departure with his limp form.
He briefly considered following and attacking them.
But his coldly analytical mind dismissed the idea.
He had meted out vengeance to his chief enemy, Grant, so any further attack upon mere pawns would be unnecessary, therefore illogical.
He watched them go with quiet satisfaction.
CHAPTER 78
Springfield looked up from his examination of Grant's inert form, a more thorough examination than Chuck had been able to give him earlier.
Gathered loosely around him on the roadside verge, the two youngsters and the three truckers had been joined by Rocky and Larsen.
They were all waiting in grim silence for his verdict.
Climbing to his feet, the tall sheriff pocketed the small hand-mirror he had been holding to Grant's lips.
When he spoke, his matter-of-fact tone did more to reassure everyone than the actual words of hope that he spoke.
‘I kin feel a pulse.
It's weak an’ it's irregular, but it's there all right.
An' there's mistin' on the mirror, so he's still breathin'.
Least that's somethin'…’
He broke off as Jim Miller let go a Indian whoop of relief and delighted grins spread across the faces of everyone in the group.
He raised his voice slightly, cutting short their premature celebration.
Gone was the slow talking, up-state sheriff, instead they caught a glimpse of the real sharpness and authority that lay underneath.
‘Now hold on there.
Ain't no cause fer partyin' yet awhile.
He's in a bad way.
He might be hangin' on, but it won't be fer long if we don't git ‘im to Dawson County Hospital PDQ.
Pete…’ he addressed Larsen directly, ‘go git m'car, an’tell my deppity I need him here fast.’
Larsen was sprinting away almost before Springfield had finished speaking.
The fatigue of the long traumatic night fell away from him, as though by magic.
The faint hope offered by Springfield's diagnosis of Brett's condition, lent wings to his heels as he raced off down the road towards the vehicles parked at the front gates under Fenton's care.
Minutes later, Deputy Sheriff Cal Fenton found himself in charge of winding up the night's operations, and responsible for getting the whole shooting match back to Rockford.
There, temporary accommodation had been arranged for the rescued sect personnel in the local church hall and community centre, and for the captured heavies in the town jailhouse.
While this was being organised, the sheriff's car, Springfield at the wheel, was speeding through the night towards Rockford and beyond, heading for Dawson County Hospital.
In the back, the deeply unconscious Grant was lying across the rear seat, his head cradled in Larsen's lap.
Springfield knew the flame of Grant's life was flickering dangerously low, and that time was short.
He could almost hear the flapping of spectral wings, as the Grim Reaper himself pursued the car and the dying man they were trying to snatch from his clutches.
‘Okay mister ,’ he thought defiantly.
‘If it's a race y'want, it's a race y'got!’
Pressing his foot to the floor, Nate Springfield drove as he'd never driven before…
CHAPTER 79
Angel One stood motionless, waiting until the bobbing lights of the makeshift stretcher party had disappeared from view and the faint sounds of their progress had receded into the distance.
Then, satisfied he was alone in the night, he moved into action.
Raising his tracksuit top, he tore a strip from the exposed white T-shirt underneath.
Lowering his tracksuit bottom, the left leg of which was sticky with drying blood, he quickly bound the already clotting wound in his left thigh inflicted by Grant's knife thrust.
His first aid completed, he made a last check around to make sure he was still alone and unobserved then moved off, heading deeper into the forest away from the highway.
Keeping the perimeter fence a few yards away on his left, Angel One loped silently along until he reached its north-western limit.
Swinging left then, he began following the fence's long sweep to the south.
He was now heading back in the direction of New York City, by circling the perimeter of the vast estate.
Through gaps in the forest canopy high overhead, he could see the night sky was tinted crimson, telling him Bethlehem House was still burning.
Breathing deeply and evenly, he jogged steadily along through the rustling darkness of the forest, enjoying the exertion and allowing the exercise to wash away the pressures of the past night.
Of necessity, he followed a twisting route through the trees in order to avoid patches of thick underbrush, all the while making sure he never strayed too far from the guiding line of the perimeter fence on his left.
Once he had passed the southern limit of the fence, Angel One planned to angle his run in towards the highway.
He reckoned that he would by then have far outflanked any cordon thrown up by his enemies, and could safely make for a phone.
From there, he would be able to summon transport from Dragon Control in the city.
As he ran, his senses remained alert to the night around him, to ensure he did not run slap into any other hunting parties like the one that had intervened when he was dealing with Grant.
It was this radar-like scanning of the night around him, which warned him of a new impending danger.
But the hunting party that was on his trail now, was unlike anything he could have anticipated.
The instinctive warning came to him a few minutes after he had cleared a small brook in an easy leap, and resumed the even rhythm of his distance-eating stride.
Perhaps some subtle imbalance or irregularity in the whispering, rustling night sounds of the surrounding forest, allied to his ultra-sensitive survival instinct.
Whatever it was that had triggered his mental alarm system, it set the adrenaline pumping into his bloodstream, and snapped his mind and body into a state of combat readiness.
He began turning his head from side to side as he ran, to locate the source of the unknown danger.
There…he had it…whatever it was, it was coming from behind him.
Then his ears picked up the soft pattering of multiple animal feet, and the sound of undergrowth being brushed lightly aside by swiftly moving bodies.
Wolves?
Unlikely — they rarely attacked man — but he took no chances.
He increased his speed until he was running flat out, buying a few seconds of precious time to allow him to find a good defence position.
Next moment, he emerged into one of the many small clearings scattered about the forest.
Sprinting across it, he reached a particularly thick-trunked tree at the farther edge.
Instantly he whipped round and dropped reflexively into the zingi tu'ii kung-fu fighting stance.
In that same instant he saw the menace he faced.
Bursting from the trees ahead of him, three black shapes came hurtling towards him over the pine needle floor of the clearing.
He didn't need the sound of their attack snarls, or the sight of their glowing amber eyes and gleaming white fangs, to know that the survivors of the killer pack — the Hellhounds — were on him.
CHAPTER 80
When the fire fighting and rescue team had crashed the gates and raced into the grounds, the killer pack had not been far away.
They had only a short time before followed the tantalising fresh scent-trail laid by Grant and Larsen, which they had then lost at the foot of the house wall.
After casting about in vain for several minutes to pick up their quarry's lost line, their frustration had abated into impatience and Satan had led the pack off in the direction of the tree-line to the westward.
Suddenly the night had erupted into a confusion of fire, noise and light, as first the house had erupted in flames and then five heavy vehicles had come roaring up the twisting driveway, headlights blazing.
Startled, the pack had run for the shelter of the trees, where they had milled about uncertainly.
But then they had seen a number of man-things leap from the line of vehicles in front of the blazing building, and spread out in a loose line.
Kill-fever had gripped their trembling bodies and incensed their savage brains at the sight of so many strange man-things waiting to be torn to pieces.
The bloodlust had even overcome their primitive fear of fire.
And Satan had led them to the attack.
It was then that things had gone badly wrong.
One of the man-things had seen them coming and shouted a warning.
The others had spun round, and the short sticks they were holding had belched terrifying thunderclaps and flashes of bright flame.
Worse, a screaming hail of invisible death had scythed down Shiva, Moloch, Ahriman and Loki in bloody, twitching death.
None of the others had escaped unscathed either, each of them being lashed in varying degrees with myriad points of searing pain.
It had been too much even for their savage canine courage to take.
The six survivors, led by Satan, turned tail and fled, instinctively following the twisting route of the driveway in the direction of the main gates.
Half way along the driveway, however, they lost another of their number.
Nemesis had been wounded more severely than the others.
Blinded in one eye and losing blood rapidly from a punctured artery in her neck, she dropped back unnoticed by the others.
Instinct told her to find somewhere to lie up, so she turned unsteadily into the shelter of the trees.
With the last of her failing strength, she dragged herself into a patch of undergrowth before collapsing.
Within minutes she had bled to death.
The five remaining dogs had raced on down the driveway, past the gaping ruin of the buckled gates, and out onto the highway beyond.
Exiting from the outer gates, Satan saw another man-thing — in this case the tall figure of Nate Springfield — and swerved left to lead his decimated pack away from any further fire-and-thunder attacks, such as they had just painfully experienced.
The dogs had followed the line of the fence until it ended abruptly, whereupon they had glimpsed many more man-things up ahead.
Instinctively they had again swung left and plunged into the familiar shelter of the woods.
Dropping to a steady lope, the pack had run on deep into the forest.
There they had just begun to feel safe again, when they had scented more of the hated man-things lurking among the trees.
Satan had swerved sharply to pass between them and the fence.
Not quickly enough, however, and once again the night was split by flame and thunder as fire-sticks had roared terrifyingly close to them.
Kali and Hades had been plucked from their midst as though by a giant hand and flung several feet away, almost cut in half by the point-blank blast of sawn-off twelve-bores.
Mindless with fear and panic, the last three Hellhounds had bolted again in headlong flight.
Deep into the safety of the forest they ran, intent only on putting as much distance as possible between themselves and the death-dealing humans.
The three dogs had run of for some distance, before slowing again to a steady lope.
Then Satan scented water off to the left and swung in that direction.
Soon the three were gratefully lapping up cold, life-restoring liquid from a small stream, before settling down to lick the small pellet wounds in their steaming flanks.
With the loss of Kali and Hades, now only Baal and Set remained to accompany the big, black lead dog, Satan.
But even this last remnant of the once ten-strong killer pack would prove a deadly threat to anyone unfortunate enough to cross their path.
The three big Dobermans lay up, licking their wounds and nuzzling their flanks with their teeth to pick out small pellets embedded there.
Now and then the long-muzzled heads would lift, pointed ears erect, at the muffled sound of distant gunshots.
But these were receding and soon ceased altogether, after a burst of three in rapid succession.
Soon they dozed beside the gurgling brook, muzzles resting on outstretched forelegs, recovering their strength after their earlier exertions.
The minutes crept silently past.
Suddenly Satan's head snapped up, ears erect.
Something was moving in the night, and not too far from where they lay.
In a flash he was on his feet, followed instantly by Baal and Set.
The three sleek heads swung to point unerringly towards the sound that had disturbed their rest.
Nostrils dilated and quivering wetly, they winded the night air for a scent trace.
Even this far from the house, the air was permeated with the acrid stink of burning, but soon their sensitive canine smell-sense picked up the telltale odour of a man-thing.
Their acute hearing had already informed them that only one set of feet was running in the night, the light footfalls vibrating to them through the drum-like quality of the primeval forest floor.
Now the erect pointed ears scanned for further clues as to the quarry's line of movement.
And soon the telltale night wind, whispering through the trees, brought them the information they sought.
Excitement rose in them, hardening muscles and quivering their sleek flanks in anticipation of the hunt.
Then Satan's upper lip lifted, exposing the big gleaming incisors, as a growl rumbled deep in his chest, and the three big Dobermans leapt forward in unison.
They cleared the stream in one lithe bound and took up the chase.
Already the painfully acquired experience from the traumatic events of the night was fading, overridden by the kill-fever which was gripping them, taking over their entire beings.
Swiftly they closed on the running prey up ahead, the scent growing stronger in their nostrils, heightening the bloodlust of the chase.
Then they sighted their quarry.
The man-thing was alone.
And he was carrying no thunder-and-fire stick to inflict pain on them.
The savage hatred Satan felt for mankind had been reinforced by the events of the night.
Fury filled his canine brain and coursed through his powerfully muscled body.
Giving tongue to his raging bloodlust with a ferocious snarl, he bulleted forward at full speed.
His battle cry was echoed by Baal and Set, as they hurtled forward in his wake.
It was at that moment their quarry became aware of them and increased his own speed sharply, sprinting flat out across a small clearing.
The three killer dogs burst from the trees in hot pursuit, their gleaming white fangs bared for the attack.
Suddenly, as they arrowed in for the kill, the man-thing did something they had never experienced before in any hunted victim.
One instant he had been running flat out, the next he had stopped, whipped round to face them, and dropped into a defensive crouch.
His unexpected action momentarily surprised them, but their canine brains instantly readjusted speed and timing of strike, as they arrowed in for the kill.
CHAPTER 81
The instant Angel One sighted his attackers he knew static defence would be well-nigh impossible against such opponents.
Part of his speed-of-reflex training as a kung-fu master had been to evade, or divert with forearm blocks, spears flung at him by other trainees in the martial arts school.
But the spears had come at him one at a time, inanimate projectiles unable to change direction, speed or purpose once thrown.
The three ravening bolts of fury launching themselves at him now, presented an entirely more complex problem.
They were animate, versatile, and extremely fast.
And they were coming at him in a concerted three-pronged attack.
In that first split-second, Angel One decided his only chance of survival lay not in defence, but in attack.
Had he been facing any of the big cat family, with their formidable armoury of fang, claw, power and speed, he would, for all his martial arts training, have been in with very little chance of survival, let alone victory.
But, pitted against them mainly fanged attack of dogs, no matter how ferocious, his own superbly trained body possessed superior weapons in the form of brain, hands and feet.
The dogs' initial surprise at Angel One's turning to face them, was further compounded by his screaming kung-fu attack cry, and his sudden leap high to his right.
The momentary confusion it caused in their reaction, meant that Satan and Baal missed their swiftly moving target by inches, as they found themselves snapping at empty air in mid-leap.
In Set's case, his confusion was fatal.
One instant he had been in mid-spring, forelegs extended and jaws agape, aiming himself at the crouching man-thing before them, the next, the target had moved with blurring speed, rising swiftly to meet him head-on.
Or, to be more accurate, foot-to-head-on.
Because Set's existence ended in a brief moment of agony, as he took the full force of Angel One's flying hip-kick on his open upper jaw.
The Oriental's heel rammed the Doberman's head back, snapping his neck instantly.
Angel One landed lightly alongside the still twitching body of his victim and immediately re-aligned his fighting stance, facing in the opposite direction to meet the next attack.
It came without pause, as the two remaining dogs recovered swiftly from their missed strike and hurled themselves at him again.
They charged in, converging on him from about six feet apart, like a white-fanged arrowhead.
But in the fraction of time it took for the dogs to renew their attack, Angel One's combat-trained eye registered something vital.
One of the oncoming dogs was slightly nearer to him than the other, and was leaping high for his throat.
The other, only a couple of feet further off, was boring in low, aiming for the region of his groin.
In that fleeting instant of time, he decided to block the high attack, and counter-attack the lower.
Throwing his left arm high, he presented his rigid forearm to the open jaws of the leaping Satan, offering it as an alternative target to the beast's intended throat-rip.
Satan took the bait and fastened his teeth reflexively on the blocking forearm.
Even as he did so, Angel One was already shifting his weight onto his left foot, in preparation for his counter-attack on his second assailant.
This took the form of a lightning-fast front snap-kick, which met the charging Baal squarely on the chest.
The hammer-blow force of the lethal chungdan ap-chagi foot-strike, catapulted Baal's body up and over in a backward flip, his rib-cage crushed and imploded into his ruptured lungs.
Crashing to the floor, the mortally wounded Doberman's jaws champed open and shut in a bloody froth, as he convulsed in his death throes.
Instantly switching targets, Angel One drove a quick punch at Satan's flank as the dog fell back, his attack having been deflected by the forearm block.
The blow struck only partly home, because Satan was already twisting in mid-air, trying for another bite as he dropped away.
In this, the big dog was partly successful, managing to inflict a painful gash in the back of Angel One's striking hand.
A brief stand-off ensued now, with Angel One crouched in his fighting stance, pivoting slowly in the centre of the clearing, while Satan circled him snarling and seeking an opening to attack.
The oriental concentrated on keeping the big amber-eyed beast squarely to his fore, banishing from his mind the pain of his badly bitten hand and forearm, as well as his wounded leg.
Waiting for the dog to launch its attack, Angel One was acutely aware of two other factors.
Firstly, he could not be sure whether other surviving members of the killer pack might arrive at any moment to join the attack on him.
Secondly, there was also the chance that the commotion of the brief struggle might have attracted other human enemies, who might even then be closing in on him.
Accordingly, he decided to bring the contest to a speedy conclusion.
To break the impasse, he made a sudden threatening move forward.
It had the desired effect.
Satan stopped circling and swung to face him, head low, teeth bared, his volcanic anger rumbling deep in his throat.
At this, Angel One taunted him, baring his own teeth and imitating the big dog's snarl.
It worked.
Provoked beyond control, Satan bayed in fury and launched himself at his tormentor's face.
Unknowingly the big Doberman had reacted in exactly the way his devious human opponent had wanted.
Angel One took one swift pace forward to meet the oncoming Satan, and his blood-smeared right hand pistoned forward, fingers extended and ramrod stiff.
The lethal nukite finger-strike rammed straight between the gaping jaws of the leaping dog with terrible force, smashed through the upper palate and pulverised its brain into instant oblivion.
Disengaging his bleeding hand, Angel One wiped it on the quivering hide of his latest victim.
Retreating to the edge of the clearing, he stood for a full five minutes, listening intently to the night sounds for anything out of place.
When he was satisfied no fresh threat was about to manifest itself from the darkness, he moved off back the way he had come, retracing his steps until he reached the shallow stream he had leapt a short time before.
Pausing again to ensure he was still alone and unobserved in the night, Angel One quickly peeled off his tracksuit top and T-shirt.
After washing his wounded forearm and hand in the clear cold water, he tore the T-shirt into strips and bandaged the injuries, as he had done earlier with the knife wound in his leg.
Refreshed by a drink, he donned the tracksuit top and set off once more on his interrupted journey south.
When he re-crossed the clearing, he barely spared a glance at the three lifeless black shapes scattered there as he sped past.
Stretched out where they had fallen, the last three members of the once invincible Hellhounds killer pack stared sightlessly after their executioner — a far more efficient and dangerous killer than Nature had ever equipped them to be at the height of their savage power.
The light footfalls of their human destroyer faded into the night, and the silence of the brooding trees closed in like a shroud over the scene of his latest carnage.
CHAPTER 82
Grant was moving steadily down a long gentle slope.
He seemed to have been moving for an immeasurable time.
He had the impression of being enveloped in a faintly luminous mist, like some high-flying bird drifting through a summer cloud.
He knew he must be dreaming.
All around him too, he sensed music.
But it was like no music he had ever experienced before.
It was soothing and restful, and seemed to be urging him gently onward in some mysterious fashion.
Dreamily he tried to concentrate on it, to classify it, but it defied his effort.
It had no identifiable melody, it was just beautifully melodic, rising and falling gently as it carried him along.
He sensed, rather than heard it, as if it and the all-pervading light were one and the same.
Ahead and around him as he drifted forward, the melodic light was increasing gradually, growing stronger and brighter as though he were heading for the source.
He was conscious of a growing feeling of peace and well-being as he drew nearer — like a weary traveller returning home after a long and tiring journey.
Then he heard the voice.
The melodious sound and the forward motion ceased, and he was floating in a hazy limbo of silence, listening intently.
But listening for what?
The voice or the music.
Then he heard the voice again.
It was faint and far off, but insistent — and it was calling his name over and over.
The voice seemed familiar and he felt he should recognise it, but at first he felt it only as a persuasive force tugging at him, trying to draw him back from the comfort and welcome of the light.
He tried to resist the voice — to shut it out from his mind — to will himself towards his destination again — towards the light.
He had actually succeeded in drifting forward and downward again, when the voice drew him to a stop once more.
It was pleading with him now, calling him back.
Back?
Back where?
He felt confused, lost.
Then recognition dawned.
It was Pam's voice.
Though faint and far off, her words suddenly became clear to him and he could understand their meaning.
‘Brett…
I love you, sweetheart…please come back to me…please don't leave me…
I love you so much…
I don't want to lose you…please, Brett honey, come back to me…don't give up…don't die…’
‘…don't give up?…don't die?…’
He examined the thought curiously, dispassionately.
Was that what was happening to him?
For a long moment, Grant looked at the brightness ahead.
It was not calling to him as Pam was, but nevertheless it promised welcome, no pain, peace…
Reluctantly, he willed himself to turn and go back…back up the long slope, towards the sound of his beloved Pam's voice which was still calling to him incessantly.
As he did so, he felt a great sadness, an acute sense of loss, filling his entire being.
The feeling faded with the dwindling light, as he moved away from its source.
Soon the ascent grew steeper, and he began to tire.
Pam's voice still urged him onward, encouraging him, but as he struggled upwards towards it, the darkness was closing in thickly around him, making it progressively harder to see or breathe.
He became aware that his heartbeat was growing stronger — until soon it was pounding in his chest, each pulse bringing with it a stab of increasing pain.
Had it not been for Pam's voice cajoling him onward and upward, he would have given up the struggle.
At last, faint and far off in the total blackness which now surrounded him, he saw another gleam of light.
Unlike the previous soft glow, this new light had a sharpness about it, and it beckoned him upward like the guiding beam of a lighthouse in a dark stormy sea.
Slowly, painfully, he forced himself upwards to reach it.
The ascent had now become so steep, it seemed as though he were now swimming up through the darkness, which was thickening and growing viscous.
It was exhausting him.
The light was directly above him now, increasing in intensity and hurting his eyes.
Not that it mattered.
His whole body seemed to be one total ache now.
But as he drove himself into a last titanic effort to surface into the light, the pain began to divide and concentrate itself in three separate areas of his body; his head, his right arm and his chest.
He felt exhausted, as though he had just run a marathon.
Then a face swam into view above him, filling his blurred vision, as he regained consciousness.
It was Pam.
She was smiling at him, although her eyes were bright with unshed tears.
He tried to smile back, and winced as his stiff and swollen upper lip objected agonisingly.
‘Hi, lover,’ she said, her lips trembling as she fought back the urge to weep with happiness at his recovery.
‘Welcome back.’
‘Hi,’ he mumbled back, his bruised, swollen mouth making his speech thick.
‘Heard y'callin' me.
Came as quick as I could.’
It was all he could think of to say, at that confused moment of re-awakening.
His voice was hoarse and weak, as though rusty from disuse.
He felt groggy and disorientated.
Pam's face was slipping in and out of focus.
His head and chest were pounding intolerably.
‘Is the pain bad, honey?’
He heard Pam's anxious voice from far off.
‘Yeah,’ he managed to mumble.
‘Rough.’
‘I'll ring for the doctor.
He'll fix you up…’
Pam's voice faded.
Then he became aware of new faces floating high above him.
Strange faces.
One was thin and bespectacled, a man's face.
The other was a female face, topped by a little white cap.
The man was speaking to him.
He knew this because he could see his lips moving.
But he could hear nothing except a dull roaring in his ears.
Then he felt a tiny prick in his arm, and the pain, the faces, the roaring, all began to recede, and he floated away into a warm, restful darkness.
CHAPTER 83
When Grant regained consciousness again, the pain was still with him, but now it was at a bearable level.
He discovered quickly that he could lessen his discomfort by lying still and keeping his breathing shallow.
He learned this the hard way, when he tried to move his head.
The resultant sharp pain made him suck in his breath, which in turn caused a burning stab of agony in his chest.
He lay still until the pain had subsided again to a dull ache, then let his eyes examine his surroundings as far as was possible without moving his head.
His field of vision was restricted by padding taped over his nose and cheekbones.
But from what he could see, he was in a private room in some hospital, to judge from the clinically white decor and the chrome steel stand by the bedside, holding the I.V.
drip bottle which was attached to his left arm by a tube.
Just like Harry Sherman, the night of the attack by the bogus nurse , the thought occurred to him.
Why am I here?was his next thought.
For a moment his mind was blank, then it all came flooding back.
The events of the past week raced past his mind's eye in a matter of seconds, the mental images flickering before him in rapid succession like a movie trailer.
Virgil Miller in his office; meeting Louise at the sect van; the ranting, golden-robed Prophet at the Crusade; the nightmare chase in the bowels of the Washington Centre; the confrontation with Angel One after the Jim Miller interview; Louise's rescue; Pam's hand impaled to the table; Harry Sherman's bandaged form and the fight with the bogus nurse in the hospital room; his capture of the Bethlehem House Control and the gunfight in the basement corridor; the escape from the fire through the underground tunnel; and lastly the fight with Angel One in the clearing…the fight…he couldn't recall anything after being hit in the chest…
He knew he must have been knocked out, and he wondered just how much damage the oriental had done to him.
His left arm was attached to the I.V.
drip, so he gingerly raised his stiff right arm, which was heavily strapped from shoulder to wrist, and began to explore the extent of his body and head injuries as best he could.
Suddenly he heard the room door open and a brisk female voice addressed him as footsteps approached the bed.
‘Aha, so we've decided to waken up, have we?
Hand down please, mister Grant.
You might hurt yourself.’
He found his arm grasped gently but firmly, and pushed back down on the bed cover.
The owner of the voice came into his field of vision.
Grant found himself looking up at an attractive dark haired nurse.
She smiled down at him as she smoothed the bedclothes and began checking him over.
Pushing a thermometer gently into the corner of his swollen mouth, she continued chattering away brightly to him.
‘You've collected a few broken bones and they're newly set.
So if you go poking and prodding about, you may dislodge something and hurt yourself.
You're also on a drip, as you can see.
You could pull that loose too, so you'll just have to be patient and lie still for now.
How do you feel?’
This last question was apparently directed to her watch, which she was studying as she checked his pulse.
‘Hungry,’ he replied indistinctly round the thermometer.
His swollen upper lip felt enormous and stiff, as though he were recovering from a dental injection.
The two factors combined to make speech difficult.
The slim tube feeding into his bandaged nose didn't help either.
‘That's a good sign,’ she told the clipboard on which she was entering the details of his pulse rate.
Moving round to the other side of the bed, the nurse proceeded to change the bottle on the I.V.
drip.
‘Are you in any pain?’ she asked the bottle.
‘Some,’ Grant replied round the glass tube in his mouth, just in case the question was really intended for him.
The nurse plucked the thermometer out of his mouth.
She checked its reading and entered another note on the clipboard.
‘I'll fetch the doctor and he'll give you something to make you comfortable.
He'll want to see you anyway, now that you've regained consciousness.’
She paused and glanced towards the door, through which Grant heard the sound of footsteps entering, and smiled.
‘Ah there you are, Miss Mason.
You'll be please to know our patient has decided to waken up and grace us with his company, at long last.’
The nurse moved away from the bed and out of Grant's vision, to be replaced immediately by a shining-eyed Pam, relief and concern vying for control of her features.
She leaned over him and kissed him gently on the corner of his mouth.
‘Hi sweetheart,’ she said.
‘Welcome back.
How do you feel?’
‘Deprived,’ he mumbled through swollen lips.
‘Deprived?
How deprived?’ she asked, mystified.
‘Wanna prop'r kiss, tha's why,’ he replied thickly.
She laughed.
‘Is that so?
Well, you can't have one just now.
Your mouth's too swollen, and I don't want to hurt you.’
‘If I don’ get a kiss, I'll be hurt worse,’he persisted.
‘Clown!’ she laughed, shaking her head.
But she leaned down and placed her soft lips gently on his bruised mouth.
A butterfly would have exerted more pressure alighting on a flower petal.
Grant inhaled her perfume, felt the feather-light warmth of her lips on his, and closed his eyes contentedly.
After a few seconds, Pam straightened up, seated herself on the chair beside the bed and took his right hand gently in her own.
The action jogged Grant's memory.
‘Hey, how's th'hand?’ he inquired.
‘Fine thanks, sweetheart.
See,’ she held it up for his inspection.
Only the tips of her fingers were visible above the bandaging, which extended to her wrist.
‘Anyway, I've been so concerned about you, I clean forgot to feel sorry for myself.
But don't worry, I'll make up for it when I get you home.
You can sit by my bed for five days, and pamper me , for a change.’
‘Five days?
I've been out for five days?’ he demanded incredulously.
She nodded.
‘You passed the crisis yesterday evening.
We thought…we thought we'd lost you.
You seemed to be sinking lower and lower.
Almost as if you were losing the will to live, the doctor said.
I watched that damned green dot bouncing less and less, until it almost hypnotised me.’
She nodded her head at the cardiac monitor screen over against the far wall.
‘Finally, the doctor said there was nothing more they could do.
Then I remembered how sometimes people in a coma could be reached by the voices of their favourite pop stars, or someone they loved.
So, I started talking to you…asking you to come back to me…not to leave me.
And it worked.
You did.
You came back to me.’
She paused for a moment, choked with emotion and dabbed her brimming eyes with a tissue.
Then she sniffed, smiled at him and continued.
‘You regained consciousness about half an hour after I started talking to you.
Oh…that reminds me…when you came round, you mumbled something about having heard me calling you.
Did you?
Can you remember?’
He nodded slowly once.
He had a throbbing headache building, centred behind his nose and eyes.
But he didn't want to say because he knew if he did, Pam would insist on leaving him to rest.
To please her, he briefly outlined his dream-like experience, his speech slurring due to the awkwardness of his stiff, swollen mouth.
He was rewarded by the happiness which showed in Pam's eyes, when he told her he was quite sure she had indeed called him back from the brink of death.
He was further rewarded when she leaned forward and kissed him gently again on his bruised mouth.
‘Okay you two, break it up!
Nate, go git a bucket of cold water an’ throw it over ‘em,’Curtis's voice rasped from the door.
Pam sat up, her face flushed with happiness and an almost girlish embarrassment, and grinned at the two men who had just entered.
They crossed the room to stand at the other side of the bed.
Curtis turned to Springfield.
‘Whaddaya think, Sheriff?’ he said.
‘Should I book 'em on a charge of indecent behaviour in a public place…or should I jes’ book 'em into a motel an' let 'em git on with it?’
‘Waal now…’
Springfield rubbed his jaw thoughtfully, ‘…it's a mite difficult t'say.
‘Specially seein' as how yore bookin' days're over now…’
‘Damn!
So they are, I forgot.
I'd like to have bust ‘im on one last rap before I finished, too.’
Curtis sighed with regret, then grinned down at Grant and Pam.
‘We dropped by t'see how the invalids were, but I kin see you're both well on the way to recovery.
I guess I'll jes’ hafta eat these damn grapes myself.’
He waved a bulging brown paper bag he was carrying in one hand.
‘Anyway, how're y'both feelin'…or hadn't y'got that far yet?’
Pam flushed again and laughed.
‘Ben Curtis, don't be crude.’
‘Who's crude?’
He spread his hands in appeal.
‘I'm jealous, is all.
If it wuz me lyin' there, my Ruthie'd be ransackin' the house lookin' fer the insurance policies, t'check they wuz payed up t'date.
An’ why're you lookin' at me like that?
Y'look like either you got constipation, or y'got somethin' t'say.’
This last remark was addressed to Grant, who was indeed waiting for a break in Curtis's verbal flow, in order to get a word in.
But at that moment the nurse returned accompanied by a white-coated bespectacled young doctor, who frowned when he saw Curtis and Springfield.
‘I hope you're not over-taxing the patient.’
His voice, like his features, was sharp with disapproval.
‘He'll be weak and easily tired at this stage, having just recovered consciousness.’
Pam and the others moved aside to allow the doctor and the nurse to check Grant out, and Curtis pulled a face at the doctor's back, making Pam stifle a giggle.
‘We jes’ dropped in t'cheer ‘im up, doc’,’Curtis said to the white-coated back, as the doctor prepared a syringe and slid the needle expertly into a vein in Grant's arm.
Finished, the doctor laid the syringe on the nurse's tray and turned to leave.
‘Well, I should prefer you to leave your visiting until the patient is stronger,’ he told Curtis.
‘But you're here now, so you may have a few more minutes with him, until the drug I have just administered takes effect.
Mister Grant has a long way to go before he will fully recover from his injuries.
Rest and quiet are what he needs most, right now.
So, please make your stay short.’
At the door, he turned and addressed Pam.
‘You may stay if you wish, Miss Mason.
But I'd advise you to get some rest yourself.
Mister Grant has passed the crisis point now, and you've been denying yourself proper amounts of sleep for the past five days.
Having you collapse from nervous exhaustion isn't going to speed his recovery any.’
He nodded to them all, and swept from the room.
The nurse was still hovering about the bed, patting the pillow, tucking in blankets and generally fussing over her patient.
Curtis jerked a thumb at the empty doorway through which the doctor had just exited.
‘Huh!
Who stole his stethoscope?’ he demanded sourly.
‘Say, whaddaya feed Doctor Frankenstein there on?’ he asked the nurse.
‘Raw meat an’ the occasional hospital visitor?’
She grinned and replied, ‘Oh, Doctor Morton's okay.
He's very conscientious, it's just he doesn't have much of a bedside manner.
He's quite nice really, underneath.’
‘Hides it well though, don't he?’
Curtis commented wryly and moved over to the bedside again.
He looked down at Grant.
‘Well ol' buddy, we'll push off.
Someone's gotta work, while others lie around gittin' pampered by pretty females.’
He winked.
‘Some folk have all the luck, eh?’
Grant felt a gentle lethargy creeping over him, and the aches and pains of his battered body began to ebb away as the drug started to take effect.
But his head cleared as the pain receded and he remembered what he had been going to ask Curtis.
‘What did Nate mean, your bookin' days're over?’
He spoke slowly to avoid hurting his bruised mouth.
‘Y'haven't chucked th'job, have you?’
‘Sure have,’ Curtis admitted happily.
‘When I saw all th'trouble you caused ol' Nate here, I decided y'weren't gonna come out t'start on my patch when y'recovered.
So, I decided to resign an’ come an' join you instead.
After all, someone's gotta run th'show, while you an' Harry lay aroun' playin' the wounded heroes, an' gittin' bed-baths from pretty nurses.’
Grant hoped he had heard his friend correctly.
‘Y'mean you're actually runnin' th'firm till me an’ Harry git back?’
‘Whaddaya mean ‘till you git back’?
I'm runnin' th'firm…period!’
Curtis shot back.
‘Didn’ Pam tell you?…
Oh no, I forgot, you two were too busy fer talkin' when me an' Nate came in.
Okay, it's like this.
Remember you once offered me a job?
Well, I decided t'take you up on it.
I had a word with Harry, an' I'm buyin' in as a junior partner…always providin' you've no objections, that is.
If y'have, there'll be no hard feelin's.
I'll jes' tie a knot in y'drip-feed, an' embezzle all th'funds.’
Grant felt light-headed, but he could not tell whether it was due to the drug taking effect, or the happiness he felt at this news.
He looked from Curtis to Nate to Pam.
‘Is he on th'level?’ he asked weakly.
Springfield and Pam both smilingly nodded their confirmation, knowing how pleased he would be at learning the news that he and his old friend and colleague would be teaming up again.
‘I'm afraid it's true, Brett’ Springfield said in mock sympathy.
‘An’ the NYPD won' take ‘im back, so you're stuck with ‘im.’
Pam laughed.
‘Yes, it's true sweetheart,’ she added her confirmation.
‘Harry agreed for his part, like Ben said.
He's a lot better, by the way.
He says it's up to you to confirm the decision with your agreement.’
‘Well, partner?’
Curtis grinned down at him.
‘I mean, th'champagne an’ caviar kin wait fer now.
Jes' a grateful ‘welcome aboard, an’ thanks fer steppin' into th'breach Ben, ol' pal', will do.
Well, whaddaya say, partner?’
He spread his hands, the bag of grapes clutched in one, his hat flapping from the other.
The room started to fade, as Grant's mind succumbed to the strong sedative the doctor had administered to him.
The faces around him were the last to go, standing out with startling clarity against the sleepy darkness that was closing in on him.
He felt happier than he had for a long time.
Just before he went under, he made a last effort.
He tried to return Curtis's grin, despite his stiff, swollen lips, and managed his exit line with commendable clearness.
‘You're fired!’
As he slipped into contented oblivion, Grant was rewarded by the burst of laughter which greeted his rejoinder.
CHAPTER 84
Springfield walked Curtis and Pam to the hospital carpark, where they stood chatting by Curtis's car.
Understandably, the conversation turned to the events of the past couple of weeks, in which they had all been involved.
Curtis remarked to Springfield that he must have seen more action in Rockford in the space of a few days, than he had done in the previous few years.
‘S'pose y'could say that,’ Springfield replied.
‘But thankfully it looks like things'll be gittin' back to normal again round these parts.
It's bin a mite hectic while it lasted, but it wuz worth it jes’ t'smoke out that nest of rattlers that wuz runnin' Bethlehem House.
Y'kin bet yore bottom dollar I'll be keepin' tabs on the sect's new set-up from now on,’ he commented grimly.
‘You mean you're letting them stay?’ asked Pam, surprised.
‘After all the trouble they've caused?’
‘Fair comment, I s'pose,’ Springfield began slowly.
‘But it's like this…their church owns the property, an’ it turned out there's a heap o' genuine folk in the city end of the organisation, who'd no idea what wuz goin' on out here.
They didn't know their church had bin taken over an' wuz bein' used by the Triads, as a front fer a major drugs operation.
‘Any who were inclined to doubt it, an’ there were a few, finally got th'message when Ben here got the soup kitchen vans busted, an' the Narcs proved they'd bin the main drugs distribution points fer supplyin' the street pushers, usin' the charity food handouts to the city down-an'-outs as a cover.
Anyhow, they've re-organised themselves an' found a new preacher t'lead 'em to glory.
This one's sane,’ he added drily.
‘They gonna rebuild the house?’ asked Curtis.
Springfield nodded.
‘Seems they intend to, but it'll take 'em some time.
In the meantime, all the genuine members who've stayed on are livin' in the tented village they've set up in the grounds, around the burned out house.
It's like an injun encampment, all that's missin' are the totem poles an’ feathers.
‘There's a coupla hundred of 'em altogether, most of 'em homeless kids with noplace else t'go.
We've told 'em they've t'keep the place open to inspection fer health an’ sanitation, so there'll be no recurrence of any take-overs from outside, like happened before.’
He paused and scratched his chin reflectively.
‘Only one thing still bugs me, though…’
‘What's that?’
Curtis squinted up at the sheriff through the curling smoke of the cigarette he had just lit.
‘That chink who damn near killed Brett…the one the kids called Archangel Michael, or Angel One, or whatever.’
Springfield's faded blue eyes had gone flint hard as he spoke.
‘I'd sure like t'have pulled him in that night.
Dangerous bastard, that one.
An’ we now know he wuz the Triad connection, the one who took over the sect an' corrupted it.’
‘Yeah,’ Curtis nodded, then added bitterly, ‘an’used that crazy Prophet bastard as his front man.’
‘Looks that way,’ agreed Springfield.
‘But wasn't it ironic that he wuz the one who eventually blew everythin' wide open, an’ led you to the chink's drugs operation?’
‘Poetic justice,’ Curtis agreed.
‘Added to my brilliant detective work, of course,’ he added with a grin.
‘Oh yeah…five years worth!’ said Springfield, and all three laughed.
Then the big sheriff became serious again.
‘Anyway, like I wuz sayin', this Angel One character's still on th'loose.
Ain't showed up anywhere.
We're keepin' an A.P.B.
on ‘im, though.
An’ he's the reason I'll be keepin' a twenty-four hour guard on Brett, till he's fit t'be moved to the same clinic as Harry in the city.’
‘Better safe than sorry,’ Curtis nodded.
‘But personally I think he's split, now his organisation's blown apart.
Besides, it could be you're over-ratin' this guy, Nate.
Oh, I know he's good, an’ he gave Brett one helluva beatin', but that don' mean he's some kinda superman.
After all, don' forget Brett wuz handicapped by bein' injured before they fought that night.’
Springfield made as though to answer, then checked himself with a quick glance in Pam's direction.
Curtis was quick to notice this.
‘Okay, Nate Springfield, give!.
Somethin's buggin' you.
What d'you know that you ain't told us?’
Pam had also caught Springfield's glance and his subsequent reluctance to speak, and put in spiritedly, ‘Nate, don't hold anything back on my account.
After what that evil bastard did to me, you couldn't possibly tell me anything about him that would make me more frightened of him than I already am.’
Springfield shrugged.
‘Okay, then here it is…
I don’ happen t'think I'm over-ratin' this chink, Ben.
Reason bein', we did a complete sweep of the whole area outside the perimeter of the grounds, jes' in case our man wuz lyin' up in the vicinity.
We didn' find him , but we sure as hell found where he'd bin.
See, we found the last three of the ten dogs of that killer pack the sect kept.
The other seven had bin shot by our men durin' the course of the night.
But it's how these three were killed that bothers me.’
He paused, searching for words.
‘Whaddaya mean,how they were killed,’ prompted Curtis.
‘Don't y'know?’
‘Oh yeah, we know all right.’
Springfield nodded slowly.
‘An’ that's what bothers me.
I got the local vet t'run an autopsy on the carcasses.
Know what he came up with?
One had its ribs kicked in through its lungs…leastways that wuz his opinion of how it prob'ly happened.
The second one had its neck an' jaw broke — again by a kick, he reckons.
An' the third one's brain had bin pulverised — by a blow delivered through the roof of its mouth!
He found traces of human skin on its teeth, so I think we kin safely assume the damage wuz inflicted by some kinda karate blow.
‘Nope,’ he finished, ‘I don’think I'm over-ratin' our Chinese Angel friend one bit.
Which is why I'm keepin' a guard on Brett, in case this one-man demolition squad decides to have another go at takin' him out.’
‘Point taken,’ replied Curtis, starting up the car.
‘Okay Nate, thanks fer everythin'.
We'll be gittin' along…an’ I'll be keepin' an eye on this young lady here, fer the same reason.
I'll be in touch…’
They drove in silence for some time, before Pam spoke.
She sounded troubled.
‘Ben…do you think there's any chance of that man…that Angel One…being caught?
I know that Jim Miller's parents have hired protection for the time being, until they decide they're safe from reprisals.
And all because that terrible man got away that night, after he'd nearly killed Brett.
And look what Nate says he did to those poor dogs too…’
‘Poor dogs!
Hah!
That's rich, that is,’ chuckled Curtis, trying to lighten her mood, even although the subject was anything but funny.
‘Listen honey, these poor dogs were big vicious Dobermans, trained as man-killers.
They ate people, fer Chrissake!
They prob'ly saw that Angel One guy as a Chinese takeaway meal…a kinda Karate Chop Suey…hah!
How d'ya like that?
Boy, I'll bet they gotta surprise when their lunch turned round an’ kicked 'em all over the forest.’
But Pam wasn't in the mood for levity.
‘Ben, I'm sorry, but I don't think it's funny,’ she persisted.
‘You might think I'm being silly, but I feel he'll blame Brett for everything that's gone wrong for him, and come back looking for revenge.’
She half turned to look at Curtis, raised her heavily bandaged hand and shuddered as she added, ‘I get nightmares now, just thinking about that man and what he did to me.’
She sounded tense and close to tears.
‘Curtis reached out and squeezed her hand reassuringly.
‘Don't you worry your pretty head about the chink.
An’ no way do I think you're bein' silly.
Fact is, I think you've got a whole lotta guts, ‘specially after what he put you through.
You tell me you're scared he might come back at Brett?
Yet you've sat by his bed fer damn near the whole of the past five days'n'nights.
I call that pretty brave.’
She smiled wanly and gave him a quick sidelong glance.
‘I wasn't really all that brave.
I had Brett's gun in my purse all the time I was sitting by him…just in case.’
Curtis threw back his head and roared with laughter.
‘Well I'll be damned…whaddaya know, Annie Oakley rides again,’ he spluttered, when he had recovered his breath.
He reached out again and hugged her to him briefly.
‘You're priceless, y'know that!
Brett's lucky to have you.
I jes’ hope he appreciates you.
Anytime he doesn't, you let me know an' I'll bust his nose fer ‘im again.’
Then, serious again, he continued soberly, ‘Anyway, as I wuz sayin', I don't think we've anythin' to worry about as far as this Angel One fella's concerned.
He don't know where either you or Brett is fer now.
An’ my guess is he'll be layin' low fer a while, tryin' t'save his own hide.
Tell you one thing, though, if he puts in an appearance at the office, it'll be the biggest mistake of his life…an' his last one!’
He patted the bulge under his armpit as he continued, ‘Me, I don’ go in fer all this kung-fu stuff.
I'm like you, Brighteyes.
I got me a surefire, old-fashioned American way of dealin' with all them Bruce Lee fanatics.
It's called a Saturday Night Special, an' it's more effective than anythin' them martial arts freaks kin dream up.’
Pam smiled contentedly at him and settled back in her seat, reassured by Curtis's confidence, and the fact that he'd be part of the firm now.
She felt that Brett — and she — would be safer with the added strength and shrewdness of Curtis on the team at Sherman & Grant…or would that now be Sherman, Grant & Curtis , she wondered.
After a few minutes, her eyes began to close as the lack of sleep caught up with her, and she began to doze off.
She was vaguely aware of Curtis covering her with a travelling rug, then she was fast asleep, lulled by the steady drone of the engine and the comfortable warmth of the car's interior.
Curtis, for his part, wished he felt as confident as he had tried to sound.
He couldn't admit it to Pam, but he was more than a little disturbed by the fact that the Triad enforcer had escaped Springfield's dragnet, after having almost killed Grant.
And that latest piece of information, that he had then brutally destroyed the three big killer Dobermans, only served to emphasise how lethally dangerous the man was.
Curtis recalled that it had only been the resourcefulness of the two kids and the fortunate intervention of the trucker Jube, that had saved his friend that night.
That and nothing else!
He just hoped the chink had a good dose of the fatalism that seemed to be a part of the oriental make-up, accepted his defeat, and kept his path from crossing theirs again.
Only time would tell.
CHAPTER 85
At the very moment he was being discussed by Pam and Curtis, Angel One was standing in the combat arena in the Triad HQ of Dragon Control.
Barefoot, he was wearing the white combat suit of the challenger and holding a gleaming katana — the sword of the Samurai warriors of ancient Japan.
Facing him on the other side of the arena was the current Executioner, whom Angel One had watched fighting and killing the previous holder of the office barely a week before.
Clad in the black combat suit with the gold and scarlet dragon motif emblazoned on its back, he too was barefoot and armed with a fearsome looking katana , its razor sharp blade reflecting back the bright overhead lighting.
The armed guards who had escorted the combatants into the arena retreated through the flush-fitting doors, which they closed and locked behind them.
The two men, Executioner and challenger, stood motionless for a few seconds, each weighing up the opponent he would now face in a fight to the death.
Only one would be permitted leave alive.
The black-clad Executioner was first to move.
Stepping forward, he advanced to the centre of the arena, where he stopped and saluted Angel One with a half bow.
As Angel One advanced in turn and returned the formal pre-combat courtesy, he was acutely aware of the fact that they were being observed from the spectators' gallery above.
Behind the blank blue glass sat the Controller and Director, and Angel One knew that the former was there to gloat over his recent downfall, and hoped-for death, at the hands of the Executioner.
When Angel One had reported back to Dragon Control early on the day following the destruction of his Bethlehem House base, the Controller had been unable to keep the malicious satisfaction out of his voice when he had berated him for his ignominious failure, as he put it, in allowing his entire organisation to be destroyed by unforeseen enemy action.
Angel One had argued in vain that the actual heroin loss involved was negligible, most of it having been moved on, and that the setting up of a new base was only a matter of time and resourcefulness.
But his argument had been rejected as unacceptable.
The Controller had countered by pointing out that the loss of the street trade alone in the Manhattan area, until control and distribution could be re-established, would cost them millions in lost revenue.
Even the Director's attempted intervention on his behalf, citing his past record of success, had on this occasion been over-ruled.
This the Controller had been fully entitled to do, of course.
The rules of the Gold Dragon Triad being that he had the unquestionable right, as Controller of the New York area of operations, to sentence any of his subordinates to be executed for a serious failure or breach of discipline.
Further, in this particular case, not only had the Controller seen fit to over-rule his Director, but had only permitted a mere four days recuperation period to allow his fallen agent to recover from his injuries.
This all-too brief period was over, and now on the fifth day after his return, the only partly healed Angel One was standing in the death arena, sword in hand, preparing to fight for his life.
But Angel One was determined to thwart his vindictive superior, if at all possible.
To this end he had formulated a plan of action in his devious mind.
The first move had been in his choice of the katana as the weapon of combat.
On the face of it, this choice seemed suicidal.
Although Angel One had been trained in kendo , the ancient art of Japanese swordsmanship, as part of his overall mastery of martial arts, he knew from having witnessed his opponent in action, that the man was more skilled than he with the katana .
So, it seemed from his choice of weapon that he had handed the advantage to his opponent, before a blow had been struck.
In fact, Angel One was counting on this factor making his opponent confident of defeating him.
But what the man did not know was that Angel One had also encompassed a darker facet in his mastery of the martial arts, namely a knowledge of ninjutsu , the deadly art of the ancient Japanese assassins from the Clan of Death — the Ninja .
The Ninja complied with no code of honour in combat situations.
Their sole purpose was to kill, by any means, provided the end result was the death of the chosen victim.
They were expert assassins, and murder was their trade.
Accordingly, Angel One had drawn on his ninjutsu training when preparing himself for the arena, with the purpose of springing a nasty surprise on his twin enemies — the Executioner and the Controller — should the opportunity present itself before he was himself killed.
The formalities over, each combatant adopted the ready position, sword extended towards the opponent.
Angel One's T'ai Chi mind disciplines had enabled him to subjugate the pain and stiffness of his physical injuries, sufficiently for his body to operate at near maximum efficiency.
At least for the short period of time he expected the combat to last.
Feet astride, knees flexed, bodies perfectly balanced, the two began circling slowly, eyes locked, watchful.
Suddenly the Executioner attacked without warning, his sword blade a glittering arc, as he slashed right and left with expert twists of his powerful wrists.
Each whirring stroke of the razor-edged steel would have sliced clean through a human limb with almost as much ease as it cut the air.
Angel One leapt back, parrying expertly enough, but knowing that his opponent was merely testing his defences, seeking out any weakness.
The long blades clashed and rang, their movement too fast for the eye to follow with certainty.
As suddenly as they had begun, the two men disengaged, as though some unspoken signal had passed between them, and resumed their wary circling.
Now it was Angel One who attacked with no hint of warning.
Once more the long gleaming blades clanged together, the clear bell-like notes of their joyous battle song sounding loud in the high-walled arena of death.
Now it was the Executioner's turn to give ground, but he parried the blurring strokes of his adversary with almost contemptuous ease.
This was exactly what Angel One wanted.
For his plan to succeed, he needed to create over-confidence in his opponent.
He had to tempt his man to go on the offensive and close with him, sure of his superior speed and skill, because his intended surprise attack would have only the one chance of success.
If it failed, there would be no mercy shown him by the enraged Executioner.
The only outcome then would be his own death under the sword of his more skilful opponent.
Once again they broke apart.
Again they circled slowly, eyes locked, alert.
The Executioner was sure of victory now.
But he was too expert a swordsman to make the fatal error of becoming careless, despite the knowledge that he had the measure of his opponent.
He decided, there and then, to finish it quickly.
He feinted twice in rapid succession, right and left, his blade flickering menacingly like the tongue of a venomous snake preparing to strike.
Then he used a trick from his swordmaster's repertoire.
As he leapt to the attack again, he uttered a hoarse, nerve-shattering scream, the purpose of which was to startle his opponent momentarily and distract him for a fatal fraction of time.
Enough time to deliver a killing blow.
But the Executioner's attack scream turned to a shriek of agony, as Angel One seized his chance and launched his own surprise counter.
Using an ancient Ninja fighting technique for disabling an adversary, he spat a tiny steel dart from between his teeth with deadly accuracy into the man's right eye.
Blinded, the Executioner stumbled back, thrusting his sword out before him in a reflexive but vain posture of defence.
Angel One leapt after him, merciless as a tiger springing on a tethered goat.
The long blade sang its death song, as it whirled in a gleaming figure-of-eight.
The first looping slash sliced neatly through the Executioner's raised forearms, and his sword dropped to the floor, his severed hands still clutching its hilt.
The backhand slash completing the figure-of-eight sped unerringly for the doomed man's neck, and an instant later his severed head somersaulted high in the air, to bounce and roll to a stop on the mat several feet away.
The headless trunk stood for a long second, the blood fountaining in a gush of scarlet from the raw stump of its neck, before collapsing bonelessly to the mat.
Immediately, the arena doors opened to admit the four armed guards.
Silently they indicated to Angel One to lay down his sword, which he did.
Then they formed up around him to escort him from the arena.
Angel One nodded curtly to his opponent's decapitated body, completing the time-honoured ritual of combat formalities, spun on his heel and marched jauntily from the arena in their midst.
Savouring the sweet taste of his victory, he did not even acknowledge the Controller's presence by so much as a glance in his direction.
He calculated he would insult him more by ignoring him.
CHAPTER 86
In the viewing gallery overlooking the arena, the Controller had leapt to his feet, his face contorted with fury.
‘Did you see that?’ he demanded, his face twisted with rage.
‘He cheated!
He used a filthy trick to defeat the Executioner.
He will face his next opponent unarmed.
I will see to it…’
‘No!
I forbid it!’
The Director's voice cut sharply across the Controller's tirade.
Gone was the wheezing, genial tone he normally adopted.
Instead, the authority in the fat man's voice and manner were unmistakable now.
Even so, the Controller's anger made him incautious.
‘But Director, he has flouted the rules of the Combat Arena,’ he protested vehemently.
‘As his Controller, I have the right to decide what form his punishment…’
‘Enough!’
The Director exploded angrily.
This time the Controller got the message and fell into sullen silence.
‘He may have contravened the rules you devised, for your admittedly entertaining method of execution by single combat.
But that is not important.’
He eyed the Controller coldly and the younger man quailed visibly as his superior continued, his tone now dripping with acid, ‘What is important, however, is that Agent Red Sixteen is most resourceful and extremely ruthless.
Qualities which are very useful to our organisation.’
Sensing that his victim was going to escape him, the Controller switched tactics.
Swallowing his anger, although the effort nearly choked him, he modified his tone and manner to one of quiet reason and said, ‘But Director, with respect, surely his total failure must be punished as an example to others?…’
‘His failure was not total,’ the Director interrupted impatiently.
‘The actual loss of merchandise was not so much as to be catastrophic.
Mainly what the sect vans were carrying when they were raided by the police.
And in any case, the circumstances were exceptional.
No-one could have foreseen an attack from such an unexpected source.
When his organisation came under attack from the Mafia gangsters, he did not fail, did he?
His response on that occasion was brilliant, both in planning and execution.
It was so effective, it will be a long time before any of the Sicilians dare to attack us again, if ever!’
The Director paused and watched the scene below for a few thoughtful seconds, as a squad of house servants bagged and carried out the human remains, and began stripping off the blood-soaked canvas cover from the padded squares underneath, removing it for cleaning.
Then he addressed the Controller again.
‘A word of advice.
You are undoubtedly a good administrator, but you are in danger of allowing your judgement to become warped by your obvious dislike of Agent Red Sixteen.
In any organisation, one often has to work with subordinates — and superiors — whom one does not like.
But a good leader should never allow his professional judgement to be coloured by his personal antipathies.’
He paused to allow his words to sink in, before continuing briskly, ‘Now, I have come to this decision…as far as I am concerned, Agent Red Sixteen has been punished sufficiently by having faced an opponent in the Death Arena.
I am therefore rescinding the sentence of death you pronounced, and shall re-assign him in a capacity which will make full use of his special abilities.
He will be given the task of hunting down and destroying external enemies who are posing a threat to the Gold Dragon Hung .
He will also be used to seek out and excise weak links within our organisation, as these can be even more dangerous than external enemies.
I think the Americans use the term ‘troubleshooter’ for such a one.
In all of this, he will be directly responsible to me .
Is this clear?’
‘Yes, Director.’
The Controller nodded his assent.
Then he rose, faced his superior and bowed deeply.
‘And I apologise for my stupidity,’ he said humbly.
‘Thank you for your advice.
I assure you I will strive to be of more worth to the Gold Dragon Hung .
Inwardly he was seething at the slight to his authority, but under the eagle-eyed scrutiny of his superior in the dreaded society, he carefully kept his features blank.
He knew he would have to tread very warily from now on.
His erstwhile subordinate had been raised to a position of considerable power now, and he would no doubt recall how little mercy he had been shown by his former Controller.
Yes, he would have to pay attention to the Director's thinly veiled warning, and be careful not to become a ‘weak link’…
The Director signed his acceptance of the apology.
‘Consider the matter closed.
Now, please have Red Sixteen sent for, so that I may inform him of my decision.’
The Controller hastened to obey, dispatching one of the guards to fetch the Director's new Troubleshooter.
Unspeaking, they awaited the return of the guard with Angel One, till the Director's wheezing voice broke the silence to rub salt in his subordinate's wounded pride with gentle sarcasm.
‘Look on the positive side, Controller.
You will be able to enjoy the spectacle of two fresh claimants fighting for the privilege of occupying the coveted post of Executioner.
I have probably saved you from years of frustration, waiting and hoping for someone good enough to come along and kill the one I have taken from you.’
His chins and belly shook with silent laughter, as he delivered this aside.
The Controller's acknowledging smile was as brittle as frosted glass.
EPILOGUE
As he relaxed in the steaming water of his post-combat bath, Angel One reviewed the events of the past chaotic two weeks, and reflected on the capriciousness of fate.
In such a short space of time, he had plunged from the pinnacle of success to the depths of defeat.
Then he had been reprieved from an open-ended sentence of death by combat, and raised to a position of great prestige and power which also promised a life of action and danger well suited to his special talents.
But despite his subsequent Phoenix-like rise from the ashes of defeat, he reflected that his fall from grace had been mainly due to the persistent interference of the private detective Grant.
He recalled the final outcome of the short fight in the forest clearing, and wondered if his final power-punch to the face had killed him.
Perhaps once he had time to spare from his new duties, he would check up.
What if he discovered that Grant had survived?
Should he kill him?
Or would that not be defying fate?…the same fate that had reversed his own fortunes that very night?
The thought of revenge was tempting, though…
Angel One sank deeper into the luxurious heat of the steaming water.
He felt it easing his injured limbs and revitalising the tired sinews of his hard-muscled body.
His mind rebelled against further decision making.
Perhaps he should continue to follow his karma and allow Grant, if he were still alive, to follow his.
Should fate ever cause their paths to cross again, that would be time enough for decisions.
The End