

The Quarterly Newspaper of the World Wide Fund for Nature-UK October 1989
NatWest — WWF card to aid environment
National Westminster Bank and WWF have joined forces to launch a new VISA "affinity" credit card as part of the £3 million sponsorship of our highest priority conservation projects, announced in the January edition of WWF News.
The NatWest WWF Card reflects the bank's commitment to conservation and environmental issues.
WWF members and supporters were amongst the first to receive full details of the new card.
By opening an account, and using it, donations will be triggered from NatWest's own funds to WWF to pay for some of our vital work.
For each new account opened, NatWest will donate £6 to WWF and a further 0.2% of the spending on each card, thus providing ongoing funds.
The NatWest WWF Card is available to anyone over 18 years of age, and can be used wherever the VISA sign is displayed in more than 300,000 outlets in the UK and over six million throughout the world.
There is no fee for the card and no interest is charged provided that the account is settled in full every month.
Where cardholders wish to take advantage of the extended credit facilities, interest charged will be in line with NatWest's existing VISA credit card which, at the time of going to press, is 2.2% per month (APR 29.8%).
Other terms and conditions of the card are similar to NatWest's standard VISA credit card, including repayment terms.
Commenting on the launch of the card, George Medley, Director of WWF-UK said,"This is a critical element of our fundraising strategy.
The money generated by this scheme will be substantial and so will allow us to make a major impact on high priority environmental and conservation tasks.
I would encourage every credit card holder amongst our members to apply for and sensibly use one of these cards instead of their current VISA or other credit cards and so help us put something back into nature."
An application leaflet for the NatWest WWF Card is enclosed with this issue of WWF News.
Minister urged to protect nature in Europe
WWF is urging the Environment Minister, Chris Patten, to help nature conservation throughout Europe by supporting plans for tougher legislation to protect wildlife and habitats in the European Community.
A House of Lords Select Committee issued a report at the end of August criticising the Government's negative and parochial attitude to a proposed EEC Directive for the protection of wildlife and wildlife habitats in the Community.
WWF, which gave evidence to the Committee along with other conservation organisations, believes the proposed Directive is desperately needed and presents a golden opportunity for Chris Patten, the new Secretary of State, to take a really positive step for the environment.
The Directive is needed because wildlife and habitats have undergone terrible declines in much of Europe and the rate of loss is accelerating (in the UK, 95% of wild flower meadows, 75% of heaths, and 80% of dry grasslands have gone since the war).
Now southern Europe's biologically richest areas are threatened with disaster.
The EEC plans to spend £35 billion (30% of the Community budget) on development, most in rural regions of southern Europe, and Ireland between 1989 and 1993.
Already, Community funds have led to some of Europe's best wildlife habitats — for example, Lake Prespa in Greece, home to wolf, bears, otter and rare birds such as the Dalmatian pelican and pygmy cormorant.
— being seriously damaged.
Much worse is likely to follow.
Most EEC Member States have totally inadequate laws to protect wildlife and habitats.
The proposed Directive will provide this protection.
Britain has little to fear because although there are deficiencies in our law it is much better than most.
Late last year Lord Caithness attacked the proposed Directive as "centralisation in Brussels and bureaucracy gone mad" .
He said "We must keep control of the future of our countryside and of our wildlife in our hands." 
Instead of worrying about the marginal impact the Directive will have in Britain, the Government should be actively supporting it and thus helping establish stronger conservation safeguards in the rest of Europe,"said Dr Simon Lyster, WWF Senior Conservation Officer.
 "Blue Sky" dies in China
Lan Tian, the baby panda born at Wolong Research and Conservation Centre in China, has died.
Born in August 1986, she received her name which means Blue Sky, from HRH The Duke of Edinburgh, International President of WWF, when he visited the Reserve in October 1986.
The only panda to have been born at Wolong Centre, Lan Tian appears to have died from an intestinal complaint.
Vital ivory decision
WWF will be campaigning hard for a total halt to the ivory trade when the organisation responsible for controlling wildlife trade — the Convention on International Trade in Endangered Species (CITES)— meets in Switzerland this month.
Over 100 countries are members of CITES, including the UK.
At the moment trading in ivory is legal as long as it complies with conditions laid down by CITES.
However, CITES' attempts to regulate the trade have not stopped the illegal trade.
There are too many loopholes allowing poached ivory to be "laundered" into the legal trade and thence onto the open market.
The issue is not easy because in Botswana, Zimbabwe and South Africa elephants are doing well, and these countries understandably want to continue to trade in ivory.
However, experience shows that it will be very hard to devise a control system so that only ivory from these countries is traded.
For the sake of the elephants throughout Africa, WWF feels that an end to the trade is the best way forward.
For new moves on saving the elephant, see pages 6 and 7.
World pays tribute to a great man
There were world-wide tributes to Sir Peter Scott, one of WWF's founders, once described as the patron saint of world conservation, following his death from a heart attack at the end of August.
Preparations were under way for his 80th birthday celebrations in September.
Six years ago, Sir Peter set up a memorial appeal fund, with instructions that it was to be launched immediately after his death.
The objective is to raise money for key projects run by the two organisations he founded, WWF and the Wildfowl and Wetlands Trust at Slimbridge.
Details of the Peter Scott Memorial Appeal for Conservation are enclosed with this issue of WWF News, and we hope all members and supporters will respond generously.
George Medley, Director of WWF — UK, paid this tribute to Sir Peter: "It is impossible to overstate the importance of his contribution to conservation.
In many ways, his energetic support for so many causes — wildfowl, whales, endangered mammals and latterly the Antarctic — brought about the tidal wave of international concern for the environment which we are now experiencing".
HRH The Duke of Edinburgh, WWF's International President, said Sir Peter made an exceptional contribution to the conservation of nature during his lifetime, and, through his television programmes and publications, made a whole generation aware of the importance of the conservation of nature.
Sir Peter founded the Wildfowl Trust in 1946, and has lived at Slimbridge in a house surrounded by geese and duck ever since.
In 1961 he was one of three people who decided to form WWF, to raise funds to protect wildlife throughout the world.
He designed our famous panda logo and was our first Chairman.
He worked tirelessly for WWF throughout his life and was Trustee Emeritus of WWF-UK when he died.
Honours came thick and fast as the world recognised his achievements.
In 1973 he became the first person to be Knighted for his contribution to conservation.
Tributes to Sir Peter: page 10.
Dancing for the future
Exotic animals are a regular sight in the fields around Midway Manor, Bradford on Avon, home of WWF's late Chairman Tim Walker — but one evening last summer, exotica of a different kind roamed the lawns and danced the night away at The Dance for Life in aid of WWF.
The dance — organised by WWF, the Walker family, and friends — was attended by 800 guests.
These included stars of stage and screen, all of whom entered into the spirit of the ball's "Around The World in 80 Days" theme, with many turning up in fancy dress.
The grounds of Midway Manor were transformed for the evening, with a candlelit drive leading guests up to the manor house where hot air balloons offered rides above the parkland.
A succession of marquees led to the fairground complex, dominated by a great ferris wheel.
The ball raised approximately £40,000 for the Time Walker Education Endowment Fund, which will provide education for future generations so that they understand the vital importance of conservation.
The Fund has been established in memory of Tim Walker who died in 1988.
The event's financial success is due to the immense support that WWF received from companies such as Allied Dunbar, De Beers, Fiat, HTV, Irish Lyle, Savills, and Whitbread and Co.
Greening the office
Universal Office Supplies, the largest suppliers of office equipment within the UK, are publishing The Green Office Guide, written by John Elkington and Julia Hailes, co-authors of the best-seller Green Consumer Guide.
The aim of the book is to generate awareness of office supplies that are damaging to the environment and promote the purchase of more environment-friendly products such as recycled paper, non-tropical hardwood desks etc.
The Green Office Guide will be sold at £1.95 with all profits coming to WWF.
The Green Office Guide is available from branches of Universal Office Supplies.
For details of your nearest branch, please write to John Kelly, Universal Office Supplies, Universal House, Trident Way, Brent Road, Southall, Middx.
UB2 5LF.
 "Arriba" fruit drink launch
 "Arriba" is a brand new fruit juice and spring water drink just launched by Panda Drinks.
It comes in 3 refreshing flavours: Tropical, Orange and Grapefruit & Pineapple, and what's more, for every can sold, a donation is made to WWF.
 "Arriba" will be available from major supermarkets and selected off-licences — so look out for it when you're next out shopping.
Panda Drinks will be raising at least £30,000 a year to be spent on our highest priority conservation projects.
Suspected eggs theft
Recently, tension had been building along the South Hampshire coast, culminating in the arrest of a man suspected of stealing the eggs of the protected migrant seabird — the little tern.
As part of a national sponsorship managed through WWF, the Central Electricity Generating Board has been funding the key conservation post of warden for the Hampshire and Isle of Wight Naturalists' Trust.
Working in close co-operation with others along the coastline, a vital part of the warden's work has been in protecting the shingle nest sites of this slender and graceful bird.
The little tern's numbers have been threatened since Victorian times when it was hunted for its snow-white plumage.
Today the bird's habitat is under threat by beach visitors.
The Key Haven Marshes warden had vigilantly monitored the comings and goings of one unwanted visitor for several weeks.
After the local police were alerted, a man was apprehended suspected to be disturbing the terns and collecting their eggs.
The outcome of the case is expected in the near future.
Dash in a green world
In August, Dash, the leading UK leisurewear specialists launched a special range of "Meadowlands" clothing to help raise at least £25,000 for WWF.
The funds raised through this promotion will help conserve endangered meadowlands around the UK.
TV personality, Anneka Rice, helped launch the range by receiving a cheque on WWF's behalf, and she is pictured wearing the purple fleece and silk jumpsuit.
Styles for ladies include jumpsuit, trousers, cardigan, skirt, shirt and a selection of co-ordinating tops; for children there are bold coloured tops with trousers.
Prices start from £22.95 for ladies and £10.95 for children.
For every garment purchased from the "Meadowlands" range, a donation is triggered to WWF.
Dash are also running a children's colouring competition via their shops, asking children to colour in a picture of a meadow.
There are prizes of "Meadowlands" clothes, colouring pencils and toy pandas to be won.
The "Meadowlands" range will be available at Dash shops and their "shops within-shops" from August until November.
Otter award
Earlier this year, Intervet (UK) Ltd, a leading British animal health company, ran a poster competition through WWF in conjunction with the popular children's publication Owl Magazine.
Children were asked to design an interpretative poster which highlighted the vulnerability and needs of Britain's threatened otter population.
The judges had the difficult task of choosing a winner from the 340 entries, but in the end the first prize, a bronze mounted otter, went to 10-year-old Helen Laughton from Cheadle, Cheshire.
Helen received her prize at an awards ceremony at London Zoo from John Precious of Intervet.
Cheryl Baker, the popular TV personality and pop-singer, also attended on behalf of WWF.
Attention all pet owners!…
Pedigree Petfoods will be launching a promotion to celebrate World Animal Day on October 4.
They will be offering two soft toys, Archie the dog and Purdy the cat, on special tins of Kit-e-Kat and Pal, in return for £4.49 plus two World Animal Day tokens from the tins.
A further promotion will be run on the Pedigree Chum and Whiskas calendars which will be sold through pet shops and supermarkets for the first time ever.
Pedigree has promised to make a donation to WWF for every Archie and Purdy toy, and Whiskas or Chum calendar sold, guaranteeing at least £35,000 to support our highest priority projects.
We need your support!
When next buying your petfood, look out for the special tins of Kit-e-Kat and Pal and pick up a Whiskas or Chum 1990 calendar.
Remember, the more you support promotions like these, the more money will be raised for WWF!
…and bird-watchers!
For those members taking part in the British Trust for Ornithology/BASF Garden Bird Survey, we are pleased to announce that BASF have generously agreed to continue their support by sponsoring a third year of the survey.
We hope that you are still enjoying taking part in the survey and will continue to give it your support.
The results, to date, have proved extremely valuable to the BTO and already some exciting results are starting to show.
The BTO/BASF Garden Bird Survey started in September 1987 as the first ever, year-round study of garden birds.
There are now some 6,000 surveyors taking part, and if you would like to join in please write to Lys Muirhead, BTO, Beech Grove, Station Road, Tring, Herts.
HP23 3NR.
Coming to a cinema near you
During October, Columbia Tri-Star's film "The Bear" , directed by Jean-Jacques Annaud, will be on general release in the UK.
The film tells the moving story of an orphan bear and its escapades amongst the mountains of British Columbia.
Columbia Tri-Star and WWF have launched a competition to coincide with the film's release.
Competition leaflets are available in your local Rank cinema — this could be your chance to win a holiday of a lifetime.
Wildlife in the bathroom
The special range of wildlife shower screens from Gelson Industries, as announced in the last edition of WWF News, is now widely available.
Sold in aid of WWF, the range features designs of elephant, heron, polar bear and penguin.
The screens cost £129.99 and are available from major DIY stores.
For further details please telephone Gelson Industries, 04252-78921.
Computing for a greener world
At a special awards ceremony held at London Zoo, Citizen Europe awarded over £11,000 worth of computer equipment to the winners of "Datachase" — a WWF education project, sponsored by Citizen Europe.
Seventy children, representing 20 winning schools from around the UK, gathered at London Zoo to receive their awards from Biddy Baxter (former Blue Peter Editor), who shared the difficult task of choosing the winners with a judging panel including John Craven.
A special message was sent to all the entrants from Virginia Bottomley, Junior Environment Minister.
 "Datachase" had three main objectives: to encourage young people to learn about environmental issues; to help students develop presentation and creative skills through the use of computers, and to demonstrate how problems can often be most successfully solved as a result of collaborative effort.
The project represented the second joint exercise between Citizen and WWF — the first was a competition in 1988 called "Pictures From Numbers" .
Heinz sponsor new publication
A new nature trail guide, Heinz Walks for Wildlife, is published on 5th October (Ebury Press, £5.95).
The book is sponsored by Heinz as part of its £1 million Guardians of the Countryside conservation programme.
For every copy sold, Ebury Press will make a financial donation to WWF.
Based on questionnaires sent to local wildlife trusts, Heinz Walks for Wildlife gives full details of over 270 nature walks — including how to get there, facilities on site and the wildlife most likely to be seen.
It includes a foreword by Bill Oddie, and an authoritative introduction in which Dr Nick Middleton discusses threats to the countryside such as pollution, urban development, intensive farming and forestry.
Heinz has also extended its range of Species Alert leaflets by adding four new titles to this series.
The titles now available are Reptiles and Amphibians; Butterflies and Moths; Plants; Mammals and Invertebrates.
To receive copies of these leaflets, write to the Conservation Department at WWF, Panda House.
Please enclose a large 16cm x 22cm, 14p sae.
Pendulum videos support WWF
The first six video releases from the newly launched video publisher, Pendulum Communications, are in support of WWF.
As well as providing a fascinating insight into the world of nature, the six titles in Pendulum's Discovery Video Wildlife Collection drive home the message that action is desperately needed if our environment and its wildlife are to be saved from eventual destruction.
WWF will receive a financial contribution for each video sold.
All priced at £9.99 and available from high street outlets and leading video stores, the six titles are: Silent Hunter; The Panda; A Desert Place; Following the Tundra Wolf; City of Coral and African Adventure.
Further titles will be launched in the coming months.
For details of an exclusive offer to WWF members on the Discovery Video Wildlife Collection, see page 11.
WWF support MPs call for more action
In a hard hitting report, published in July, the influential House of Commons Select Committee on Energy has called on the Government to implement without delay policies to reduce emissions of gases which cause the greenhouse effect.
The all-party Committee's report came after a comprehensive enquiry which took oral and written evidence from 25 bodies, including WWF.
The Committee's recommendations include the need for more research and development into global warming, the setting of targets for greenhouse gas emissions and the conservation of fossil fuels such as coal, oil and gas.
The Committee also outlined tough recommendations on how greenhouse gas emissions should be reduced.
The MP's on the Committee, who agreed unanimously on the report, criticise the Government's record on energy efficiency, stating that energy efficiency "is the most obvious and most effective response to the problem of global warming" .
In this they agree with environmental groups and a growing number of scientists and energy experts.
They also disagree with the Government's view on the importance of nuclear power to combat the greenhouse effect, stressing that its contribution should not be overstated.
Tessa Robertson, WWF's Pollution and Energy Officer, gave written and oral evidence to the Committee on energy use in the transport sector.
Her evidence pointed out that existing technology such as catalytic converters for cars, while indirectly reducing levels of the greenhouses gases ozone (at ground level) and methane, has no effect on carbon dioxide (CO2).
The huge rise in vehicle use forecast by the Government will therefore cause CO2 emissions from vehicles to increase enormously.
A number of WWF's recommendations on reducing vehicle use have been endorsed by the Committee, including the removal of tax incentives from company cars and relating taxation to the efficiency of vehicles.
They also agree with WWF's concern over the lack of information on the role of aviation fuel in global warming.
Other recommendations include the need for policies to speed up the exploitation of renewable energy technologies (such as wind, wave, solar and geothermal power) which do not Produce carbon dioxide, the most important greenhouse gas.
The increased use of natural gas (which produces less CO2 when burned than coal and oil) in the UK energy mix would serve to reduce the UK's CO2 emissions, said the Committee, but stressed that its potential should not be overstated, as supplied are limited.
The report also calls on the Government to "exert as much pressure as possible on all international fora to ensure that worldwide action is taken to combat global warming" , but stresses that the UK should "set an example…by seriously tackling its own emissions problems in advance of international understanding" .
The most important international forum looking at the issue is the Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change, which held its second meeting in Nairobi — see below.
Representatives from countries all over the world met in Nairobi at the end of June to discuss the greenhouse effect.
Countries get together
The countries are all members of the Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change, run by UNEP (United Nations Environmental Programme) and WMO (World Meteorological Organisation).
Membership of the IPCC is open to all UN countries.
WWF was represented at the IPCC by Adam Markham of WWF International and Tessa Robertson of WWF-UK.
WWF played an active role, making a statement on its policy on the greenhouse effect and pledging £5,000 to a trust fund set up to facilitate participation by developing countries in the IPCC.
The IPCC is charged with producing a comprehensive review and recommendations on the state of knowledge of the science of climate and climatic change; its likely social and economic impacts, and way of delaying or limiting such impacts.
The Panel is also looking at ways of tackling global warming using legal methods.
One possibility could be a new convention on climate, a proposal which is strongly supported by the British Government.
The IPCC has set up three working groups to investigate these points, and will present its report at WMO's second World Climate Conference in November 1990.
In the last issue of WWF News, we reported on the efforts of WWF and other environmental groups to get an energy efficiency clause included in the Bill to privatise the electricity industry.
Such a clause was passed by the House of Lords, but was rejected by the Government.
As a result, it was defeated when the Bill returned to the House of Commons, despite the support of a number of Conservative MPs.
Update on electricity privatisation
The Government responded to the concerns of MPs from both sides of the House by proposing its own electricity efficiency clause.
The replacement, voted against by Opposition MPs but passed because of the Government majority, does not, however, allow the penalties to be imposed against electricity suppliers which fail to promote electricity efficiency, and so is not as strong as the Lords' amendment.
WWF is calling on the Government to fulfil a pledge made to the Lords that the licences granted to suppliers will be amended to include provisions for penalties to be imposed.
The Electricity Act received the Royal Assent on 27th July.
Honour for WWF's director
George Medley, Director of WWF — UK for over 10 years, was awarded the OBE in the Queen's Birthday Honours List this summer.
Mr Medley jointed WWF in 1978 as Director from Glaxo Laboratories India Ltd where he was Managing Director.
Since then WWF-UK has developed under his leadership into one of the country's most effective and powerful conservation groups, raising funds for environmental protection both in Britain and abroad.
Our campaigns include saving the rainforests, securing better protection for Britain's countryside and recently pressing for a ban on the ivory trade to save the elephant.
In his time at WWF, the amount the organisation has raised for conservation has grown from under £1 million to £15 million annually.
Mr Medley said, "This honour is a reflection of all the progress that WWF-UK has made over the past ten years, and the team that has achieved these successes." 
The perfect Christmas gift for all wildlife lovers
Now you can give WWF membership to a friend or relation as a very special Christmas gift, by posting the coupon before November 30th.
Just before Christmas, your friend will get a membership pack in a special seasonal design, with a personal greeting from you on the envelope.
Inside the pack will be a membership chard, an attractive car sticker.
WWF News, our own members' newspaper.
Every three months throughout the coming year, your friend will receive an issue of BBC Wildlife, Britain's finest nature magazine, plus the newest edition of WWF News.
And, most important of all, you will have the satisfaction of knowing that their membership — like yours — is helping save the world's wildlife.
Your gift will arrive in this special envelope with your name and your friend's name displayed.
It's the perfect gift for wildlife lovers — a whole year of enjoyment for just £20.
To be in good time for Christmas, why not clip and post the coupon now.
For additional membership gifts, please supply details on a separate piece of paper and adjust payment accordingly.
Move to curb illicit trade in wildlife
It is perhaps tempting to assume, after the Government's recent ban on ivory imports, that the UK can claim to be a shining example of those striving to control the trade in wild animals and plants and their products.
But a careful look through a few of the magazines and newspapers in which wildlife traders advertise, suggests otherwise, says Steven Broad, Investigations Officer, Wildlife Trade Monitoring Unit.
Although the UK is by no means a major centre for illicit wildlife trade, a significant market does exist.
The majority of the trade in, for example, pet parrots or snake skin handbags, is legal, but there is always a small minority of traders and buyers willing to break the law in order to obtain very rare species or to increase their profit margins.
The international wildlife trade is controlled by the Convention on International Trade in Endangered Species of Wild Fauna and Flora (CITES) which bans commercial trade in an agreed list of currently endangered species and regulates and monitors trade in others that might become endangered.
The EEC has further strengthened these controls by banning the sale of endangered species within the Community.
WWF-UK funds a wildlife trade investigations project, now in its third year of operation, which aims to reduce the threat posed by uncontrolled trade tot he survival of rare species by improving the enforcement of CITES and EEC controls.
In the UK this is done by working with the Department of the Environment, HM Customs and Excise and the police to identify illegal trade and by actively encouraging and helping these bodies to increase their efforts to control such trade.
A large number of problems has been encountered, one of the most surprising being the fact that no UK Government department had taken responsibility for enforcing the EEC controls on the sale of protected wildlife specimens.
Careful study of the bird trade press during the first few months of 1989 led to the identification of a large number of advertisements offering species, such as the Scarlet Macaw, which may only be put on sale after permission has been obtained from the Department of the Environment.
The DoE was able to confirm that most of the advertisers involved had not obtained their consent.
After considerable discussion, sale controls are now being enforced by the police and their efforts during the past six months are already beginning to be reflected by increasing compliance with the regulations.
Other problems tackled have included illegal trade in rhinoceros horns, ivory, live reptiles, aquarium fish, coral and wild-collected orchids.
A vast amount of work remains to be done before the UK can really claim to be properly policing trade in wildlife.
The task is enlarged considerably because several EEC countries do little to enforce wildlife trade laws, whilst trade controls between EEC Member States have been greatly reduced.
The only way that illegal wildlife trade will be successfully curbed is by governments committing more time and resources to do so.
Guest Column:
The vital human factor in conservation
Many people are extremely generous when it comes to giving money to conservation.
Their motives tend, I suspect, to be a mixture of concern for their own and their families' future, concern for countries and people who are less well-off than they are and a sympathetic response based on a wish for the better treatment of the animal world.
by David M. Jones Director of Zoos, The Zoological Society of London, and WWF Trustee
The finances raised by such "emotional" appeals have traditionally been used to deal with acute problems — the issues of the moment.
But what many people don't realise is that long-term conservation, particularly in the Third World, is going to depend, whether we like it or not, more on the economic state of the country than on appealing to the better nature of its politicians.
WWF and its mature colleagues in the conservation world have long realised that many of the priority issues with which we are all currently concerned (rain forest destruction, coastal marine pollution, over-exploitation, loss of diversity) are issues which have to be tackled in parallel with those of human population increase, extreme poverty, low food production levels, lack of marketable resources and, in a few cases, uncaring, self-centred governments.
By investing a few million pounds into the anti-poaching forces of Kenya and Tanzania, as is happening at the moment, we will probably reduce and even stop the poaching problem for the time being but the long-term survival of the elephant in eastern Africa is going to depend ultimately on those countries' abilities to incorporate wildlife and wild area protection into an overall land use policy.
Most rural Africans see wildlife as a relatively endless source of food and find it difficult to grasp the concept of sustainable management.
WWF's new projects in the Korup rainforest in the Cameroons and on rural range-land management in Zimbabwe are based on the thesis of developing a land use policy specific to a particular area, which makes the best possible use of all the resources available.
It aims to manage those resources in concert and on a long-term basis for the benefit of the local human population.
Thus, a proportion of the land, usually near the villages and suitable for agriculture, is retained providing, with proper management, it can go on producing crops at a reasonable level.
Forest products are gathered at a level which does not affect the harvest next year be it fruit, timber, grasses, wild honey or medicinal plants.
Wild animals are used for food but at a level at which they can still reproduce a similar surplus a year later.
In these instances, local people learn to understand the need for this approach, a skill that many communities have lost as they "modernised" .
In a country like Kenya with a 4% plus increment in the population, the pressures are becoming so heavy that the relatively slow educational process towards the utilization of natural resources is likely to be swamped by the acute needs of the very people who need to be informed.
Education about the best use of the resources around them is probably the highest of the long-term priorities in such countries.
One project trying to help with this is run by a new organisation in Kenya, the Gallman Memorial Foundation, on a large ranch, owned by the founder of the Trust, at the western end of the Laikipia plateau.
This project, which has considerable assistance both from WWF, the Zoological Society of London and others, is in its early stages.
It aims to bring the best of Kenya's young biological scientists and, at a different level, the children from surrounding communities, to a variety of purpose-designed training and educational programmes on site and to give them the experience of seeing wildlife being managed alongside the traditional keeping of domestic stock.
The ranch, Ol Ari Nyiro, is run as a commercial livestock enterprise supported by several thousand acres of arable agriculture, but only where the land permits.
Some 80% of its 90,000 acres remains relatively untouched and, because of that, supports a large number and a wide range of indigenous species.
The ranch is surrounded on three sides by intensive arable agriculture, split into tiny small-holdings and, for the most part, being worked on land totally unsuitable for the purpose.
It will be necessary over the next decade or two to provide countries like Kenya with much more economic support for their rural populations, particularly those adjacent to the national parks and wilderness areas, while an effective long-term strategy for sustainable development is worked out.
In the past, WWF has been largely fulfilling a fire brigade role.
They still, of course, have that function, but more and more the Fund's resources are being invested in influencing those agencies which are capable of generating the much larger sums of money required to carry out these long-term programmes.
Many readers will have noted the fact that WWF-UK, in particular, have taken a lead in putting greater emphasis on developing relationships with the big aid agencies, including our own in Britain (the ODA), the EEC, the World Bank and other development banks in the hope that the large sums of money which they have can be directed, at least in part , towards overcoming these substantial long-term difficulties.
Even the Fund's well-known symbol, the giant panda, is going to be dependent for its survival on the long-term economics and land-use policy for western Szechuan.
The long-term problem for this species is the creeping infiltration of marginal agriculture taking over and fragmenting the remaining suitable habitat for this species.
So this, too, is a question of economics — that is, to find new homes and income-earning occupations outside the reserves for these people.
We must allow them to benefit from the presence of the reserves and, where feasible, to give them the use of the products of the wilderness areas without reducing its natural capital.
Europe-wide catalogue is launched
WWF offices throughout Europe have combined to produce an "international collection" of environmentally-friendly and panda-branded products for members and supporters.
This catalogue is being sent to you with the current issue of WWF News.
 "All trading barriers within Europe are being removed by 1992, and as Europe-wide environmental concerns grow, we believe there is an opportunity to offer WWF members in different countries a range of high quality products, which cause the least possible harm to our world and its resources," says John Wilkinson, Head of Consumer Fundraising at WWF-UK.
There are obvious economical benefits if the same catalogue and product range can be used internationally.
Our first international catalogue is being distributed to members in Belgium and throughout Scandinavia as well as the UK.
Your reactions are important as we hope to expand our range of environmentally-friendly goods in future offers.
Please share this catalogue with your family and friends and order as soon as you can.
As always, your support is greatly appreciated.
For additional free copies of "The International Collection" contact Lisa James at WWF, Panda House, telephone 0483 426444.
Beware exotic shells & coral
Tempted to buy marine souvenirs when on holiday?
Please don't.
The beautiful shells, corals or tortoiseshell souvenirs that are offered in exotic places such as the Caribbean or Indian Ocean islands are very attractive, but they are being seriously over-exploited.
For example, at least 12 million Queen Conch shells are taken every year from the Caribbean.
The Marine Conservation Society has produced a leaflet explaining which species are most at risk from the souvenir trade.
Write to them for a copy to: MCS, 9 Gloucester Road, Ross-on-Wye, Herefordshire, HR9 5BU, enclosing a sae at least 10cm x 21cm.
WWF goods now in some stores
For the first time, this autumn people can buy a selection of goods from the WWF Gift Catalogue from shops and garden centres around Britain.
The response has been so good that many shops, and garden centres in particular, may stock the items all year round.
Below are just some of the places where you can buy our goods:
New move to bring life to churchyards
Churchyards should not only be the resting places for our bodies, but could, with very little effort, be transformed into glorious meadows buzzing with bees and butterflies — wildlife service stations in arable and urban deserts.
A public awareness campaign to launch this idea is backed by WWF, the Nature Conservancy Council (NCC and UK2000.
Videos, slide-talk packs and audio cassettes and DIY information sheets are all available.
 "" Living Churchyards "is the latest idea to emerge from a new link between the conservation movement and the world's faith groups, which is one of the most successful alliances that WWF has made this decade," says Ivan Hattingh, Head of Development at WWF.
There are approximately 20,000 churchyards in England and Wales, mostly carved out of ancient herb-rich meadow.
The NCC has identified this habitat as urgently in need of protection since only about 3% remains.
Down the eastern side of the country amidst intensive arable operations, churchyards are particularly valuable for displaying many of the old meadow species.
Elsewhere these small oases often contain such rarities as the Green Winged Orchid and Lady's Tresses.
Eve Dennis, of the Arthur Rank Centre's Church and Conservation project, promoter of the campaign, believes that churchyards provide a focus and are small enough for a group of local enthusiasts to manage.
"Everyone can get involved in bringing churchyards to life.
Our natural heritage and a part of God's creation are symbolically represented here so there is a bringing together of secular conservationists and the church.
I do hope that the church will now take a greater interest in, and responsibility for, nature conservation — here is an opportunity right on their doorsteps!"
For further information contact Cherry Duggan at WWF, telephone 0483 426444 or Eve Dennis.
Arthur Rank, telephone 0203 696969.
Changing your address?
From time to time we have copies of WWF News and other member communications returned to us because people have moved house and forgotten to inform us of their new address.
If you are planning to move house, please could you let us know by simply completing and returning this form to WWF.
That way, you can help us make sure that you continue to receive your membership benefits after you have moved.
 "Environment enterprise" award for schools
September saw the launch of a three-year "Environmental Enterprise Awards" scheme, being run jointly by WWF-UK and the Department of Education and Science with support from the Laura Ashley Foundation.
The aim of the awards is to foster constructive concern for the environment and enterprise amongst school children from the ages of 7-18.
Young people will be invited to use their knowledge and ingenuity in science, technology, craft and design to work on systems, plans or inventions that will reduce or, if possible, eliminate the harmful environmental effects of some aspects of human activity.
The awards will take the form of a cash payment to the school or college, to be used, as set out in the rules, to process the original project.
The competition will be administered by WWF-UK with a judging panel to include business people, scientists with environmental knowledge, technologists and teachers.
Information on the Award Scheme will be sent to all schools and colleges of further education in England in September with a tear-off slip for schools to indicate their interest in the scheme.
Over the three years, schools that register an interest in the scheme will receive regular "theme bulletins" and regional workshops are also planned to provide backup information and support.
It is also hoped that the new European Space Agency's Olympus Satellite will broadcast programmes about the projects.
For further details contact the Education Dept at Panda House.
Three New Educational Books from WWF
The first two books produced by the new partnership of WWF with IIED and Earthscan Publications, dealing with major environmental questions, have just been published.
Acid Earth: the global threat of acid pollution by John McCormick.
The first edition of Acid Earth is widely held to be the most comprehensive and effective popular book on the subject.
In this new edition it has been thoroughly revised, expanded and brought up to date.
John McCormick is currently writing a history of the global environmental movement.
Taking Population Seriously: the missing piece in the puzzle by Frances Moore Lappe and Rachel Schurman.
They look at the social causes — economic, political and cultural — which affect fertility and choices about reproduction.
They show how, for many people, large families are the only available option, since no other sources of security are available.
In seeking solutions to the "population problem" the authors examine the handful of third world countries which have been exceptionally successful in reducing fertility rates.
They make their point clearly and forcefully: if we are to take population seriously we must stop thinking on terms of controlling births, and think about the relationships of social power in order to fit the "missing piece" into the population puzzle.
Published by Earthscan the books are available from booksellers, price £6.95 for Acid Earth, and £4.95 for Taking Population Seriously.
The launch of a new book, Winds of Change — living with the greenhouse effect in October marks the beginning of a weather project which as well as the publicly available book, will include a series of "weather project packs" for primary and secondary education and a TV programme.
Film makers from Television Trust for the Environment will be producing the TV documentary on the "greenhouse effect" , to be launched at the same time as the book and shown by Central TV.
The weather project packs will be produced by WWF's Education Department in conjunction with the publishers Hodder & Stoughton and will be available in Spring 1990.
They will include teachers' notes, student activity sheets and full colour wallcharts.
An edited version of the TV programme will be an integral part of the secondary school package.
Topics on which these packs will focus are: extreme weather conditions and people's responses; ice ages; greenhouse effect; sea-level rise and the effects; policy options on air pollution.
The book is published by Hodder & Stoughton and available from booksellers at £9.95.
Catalogue of resources for schools
In time for the beginning of the new academic year, WWF has produced a new education catalogue.
There are now over 60 publications and projects which have been developed by teachers and other educationalists, in conjunction with WWF staff, for teachers.
 "Whatever subject or age group you teach, there will be plenty of resources to help you cope with the demands of the National Curriculum, especially now that environmental education is to be an important cross-curricular theme," says Peter Martin, WWF Senior Education Officer.
"Even if you have a copy of the old (September 1988) Catalogue, have a look at this year's edition as it contains details of 15 new titles and information on many more books, packs, videos and projects.
Also included are several specially developed for use in primary schools, which will be available in the near future."
All WWF's educational materials are high quality, professionally produced publications designed to help teachers in their everyday classroom work.
Most are heavily subsidised and represent excellent value for hard-pressed school budgets.
WWF Teacher Members get a 33% discount off all materials we stock.
If you are a teacher, put a copy of the catalogue on your notice-board an give one to your colleagues, head teacher or chairman of governors.
If not, give one to any of your friends who are teachers or to your local school.
For a free copy of the 1989 WWF Education Catalogue, write to the Education Department at Panda House enclosing a self-addressed envelope and 3 x 2nd class stamps.
Rare plants flourish in old goods yard
It is difficult to equate a derelict railway goods yard in central London with new and rare plant species, or with unusual associations of native plants, but this has now been established in a special report supervised by the Urban Environmental Consultants at North London Polytechnic.
Gillespie Park, Islington, derelict until 1981 and more recently landscaped, seeded and managed as an information ecological park, is now fully established as a fascinating urban nature reserve.
The new report shows a large species list, unusual for central London, including the much talked-about "supergrass" , a unique hybrid discovered by botanist Brian Wurzell, author of the report.
Other rarities include the second only record in London of the foliose lichen Peltigera didactyla, which was only discovered during the survey, funded by WWF and UK2000.
Hedgerow plants such as bush vetch and heathland species such as mouse-ear hawkweed are also new to London.
A cocktail of tree species from all habitat types — hawthorn, rowan, holly, field maple, pedunculate oak, wild cherry, dog rose, silver birch, hazel, yew, blackthorn and sea buckthorn, indicate a staggeringly varied microhabitat.
Gillespie Park is currently being expanded to include some rail sidings, losing some of the original park in the process, but saving the most interesting of the wildlife habitats.
The large man-made pond, now replete with reedmace, bulrush and sweet galingale, is to be saved.
Mr Peter Bonsall of the London Borough of Islington's Parks Department, says,"This is a site we have fought hard to retain.
It is a unique feature in this part of London, providing a popular spot for recreation and a valuable educational resource".
Fine Art Award
Wildlife artist Gary Hodges, from London, is this year's winner of WWF's Fine Art Award, presented at the Society of Wildlife Artists' annual exhibition at the Mall Galleries, London.
His superbly detailed pencil drawing (below) of a loving mother elephant protecting her baby was an obvious choice, as it symbolised the protective spirit we all feel towards these magnificent creatures.
It will be reproduced as a Christmas card and will feature in WWF's 1990 Gift Catalogue.
Gary has had an interest in nature since childhood and is an enthusiastic supporter of conservation and environmental issues.
His work has been sold all over the world and he recently held a successful one-man exhibition in Paris.
Special Announcement
New "Teachers Only" Membership Scheme
WWF are pleased to announce a Membership Scheme that provides a wide range of benefits designed for teachers by teachers.
Send for your Free Copy today
As a teacher you are warmly invited to accept a free copy of our Information Pack.
Simply complete the coupon below and send it to us, using the Freepost address given.
When you receive your copy you will discover a unique range of benefits to which you will become entitled as a WWF Teacher Member.
These include: a special 33% discount on a comprehensive range of WWF Materials for Teachers.
Monthly copies of the acclaimed monthly nature publication BBS Wildlife.
WWF Materials for Teachers are designed to help teachers to meet the challenge of environment education in the most convenient and practical way possible.
And there are further benefits too, all fully described in your Free Information Pack.
Send today.
INTERNATIONAL FOCUS ON OUR CONSERVATION CHALLENGES
Cameroon:
Exxon Chemical team's adventure in the rainforest
In an unusual joint venture with industry, a group of young trainee managers from Exxon Chemicals' offices in Europe has spent four months in Cameroon, carrying out practical conservation work on WWF's Korup rainforest project.
The WWF/Exxon Chemical relationship began when a group of trainee managers approached WWF to ask whether they could become directly involved with a WWF project.
The idea stemmed from a brief given at a training course when they were asked to work on a project "which would help another person or group of people" .
The particular combination of skills and financial support by Exxon Chemicals created a unique situation which WWF thought would be beneficial for a particular project.
The Korup rainforest project in the Cameroon was selected and it was agreed with WWF that the team — Steve Taylor (UK), Martine Lalevee (France), Dave Williams (UK), Jan Buize (Holland), and Simon Tutt (Thorn EMI, UK)— should provide the necessary supplies for their project.
Each member was assigned a task which would draw on their skills.
Exxon Chemicals donated £40,000 and other companies also donated goods, services or money.
These companies are acknowledged at the end of this article.
When the team left for Cameroon they had spent several months gathering the equipment necessary for their 4 weeks of planned project activity.
They travelled to Mundemba, 230 kms west of the airport at Doula, where the WWF Park HQ is situated and where their first task awaited them.
This was the provision of electricity to the WWF HQ and the building of cupboards for forest specimens and special equipment.
The work was completed with the assistance of local carpenters and electricians.
Electricity link
The team also provided an electricity supply to the building housing the Ministry of Agriculture staff who are working closely with WWF on the Korup Project.
Travel within the rainforest is not easy and so WWF had asked the team to repair and make "river-worthy" a seven metre assault craft which now provides transport via the forest's larger rivers — the most efficient forest pathways.
The boat had been bought some time earlier but had been abandoned due to decay and damage.
It was cleaned, its seats and cockpit replaced, and a steering wheel, controls and outboard motor installed.
This boat now provides access to the forest for scientists and local people.
The team also improved communications when they installed radio transmitters in the three WWF site offices at Nguti, Buea, and Mundemba.
Another task was the provision of training in servicing the project's Landrovers as the local people had little experience.
Mundemba's local technical college and women's centre was also visited and tools, equipment and relevant training were provided.
At the women's centre an earlier donation of sewing machines had remained unassembled, a situation soon rectified.
Other donations to this centre included typewriters and two fire extinguishers.
While in Korup, one team member, Martine Lalevee, was commissioned by the Ministry of Tourism to design and produce an information brochure on Korup.
This explains the scientific and environmental importance of Korup and will help to attract tourists.
Steve Taylor said one of the highlights of their visit was a two-day trek into the heart of the rainforest.
"We waded waist-deep through rivers into the forest, where magnificent trees towered above us, the canopy blocking out the sun.
We could sometimes hear animals in the distance, but only caught fleeting glimpses of the occasional bird — a symptom of the large amount of illegal hunting that goes on.
"After seven hours we arrived in Ekondo Jundu, a village in a forest clearing, where only a few outsiders had been seen before.
We were greeted in an inquisitive but friendly manner and handed a coconut fresh from the tree."
The team have since made a second visit to Korup to complete some unfinished tasks, and the whole Korup relationship was a success.
Lasting benefits
Africa:
New Projects to save threatened elephants
Thanks to a fantastic response by WWF supporters to our African elephant appeal (over £300,000 in the UK alone so far in 1989), we have been able to step up vital elephant conservation projects on the ground in Africa.
We will be spending at least £800,000 on African elephant conservation between now and July 1990, and nine African countries with key elephant populations will be targeted.
Under a joint WWF/EEC programme, funds have already beeb allocated for anti-poaching activities in Kenya and Tanzania, where the poaching and elephant population declines have been particularly drastic.
Both countries have already received over £65,000 each for aircraft maintenance, the purchase of spare parts, radio equipment and other vital supplies.
In addition, WWF has contributed funds for two Landrovers, 50 patrol tents and 18 patrol outposts in Tanzania's Selous Game Reserve, which has East Africa's largest remaining elephant population.
Perhaps even more important are the forests of Central Africa which contain 50% of Africa's elephants and a vast diversity of other animals and plants.
WWF projects are either under way or being developed in Cameroon, Central African Republic, Gabon and Zaire.
"Gabon is specially significant because it probably now has more elephants than any other African country, and so far they have been relatively undisturbed by poachers.
We must make sure it stays that way,"says Dr Simon Lyster, WWF's Senior Conservation Officer.
"We will also be working in Zambia, Botswana and Namibia.
Namibia is particularly interesting because of its "desert" elephants and black rhinos, which have suffered a recent upsurge in poaching and may become even more vulnerable as the country moves towards independence."
Elephants should not be seen as a mere single species in conservation terms.
They are a vital tourist attraction, their foraging creates a mosaic of habitats which benefits a wide range of species, and their habitats range from forest to savanna to semi-desert.
 "Just as we used the tiger as a symbol to secure the protection of a huge diversity of habitats in India, so we want to achieve the same with the elephant in Africa" , Simon Lyster adds.
WWF has joined forces with other organisations interested in elephant conservation to make sure everyone works together as effectively as possible.
These include the EEC, African Wildlife Foundation, IUCN, Wildlife Conservation International and the US Government.
We are also, of course, working hand in hand with African Governments.
Saving the elephant will require more than just working in Africa.
We must also aim at the ivory consumers.
The most important of these is Japan which consumes 30%-50% of all ivory leaving Africa.
WWF will soon undertake a major public awareness campaign in Japan, concentrating on making the link between the purchase of ivory products and the slaughter of elephants.
It may be that few people in Japan have yet made this connection, or realise the sheer scale of the catastrophe in Africa.
The Japanese Market
The major vehicle for the campaign will be television coverage; but extensive briefings of Japanese officials have already taken place and other measures, including in-flight film footage on Japanese flights, are being considered.
Britain:
Good management comes to the aid of Cumbria
Nature reserves are widely appreciated and much admired, but do we ever stop to think of the behind-the-scenes management?
At the heart of these natural jewels should be a management plan which indicates who should do what, where, when, why and how to ensure that the reserves maintain their conservation interest.
WWF recently funded the Cumbrian Wildlife Trust to produce management plans for its best six reserves.
Paul Kirkland, the project officer with the task of producing these plans, showed me around two of them.
The first reserve, Foulney Island, is a narrow spit projecting out into Morecambe Bay, its dull green salt marsh broken by splashes of the purple-flowered sea lavender.
The shingle beach of the spit is the major tern breeding site in the estuary and receives special protection under an Act of Parliament.
Each year a warden is employed to make sure that the inhabitants — mainly little, sandwich, arctic and common terns — are able to breed in peace.
Disturbance and high tides pose the greatest threats to the breeding birds.
A recent storm meant that all the common and little tern chicks perished.
Surprisingly the terns laid a second brood and Paul and the warden hope that some of these chicks may fledge.
The second reserve we visited was inland, although at one time the impressive limestone cliffs fringing the Hervey Nature Reserve had been coastal and some of the plants found here today reflect this marine ancestry.
The reserve consists of 250 acres of carboniferous limestone that dips gently to the east, and the dramatic cliffs and screes are to the west and south.
On top, the limestone plateau is dissected by a number of fissures called grykes, which give the overall impression of a pavement.
Inside the grykes the environment is cool, dark and damp, so species more commonly found in woodland are seen, including wood sage, harts tongue fern and there are even stunted trees.
On the top of the pavement a thin soil may develop and thyme and rock roses are able to grow.
When all the limestone is dissolved out of the soil, more acid-loving species such as heather can become established.
Both of these two wild and beautiful reserves need active management.
At the Hervey Reserve scrub invasion needs to be controlled, and at Foulney Island disturbance needs to be avoided.
As Paul Kirkland explained,"Management plans are an essential tool for effective and efficient management.
They put down on paper where we are going with the reserve and how we should achieve our objectives."
Protecting a rare plant in the forest
The complex life of the wild gladiolus is a little nearer to being understood thanks to the efforts of Jon Stokes, a botanist.
He has been studying this rare British plant since WWF funded his first project three years ago.
The attractive plants flower for one week in late June/early July and are found only at a few sites in the New Forest.
Jon had discovered that the plants are limited in their range by largely specific environmental conditions.
They will grow only in particular soils that are unleached and stone-free.
Such soils are found only in small pockets in the Forest.
I visited the site and Jon explained that these sites must also receive regular frosting as the bracken which tends to dominate the grassland will otherwise choke out the wild gladiolus.
The frost causes the bracken to die back and thereby opens up the canopy to let in more light.
The plants that are in flower are probably between 5-7 years old, and about only 1% of the population flowers in any one year.
Once they have flowered, the plants die, first dispersing their seeds to within a metre.
Jon pointed out the clearly visible "honey guides" on the plants' petals, and explained that he had only recently discovered that they could be pollinated by butterflies.
Right on cue, a butterfly flew up to the plants we were looking at and landed!
I asked Jon if the plants proved to be a tasty morsel for the Forest's ponies.
He assured me that, although prone to grazing when young, once the wild gladiolus reached a certain height they were largely ignored.
The main threats to the plants appear to be casual picking by admiring walkers and being dug up by serious collectors.
Both activities are illegal as the plant is protected under the 1981 Wildlife and Countryside Act.
Jon Stokes is confident that he will be able to make management recommendations, and we hope this part of our natural heritage will continue to flower in the Forest.
India:
Saving humans from aggressive tigers
India's Project Tiger, launched in 1973, has been one of the most successful species conservation projects.
Not only have tigers doubled in numbers, but other species and habitats have benefited.
However, tiger attacks on people have caused problems, especially in the forests of the Sundarbans, where aggressive tigers have been killing people for hundreds of years.
Now, a simple mask gives hope of minimising the human toll.
Tigers stalking workers have not attacked those wearing face-masks on the back of their heads.
Cheap rubberized plastic masks appear to be the most effective measure yet in combating aggressive tigers.
The masks were introduced in 1986: it was argued that since tigers normally attack prey from behind rather than face-to-face, a mask worn on the back of the head should be a deterrent.
Some 2,500 out of over 8,000 workers began taking the masks when they went into the forest to cut wood, collect honey or fish.
The result has been dramatic.
The following year none of the men wearing a mask was killed by a tiger, but 30 without masks fell victim.
The masks are only the latest in a number of measures in the effort to eliminate deaths by tiger attacks.
Electric fences around sensitive areas and electrified human dummies have also had some effect, apparently warding off marauding tigers.
The dummies are dressed in worn clothes which retain a strong human scent, and some have mobile heads which give an illusion of life as they move into the wind.
Tigers have attacked the dummies and received shocks from the fences.
They have been heard to scream and leave frantic claw marks.
Tracks have shown that the tigers involved have subsequently kept clear.
In terms of tiger conservation, the Sundarbans of India and neighbouring Bangladesh are of crucial importance.
The tiger population may number some 500 or more, the largest surviving single population of the 7-8,000 in the world, and the only one which conforms to scientific calculations of the number required to retain the broad genetic base for natural evolution.
Source: WWF News International
Free leaflets on issues
WWF has greatly expanded its conservation work, and in response to requests from supporters, a series of leaflets has been published outlining some of the main issues.
In each case, the author analyses the environmental problem and describes how WWF is tackling it.
The five leaflets published so far cover the problem of global warming, biological diversity — saving the wealth of life on earth; Britain's threatened countryside; safeguarding our seas; and protecting Britain's wildlife.
For a free set of leaflets, please send a large sae to Pat Harrison, Communications Dept.
WWF-UK, Panda House, Weyside Park.
Godalming, Surrey GU7 1XR.
Supporters in Action
News from WWF Supporters' Groups
Get into Print!
Send your photos and accounts of Walk for Wildlife as soon as possible to your local Area Manager for inclusion in the next issue of WWF News.
Everything cannot be printed, space (and the editor!) will not permit.
Any interesting or amusing incidents, photographed or recounted in a short article will be welcome.
For WWF News, colour photos or transparencies can be used, or black and white prints.
These should be as clear as possible without too much heavy light and shade.
If there is anything of particular local interest why not send it to your local newspaper?
A clear photo with a newsy caption or short article is often welcome.
When sending news items to the local press keep them short and to the point, include anything that will be of interest to a number of people,(newspapers are in the business of selling newspapers!) or focus on an unusual angle.
Address the envelope to the News Editor and make sure that the address is the correct one for receiving copy.
If in doubt phone the newspaper office and ask where articles for the attention of the news editor should be sent.
Make sure it arrives in time to be included in the next issue.
Articles for the press should be written with double spacing and wide margins.
WWF News can accept handwritten articles as long as they are legible.
Running Wild For Wildlife
In the early morning of Saturday, 1st July a colourful group of parrots, tigers, pandas, elephants, bats and many other species gathered at London Zoo.
At 8.30 am sharp they "escaped" from the main gate of the Zoo and made off in different directions, all with the purpose of raising as much money as possible for WWF.
The idea of the event was that 12 teams of people, most of them dressed up as rare animals, had 12 hours to get as far as possible without using any money.
An army Catering Corps team "The Spirited Sustainers" arrived at the Jersey Wildlife Preservation Trust using many different forms of catering transport, much of it vintage, kindly loaned by various catering companies.
The final flight to Jersey was donated by Jersey Air.
Sally Line donated a crossing to another team who reached Paris, others were given coach tickets at Victoria Coach Station, teams reached Bristol, Lindisfarne and Gretna Green whilst the Elephant Washing Company went to Windsor Safari Park and washed an elephant.
Some just stayed in London The "Owl and the Pussycat" rowed up Regent's Canal in a donated boat while the "Quaffing Quartet" completed the monopoly board of London, mainly on foot, and "Bridge the Gap" rode tandems across 20 London bridges.
All reported having had a wonderful day and causing much comment and amusement wherever they went.
The response from the public in places they visited was generous and heartwarming.
The teams pledged over £5,000 for WWF in sponsor money and collections, so it was a fun day, as well as a worthwhile one, for conservation.
North-West
John O'Groats to Lands End
Cyclist Nicholas Chareyon, a WWF supporter from West Didsbury, raised over £1,000 when he undertook a sponsored cycle ride with is two pet Alsatians starting from John O'Groats and ending up in Cornwall at Lands End.
The dogs travelled in comfort in their custom built trailer, with its WWF logo.
He hoped that the dogs, besides being good company, would be an attraction and help to get donations along the route.
Northern Ireland
Wildlife Link
WWF is giving money for conservation all the time in Northern Ireland, with much of the spending going into coastal projects, the theme of this year's Walk for Wildlife campaign.
The National Trust properties at Anne's Point and Strangford Lough have received substantial financial help from WWF, funds being used for both site purchase and management initiatives.
WWF is also currently funding an appointment of someone to investigate the possibility of setting up a Northern Ireland Wildlife Link, a system currently operating in England and Scotland.
The Link group acts as a forum for the major environmental issues and agrees strategies to combat existing problems.
Scotland
Carry the Can for BioAlert '89
House to House and Flag Day collections will continue throughout the year in Scotland, and helpers are still needed in some areas.
Some magnificent results have come in so far with Badenoch and Strathspey being 71%, Nithsdale 99% and East Lothian 100% up on last year.
The more people helping, the more money can be raised so anyone that can find the time to take a tin round and help get the message of conservation and WWF over to others please volunteer.
For those who prefer to work as a team, what about helping with a flag day?
So far this year our events have been small but successful.
A few hours of your time can make the Fund a fortune so please phone Jane Milligan.
Midlands
A Swan Saving an Elephant!
The Swan Diplomat Hotel, at Streatley-on-Thames, aims to raise over £25,000 for the WWF Elephant Emergency Appeal and other WWF projects throughout the world.
Guests, diners, drinkers and conference delegates at The Swan are invited to enter two-monthly competitions to win a week-end at the hotel and a huge toy elephant.
A selection of soft toys will also be on sale during the period together with some of the WWF endorsed Richards And Appleby's Natural History Collection of toiletries.
A special "Pink Elephant" cocktail is being created and there are many other ideas to raise funds for WWF.
We would be interested to hear from any other Hotels or Conferences in the Midlands who might like to discuss a similar project.
Please ring Sue Mayes.
Pavilions Centre, Birmingham
WWF has accepted an invitation to hold an exhibition on the Elephant Crisis at the Pavilions Centre from Monday, 30th October to Monday, 11th November.
A display is planned and, a competition to win a huge cuddly elephant toy, the latter donated by Carl Bailey of RB Toys.
There will be some toy elephants for sale — IF we can find a shop outlet within the Pavilions.
The Centre Manager has, also, offered the proceeds of the Wishing Well for one month.
Volunteers to help man the stand will be very welcome.
Please ring Sue Mayes 0295 721937
From the Area Staff
Sue Mayes and Ros Grant appreciate enormously the warmth of welcome they have received from Groups and Independent Fundraisers in the Midlands area.
It is a privilege to work with such dedicated enthusiasts — but — we still need more group members in the Midlands.
Could you spare a few hours a month to be a secretary or chairman of a group, a Panda keeper, or trading officer?
How about helping with Walk for Wildlife next year, the House to House collection or a Flag Day?
Perhaps running a book sale, opening a garden arranging a sponsored ride is more attractive.
Any good ideas please telephone.
Gardeners — Note!
Col. and Mrs Travers in Shiplake had a team of thirty, or so, helpers for their Garden Party, which started off with a magnificent anonymous donation of £300.
Alan Parfitt of the Henley group ran a WWF Trading Stand and the event was so successful that Col. and Mrs Travers plan to hold another Garden party on Thursday, 31st May 1990.
Gardeners — put the date in your diary.
South-West
Conservation Curtain Raiser
The WWF Torbay Group began a new season of public meetings about Conservation in June.
Group Chairman, George Rosevear, welcomed over 80 members of the public to the first meeting, and then presented the Cycle Sponsor team of the Torquay Boys Grammar School with their headmaster, Mr Pike, with a WWF plaque and personal badges to the team for their efforts at raising £280 for WWF.
Brian Carter, Torquay Herald Express nature columnist and local conservationist, was then introduced and delivered a nostalgic and hard hitting talk on local and international environmental issues drawing from his experiences.
Following the talk there were a wide range of questions demonstrating the concern the audience felt for threatened wildlife and the environment.
Local issues such as the Primley Park and Barton development were mentioned as well as global issues such as the loss of the African rainforest, Oban, the ivory trade and elephants and unleaded fuel.
The evening raised over £125 for the Save the Elephant appeal and succeeded in creating awareness about many conservation problems.
East Anglia
A Very Special Person
The Thurrock group has a very special helper.
Yvonne Orsett introduced herself, originally, by buying from the stall whenever she saw it, then came donations of bric-a-brac, small craft items and the beautiful baby clothes knitted by her mother who has won prizes locally.
Yvonne cares passionately about animal causes and is not averse to expressing her opinions in words and deeds — all the more remarkable as she is deaf.
Since she became interested in the group Yvonne has now, consistently, become the highest House to House collector in Thurrock and raised, this year, £195.19p in her panda box.
It has been especially adapted by her father to take the strain of the amount of money she always collects.
She has now learned to drive and joined this year's flag day to add £31,76p to her total.
London
Dogs — Over £50 Each!
Twenty-four dogs were worth over £50 each at the end of the WWF Sponsored Dog Walk held in Hyde Park in June.
Up to 20 miles each was walked by dogs and owners on the 1 mile route round the Serpentine and the money raised was in excess of £1,200.
People and dogs came from as far away as Oxford to take part in this event which must have left them all fitter and leaner at the end of the day.
The carrots, or tins, at the end of the walk were 200 tins of Pedigree Pal Partners dog food which were eagerly taken home by hungry dogs.
South-East
Silence is Golden
Twenty four girls at the Southampton 1st Woolston (St Mark's) Brownie Pack discovered for themselves that silence is golden by keeping absolutely quiet for half-an-hour and earning £200 from sponsors.
 "It was as hard for me to keep quiet as it was for them," Brown Owl, Mrs Sheila Scott, told the Southampton and District WWF Group Chairman, Geoffrey Cockrell, when he went along to one of their cheerful, noisy meetings in July to receive a cheque for WWF.
In return he presented the Pack with a WWF miniature shield as a token of appreciation of the £200 their golden silence had contributed to WWF funds.
North-East
From a Coral Reef to St. Petersburg
Susan Sutcliffe, a delighted WWF supporter from Linton, near Wetherby, won the prize tickets for a holiday for two in St Petersburg at the Coral Reef Charity Ball in aid of WWF.
The ball, held at Nostell Priory and in aid of WWF marine conservation projects, was a great success and attracted 300 guests.
WWF thanks all those who gave their time or financial support to this event, in particular the Ball Committee and the WWF Supporters Group members who worked so hard.
Hidden Gardens
The gardens opened to the public at Great Ouseburn, near York, raised £1,689 and attracted nine hundred people to look round.
The newly formed Harrogate and Nidderdale Group organised the event.
SIR PETER SCOTT: MAN OF ACTION AND CONSERVATION PIONEER.
Sir Peter Scott Exhibition
The retrospective touring exhibition of Sir Peter Scott's work (reported in WWF News, July) started in Cheltenham last month and was formally opened by the Princess Royal on 18th September.
Approximately 90 pictures, drawings and sketchbooks can be seen, and the dates for this special exhibition are:
The Man Who Sparked The Green Revolution
by Sir David Attenborough Trustee, WWF-UK In the early 1950s, the London Zoo announced that one of its Scientific Meetings would include a lecture by Peter Scott.
Most people in the least interested in natural history knew who he was.
He was an explorer and naturalist — his lecture was to be about his expedition to an unexplored part of the Canadian Arctic looking for wild geese.
But he was also a war hero who had commanded small ships in battles in the Channel, for which he had been awarded two DSC's, and the son of Scott of the Antarctic who then, even more than now, was a national hero of mythic proportions in the eyes of most of us.
So the excitement we all felt, sitting in the lecture theatre, was electric.
He seemed diffident, even shy.
But when he spoke, he had his audience hanging on his every word as he described in the most modest terms, what was clearly an arduous adventure, expertly carried out.
Exactly how he achieved this I cannot explain except to say that he had a kind of eloquence that made you think he was speaking to you personally and the gift of a born story-teller.
I don't know whether there was anyone there from BBC Television, but if there was, he or she would have had no doubt who should be the person to present a regular natural history programme if and when they got round to it.
Television in those days was a very small operation with studios only in London and only one network, the BBC.
They didn't get round to it until 1954 when "Look" started.
 "'Look" was very different from any natural history programme transmitted today.
Peter sat in the studio with a guest naturalist who had brought with him his own bits of film.
These had no actuality sound with them — the technology wasn't up to it then — and Peter and his guest gave a live, ad-lib commentary as the film was shown.
It was not, it must be said, slick.
But it projected enthusiasm, delight and knowledge right through the television screen and it made Peter within a few months well-known to millions of people who had never imagined that they had any interest in natural history.
The first programmes were mostly about British natural history, but soon the supply of other people's film began to run out and Peter started to go abroad with BBC teams to make his own.
Perhaps it was these journeys that made him realise to the full how many of the world's species were on the brink of extinction.
At any rate, he used the programme again and again to warn of what was happening and in doing so, he created a public awareness of conservation issues that was, I am sure, without parallel before that time.
When he, with others, helped to launch WWF in 1961, great numbers of people were waiting for it and anxious to help.
His prestige and celebrity grew and grew.
Naturalists, zoologists, conservationists already knew him well because of his work with the Wildfowl Trust.
It was politicians, captains of industry, people of influence in all quarters to whom his status as a public figure now gave him access.
Everyone knew him and he seemed to know everyone.
And he never had any hesitation in using his reputation to reach the most unapproachable people personally if he thought that conservation would benefit as a result.
But in the end, I am sure that it was with the public at large that his influence counted most.
He spoke to them and persuaded them with his books and his paintings, through radio and television, by his speeches and his straightforward and trenchant statements to the press about the issues he believed to be so crucial for the welfare of the world.
It is they who now, by sheer force of numbers and depth of concern, have made politicians all over the world realise the urgency of the environmental crisis.
We all know that there has been a green revolution.
No single person is more responsible for it than Peter Scott.
The Man Who Launched WWF
by Guy Mountfort Vice President, WWF-UK I first met Peter Scott some forty years ago, but it was not until the creation of WWF that we became close colleagues.
Since then I learned to admire and respect him greatly.
Without his burning enthusiasm and complete conviction I doubt that WWF would have come into being, for there were many doubters in those days.
I remember his determination at the first exploratory meeting in the upstairs room of a small pub off Victoria Street in London.
Those present were Peter, Max Nicholson, Sir Landsborough Thomson, Ian McPhail and myself.
Sir Julian Huxley, who had first suggested the need for a world organisation to save wildlife, was unable to join us.
We elected Peter as Chairman and he began by saying that we needed national appeals to raise money in all the richest countries.
 "We should aim to raise at least one million pounds a year" , he said.
It is interesting to record that the British National Appeal alone raised more than £18 million for WWF in 1988!
It was Peter who contrived to enlist HRH Prince Philip as President of British Appeal and through him we got HRH Prince Bernhard as our first President of WWF International.
Those were exciting days and as the money began to pour in we all felt we had joined a successful crusade.
Peter was a born leader and his chairmanship of WWF could not have been more effective.
Whatever task he undertook was tackled with single-minded determination.
At our council meetings he always drew exquisite portraits of birds in the margins of the agenda paper.
There was always a scramble to obtain them after the meeting.
His creation of the Wildfowl Trust resulted in the finest collection of ducks, geese and swans in the world and also in saving the Ne-ne Goose of Hawaii from extinction.
Not content with being an expert scuba-driver, he explored all the tropical seas and produced a unique field guide to the tropical fish of the world, illustrated by pictures drawn under water with coloured crayons.
He was still scuba-diving in his seventies.
Very few men have led so versatile or so successful a life as Peter Scott.
But it was as the great leader in efforts to save the environment and the natural treasures of the world that he will be longest remembered.
I am proud to have had his friendship.
The Man Who Influenced World Leaders and the Young
by Sir Arthur Norman Chairman, WWF-UK To have influenced in one short lifetime fundamental changes in the attitude of hundreds of millions of fellow humans towards the natural world and to have seen his ideas take root and flourish all over the world, is surely the achievement of a very extraordinary and great man.
Our grief at his passing, just a few days before we could celebrate with him his eightieth birthday, is only diminished by the knowledge that he left us knowing that the fruits of his inspired leadership and labours are imperishable.
Tributes to Peter Scott continue to flow from all quarters of Planet Earth which he served so wonderfully well and WWF-UK has more reason than most to mark this loss of its Founder Chairman and main source of inspiration since its inception 28 years ago.
This special tribute in WWF News attempts, however inadequately, to give WWF supporters and staff a picture of what Peter's many qualities and leadership skills meant to some of those who have been privileged to work with him in a great adventure.
My own recollections begin at a public function just over 20 years ago.
He had just delivered an impassioned speech to win friends and financial support for WWF and I was near enough and lucky enough to be introduced to him.
 "Can you tell me why" , he asked, "it is so difficult to get business leaders to come and help?" 
My lame reply protested that people in business were just as interested as anyone else but their noses were kept very close to their own grindstones.
 "Busy people are never too busy to do what they know to be important" was the challenging comment that brought me under his spell and a bit later into the ranks of his followers.
I was immediately impressed by the breadth and depth of his knowledge of the workings of the natural world, by his own diverse and exceptional achievements, by his incredible work rate and by the wisdom with which he viewed the task ahead.
He saw that WWF's first requirement was to convince leaders of political, economic and social life that their own plans and ambitions could come to nothing if they were pursued without regard to those vital things on which all life depended.
But he always rated the young — the leaders and citizens of tomorrow — as the main target.
We simply must do more, he would say, to help young people during their formative years, to understand what is at stake and to want to become involved.
He knew well enough that convincing politicians was a tough job, so his plan was to present them with an informed and insistent electorate of the future.
As we can now see this is exactly what has happened and what will continue to happen as we continue to expand educational activities alongside the many practical projects which compete for scarce resources.
The great endeavour which Peter Scott and a small group of inspired people began in 1961 may be said to have only just started to have the worldwide impact which will help mankind to learn once again to develop in full harmony with the natural world, but it is already indelibly clear that Peter's influence and determination has been crucial in creating a force that will not be denied its place of importance on a planet which, in the foreseeable future, may be required to support a human population of double its present size.
SPECIAL SELECTION FOR WWF SUPPORTERS
Wildlife Videos (A)
Exclusive Officer Buy 3 and save £3.00
The first 6 video releases from Pendulum Communications (see article on page 2) are now available to WWF members.
All videos are £9.99 each, but you can save £3.00 by buying any three for only £26.97.
These videos are part of a growing series of high quality programmes.
Affordable, collectable, entertaining and educational, they will make perfect Christmas presents.
A Desert Place
— filmed in the Sonoran Desert near Tucson, Arizona.
This video shows an extraordinary variety of plants and animals, including birds and rodents that never need to drink!
The Panda
— is the best known of our threatened species.
This film uses newsreel, archival and contemporary film to explore this beautiful and endearing animals past, present and likely future.
Silent Hunter
— A film of Africa's most elusive predator, the leopard.
John Varty and Elman Mhlongo developed a unique relationship with a family of wild leopards and gathered the most gripping and compelling sequences ever filmed.
African Adventure
— Two gold award winning films, "Focus on Africa" , a unique insight into the social hunting behaviour of the lion, together with "Children of Africa" , a look at the animal population of a game reserve through the eyes of 2 young adventurers.
City of Coral
— was filmed on a coral reef in the Caribbean Sea where we see forms of life beyond our wildest fantasies.
An extraordinary world where "rocks" move, eat and fight; some of the most interesting sequences show the life of the coral itself.
Following the Tundra Wolf
— is narrated by Robert Redford and examines the interdependence of the wolf pack and Caribou herds of the cold Canadian Arctic, where temperatures of fifty below zero are commonplace.
A Unique Christmas Present (B)
Collectors' Coins at half the Coin Year Book Price
WWF are offering this set of limited edition (10,000 sets) 1980 Falkland Island coins featuring a variety of interesting wildlife from the islands.
The coins are presented in a protective acrylic display pack with ah and some slip cover.
This set is available at a special price to WWF members, half the Coin Year Book's recommended price at only £9.00, and includes coins in the following denominations: 50p, 10p, 5p, 2p, 1p, ½p.
A superb gift and a good investment!
Recommended price £18.00 Price to WWF Members £9.00
Sacred Elephant (C)
By Heathcote Williams The largest and oldest of land mammals is celebrated by Heathcote Williams in a poem written and already broadcast on BBC radio.
In an astonishing blend of verse, superb pictures and prose, our eyes are opened to the elephant's grace, social sophistication, sensitivity and gentle power.
176 pages with a total of 189 superb colour and black and white illustrations, paperback £9.95
Save our Seas
With this exclusive WWF T-Shirt
This giant fashion T-Shirt is one large size that will fit up to a 42″ chest, and is a great way to show your support of WWF's imported work.
Made in machine-washable 50% cotton, 50% polyester mix, it looks good worn with jeans or as a beach cover-up.
David Shepherd's "Elephant" 
A fine bone china plate by Wedgwood
David Shepherd is unquestionably one of the world's leading wildlife artists, and a powerful supporter of conservation.
He is at the forefront of the campaign to save the Elephant from extinction.
The Elephant is his favourite subject to paint — and the one for which he is most famous.
The group of African Elephants featured is specially painted by David Shepherd for this collector's plate.
An Important Collectors' Edition Limited to 25,000 Worldwide
The craftsmen of Wedgwood have ensured faithful reproduction of the original painting by the skilful application of complex ceramic colours onto a translucent fine bone china plate, edged with a broad band of 22 carat gold.
At over 10½″ in diameter, this large plate gives a sense of spaciousness to Shepherd's sensitive portrayal of this most noble of animals.
The Elephant is one of eight David Shepherd plates featuring Tiger, Lion, Hippo, Rhino, Giraffe, Zebra and Cheetah.
Details of the other subjects will be sent to purchasers of the Elephant plate.
This Wedgwood "David Shepherd" plate will make a superb gift for anyone with an interest in art or wildlife.
Furthermore you will be helping conservation twofold as WWF and the David Shepherd Conservation Foundation both receive a proportion of the selling price.
£25.00 
Marine nature reserves: inadequate and late
A report on Marine Nature Reserves, commissioned by WWF-UK, shows that the whole procedure for establishing them is inadequate.
Despite agreement some years ago that seven sites around Britain's coast needed protection, only one — Lundy Island — has been declared a Marine Nature Reserve so far, writes Dr Madeleine Havard, WWF's Marine Conservation Officer.
The author of the report, Dr Lynda Warren, shows how Marine Nature Reserves provide an important way of protecting our marine heritage.
The coastal waters of the British Isles support a rich and varied marine life, now coming severely under threat from man: pollution, overfishing and misuse of resources and even some recreational activities are all taking their toll on this fragile ecosystem.
A series of Marine Nature Reserves around the coast, highlighting and protecting areas of highest interest, would be a marvellous flagship for a wider based marine conservation programme for the UK.
Provision for legislation for Marine Nature Reserves was only included in the Wildlife and Countryside Act 1987 at the last minute, after much pressure was brought to bear on Peers and MP's by conservation bodies such as WWF and the Marine Conservation Society.
Unfortunately this legislation has proved to be totally ineffective both as it was drafted and as it has been put into practice.
The NCC, the government body dealing with the statutory designation of nature reserves, drew up an initial list of seven sites warranting Marine Nature Reserve status — Lundy Island and the Isles of Scilly in England, St Abbs Head and Loch Sween in Scotland and Skomer, Menai Strait and Bardsey in Wales.
Recently the NCC has diverted its interest from the Isles of Scilly, now under the auspices of the Isles of Scilly Environmental Trust, to Lindisfarne and surrounding area.
The difficulties experienced in designating Marine Nature Reserves have been exemplified by Skomer which was first proposed as a Marine Nature in 1982, reached a formal consultative stage in 1986, and is still being considered for designation by the Secretary of State for Wales in 1989.
The NCC must apply to the Secretary of State for designation of a Marine Nature Reserve and approval of the proposed byelaws.
Any Marine Nature Reserve byelaws are, however, restricted both as to whom they effect and what they can do.
Many relevant authorities, such as the Sea Fisheries Committees, are excluded from the effects of the byelaws and many activities, such as discharge of any substance from a vessel, are excluded.
To protect marine sites new legislation is needed giving the NCC stronger powers in the creation of byelaws and more leeway in the consultative process.
Although all interested parties must have a say, surely it is time that the marine environment is given the recognition and protection it deserves.
WWF protest at plan to break up NCC
WWF is protesting about the Government's plans to abolish the Nature Conservancy Council, their statutory advisors on conservation.
The last act of the then Secretary of State, Nicholas Ridley, was to announce the end of the NCC and the formation of three completely new bodies.
These will consist of a combined ex-NCC Scotland and Countryside Commission for Scotland in a new Scottish natural heritage agency; a similar combination in Wales, although at present there is no separate country identity for the Welsh Countryside Commission — just ten people in a regional office in Newtown; and in England there will still be separate agencies of the Countryside Commission and whatever replaces the NCC.
Dr Chris Tydeman, Senior Conservation Officer UK for WWF, says this means there are no plans for an organisation taking a total view of Great Britain's needs (Northern Ireland has always been treated separately and has no NCC).
He is concerned about the dissipation of the NCC's science team, and asks: "What of the UK's international responsibilities under Conventions such as Ramsar, Bonn and Berne; or to the EEC for directives such as the Birds Directive and the proposed habitats directive?
What will happen to the overview of grants to voluntary conservation bodies, particularly national bodies?
No consultation
 "It is extraordinary that no consultation took place with interested parties before the decision was announced." 
There is still a good chance to undertake positive action which will strengthen the countryside agencies rather than weaken, which the present proposals look to do.
The voluntary bodies must be consulted in a rather more positive fashion than the very flimsy effort so far produced by the Scottish Development Department and the Government must now throw the baby out with the bath water and greatly weaken our statutory conservation agency just when it is needed most.
Hope for Antarctica
There has been a new development in the struggle to keep the Antarctic free from all mining and oil development.
The Australian government announced they would not sign the Antarctic Minerals Convention, designed to control any mineral exploitation there and due to be signed by all nations claiming territory there.
Instead, the Australians propose a comprehensive environmental protection convention, and will study prospects for an Antarctic Wilderness Park.
Sir Peter Scott, who had led the campaign in Britain to save the world's last pristine continent, congratulated Prime Minister Hawke on his country's magnificent stance.
It is thought that problems like the Alaska oil spillage, and the discovery of a hole in the ozone layer over Antarctica, influenced the Australian decision.
The French government have given them strong support, Britain, along with West Germany and the USA, is still anxious to keep the mining options open, however — WWF News International.
The £180,000 bike ride
On one of the hottest days of the year, over 6,500 indefatigable cyclists helped raised £180,000 for WWF.
They set off from Alexandra Palace for WWF's fourth annual London to Cambridge Bike Ride — and it proved to be the most successful yet.
The WI were magnificent and provided thousands of lunches; the Red Cross picked up the few casualties and stragglers; and children along the route played welcome hosepipes on the passing riders.
Thanks to everybody who joined in — see you next year!
WWF DIARY
My day with Jane Asher, Puffins, Seals and 100,000 Manx Shearwaters on Skomer Island
I was not quite sure I heard the question right — how did I feel like taking Jane Asher to a Marine Nature Reserve for a day?
Surely I had misheard — but no, it was then confirmed — that was indeed the question.
How could I refuse?
I need to explain why this was happening in the first place.
At the beginning of this year, it was decided that we should run a marine campaign, launch date some time in July.
We linked up with the Daily Express to help run the campaign, part of which is to champion the cause of Marine Nature Reserves.
We needed someone to put the message across and this is where Jane came in — she is a long-time supporter of WWF and now one of our Trustees.
Skomer Island off the Dyfed (formerly Pembrokeshire) coast was chosen as the specific target as it should by now have been a statutory Marine Nature Reserve.
Two or three 'phone calls later and it was all arranged — Jane I were to go to Skomer.
And it was on a brilliant sunny Wednesday morning that we drove into the car park at Martin's Haven from where the boat leaves for Skomer.
Besides Jane and her three children, we were accompanied by Dr Madeleine Havard, our newly appointed Marine Conservation officer, and a photographer from the Daily Express, John Downing.
We were greeted by an entourage from the Dyfed Wildlife Trust led by their Director, David Saunders, who instantly led us to the boat.
 "I do hope we see some good views of puffins," said Jane as we moved off from the mooring.
Five minutes later we were sailing through rafts of them only feet from the boat.
As we pulled into the jetty, they were flying all around and landing on the grassy slopes.
then there were the Manx shearwaters — just like small albatrosses that live in burrows, along with puffins and rabbits, to avoid the predatory greater black backed gulls.
Skomer hosts about 100,000 pairs, the largest colony in the world.
They are largely nocturnal, spending their days either down the burrows or out at sea gliding on stiff wings.
For research purposes, these are special burrows with removable lids and it was from one of these that a research student from Oxford University picked out an adult and a chick like rabbits from a hat.
Much "oohing" and "aahing" from children and adults alike, as the chick looked just like a big cuddly toy and it didn't have nearly such a sharp beak, as Jane was about to find out.
You can concentrate on two things for only so long as changing positions to help the photographer and holding the adult shearwater proved.
For a fraction of a second Jane was off guard and the shearwater struck right in the palm of her hand.
Photography over, antiseptic was applied and then more photography.
Anxious faces were peering at watches.
The Dyfed Wildlife Trust people were keen to show us more.
We moved on across the island to see the kittiwakes' colony and yet more puffins, this time with beakfulls of fish returning to their nesting burrows.
To the old farm for lunch, but what about the seals?
John was very concerned.
Would there be any, and could they be photographed?
Back to the edge of the island and there was already a crowd of people looking down at the rocks.
There must be seals — and then there they were, 18 seals hauled out on the rocks.
 "Fine," said John, "but they are too far away for a good picture." 
So Jane and John took to the boats, and drifted right up to the remaining seals before they scattered into the water.
Five minutes later and the rocks were covered.
Sadly we were not able to see any of the true underwater riches of the island — merely the animals dependent on the sea.
But that was enough to show the importance of the area as a Marine Nature Reserve.
With puffins still zooming around the landing bay, we left for the mainland having had a marvellous day.
Great thanks are due to the Dyfed Wildlife Trust for organising the trip and being such good hosts, and especially to Jane Asher for taking the time not only to make the visit but also to meet the very short deadline required for the article.
Special mention must also be made of Jane's children — Katie, Alex and Rory — who were extremely patient and very good companions.
Let's hope Skomer is declared a reserve by our next visit.
By Chris Tydeman, Senior Conservation Officer — UK.