

A Colour Atlas of Infectious Diseases
2nd Edition
The medical and sociological advances of the twentieth-century have led to many infectious diseases being eliminated or rendered relatively harmless.
However, experience teaches that we cannot become complacent — the balance between man and micro-organism remains delicate; banished infections can readily invade from overseas.
Constant vigilance is essential, but undergraduates have little opportunity to gain first hand experience of infectious diseases during their hospital training.
This atlas aims to provide the student and newly qualified doctor with a guide to the diagnosis of the common exanthemata, and the experienced physician with clinical photographs of less common though important diseases.
Emphasis has been placed on clinical aspects of disease, although a brief account of the  causative organism and the relevant pathology is also given.
The texts accompanying the illustrations are concise, but are intended when read in sequence to give a simple coherent account of each disease.
In this second edition the standard work has been fully revised with a number of new photographs and rewritten text to reflect developments and progress in infectious diseases.
Of the first edition it was said: The book deals with the whole gamut of infectious diseases but due emphasis has been placed on the common diseases, both in their typical and atypical forms and on those aspects of the less common diseases which a practitioner may recognise…
There can be very few students, young doctors and especially trainees in general practice who would not benefit from reading this book in detail.
Most experienced physicians would find it useful to refer to and in my opinion no postgraduate library or teaching practice can afford to be without a copy.
Also available from the same authors: This atlas is designed to test the postgraduate's knowledge of commonplace infections and provide a challenge to the more experienced physician who is likely to encounter unusual and exotic infections in travellers.
Emphasis has been placed upon the clinical aspects of infection and relevant questions on basic microbiology and pathology have therefore been included.
Diagnostic Picture Tests in Infectious Diseases