

The Open College of the Arts is an educational trust.
It offers practical courses in the arts and crafts to those who wish to work mainly at home, yet take advantage of professional tutorial support.
The courses consist of specially written course books taking you through a programme of work, mostly practical activity.
What Do The Courses Consist Of?
The work is to be done at home over a period of about nine months.
But you will also receive regular tutorial support, and there are optional day or summer-schools on some courses.
A general introduction to the practice of the visual arts.
It includes drawing, painting, design, sculpture and textiles.
What Courses Are On Offer?
Art and Design:
A course concentrating on work with oil and acrylics; it deals with colour theory, composition, figure and landscape painting, and some aspects of abstraction and expressionism.
Painting:
Visual exploration and design using textiles; building a personal imagery through the quality and colour of materials; constructing and decorating a textile surface.
Textiles:
An introduction to construction, modelling and carving sculpture, using a variety of materials such as wood, clay, plaster and ciment fondu.
Sculpture:
An introduction to many forms of imaginative writing, from poetry to plays.
Creative Writing:
A course to help develop artistic qualities in photography, concentrating on layout, balance, lighting and self-expression, rather than on technical aspects.
Tuition for this course is by post.
The Art of Photography:
The following courses are in preparation: The course will aim to develop musical understanding through active listening, writing and making music.
An introduction to a wide-ranging survey of Western Art from Roman times to the present.
Music:
The Art of The Western World:
A course beginning January 1990 in collaboration with the National Trust.
It will look at the historical principles of design of large gardens and their application to the smaller domestic garden.
Garden Design:
Anyone: there are no age limits or entry requirements.
Who Can Enrol?
Many of our students are absolute beginners who are looking to expand their artistic interests.
Others who may already have experience take a course of the discipline and for the refreshing new ideas that it brings.
Yet others may be thinking of going on to more formal education, and treat a year with the OCA as an introduction to their particular interest.
OCA issues it's own certificate to those who require written evidence of their achievement.
Our comprehensive Guide to Courses is published in mid July.
We will gladly send you a copy if you complete the form overleaf and send it to us (no stamp needed) at OCA, Freepost, Barnsley, South Yorkshire S70 6BR.
Or if you have any queries, please ring us at Barnsley (0226) 730495).
Would You Like to Know More?
…now You Can