

The Stage Door Club
(off Gilbey Bar)
Everything you want to complete your evening out at the theatre
Whether it's for a relaxing drink or a three course meal, before or after the show, choose from our tempting menu and fine wine list.
Our friendly wine bar is also there for your pre-show drink, your interval glass of wine or your after show socialising.
Open from 6pm Monday to Saturday.
Meals served from 6.30pm.
Last orders 11pm.
Booking advisable, but not always necessary.
The Stage Door Club is the "theatre-goer's rendez-vous" , so if you're a theatre-goer you're automatically a member!
November
Main House
Monday 13 — Saturday 18 November Evenings 8pm, Saturday Matinee 4.30pm
North Bank Productions in association with the The Royal Theatre Northampton presents by Charlotte Bronte dramatised by Lionel Hamilton
JANE EYRE
This powerful new production of the classic romantic novel magnificently re-creates this superb love story, bringing it to life with a passion and sensitivity that makes it compelling theatre.
Often revealing much about the life of its author, JANE EYRE endures a life of hardship and cruelty before arriving at Thornfield Hall.
Here her happiness and growing attachment to Mr Rochester is soon shattered by the dark secret he hides…
One of the greatest love stories of all time and amongst the most enthralling romances in literature — JANE EYRE is compulsive entertainment for both those who know the story and for those to whom it is unfamiliar.
Monday 13 — Saturday 18 November at 8.15pm Stage Directions Theatre Company present (Mon — Weds) by Gareth Thomas (Thurs — Sat) by R.C. Sheriff PETTICOAT REBELLION tells of the heroic suffragette movement's fight to get voting rights for women.
From the 1860's to the 1920's these indomitable women suffered imprisonment, force feeding and even death.
This moving story, originally written for The National Youth Theatre, is told using song, mime, slides and a cast of 35 young people.
Directed by Michael Jackson, assisted by Sharon Dungey.
Studio
PETTICOAT REBELLION
JOURNEY'S END
In JOURNEY'S END a small group of British Officers have no choice but to do their duty in France in 1918.
It is only their courageous sacrifice and innate nobility that illuminates the bloody and senseless war they are involved in.
Sixty years on Sheriff's honest and compassionate play about the last 48 hours of their lives is still compelling and gripping with a relevance for today's audience.
Directed by Yvonne Cull.
Tickets: £3 (reductions £2.50) Leisure Card £2.50 (reductions £2)
Monday 20 — Friday 24 November Mon 1.30pm Tues — Thurs 10am & 1.30pm, Fri 10am SNAP Theatre Company present adapted from E.B. White's classic tale Voted "The best American Children's Book of the Past 200 Years" by the Children's Literature Association.
This is the story of a little girl named Fern, who loves a little pig named Wilbur, and Wilbur's friend Charlotte a beautiful grey spider, Templeton the gluttonous rat and the Zuckerman family.
It follows the friendship between Charlotte and Wilbur and we see Charlotte's campaign, using her miraculous web, to save Wilbur from the usual fate of nice fat pigs.
The play also features music and song.
MAIN HOUSE
CHARLOTTE'S WEB
All seats £2.
No discounts.
Thursday 23 — Saturday 25 November at 8pm
MAIN HOUSE
HARLOW OPERA COMPANY present a Gala Celebration of the Musicals of 
 "…beautiful mornin' beautiful day…" 
RODGERS & HAMMERSTEIN
A colourful and exciting celebration in song and dance of those two giants of the American musical theatre RODGERS & HAMMERSTEIN whose captivating melodies and lyrics are played somewhere throughout the world every day of the year!
The team who gave us SOUTH PACIFIC, OKLAHOMA, CAROUSEL, THE SOUND OF MUSIC and THE KING AND I are just some from the legacy of the best and most popular shows of the post-war era.
An evening to remember.
Devised and Directed by Doris Palmer, Musical Direction by Nigel Stark, Choreography by Babara-Anne Chalmers.
Tickets: £3.95 £3.50 (reductions £2.95, £2.50) Leisure Card £3.50, £2.50 (reductions £2.50, £2).
Friday 24 November at 8.15pm
STUDIO
New Essex Poets present 
HARLOW YOUNG POETS FESTIVAL '89
This annual event for Harlow Schoolchildren culminates in the reading of the winning entries along with some music from local schools.
Prizes supplied by the Longman Group will be awarded.
Adjudication from BBC Essex producer RIC MORGAN will be given on this popular evening.
Tickets £3 (reductions £2.50) Leisure Card £2.50 (reductions £2)
Saturday 25 November at 8.15pm
STUDIO
Cosmorama Theatre Group presents by Elly Crichton Stuart
THE PANKHURSTS
Britain today has a woman Prime Minister and yet just over 70 years ago women were not even able to vote.
The change in attitudes and the granting of the franchise were largely due to the efforts of one family — THE PANKHURSTS.
On their first visit this Essex based company bring the little known story of Christabel and Sylvia Pankhurst.
By 1928 when the vote was granted to women over 21, the two sisters had ceased to communicate with each other— their ideas and lifestyles were now poles apart.
 "an enjoyable and educational play" THE STAGE
 "The…differences between the two sisters were stunningly realised" Billericay Gazette.
Tickets: £3.20 Leisure Card £2.70.
Sunday 26 November at 8pm
MAIN HOUSE
Conductor Bryn Jones
HARLOW COLLEGE CHOIR
with the NELSON ORCHESTRA Conductor Adam Pounds
Beethoven Egmont Overture Pounds Gaelic Triptych Schubert Mass in G Dvorak Czech Suite Handel Coronation Anthems
This is the first  occasion that Harlow College Choir has combined forces with the Nelson Orchestra in what promises to be a most varied and enjoyable programme.
Tickets: £3.95 (reductions £2.95) Leisure Card £3.50 (reductions £2.50)
DECEMBER
MAIN HOUSE
Friday 1st December at 8pm
On her first visit to the Playhouse the high energy SUZI QUATRO is in concert with her band and singers.
She also introduces a dynamic new group NORMA JEAN as her special guests.
THE QUEEN OF ROCK 'N' ROLL IS SUZI QUATRO
Tickets: £7.75 £6.75 Leisure Card £7.25, £6.25.
Saturday 2 December at 8pm
MAIN HOUSE
Mary O'Hara the natural Irish singer and harpist with a delicate and pure voice makes her second visit to The Playhouse by popular demand.
She will entertain with a fascinatingly varied programme of songs, both traditional and modern, with piano and flute accompaniment.
MARY O'HARA
Tickets: £7.75, £6.75
Leisure Card £7.25, £6,25.
Saturday 2 December at 8.15 pm
STUDIO
Kathakali originated in South India over 400 years ago.
It is a magnificent combination of drama, dance and music which captures the magic of India.
Centre Ocean Stream is a unique company renowned for their spectacular performances with characters transformed beyond recognition into unbelievable images moving in coloured light.
They join in an incredible evening of colour and visual performance, which provides an unforgettable experience.
CENTRE OCEAN STEAM and KATHAKALI
Tickets: £3.20
Leisure Card £2.70.
Monday 4 — Saturday 9 December Evenings 8pm, Saturday Matinee 4.30pm
MAIN HOUSE
David Kirk Productions presents Philip Madoc, Geoffrey Hughes, Jackie Lye (TV's Brush Strokes), Sally Watts (TV's Coronation Street) in by Peter Whalley
DEAD OF NIGHT
 "What's so wrong with wanting to defend what's yours?" 
A new, abrasive Who-Dun-What?
A couple return from the Crown Court.
The man has been cleared of the manslaughter of an intruder.
A triumph for the rights of the ordinary citizen?
Or are there facts that the court didn't know?
As their celebrations continue more facts emerge with enough twists and turns to keep you guessing up to the final curtain.
Tuesday 5 — Saturday 9 December Tues 4pm, Weds — Fri 10.30am & 4pm Sat 10.30am & 1.30pm
MAIN HOUSE
Television's most famous bear and star of the longest running children's show in the world SOOTY, with his pals SWEEP & SOO and Ringmaster MATTHEW CORBETT, invite you to roll-up for the Circus and get ready to laugh and be amazed.
Also featuring the Circus Band, Mickey the Monkey and, of course, wild animals (well certainly very cross!!!).
Book early — or you'll miss out.
SOOTY
Tickets: £3.
Leisure Card £2.55
Wednesday 6 — Saturday 9 December at 8.15pm
STUDIO
HARLOW THEATRE COMPANY present by Willy Russell
EDUCATING RITA
 "I wanna know"  "What do you want to know"  "Everything" 
Frank is educating Rita in this superb play which provides lots of humour as well as the underlying pathos of two people struggling with changes which mean their lives will never be the same again.
Directed by Bernard Moule.
Tickets: £3 (reductions £2.50) Leisure Card £2.50 (reductions £2)
Sunday 10 December at 8pm
MAIN HOUSE
Conductor Roger Wardle Leader Jeanne Mann Soloist Brian Wightman
HARLOW SYMPHONY ORCHESTRA
ELGAR Cockainge Op. 40 MOZART Concerto for Bassoon in B Flat major.
TCHAIKOVSKY Symphony No 4 in F Minor Op 36
Tickets £3.95 (reductions £2.95) Leisure Card £3.50 (reductions £2.50)
Monday 11 & Tuesday 12 December at 8.15pm
STUDIO
SNAP Theatre Company presents by Shelagh Delaney
A TASTE OF HONEY
Set in the late 1950's — at the end of post-war rationing and at the beginning of an era of new affluence — this new production of A TASTE OF HONEY, an off-beat comedy drama, brings to the stage the lives of five people living in the Manchester area.
A single mother and her teenage daughter, the mother's latest boyfriend and the girl's first love and the young man who just wants someone to care for.
The film version starred Dora Bryan and propelled Rita Tushingham to stardom.
Tickets: £3.20 (reductions £2.75) Leisure Card £2.70 (reductions £2.25).
Thursday 14 — Saturday 16 December at 8.15pm
STUDIO
HARLOW YOUTH THEATRE present 
DREAMS ON ICE
A new devised piece that explores the dreams and aspirations of young people.
What chance do young people have to find their dreams?
What happens to the aspirations of youth as we grow older, do they just melt away?
Do we really want our dreams to come true?
Or will we always keep our dreams in cold storage?
Utilising a variety of theatre styles, DREAMS ON ICE will be frightening, truthful, entertaining and lots of fun, but never boring!
Co-directed by Paul Cowan and Alastair Macmillan.
Tickets: £3 (reductions £2.50) Leisure Card £2.50 (reductions £2)
Wednesday 20 December Saturday 20 January 1990 Evenings at 7.30 pm Matinees Tues 26 Dec, Mon 1 Jan and all Saturdays at 3pm
MAIN HOUSE
PLAYHOUSE PRODUCTIONS present THE ENCHANTING TRADITIONAL PANTOMIME written & directed by Barry Bowen music by Duncan Lane choreography by Jeanne Kelly
CINDERELLA
There is no better way, young or old, to enjoy the festive side of Christmas than with a visit to the pantomime.
And this year, with a string of panto hits behind them, Playhouse Productions present the best loved of all panto tales CINDERELLA!
This charming "rags to riches" story is packed full of song, dance, rib-tickling slap-stick, wicked, wicked baddies, outrageous dames, a thigh slapping, high-heeled hero, a sweet and beautiful leading lady and plenty of fun & laughter, plus live white ponies!
And its sure to be a huge success — just look at what the press said last year!!!
 "It's Superb — Oh Yes It Is"  "fun family night out" 
"The huge cast of Babes in the Wood didn't put a foot wrong!
 "great costumes and animal masks" 
 "a high standard of traditional entertainment" 
 "grab a ticket if you can for this fine family show" 
Harlow Gazette Dec '88
So don't miss out — join in the fun.
Book your seats now and bring the family with you.
Tickets: £4.60, £4, £3.30 (reductions £4.30, £3.70, £3) No Leisure Card 10% discount on bookings of 20 or more (see panto leaflet for full details)
January
STUDIO
Friday 5 — Sunday 7 January Fri & Sat at 8.15pm, Sun at 3pm
HARLOW BALLET present 
A WINTER WORKSHOP
A programme of ballets created at the workshop.
Tickets £2 (reductions £1)
Tuesday 30 January — Saturday 3 February Evenings 8pm, Saturday Matinee 4.30pm
MAIN HOUSE
Century Theatre present Music by Marguerite Monnot Book & Lyrics by Julian More, David Heneker & Monty Norman (based on the original French by Alexander Breffort)
IRMA LA DOUCE
This powerful musical brilliantly captures the seedy sub-culture of a bygone Paris.
It paints a vivid picture of a society operating outside (but not entirely above) the law.
IRMA is a product of this society.
She is proud, streetwise, beautiful — and a whore.
She is also hopelessly in love — a considerable professional disadvantage.
This production charts her struggle with, and ultimately victory over, the circumstances which threaten to destroy her.
It's a remarkable musical full of tuneful songs which give it a romantic and charmingly French flavour.
IRMA LA DOUCE promises to be just as vital and exciting as Century Theatre's fabulous production of CABARET last year.
All in all a show not to be missed.
February
STUDIO
Thursday 1 — Saturday 3 February at 8.15pm
The Gamboling Guizers in based on Carlo Collodi's Pinocchio
THE WOODEN BOY
After the success of last years "Lockermen" this dance and mime duo return with a new show directed by Peta Lily.
Most people think of Pinocchio as the wide-eyed, sweet-voiced puppet.
Few have read the story as told by its inventor.
In THE WOODEN BOY, Gamboling Guizers create a rough and claustrophobic world of wood.
Using plenty of knockabout humour and a vigorous comedia dell'arte energy, they unfold this sinister tale of wood brought to life!
Not suitable for the very young.
Tickets: £3.20 (reductions £2.75) Leisure Card £2.70 (reductions £2.25)
Sunday 4 February at 7.30pm
MAIN HOUSE
Harlow Arts Council present Imagine "It's a Knockout" played on stage and using theatre games such as mime, improvisation and music and you've got it!
Local teams compete to raise money for a notable charity.
IT'S A PLAYOUT
Tickets: £3.
No reductions.
PLAYHOUSE GALLERY
The Playhouse Gallery, one of the few public art galleries in the area, is commited to showing a wide range of fine and applied art as well as documentary exhibition.
Exhibitions change at frequent intervals and smaller shows, normally of local work, can be seen in the Gilbey Bar.
The Gallery (admission free) is open from 11am on Mondays to Saturdays throughout the year.
until Saturday 18 November
GALLERY
Will exhibit works in various media including etching, monoprinting, watercolour and oil.
ANTHONY DE JONG CLEYNDERT
Since growing up on the Norfolk coast he has painted from landscape.
A year in Florence and the poetry of Dante have inspired him to set out to understand the influences in his life and work.
On Monday 13 Nov the artist will be in The Gallery to talk about his work.
Thursday 30 November — Thursday 21 December An exhibition of paintings, drawings, sketches and artist's prints all for sale on a "pay for it and take it away" basis — with the result that the exhibition will be constantly changing.
A professional framer will be represented in The Gallery to advise visitors on the framing of their purchases.
GALLERY
CHRISTMAS ARTS MARKET
Interested artists should contact the Exhibitions Co-ordinator at The Playhouse Gallery, The High, Harlow, CM20 1LS.
Tel 24391
Thursday 11 January — Saturday 3 February Alistair S. MacMillan, Theatre Animateur, and Michael Anderson, Harlow's Artist in the Community present a joint exhibition of recent projects.
With groups such as Passmore Youth Club, Princess Alexander Hospital, Leah Manning Centre and Harlow College.
Involving artists such as IAN KILLIN, MARY RILEY, ELEANOR BIRKETT, FAY PRENDERGAST, HILERY HUGHS, KINNY GARDNER, HEBRON WACHENGE, DANIEL PIPE, COLT AND KRAZY KAT THEATRE.
GALLERY
ART ATTACK
Playhouse Co-Op Film Society
Membership £5.00 per season or £12.00 per year.
(Open to all over 16) bringing you the world's best films.
Watch out for the special Playhouse Co-op Film Society brochure available at the theatre.
Further information from the Secretary.
Tel: Harlow 32722 or come along ½ hour early on a meeting evening and join.
(No advance bookings)
Sunday 3 December at 8pm
MAIN HOUSE
Barry Levinson's comedy of 1963 Baltimore with sales rivals RICHARD DREYFUSS and DANNY DE VITO also BARBARA HERSHEY.
TIN MEN
(The 1989 A.G.M. will preceed this film)
Sunday 7 January at 8pm
MAIN HOUSE
Chris Menges directed the true story of activist parents fighting apartheid in 1963, again with BARBARA HERSHEY.
A WORLD APART
Sunday 28 January at 8pm
MAIN HOUSE
The bitter struggle for water rights by crafty peasants YVES MONTAND and GERALD DEPARDIEU lasts two generations.
JEAN DE FLORETTE
Box Office Information
How to Book
In Person
Box office open Monday — Saturday 10a.m — 8p.m.
Sundays and Bank Holidays one hour prior to time of performance.
Call in at a Booking Agent.
On Harlow 31945.
Seat Reservations (held 5 days or up to 24 hours before performance).
By Telephone
To: The Box Office, The Playhouse, The High, Harlow CM20 1LS, and enclosing a first class SAE.
By Post
Access, American Express, Visa and Diners Club cards welcomed.
Phone 31945 for instantly confirmed bookings.
How to pay
Credit Cards
Made payable to "The Playhouse, Harlow" crossed and with address on the back (with a bank card if booking in person).
Cheques
Unreserved seats available from one hour before most performances — just come along.
We regret that no tickets may be changed or money refunded.
However the Box Office will oblige patrons by offering returned tickets for re-sale.
The sale of the Theatre's own tickets will take priority.
On the Day
Theatre Ticket Prices
Main House:
Studio Theatre
Film Ticket Prices
Conditions of Sale
(subject to availability) Reductions apply to students, children & OAP's
Special Reductions
Main House & Studio
Standby for Unemployed and their families 50p (on production of UB40)
Child, Student and OAP standby £1 (not available for film, proof of status required if over 14).
Standby's available ½ hour before performance.
10% discount for parties of ten or more on advance bookings for Main House shows — unless otherwise stated.
Party Bookings
Join Us
Moneysavers
Join our Moneysaver Scheme and save money on theatre seats.
Members of MoneySavers gain the privileges of * Priority Booking — up to two weeks in advance of public booking * The Playhouse "What's On" brochure sent direct to you in advance of public distribution * Free membership of The Stage Door Club and most important of all * Two seats for the price of one on most Monday and Tuesday evenings in the Main House and for many first nights in the Studio Theatre.
Subscription is just £7 (£3.50 OAP's, children and students) for a whole year.
Ask at the Box Office for membership details the next time you are in town.
Why not support your local theatre?
For a membership fee of £1.50 you will * receive priority booking privileges ahead of the general public * be able to take part in various social events organised by the Club * be able to join our volunteers who support the theatre in various publicity activities * gain free membership of The Stage Door Club
Playhouse Supporters' Club
Membership forms are available in The Playhouse Foyer.
Should you wish to give theatre tickets as a present, please enquire at The Box Office, Playhouse Gift Vouchers are available from as little as £1.
Gift Vouchers
There to Help You
For the Disabled
The theatre has special facilities for welcoming disabled people including a lift and wheelchair positions in blocks D and E, and a special toilet for the disabled.
A wheelchair is available on the premises if required.
There is an induction loop installed in the Main House; this enables patrons with a hearing aid to "tune in" to the switch marked "T" to take advantage of this facility.
For the Hard of Hearing
Winner of a Harlow District Council Access Award 1989.
Theatre Animateur
Alastair MacMillan is the Theatre Animateur based at The Playhouse.
During the winter he will be continuing to provide projects of interest to teachers and students in both primary and secondary schools.
For further information please contact Alastair at The Playhouse on 24391 ext 207.
Look out for the Animateur sign in the brochure, it means a related theatre workshop is being offered free of charge, to any school making a block booking.
Contact Alastair for further information.
(Max 25)
Harlow School Ballet
Ballet and modern classes in the Studio Theatre Monday — Saturday.
Beginners to professional standard.
Telephone Leo Kersley on 24995 or Michael Branwell on 639170 for information or write to 17 Old Orchard, Harlow.
The Ballet Barre
Situated in The Playhouse Foyer selling Dancewear, Keep Fit, Gymnastics, Majorette Wear, Stage Make-up.
Shoes: Ballet, Ballroom, Dance, Bridal
Open: Tuesday, Thursday, Friday & Saturday 10am — 5.30pm with Late Night shopping on Thursday to 8pm.
Eats and Drinks
Gilbey Bar
The theatre's fully licensed lounge bar situated on the first floor.
Open Monday — Saturday 11am — 2.30pm and 7pm — 11pm.
Serving: * a wide selection of draught and bottled beers.
* a comprehensive stock of liqueurs and spirits * wines by the glass
Also available: Morning Coffee, Confectionery, Sandwiches and Filled Rolls.
Daily lunchtime specials include Moussaka, Lasagne, Curry, Salad and Ploughman's lunches.
Interval drinks (including coffee) for the Main House and Studio Theatre may be ordered at this bar.
Fully licensed ground floor bar open Monday — Saturday 10.30am — 2.30pm and 5.30pm — 11pm.
A fully comprehensive stock including two bitters, three lagers, Guinness and cider on draught.
Foyer Bar
Coffee, Tea and a variety of Hot and Cold Snacks are available all day from the Snack Bar.
The theatre's members only wine bar situated between the first and second floors.
Open from 6pm Monday — Saturday serving good wine and food.
Happy to cater for meals before or after the show and interval drinks.
Booking advisable but not always necessary.
The Stage Door Club
Situated on the Ground Floor.
Open from 10.00am — 2.30pm.
Fresh home-cooked food.
Evening party books on request Telephone Harlow 31947
Petticoat Restaurant
Facilities for Hire
Looking for a Venue?
The Playhouse is the ideal venue for your Conference, Exhibition or social function.
There are several areas of varying capacities including the Conference Room, the Studio Theatre and the Main Auditorium.
Catering facilities are available.
For further information contact the Publicity Manager on Harlow 24391, who will be pleased to discuss your requirements and arrange for you to visit the facilities.
We have an extensive wardrobe of costumes for hire for theatrical productions or as fancy-dress.
A costume can be hired for as little as £5.
Costume Hire
Opening times: Monday, Tuesday and Saturday 9am — 1pm, Thursday and Friday 1pm — 7pm.
Entrance to the Costume Hire Department is via the Stage Door.
the Playhouse has a large selection of stage properties for hire.
Props Hire
Contact Phil Waite on Harlow 24391.
The Playhouse has superbly equipped scenic workshops and experienced staff who will design and build props and scenery to specification.
Production Services
Phone Nodge Nolan on Harlow 24391 for details.
Leisure Card at The Playhouse
Leisure Card is a scheme introduced by Harlow Council to bring the outstanding amenities of the Town to its residents, as cheaply as possible.
Leisure Card now brings substantial discounts to All Harlow residents at The Playhouse.
Up to 20% off most shows If you don't already have your FREE Leisure Card, simply call in at Leisure Services Offices at 1 Adams House.
Applications forms are available at The Playhouse.
Leisure Card cannot be used in conjunction with Moneysavers, S.E.A.T., Party Booking Discounts, Standbys and other special concessions.
Leisurebus
for your evening out at The Playhouse
It's Free
For a 3 month trial period Harlow Council have introduced Leisurebus running on two routes around the town.
Both stop at the Playhouse, with the first bus at 6.59pm and the last at 11pm.
Now you will be able to travel independantly and safely in the evening, and the time-table has been designed to coincide with performance times at The Playhouse.
For further information pick up a LEISUREBUS leaflet in The Playhouse Foyer or contact Harlow Town Hall.