

TESCO Guide To Alcohol Free and Lower Alcohol Drinks
The selection of alcohol-free and lower alcohol drinks for the adult, discerning drinker is increasing.
As production techniques improve, brewers and winemakers are able to produce reduced alcohol drinks that retain their original flavours.
Tesco has been at the forefront of development and the selection we offer reflects our commitment to this area of growing interest and our concern for healthier lifestyles.
But what exactly is, for instance, an alcohol-free wine and how is it produced?
How many glasses of a lower alcohol product can you drink before you have consumed the equivalent of a standard glass of alcohol?
These are important questions for people who want to monitor the amount of alcohol they consume on a regular basis and perhaps replace their standard consumption with products that are reduced in alcohol.
This Guide is designed to answer such questions.
What is an Alcohol-Free Beer or Wine?
An alcohol-free beer or wine is one that has had the alcohol removed leaving a MAXIMUM of 0.05% vol. alcohol.
The process used to produce alcohol free products is generally that of distillation.
What is a Lower Alcohol Product?
In a lower alcohol product, the alcohol content is reduced significantly from the standard level but some alcohol is retained to keep the product more authentic to its original taste.
At present, there is no legal limit to the amount of alcohol allowed in a beverage describing itself as "Low Alcohol" .
As a rule of thumb, however, most lower alcohol Beers and Ciders are under 1.2% alcohol by volume and most of the other lower alcohol beverages which Tesco stocks are less than 3.5% vol.
The alcohol content is clearly stated on the front of the label.
The three most common methods to reduce the alcohol in a wine or beer are ARRESTED FERMENTATION, DILUTION and a special method called REVERSE OSMOSIS.
Arrested fermentation prevents some of the sugars from turning to alcohol, while dilution involves the addition of natural spring water or grape juice to dilute the alcohol.
Reverse Osmosis involves passing the beer or wine across a special membrane which allows the alcohol to leave the drink but keeps colour and flavour in.
Some products can be a combination of more than one method but all will have the goal of creating a full flavoured drink with greatly reduced alcohol content.
A Healthier Lifestyle
Alcohol taken in moderation is enjoyable and not damaging to health but the key word is MODERATION.
In today's modern society more and more people are turning to Low Alcohol and alcohol-free drinks to help achieve that moderation.
Tesco's exciting range of low alcohol and alcohol-free products offers an adult alternative to soft drinks.
An important point to remember, however, is that only a drink that is alcohol-free should be consumed if you wish to avoid alcohol altogether.
When driving avoid drinking alcohol.
Although low alcohol products contain lower than standard levels of alcohol, they still contain alcohol and could, if consumed in sufficient quantities, impair driving skills.
Lower alcohol drinks can help weight reduction too as alcohol is a high provider of calories and it makes sense if you are watching your weight to drink lower alcohol drinks.
How much Alcohol Do You Consume?
A way of measuring alcohol intake which is used throughout the industry is by "units" of alcohol.
One unit is equivalent to 10ml of pure alcohol (pure alcohol means 100% vol).
As a general guide, sensible limits for drinking which do not carry long term health risks for fit and healthy people are as follows:
It is advised that women who are pregnant or planning to become pregnant should avoid drinking alcohol altogether.
The less you drink the better for the baby.
If you enjoy an occasional drink this may do no harm but by cutting out drink altogether you avoid any possible risks.
For further information on safe limits of drinking, please consult your doctor.
MEN no more than 21 units per week, spaced throughout the week.
WOMEN No more than 14 units per week, spaced throughout the week.
Measuring Alcohol Intake
As a quick reference guide to give you an indication of how many glasses of a lower alcohol product you can drink for every glass of a standard alcohol product below is a table which shows drinks which have the same alcohol content.
This table is only a very general point of reference.
Obviously, not all wines or beers have the same alcohol content, and a half pint of an extra strength lager, of 6% alcohol, for example, will equal 2 units of alcohol rather than 1 unit.
Therefore, for a comprehensive look at the units of alcohol present in any of the beer, wines, and spirits available through Tesco, please refer to the table on the following pages.
This easy-to-use table will allow you to establish the units of alcohol contained in the product you are buying and therefore help you to establish just how much alcohol you are consuming.
STEP 1: Look at the left hand column for the % vol alcohol quoted on the label of the product you are buying.
STEP 2: Look under the appropriate size of glass/can/bottle column for the units of alcohol it contains.
For example if you are purchasing a 75cl bottle of Tesco Claret at 11.5% vol, it will contain 8½ units of alcohol.
The 1.5 litre size would contain 17 units of alcohol (i.e. twice as much as the 75cl size).
As another example, if you purchased a 4 x 330ml pack of Tesco Danish Low Alcohol Lager, at 0.9% vol, each bottle would contain ½ unit of alcohol.
Units of Alcohol in Bottles and Cans for Drinks of Various Alcoholic Strength (approximate values)
Alcohol-free Beer
Kaliber Alcohol-Free Lager 4 x 330ml
Kaliber is brewed as a fully fermented lager whose alcohol is then removed.
Brewed as a strong traditional bitter, the alcohol is removed by an advanced distillation method, leaving the distinct taste of real beer.
Smithwick's Alcohol-Free Bitter 4 x 330ml
Not more than 0.9% vol
 "Low in Alcohol" Beer
lager
Tesco Danish Low Alcohol Lager 4 x 330ml
Tesco Danish Light is brewed as a standard lager and its alcohol is then removed.
The result is a clean, full flavoured low alcohol lager with a lovely dry aftertaste.
Not more than 0.9% vol
Tennent's L.A. 4 x 330ml
This product starts life as a fully brewed Tennent's Lager and is then de-alcoholised.
An amount of Tennent's Lager is then added back into Tennent's L.A. to bring the alcoholic strength up to 0.9% vol to give it body.
Not more than 0.9% vol
Swan Light 4 x 375ml
Swan Light is brewed originally as Swan Export.
The alcohol is removed through a high vacuum, low temperature distillation process.
Not more than 0.5% vol
Clausthaler 4 x 330ml
An authentic German low alcohol lager which is brewed longer with reduced sugar to give a fuller flavour without the alcohol.
Not more than 0.9% vol
Carlton L.A. 4 x 330ml
A fully brewed quality lager, the alcohol is then reduced by the latest technology process of distillation under reduced pressure.
Not more than 0.9% vol
Dansk L.A. 4 x 330ml
Dansk L.A. is brewed as a full strength lager, then the alcohol is removed by a unique evaporation process.
Not more than 1% vol
bitter
White Label Low Alcohol Bitter 4 x 440ml
White Label is brewed with a special strain of yeast.
The level of fermentable sugar is strictly controlled and the fermentation process is halted at 1% vol.
Not more than 1% vol
Bass L.A. Low Alcohol Bitter 4 x 440ml
A full flavoured Bitter brewed in the north of England to full strength and whose alcohol is removed through distillation.
Not more than 1% vol
Highway Low Alcohol Bitter 4 x 330ml
This was the first low alcohol bitter for the take home beer market.
Brewed by a small independent brewery in Cambridgeshire, Highway has a slightly malty flavour.
The low alcohol is achieved through a special filtration method which removes the alcohol molecules from the product.
 "Low In Alcohol Cider" Note more than 0.9% vol
Strongbow L.A. Low Alcohol Cider 4 x 275ml bottles
This cider is first fully fermented and then the alcohol is removed to 0.9% vol.
A delightful, appley, medium dry style.
Not more than 0.9% vol
Blackthorn L.A. Cider 4 x 330ml
Made from the traditional Dry Blackthorn Cider blend, the alcohol by volume content is greatly reduced to 0.9% by using a low temperature high vacuum distillation technique which ensures the end product is still full bodies and full flavoured though low in alcohol.
Not more than 0.9% vol
Coates Somerset Low Alcohol Cider 70cl
Fully fermented Somerset cider blended with Mendip water, apple juice and citric acid to create a full-bodied cider taste with the benefit of less than 1% alcohol by volume.
Our range of Alcohol-Free wines offers a choice of several styles from 3 countries at no more than 0.05% alcohol by volume.
Alcohol-Free Wines
Note more than 0.05% vol
Germany
Eisberg Alcohol-Free German Wine 75cl
One of the first alcohol-free wines available, Eisberg German is a medium sweet wine whose alcohol is removed through a distillation process.
Note more than 0.05% vol
France
Eisberg Alcohol-Free French Wine 75cl
A medium dry white French wine which has proved very popular since its introduction as an extension to the Eisberg range.
Not more than 2.5% vol
Lower Alcohol Drinks
France
Tesco Escoubes Light 75cl
Produced by the winemaker acclaimed for "1989 Wine Magazine/Good Wine Guide, White Wine of the Year" , this is a superb example of a product vinified to retain all the characteristics of a fruity well balanced wine.
Note more than 3% vol
Petillant de Listel 75cl
Semi-sparkling, with lots of fruit and a medium palate, this delicate beverage is produced by one of southern France's most renowned wineries.
Not more than 3% vol
Italy
Tesco Lambrusco Light 75cl
Lambrusco, named after the grape variety from which it is produced, is now the nation's second favourite wine.
This low alcohol version is as light and approachable as the full strength variety and is ideal for parties.
Not more than 3% vol
Monteverdi Red 75cl
Monteverdi White 75cl
The use of the Moscato grape variety in the blend for this drink gives a scented bouquet and a soft palate.
Not more than 0.5% vol
Germany
Tesco Dealcoholised Riesling 75cl
A delightful fresh Mosel wine produced from Germany's premier grape variety.
Note more than 2% vol
Goldener Oktober Light White 75cl
Goldener Oktober Light Red 75cl
The famous St. Ursula winery at Bingen-am-Rhein in Germany produces this attractive blend of wine and natural waters that retains the typical Germanic style.
Note more than 0.5% vol
California
Paul Masson Dealcoholised White Wine 75cl
Paul Masson Dealcoholised Rosé Wine 75cl
California's most famous winery produces these medium white and soft rosé wines with characteristically fruity bouquets.
WATCH THIS SPACE!
As wine and beer makers continue to improve this lower in alcohol product sector, Tesco will be adding to an already extensive range.
Throughout the summer watch out for larger pack sizes, products from the New World and new styles.
Tesco Stores Ltd.