

Harlow Sport Centre
Squash
OPEN Monday to Friday 07.00 — 23.30 Saturday & Sunday 08.00 — 23.30
Squash at Harlow Sportcentre has moved from strength to strength, starting with just two courts when the centre first opened.
Three major development programmes have resulted in our present provision of 12 championship courts, six of which are glass-backed.
SQUASH
The choice does not stop there — we offer you two ways in which to pursue that infernal black ball: As a Sportcentre member you can book courts 1 — 6 from 07.00-23.00, seven days in advance.
1.
SPORTCENTRE COURTS 1 — 6
There is a ladder league run and administered by the Sportcentre specially for its members.
This encompasses all ranges of ability from the beginner to the very experienced.
There are many leagues running on approximately two monthly cycles.
Participants of the ladder league are also invited to enter the special k.o. competitions run for them throughout the year.
LADDER LEAGUE
For those who wish to widen their horizon of squash in a sociable atmosphere there is:
This luxury six court development provides for every player's needs, whether beginner, advanced, young or old.
2.
SQUASH PLUS AT HARLOW SQUASH CLUB
The six championship courts (five glass-backed) provide ideal conditions for play, whilst the luxurious "Members Only" bar and lounge will make relaxing and spectating a real pleasure.
* Leagues
* Club Nights
* Competitions
* Teams
* Junior Sessions
* Ladies Morning
* Pro Coaching
* Social Nights
* Bar Snacks
A full and varied programme of playing and social events are organised by the club and its committee, including internal leagues, competitions and demonstration matches, as well as club nights and the services of the club's professional coach.
Regular social events, discos, supper nights, fun competitions are held by the social committee, which are enhanced by the "cosy" atmosphere of the club bar.
Don't forget membership of the Squash Club also provides you with full membership of the Sportcentre, and therefore allows you to utilise all its facilities, whether it be the new 2nd Nature Gymnasia, the sauna, or just trying out some of the many activities available at the centre.
Members may make court bookings up to seven days in advance (14 days for Squash Club members).
One booking on any one day may be made by telephone on Harlow 635100 or by personal visit at Reception.
BOOKING INFORMATION
Members
Non-members may use unbooked courts or play a game with a member on payment of the day membership (guest) fee; unless you are an early bird or night owl where the guest fee is waived for players vacating courts before 09.00 or on court after 22.30.
Non-Members
Court booking can be made anytime between 09.30-21.30 seven days a week.
TIMINGS FOR BOOKINGS
Remember for Booking/Information Telephone Harlow 635100
1.
Cancellations notified to Reception before the day of play will not be charged.
2.
Cancellations notified on the day of play will not be charged if the court is re-let.
3.
Courts not cancelled will incur a NO-SHOW additional charge.
For Clubs, Associations, Companies and Organisations wishing to make regular (termly) or block bookings of any facility at Harlow Sportcentre, please ask for the Booking Secretary in the Administration Office, telephone Harlow 635100.
REGULAR/BLOCK BOOKINGS