

AFRICA
NAMIBIA
Independence
Namibia, the last remaining colony in Africa, achieved independence on March 21, 1990, ending 106 years of colonization, under German rule from 1884 to 1915 and then under South African administration.
At a ceremony in Windhoek, the capital, the South African flag was lowered at midnight on the evening of March 20, and was replaced by the newly designed flag of the Republic of Namibia (composed of diagonal stripes of blue, red and green separated by white lines, with a golden sun at the top near the hoist).
The independence ceremony was performed under the auspices of the UN, described in some reports as the "midwife" of Namibia's independence.
Sam Nujoma was sworn in as Namibia's first President by UN Secretary-General Javier Pérez de Cuéllar.
As leader of the South West Africa People's Organization (SWAPO) since its formation in 1960, Nujoma embodied Namibia's resistance to the South African occupation.
[For his return to Namibia in September 1989 after nearly 30 years of exile see p. 36885.]
On Feb. 16, 1990, he had been elected unanimously to the office of President by the deputies to the then Constituent Assembly.
[For November 1989 UN-supervised elections to the Assembly, in which SWAPO won an overall majority, see pp. 37031-32.]
Nujoma's policy statement — Swearing in of National Assembly and Council of Ministers
In his first policy statement as President, Nujoma on March 21 promised to redress the distortions of the apartheid economy, and appeared to assuage fears of the white minority and potential Western aid donors by rejecting the idea of large-scale nationalization, which SWAPO had for a long time held to be a cornerstone of its Marxist ideology.
In what was seen as a pragmatic change of policy, Nujoma now declared that his government was committed to a mixed economy and actively sought foreign investment.
An earlier statement by the Finance Minister-designate, Otto Herrigel, had noted that a central bank independent of the South African Reserve Bank, which would issue its own currency, was ultimately to be established.
Herrigel had warned on Feb. 8 that Namibia would have a budget deficit of 500,000,000 rand (approximately US$200,000,000) in its first year of independence.
Earlier on March 21 the Constituent Assembly deputies had been sworn in as members of the National Assembly — Namibia's legislature on independence [see also below].
Moses Tjitendero, a SWAPO member, was elected as its Speaker.
Nujoma exercised his prerogative of appointing six non-voting members to the Assembly; these included Herrigel and the Agriculture Minister, Gert Hanekon.
The Council of Ministers (members of which had been proposed in December 1989 — see p. 37116) was also sworn in by the new Chief Justice, Hans Berker.
Hage Geingob Prime Minister Theo Ben Gurirab Foreign Affairs Peter Mueshihange Defence Andimba Toivo ja Toivo Mines and Energy Hifikepunje Pohamba Home Affairs Ngarikutuke Tjiriange Justice Otto Herrigel Finance Nahas Angula Education, Culture and Sport Hidipo Hamutenya Information and Broadcasting Nicky Iyambo Health and Social Services Hendrik Witbooi Labour, Public Service and Manpower Development Libertina Amathila Local Government and Housing Ben Amathila Trade and Industry Richard Kapelwa Works, Transport and Communications Marco Hausiku Lands, Resettlement and Rehabilitation Gerhard (Gert) Hanekon Agriculture, Fisheries, Water and Rural Development Nico Bessinger Wildlife, Conservation and Tourism Zedekia Ngarivue Director-General of National Planning Commission Peter Tsheehama Minister of State for Security 
Council of Ministers
Provisions of Constitution
The independence Constitution adopted by the Constituent Assembly on Feb. 9, 1990 [see p. 37176], contained strong safeguards relating to human rights and liberties and placed considerable limits on the power of the executive president.
Under the Constitution Namibia was defined as a multiparty republic.
An executive President would be head of state; holders of this office would in future be elected directly for a maximum term of five years and limited to a maximum of two such terms.
The President would exercise the functions of government with the assistance of a Council of Ministers headed by a Prime Minister.
The President was empowered to declare a state of emergency, but such a declaration would require National Assembly approval within 30 days.
Legislative authority lay with the parliament: as of March 21, the former Constituent Assembly was converted into the National Assembly, with 72 members serving a five-year term, the lower house of a bicameral parliamentary structure.
A proportional representation system was to apply to future elections.
An upper house representing regional leaders was to be created two years after independence.
The Constitution provided for an independent judiciary, with a Supreme Court as its highest body, and for a bill of rights (including rights to fair trial and cultural and religious freedoms) entrenched against amendment.
English was to be the official language, although only 3 per cent of Namibians spoke English as their first language.
The practice of apartheid, imposed on Namibia by successive South African governments since 1948, was made a criminal offence, as were torture and forced labour; the death penalty was formally banned.
Namibia's international affiliations
Already recognized prior to independence as a member of the FAO, the ILO, UNESCO and the WHO, Namibia at independence became a full member of the UN, the OAU, the SADCC, the Non-aligned Movement and the Commonwealth.
Namibia was reportedly to seek IMF and World Bank membership, and was to remain for at least two years a part of the Southern African Customs Union.
The South African rand would remain legal tender for at least two years after independence.
Namibia was to be invited to accede to the Lomé Convention which regulated relations between the European Communities (EC) and the 68 (with Namibia) developing countries of Africa, the Caribbean and the Pacific (the ACP countries)[see p. 37210].
Defence
Namibia's armed forces were to be based on the integration of locally recruited units with former SWAPO guerrillas.
A British Army team of instructors arrived in the country in early April to begin training officer cadets and junior officers.
Departure of UNTAG personnel
Staff of the UN Transitional Assistance Group (UNTAG), including 4,000 infantry and a 300-member military observer unit from various countries, were expected to leave Namibia by early April.
UNTAG's mandate to create and maintain an atmosphere conducive to the holding of free elections, and to supervise the independence process, had begun on April 1, 1989.
The UN had never before mounted such a complex and expensive peace-keeping operation, and after an uncertain start [see pp. 36576-77]its role as facilitator was widely approved.
Chronology to independence.
1878 United Kingdom annexes Walvis Bay.
1884 Start of German colonial rule.
1915 Germany surrenders Namibia to South African troops.
1920 League of Nations mandate allows Namibia to be administered by South Africa on behalf of the British Crown; South Africa begins distributing land to white settlers.
1925 Legislative Council established for whites only.
1947 South Africa refuses to hand over mandate for Namibia to UN trusteeship on the grounds that it does not recognize UN as successor to League of Nations [see p. 8834].
1949 Namibians petition UN for end of South African rule [see pp. 10405-06].
1960 SWAPO founded.
1966 UN General Assembly revokes South Africa's mandate; South Africa refuses to withdraw [see pp. 21797-99]; SWAPO begins military offensive [see p. 21970].
1967 UN Council for Namibia set up to administer Namibia on behalf of UN until independence; refused access by South Africa [see pp. 22637-38].
1968 21 SWAPO members begin life sentences on Robben Island after convictions for terrorism [see p. 22636]; start of implementation of "homelands" policy in Namibia [see p. 22637].
1971 International Court of Justice rules South Africa's occupation illegal [see pp. 24729-31].
1975 SWAPO allowed to set up bases in Angola following Angola's independence.
1977 South Africa appoints Administrator-General with full powers [see p. 28498]; five-country Western "contact group" formed to negotiate with South Africa [see pp. 28497-98].
1978 Contact group's proposals incorporated into UN Security Council Resolution 435 [see p. 29463]; disregarded by South Africa, whose administration holds internal elections [see pp. 29465-66]; establishment of new interim government declared null and void by UN Security Council.
1981 US administration under President Reagan introduces policy of "linkage" between Namibian settlement and Cuban withdrawal from Angola [see p. 31205].
1983 South Africa resumes direct rule [see pp. 32003-04].
1988 South African forces defeated in battle of Cuito Cuanavale in southern Angola [see pp. 36077-78]; agreement reached between South Africa, Angola, Cuba and USA on timetable for withdrawal of troops [see p. 36479].
April 1, 1989 Implementation of UN independence plan begins; South African troops clash with SWAPO guerrillas crossing from Angola on first day of ceasefire [see pp. 36576-77].
November 1989 Elections to Constituent Assembly won by SWAPO [see pp. 37031-32].
International contacts at independence celebrations
The independence ceremonies, attended by more than 20,000 people including 15 heads of state, provided the opportunity for high-level diplomatic contacts among world leaders.
In an unexpected encounter, South African President F. W. de Klerk held 90 minutes of talks with Soviet Foreign Minister Eduard Shevardnadze in what was described as the highest-level meeting ever held between their two governments.
The talks were described by de Klerk as "enlightening and informative" and remarkable for "the degree of understanding the Soviets showed for South Africa's problems" .
De Klerk also met the West German Foreign Minister, Hans-Dietrich Genscher, the UK Foreign and Commonwealth Secretary Douglas Hurd, the Egyptian President Hosni Mubarak (who currently chaired the Organization of African Unity), and the Presidents of Zambia, Angola and Mozambique.
Nelson Mandela was one of the guests of honour, and took the opportunity of meeting Shevardnadze as well as US Secretary of State James Baker.
Shevardnadze and Baker also met each other, reportedly discussing the continuing war in Angola and developments in Eastern Europe.
Baker also spoke with Angolan President Eduardo dos Santos.
A number of countries immediately announced that they were establishing diplomatic relations with Namibia; these included the Soviet Union, China, Pakistan, Poland, East Germany and Romania.
EUROPE
SOVIET UNION
Presidential system — End to constitutional guarantee of Communist Party monopoly
Election of Gorbachev as President of the USSR
The Congress of People's Deputies on March 13 approved the creation of the post of President of the USSR, with extensive executive powers.
Two days later it elected Mikhail Gorbachev to that post.
This marked a watershed in the transfer of political decision-making in the Soviet Union from the Communist Party (CPSU) to the state leadership.
Supreme Soviet and Congress debate on new presidency
The creation of the new presidency had been among the radical proposals announced by Gorbachev at a meeting of the CPSU central committee on Feb. 5-7 as part of a draft new party platform [see pp. 37234-35].
The proposal was endorsed at a meeting of the USSR Supreme Soviet Presidium chaired by Gorbachev on Feb. 12.
However, when the USSR Supreme Soviet convened for its third session on Feb. 14, the Presidium unexpectedly failed to obtain the necessary two-thirds majority for a proposal to call the Congress of People's Deputies into emergency session by the end of February to make the necessary constitutional changes.
Gorbachev had stressed the urgency of creating the new presidential system in order to safeguard democratization and perestroika.
Alluding to the multiple crises of inter-ethnic and nationalist strife, collapsing Communist Party support, economic chaos and a greatly increasing incidence of crime, he asserted: "Today is the time to decide all these questions.
More time could finish off the country."
Misgivings had been expressed by many deputies, however, principally about allowing less than two weeks for preparation and discussion of such an important piece of legislation.
The Supreme Soviet on Feb. 14 nevertheless supported a compromise proposal by Gorbachev that it should return to the question, and on Feb. 27 it approved in principle (by 347 votes to 24, with 43 abstentions) a draft bill on creating the new presidency, and agreed to convene an extraordinary Congress.
These votes came after a long and stormy debate; some deputies warned of the dangers of dictatorship because the proposed new presidency lacked an adequate system of checks and balances by the legislature, and argued that a switch to presidential rule was premature.
In the debate Gorbachev had at times unashamedly used his position as Supreme Soviet Chairman to bully and cajole deputies into accepting his arguments about the precariousness of his reform programme and the urgent need to "enhance the mechanism of executive authority, in order to ensure that laws work" .
The extraordinary Congress of People's Deputies session convened on March 12.
The whole of the first day's proceedings was taken up with debate on the new presidency, again featuring accusations principally by radical deputies of the potential for authoritarianism and dictatorship.
Against Gorbachev's wishes a vote on the issue had to be postponed until the following day.
Meanwhile, intense lobbying was reported of deputies from Estonia, Georgia and other strongly nationalist-minded republics who were threatening to boycott the vote on the grounds that strengthening centralized executive authority ran counter to recent official proposals for restructuring the Soviet Union into a looser confederation of sovereign republics.
The session itself was boycotted by most deputies from Lithuania, reflecting that republic's independence declaration of the previous day [see above].
Congress approval — Details of new presidency
The Congress voted on March 13 in favour of the law establishing the post of President of the USSR by 1,817 to 133, with 61 abstentions.
It appeared that the majority shared in the assessment, voiced by Prime Minister Nikolai Ryzhkov, that a "strong presidency is essential to prevent a vacuum in authority" , given that "the power of the Communist Party is waning, while the government executive is not used to working with the new system" .
Last-minute amendments curbing some of the President's powers of veto over legislation and of authority to impose states of emergency as set out in the draft law appeared to have won round many opponents.
The main points of the new law on the presidency were as follows.
Election.
Any Soviet citizen of at least 35 but no more than 65 years old could be elected President of the USSR, albeit for a maximum of two terms.
The President would be elected on the basis of universal, equal and direct suffrage by secret ballot for a five-year term.
To be elected, a candidate should receive more than half of the votes cast nationally and in the majority of union republics in a more than 50 per cent poll.
Powers and responsibilities.
The President of the USSR, as head of state, would be "the guarantor of observance of Soviet citizens' rights and freedoms and of the USSR Constitution and laws" ; the protector of "the sovereignty of the USSR and union republics and the country's security and territorial integrity" ; and the supreme representative of the USSR at home and in international relations.
The President would (i) submit to the Congress of People's Deputies annual reports on the state of the country, and would brief the USSR Supreme Soviet "on the most important matters of the USSR's domestic and foreign policy" ;(ii) propose to the USSR Supreme Soviet (and subsequently to the Congress for confirmation) candidates for the posts of the Chair of the USSR Council of Ministers (Prime Minister), Chair of the USSR Committee of People's Control, Chair of the USSR Supreme Court, USSR Procurator General and USSR Chief State Arbiter, as well as recommend to the USSR Supreme Soviet and to the Congress the removal of these officials (with the exception of the Chairman of the USSR Supreme Court);(iii) place before the USSR Supreme Soviet the question of forcing or of accepting the resignation of the USSR Council of Ministers, and would appoint and remove in conjunction with the Chairman of the USSR Council of Ministers members of that body (subject to confirmation by the USSR Supreme Soviet);(iv) sign USSR laws, being entitled within a period of no more than two weeks to refer a law and objections to it back to the USSR Supreme Soviet for further discussion and voting (should the USSR Supreme Soviet confirm its earlier decision by a two-thirds majority in both its chambers the President would be obliged to sign the law);(v) enjoy the right to suspend the operation of USSR Council of Ministers resolutions and instructions; and (vi) propose to the Congress of People's Deputies the dissolution and re-election of the USSR Supreme Soviet in the event of an irreconcilable dispute over legislation arising between that body's two chambers.
The President would "co-ordinate the activity of state bodies to ensure the defence of the country" , and would be Supreme Commander-in-Chief of the USSR Armed Forces.
Other responsibilities for defence and security would include:(i) declaring general or partial mobilization, a state of war "in the event of a military attack on the USSR" (subject to immediate referral to the USSR Supreme Soviet), or martial law in specific localities "in the interest of the defence of the USSR and the security of its citizens" ;(ii) giving warning of the declaration of a state of emergency in particular localities "in the interests of safeguarding citizens' security" , and proceeding with such a declaration "at the request or with the consent of the presidium of the Supreme Soviet or supreme body of state power of the affected union republic" .
In the absence of such consent, the President might still introduce a state of emergency subject to ratification by a two-thirds majority of the USSR Supreme Soviet.
In conjunction with a state of emergency the President might also impose temporary direct presidential rule over a union republic.
The President could issue decrees which would be binding throughout the country.
The President might only be removed from office by the Congress of People's Deputies in the event of his violating the Constitution or the law.
A proposal to this effect could be made from within the Congress itself or by a two-thirds majority of the USSR Supreme Soviet, but subject to findings by the USSR Committee for the Supervision of the Constitution.
Consultative bodies.
The President would head a new Council of the Federation, comprising the "highest state officials [i.e. Supreme Soviet Chairs]of the Union Republics" .
This body would examine "questions of compliance with the union treaty" ; work out measures to implement nationalities policy; and submit to the Soviet of Nationalities (one of the USSR Supreme Soviet chambers) "recommendations on resolving disputes and settling conflicts in inter-ethnic relations" .
In addition the President would appoint and head a Presidential Council responsible for elaborating "measures to implement the main directions of the USSR's domestic and foreign policy and to ensure the country's security" .
A proposal to bar the President from membership of any political party narrowly failed to obtain the support of the necessary two-thirds of the 2,250 Congress delegates, the voting on March 13 being 1,303 in favour and 607 against.
Gorbachev's election
Gorbachev was elected President of the USSR by a secret ballot of Congress deputies on the evening of March 14, the result being announced on the following morning.
Of the 1,878 votes cast, 1,329 (59.2 per cent) were for Gorbachev, 495 were against, and 54 were invalid.
The Congress had on the previous day voted (by 1,542 to 368, with 76 abstentions) to waive the provision for a direct election, assessing that the "difficult" situation in the country was likely to render any delay in installing the first President a "grave political mistake" .
Gorbachev had been formally nominated by the CPSU central committee, which had held a brief meeting on March 14.
He was the only candidate when it came to the vote in the Congress, but initially there had been two other nominations for the post.
The Soyuz ( "Union" ) group of deputies, formed on Feb. 16 in the USSR Supreme Soviet with the aim of resisting "the destruction of the USSR" by separatist, nationalist and chauvinist forces (and described by commentators as a largely conservative bloc seeking to counterbalance the radical Inter-Regional Group of deputies formed in July 1989 — see p. 36824), had decided at a meeting on March 11 to nominate other candidates to preserve democratic principle.
Its original preferred candidate was Ryzhkov, but fears were expressed at the meeting that if elected Ryzhkov would cede the post to Gorbachev, and it was therefore decided also to nominate Vadim Bakatin, the USSR Internal Affairs Minister.
However, both men declined these nominations on March 14.
Gorbachev was sworn in by the Congress immediately after the result of the vote was announced.
He then gave a policy statement in which he said that he would use his new powers principally to "radicalize" perestroika.
Distancing himself from the CPSU, he promised as President not to represent a single political trend but to involve the full range of "public thought" in government.
Appointment of Presidential Council — Lukyanov's election as Supreme Soviet Chair
The Presidential Council initially appeared designed to supplant the CPSU central committee politburo as the main centre of political decision making in the Soviet Union.
The Council's composition was announced on March 24-25, and its first session took place amid saturation Soviet media coverage on March 28.
The Financial Times of March 29 described the diverse membership of the Council as "a clear attempt to balance politics, regional interests and subject specialists" , while other commentators noted the span of members' political persuasions from social democracy to Marxist conservatism to right-wing Russian nationalism.
This diversity led to confusion among observers as to whether the Council would indeed become a significant centre of political decision making, or would be a much less important and purely consultative body.
However, the Guardian of March 26 assessed that the Council's composition suggested that "[Gorbachev]wants to bring on board a variety of different constituencies and force them to toe the line" .
Members of Presidential Council
Chingiz Aytmatov, Vadim Bakatin, Valery Boldin, Albert Kauls, Gen. Vladimir Kryuchkov, Yury Maslyukov, Yury Osipyan, Yevgeny Primakov, Valentin Rasputin, Grigory Revenko, Stanislav Shatalin, Eduard Shevardnadze, Aleksandr Yakovlev, Veniamin Yarin, Gen. Dmitry Yazov.
Ex-officio member.
Nikolai Ryzhkov (Chair of the Council of Ministers).
Six of the Council's members, namely Kryuchkov, Maslyukov, Primakov, Shevardnadze, Yakovlev and Yazov, were full or candidate members of the CPSU central committee politburo, all of whom except Yakovlev held in addition ministerial or state posts (although Primakov resigned on March 28 as Chair of the Soviet of the Union in connection with joining the Presidential Council).
Also drawn from the party's senior ranks were Boldin, the head of the CPSU central committee's general department, and Revenko, the Ukrainian CP committee first secretary in Kiev, who was generally regarded as a conservative.
The only other government member in the Council (apart from Ryzhkov, sitting ex officio) was Bakatin.
There were two appointments from the Academy of Sciences, namely Shatalin, a pro-reform economist, and Osipyan, a theoretical physicist.
Two members drawn from the rank and file of the Congress of People's Deputies were Kauls, a highly successful agricultural manager from Latvia, and Yarin, a metalworker from the Urals and a leader of the United Workers' Front, an unofficial blue-collar organization set up in mid-1989 [see p. 36898].
The latter was regarded as a conservative and a Russian nationalist, as was Rasputin, a celebrated poet and the only non-communist in the Council.
Another figure from the arts was Aytmatov, a Kirghiz and one of the Soviet Union's most renowned living novelists.
Observers remarked on the absence from the Council of Yegor Ligachev, the leading conservative in the CPSU central committee politburo and at one time de facto second in the Soviet leadership behind Gorbachev.
As a consequence of the creation of the new presidency, Gorbachev's former post of Chairman of the Supreme Soviet was restyled, effectively being restored to the function of parliamentary Speaker (the post had served this function prior to becoming a de facto executive presidency and occupied by Gorbachev in May 1989 — see pp. 36486; 36659).
On March 15, at the closing Congress session, Anatoly Lukyanov (hitherto First Deputy Chairman of the Supreme Soviet and thus de facto First Vice-President of the USSR — see p. 36660) was elected Chairman of the Supreme Soviet by 1,202 votes to 682, defeating seven other candidates.
He remained de facto Vice-President, the Chairman of the Supreme Soviet now being constitutionally the President's temporary successor (pending a fresh election) should the latter become unable to execute his duties.
Abolition of constitutionally guaranteed communist monopoly
The Congress also voted at its March 13 session to amend the 1977 USSR Constitution to abolish the Communist Party's guaranteed monopoly of political power.
The vote was 1,771 for and 164 against, with 74 abstentions.
Rather than wait for the 28th CPSU congress due in July, as had been expected [see pp. 37234-35], a plenum of the CPSU central committee had given the party's endorsement to the changes on March 11.
As amended, Article 6 of the Constitution, which previously had enshrined the Communist Party as the "leading and guiding force in Soviet society and the nucleus of its political system" , now read: "The Communist Party of the Soviet Union, other political parties, trade unions, youth and other social organizations and mass movements participate in the formulation of the policy of the Soviet state and in the administration of state and social affairs through their representatives elected to the soviets of people's deputies and in other ways." 
A proposal that all reference to the Communist Party should be deleted failed to secure the required two-thirds majority endorsement, albeit winning 1,067 votes in favour compared with 906 against.
Article 7, which previously had defined the official role of organizations affiliated to the CPSU, was amended to read: "All political parties, social organizations and mass movements, in the exercise of the functions stipulated in their programmes and rules, operate within the framework of the Constitution and Soviet laws." 
Gorbachev revealed that a law on establishing new political parties was currently being drafted.
Lithuania independence crisis
The Lithuanian Supreme Soviet, which as a result of elections on Feb. 24 had passed firmly into the control of deputies affiliated to the nationalist Sajudis movement, on March 11 plunged the Soviet Union into a constitutional crisis when it unilaterally declared Lithuania independent.
Sajudis election victory
Sajudis (the "Popular Front for Perestroika" ) had been expected to win decisively in the elections to the Lithuanian Supreme Soviet.
In the first round of balloting, on Feb. 24, Sajudis-affiliated candidates won enough seats (72 out of 90 seats decided) to ensure an outright majority in the 141-seat Supreme Soviet.
A second round was held on March 4-10 in constituencies where no candidate had secured an absolute majority, and 43 more seats were decided, 20 going to Sajudis-backed candidates.
Fresh elections were due on April 7 in six constituencies where turnout on Feb. 24 had been below 50 per cent(the average turnout was over 71 per cent ), and were also awaited in two constituencies where a run-off on March 4 had failed to produce a winner.
These were the first multiparty elections to be held in the Soviet Union, the Lithuanian Supreme Soviet having in December 1989 abolished the constitutionally guaranteed communist monopoly of power [see p. 37129]and having earlier in February passed a new law regulating the establishment and functioning of new political parties; in fact new or revived political parties had been emerging in Lithuania since the beginning of 1989 [see pp. 36487; 36854].
Sajudis did not compete as a political party, but backed candidates from several parties including the newly independent Communist Party of Lithuania (CPL — see pp. 37128-29; 37168), as well as independent candidates.
Of all the competing political parties, only the "Lithuanian Communist Party on the CPSU platform" (a breakaway faction of the CPL, which favoured continued subordination to the Communist Party of the Soviet Union and drew its support overwhelmingly from the minority Russian, Byelorussian and Polish populations — ibid.) did not campaign with a pro-independence manifesto.
It appeared from the poor showing of the pro-CPSU communists in the elections that a surprisingly large number of Russians had voted for Sajudis-backed candidates, or had boycotted the voting in overwhelmingly Russian-populated constituencies where only a pro-CPSU communist was standing.
1st round 2nd round Total (Feb. 24)(March 4-10) Communist Party of Lithuania (independent) 27 13 40 Lithuanian Communist Party (CPSU platform) 4 1 5 Social Democratic Party 9 0 9 Green Party 2 2 4 Democratic Party 0 3 3 Christian Democratic Party 2 0 2 Humanism and Progress Party 0 0 0 Independents 46 24 70 Total 90 (72) ** 43 (20) ** 133* (92) *Results with eight seats still to be decided.
**Number of seats won by Sajudis-backed candidates.
Lithuanian Supreme Soviet election results
as of March 10 (seats won)
Constituent session of Lithuanian Supreme Soviet — Independence declaration
The new Lithuanian Supreme Soviet convened late on March 10 with 125 deputies in attendance.
The timing of this constituent session was influenced by the impending vote in the USSR Congress of People's Deputies on creating a new executive presidency [see pp. 37297-99], and specifically by fears that new presidential powers would be used to block Lithuania's progress towards independence.
In order for the Lithuanian Supreme Soviet to convene on March 10 with the requisite two-thirds quorum most of the second round run-off elections, scheduled for March 10, had been brought forward.
The proclamation of Lithuania's independence took place late on March 11 as a result of voting in what was now to be known as the Supreme Council (Taryba; the Russian word soviet, literally meaning "council" , was dropped).
The proclamation took the form of (i) a declaration (approved by 126 votes to none, with six abstentions) "reflecting the people's will" and reaffirming the continuing validity of Lithuania's Feb. 16, 1918, independence declaration and of the May 15, 1920, resolution by independent Lithuania's Constituent Assembly (Seimas) confirming it as a democratic state; and (ii) a bill "on the restoration of the Lithuanian independent state" .
The latter document (approved by 124 votes to none, with four abstentions) stated that Lithuania's constitution of May 12, 1938, had been abrogated illegally as a consequence of the Soviet military intervention of June 15, 1940, and of the July 21, 1940, vote in the Lithuanian People's Seimas (elected under Soviet supervision only a week earlier and now denounced as a "tool for exerting the will of a foreign country" ) to seek accession to the Soviet Union.
It declared reinstated the 1938 Constitution to underpin a provisional new "basic law" , and terminated the validity of the April 20, 1978, Soviet Lithuanian Constitution and of the 1977 USSR Constitution as it had previously applied on Lithuanian territory.
In other voting it was decided to adopt the formal name Lithuanian Republic, dropping the adjectives Soviet and Socialist, and to restore to official use the emblem of independent Lithuania, featuring a knight on a white horse, in place of the Soviet Lithuanian emblem based on the hammer and sickle.
At the close of the March 11 session a declaration was read out by Vytautas Landsbergis [see below]calling for international "fraternal solidarity and support" for Lithuania's "continuity as an independent state" and for its "return to the family of free countries of the world" .
On the following day the Supreme Council issued appeals to Soviet President Mikhail Gorbachev and Prime Minister Nikolai Ryzhkov asking for "benevolent understanding" and recognition of Lithuania's independence by the Soviet Union and for those appeals to be regarded as an official proposal to begin negotiations to settle all issues connected with the restoration of that independence.
Another appeal to Gorbachev on March 13 described as "illegal" the stationing of Soviet troops on Lithuanian soil and proposed negotiations on their withdrawal.
The vote on independence was greeted with jubilation inside the Supreme Council chamber and by people on the streets of the capital, Vilnius.
Hundreds of people looked on and cheered as a metal cast of the hammer and sickle emblem was ripped from the outside wall of the Supreme Council building.
Election of Landsbergis as President — New government
Earlier on March 11 the election had been held to the post of Chairman of the Supreme Council (i.e. President of Lithuania).
The two candidates for the post were Landsbergis, the Sajudis chairman and a non-communist, and Algirdas Brazauskas, the popular CPL first secretary and outgoing Lithuanian President [see p. 37168].
Landsbergis, 58, a musicologist specializing in 19th and early 20th century Lithuanian music, was elected in a secret ballot, polling 91 votes for and 42 votes against, compared with 38 votes for and 95 against Brazauskas.
The latter declined a nomination by Landsbergis to the post of Deputy Chairman.
The Supreme Council on March 11 provisionally elected as Prime Minister Kazimiera Prunskiene, one of the CPL members backed by Sajudis in the elections and a Deputy Premier and Economy Minister in the outgoing government of Vytautas Sakalauskas.
On March 23 she made the first appointments to a new government.
Initial Moscow reaction
In his first public reaction, Gorbachev in his opening address on March 12 to a session of the Congress of People's Deputies [see p. 37297]described the Lithuanian independence declaration as "alarming" .
On the following day he condemned it as "illegitimate and invalid" and rejected opening formal negotiations, this position being reiterated in a resolution passed overwhelmingly by the Congress on March 15.
[Subsequent developments in March and April, including a Soviet clampdown against Lithuanian army deserters, the occupation by Soviet troops of Communist Party buildings in Vilnius, and threats of a Soviet economic blockade of Lithuania, will be covered in the next News Digest.]
Foreign reactions
No government gave immediate diplomatic recognition to Lithuania as an independent sovereign state.
The administration in the United States (which had never formally recognized the incorporation of the three Baltic republics into the Soviet Union) on March 12 ruled out such recognition until independence had been properly negotiated with the Soviet authorities, and it called on the latter to respect Lithuania's declaration, and on all parties to avoid violence.
Other Western governments took a similar position.
In Poland (which had close historical and cultural links with Lithuania, and a common border) the government published a statement on March 12 supporting Lithuania's "self-determination" and expressed the hope that this could be achieved peacefully through negotiations.
Of all the Warsaw Pact countries, officials in Hungary appeared to go furthest in declaring readiness to recognize Lithuania's independence.
However, Foreign Minister Gyula Horn on March 12 expressed the concern felt in many quarters internationally that the secession of Soviet republics might jeopardize Soviet reforms, and that the potential rapid disintegration of the Soviet Union posed a threat to world peace and stability.
EUROPE
EAST GERMANY
Election victory for Christian Democrats
East Germany's first free and secret general election was held on March 18, when the Alliance for Germany, formed by Christian Democrats in February [see p. 37260], performed unexpectedly well, winning 48.12 per cent of the vote and a total of 192 seats, just short of an absolute majority in the 400-seat unicameral Volkskammer.
Election campaign
Main parties' programmes
The campaign was heavily dominated by the West German parties, which provided expertise and substantial resources, with West German politicians making frequent appearances at election rallies.
Purely East German groupings such as the Alliance"90, made up of many of the groups which had sparked initial resistance to the Honecker regime, found themselves unable to compete on equal terms.
Differences in party programmes centred in the main on when and how unification should take place.
The Alliance for Germany, backed by the West German federal Chancellor Helmut Kohl, advocated rapid monetary union, followed shortly afterwards by political reunification with the accession of the German Democratic Republic (East Germany) to the Federal Republic of Germany (West Germany) under Article 23 of the latter's Basic Law [see p. 37259].
The Alliance sought to imply that this process might be delayed if Kohl had to negotiate with an SPD-led government in East Berlin.
It also tried to associate the SPD with the former regime, using such slogans as "No more socialist experiments" , and making references to the "PDSPD" to blur the distinctions between PDS and SPD.
The SPD supported a more cautious approach to unification [see p. 37260].
It stressed the dangers of high unemployment and economic instability for East Germans if the process were rushed.
The PDS emphasized concern over a deterioration in the comprehensive social protection currently offered by the East German state.
Kohl's statement on East German savings
In his sixth and final campaign speech on March 13, in the town of Cottbus, north-east of Dresden, Kohl declared: "We want savers to know that when the change in currency comes it will be at one-to-one for them.
This will be valid for small savers but not for the whole currency.
It is crucial that those who deserve our support and solidarity should not be disadvantaged."
East Germans had substantial savings, estimated at nearly 180,000 million East German marks, and many feared that these might be drastically devalued when a currency union was introduced.
West German decision to stop some benefits for East German immigrants
On March 20 (as provisionally agreed by the Cabinet on March 14) the West German government, which faced growing strain on its economy and social services and increasing pressure from local and regional governments, decided to close the emergency reception centres for East German immigrants from July 1.
Certain special benefits including the DM200 "welcome money" and concessionary loan facilities would also be stopped.
Over 144,000 East Germans had resettled in West Germany between the beginning of 1990 and March 18.
The move was seen as likely to correspond with the introduction of a currency union between the two countries.
( "Integration money" of DM1,200 monthly would still be paid for the first year to immigrants unable to find work.
Ethnic Germans from the rest of Eastern Europe would at this stage continue to receive benefits.)
Election results — Initial steps towards formation of new government
Lothar de Maizière, leader of the Christian Democratic Union (CDU), described the outcome of the elections as "an amazing result for us" .
The Independent of March 19 viewed it as "a resounding vote of confidence in the West German Chancellor Helmut Kohl" .
The CDU was the dominant force in the Alliance for Germany, which also comprised the German Social Union (DSU) and Democratic Awakening [see p. 37260].
The Alliance was particularly successful in the industrial south, winning around 60 per cent of the vote in the five most southerly constituencies, whereas in East Berlin it won only 22 per cent and finished in third place.
The Social Democratic Party (SPD), despite an initial strong lead in opinion polls, fared less well than predicted, winning 21.88 per cent of the vote and 88 seats.
It did well in East Berlin (winning 35 per cent of the vote) and in the north of the country, but was completely overshadowed in the industrial south.
The Party of Democratic Socialism (PDS)— the former ruling communist Socialist Unity party which had been renamed in February [ibid.]— strengthened by the personal standing of its leading candidate, Prime Minister Hans Modrow, did better than expected, winning 16.4 per cent of the vote and 66 seats.
In East Berlin the PDS polled 30 per cent of the vote.
A total of 11,604,418 people went to the polls, representing a turnout of 93.4 per cent of the electorate of 12,426,443, and 11,541,155 valid votes were cast.
The elections were held in accordance with a law passed on Feb. 20 [ibid.], and voters had one vote for one of the listed parties (there being no candidates' names on the voting form).
There were 15 constituencies corresponding to the country's 15 administrative Bezirke (regions), the number of deputies in each being determined by the population in each case.
To ensure proportionality and representation even for parties polling a small fraction of the vote across the country, a first count was made on a country-wide basis according to the so-called Hare-Niemeyer system; afterwards a second constituency-by-constituency count was made.
There was no "hurdle" to surmount if representation were to be won (in West Germany parties had to poll at least 5 per cent of the vote to enter parliament).
Parties pursuing fascist, militarist and anti-humanist goals were not allowed to participate [see p. 37260 for banning in East Germany of activities of West German neo-Nazi Republicans].
Votes Percentage Seats 
Election results
Half the parties contesting the elections failed to win representation and polled 0.13 per cent of the vote or less.
They were (i) the Alternative Youth list, comprising the German Youth Party, Marxist Youth Association, Green Youth and the Free German Youth or FDJ (14,616 votes);(ii) Christian League (10,691 votes);(iii) Communist Party of Germany (KPD)(8,819 votes);(iv) Independent Social Democratic Party (3,891 votes);(v) European Federalist Party (3,636 votes);(vi) Independent People's Party (3,007 votes);(vii) German Beer Drinkers' Union (2,534 votes);(viii) Spartacist Workers' Party (2,417 votes);(ix) Unity Now (2,396 votes);(ix) League of Socialist Workers (386 votes);(x) Association of Working Circles for Employees and Democracy (380 votes); and (xi) European Union of the GDR (no votes).
Alleged Stasi involvement by leading politicians — Resignations of Schnur and Böhme
The process of forming a government was slowed by numerous allegations that as many as 10 per cent of new deputies had worked for the former Ministry of State Security police ( "Stasi" ) as active informants.
The issue had already had a major impact during the election campaign, when Wolfgang Schnur, a human rights lawyer in Rostock and the leader of Democratic Awakening, resigned his post on March 14 after admitting that he had worked for the Stasi.
He was replaced as party leader by Pastor Rainer Eppelmann.
When allegations that Schnur had worked for the Stasi for at least 20 years were first made on March 9 his denials were supported up by the West German government which said that he had on the contrary been passing information on political repression in East Germany to them.
However, the West German CDU later pressed Schnur, who had been taken into hospital after collapsing with circulatory problems, to resign after the allegations had been further substantiated.
Allegations were subsequently made against Ibrahim Böhme, the SPD leader, who denied ever working for the Stasi or knowingly passing them information.
On March 26 Böhme stood down temporarily from the SPD leadership, until the allegations could be cleared up.
Two days later the official East German news agency ADN reported that the investigation of Stasi files "exonerated" him.
Despite this "exoneration" Böhme nevertheless formally resigned with immediate effect on April 1 and Markus Meckel, his deputy, took over as party chair.
ADN had also reported that no evidence had been found to substantiate similar allegations against de Maizière and Gregor Gysi, the PDS leader.
Several thousand protesters demonstrated on March 29 in East Berlin, Leipzig and Erfurt, demanding the vetting of all MPs.
Eppelmann and a member of the commission overseeing the dissolution of the Stasi had proposed implementing such a procedure on March 21, but two days later the state prosecutor, supported by both de Maizière and the PDS-led caretaker government [for formation of which see p. 37260], maintained that such a step would be unconstitutional and that the new Volkskammer had to decide itself what should be done.
Formation of parliamentary factions
Alliance"90 and the Green Party agreed on March 24 to form a joint floor group or faction in the Volkskammer.
It had originally been intended to include the Independent Women's Union, which had campaigned jointly with the Green Party, but the two parties split after the Independent Women's Union unsuccessfully demanded a larger share of the eight seats the list had won.
On March 23 the NDPD (which together with the CDU, the DBD and the liberal democrat precursor to the LDP had been one of the four "bloc" parties governing in coalition with the former communist regime — see p. 37025) joined the League of Free Democrat — the renamed LDP — to form one faction.
The largest party in the League of Free Democrats electoral alliance, the LDP had the day before renamed itself and declared its intention to merge with the West German free democrat FDP, if possible by the end of 1990.
The three parties comprising the Alliance for Germany (the CDU, the DSU and Democratic Awakening), however, did not join together as one faction despite pressure that they do so from their West German counterparts when they went to Bonn on March 22 for discussions on the formation of a government in East Berlin.
Opening of negotiations on formation of coalition government
The SPD party executive had reaffirmed on knowing the election results its election campaign position that it would not join a coalition containing the right-wing DSU.
However, the party's newly elected deputies decided in favour of negotiations on the formation of a "grand coalition" , and these were opened on March 28.
Pre-election conclusion of round table talks — Social charter and draft constitution
A social charter approved by the round table on March 5, and by the Volkskammer at its session on March 6-7, provided for a range of rights much more comprehensive than those guaranteed in West Germany, including the right to work, the right to strike and the banning of lockouts by management.
The round table held its 16th and final session on March 12 when a draft constitution was discussed.
Participants agreed that the draft should be discussed by the newly elected Volkskammer and then put to the East German electorate in a referendum on June 17, 1990.
At this session the SPD also criticized a law approved by the Volkskammer on March 6-7 providing for publicly owned combines, enterprises and institutions to be turned into joint-stock companies, and warned against over-hasty privatization of public assets.
Discovery of Stalinist victims' graves
During March a number of mass graves were found near former concentration camps or prisoner-of-war camps.
It was alleged that these were the graves of victims of the occupying Soviet forces after the Second World War rather than of Nazi victims.
Reports indicated that at the Buchenwald concentration camp near Weimar, in addition to the 56,000 people who died there under Hitler, as many as 13,000 more died when the camp was used by Soviet forces to imprison political opponents in 1945-50.
In the last week of March three mass graves were uncovered near the former Nazi camp in the Schmachtenhagen forest near Oranienburg-Sachsenhausen north of Berlin.
Contemporary eye witnesses said that they were the graves of Germans shot by Soviet soldiers.
The Cologne-based Association of the Victims of Stalinism claimed that around 21,000 internees had died after 1945 in Oranienburg-Sachsenhausen and that 90,000 people had died in camps set up by Soviet occupying forces in eastern Germany after 1945.
International debate over implications of reunification
Controversy over Oder-Neisse border
Kohl's continuing reluctance to give an unequivocal commitment to the inviolability of the German-Polish border along the Oder-Neisse rivers aroused renewed controversy in early March and appeared to threaten the viability of the West German Christian Democrat-FDP coalition.
The reassurance implied by Kohl's proposal of Feb. 28, that the West and East German parliaments should give a joint commitment guaranteeing the border after March 18 [see p. 37260], was undermined by a statement made on March 2 by the Chancellor's Office in Bonn, indicating that such a commitment "would have to make it clear that the Polish government's declaration of Aug. 23, 1953, waiving any claims to reparations from Germany [see p. 15271], remains valid, and that the rights of the Germans as agreed by Chancellor Kohl and [Polish]Prime Minister Tadeusz Mazowiecki in the joint declaration of Nov. 14, 1989 [see pp. 37048-49], will be regulated by a treaty" .
The March 2 statement unleashed vociferous criticism from the Polish government, from Roland Dumas, the French Foreign Minister, during a visit to West Berlin, from European Community Foreign Ministers at a meeting on March 5, and also from Hans-Dietrich Genscher, the FDP West German Foreign Minister, and other FDP leaders.
Lengthy discussions between the coalition partners on March 6 eventually resulted in an agreement that both German parliaments and governments would issue a declaration of intent after March 18 to the effect that "Germans will neither now or in the future call [the Polish people's]right to live within secure borders into question by raising territorial claims" ; there would be no linking with the reparations issue or with the protection of a German minority in Poland.
After stormy debate the Bundestag (West German lower house of parliament) passed a resolution to this effect on March 8.
On March 9 during a visit by Mazowiecki and President Jaruzelski of Poland to France, the Polish position was supported by President Mitterrand, who said that the declaration should be "more specific" .
Agreement that Poland should attend "two-plus-four" unification talks
On March 14 in Bonn, the first meeting took place under the "two-plus-four" formula agreed in February [see p. 37259], involving East and West German officials and representatives of the Soviet Union, France, the United Kingdom and the United States.
The meeting agreed "that Poland will be invited as soon as questions are discussed…that especially affect its borders" .
Consultations by Kohl with allies
Visiting NATO headquarters in Brussels on March 8 immediately after the Bundestag debate [see above]Kohl stressed that he wanted the unification process "to calm down and not to be so hectic" .
He attributed the pressure for quick unification to events outside his control, especially the continuing exodus of East Germans to West Germany and the increasing economic instability in East Germany.
Kohl held talks with the 17-member Commission of the European Communities (EC) in Brussels on March 23, maintaining that German unification would "accelerate, not constrain" the "unstoppable current" which he said was sweeping the EC towards both economic and political union.
Having held talks with both Mitterrand and US President Bush during February [see p. 37260], Kohl visited the United Kingdom on March 29-30 for discussions with UK Prime Minister Margaret Thatcher.
Apparently modifying her stance of late 1989, when she had warned against any over-hasty German reunification, Thatcher now took a less negative line, and on March 29 she appeared to concede for the first time that changes in Eastern Europe meant that "some reductions" could be made to the British Army of the Rhine in West Germany.
Divisions remained, however, over the pace of integration within the EC.
Warsaw Pact meeting — Discussion of German neutrality
At a meeting of Warsaw Pact Foreign Ministers held at the invitation of the Czechoslovak government in Prague on March 17, participants disagreed over whether a united Germany should belong to NATO or be neutral.
They all agreed that the unification of Germany and the creation of new European security systems should be "synchronized" , as advocated by Soviet Foreign Minister Eduard Shevardnadze, but the Soviet Union was isolated in opposing a united Germany's membership of NATO.
Poland, Czechoslovakia and Hungary in particular rejected the possibility of German neutrality.
Polish Foreign Minister Krzystof Skubiszewski said that neutrality was likely to "foster [German]tendencies to become a great power acting on its own" , while Hungarian Foreign Minister Gyula Horn argued that NATO membership was "the only way to keep Germany under control" .
Shevardnadze, however, maintained that such an option was "impossible" , although the issue required "further discussion and clarification" .
A key question in his view was the level of armaments which a united Germany would be permitted to maintain.
Jiri Dienstbier, the Czechoslovak Foreign Minister, proposed the establishment of a European security commission which could eventually replace the existing two alliances.
MIDDLE EAST — ARAB WORLD
ISRAEL
Collapse of "national unity" government
After less than 15 months in power Israel's "national unity" coalition government collapsed in mid-March [for formation of coalition in December 1988 see pp. 36947-49].
The breakdown reflected fundamental differences between the two main coalition partners, Likud and Labour, over the pace and direction of the Middle East peace process.
Shamir under pressure
The current round of peace negotiations aimed at arranging elections among Palestinians in the occupied territories had started in May 1989 [see p. 36670].
The process had ground to a halt by early 1990 [see p. 37199], largely as a result of Likud's hesitancy to proceed with a first-stage meeting of Egyptian, Israeli and United States officials without first receiving certain US "guarantees" (the first-stage meeting was supposed to discuss a second-stage Israeli-Palestinian meeting in Cairo on the proposed elections).
Pressure on Itzhak Shamir, the Israeli Prime Minister and Likud leader, to make a definite decision on the US-backed peace formula began mounting in late February.
The Labour Party's executive committee stressed after a Feb. 22 meeting that the government had to make a clear decision on the formula within two to three weeks, otherwise it would be forced to end the coalition.
The Labour Party also announced that it found the peace formula "totally acceptable" .
The Israeli Foreign Minister Moshe Arens met with the US Secretary of State James Baker in Washington on Feb. 23.
According to a report in the Jerusalem Post of March 3, during the talks Baker demanded a quick Israeli response on a number of unresolved issues, including the composition of the Palestinian delegation to the proposed Israeli-Palestinian talks in Cairo.
Baker insisted that the delegation include at least one deportee and one person with East Jerusalem links.
A compromise formula was apparently agreed, which, among other things, would allow the participation of a West Bank resident who owned a second home in East Jerusalem.
Following the Arens-Baker meeting, reports in the Israeli media began to imply that Shamir had privately agreed to the compromise formula.
The Prime Minister therefore came under increasing pressure from within his own Likud party to oppose any compromise on the proposed Palestinian delegation.
Pressure came not only from hardline critics such as former Trade and Industry Minister Ariel Sharon [see p. 37265 for Sharon's Feb. 12 resignation]and Second Vice-Prime Minister and Minister of Housing and Construction David Levi, but also from members of his own faction, including Deputy Foreign Minister Binyamin Netanyahu and Knesset (parliament) member Benny Begin.
In addition, five pro-Sharon Likud members of the Knesset, led by Economic Affairs Minister Itzhak Moda'i, announced on Feb. 28 that they had established a separate party in protest at Shamir's "undemocratic" leadership of the party.
The members of this new grouping, the Party for the Advancement of Zionist Ideology, were all members of the former Liberal Party.
Their defection reduced Likud's representation to 35 seats in the 120-member Knesset, so that Labour with 39 seats became the largest party [for 1988 election results see p. 36948].
Likud rejection of compromise formula
According to the Jerusalem Post of March 24, Likud ministers held a decisive meeting on March 3, at which a proposal by Arens that the party accept the compromise formula was almost unanimously rejected, with only Justice Minister Dan Meridor in favour.
According to the report, even mainstream party members expressed deep concern over the ability of the US to limit the role of the Palestine Liberation Organization (PLO) in any future discussions.
The ministers met again on March 5, after which a resolution was issued which specified that Arabs in East Jerusalem could not participate in the peace process.
The resolution went on to state that "any attempt by [the PLO]to sneak in and take control of the process in any way will result in the termination of the process and Israel's withdrawal from it" .
A meeting of the 12-member "inner Cabinet" on March 7 postponed any decision on the peace proposals for a further four days.
Despite Labour pressure, Shamir refused to put the issue to a vote.
Labour ministers told reporters after the meeting that they would recommend that the party dissolve the coalition if a go-ahead for preliminary talks was not agreed soon.
At a meeting on March 11 Shamir again refused Labour demands to put the issue to a vote, maintaining that further discussion was needed.
This prompted Shimon Peres, the Labour leader and Vice-Prime Minister and Finance Minister, and his five Labour colleagues to walk out of the meeting.
Peres later told reporters that the Cabinet had been prevented from making a decision on the peace process and that this had "stopped the peace process itself" .
The Labour Party's 1,300-member central committee convened in Tel Aviv on March 12 and voted overwhelmingly to give the party's executive committee (comprising its 39 Knesset members and a further 87 senior officials) authority to take whatever action it thought necessary to advance the peace process.
Dismissal of Peres — Defeat of Shamir in no confidence debate
Shamir opened a meeting of the full Cabinet on March 13 by announcing the dismissal of Peres.
The announcement was followed by the collective resignation of the remaining nine Labour ministers.
Shamir took on temporary responsibility for all the vacant portfolios.
The timing of Shamir's dismissal of Peres was vital, occurring only hours after Labour ministers had agreed to vote with the opposition on a motion of no confidence in the government scheduled for March 15.
Since under Israeli law a minister's dismissal or resignation only took effect 48 hours after the initial announcement was made, Shamir left just enough time to clear the Cabinet of Labour ministers before the Knesset vote.
Another Israeli stipulated that in the event of a defeat in a vote of confidence, the existing Cabinet was automatically transformed into an interim government, with all ministers retaining their portfolios.
Therefore, by dismissing Peres at the time he did, Shamir made certain that he would retain the premiership whatever the outcome of the Knesset vote.
The no confidence debate took place in a crowded Knesset on March 15.
Midway through the debate, Ovadia Yosef, a former Sephardi chief rabbi and the spiritual mentor of the Sephardic Torah Guardians (Shas), attempted to engineer a compromise whereby the government would respond positively to the US peace proposals, whilst maintaining its stand on certain aspects of East Jerusalem participation.
The debate was adjourned for two hours whilst Shamir, Peres and other party leaders travelled to Yosef's Jerusalem home to discuss the proposal.
However, during the discussions Shamir insisted that he needed another two weeks in order to reach a final decision.
The leaders returned to the Knesset for the vote, in which the Shamir government was defeated by 60 votes to 55 (with five abstentions), and was thereby relegated to the status of a minority-backed caretaker administration.
It was the first time in Israel's 41-year history that a government had been brought down on a vote of confidence.
The crucial aspect of the vote was the abstention of five of the six Shas members; one Shas member, Immigration and Absorption Minister Itzhak Peretz, voted with Likud and on March 18 he resigned from the party.
Labour, with 39 seats, gained the extra 21 votes from the oldest of the religious groups, Agudat Israel (five seats); the centre-left parties Ratz, Mapam and Merkaz-Shinui (10 seats); and the Arab-dominated and anti-Zionist Hadash, the Progressive List for Peace (PLP) and Arab Democratic Party (six seats).
Likud was supported by the breakaway ex-Liberal faction led by Moda'i (five seats); the far-right Tehiya, Tzomet and Moledet (seven seats); the religious parties Mafgal and Degel Hatorah (seven seats); and one Shas vote.
Likud ministers and Knesset members met on March 18 and approved Shamir's continuation as party leader.
Prior to the meeting there had been much speculation that Shamir would face a challenge at the meeting; in the event even Sharon urged the party to unite behind Shamir.
Invitation to Peres to form government
President Chaim Herzog began consultations with the various parties and factions on March 18, the first step towards the formation of a new government.
Two days later, Herzog invited Peres to try and form a new government, giving him three weeks in which to do so.
Peres' first act was to telephone Shamir and invite Likud to co-operate in a new broad-based coalition.
Once Shamir had rejected this invitation, Peres entered into intensive negotiations in an attempt to achieve a majority.
Initially Peres concentrated his efforts on winning the support of the five Shas members who had abstained in the March 15 confidence vote and of the two Degel Hatorah members, both of whom had supported Likud in the vote.
The direction of Peres' advances meant that Eliezer Menachem Schach, the 96-year-old spiritual leader of Degel Hatorah who was also an influential figure within Shas, became a pivotal political figure in late March.
However, a much publicised speech delivered by Schach on March 26 was almost devoid of any political content, and the Israeli media consequently concluded that Peres's efforts to woo the rabbi had failed.
Peres then turned his attention to the five-member ex-Liberal Likud faction led by Moda'i, but as of early April his efforts were unrewarded and negotiations continued.
Controversy over increased immigration of Soviet Jews
Increased Soviet Jewish immigration to Israel during 1989 and the prospect of a future mass exodus became a central issue of debate in early 1990, affecting not only Arab-Israeli relations but also the close ties between Israel and the United States.
The number of Soviet Jews entering Israel had risen to 13,000 during 1989, largely as a result of a relaxation of Soviet emigration policies.
Israeli officials estimated that this figure would increase dramatically in 1990, an appraisal which appeared to be based partly on persistent reports of a threat from anti-Semitic groups to the safety of Jews in the Soviet Union.
The debate only expanded in mid-January when Prime Minister Shamir delivered his controversial "big Israel" speech, in which he implied that the occupied territories would be used to settle Soviet immigrants [see p. 37199].
Predictably, Shamir's speech was greeted with great alarm in the Arab world, where it motivated Arab and Palestinian leaders to protest vociferously against any Jewish settlement in the occupied territories.
The protests ranged from sensitive lobbying of the superpowers by the moderate Arab nations to the issuing of terrorist threats by Lebanese-based Moslem extremists [see p. 37266 for statements by Arab Co-operation Council on the issue].
Shamir's speech was also criticized by the Soviet Foreign Ministry and by the US State Department, the latter warning Israel that it would prohibit the use of US aid funds for resettling Soviet Jews in the West Bank.
At the same time, however, the USA continued to press the Soviet Union to ease the emigration process by starting direct flights to Israel.
The Arab states stepped up their pressure on the Soviet Union to halt emigration in late February after reports appeared in the Israeli press alleging that a high-ranking absorption official had told a committee on immigration to start preparing for the arrival of 230,000 Soviet Jews in 1990, a massive increase on earlier estimates.
The Israeli government responded to the leaked report on March 2 by imposing military censorship on domestic and foreign media reports about Soviet Jewish immigration.
During February and March the Soviet Jewish immigration issue served to increase further tension between Israel and the USA.
Relations were already strained as a result of Likud's approach to US-sponsored Middle East peace effort.
On March 1 Baker told the US House of Representatives appropriations committee that a US$400,000,000 housing loan scheme to Israel would be withheld unless Shamir's government provided a firm commitment that it would halt all settlement activity, including the expansion of existing settlements.
Baker also told the committee that he was satisfied that the PLO was adhering to its 1988 commitment to renounce terrorism, a statement which infuriated Shamir and his supporters.
Statement by Bush on the Jerusalem issue
The controversy widened considerably on March 3 when US President George Bush told a press conference that he wanted Israel to stop settling Soviet Jews in the West Bank and also in East Jerusalem.
Bush made his statement after receiving a CIA report in mid-February, which had informed him that Israeli claims that under 1 per cent of Soviet immigrants were being settled in the "occupied territories" was only partly true, because a further 10 per cent were being placed in settlements in East Jerusalem.
Bush's public and deliberate linking of the "occupied" West Bank with East Jerusalem was greeted with near unanimous condemnation in Israel, where Israeli control over the whole of the "" eternal "capital" was widely considered to be an irreversible fact.
The Palestinians of East Jerusalem, who had overwhelmingly refused Israeli citizenship, had equally firmly demanded the city as the capital of a future State of Palestine.
The issue of Jerusalem was one of the Middle East's most intractable problems, underscoring the seemingly irreconcilable differences between Jews and Arabs.
The various parties involved in the peace process had tended to ignore the issue, working on the assumption that it could only be tackled at an advanced stage of a settlement.
In terms of Israeli-US relations, the issue was so potentially divisive that it had been largely ignored; the issue never formally arose during the whole of US President Reagan's eight years in office.
On one level Bush's statement was a simple reiteration of the official US position on Jerusalem — i.e. that it did not acknowledge the annexation of the Eastern section of the city in the aftermath of its capture from Jordan in 1967.
However, the fact that the issue was raised at all by a US President, and in such an unequivocal manner, was widely considered to be of great significance.
The timing of Bush's statement was also considered to be important, its delivery coinciding with US attempts to dissuade Israel from barring East Jerusalem Arabs from any peace negotiations.
AFRICA
SOUTH AFRICA
Election of Mandela as ANC deputy president — Mandela's meeting with Tambo — Township violence
The African National Congress (ANC) announced on March 2, at the end of a two-day national executive committee meeting in Lusaka (Zambia), the election of Nelson Mandela as deputy president of the organization.
Walter Sisulu and Govan Mbeki, Mandela's veteran prison companions who had been released in Oct. 1989 and November 1987 respectively [pp. 36964; 36074]after serving long prison sentences, were both re-elected to the executive, now enlarged to 34 members.
The election reaffirmed Mandela's position as effective leader of the ANC (whose 72-year old president, Oliver Tambo, was in Sweden convalescing after a stroke), with Sisulu, Mbeki and another veteran freedom fighter, Raymond Mhlaba (who had been released from prison along with Sisulu in October 1989) now forming the core of the internal leadership.
In the absence of Tambo and Mandela, Alfred Nzo, the secretary-general, had up until now been serving also as acting president.
The ANC also announced that it would move its headquarters to Johannesburg "without delay" , and would send a delegation to South Africa for preliminary talks with the State President, F. W. de Klerk.
After the meeting Mandela reiterated the ANC position that power-sharing negotiations could not begin until the state of emergency was rescinded and all political prisoners were freed.
On March 12 Mandela, continuing a foreign tour which had so far included Zimbabwe and Ethiopia and Tanzania as well as Zambia, travelled to Sweden, whose government had shown the greatest support for the ANC outside Africa.
Here there was an emotional reunion between Mandela and Tambo, once partners in a law firm, who had last met in June 1962, shortly before Mandela was captured and imprisoned.
Intensification of unrest — Police killing of protesters at Sebokeng
Eleven black protesters were killed on March 26 in the township of Sebokeng, near Johannesburg, when police opened fire on a crowd seeking to march on the local offices of the ruling National Party.
There were more than 300 reported injuries.
The protest focused on high rents and called for the resignation of township councillors.
An estimated 13 people had been killed in violent incidents on the previous day, in what amounted to a serious upsurge in township unrest.
Commentators noted that the lifting of some restrictions on black political activity in early February had given rise to a sharp increase in the level of township protest.
The release of Mandela on feb. 11 [see pp. 37232-33]also appeared to have provoked new levels of violence, particularly in faction fighting in Natal townships; by late March some 250 people had been killed since his release, mostly in Natal and the homelands.
This was attributed to some extent to heightened expectations among the disenfranchised majority, and, in Natal, to a bitter struggle for political control of the townships.
Giving as its reason police brutality against black protesters, in particular at Sebokeng, the ANC broke off its first preliminary meeting with the government, which had been scheduled for April 11.
Addressing a crowd of some 300,000 at Port Elizabeth on April 1, in what was described as South Africa's biggest ever political rally, Mandela announced that he would meet de Klerk alone, principally to discuss the intensification of violence.
On April 1-2 he saw for himself the effects of internecine war when he toured the Natal townships; on April 5, after his meeting with de Klerk, it was announced that talks would take place in the near future about the remaining obstacles to full negotiations.
Two smaller black political organizations rejected de Klerk's offer of negotiations in conferences held during March, following the lifting of restrictions on these and other groups in early February.
The Azanian People's Organization (Azapo — inaugurated in 1979 and continuing the aims of the Black Consciousness Movement) on March 3-4 declared its total opposition to any dialogue with the South African government, undertaking to intensify armed opposition to the apartheid regime, and elected Itumeleng Mosala as its president.
The Pan-Africanist Congress (PAC) took a similar line at its conference, held in Bloemfontein on March 10-11.
Earlier the Azapo leadership had met Mandela and leaders of the United Democratic Front (UDF) for "exploratory" talks on "the necessity and need for unity" among black political organizations.
Cancellation of joint ANC-Inkatha peace rally
In late March reports described fighting in the Pietermaritzburg (Natal) townships as some of the worst in the region since clashes began three years previously [see pp. 36069-70; 36911]between pro-ANC militants and supporters of the (mainly Zulu) Inkatha movement led by Chief Mangosuthu Buthelezi.
In what was seen as a setback to an eventual peace settlement, the ANC on March 29 cancelled a peace rally due to have been held with Inkatha on April 2.
Local ANC organizers apparently convinced the ANC executive that hostility between the rival groupings, which had resulted in some 40 deaths in the preceding week, was such that a joint rally posed a serious security problem.
Meetings between de Klerk and UK and US emissaries
The UK Foreign and Commonwealth Secretary Douglas Hurd visited South Africa on March 19 en route to the Namibian independence celebrations [see p. 37297].
He had talks with de Klerk, Foreign Minister Pik Botha and Gerrit van N. Viljoen, Minister for Constitutional Development.
In the course of his visit to Sweden, Mandela had called on the international community to sever all diplomatic links with South Africa and to intensify sanctions in order to eliminate apartheid.
However, US Secretary of State James Baker also conferred with de Klerk on March 22, after meeting Mandela at the Namibian independence celebrations on March 21.
AFRICA
SOUTH AFRICA-HOMELANDS
Coup in Ciskei — Popular protests against homelands system
Ousting of President-for-life in Ciskei
The dictatorship of Lennox Sebe was terminated in the early hours of March 4 by a bloodless coup led by the chief of military intelligence, Brig.
Joshua Oupa Gqozo.
Sebe, the "President-for-life" of the Ciskei homeland which was granted nominal independence by South Africa in 1981, was absent from the country at the time.
The constitution was suspended and the Cabinet placed under house arrest.
Brig.
Gqozo announced the formation of a four-member military committee, including himself, to run the country in conjunction with an eight-member Council of State whose composition was announced on March 8.
In a statement broadcast on March 4, Gqozo said that the Army had acted in response to repeated requests by the people of the homeland.
He cited corruption, police brutality, detentions without trial and nepotism as being among the "crimes" of the Sebe regime, which was notorious for its disregard for human rights.
An estimated 200 people were to be released from detention immediately.
The announcement of the coup was greeted with signs of jubilation among the 800,000 residents of Ciskei, many of whom destroyed their Ciskeian nationality cards in protest at the continuation of the homeland system.
The new military authorities in Ciskei immediately declared themselves in favour of reintegration into South Africa; they also announced that trade unions, banned under Sebe, would be allowed to function.
The celebrations turned violent as property belonging to people connected with the former regime was attacked and looted by the crowds, and rioting broke out in which 27 people were killed.
A state of emergency was declared as the homeland's security forces failed to restrain the rioting.
On the same day South Africa sent in troops to restore order and to protect its own interests.
These included ensuring the safety of a dam which controlled the water supply to the (white) South African town of East London.
The coup was apparently welcomed by the South African authorities, for whom Sebe's corrupt and repressive regime had become an embarrassment.
The Minister of Foreign Affairs, Roelof "Pik" Botha, stated that South Africa would not intervene to crush the coup, indicating a change in government policy since February 1988, when South Africa had sent troops to Bophuthatswana to save the government of President Lucas Mangope from being overthrown [see p. 36548].
Unrest in other homelands
Mounting dissent had been reported from all 10 homelands after President F. W. de Klerk announced the lifting of some restrictions on political activity in early February [see p. 37232].
(Four of the homelands — Ciskei, Bophuthatswana, Transkei and Venda — were nominally independent of South Africa, but were not recognized by the international community; the remaining six were "self-governing" ; all remained heavily dependent on subsidies from South Africa.
Altogether the homelands accounted for 13 per cent of South Africa's land area — see map.)
A long-held hatred of the system of separate ethnically defined "bantustans" for blacks was finding expression in support for the African National Congress (ANC) demand for reintegration of the homelands into South Africa, as part of the dismantling of apartheid legislation.
Walter Sisulu, the veteran ANC activist and member of the ANC executive, on March 9 denied allegations made in the South African Parliament and press that the ANC was responsible for the protests sweeping the homelands, which he said were popular revolts against repressive dictatorships.
An estimated 14 people were killed on March 7-8 when police fired on crowds demonstrating in Boputhatswana in favour of their homeland's reintegration, and calling for the resignation of Mangope.
The South African security forces provided "co-operative assistance" with the homeland forces in containing the demonstrations, but did not deploy troops.
By March 14 the entire homeland area had been placed under a state of emergency.
Earlier, on Feb. 7, up to 70,000 people had protested in Garankuwa, in eastern Bophuthatswana, demanding that their South African citizenship be restored, but Mangope had reaffirmed on Feb. 18 that the homeland would never be reincorporated into South Africa.
On Feb. 9 the Transkei authorities had confirmed that a referendum would be held to determine the opinion of its citizens on integration, in view of the recent political changes in South Africa.
The homeland's military leader, Gen. Bantu Holomisa, who had seized power in a coup in 1987, was outspokenly opposed to the homelands system.
On Feb. 7 he announced the legalization of the ANC and the release of all political prisoners.
A number of political restrictions had been lifted in November 1989 [see p. 37033].
In Venda, following a special session of the homeland assembly on March 13, it was announced that a similar referendum would be held on reintegration, and also that the Constitution would be revised to allow for a multiparty system.
(A coup in Venda on April 5, to be covered in the April news digest, brought to power a military regime demanding reintegration into South Africa, and thus left the Bophuthatswana regime alone in seeking to sustain separate development.)
Among the non-‘independent"homelands, unrest was particularly serious in Gazankulu during February and March, with demonstrators calling for the resignation of the homeland's Chief Minister, Hudson Ntsanwisi.
Up to 30 people were killed, and there were large numbers of arrests.
A stayaway by civil servants and other workers from Feb. 19 forced the postponement of the official opening of the homeland's legislature in mid-March.
A school pupil boycott had also been in operation since the beginning of the year.
On March 2 the federal Appeal Court in Bloemfontein upheld an earlier finding by the Orange Free State Supreme Court that the incorporation in December 1987 of the town of Botshabelo into the QwaQwa homeland [see p. 36550]was invalid.
AFRICA
MOZAMBIQUE
President's visit to USA
President Joaquim Chissano, making his first official visit to the United States, met President George Bush on March 13 for two hours of talks, in what was seen as marking an improvement in relations between the two countries.
Mozambique's Frelimo government had abandoned rigid Marxist-Leninist ideology in the course of 1989 [see p. 36804], and the draft of a new constitution was currently being debated.
This provided among other things for the direct election of the President and of the legislature, the right to strike, the abolition of the death penalty and the right to private property.
During his visit to the USA Chissano expressed confidence that an end to the war with the right-wing rebel group, the Mozambique National Resistance (MNR) was within sight, declaring that he was now prepared to enter into direct talks with the rebels.
The US administration agreed to provide unspecified aid for development and reconstruction.
The USA had on Jan. 24, 1990, removed Mozambique from the list of Marxist nations denied preferential loan and trade agreements, as an encouragement to the adoption of free-market economics.
Former US President Ronald Reagan had placed Mozambique on this list in October 1986.
AFRICA
LESOTHO
Departure of King
The ruling Military Council on March 5 repealed a 1986 decree vesting legislative and executive authority in the head of state, King Moshoeshoe II, thus formalizing the action taken by the chairman of the Council, Maj.-Gen.
Justin Metsing Lekhanya, on Feb. 21.
Lekhanya, who claimed that the King, with his associates in the Military Council and in the Council of Ministers, sought to hinder the Military Council's "programme of democratization" , announced on March 1 the composition of an eight-member "task force for democratization" .
The military government was due to return power to a civilian regime in June 1992.
The King left the country on March 10.
In a statement broadcast on the same day Lekhanya revealed that the Military Council had requested Moshoeshoe to take a "brief sabbatical" in the United Kingdom.
He dismissed claims published in pamphlets that the King's powers had been usurped, and said that "some members of the Council harboured secret ambitions for unbridled personal authority and power" and had wanted to elevate the King to the position of absolute monarch.
AFRICA
ZIMBABWE
Presidential and legislative elections
In elections held on March 28-30, President Robert Mugabe was re-elected for a further term, and his ruling ZANU-PF party won 116 of the 120 elective seats in a restructured 150-member House of Assembly.
The 54 per cent turnout of the 4,800,000 registered voters was significantly lower than the more than 95 per cent turnout for the 1980 and 1985 elections [see pp. 30367-75; 34020-21].
The House of Assembly, whose members would serve a six-year term, had been restructured in line with constitutional changes originally published by the government in three draft bills on Oct. 9, 1989 [see p. 36966].
The constitutional changes also provided for the legislature to become unicameral, with the abolition of the 40-member Senate; this provision took effect from the March elections.
The government had originally announced on Feb. 14 that the election would be held on March 28-29; on March 28 it was announced that polling would be extended for a further day on account of heavy rains which had led to voters being discouraged by transport difficulties.
Details of results
Mugabe won 78 per cent of the vote in the presidential election against 16 per cent obtained by his opponent Edgar Tekere, leader of the opposition Zimbabwe United Movement (ZUM) which had been formed in April 1989 [see pp. 36965-66].
Of the four seats not won by ZANU-PF in the House of Assembly, ZUM won two in Tekere's home province of Manicaland; a third seat, also in Manicaland, was taken by the Rev. Ndabaningi Sithole's ZANU (Ndonga) party; and the election for the remaining parliamentary seat was postponed.
In all there were 271 candidates from five parties — ZANU, ZUM, ZANU (Ndonga), the United African National Council (formerly led by Bishop Abel Muzorewa), and the National Democratic Union.
Eight opposition candidates withdrew shortly before polling.
It was reported that, when ZANU-PF held primary elections in mid-February to select its candidates, several senior party officials, including Joyce Mujuru (Minister of Community Development and Co-operatives), had been defeated, but that Mugabe had reinstated them after nullifying the results.
As a result of the elections, ZANU-PF had secured an unassailable position in the 150-seat Assembly, with 10 members to be chosen by the traditional chiefs and the remaining 20 (including eight provincial governors) to be chosen by President Mugabe himself.
Mugabe declared at a press conference in the capital Harare on April 1 that the election result was "a mandate for all our policies, including the establishment of a one-party state" .
(The ZANU-PF election manifesto had reiterated the party's commitment to socialism, conditioned by the need for it to be "firmly guided by the country's historical and cultural background" , but had not mentioned plans to introduce a one-party state.)
Mugabe stated that Tekere could rejoin ZANU-PF, from which he had been expelled in October 1988 [see p. 36415], provided that he "retrace his steps" .
Election violence
Patrick Kombayi, the ZUM candidate opposing Vice-President Simon Muzenda in the Midlands town of Gweru, was on March 24 seriously wounded, along with five of his supporters, in a shooting incident in the town.
Kombayi, a former mayor of Gweru and a ZANU-PF stalwart until his impeachment in 1984 for beating up a local shopkeeper, claimed that the Central Intelligence Organization was responsible, but this was denied by the Zimbabwean authorities.
The Catholic Commission for Justice and Peace (CCJP) issued a statement in Harare on March 27 accusing ZANU-PF of responsibility for the near-fatal shooting incident which, allegedly, occurred in the presence of uniformed police, and which it described as a "gross misuse of state machinery for intimidation purposes" .
The CCJP also declared that pre-election violence and the intimidation of the opposition had reached such a scale that it was "calling into question the freedom and fairness of the general election" .
Commentators in the Western press observed that the elections were characterized by "widespread apathy" , and one ZANU-PF official reportedly conceded that "especially in the urban areas it seems the working class has lost faith in ZANU-PF to look after their interests" .
Popular disillusionment was believed to reflect rising unemployment, sharply increasing prices, the near collapse of public transport, and official corruption.
The rally to launch ZANU-PF's election campaign on March 4 had only half filled the national sports stadium in Harare (capacity 70,000), despite the presence of Nelson Mandela, who was on his first foreign tour since his release in February from prison in South Africa.
AFRICA
GABON
Conference on moves towards multiparty system
President Omar Bongo announced on March 9, after a meeting of the central committee of the ruling Gabonese Democratic Party (PDG), that a national conference would be held at the end of March to discuss democracy and to draft the statutes of a new party, the Gabonese Social Democratic Rally (RSDG).
The continuing democratic process, he said, would be "pursued and followed to its conclusion in the setting up of a multiparty system" .
However, he reversed an earlier decision (announced on Feb. 23) to dissolve the PDG, declaring that it would continue as an element of the RSDG grouping.
The moves towards democratization had been precipitated by widespread unrest, focusing particularly on economic grievances.
After student protests and looting on Jan. 18-19, doctors and teachers had gone on strike in late February, demanding better pay and conditions; they were joined by telecommunications workers and airport staff.
President Bongo announced a limited Cabinet reshuffle on Feb. 26, dismissing the Ministers of National Education and Public Health and abolishing the portfolio of Deputy Prime Minister held by four ministers.
In an interview with French radio on Feb. 27 Bongo blamed the wave of strikes and disturbances on reduced purchasing power resulting from austerity measures imposed at IMF insistence.
On March 23-24 over 1,000 demonstrators, many of them unemployed, looted supermarkets and shops owned by Lebanese traders in the economic centre of Port Gentil, where oil workers had gone on strike on March 21.
Meanwhile, strikes by civil servants and bank employees continued in Libreville, the capital.
On March 27, as the national conference got under way, the government imposed a curfew and banned strikes and demonstrations.
Attended by some 200 political movements and associations, the national conference heard Bongo warn in his opening address that "anarchy" would impede economic development and drive away foreign investors.
The new RSDG, he said, would provide a framework for Gabonese of diverse political persuasions to prepare for a multiparty system, in a period of "responsible development" which would "comprise a transitional period of apprenticeship" .
AFRICA
COTE D'IVOIRE
Austerity measures — Protest demonstrations
A programme of austerity measures, introduced as part of an IMF-backed adjustment programme, was announced in detail on March 15 by Moïse Koumoue Koffi, the Budget and Economy and Finance Minister, with effect from April 2.
Meanwhile President Félix Houphouët-Boigny had on March 5 rejected the idea of a multiparty state, as was being demanded during continuing protests in which civil servants and striking workers were increasingly joining student demonstrators.
Houphouët-Boigny blamed foreign quarters for destabilizing African countries by their "policy of low prices" for raw materials.
The country's economic crisis was ascribed largely to the slump in world prices for coffee and cocoa.
Talks continued during March between the government and trade unions, against a background of escalating protests.
Austerity measures: On Feb. 27 the President announced that ministers and civil servants would have to pay up to 40 per cent of their salaries into a fund to pay off the foreign debt, while private-sector firms would have to pay a "solidarity tax" .
Details announced on March 15 made clear that lowest-paid workers would be exempt from such salary cuts, as would teachers and employees of parastatals, whereas senior civil servants would be worst affected.
Meanwhile, in an attempt to reduce the impact of these cuts, price reductions were announced on March 9 on beef, rice and petrol, and water and electricity tariffs were also reduced.
Protests: Student unrest had already involved a brief occupation of Abidjan cathedral on Feb. 23, with demonstrators calling on Houphouët-Boigny to resign and accusing him of corruption.
Alhassane Salif N'Diaye on Feb. 28 replaced as Minister of National, Secondary and Higher Education Balla Keita, who became a Minister-delegate to the Presidency, and on March 2 all schools and higher educational institutions were closed down.
On March 26 a nationwide ban on demonstrations was announced, and police and soldiers arrested 150 teachers and doctors who defied the ban in Abidjan.
On the following day doctors and medical personnel announced an indefinite strike, which was promptly declared illegal.
Further demonstrations in the capital on March 28, calling for the President's resignation, were broken up by police using tear gas and stun grenades.
On April 2, as schools and the university reopened, there were minor clashes between high school students and police.
Protesters on April 5 disrupted a march organized to show support for the President, and on the following day police broke up a protest in Adzope, 100 km north of Abidjan, shooting dead a student.
On April 7 the government ordered the closure of all schools and the university, and declared the current academic year invalid.
AFRICA
NIGER
Major Cabinet reshuffle
A major Cabinet reshuffle carried out by President Ali Saibou on March 2 involved the restoration of the post of Prime Minister, abolished in the reorganization which followed the elections of December 1989 [see p. 37115].
The new Prime Minister was Aliou Mahamidou, hitherto director of the state-owned cement manufacturing company.
Lt.-Col. Tanja Mamadou replaced Amadou Madougou as Interior Minister and the Ministers of Education, Higher Education, and Economic Promotion were also replaced.
Aliou Mahamidou Prime Minister Aissata Moumouni Social and Women's Affairs Capt. Abdoul Rahamane Seydou Youth, Sports and Culture Lt.-Col. Tanja Mamadou Interior Lt.-Col. Ousmane Gazere Public Health Lt.-Col. Issa Amsa National Education Maj. Ousman Issaka Equipment Maj. Amadou Moussa Gros Transport and Tourism Adamou Souna Agriculture and Animal Breeding Wassalke Boukary Finance Almoustapha Soumaila Planning Abdou Imsa Mines and Energy Karagi Ayarga Water Resources and Environment Mahamane Boukary Minister-Delegate to the Presidency in charge of Administrative Reform Ali Bandiere Justice; Keeper of the Seals Mamadou Dagra Civil Service and Labour Khamed Abdoulaye Communications Nassirou Sabou Economic Promotion Aboubakar Adamou Higher Education, Research and Technology
New Niger Council of Ministers
Madougou had been blamed for an incident three weeks earlier, on Feb. 9, when police opened fire on a demonstration in Niamey, the capital, by students protesting about the implementation of a government austerity plan for the education system, which envisaged cuts in scholarships and employment opportunities for graduates.
Official estimates placed the number of dead at three, but the unofficial toll was 14.
Two teachers were among the 100 arrests.
Similar student protests were held on the same day in provincial centres.
Saibou had described the police action on Feb. 9 (which occurred when he was on a visit to Guinea-Bissau) as "a mistake" , and had set up an inquiry into the incident.
On Feb. 16 more than 5,000 people took part in a protest march to the Moslem cemetery where victims of police action of the previous week were buried.
Col. Amadou Seyni Maiga resigned on March 5 from his post as political secretary of the powerful executive bureau of the sole legal political grouping, the Mouvement national pour une société de développement.
Maiga, generally considered to be Saibou's deputy, had also been blamed for the Feb. 9 killings, and his departure was described as "in the interest of the nation and in order to restore calm" .
AFRICA
TOGO
Legislative elections
Elections to the 77-seat National Assembly took place on March 4.
As in the last elections, in 1985 [see p. 33511], the electorate was offered a choice of candidates, 230 names having been put forward in all, with up to six candidates in some constituencies in the capital, Lomé.
According to Le Monde, all the candidates professed support for the regime of President Gnassinbe Eyadema, but had not had to be approved in advance by the ruling and sole legal party, the Rally of the Togolese People (Rassemblement du Peuple Togolais — RPT).
AFRICA
BENIN
Inauguration of transitional legislative council and government
President Mathieu Kerekou inaugurated on March 9 the High Council of the Republic (HCR), the legislative council which replaced the National Assembly dissolved on March 1 [see p. 37238].
A 15-member all-civilian government accountable to the HCR was formed on March 12.
Kerekou remained President and Head of the Armed Forces, but the new government was headed by Prime Minister Nicéphore Soglo, who also took on the portfolio of Minister of Defence formerly held by Kerekou.
All the ministers were new to government office; the Minister of Finance had been hitherto a banker, the Interior Minister a lawyer and the Minister of Foreign Affairs the ambassador to the United States.
A press release on the "New Democratic Era in Benin" , published on March 12, set out the political transition programme, which would lead via a new constitution, a new electoral law and the free formation of political parties, to legislative and presidential elections in February and March 1991.
The HRC and the new government were to implement the programme.
Nicéphore Soglo Prime Minister, Defence Florentin Feliho Interior, Security and Territorial Administration Théophile Natta Foreign Affairs and Co-operation Paul Dossou Planning and Statistics Idelphonse Lemon Finance Paulin Hountondji National Education Karim Dramane Culture, Youth and Sports Yves Yehoussi Justice and Legislation Adamou Ndiaye Rural Development and Co-operatives Eustache Farre Equipment and Transport Véronique Lawson Public Health Toussaint Tchitchi Information and Communications Véronique Ahoyo Labour and Social Welfare Fatiou Adekounti Industry, Energy and Public Enterprises Richard Adjaho Trade, Arts, Crafts and Tourism
New Benin government
In an address on March 9 Soglo paid tribute to Kerekou for accepting the political reforms, and promised to work towards consolidating democracy.
He also appealed to all Beninois to return to work to lay the basis for economic revival, while the transitional government implemented an economic structural adjustment programme and negotiated for external financial resources.
AFRICA
BURKINA
Popular Front congress
The first congress of the ruling Popular Front, held in Ouagadougou, the capital, on March 1-4, decided to draft a constitution for Burkina Faso and put it to a referendum within six months.
On the eve of the congress two political groups described as being on the right of the revolutionary spectrum, the National Convention of Progressive Patriots (CNPP) and the Union of Democrats and Patriots of Burkina (UDPB), were allowed to join the Front, which now consisted of four national unions and seven political groups.
President Blaise Compaore, the Popular Front Chairman, also invited representatives from opposition groups with no legal status to attend the congress, in which some 3,500 delegates took part.
Radio Burkina said that delegates had agreed on the need to maintain "state capitalism" , but that this did not entail the rejection of private enterprise, which "should be supported at all costs" .
The congress called for priority to be given to achieving self-sufficiency in food production and to raising the level of industrialization, stressing that both these aims depended on a politically stable environment in which democracy prevailed.
President Compaore, in his closing address to the congress, described it as a resounding victory for the Burkinabe people against economic alienation and for more democracy.
At its present stage of development, he warned, Burkina could adopt neither a one-party system nor "an anarchic multiparty system, which breeds national division" .
The Popular Front, he added, had gained acceptance as the authentic leadership body of the revolution and as the framework for consultations and the unifying force for all political and ideological organizations.
Compaore told French radio that exiled opposition members were free to return home.
The organizing secretary of the Popular Front, Maj. Arsène Ye Bognessan, said that the formation of grass-roots structures in the country would have to wait until late 1990 or 1991 when elections would be held.
Clément Oumarou Ouedraogo retained his position as the Front's secretary in charge of political affairs, while Capt. Gilbert Diendere was reappointed secretary in charge of defence and security.
AFRICA
COMOROS
Presidential elections
After two rounds of voting on March 4 and 11, Said Mohamed Djohar was declared the winner of the country's first free presidential elections since independence in 1975.
Djohar, 72, who was sworn in for a six-year term on March 20, was a former President of the Supreme Court and had served as interim President since the assassination of President Ahmed Abdallah Abderrahman in November 1989 [see p. 37033].
Djohar had the support of influential elements of the previous ruling and sole legal party, the Union comorienne pour le progrès (UCP or Udzima).
He obtained 103,244 votes (55.08 per cent) in the second round, against 84,178 votes (almost 45 per cent ) for Mohammed Taki, who had been Speaker of the National Assembly between 1980 and 1985 but who now represented the Union nationale pour la démocratie aux Comores (UNDC).
The turnout was in the region of 60 per cent.
There had been a total of eight candidates in the first round of voting on March 4, after an agreement in December 1989 between the various political groupings to end the previous one-party system.
Several, including Taki, returned from exile to contest the elections.
Besides Djohar and Taki, the six other candidates were:(i) Prince Said Ali Kemal, a former ambassador, the grandson of the last Sultan of the islands and founder of the Chuma (Islands' Friendship and Unity) Party;(ii) Mohamed Ali Mroudjae, a former Prime Minister, of the Parti comorien pour la démocratie et le progrès;(iii) Mohammed Hassan Ali, a former Vice-President, now leader of the Moheli National Front;(iv) Abbas Djoussouf, representing the Mouvement démocratique populaire;(v) Mohammed Ali Mbalya of the Parti socialiste des Comores; and (vi) Moustapha Said Cheikh, a Marxist standing for the Front démocratique, who had been sentenced to life imprisonment for his part in an attempted coup in 1985, but who had been released from prison following Abdallah's death.
All the candidates were said to be in favour of free legislative elections and economic reform.
A delegation of observers from the Organization of African Unity (OAU) expressed satisfaction with the conduct of the elections, and the Supreme Court dismissed Taki's allegations of widespread fraud.
The elections had originally been scheduled for January 1990 and then postponed to Feb. 18 when they were abandoned soon after polling started upon the observation of irregularities, and Djohar's rivals accused him of vote-rigging.
Djohar refused their demands for him to step down, blaming lack of preparedness for the failure of the February ballot.
Djohar named a 12-member Cabinet on March 22, among whom Kemal was named as Minister of State for Economy and Trade, and de facto second in the governing hierarchy; Mroudjae was appointed Minister of Production, Industry and Handicrafts.
New Comoran Council of Ministers
Ministers of State Said Ali Kemal Economy and Trade Said Ali Youssouf Transport, Tourism and Immigration
Ministers Said Hassan Said Hachim Equipment, Environment, Town Planning, Housing, Posts and Telecommunications Ali Mroudjae Production, Industry and Handicrafts Mtara Maecha Foreign Affairs and Co-operation Tadjiddine Ben Said Massonde Minister in the Presidency, in charge of Finance and Budget Mohammed Taki Mboreha Health and Population Said Attoumane Justice, Civil Service, Employment and Professional Training Ibrahim Halidi Interior and Administrative Reforms Arbabidine Mohammed National Education, Culture and Koranic Teaching
Secretaries of State Mouhtare Rachid Information Daoud Attoumane Presidency, in charge of culture and Islamic Affairs
Legislative elections, last held in 1987 [see p. 35181], were expected to be held in the course of 1990.
Earlier departure of mercenaries
The French mercenary leader Bob Denard, who for a brief period had ruled the island with members of the former Presidential Guard following the death of President Abdullah [see p. 37033], was deported on Dec. 15, 1989, initially to South Africa, along with other mercenaries.
Denard, who denied complicity in the death of Abdallah, was forced to depart following pressure from France and South Africa.
Both countries suspended aid to the islands while the mercenaries were in control.
French forces in Mayotte and Réunion were placed on alert and four warships were stationed off Moroni.
After the departure of Denard's men, the Presidential Guard was replaced by 50 French paratroopers at the request of the Comoran authorities.
AFRICA
KENYA
New Foreign Minister — Other Cabinet changes
Wilson Ndolo Ayah, hitherto Minister of Water Development, was on March 9 appointed as Minister for Foreign Affairs and International Co-operation in succession to Robert J. Ouko, who had been murdered in mid-February [see p. 37239].
In other ministerial changes announced on the same day by President Daniel Arap Moi,(i) John Okwanyo was appointed to the Water Development portfolio;(ii) Matthews Onyango Midika replaced Okwanyo as Minister for Regional Development; and (iii) John Kyalo was appointed as a Minister in the Office of the President, replacing Johnstone Muendo Makau who had been relieved of this post (to which he had been appointed in May 1989 — see p. 36648) on March 2 [for full Cabinet list as of September 1989 see p. 36917].
President Moi on March 1 imposed a permanent ban on demonstrations in Kenya following violent clashes on Feb. 23 between the police and mourners in Nairobi and Kisumu at services for Ouko [see p. 37239].
AFRICA
ETHIOPIA
Mengistu's liberalization proposals
President Mengistu Haile Mariam, in a nationally broadcast speech in Addis Ababa on March 5, put forward proposals for far-reaching economic liberalization, accompanied by political changes to broaden the basis of support for his beleaguered regime.
Conceding that over the past 15 years "the transition to the socialist system…has proved difficult and unobtainable" , he proposed instead the introduction of a mixed economy, with a requirement that state enterprises become profitable and with scope for private enterprise, alongside the state sector, in all areas of the economy.
There was to be a further overhaul of rules covering joint ventures with foreign firms (already the subject of a new code the previous year), and the development of a free market in agricultural trade was spelled out.
The state would continue to own land, but peasants could work their plots as their own businesses, employ labour, and pass on farms to their heirs, and members of co-operatives could set up private businesses.
The ruling Workers' Party of Ethiopia (WPE), Mengistu said, should be changed "in content, character and name" , to become the Ethiopian Democratic Unity Party.
He invited the participation of opposition groups "who will bring themselves, through their organizations, under the umbrella of the democratic unity of the Ethiopian people" .
Commentators initially understood that his proposals and the WPE central committee resolution of March 6 which adopted his report excluded a multiparty system, and required opposition groups to merge themselves into the existing single party framework under its new name.
Later in the month, however, Mengistu reportedly commented (during a visit on March 18 by a Canadian delegation led by External Affairs Minister Monique Landry) that a multiparty system could be acceptable, and the official news agency specified that "there is nothing [in the WPE resolution]which states that opposition groups are required to join or work under" the ruling party.
Mengistu's proposals were "subject to the will and decision of the Ethiopian people" and it was anticipated that the details would be put forward for ratification by referendum.
The proposals were rejected, however, by the rebel groups currently controlling substantial areas of the country [see pp. 37239-40 for military setbacks for Mengistu's forces in February], on the grounds that they contained nothing designed to promote a peace settlement, but rather sought to bolster the regime's capacity to fight the war.
AMERICAS
UNITED STATES
Abortion
In the aftermath of the July 1989 Supreme Court decision undermining the 1973 Roe v. Wade judgment (the foundation of legalized abortion in the USA), over 150 bills designed to restrict the availability of abortion had been introduced to state legislatures throughout the country.
The passion generated by the abortion issue, however, meant that such measures were bitterly opposed and few had been approved by the beginning of March 1990.
A bill passed in Pennsylvania in November 1989 remained blocked as a result of legal action [see p. 37036]; a Michigan bill requiring minors to obtain the consent of their parents for an abortion had been passed by the legislature but the Governor had withheld his assent.
During the course of March, however, anti-abortionists attempted to enact laws in Guam and Idaho, either of which would have forced the Supreme Court to decide upon the legality of the core of the Roe v. Wade judgment.
Passage of anti-abortion bill in Guam
In the (predominantly Catholic) US Pacific territory of Guam, the island's Legislature passed a highly restrictive anti-abortion law on March 9, which explicitly challenged a woman's constitutional right to abortion as recognized by Roe v. Wade.
The bill, which was signed into law on March 19 by Governor Joseph Ada, prohibited abortions in cases of rape, incest and foetal abnormality, and provided limited access only in cases of maternal risk.
In addition to criminalizing both the practice and receipt of abortions, the law also made the provision of information concerning abortion a crime punishable by up to one year's imprisonment.
Within hours of the signing of the law, Janet Benshoof, an attorney from the American Civil Liberties Union, made a speech in which she deliberately gave advice on where women could obtain abortions.
Two days later she was arraigned for violating the new law, although her case was overtaken by challenges to the constitutionality of the legislation.
The District judge for Guam ruled on March 26 that the law was "obviously unconstitutional" and suspended its enforcement pending a full hearing on its constitutionality.
If the law was ruled unconstitutional, as was widely anticipated, Ada refused to say whether he would seek to appeal to the Supreme Court.
Veto of restrictive anti-abortion law by Idaho Governor
On March 22, after an emotional debate, the Idaho state legislature passed legislation to prohibit abortion as a form of birth control, although continued to allow it in cases of profound foetal abnormality, maternal risk, and in some cases of rape and incest.
The bill, which would outlaw over 90 per cent of the abortions currently allowed within the state, imposed severe criminal penalties on doctors who failed to comply with its terms.
Whereas developments in Guam took those involved in the abortion debate by surprise, the anti-abortion legislation passed in Idaho was prepared by the National Right to Life Committee with the specific intention of forcing the Supreme Court to re-examine the remaining aspects of Roe v. Wade.
Idaho had been selected by anti-abortionists after similar bills had been defeated in several other state legislatures.
Governor Cecil Andrus, a conservative anti-abortion Democrat, vetoed the legislation on March 30 on the grounds that it was too restrictive.
Andrus criticized the bill for its potential to turn the victim of a rape into a criminal, and objected to the role of outside activists attempting to exploit his state's legendary conservatism.
He denied allegations that a threatened boycott of Idaho potatoes by pro-choice advocates had influenced his decision to veto the bill.
Announcement of date for Noriega trial
US District Court Judge William Hoeveler announced in Miami on March 14 that the trial on drugs-trafficking charges of former Panamanian leader Manuel Noriega and four co-defendants would begin on Jan. 28, 1991.
He also ruled that Noriega's lawyers must obtain the court's approval before being given access to classified government documents connected with the case.
Fire in New York social club
A total of 87 people, many of them immigrants from central America, died in the early hours of March 25 when fire swept through the unlicensed Happy Land social club in a slum district of the Bronx, in New York City.
Julio Gonzalez, a 36-year-old Cuban, was charged on March 26 on one count of arson and 87 counts of murder.
Gonzalez, who had been ejected from the premises after an argument involving a former girlfriend, was alleged to have deliberately caused the fire by igniting gasoline within the club.
The fire was the second worst in the city's history and occurred exactly 79 years after the death of 145 people in a factory fire which had led to the imposition of strict building regulations.
Mayor David Dinkins expressed his sadness over the incident and promised more resources to tackle the hundreds of unlicensed clubs thought to be operating in the city, many of which were violating safety regulations.
AMERICAS
PANAMA
President's hunger strike
President Guillermo Endara ended on March 13 a 13-day hunger strike which he had reportedly undertaken in solidarity with the most needy of Panamanians at a time of severe economic crisis.
He denied suggestions that his action was a protest at the failure of the United States government to supply promised emergency aid following its invasion in December 1989 [see pp. 37112-13].
On March 23 the US government agreed with the Panamanian government a US$500 million package for the reconstruction of small businesses destroyed during the invasion.
This was in addition to a $25,000,000 aid package reportedly received on March 7 to provide new housing in the El Chorillo district which had been worst affected by the fighting.
AMERICAS
NICARAGUA
End of US economic embargo
United States President George Bush announced on March 14 that, following the electoral defeat of President Daniel Ortega Saavedra, the US government was lifting its five-year economic embargo on Nicaragua, and that it had requested Congress to grant approval by April 5 of $300 million in immediate economic aid and of a further $200 million the following year.
Bush confirmed that an additional $21,000,000 would be made available for food and humanitarian assistance.
Agreement to disband contras
An agreement was signed in the Honduran capital, Tegucigalpa, on March 23 to disband by April 20 an estimated total of 10,000 contra rebels based in camps in Honduras.
The process was to be supervised by special international commissions.
The agreement followed talks between the contra leader Oscar Sobalvarro (known as Commander Rúben), Antonio Lacayo, an adviser to Nicaragua's President-elect Violeta Chamorro, and Cardinal Miguel Obando y Bravo, Archbishop of Managua.
Sandinista leaders, headed by Ortega, did not participate in the discussions, but nevertheless welcomed the agreement, which also called for an immediate and unconditional ceasefire and the grouping of the estimated 3,000 contras inside Nicaragua in UN-supervised security zones before being disarmed.
The agreement was placed in doubt by a renewed contra offensive on March 24 during which 12 Sandinista soldiers were reported killed and 12 people wounded near San Sebastian de Yalí, approximately 145 km from Managua.
AMERICAS
GUATEMALA
Withdrawal of US ambassador
The United States ambassador Thomas Stroock was recalled to Washington on March 5 for consultations, in protest at the failure of the government of President Vinicio Cerezo to contain an upsurge in assassinations widely attributed to right-wing extremists in the Army.
US State Department official Margaret Tutwiler stated on March 5 that the US government had insisted for more than a month on a public inquiry into the current political violence and had offered technical assistance in its investigations.
AMERICAS
CHILE
Return to democratic government
Chile's National Congress, suspended for 16@1/2 years following the military coup of September 1973 [see p. 26151-52], met on March 20 in a new parliament building in Valparaiso, 119 km from the capital Santiago.
The Congress immediately introduced a number of measures in line with election pledges of the new coalition government of President Patricio Aylwin Azócar [see p. 37117].
The death penalty was abolished, and restrictive security laws inherited from the previous military regime of Gen. Augusto Pinochet Ugarte were suspended with a view to their future revision.
Tax reforms were agreed which were expected to produce US$500 million extra per year for spending on social relief programmes.
Aylwin, whose formal inauguration on March 11 was attended by 14 world leaders, had announced an amnesty for 40 political prisoners (out of an estimated total of 400) on March 12 and promised that the Congress would "resolve" further cases in the near future.
He also promised that measures would shortly be announced for the investigation of human rights abuses under the Pinochet regime.
Weekend celebrations to mark the end of military rule had led to violent clashes between police and demonstrators.
On March 11, during the ceremony to welcome Aylwin, 122 civilians and 79 police were reported injured outside the Moneda Palace in Santiago.
Shooting of former junta member
Gen. (retd) Gustavo Leigh Guzmán, a former Air Force commander and member in 1973-78 of the military junta under Pinochet, was shot five times at close range by unidentified youths on March 21 in Santiago, and was taken to hospital in a critical condition.
Responsibility for the attack was claimed by a previously unknown right-wing group, the National Resistance Front (FAN), who accused Leigh of having betrayed the "ideals" of the 1973 military coup.
The Manuel Rodriguez Patriotic Front (FPMR-A) also claimed responsibility for the attack, describing it as an act of "popular justice" .
Charges of human rights abuses brought against Leigh and 39 other officers had been dismissed in August 1986 when they invoked a 1978 amnesty law [see p. 34988].
AMERICAS
COLOMBIA
M-19 peace treaty — Congressional and municipal elections
The left-wing guerrilla April 19 Movement (M-19) signed a final peace treaty with the government on March 9 in Bogotá, the capital.
According to the reported terms of the agreement the government would call a referendum to decide on a reform of the Constitution and would table in Congress a reform of the current electoral law.
In return the M-19 guerrillas would be amnestied and allowed to return to civilian life.
On March 8-9 guerrilla columns had handed in their weapons in ceremonies held in the southern town of Santo Domingo in Cauca province.
These were witnessed by six representatives of the Socialist International and formally ended M-19's 16-year guerrilla war, completing a peace process initiated in January 1989 [see p. 36393].
Congressional and municipal elections
In congressional and municipal elections held on March 11 the ruling Liberal Party (PL) made substantial gains.
In the Senate, the PL won 72 of the 114 seats, the Conservative Party (PC) won 41, and one seat went to Bernardo Jaramillo [see below]of the left-wing Patriotic Union (UP).
In the lower House of Representatives the PL was thought to have secured 60 per cent of the 199 seats.
The PL also extended its control of regional and local government throughout the country and regained the mayorships of Bogotá and Medellín which it had lost in 1986.
M-19, participating in the elections following the conclusion of a peace treaty with the government [see above], was thought to have won at least two seats in the House of Representatives and took control of the councils of the small towns of Yumbo, Almaguey and San Alberto.
Its leader, Carlos Pizarro Léon-Gómez, running for mayor of Bogotá, obtained some 8 to 9 per cent of the poll (between 80,000 and 100,000 votes).
Voters also heavily endorsed a clause on the ballot paper calling for the convening of a constituent assembly to reform the Constitution.
Election of PL presidential candidate — Confirmation of M-19 candidate
In the same ballot, voters were given the unprecedented opportunity to choose the PL candidate for the presidential election scheduled for May 27, 1990.
César Gavira Trujillo, 43, who had held office as Finance Minister and Interior Minister under the current President, Virgilio Barco Vargas, and who had taken over the election campaign of Luis Carlos Galán Sarmineto after the latter's assassination on Aug. 18, 1989 [see p. 36844], received an estimated 60 per cent of the vote and comfortably defeated his five rivals.
On March 20 Pizarro was confirmed as the M-19 presidential candidate.
The PC's nominated candidate was Rodrigo Lloredo.
Murder of UP presidential candidate — Resignation of Interior Minister
Bernardo Jaramillo Ossa, 38, the newly elected UP senator and its presidential candidate, was shot dead at point-blank range on March 22 in Bogotá international airport terminal, despite having a heavy personal bodyguard.
His killer, a 16-year-old hired assassin who was wounded and captured, later claimed that a stranger had provided him with a submachine gun and directed him to kill the UP leader.
At least three accomplices were reported to have escaped.
On March 22-23 protest meetings and marches condemning the murder were reported to have taken place across the country, with one soldier being reported killed and several people wounded in the Policarpa slum district of Bogotá.
UP leaders immediately demanded the resignation of the Interior Minister Carlos Lemos Simmons, accusing him of ultimate responsibility for the crime and claiming that he had encouraged right-wing death squads to murder UP leaders.
Three days previously Lemos had publicly declared that the UP was the political arm of the Colombian Revolutionary Armed Forces (FARC) left-wing guerrilla group which had killed 17 soldiers on March 5 in a campaign to disrupt congressional and local elections [see below].
Jaramillo had assumed the presidency of the UP following the assassination of its previous leader Jaime Pardo Leal in October 1987 [see 35755].
He was the 68th UP member murdered by suspected right-wing death squads since the beginning of the year, bringing the estimated total number of members assassinated to 1,030 since the formation of the UP in May 1985.
As reported on March 23, the leader of the Medellín drug cartel Pablo Escobar Gaviria, in a letter to UP president Diego Montana Cuellar, "emphatically denied" government charges that he had ordered the killing, claiming that it was the work of the government itself.
Lemos resigned on March 25, allegedly in indignation at the failure of Barco to defend him against opposition charges.
He claimed that his departure was a victory for the drug cartels and represented a weakening of the government's ant-drugs policy.
He was replaced by Horacio Serpa Uribe, a former Attorney General.
AMERICAS
BRAZIL
New Cabinet
A new, smaller Cabinet took office following the inauguration of President Fernando Collor de Mello on March 15.
Zélia Cardoso de Mello, 36, combined as Economy Minister the previous functions of the Finance and Planning Ministries, and was responsible for introducing the radical economic austerity plan [see below].
José Lutzemberger, 63, known as the "father" of Brazilian ecology and a winner in 1988 of the so-called Alternative Nobel Prize for Ecology, was also an unexpected appointment as Environment Minister.
The choice of military men to head the armed service ministries was seen to indicate moves to "modernize" the role of the armed forces.
The new Minister of Agriculture, Joaquim Roriz, resigned on March 29.
The reasons behind his decision were not publicly announced.
Bernardo Cabral Justice Francisco Rezek Foreign Affairs Zélia Cardoso de Mello Economy Ozires Silva Infrastructure Antonio Rogério Magri Labour Margarida Procópio Social Security Alceni Guerra Health Carlos Chiarelli Education (vacant) Agriculture Adml.
Mario César Flores Navy Gen. Carlos Tinoco Ribeiro Gomes Armed Forces Brig.
Sócrates Monteiro da Costa Air Force José Lutzemberger Environment Romeu Tuma Inland Revenue Ibrahim Eris President of Central Bank 
New Brazilian Cabinet
Austerity measures
A highly controversial New Brazil (Brasil Nuevo) austerity plan, announced by Collor on March 15, combined free-market reforms with strong government intervention in order drastically to reduce inflation (running at an estimated monthly rate of 85 per cent) and to eliminate a US$31,000 million federal budget deficit.
Collor also stated that interest payments on the $115,000 million foreign debt would not exceed $5,000 million in 1990.
The measures, which were subject to congressional approval within 30 days, included:(i) a 30-day price freeze to be followed by staged increases in wages and prices;(ii) high taxes on wealth, share and gold dealings, capital gains and farm incomes;(iii) the abolition of the cruzado and its replacement by a free floating cruzeiro currency;(iv) an 18-month "liquidity squeeze" freezing an estimated $115,000 million in personal savings and corporate assets;(v) dismantling of import barriers and suspension of export subsidies and the relaxation of foreign currency controls;(vi) sharply increased utility rates;(vii) an estimated $2,200 million cut in state subsidies to private business;(viii) the closure of 24 state agencies (expected to entail the dismissal of 81,000 employees) including the Institute of Sugar and Alcohol (IAA), the Brazilian Coffee Institute (IBC), the steel holding company SIDERBRAS, the port authority PORTOBRAS, and INTERBRAS, a foreign oil trading subsidiary of the state oil monopoly PETROBRAS; and (ix) the initiation of a programme to privatize state companies.
The liquidity squeeze (predicted to affect only 10 per cent of the population directly) immediately limited withdrawals from interest-bearing money-market accounts (estimated to total $70,000 million) to 20 per cent and those from private savings and current accounts to no more than approximately $1,000.
This caused a panic rush on banks and created such a shortage of new cruzeiros that the black market for dollars was reported to have collapsed.
Record drops in share trading (the Sao Paulo stock exchange index dropping by one-third on March 21) and a sharp fall in gold prices also resulted.
Retail sales around the country were reported to have plummeted amid forecasts that a major recession was inevitable.
Jair Meneguelli, leader of the Workers' Central Union (CUT), predicted a sharp drop in real wages and mass unemployment, and called on March 19 for nationwide protest demonstrations.
On March 21 Collor warned employers who dismissed workers that their books would be subject to "hostile inspection" and that they would be considered "unpatriotic" and guilty of "sabotaging" the economic programme.
He had previously appointed the Chief of Federal Police, Romeu Tuma, to be Chief Inspector of Taxes with special powers to punish tax evasion and to enforce price controls.
However, the government on March 26 rescinded emergency police powers when they were declared unconstitutional by Arites Junqueira, head of the Public Prosecutor's Office.
Under the emergency powers dozens of bank managers and supermarket owners had been arrested for allegedly refusing to comply with the new legislation.
The directors of the country's leading newspaper, Fôlha de Sao Paulo, had also been briefly detained for likening Collor's style of government with that of the Italian fascist dictator Benito Mussolini.
Death of Prestes
Luís Carlos Prestes, one of Latin America's best known revolutionary leaders, died on March 7 aged 92.
As a young army officer Prestes had joined an abortive rebellion to depose the repressive regime of President Artur da Silva Bernardes (1922-1926).
Escaping capture, he led the 1,500-strong "Prestes Column" on a two-year 25,000-km march through Brazil's interior, fighting off or eluding attacks by government forces and the private armies of landlords, while seeking in vain to enlist peasant support.
The column finally dispersed in Bolivia in 1927.
Returning from exile to head the newly formed Brazilian Communist Party (PCB), Prestes was imprisoned for nine years in 1935 for leading an unsuccessful uprising against the dictator Getúlio Vargas (1930-45) and on his release was elected to the Senate with the highest personal vote of any candidate.
Exiled abroad for opposing the 1964 military coup, Prestes returned to Brazil from Moscow in 1979 when the ban on opposition parties was lifted.
He was expelled from the PCB in 1984 following protracted disagreements with the leadership.
In the presidential elections of 1989 [see pp. 37040; 37117-18]he supported Luis Inacio da Silva of the Workers' Party (PT).
AMERICAS
URUGUAY
New coalition Cabinet
President Luis Alberto Lacalle Herrera, who was inaugurated on March 1, broadened the political base of his ruling Blanco Party (PN) by agreeing to the inclusion of four members of the main opposition Colorado Party (PC) in his new Cabinet.
The Minister of Education and Culture, Guillermo Garcia Costa, was to have temporary additional responsibility for the Ministry of Territories and Environment until a Colorado candidate was chosen.
In return the Colorados pledged support for the government's efforts to draw up an economic plan to combat inflation and reduce the fiscal deficit.
In his first address to both houses of the Congress on March 1, Lacalle requested a 100-day "social truce" between business sectors, trade unions and political parties in order that state accounts could be put in order.
Juan Andres Ramirez Interior Enrique Braga Economy and Finance Mariano Brito Defence Guillermo Garcia Costa Education and Culture Wilson Elso Goni Transport and Public Works *Augusto Montesdeoca Industry and Energy Carlos Cat Employment and Social Security *José Solari Health Alvaro Ramos Agriculture and Fisheries *José Villar Tourism * (vacant) Territories and Environment Ramon Diaz Governor of Central Bank *PC member.
New Uruguayan Council of Ministers
AMERICAS
VENEZUELA
Debt financing agreement
An agreement to reduce and restructure debts of US$20,500 million was signed in New York on March 20 by Planning Minister Miguel Rodriguez and Venezuela's 400 commercial creditor banks.
It was the fourth such agreement under a international debt initiative launched by the US Treasury Secretary Nicholas Brady in March 1989 [see pp. 36541-42; 37016-17; see p. 37243 for similar agreement with Mexico].
The agreement, under which the government expected to save $1,000 million, included options for the creditor banks (i) to make new bond loans carrying a 15-year maturity and seven-year grace period before payment of interest which would be equivalent to 20 per cent of their exposure;(ii) to offer 30 per cent discounts on bonds for loans swaps in return for guarantees on principal and interest payments and additional payments after six years if oil prices rose beyond a specified level (thought to be $26 per barrel);(iii) to cut interest rates to 5 per cent for two years before gradually raising them; or (iv) to allow the Venezuelan government to buy back existing loans at larger discounts (estimated to be 60-65 per cent) should the banks be willing to take the loss.
The viability of the buy-back option was thought to be dependent on the availability of new loans especially from the World Bank and International Monetary Fund (IMF), both of which had expressed support for the agreement, and also from the Japanese Export-Import Bank and the Spanish government.
Rodriguez described the agreement as a "crucial aspect" of the anti-inflationary plan to attract foreign trade and investment announced by President Carlos Andres Pérez in February 1989.
AMERICAS
HAITI
Resignation of President — Appointment of successor
Enforced resignation of Avril
Gen. Prosper Avril, who had seized power in a military coup in September 1988 [see pp. 36281-82], resigned as President of Haiti on March 10, after a period of prolonged and intensifying popular opposition to his government.
He was succeeded by Ertha Pascal-Trouillot, a member of the country's Supreme Court and the first female President in Haiti's 186-year history.
During the early months of 1990 Avril's response to the growing opposition had included attempts to suppress it through the imposition in January of a "state of siege" , followed by efforts to defuse it through the promise of free elections [see p. 37182].
Anti-government protests intensified following the death on March 5 of an 11-year-old schoolgirl who was killed by a stray bullet as troops fired warning shots in an effort to disperse demonstrators in the southern town of Petit-Goave.
On March 7, the Group of 12 (a newly formed coalition of the country's main opposition parties, ranging from communists to conservatives) issued a joint statement calling upon the populace to rise up against Avril and force him to hand over power to an interim civilian administration as the first step towards the holding of free elections.
A general strike was called for March 12, and by March 10 street barricades had been erected in the capital, Port-au-Prince, and many other towns.
An unknown number of people died or were wounded in clashes with troops.
Appointment of interim military government
When he resigned on March 10, Avril handed power to the acting Army Chief of Staff and former Foreign Minister, Gen. Herard Abraham, who promised to restore order and to transfer authority to a civilian administration within 72 hours.
At least 20 people were killed in the following two days as the Group of 12 refused to call off the general strike unless Avril left the country.
Amid scenes of widespread celebration Avril and his family were evacuated to the United States aboard a US Air Force transport on March 12.
Under the country's liberal 1987 constitution — one of the few enduring legacies of the popular overthrow of the Duvalier family dictatorship — the highest-ranking Supreme Court Justice should serve as interim President.
Chief Justice Gilbert Austin had been rejected by the Group of 12, however, on the grounds that he was too closely associated with Avril.
The Presidency devolved upon Pascal-Trouillot, the most junior of the 12 Supreme Court justices, after her colleagues had declined to accept the post.
Swearing in of civilian President
Pascal-Trouillot was sworn in on March 13, becoming the country's fifth President since the overthrow of the Duvaliers.
She accepted the presidency "in the name of Haitian women" and stated that the central task of her administration would be "to pass power to a democratically elected government chosen with complete liberty" .
The first components of a 19-member Council of State, drawn from a wide range of Haitian society to assist the new President, were installed on March 16.
Pascal-Trouillot appointed a 13-member Cabinet on March 18 which included Joseph Maxi, a prominent dissident and the president of the Haitian League of Human Rights, as the country's Interior Minister.
Joseph Maxi Interior Jean Thomas National Defence Pierre Labissiere Justice Kesner Clermont Foreign Affairs and Worship Leslie Goutier Economy and Finance Charles Tardieu National Education, Youth and Sports Carlo Desinor Information and Co-ordination Serge Fils-Aime Public Health and Population Lionel Richard Agriculture, Natural Resources and Rural Development Claudette Werleigh Social Affairs Jean-Pierre Moise Pierre-Louis Public Works, Transport and Communications Ludovic Pierre Planning, External Co-operation and Civil Service Maurice Lafortune Commerce and Industry
New Haiti Cabinet
During the remainder of the month there were frequent outbreaks of violence; during the night of March 23-24 alone, 17 people were reported to have been killed.
Responsibility for much of the killing was attributed to remnants of the Tontons Macoutes, the widely feared militia of the Duvaliers which had remained active since 1986 and had supported the Avril regime.
There were also reports of clashes between troops and localized vigilante groups established to provide protection against the activities of Duvalierist supporters.
AMERICAS
GRENADA
Inconclusive general election
Nicholas Braithwaite, 64, was appointed Prime Minister by Governor-General Sir Paul Scoon on March 16 following an inconclusive general election on March 13.
The election, which according to the constitution had to be held by March 1990, was called following the death in December 1989 of Prime Minister Herbert Blaize [see p. 37119].
Braithwaite was leader of the centrist National Democratic Congress (NDC), and had led an interim government for 13 months after the US invasion in 1983 [see p. 32614].
The NDC, winning seven seats (having held six hitherto), fell one seat short of being able to command a legislative majority in the 15-member House of representatives.
The Grenada United Labour Party (GULP), led by former Prime Minister Sir Eric Gairy, won four seats (having had no representation in the previous parliament).
Two seats each went to The National Party (TNP), led by acting Prime Minister Ben Jones (five seats hitherto), and to the New National Party (NNP), led by former Public Works Minister Keith Mitchell (three seats hitherto).
The Maurice Bishop Patriotic Movment (MBPM), led by Terry Marryshow, failed to win any seats, attracting less than 2 per cent of the popular vote.
The 1984 general election [see pp. 33327-28]had been dominated by a hastily assembled NNP coalition, from which the current NDC, TNP and NNP originated.
The appointment of Braithwaite as Prime Minister followed protracted negotiations and reports that Jones had offered his support and that of the other NP representative, to give a working majority of three.
Jones subsequently denied, however, that he had given any pledge of support to Braithwaite.
The apparent settlement had followed the intervention of the Governor-General, who had threatened, when the negotiations were at an impasse on March 15, that he would use his powers to appoint a Prime Minister and to call another election.
AMERICAS
NETHERLANDS ANTILLES
General election
<HAVE WE ALWAYS HYPHENATED L-Peters IN THE PAST?
The centre-right coalition government of Maria Liberia Peters, which had held office since May 1988 [see p. 36212], strengthened its position in a general election to the 22-seat Staten (parliament) on March 16.
On the main island of Curaçao which was allocated 14 seats, Liberia Peters's centre-right National People's Party (Nationale Volkspartij — NVP — also known as the Partido Nashonal di Pueblo) won seven seats (compared with six in the last elections in November 1985 — see pp. 34291-92).
The 30 May Workers' Liberation Front (Frente Obreroi Liberashon 30 di meis — FOL), also a coalition member, won three seats (one in 1985).
The opposition social democratic New Antillean Movement (Movimento Antijas Nobo — MAN), led by former Prime Minister Domenico (Don) Martina, won two seats (four in 1985).
The two remaining seats went to the Democratic Party (Democratische Partij — DP — three in 1985) and to a new party, Nos Patria.
Eight seats were distributed among the four smaller islands.
On Bonaire all three seats were won by the Bonaire Patriotic Union (Union Patriotico Bonairiano — UPB — one in 1985); on St Maarten the Democratic Party of St Maarten (DP-SM) won two seats (three in 1985) and the Patriotic Alliance won one, entering parliament for the first time; on Saba the single seat went as before to the Windward Islands People's Movement (WIPM — not the West Indian People's Movement as given on p. 36212); and on St Eustatius the single seat went as before to the Democratic Party of St Eustatius (DP-SE).
ASIA — PACIFIC
AFGHANISTAN
Failed coup attempt
President Najibullah survived a coup attempt launched by his Defence Minister, Lt.-Gen.
Shahnawaz Tanay, in early March.
As many as 200 civilians and an unknown number of military personnel died during heavy fighting between government and rebel forces.
The coup attempt constituted the severest test faced by Najibullah's regime since the Soviet military withdrawal in February 1989 [see pp. 36448-50].
Background
The failed coup was the latest in a long sequence of clashes between the rival Khalq ( "Masses" ) and Parcham ( "Banner" ) factions of the ruling People's Democratic Party of Afghanistan (PDPA).
Tanay was a leader of the Khalq faction, which had strong support within the armed forces and had tended to press for a military solution to the Afghan civil war.
Najibullah, meanwhile, was leader of the Parcham faction which broadly supported a policy of "national reconciliation" with the mujaheddin guerrillas.
In December 1989 Najibullah had arrested a large number of Khalqi officers whom he suspected of plotting against him [see p. 37184].
Many of the officers were released after Gen. Tanay had apparently gone on strike in protest.
However, on March 5 the trial of some of the remaining detainees opened in Kabul, prompting Najibullah to place loyal Army units in the capital on alert.
According to the Far Eastern Economic Review of March 22, evidence produced at the first day of the trial "implicated Tanay and other top brass" .
Details of coup attempt
Tanay launched his assault on Najibullah during the early afternoon of March 6.
Rebel-controlled aircraft flew from Bagram air base (70 km north of Kabul) and launched bomb and rocket attacks on the presidential palace and the capital's media stations.
Armed forces units loyal to Najibullah immediately responded by attacking the Defence Ministry; heavy fighting quickly erupted in other parts of the city.
Government forces delivered a critical blow to the rebels on March 7 when the Defence Ministry's communication links were severed.
According to reports by the Soviet news agency Tass, fighting in Kabul itself abated on March 7.
It was on March 7 that a helicopter carrying Tanay, accompanied by his family and a number of Afghan generals, landed near the Pakistan border town of Peshawar.
Tanay was subsequently reported to have returned to a mujaheddin-occupied area of Afghanistan.
Tass still reported heavy fighting around Bagram on March 8.
On March 9 mujaheddin sources in Islamabad, the Pakistan capital, acknowledged that government forces had retaken the Bagram air base, but claimed that "renewed" fighting between the rebels and government troops was taking place in the northern provinces of Balkh and Konduz.
Involvement of Hekmatyar and others — Appointments and dismissals
The Afghan government claimed that Tanay's action had been planned with the help of numerous accomplices.
Soon after the March 6 attack on the presidential palace, the government began broadcasting radio reports stating that Tanay was being supported by Gulbuddin Hekmatyar, the mujaheddin leader of the Hezb-e-Islami group.
Hekmatyar, who had suspended his participation in the mujaheddin government-in-exile in August 1989 [see also p. 37354], declared his support for the coup at a press conference in Islamabad on March 6.
However, the next day, the government-in-exile itself issued a statement denying solidarity with any of those involved.
The Pakistan government denied Afghan accusations that it, or its Inter-Services Intelligence Agency (ISI), had been involved in the coup attempt.
Tanay himself was officially dismissed as Defence Minister on March 6 and was replaced by Maj.-Gen.
Mohammad Aslam Watanjar, hitherto Minister of Internal Affairs.
Watanjar was replaced by the Water and Electricity Minister, Raz Mohammad Patkin.
Both Watanjar and Patkin were leading Khalqis, a detail that was stressed by the government in an attempt to play down divisions within the party.
However, five Khalqis were expelled from the politburo and other party posts on March 8.
The five were Tanay, Lt.-Gen.
Nazar Mohammad, Mir Saheb Karwal, Lt.-Gen.
Sayed Mohammad Ghulabzoi and Niaz Mohammad Mohmand.
Tanay, Mohmand, Mohammad and Karwal were also dismissed from the Supreme Council for the Defence of the Homeland established in February 1989 [see p. 36449]along with Lt.-Gen.
Abdol Qadir Agah, the former General Commander of Air and Air Defence Forces.
Others implicated in the coup attempt included Assadullah Sarwari, the Afghan ambassador to South Yemen (and a former Deputy Premier and head of the country's secret police), and Pacha Gol Watadar, a former minister who had defected to the mujaheddin in 1989.
ASIA — PACIFIC
INDIA
Crisis within government and Janata Dal
A controversial by-election in the northern state of Haryana in late February provoked a political crisis in March which, according to some commentators, brought into question the commitment to "value-based politics" of the National Front coalition government formed following the coalition's victory in the November 1989 general election [see pp. 37030-31; 37124-26].
Meham by-election
The crisis arose out of a state-level by-election held on Feb. 27 in Haryana's Meham constituency.
The election was contested by Om Prakash Chauthala, Haryana's Chief Minister, on behalf of Janata Dal, the ruling party in the state and the main component of the centrally governing National Front coalition.
Chauthala had been appointed Chief Minister on Dec. 2, 1989, replacing his father, Devi Lal, on the latter's appointment as the central government's Deputy Prime Minister and Minister of Agriculture [see pp. 37031; 37124].
In order to remain as Chief Minister Chauthala was required to win a state Legislative Assembly seat by May 1990.
The by-election was, by most accounts, a violent and corrupt affair.
As many as 20 people died in polling-related incidents, and the returning officer was forced to suspend voting in eight stations.
Media reports of the by-election blamed much of the violence on Chauthala's supporters, India Today of March 31 alleging that Abhay Singh, Chauthala's son, had, with police help, organized booth-capturing.
The conduct of the by-election was investigated by the central Election Commission, which, in an unprecedented decision on March 7, countermanded the by-election on the grounds of electoral malpractice, thereby effectively ordering a full re-poll.
Pressure for Chauthala's removal
Even before the Election Commission decision was published, pressure for Chauthala's removal had started to mount.
A March 3 meeting of a Janata Dal subcommittee comprising Ajit Singh, George Fernandes, Madhu Dandavate and Nathu Ram Mirdha (all central ministers — see p. 37125) had demanded Chauthala's resignation.
The subcommittee's demand was supported by other senior political figures, including L. K. Advani, leader of the Bharatiya Janata Party (BJP), on whose parliamentary support the minority National Front government depended [see p. 37031].
Devi Lal's resignation and its subsequent withdrawal
Against a background of mounting pressure for his son's dismissal, Devi Lal abruptly resigned from the government on March 16.
In his letter of resignation to the Prime Minister, V. P. Singh, Lal claimed that his Cabinet colleagues had organized a "vilification campaign" against him through the national press.
He also cited his disappointment over a number of recent appointments made by the Prime Minister.
On March 18 Lal withdrew his resignation after discussion with numerous people including two of his closest supporters, Mulayem Singh Yadav and Lallu Prasad Yadav (Chief Ministers of Uttar Pradesh and Bihar, respectively).
V. P. Singh had also written a letter to Lal acknowledging his services to the government and party and suggesting on the issue of Chauthala's future that the "best course" would be to discuss the matter within Janata Dal.
In a further development on March 22 Lal, in his capacity as chairman of Janata Dal's parliamentary board, dismissed Ajit Singh from his post as party secretary-general.
According to The Hindu of March 31, Lal had acted in order to pre-empt a possible move by Singh to remove Chauthala from the party and also in order to convey a message to the Prime Minister that any action against his son "could not only evoke resistance but provoke counterattacks" .
Bihar State Assembly election results
The final results of February's elections to the Bihar State Assembly [see p. 37245 for incomplete results]were: Janata Dal 120, Congress (I) 70, Bharatiya Janata Party (BJP) 37, Left Front parties 29, Jharkand Mukti Morcha 19, others 47.
Although Janata Dal failed to gain a majority, it formed a government on March 10 with the support of smaller parties and independents.
As in the case of the central government, the new Bihar ministry relied for its survival on the outside support of the two communist parties and the BJP.
The new Chief Minister, Lallu Prasad Yadav, replaced Congress (I) 's Jagannath Mishra [for whose appointment see p. 37125].
1990 budget
The central budget for the financial year 1990 (starting April 1, 1990) was presented to the Lok Sabha by the Finance Minister Madhu Dandavate on March 19 [for 1989 budget see p. 37006].
Dandavate began his budget speech by outlining the grave economic situation inherited by the new National Front government when it came to power in late 1989, which included a "strained" balance-of-payments position, low foreign exchange reserves and low foodgrain stocks.
The budget was heavily reliant on a massive projected gain in tax revenue, from Rs378,000 million (1989 revised figure) to Rs453,000 million (US$1.00=Rs16.4316 as at April 2, 1990).
Of this Rs75,000 million increase, only Rs19,000 million would be derived from new tax measures, the remainder to be gained by a reduction in tax evasion.
In line with this aim, Dandavate promised a "sustained and multipronged drive against proliferation of black money" .
He fulfilled in part the government's pre-election promise to provide debt relief for farmers, setting aside Rs10,000 million to waive rural debts of less than Rs10,000 (some estimates put the total outstanding rural debt figure at Rs140,000 million).
Defence spending was raised to Rs157,500 million, representing an increase of 8.6 per cent over the 1989 revised estimates, in view of the situation on the Indo-Pakistan border in Kashmir [see p. 37246].
1989 1989 1990 (forecast)(revised)(forecast)(000,000 rupees) Total receipts 747,390 759,460 873,290 Total expenditure 820,760 876,960 945,350 Overall deficit 73,370 117,500 72,060 Defence spending 145,000 157,500 
Budget details
Further government moves on corruption — Bhopal developments
Filing of corruption charges over HDW submarine deal
On March 5 India's Central Bureau of Investigation (CBI) filed a First Information Report (FIR) in a New Delhi court in connection with allegations that commissions had been paid to Indian middlemen during the government's purchase of submarines from a West German company, Howaldtswerke Deutsche Werft (HDW), in the early 1980s.
Commenting on the move in an editorial on March 7, The Hindu said that it marked "the logical culmination of one stage in V.P. Singh's effort to eliminate corruption in the upper reaches of government and restore the integrity of the decision making process" [see p. 37184 for initiation in January 1990 of criminal proceedings in Bofors corruption case].
V. P. Singh had launched an inquiry into the HDW submarine deal on April 9, 1987, three days before he resigned as Defence Minister in the Gandhi government [see pp. 35381-82].
A year later, Singh's successor at the Defence Ministry, K. C. Pant, issued a statement to the Lok Sabha which concluded that the allegations had been baseless and the government had decided to treat the matter "as closed" .
Six people were named in the CBI's FIR, including Shivinder Singh Sidhu, a former Additional Secretary in the Defence Ministry who was currently Secretary-General of the International Civil Aviation Organization, and G. P. Hinduja, a London-based Indian industrialist who was also deeply implicated in the Bofors affair [for January developments in which see p. 37184].
The FIR also revealed other "linkage" between the HDW and Bofors cases.
Interim Bhopal payments
On March 5 M. S. Gurupadasamy, the Minister of Petroleum and Chemicals, announced an interim relief programme for victims of the 1984 Bhopal poison gas disaster [see pp. 33467-68].
In January the Indian government had announced its intention to oppose a 1989 compensation settlement between the Gandhi government and the owners of the Bhopal plant, the US company Union Carbide Corp [see p. 37184; for February 1989 compensation settlement see p. 36466].
A sum of Rs200 would be paid monthly for three years to as many as 500,000 people currently claiming compensation.
The money paid as interim compensation would be adjusted against any final settlement.
ASIA — PACIFIC
BANGLADESH
Resignation of Finance Minister
Wahidul Haq resigned as Finance Minister on March 16, when his portfolio was transferred to Maj.-Gen. (retd) Mohammad Abdul Munim, the Minister of Agriculture.
Haq, a professor of economics at a Canadian university prior to becoming Finance Minister in August 1988 [see pp. 36558-59], was widely blamed for Bangladesh's growing budget deficit, a trend which had strained the country's relationship with Western financial institutions.
Shortly after Haq's resignation the government announced plans to curb public expenditure by holding it during the current financial year (ending in June 1990) at the 1988-89 level.
The move was interpreted as an attempt to persuade the International Monetary Fund and the World Bank to release some US$500,000,000 of credits which had been withheld because of concern about the management of the country's economy.
It was reported on March 22 that Air Vice-Marshal (retd) A. K. Khandker, the Planning Minister since November 1986 [see p. 34813], had also resigned.
ASIA — PACIFIC
SRI LANKA
New Cabinet — IPKF withdrawal
On March 28 Sri Lankan Prime Minister D. B. Wijetunge resigned, with the result that the cabinet was dissolved.
President Ranasinghe Premadasa reshuffled the Cabinet on March 30, reappointing Wijetunge as Prime Minister but omitting from the new ministerial team Gamini Dissanayake, a minister for the past 13 years.
Dissanayake had competed with Premadasa for the ruling United National Party's nomination as presidential candidate in 1988 (as had Lalith Athulathmudali, now transferred from Agriculture to Education), and had subsequently differed with the President on such issues as the handling of the withdrawal of Indian troops from Sri Lanka.
Ranjan Wijeratne, who as Foreign Minister negotiated the withdrawal of the Indian troops, was made Plantation Industries Minister.
Dingiri Banda Wijetunge Prime Minister; Finance *Harold Herath Foreign Affairs P. Dayaratne Lands, Irrigation and Mahaweli Development Joseph Michael Perera Fisheries and Aquatic Resources Alick Aluvihare Posts and Telecommunications C. Nanda Mathew Youth Affairs; Sports Renuka Herath Health; Women's Affairs B. Sirisena Cooray Housing and Construction **Ranjan Wijeratne Plantation Industries **A.
C. S. Hameed Justice **M.
Vincent Perrera Environment and Parliamentary Affairs **Lalith Athulathmudali Education and Higher Education Festus Perera Public Administration, Provincial Councils and Home Affairs **S.
Thondaman Tourism and Rural Development **Ranil Wickremasingh Industries, Science and Technology **W.
J. M. Lokubandara Cultural Affairs and Information **A.
R. Mansoor Trade and Commerce **U.
B. Wijekoon Handlooms and Textile Industries **A.
M. S. Adhikari Reconstruction, Rehabilitation and Social Welfare *K.
D. M. C. Bandara Power and Energy *Weerasinghe Mallimarachchi Food and Co-operatives *Rupasena Karunatilleke Ports and Shipping *R.
M. Dharmadasa Banda Agricultural Development and Research *D.
M. Premachandra Labour and Vocational Training *New appointment.
**Changed portfolio.
Sri Lankan Council of Ministers
Indian troop withdrawal
India completed the withdrawal of its troops from Sri Lanka on March 24, a week ahead of schedule [see p. 37126 for announcement of March 31 deadline].
The final contingent of the Indian Peace Keeping Force (IPKF) left from the eastern port of Trincomalee, the last major town it had controlled in the region.
According to Indian Army statistics, at least 1,100 Indian soldiers and 2,200 Tamil fighters had been killed in the 32 months of fighting since the IPKF's July 1987 arrival; other estimates put the losses higher, and there had been an unknown number of civilian casualties.
The IPKF withdrawal left the Liberation Tigers of Tamil Eelam (LTTE) in virtual control of the north of Sri Lanka.
On April 1 the senior LTTE leader, Velupillai Prabhakaran, came out of hiding to give a news conference in the northern Jaffna peninsula.
He said that his group would contest elections, but would not hesitate to take up arms again if the Sri Lankan government tried to suppress the Tamil movement.
Declaration of independent state by North-Eastern Provincial Council
On March 1, three weeks before the troop withdrawal, the North-Eastern Provincial Council (the Indian-backed legislature for the predominantly Tamil north and east region) passed a resolution declaring the area to be an independent state of Eelam.
A majority of seats on the 71-member council were held by the Eelam People's Revolutionary Liberation Front (EPRLF)[see p. 37007], which had been supported by the Indian troop presence.
India, however, immediately reaffirmed that it supported the unity of Sri Lanka.
The declaration was seen as a last gesture by Annamalai Varatharaja Perumal, the Chief Minister of the Council and leader of the EPRLF, who subsequently left Sri Lanka along with his wife and family.
The general secretary of the EPRLF, K. Padmanabha, was also reported to have left Sri Lanka, along with other key officials, and to have gone to India, where thousands of EPRLF supporters were seeking refuge in fear of persecution by the LTTE as it moved into areas vacated by Indian troops.
ASIA — PACIFIC
THAILAND
Chaovalit's resignation as Army Commander and entry into Cabinet
On March 28 Gen. Chaovalit Yongchaiyut, 58, who had resigned the previous day as Army C.-in-C., announced that he would be joining the government as a Deputy Prime Minister and as Minister of Defence, ending widespread speculation about his political plans.
Widely regarded as a principal rival and potential successor to Prime Minister Chatichai Choonhaven, Chaovalit had given little indication of his likely response to the Cabinet invitation which had been made after he announced his intention to retire early from the Army command [see also p. 37188].
Chaovalit's supporters had been divided on the best course for him to follow.
One group dismissed the Prime Minister's offer as an attempt to co-opt him into the ruling Chart Thai party and thus disarm his independent political ambitions.
A "conciliation" faction, however, saw a place in Cabinet as an essential power base for a future leadership challenge.
Chaovalit's entry to government was expected to raise the prestige of the administration which had been beset over the previous year by a series of corruption scandals and labour disputes.
His appointment was, however, opposed by sections of the influential student movement which objected to the "undemocratic" nature of the arrangement.
Chaovalit would be the only member of the government not elected to parliament.
As Army C.-in-C.
Chaovalit had considerable influence on Thailand's relations with its neighbours.
His two Cabinet portfolios, which would make him the most powerful member of the government after the Prime Minister, were expected to give him a key role in the formulation of the country's overall foreign policy.
The rapprochement between Chaovalit and Chatichai ensured the promotion to the top post of the Deputy Army Commander, Gen. Suchinda Kraprayoon, who had been named by Chaovalit as his personal choice for the succession in December 1989.
While Chaovalit's own position had remained unresolved, however, there had been speculation that Chatichai (who then held the Defence portfolio himself) would block Suchinda's candidature with a nomination of his own.
ASIA — PACIFIC
MONGOLIA
Leadership changes — Abolition of constitutional guarantee of leading role of communist party — Soviet troop withdrawals
Opposition protests — Resignation of MPRP politburo
The Mongolian Democratic Union (MDU), the Social Democratic Party, New Progressive Association and Union of Democratic Students jointly organized a rally of about 40,000, the largest to date, in the capital, Ulan Bator, on March 4, and demanded an extraordinary congress of the ruling Mongolian People's Revolutionary Party (MPRP) before the end of March to select a new central committee.
The demonstrators also wanted the People's Great Hural (legislature) to end the MPRP's constitutional right to rule, and to reform the Law on Elections.
The MPRP fixed a central committee plenum for March 12.
Persisting with demands for a full congress, however, 11 supporters of the MDU went on hunger strike in temperatures of well below freezing, and in addition demanded the resignation of the politburo.
Others joined the strike, raising the numbers to 30 at times.
On March 9 demonstrators, under an overtly nationalist blue flag featuring the Soyombo symbol, threatened to call a general strike; the politburo thereupon agreed to resign and the strike was called off.
When the plenum opened on March 12, the MPRP general secretary Jambyn Batmönh announced his resignation and that of the seven-member politburo and called for the complete separation of the party and state, saying that the party would henceforth "prove its leading role in the society not constitutionally but with its deeds for happy future [sic]of the Mongolian people" .
Gombojavyn Ochirbat, 61, chairman of the Trades Union Council from 1972 to 1982 (when he offended the wife of the then Mongolian leader Tsedenbal), and currently Mongolian representative on the editorial board of the World Marxist Review in Prague, was elected MPRP general secretary, and Nyamyn Mishigdorj and Foreign Minister Tserenpilyn Gombosren became members of the secretariat.
These three and Tseveenjavyn Öold, chairman of the central control committee, and Lodongiyn Tudev, editor-in-chief of the party paper Unen, made up the new five-member politburo.
About half of the central committee offered to resign and 14 were relieved of their duties.
A new central committee would be chosen at an extraordinary congress, fixed for April 10.
Batmonh and Dumaagiyn Sodnom were asked to remain as President and as Chairman of the Council of Ministers (Prime Minister) respectively until the Great Hural met.
The new party leadership appealed on television for unity and national support and pledged its co-operation with opposition groups to draw up changes in the constitution and electoral law.
By March 18, however, dialogue between the MPRP and other political groups had collapsed and communists rallied in support of the party to denounce the opposition movement.
On March 20 Sanjaasureniyn Dzorig, co-ordinating secretary of the MDU, addressed a rally of 4,000, accusing the new MPRP leader Ochirbat of arrogance and of being out of touch with the situation in Mongolia.
He also suggested that the authorities intended to control the opposition with force.
MDU members felt that Batmönh was the only leader capable of making responsible decisions and begged him not to resign the presidency.
Resignation of Batmönh and Sodnom — Removal of constitutional guarantee of leading role of MPRP
When the Great Hural opened on March 21, Batmönh and Sodnom resigned.
Punsalmaagiyn Ochirbat, hitherto Minister of External Economic Relations and Supply, was elected President, and Sharavyn Gungaadorj, hitherto a Deputy Chairman of the Council and Minister of Agriculture, Livestock Breeding and Food Industry, became Prime Minister.
[For full Cabinet list as of end-March 1990 see p. 37344.]
Article 82, which set out the leading role of the MPRP in the government, was removed from the Constitution; there were 324 votes in favour and 10 abstentions.
The new electoral law was passed but it made no mention of the role of opposition groups, merely stating that elections would take place within the framework of socialism, thus effectively barring non-socialist candidates.
MDU leader Dzorig told supporters at a rally that eliminating the MPRP's monopoly of power from the Constitution was not enough and demanded that the Hural, of which 93.4 per cent of the deputies were MPRP members, be dissolved to make way for a democratically elected legislature.
After his election President Ochirbat spoke in favour of separating party and state functions and of integration into world economic structures.
 "Mongolia," he said "will actively carry out a policy of development, applicable in nature with the USA, EEC members and other countries within the current of ideology and socio-political states." 
Diplomatic relations were established with South Korea on March 27.
Disgrace of Tsedenbal
Since December 1989 opposition groups had been demanding the trial of former President Yumjaagiyn Tsedenbal for causing economic stagnation in the 1960s and 1970s.
More recently he had been accused of planning to allow Mongolia to be absorbed into the Soviet Union prior to the death of Stalin.
The March plenum expelled him from the MPRP and withdrew all his titles.
A trial was thought unlikely, as Tsedenbal, who lived in Moscow, was said to be senile.
However, the State Procurator's office considered that there was sufficient evidence to prosecute his wife Anastasiya Tsedenbal-Filatova, for misappropriation of resources of the Mongolian Children's Fund.
Soviet troop withdrawals
Talks involving Col.-Gen.
Kleymenov, deputy head of General Headquarters of the Soviet Armed Forces in Ulan Bator, ended with an agreement in early March that all remaining Soviet troops would be withdrawn from Mongolian soil; the operation would begin in 1991 and be completed by 1992.
A Mongolian military spokesman further said that Soviet military instructors would no longer be required.
On March 26 Zorig, the MDU leader, called for all Soviet advisors to be withdrawn from the Ministry of Defence and Public Security and from the Planning Commission.
New government leaders continued to speak in favour of Mongol-Soviet ties, but after the March plenum Foreign Minister Gombosuren expressed the hope that Mongolian-Chinese relations would achieve the same level as Mongolian-Soviet relations.
ASIA — PACIFIC
CHINA
Party plenum
A communiqué was released on the last day of the sixth plenary session of the 13th Chinese Communist Party (CCP) central committee which met on March 9-12.
Calling for the "strengthening of ties between the party and the masses" , it made seven demands:(i) adherence to the mass line (i.e. policy making and implementation in line with the interests of the people);(ii) officials to go down among the masses;(iii) the strengthening of socialist democracy and the legal system;(iv) fighting official corruption;(v) supervision, internal and from outside;(vi) the need for exemplary behaviour from party members; and (vii) raising political (Marxist) awareness.
Normally held once a year, this was the third plenum in less than a year (third plenum, November 1988; fourth plenum, June 1989, to dismiss Zhao Ziyang; fifth plenum, November 1989, to rectify the economy) reflecting the rapid pace of change.
The communiqué did not mention the June 1989 suppression of China's pro-democracy movement, nor the upheavals in the Soviet Union and Eastern Europe, except to comment that "although the international climate is unpredictable and there are still temporary difficulties at home, we will remain invincible as long as we focus on…boosting national economic development" .
A "Political Column" by Shih Chun-yu, published in Ta Kung Bao of March 13, suggested that focusing on economic development and fighting corruption while ignoring "Western propaganda on democracy and freedom" would encourage support for the party.
The People's Daily explained the plenum's focus by restating the comment by Deng Xiaoping that China's overriding need was stability.
Resignation of Deng Xiaoping from last official post
The plenum preceded a session of the National People's Congress (NPC), the national legislature, which began on March 20.
On the second day of the NPC, Deng Xiaoping, as expected, resigned his last official post as Chairman of the State Central Military Commission (CMC) which he had held since 1983.
(Jiang Zemin, CCP general secretary, was elected to succeed him, as the only candidate, on April 4: Jiang had already taken over from Deng, in November 1989, the chairmanship of the party CMC.)
In spite of his resignation, it was believed that Deng would remain China's most influential political leader.
ASIA — PACIFIC
TAIWAN
Presidential election
Presidential elections on March 20 brought into focus the conflict between, on the one hand, Taiwan's claim to embody the legitimate government of mainland China, and, on the other hand, the problem that the ossified political institutions which sustained that claim lacked credibility and acceptance among the younger population in particular.
Rivalry within KMT over choice of presidential candidate
Tensions rose dramatically in early March over the possibility of rival candidates within the ruling Kuomintang (KMT) for the presidential elections later in the month.
The two possible rivals to the existing President bowed out on March 10 and 11, however, after pressure from KMT leaders to avoid splitting the party.
It was unclear whether any concessions were made.
President Lee Tung-hui, a native Taiwanese who had succeeded Chiang Ching-kuo in 1988, had been nominated in February 1990 as the KMT presidential candidate.
However, there was unease among conservative KMT members not only at his Taiwanese (as opposed to mainland Chinese) origins but also at his calls for rapid reform, exemplified by the 1990/91 budget which had increased spending on foreign policy by 50 per cent but decreased defence spending.
It was claimed that in developing an aggressive new foreign policy, he was disregarding nationalist dreams of recovering control of the mainland.
Lee's choice of running mate, Lee Yuan-tzu, currently the President's Chief Secretary, was also controversial and his nomination was forced through on a show of hands rather than a secret ballot.
Rival aspirants were Lin Yang-kang, the popular head of the judiciary, and Chiang Wei-kuo, National Security Council General Secretary and sole surviving son of Chiang Kai-shek.
While Chiang had little public support, he would have been a popular choice in the National Assembly, the veteran-dominated body responsible for electing the President.
Voting of new powers to National Assembly
The National Assembly passed on March 16 a series of revisions to the Temporary Provisions, which for 40 years had superseded the Constitution, enhanced presidential power and frozen in office the mainland-elected members of the various deliberative assemblies, pending hypothetical recovery of the mainland.
Revision of the Temporary Provisions was at the sole discretion of the National Assembly, and the current changes reflected the determination of veteran members to enhance their own power, as more opposition members took seats in Parliament.
The revisions passed on March 16 included the power to meet yearly, rather than every six years, to be able to initiate and veto legislation, and to ensure mainlander domination of the National Assembly.
They also raised members' pay by 400 per cent.
Demonstrations by DPP and students
On March 17, according to a Reuters report, "military police dragged 14 leaders of the opposition from the presidential palace after officials had denied them a meeting with President Lee" .
The following day the opposition Democratic Progressive Party (DPP) held a mass rally and sit-in in front of the Chiang Kai-shek Memorial Hall to demonstrate against the new National Assembly powers.
It was the biggest demonstration since the lifting of martial law in 1988, and was estimated by police to number 10,000.
Demonstrators demanded the dissolution of the National Assembly, direct presidential elections, abolition of the Temporary Provisions and a meeting on national policy.
On the eve of the presidential elections, as 3,000 students continued the sit-in and over 50 went on hunger strike, Lee announced an extraordinary national policy meeting for the summer.
The DPP responded by calling off plans to surround the building where the National Assembly was to meet for the election.
Re-election of President Lee
On March 20 Lee was re-elected for a further six-year presidential term.
Out of a total of 752 members, 668 voted, and Lee received 641 votes (96 per cent), the remainder spoiling their ballot papers.
Li Yuan-tzu was elected the next day as Vice-President with 93 per cent of the votes, receiving 602 out of 644 cast.
On the afternoon of his election, the President met a 50-strong student delegation for an hour.
The students seemed satisfied with assurances that reforms would follow the policy meeting scheduled for the summer, and called off their sit-in.
However, they demanded the creation of a national union of students and vowed to continue to fight for democracy.
ASIA — PACIFIC
HONG KONG
Approval of draft Bill of Rights
A draft Bill of Rights, which was intended to secure basic civil liberties for Hong Kong following the reversion of its sovereignty to China in 1997, was approved by the colony's Executive Council on March 6 and published on March 16.
The enactment of the bill was planned for July 1990 following two months of public consultation.
The draft proposed the incorporation into Hong Kong law of the human rights and freedoms provisions of the International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights, itself based on the Universal Declaration of Human Rights of 1948 [see p. 9279].
A measure of confusion and uncertainty arose within the colony, however, as to the precise constitutional status of the bill in relation to the Basic Law — Hong Kong's proposed mini-constitution [see p. 37248]— and as to whether or not China had the power to repeal the bill, given its non-participation within the terms of the Covenant and its insistence that the Basic Law should be seen as supreme.
New UN plan for boat people
The UN High Commissioner for Refugees, Thorvald Stoltenberg, proposed on March 16 a scheme designed to ease the continuing problems arising from the influx of Vietnamese refugees, or "boat people" , into Hong Kong.
The total number of boat people in Hong Kong had reached some 56,000 as of October 1989 [see p. 36975], and the UK had in January 1990 failed to secure international approval for a policy of involuntary repatriation [see pp. 37121-22; 37185].
Stoltenberg proposed (i) an improvement in the screening process in Hong Kong in order to distinguish between genuine refugees and economic migrants;(ii) improved conditions within the Hong Kong refugee camps;(iii) the acceptance of an agreement by Vietnam to increase its intake of returning voluntary refugees; and (iv) an international effort to give direct economic assistance to those regions in Vietnam from which the boat people had come.
Jewel Lafontant, the United States co-ordinator for refugee affairs, said on March 16 that the United States would accept half of any new Vietnamese boat people fleeing to Hong Kong, as long as they were considered to be genuine refugees; only 11 per cent of those as yet screened in the colony had been classified as such.
During the period March 1989-March 1990, 1,582 boat people had voluntarily returned to Vietnam.
Both the UN and the Hong Kong government reportedly hoped to increase voluntary repatriations to 1,000 a month by mid-1990.
ASIA — PACIFIC
JAPAN
Kaifu's meeting with Bush
Toshiki Kaifu, the Japanese Prime Minister, met President George Bush of the United States in Palm Springs, California, on March 2-3 for informal talks on trade and other issues.
Although the talks had been called at short notice in an attempt to reduce bilateral tensions, particularly in the light of recent failures in official negotiations, they were felt by press observers to have produced only ambiguous results.
After the talks Kaifu said on March 3 that he would make "maximum efforts" to accelerate the structural reform of the Japanese economy in such a way as to improve market access for foreign traders while also improving the quality of life for Japanese consumers — a phrasing which was regarded as being carefully chosen so as not to imply unconditional concessions to the United States.
President Bush for his part stressed the importance of progress under the bilateral Structural Impediments Initiative (SII) talks, the third round of which had taken place on Feb. 22-23 between US and Japanese trade officials, but which had so far produced little concrete progress toward the elimination of what the USA termed Japan's unfair import barriers.
Kaifu also assured the USA that Japan would adopt a larger political role in international affairs.
The meeting came at a time when relations between the two countries were unusually strained.
Japan's exports to the United States had totalled more than US$100,000 million in 1989, against imports of some $50,000 million, and popular pressure was mounting in the USA to list Japan among the countries applying "structural impediments" within the definition of the "Super 301" clause of the 1988 Omnibus Trade Act [see pp. 36925-26]; the clause, if invoked, would have entailed trade sanctions unless Japan agreed to changes within 12 months of its listing.
The third round of the SII trade talks had ended on Feb. 23, like the two earlier rounds in September and November 1989, without apparent progress.
Despite the lack of specific commitments in the Palm Springs talks, Kaifu came under harsh parliamentary criticism after his return to Japan, for making what were termed unilateral promises to the USA without obtaining US undertakings in return.
He responded by denying that any concessions had been made.
It had been announced, however, on March 1 that Japan and the USA were nearing agreement on a new procedure governing the public procurement procedures for supercomputers, an area listed under the Super 301 clause by the United States.
The existing 1987 agreement was considered to have failed, US manufacturers having sold no machines to Japan since its signature.
ASIA — PACIFIC
SOUTH KOREA
Cabinet reshuffle
President Roh Tae Woo replaced 15 of his 28-member Cabinet on March 17.
In accordance with the creation in February of the Democratic Liberal Party (formed from an amalgamation of Roh's ruling Democratic Justice Party with two opposition groups — see p. 37247), three of the new ministers were former members of the opposition.
Kim Jeong Soo and Kang Bo Seong were both members of Kim Young Sam's Reunification Democratic Party, whilst Lee Hee Il came from Kim Jong Il's New Democratic Republican Party.
The reshuffle involved sweeping changes in economic portfolios.
Economic growth had slowed from 12 per cent in 1988 to 6.5 per cent in 1989, and at the first meeting of the new Cabinet on March 20 Roh suggested that the country's current economic difficulties were the government's chief priority.
Lee Seung Yoon, the new head of the Economic Planning Board, Chung Yong Euy, the Finance Minister, and Park Pil Soo, the Minister for Trade and Industry, were known advocates of "growth first" expansionary measures, whereas their predecessors had laid a greater emphasis on prices and incomes management and on increased social justice.
Kang Young Hoon Prime Minister *Lee Seung Yoon Deputy Prime Minister; Economic Planning Board Choi Ho Joong Foreign Affairs *Ahn Eung Mo Home Affairs *Chung Yong Euy Finance *Yi Jong Nam Justice Lee Sang Hoon Defence Chong Won Sik Education *Chung Dong Sung Sports *Kang Bo Seong Agriculture, Forestry and Fisheries *Park Pil Soo Trade and Industry *Lee Hee Il Energy and Resources Kwon Yong Gack Construction *Kim Jeong Soo Health and Social Affairs Choi Young Choul Labour *Kim Chang Sik Transport Lee Woo Jae Communications Choe Byung Yul Public Information *Lee Yun Tack Government Administration *Chung Kun Mo Science and Technology *Hong Sung Chul National Unification Lee O Young Culture *Choi Sang Yup Director of Office of Legislation Lee Sang Young Director of Patriots' and Veterans' Affairs Agency Suh Dong Kwon Director of Agency for National Security Planning Cho Kyung Shik Director of Environment Agency Park Chul On First State Minister for Political Affairs *Lee Ke Soon Second State Minister for Political Affairs *New appointment.
New South Korean Cabinet
ASIA — PACIFIC
PHILIPPINES
Revolt by supporters of rebel governor — Release of Enrile
Troops loyal to President Corazon Aquino on March 4 crushed a revolt by supporters of Rodolfo Aguinaldo, the suspended governor of Cagayan Province (the northern region of the country's main island of Luzon).
Up to 20 people were reported killed in the fighting, including a senior Army officer, Brig.
Gen. Oscar Florendo, who was being held hostage by the rebels.
Aguinaldo was in January suspended for 60 days for supporting the December 1989 coup attempt by rebel troops [see pp. 37120-21].
After initially resisting the suspension, he and several hundred armed supporters went into hiding in the mountains north of Tuguegarao, the provincial capital of Cagayan.
In late February his arrest was ordered as charges of rebellion with murder were filed against him in a Manila court.
As troops closed in upon his mountain stronghold, Aguinaldo and his companions returned to Tuguegarao and seized control of a hotel.
It was here that they were confronted on March 4 by a party sent to effect Aguinaldo's arrest.
As he sought to negotiate with Aguinaldo, Florendo, the director of the civil relations office of the Armed Forces of the Philippines and a former friend of Aguinaldo, was taken hostage along with three other members of the arresting party.
Government forces then laid seige to the building and, after a standoff of several hours, there was a four-hour gun-battle which culminated in the storming of the hotel.
Some 200 of Aguinaldo's supporters were reported to have been captured, but a further 100 or more, including Aguinaldo, escaped.
Aquino denounced the killing of Florendo as "an act of cowardice and treachery" , and promised that the "fullest force of the law courts will be meted out" to those responsible.
Release of Enrile
Senator Juan Ponce Enrile, the leading conservative opponent of Aquino who had been arrested on Feb. 27 on identical charges to those against Aguinaldo on Feb. 27 [see p. 37250], was released on bail on March 6.
The majority decision by the 15-member Supreme Court ruled that Enrile should be freed on bail of 100,000 pesos (approximately US$4,600), pending a decision on his claim that the charges against him were "non-existent" in the penal code.
It was reported on March 10 that fresh charges had been filed against Enrile which accused him of attempting corruptly to seize control of the country's coconut industry.
It was also reported that three dismissed military officers had been charged with rebellion and murder in connection with the December coup attempt.
ASIA — PACIFIC
PAPUA NEW GUINEA
Attempted coup
On March 15 the Commissioner of the Royal Papua New Guinea Constabulary and Controller of the State of Emergency in the country's North Solomons Province, Paul Tohian, was dismissed by the government following an attempted coup the previous night.
Prime Minister Rabbie Namaliu insisted, however, that the Commissioner had acted under the influence of alcohol and that there had been no conspiracy.
Tohian was unhappy at the prospect of the complete withdrawal by March 16 of the police and Army from Bougainville island in the North Solomons, following the agreement in February of a truce between the government and secessionist rebels [see pp. 37249-50].
On March 14 he used the police radio network in the capital in an attempt to mobilize the "disciplined forces" against the government.
The Prime Minister, along with other members of the Cabinet and the leader of the opposition, Paias Wingti, immediately went into hiding.
The police, however, failed to respond in significant numbers to Tohian's appeal and the Army, under Brig. -Gen.
Rochus Lokinap, remained loyal to the government.
After the attempt the Prime Minister criticized the opposition for exaggerating the seriousness of the threat.
The Commissioner had, according to Namaliu, been under observation for some time before acting on impulse and alone.
ASIA — PACIFIC
AUSTRALIA
General election
The ruling Australian Labor Party (ALP) won a narrow victory in a general election on March 24, thereby ensuring a fourth successive term of office for Prime Minister Bob Hawke, a feat unparalleled in Australian history.
His victory was all the more remarkable given that it occurred within a context of continuing economic difficulties including heavy external debt, a severe current-account deficit, high interest rates and rising inflation.
The election, constitutionally due by May 1990, was announced by Hawke on Feb. 16.
A day earlier the Reserve Bank, the country's central bank, had announced a 0.5 per cent cut in cash rates — the interest paid on overnight borrowing — to 16.5 per cent.
The reduction followed an earlier relaxation of tight monetary policy on Jan. 23, and was denounced by the opposition as "blatantly political" .
The calling of the elections also followed immediately on a period of disarray within the Liberal-National Party opposition coalition, which included an embarrassing climb-down over its alternative health policy in February because of financial miscalculations.
Further problems were evident in the week before the election was called, when Liberal leader Andrew Peacock dismissed a senior member of the Shadow Cabinet for disloyalty.
The key campaign issue was the ALP's competence in managing the country's economy.
The government's position was helped enormously in this respect when, on Feb. 21, Treasurer Paul Keating unveiled an economic package, agreed with the trade union movement, which included cuts in personal taxation and wage rises estimated to provide an overall 7 per cent increase in take-home pay during the 1990-91 financial year (beginning in July), against an assumed 6 per cent increase in prices.
The package also included cuts in defence expenditure of A$80,000,000 and in social security spending, an increase in taxation on luxury cars, and an increase in public expenditure of A$323,000,000, much of which was to be directed towards child care and road improvements (US$1.00=A$1.3151 as at Feb. 19, 1990).
Most commentators agreed that the ALP also fought a highly professional and effective campaign.
It took advantage of the country's transferred preferential voting system by projecting itself as the second choice for the country's growing number of Green voters.
(The Australian Conservation Foundation and the Wilderness Society, the country's two main environmentalist groups, called on their supporters to vote for the Democrats — the centre party which held the balance of power in the Senate but which possessed no seats in the House of Representatives — but to direct their second preferences to the ALP.)
The party also successfully targeted marginal seats in key areas such as in New South Wales where the Liberal-National state government was proving unpopular and in Queensland where the ALP exploited the legacy of corruption associated with the years of National Party rule.
The ALP's replacement of Peter Dowding, its unpopular Premier of Western Australia, shortly before the campaign began [see p. 37250], minimized its losses within the state.
By contrast, the opposition campaign lacked dynamism and the Liberal-National coalition had difficulty in removing its recent reputation for factional infighting, a major cause of its 1987 election defeat.
In the final days of the campaign, with the opposition trailing the government in the polls, Peacock started a controversy by suggesting that, if elected, he would cancel the planned establishment of an Australian-Japanese high technology city in Australia.
The suggested settlement, known as a multi-function polis (MFP), was sponsored by Japan and involved more than 100 Japanese companies.
Peacock criticized the proposal on the grounds that it "would establish an enclave" which "would be socially divisive and risk a backlash against foreign investment and immigration" .
Peacock's remark was widely denounced within Australia as racist in tone and intent, and concern over the issue was expressed by the Japanese government on March 20.
As the votes were counted it became clear that the contest was the closest federal election for 30 years, with both sides claiming to have won a narrow victory.
Although the ALP suffered an adverse swing of approximately 6 per cent, the most significant gains were made not by the opposition coalition but by the Democrats (whose share of the vote increased from 6 to 11 per cent ) and by independent and environmental candidates.
Two significant trends were heavy ALP losses in Victoria, and a nationwide decline in support for the corruption-tainted National Party.
Although the Democrats increased their share of the vote, the party's leader Janine Haines failed in her bid to become the first candidate from a minor party since 1966 to win a seat in the 148-seat House of Representatives.
An independent candidate, Ted Mack, was successful in winning a north Sydney seat from the Liberals.
Some 3,000 electors in a north Queensland constituency were cut off by floods and did not vote until several days after the election.
This, together with the closeness of the result (which meant that the distribution of preference and postal votes was particularly significant), ensured that the final outcome of the election remained in doubt for several days after polling, during which time Hawke continued as Prime Minister in a caretaker capacity.
Eventually the ALP emerged as the winning party with an expected overall majority of eight seats.
Distribution of seats* 1990 at dissolution 1987 ALP 78 83 86 Liberal Party 55 47 43 National Party 14 18 19 Democrats ——— Others 1 —— *With counting not yet complete in several constituencies the above table represents the likely final distribution of seats.
Election results in House of Representatives
Elections also took place for 40 seats in the 76-seat Senate, where each of the six states was represented by 12 members, and the Northern Territory and the Australian Capital Territory by two members each.
(Under the terms of the Constitution, half the state senators were liable for re-election every three years, as are all four representatives from the two territories).
At time of publication the ALP had won 14 seats, the Liberals 12, the Nationals one, and the Country Liberal Party one; 12 seats remained undecided.
Resignation of Liberal Party leader — Defeat of National Party leader
It was not until March 29, five days after polling, that Peacock conceded defeat and immediately resigned as leader of the Liberal Party.
He nominated John Hewson, the Shadow Cabinet Treasurer, as his successor.
The National Party was also due to hold a leadership contest following the failure of its federal leader, Charles Blunt, to secure re-election.
Blunt lost his northern New South Wales constituency to the ALP.
ASIA — PACIFIC
NEW ZEALAND
Resumption of contacts with USA
The United States government announced on March 1 that it was ending a four-year prohibition on official ministerial-level contacts with New Zealand.
The move was announced shortly before a meeting in Washington between US Secretary of State James Baker and the New Zealand Minister of Foreign Affairs and External Relations and Trade, Mike Moore.
New Zealand legislation prohibiting nuclear-powered or nuclear-armed ships from its territorial waters had been first enforced in February 1985.
In response the USA had denied New Zealand access to military intelligence, the preferential purchase of equipment and participation in joint military manoeuvres; in August 1986 the US had additionally imposed the ban on ministerial-level contacts and formally suspended its obligations to New Zealand under the ANZUS treaty, the tripartite defensive alliance between the US, Australia and New Zealand [see pp. 35457-58].
The softening of the US stance reflected the increased diplomatic contact with the New Zealand government which had followed the replacement of Prime Minister David Lange by his Labour Party colleague Geoffrey Palmer in August 1989 [see p. 36852].
It was also thought to signify US approval for Palmer's decision in September 1989 to improve his country's regional defensive capability by re-equipping the navy with West German-designed frigates [see p. 37152].
Palmer welcomed the US decision but emphasized that the government's popular anti-nuclear stance was "non-negotiable" .
The country's opposition National Party, hitherto committed to repeal the anti-nuclear legislation, on March 8 reversed this position and declared itself in favour of the government's stance.
The party's deputy leader, Donald McKinnon, immediately resigned as defence spokesperson in protest over the volte face.
EUROPE
SOVIET UNION
Republican and local elections
In February and March the process of electing local soviets (councils) and republican legislatures was at its height, with elections taking place in most of the Soviet Union's 15 constituent republics.
In many parts of the country these proved to be the most open elections ever to take place under Soviet rule, and gave ample demonstration of collapsing support for the Communist Party (CPSU).
There were some notable victories for radical reformers, nationalists and candidates from the political opposition, notably in the Baltic republics and in Moscow, Leningrad and Kiev, the Soviet Union's three largest cities.
Republican Local soviets Supreme Soviet Armenia (to be decided) due on May 20 Azerbaijan (to be decided)(to be decided) Byelorussia March 4 March 4 Estonia Dec. 10, 1989 March 18 Georgia due on June 17 (to be decided) Kazakhstan Dec. 24, 1989 March 25 Kirghizia Feb. 25 Feb. 25 Latvia Dec. 10, 1989 March 18 Lithuania (to be decided) Feb. 24 Moldavia Feb. 25 Feb. 25 Russian Federation March 4 March 4 Tadjikistan Dec. 24, 1989 Feb. 25 Turkmenia Jan. 7 Jan. 7 Ukraine March 4 March 4 Uzbekistan Feb. 18 Feb. 18 *Second round run-off elections were held generally two weeks after the first round in constituencies where contests between more than two candidates had failed to produce a winner with over 50 per cent of the vote.
Repeat elections were needed where neither a sole candidate nor either of two candidates had secured 50 per cent of the vote in the first or second round.
Election timetable
First round voting*
Baltic republics and Moldavia
The elections in the Baltic republics, unlike in the rest of the Soviet Union, were held on a genuinely multiparty basis, constitutionally guaranteed Communist Party (CP) monopolies having been abolished in the past three months and new parties having been allowed to form for at least the past year.
However, the picture was confused by the fact that independent and party candidates alike affiliated themselves to groups such as the nationalist Popular Fronts, which did not compete as political parties.
In all three Baltic republics, and in the southern republic of Moldavia (which like them had been annexed by the Soviet Union in 1940), separatism was the dominant election issue.
[For Supreme Soviet elections in Lithuania and consequent developments in that republic see pp. 37299-300.]
In Estonia the nationalist Estonian Popular Front won 43 of the 105 seats in the Supreme Soviet and a further 35 went to the Association for a Free Estonia and other groups supporting independence.
The remaining 27 went to members or sympathizers of the International Movement, which drew its support overwhelmingly from Estonia's large Russian minority and vehemently opposed Estonian independence.
Candidates belonging to the Estonian CP, represented in all these groups, won 55 seats [for extraordinary Estonian CP congress at the end of March see below].
Ahead of the Supreme Soviet elections in Latvia the nationalist Latvian Popular Front had been confidently predicting that it would secure a two-thirds majority in the 201-seat chamber, basing this prediction on its unexpectedly strong showing in the local elections in December 1989 when its candidates had won around 75 per cent of all seats, including half the seats in the city soviet of the predominantly Russian-populated capital, Riga.
After the second round of voting the Popular Front was claiming the support of up to 121 deputies, thus needing to win only another 14 seats in repeat elections to achieve its goal.
The Latvian Supreme Soviet was not due to convene until after these repeat elections in May.
In Moldavia there was a marked division of voting along ethnic lines.
The anticipated strong showing for candidates affiliated to the nationalist Moldavian Popular Front appeared to have been matched by an equally strong showing for the rival Yedinstvo ( "Unity" ) movement, drawing its support largely from the Russian and Ukrainian minority communities.
Neither group competed as a political party in the elections, instead giving their backing to independent candidates.
Confusingly, many independents were in fact Moldavian CP members and also enjoyed that party's backing (the Moldavian CP did not officially nominate any candidates).
According to the results given in the Soviet central government newspaper Izvestiya after the second round of voting for the Moldavian Supreme Soviet, with all but 10 of the 380 seats filled, such dual endorsements meant that up to 80 per cent of the elected deputies were identified as communists, while both the Popular Front and Yedinstvo were reported each to be represented by around 30 per cent of deputies.
First session of new Estonian Supreme Soviet — Secession moves
The newly elected Estonian Supreme Soviet on March 30 approved a declaration which set in motion a gradual process of secession from the Soviet Union by rejecting central Soviet authority and announcing the goal of restoring Estonian independence.
 "The Supreme Soviet does not recognize the legality of state authority of the USSR on the territory of Estonia," said the declaration, which had been backed by 73 of the 105 deputies following a stormy debate.
It continued: "The Supreme Soviet declares the beginning of a period of transition which will culminate in the formation of the constitutional organs of state power in the Republic of Estonia." 
At the opening session on March 29 Arnold Rüütel, previously the Chairman of the Estonian Supreme Soviet Presidium, was elected to the restyled post of Chairman of the Supreme Soviet (de facto President).
Election of unofficial "Congress of Estonia" 
Nationalists organized in "Citizens' Committees" attempted to pre-empt the Estonian Supreme Soviet elections by holding at the end of February and in early March privately organized elections to a rival "Congress of Estonia" , intended as a revival of the parliament of the independent pre-war republic.
Some 580,000 Estonians took part, exclusively people who had been citizens of the pre-war independent Estonia and their descendants; most of Estonia's political parties fielded candidates, some with Popular Front endorsement.
The 499-member Congress held its constituent session on March 11-12, when it declared itself the constitutional representative of the Estonian people and passed resolutions calling for restoration of Estonia's independent statehood and the withdrawal of Soviet troops stationed in the republic.
Russian Federation, Ukraine and Byelorussia
The biggest single voting exercise of the entire local and republican election process occurred on March 4 when more than 100 million people (an average turnout of roughly 70 per cent) went to the polls in the three predominantly Slav republics.
In the Russian Federation there were on average six candidates for each of the 1,068 seats in the republican Supreme Soviet.
Consequently the vast majority of contests were not decided until the second round on March 18.
The most striking results were in Moscow, where candidates belonging to an umbrella organization of reformist groups and political clubs calling itself Democratic Russia won 55 of the capital's 65 Supreme Soviet seats, and in Leningrad, where a comparable organization calling itself Democratic Elections"90 won 28 of the city's 34 Supreme Soviet seats; both organizations also won control of their respective city soviets.
The Leningrad city and regional Communist Party first secretary and leading conservative, Boris Gidaspov, had been the most prominent local party leader to ignore party recommendations and had refrained from standing in the elections to the Russian Supreme Soviet, having apparently anticipated the kind of defeat inflicted at the polls on March 4 and 18 on many other Russian city and regional party secretaries.
However, the results from outside the major cities reportedly had a more traditional complexion, with party officials and bureaucrats featuring prominently among the elected deputies and looking likely to form the majority in parliament.
The elections in the Ukraine saw the nationalist organization Rukh ( "The People's Movement" ) take control of the city soviet in the capital, Kiev.
Legally registered only since late February, Rukh also performed well in the west of the republic (a nationalist heartland), where it took control of the Lvov city soviet.
In the Ukrainian Supreme Soviet election, in which there were on average almost seven candidates for each of the 450 seats, Rukh won the majority of the Kiev seats, but its leaders claimed that it had performed badly in most rural areas because of obstruction and electoral malpractice by officials.
In Byelorussia, which was widely regarded as retaining one of the most conservative republican leaderships, it had been decided to allocate a quota of reserved Supreme Soviet seats for official organizations (a practice applied in the March 1989 elections to the USSR Congress of People's Deputies but since labelled undemocratic and abandoned for national elections — see p. 36978).
In direct elections for 272 of the 360 Supreme Soviet seats there were on average five candidates for each seat.
Candidates endorsed by the republic's nationalist Popular Front-style organization Adradzhenne did better than expected, despite alleged official harassment during the campaign, but compared with the other two Slav republics there were no spectacular upsets.
Pre-election demonstrations
Ahead of the March 4 elections massive demonstrations in support of radical democratic reforms were staged on Feb. 25, in defiance of official warnings and condemnation, in cities across the Russian Federation.
In Moscow at least 50,000 people defied a heavy security presence to stage a march and rally close to the city centre which featured speeches and banners strongly condemning Communist Party leaders, including President Mikhail Gorbachev, and calling for round table talks between the authorities and the political opposition.
Thousands of people pressing similar demands also demonstrated in Leningrad, Yaroslavl, Gorky, Saratov, Voronezh, Stavropol, Volgograd, Ufa, Sverdlovsk, Omsk, Barnaul and Novosibirsk (many of these cities had recently witnessed protests resulting in the removal from office of unpopular local Communist Party leaders — see p. 37235).
There were also pro-reform demonstrations on Feb. 25 in Minsk (the Byelorussian capital), in Kiev, and in the Ukrainian city of Donetsk.
Central Asia
Some of the least surprising election results were recorded in the five Central Asian republics.
As in the Congress of People's Deputies elections in March 1989 [see p. 36513], practices reminiscent of elections held before the introduction of the democratic reforms under Gorbachev continued to prevail, including artificially high turnouts, a lack of choice between candidates for many seats, and overwhelming communist majorities.
In Kazakhstan (as in Byelorussia) reserved seats for official organizations had been retained.
In Uzbekistan the practice of allowing many local Communist Party leaders to stand unchallenged in Supreme Soviet constituencies prompted isolated protests by supporters of unofficial opposition groups.
However, in only one of the 179 single-candidate constituencies did the candidate fail to win the required 50 per cent in first round voting.
Communist Party members accounted for 348 of the 368 deputies elected in the first round to the new 500-member Uzbek Supreme Soviet.
By contrast, in Tadjikistan each of the 230 Supreme Soviet seats was contested by between two and 20 candidates.
New Uzbek President and Prime Minister
The new Uzbek Supreme Soviet held its constituent session on March 24-31.
On the first day Islam Karimov, the first secretary of the Uzbek CP, was elected President of the Supreme Soviet by secret ballot.
Later, Shakurulla Mirsaidov was elected Chairman of the Council of Ministers (Prime Minister).
Transcaucasia
As of the end of March elections were still awaited in all three Transcaucasian republics.
Due to the continuing grave security situation in Transcaucasia dates had still to be set for local soviet and republican Supreme Soviet elections in Azerbaijan.
Only in March were Supreme Soviet elections finally scheduled (for May 20) in neighbouring Armenia.
In Georgia the Supreme Soviet, reportedly bowing to pressure from opposition groups, on March 20 decided to postpone the elections to that body due on March 25 until October or November, in order that other political parties would have time enough to organize themselves to take part.
At the same time it amended the republic's constitution to abolish the guaranteed Communist Party monopoly of power.
Estonian Communist Party independence
Delegates at the close of a three-day extraordinary congress of the Estonian Communist Party (CP) on March 25 voted overwhelmingly to endorse a declaration in principle of the party's independence.
Unlike its counterpart in Lithuania, however, which had split decisively from the Communist Party of the Soviet Union (CPSU) in December 1989 [see pp. 37128-29; 37168], the Estonian CP decided on a six-month transitional period before taking a final vote on the issue of the party's future relations with the CPSU.
This was interpreted as a concession to President Mikhail Gorbachev (who was also the CPSU general secretary), since the six months would not elapse until after the 28th CPSU congress due in July, at which far-reaching party restructuring, possibly including federalization, was anticipated [see pp. 37128; 37234-35].
At the Estonian CP congress there were 432 votes in favour of party independence, three votes against and six abstentions.
A new party programme was adopted, and Vaino Vaelaes, the outgoing party first secretary, was elected overwhelmingly to the new post of party chairman.
The vote on party independence was boycotted, however, by 228 delegates drawn mostly from Estonian's large ethnic Russian minority population.
It was reported that immediately after the close of the congress around 120 of these delegates began discussions on splitting from the Estonian CP and setting up a rival communist party in Estonia which would be subordinate to the CPSU.
Continuing ethnic unrest
Central Asia
The resurgence since late February of violence in Uzbekistan against the Meskhetian minority [see p. 37257]produced its first reported fatalities on March 3 when at least three people were killed in clashes between Uzbek demonstrators and security forces in Parkent, near the Uzbek capital of Tashkent.
According to official reports the deaths of two civilians and one policeman occurred when police and Interior Ministry troops opened fire on an Uzbek mob which was attempting to storm local government buildings; another 73 people, mostly members of the security forces, were injured.
The mob was demanding the eviction of Meshketians who had been temporarily rehoused in Parkent after being evacuated in February from other parts of Tashkent oblast (region) to escape pogroms against their communities.
The Tadjik Communist Party central committee on March 3 expelled from the party Buri Karimov and Nur Tabarov, and on March 19 they were dismissed by the Tadjik Supreme Soviet as, respectively, a Deputy Chairman of the Tadjik Council of Ministers and Tadjik Minister of Culture, for having "compromised themselves" during nationalist unrest in the Tadjik capital, Dushanbe, in mid-February.
They were accused of complicity in an attempt to overthrow the Tadjik government at the height of the unrest [see p. 37256].
Azerbaijan and Armenia
A fresh outbreak of violence in Azerbaijan, the worst since January, occurred on March 24 when armed Armenian militants attacked villages near the town of Kazakh (close to the Armenian border), killing nine people, including a family of five who were burned alive in their home.
In the course of the next week fighting flared at several points along the Armenia-Azerbaijan borders.
On March 5 a closed sitting of the USSR Supreme Soviet adopted a resolution which concluded that efforts by the central authorities to normalize the situation in Transcaucasia by political means had achieved "no positive results" .
It ordered the state authorities of Armenia and Azerbaijan to "enter into talks immediately to conclude an inter-republican treaty on restoring trust and accord between peoples, proceeding from the principles of equality of rights and the sovereignty and territorial integrity of both republics" [for February USSR Supreme Soviet debate on Transcaucasia see p. 37257].
Responding to the resolution, the Prime Ministers of Armenia and Azerbaijan met for preliminary talks in the Georgian capital, Tbilisi, on March 30.
Creation of new State Committee for Nationalities — Ministerial resignations
It was announced on March 30 that the USSR Supreme Soviet had set up a USSR Union Republican State Committee for the Nationalities Question "to improve state administration in the sphere of national development and inter-ethnic relations" .
There was no announcement of who would chair the new State Committee.
The USSR Ministers of Health and of Civil Aviation, respectively Yevgeny Chazov and Col.-Gen.
Aleksandr Volkov, were relieved of their posts "in connection with their transfer to other work" on March 29.
There was no immediate announcement of their replacements.
Tank sale scandal
Nikolai Ryzhkov, the Chairman of the USSR Council of Ministers (Prime Minister), on March 14 threatened his own and his government's resignation after his name was cited during exchanges in the Congress of People's Deputies in connection with a recently discovered scandal centring on a plot illegally to export Soviet battle tanks to the West.
The scandal had first come to light in mid-January when officers of the State Security Committee (KGB) had uncovered 12 new T-72 battle tanks in crates on board a freight train at the Black Sea port of Novorossiysk, concealed as part of a shipment of scrap metal intended for export.
It had emerged that a recently formed Soviet state co-operative company called ANT, with clearance from at least three government ministries, had bought the tanks as surplus stock from an armaments factory at Nizhny Tagil in the Urals, had arranged to sell them to a Western country (not officially disclosed, but unofficially reported to be France), and had stood to make US$8,000,000 profit on the deal.
It had also been discovered that ANT, which had since been closed down, had been preparing other illegal export deals worth nearly US$900,000,000 involving items including valuable metals, uncut diamonds and classified aviation equipment.
The government at the end of January had officially reprimanded in connection with the scandal Boris Belousov, Apollon Systsov and Vladimir Shimko, respectively the USSR Ministers of the Defence, Aviation and Radio Industries, together with other senior officials.
Gen. V. Dovgan, a senior military-industrial administrator, had been dismissed and stripped of his rank after it had been revealed that he informally approved the sale of the tanks to ANT, and Deputy Aviation Industry Minister Anatoly Bratukhin had been dismissed for gross violation of arms export regulations.
Anatoly Sobchak, a radical Congress deputy from Leningrad, alleged in the Congress on March 14 that Ryzhkov had personally signed the export licence.
In reply Ryzhkov rounded on President Gorbachev, asking why Sobchak was so frequently given the floor to make such statements.
Ryzhkov angrily denied the allegation, adding: "The government may make mistakes, but it is not corrupt.
How can a government carry on in such circumstances?
I ask you: let us work, or we will resign."
The Congress then signalled its support for Ryzhkov with a thunderous and sustained ovation.
Gorbachev pronounced that Sobchak's statement had been "unseemly for a deputy" .
Some deputies proposed that footage of the exchanges concerning the ANT affair should be omitted from the coming evening's edited television broadcast of Congress proceedings, but this was defeated in a vote by 1,250 to 637.
Reform of laws on property ownership and on land leasing
Property ownership
The Supreme Soviet adopted a 34-Article law on ownership on March 6.
Deputy Prime Minister Leonid Abalkin, presenting the draft law, said that it would create conditions necessary for the transfer to a planned market economy.
The law allowed Soviet citizens the right to own and inherit property, mineral resources, equipment, money, shares and water.
Ownership was divided into three categories: state, collective and individual.
The official news agency Tass pointed out that the term "private property" had been avoided because the phrase "has great emotive force" in the USSR, where people associated it with exploitation.
The bill had faced a stormy second reading on Feb. 15, with Kharkov deputy Leonid Suchov calling for a national referendum on the issue, since he believed the law "betrayed the essence of the state" .
This reflected the view of other deputies who foresaw property-owning black marketeers controlling the economy.
However, deputy Vladimir Tikhonov called this fear "our chronic disease" .
He said that if deputies took such a blinkered view of property relations and of lessening the economic power of the state over production, they would be unable to draw up a logical law reflecting the need for better social conditions.
Other fears expressed at the debate included the belief that republics with more recent experience of private farming, for example the three Baltic republics (which had joined the Soviet Union only in 1940), would develop at different rates to other parts of the country which had experienced only collectivized agriculture.
The law, which was to come into effect on July 1, was adopted with 350 votes in favour, three against and 11 abstentions.
Land leasing
The Soviet central government newspaper Izvestiya published on March 7 the "fundamentals" regarding land regulation, as discussed by the Supreme Soviet on Feb. 20 and 28.
The document stated that land was the property of the people living on it, and that every citizen had a right to a plot.
Soviets of people's deputies were to be given the right to distribute land to individuals, to collective and state farms, to institutions and to enterprises.
The area to be distributed was to be set by individual republics.
Tenure would be in perpetuity.
The Times on March 3 commented that there was still a great fear that any future political retreat would lead to confiscation of livestock and crops.
To combat this the regulations stipulated that compensation would be paid in full to landowners, including any lost profit, should their land be taken away from them.
In general landowners were expected to work the land and to increase productivity, but not to upset the ecological balance.
However, some of the Soviet Union's smallest ethnic groups, principally the indigenous peoples of Siberia, were to be allowed to own land without having to put it to any economic purpose.
Payment was to be exacted through a land tax or rent set by the republics according to the quality of the land.
Regulations on payment would come into effect on Jan. 1, 1991, while the rest of the regulations were valid from March 15, 1990.
Ukrainian decision to close Chernobyl nuclear power station
The Ukranian Supreme Soviet announced in early March that it would phase out operation of the Chernobyl nuclear reactor over the next five years before closing it down completely.
In a resolution published by the republic's official press, it was also announced that the Ukraine would stop building nuclear power plants altogether.
It was unclear whether the Ukraine had the power to carry out these resolutions; the final decisions on such matters had hitherto always been taken in Moscow.
New Soviet-US grain deal
A new five-year agreement for Soviet grain purchases from the United States was concluded in Vienna on March 22, to replace the 1983 agreement due to expire at the end of 1990.
Details would not be published until the signature of the agreement, expected at the planned June summit meeting between Gorbachev and US President George Bush, but it was known to involve an increase in minimum annual Soviet purchases, from 9,000,000 to 10,000,000 tonnes, including at least 4,000,000 tonnes each of wheat and feedgrains, and the balance in soyabeans or soyabean meal.
In any one year the Soviet Union could choose to substitute up to 750,000 tonnes of any one commodity for another.
The Soviet side had originally sought greater flexibility, with minimum purchases as low as 6,000,000 tonnes; actual purchases in 1989, however, had been a record 21,700,000 tonnes.
The grain deal was concluded in the context of broader negotiations in Vienna on a bilateral trade agreement which could open the way for the US to accord most favoured nation (MFN) status to the Soviet Union, entailing the application of the lowest available tariffs on Soviet goods.
EUROPE
YUGOSLAVIA
Worsening crisis in LCY
The League of Communists of Yugoslavia (LCY) appeared to be moving closer to collapse when on March 30 its central committee failed to muster a quorum for a plenary session.
The session had been intended to set a date for reconvening the 14th party congress, which had broken up in disarray on Jan. 23 [see pp. 37172].
According to the party statutes a quorum depended not on a simple majority of central committee members being present at a plenary session but on all the LCY's constituent republican and provincial Leagues of Communists (LCs) being represented.
Although the session began with 88 of the 165 members in attendance, it was boycotted by all the central committee members from the former Slovene League of Communists (LC), which had unilaterally split from the LCY and renamed itself in February [see p. 37255], as well as by most members from the Croatian and Macedonian LCs.
Furthermore, central committee members from the Bosnia-Hercegovina LC staged a walkout in the course of the session after LCY presidium president Milan Pancevski (Macedonia) and acting presidium secretary Petar Skundric (Serbia) had tried to insist that a decision on resuming the congress be taken without a quorum.
The presidium had named Skundric to take the place of Stefan Korosec (Slovenia) as its secretary on Feb. 16.
During February and March there were signs that the Croatian and Macedonian LCs were preparing to emulate the Slovene party by splitting from the LCY.
Both parties adopted the name League of Communists — Party of Democratic Change, and announced that the LCY could only survive by embracing a clearly-defined democratic reform policy and by radically restructuring itself as a confederation of independent parties.
Dropping of "socialist" from official name of Slovenia
Slovenia's republican Assembly (parliament) on March 8 adopted amendments to the republic's constitution which dropped the adjective "socialist" from the republic's formal name and from the names of all republican institutions.
IMF agreement
The Yugoslav government announced on March 19 the conclusion of an 18-month standby credit agreement with the International Monetary Fund (IMF) allowing drawings, in seven tranches, up to the equivalent of US$600 million.
It was expected that this would open the way for further World Bank and European Community lending (Yugoslavia having already requested $500 million in aid to recapitalize its banking system, and $1,000 million in medium-term economic assistance over three years, from the Group of 24 Western countries and Japan).
The IMF agreement was intended to support the restructuring process which was being pursued with the application of the austerity measures, a wage freeze and currency reform announced in December 1989 [see p. 37194].
Alleged poisoning outbreak in Kosovo
The troubled relations between the Serbian and the majority ethnic Albanian populations in the autonomous province of Kosovo suffered a further setback in late March, after an incident on March 22 in which some 400 students and schoolchildren were rushed to hospital with symptoms thought to be consistent with poisoning.
Although Serbian officials dismissed the incident as an outbreak of mass hysteria, Albanians described it as a mass poisoning perpetrated by Serbian nationalists, and anti-Serbian and anti-Montenegrin demonstrations quickly broke out across the province.
More than 100 people were injured on March 22 at Podujevo, near the regional capital Pristina, when more than 4,000 people began assaulting Serbs and Montenegrins.
Troops were brought in on March 24 to quell the unrest, and a wave of arrests began among Albanian activists.
The Serbian Internal Affairs Secretariat (i.e. Ministry) declared on March 28 that rumours of a deliberate chemical poisoning were merely "a stage-managed deception by the protagonists of Albanian nationalism and separatism" .
Meanwhile, however, the head of the Ministry, Jusuf Karakushi, resigned on March 26 after accusations that he had failed to protect the Albanians properly.
EUROPE
HUNGARY
First round of general election
The centre-right populist Hungarian Democratic Forum (HDF or MDF) emerged as the strongest single party in the first round of voting on March 25 of elections to the Országgyülés (National Assembly).
The HDF was closely followed by the more liberal Alliance of Free Democrats (SzDSz), while the agrarian Independent Smallholders' Party came third.
There was a turnout of 4,892,242 or 63.15 per cent of the total electorate.
A second round of polling on April 8 would determine the final distribution of seats, and in the event only five constituencies had results settled on the first round.
The Assembly had 386 seats and under the country's complex electoral system (approved in October 1989 — see p. 36961), there were 176 single-member constituencies, where results were decided either by overall majority in the first round, or in a second round to which candidates would go forward if they finished in the top three or obtained over 15 per cent of the vote.
Of the remaining seats, 152 would be elected on a proportional basis from county and metropolitan lists, and 58 were to be indirectly elected from national "compensation" lists nominated by the parties.
In the first round voters had to indicate their preference for an individual candidate and for a party list.
Out of more than 50 parties and associations established in the previous 18 months, 28 contested the election but only 12 at national level.
The HDF and the SzDSz were the parties mainly in contention throughout the campaign.
The HDF polled well in the capital, while the SzDSz consolidated its position further to the west, reflecting a traditional economic and political divide between the east and west of the country.
The HDF, led by Jozsef Antall, a 57-year-old historian, favoured the privatization of state property "within the context of a reasonable and socially controlled process" .
With a traditional power base in the provinces and an estimated membership of 25,000, the populist HDF appeared to benefit from nationalist outrage at the violence against ethnic Hungarians in Tirgu Mures, Romania, immediately before the election [see p. 37327].
The SzDSz favoured a more radical restructuring and privatization of the economy, rapid integration into Western Europe, a faster withdrawal of Soviet troops from Hungary than that already under way[see pp. 37328; 37258; 37195], and withdrawal from the Warsaw Pact.
Led by Janos Kis, a 46-year-old former dissident, the SzDSz claimed 20,000 members, many of whom were "urbanist" , Jewish intellectuals.
Of the other parties, the Independent Smallholders' Party (which had won 57 per cent of the vote in the last free election in 1945 — see p. 7600), led by Istvan Prepeliczay, advocated the return of collectivized land to its owners as listed in the 1947 land register; the Hungarian Socialist Party (HSP) was established in October 1989 [see p. 36960-61]as the reformed successor to the Hungarian Socialist Workers' Party (HSWP) and currently claimed 50,000-60,000 members, the first candidate on its national list being Imre Poszgay, who had acted as a catalyst for many of the reforms but who came third in the constituency where he was also standing; and the League of Young Democrats (FIDESZ), led by Viktor Orban and claiming 5,000 members, was closely allied to the SzDSz.
HDF 24.71 SzDSz 21.38 Independent Smallholders' Party 11.76 HSP 10.89 FIDESZ 8.94 Christian Democratic People's Party 6.46
Percentage of votes won by parties in first round of elections
Parties polling less than 4 per cent of the vote would not gain representation through the county lists.
These were the hardline communist HSWP — 3.68 per cent; the Hungarian Social Democratic Party — 3.55 per cent (launched in March 1989 and led by Anna Petrasovits — see p. 36939); the communist-orientated Agrarian Alliance — 3.15 per cent ; the Entrepreneurs' Party — 1.89 per cent (formed in August 1989 — ibid.); the Patriotic Electoral Coalition — 1.87 per cent (broadly of socialist persuasion and led by Kálmán Kulcsár, Minister of Justice); and the Hungarian People's Party — 0.76 per cent (a successor to the National Peasant League and led by former HDF leader Gyula Fekete — ibid.).
IMF agreement — EC loan
The International Monetary Fund (IMF) announced on March 14 its approval of a standby credit arrangement for Hungary allowing drawings up to 159,210,000 special drawing rights (US$206,000,000) over 12 months, in support of its economic and financial reform programme.
Hungary's emergency economic plan had been approved by the Orsággyülés in December 1989 [see p. 37130], since which time three small devaluations of the forint had reduced its exchange value by a total of 5 per cent.
Hungary had in late January limited the renewal of export licences for sales to the Soviet Union (with which it had a marked trade surplus) and pursued its aim of exporting more to the West for hard currency.
The IMF noted as an objective the reduction of Hungary's current-account deficit in trade with the West, from $1,400 million in 1989 to $550 million in 1990.
A further sign of reform noted by the IMF was the passage of legislation in March providing for the establishment of a Hungarian stock exchange.
The IMF agreement was expected to open the way for further lending by the World Bank and by Western countries and Japan in the framework of the Group of 24 [ibid.], and on March 30 the European Communities (EC) approved payment of the first tranche, 350,000,000 European currency units (ECUs), of a five-year loan of ECU870,000,000 (US$1,000 million), requested by Hungary in November 1989 and approved in principle by EC heads of government at their Strasbourg summit meeting in December [see p. 37132].
The EC Commission on March 30 described the loan as "a mark of our confidence in the will of Hungary's political and economic leaders to achieve political reform and economic recovery" .
EUROPE
CZECHOSLOVAKIA
State budget for 1990 — Other economic measures
Vaclav Klaus, the Finance Minister, on March 27 presented the revised state budget for 1990 to the Federal Assembly.
In his introduction he said that this budget had to signal a radical departure from practice in recent years, especially in stressing an anti-inflationary orientation and in moving away from state paternalism towards private enterprises.
The budget aimed to turn an effective deficit of over 10,000 million crowns (US$1.00=16.9702 crowns as at March 26, 1990), as envisaged in the original draft budget for 1990 prepared by the previous communist regime, into a real surplus of 5,400 million crowns, primarily by cutting subsidies to economic bodies (including agricultural co-operatives) by 10 per cent, by cutting spending on defence and security by 12.5 per cent , and by cancelling subsidies of 1,200 million crowns for the Communist Party of Czechoslovakia (CPCz).
Overall revenue was projected at 420,000 million crowns, 2.9 per cent more than in 1989.
The federal budget revenue would be one-third lower than in 1989, due to a shift of resources to the budgets of the Czech and Slovak republics.
This would mean that the federal share of the total budget revenue in relation to the two republics would be reduced from 50 per cent to 33 per cent.
Klaus said that the measures included in the budget were part of an overall economic reform procedure.
The restrictive financial policy would be aimed at ensuring an elementary degree of monetary stability and creating the basis for further steps in liberalizing prices, the exchange rate and foreign trade.
A session of the federal government on March 1 approved a bill on private enterprises, removing all limits on the number of people whom such enterprises could employ or on the level of profits which could accrue.
It was also decided that joint stock companies would be permitted and that foreign-owned ventures would be allowed to operate on the same terms as domestically owned firms.
Klaus announced on March 23 that a government office for privatization of state-owned enterprises would be set up; it was reported, however, that there were differences within the Cabinet over the extent to which such enterprises should be privatized.
Klaus announced on March 22 that the government had decided to cancel Czechoslovakia's multilateral agreements with the CMEA (COMECON) under which the exchange rates between the crown and the currencies of the other CMEA countries were fixed by joint arrangement [see p. 37334].
Following the elapse of a mandatory three-month period after notification of the cancellation, Czechoslovakia would henceforth be able to fix its own exchange rates.
Dispute over renaming of state — Resignations — Other political developments
Following a long debate, the Federal Assembly on March 29 voted to resolve the issue of renaming the state (known officially as the Czechoslovak Socialist Republic since 1960) by a compromise, whereby the state would be referred to as the Czechoslovak Federative Republic in the Czech lands and the Czecho-Slovak Federative Republic in Slovakia.
There had been much insistence among Slovaks that the country's name had to be hyphenated in order to make explicit the separate and equal identity of the two nations, whereas many Czechs felt that the issue was divisive and that the state's title should be merely shortened by removing the word "Socialist" .
It was pointed out in Slovakia that the first documents issued in the name of the state at its inception in 1918 had used the hyphenated form, and thousands of Slovaks demonstrated in Bratislava, the Slovak capital, on March 30 against the omission of the hyphen.
The Slovak National Council (parliament) on March 1 decided to change the title of the Slovak Socialist Republic to the Slovak Republic.
The Czech Socialist Republic was similarly renamed the Czech Republic by the Czech National Council on March 6.
Resignation of Slovak Premier from CPCz
Milan Cic, the Slovak Premier, on March 10 declared his intention of leaving the CPCz, stating that this step should not be linked with any "careerist interests or motives" .
He later remarked that if the government was to fulfil its role it should not be affiliated to any party, and it therefore followed that the Premier should not belong to any party either.
It was announced on March 12 that Vladimir Lexa, the Slovak First Deputy Premier, had informed Cic of his decision to leave the CPCz.
Communist Party of Bohemia and Moravia
A Communist Party of Bohemia and Moravia was formed on March 31.
Although there had always been an autonomous Communist Party of Slovakia within the CPCz, no such organization had existed in the Czech lands of Bohemia and Moravia except briefly during the Prague spring of 1968 when such a party was mooted.
First sentence in connection with Nov. 17 demonstration
First Lieutenant Jaroslav Oudran was sentenced on March 14 to 4 1/2 years' imprisonment and stripped of his rank by a military court, having been convicted of using force in an "inadmissible" way during the violent police dispersal of a demonstration by students on Nov. 17, 1989, which had set in motion the events which led to the removal of the communist regime [see p. 37026].
Oudran was the first police officer to be convicted for his conduct during the demonstration.
Havel's visit to France and UK — Other foreign visits
President Vaclav Havel paid a state visit to France on March 19-21, holding talks with President Mitterrand.
He then paid a state visit to the United Kingdom on March 21-23, the first by a Czechoslovak President since 1923.
He was received by Queen Elizabeth and held talks with the UK Prime Minister, Margaret Thatcher.
[For his visit to Iceland, Canada and the USA in February see p. 37256.]
While Thatcher made clear in a speech at a dinner in Havel's honour that she saw a continued need for NATO and the presence of US troops in Europe, Havel stated in a press conference during his visit that it was "unfortunate to keep on insisting on NATO" , as the European situation was changing rapidly, and he made clear his preference for a common security system subsuming both NATO and the Warsaw Pact.
Havel also disclosed at the press conference that Czechoslovakia had exported over 1,000 tonnes of Semtex explosive to Libya in recent years under the previous regime; by his reckoning, this meant that "world terrorism" would have enough Semtex "to last 150 years" .
He said that the exports had not been profitable, but had been made "on orders from above" , a remark which was interpreted as a reference to the former Soviet leadership of the President Brezhnev.
He added that the exports had ceased some time previously.
The UK Foreign and Commonwealth Office announced on March 22 that the UK and Czechoslovakia would co-operate in trying to find out the ultimate destination of the Semtex which had been exported to Libya.
It was announced on March 20 that Jiri Dienstbier, the Czechoslovak Foreign Minister, had rescinded the previous regime's decision to expel UK, US and Canadian diplomats who had supported the Czechoslovak human rights movement Charter 77, and had invited the diplomats to return to the country at any time.
West German President's visit to Prague — Other visits
President von Weizsäcker of West Germany paid a one-day official visit to Prague on March 15, the 51st anniversary of the Nazi occupation of the city, at the invitation of Havel, who had intended the occasion as a symbolic mark of reconciliation between the Czech and German nations.
Weizsäcker, who was the first head of state to be received in Czechoslovakia since Havel's election as President, was accompanied by Hans-Dietrich Genscher, the West German Foreign Minister, who held talks with Dienstbier.
Mark Eyskens, the Belgian Foreign Minister, paid an official visit to Prague on March 19-20, holding talks with Havel, Dienstbier, Klaus and Marian Calfa, the Czechoslovakian Prime Minister.
Dienstbier held talks with Manfred Wörner, the Secretary-General of NATO, and ambassadors of the NATO member countries during a visit to Brussels on March 3.
EUROPE
ROMANIA
Ethnic violence — Electoral law
A state of emergency was declared in the Transylvanian city of Tirgu Mures, 300 km north-west of the capital Bucharest, on March 20 after an estimated 2,000 Romanian nationalists, armed with scythes, axes and clubs, had attacked a peaceful demonstration of 5,000 ethnic Hungarians.
Three people (whose identities were unknown) were reported killed and 300 wounded.
Soldiers and armed police, supported by tanks, were drafted into the centre of the city to keep the two sides apart.
A general strike by supporters of both sides (but predominantly Hungarians) had been called in surrounding regions and the Hungarian Prime Minister Miklós Németh sent a letter of protest to Bucharest and appealed to the UN to intervene.
President Ion Iliescu called for calm and the Council of National Unity (CNU — see p. 37251-52) announced that a commission of inquiry would be established immediately.
On the evening of March 20 an estimated 70,000 ethnic Hungarians demonstrated in Bucharest.
Unrest had been growing in the Transylvanian region ever since December 1989 when the new National Salvation Front (NSF) government had reached an agreement with the Hungarian government to restore ethnic and cultural rights denied to the Hungarian community of 2,000,000 people by the former regime of Nicolae Ceausescu.
These had included education in Hungarian, increased autonomy in local affairs and an end to the forced settlement of immigrants from elsewhere in Romania.
Romanian nationalists, in particular the right-wing Romanian Hearth Movement (Vatra Romaneasca — UVR) formed in Tirgu Mures in December 1989, had opposed such demands, arguing that they ultimately represented Hungarian moves for the re-annexing of Transylvania to Hungary.
Violent confrontations had taken place in Satu Mare on March 15 when Hungarians had attempted to celebrate Hungarian National Day, and in Tirgu Mures on March 16 when a Hungarian-owned pharmacy had allegedly refused to serve Romanians.
However, a joint Hungarian-Romanian demonstration in the nearby city of Cluj on March 18 had demanded an end to inter-ethnic hostility and called for the resignation of Iliescu and for the dismissal of all members of Ceausescu's Securitate secret police.
Anti-Hungarian demonstrations had intensified on March 19 in Tirgu Mures when nationalists, many of whom were reported to have been brought in from neighbouring villages, stormed the headquarters of the Hungarian Democratic Union of Romania (HDUR) while police and soldiers present reportedly refused to intervene.
Twenty-four people were reported to have been injured.
Further attacks on the offices of Radio Tirgu Mures to stop Hungarian broadcasts resulted in Andras Suetoe, an eminent Hungarian poet, being seriously injured.
Amid criticism that the government's reactions to the troubles had been slow and their position confused and biased, Deputy Prime Minister Gelu Voican-Voiculescu, who was leading compromise talks between the HDUR and the UVR on March 22, assured crowds in Tirgu Mures that the government's commission of inquiry would be objective but would seek the "resolute" punishment of those found guilty of instigating the unrest.
The joint HDUR and UVR talks ended on March 24 and called for respect of rights of nationalists and minorities, for the right to education in a mother tongue and for an unbiased bilingual media to assess accurately recent disturbances.
Two commissions were to be established to facilitate progress in these areas.
HDUR representatives also declared that the Hungarian population were loyal supporters of Romania as a sovereign and unitary state.
In response an estimated 6,000 nationalists were reported to have demonstrated the same evening in Tirgu Mures, demanding that Hungarians not be granted separate education in their own language or minority rights.
Troops remained deployed in the city.
An arson attack gutted the Bucharest offices of the Hungarian state airline (Malev) on March 25 as crowds outside protested that the Hungarian population was planning to secede from Romania.
The attack was denounced by the Hungarian government, which called on the Romanian authorities to stop such "terrorist acts" .
Smaller nationalist protests were also reported to have taken place in other towns.
Iliescu broadcast a further plea for ethnic tolerance.
On March 26, schools and colleges reopened in Tirgu Mures, including the Institute of Medicine and Pharmacy whose ethnic Hungarian students had been on strike for three weeks, and tension in the city and surrounding region was reported to have eased.
Electoral law
The CNU finally adopted a new electoral law on March 17 which cleared the way for the holding of a general election on May 20.
Its 99 articles had been subject to public scrutiny since January and the final endorsement of each one provoked lengthy and often heated exchanges among CNU representatives.
The first articles established general principles of democracy, freedom and human dignity, based on a multiparty system with a President, Senate and Assembly of Deputies elected by universal and secret voting.
Detailed clauses ensured that (i) the President once elected could not be a member of a political party;(ii) the military were denied seats in the Senate;(iii) members of the Securitate and militia bodies guilty of repression and public officials guilty of abuses were not eligible for election;(iv) candidates for election to the Assembly of Deputies had to be over 21 years of age and for the presidency and Senate over 30, with no upper age limit;(v) prisoners and the mentally handicapped were not eligible for election or to vote;(vi) independent candidates were eligible to stand for the Senate and Assembly if supported by at least 250 electors and for the presidency if supported by 100,000 electors;(vii) the votes of Romanian citizens abroad via diplomatic missions, consulates or trade agencies would be treated as votes cast in the city of Bucharest;(viii) the financing of political parties from abroad was forbidden;(ix) strict procedures would be applied to check and validate nominations;(x) hours of polling would be from 6 a.m. to 11 p.m.
Agreed amendments to the law increased the number of Senate seats for the city of Bucharest from seven to 14 and the total number of seats in the Assembly of Deputies was raised from 331 to 387.
Suicide of Ceausescu trial judge — Opening of trial of Securitate officers
Maj.-Gen.
Gica Popa, the judge who condemned Ceausescu and his wife Elena Ceausescu to death on Dec. 25, 1989, was reported to have committed suicide on March 1.
Popa, who had headed the Bucharest Military Court since 1987, was known to have suffered a nervous breakdown.
However, his wife, Eleonora Popa, confirmed on March 2 that he had been receiving "anonymous threats" for over two months and that he had received no support from the Justice Ministry, which had confiscated his suicide letter.
On March 2 the trial of 21 police and Securitate officers began in Timisoara.
Six of the defendants, headed by Maj.-Gen.
Emil Macri, the former Securitate Head of Economic Counter-Intelligence, were accused of genocide, the aiding and abetting of genocide and the illegal disposal of 40 bodies from the Timisoara mortuary.
They faced life imprisonment if convicted.
EUROPE
BULGARIA
Restoration of Turkish names — Economic legislation
Relegalization of Turkish and Pomak names
The National Assembly on March 5 unanimously adopted a bill which entitled all Bulgarian citizens freely to choose their own names, and thus allowed ethnic Turks and Pomaks (descendants of Bulgarians converted to Islam during Ottoman rule) to resume the use of their original names in place of the Slavic names which they had been compelled to adopt during official campaigns of forced assimilation, the Pomaks in the early 1970s and the Turks in 1984-85.
The bill entered into force on March 13, and under a transitional regulation in force until the end of 1990 citizens were allowed to resume using their former names simply by registering them with local authorities; after 1990 a name could only be changed subject to approval and registration by a court of law.
Substantial changes to the original draft of the bill, notably the extension of all its provisions to cover Pomaks, had been secured partly as the result of agitation by several thousand Turks and Pomaks who demonstrated outside the National Assembly during the March 5 session.
New National Day — Demonstrations
The State Council led by President Petur Mladenov issued a decree on Feb. 27 reinstating as Bulgaria's National Day March 3, the date of Bulgaria's liberation in 1878 from Ottoman Turkish rule, in place of Sept. 9, the anniversary of the 1944 communist seizure of power.
On March 3 there were official ceremonies in Sofia (the capital), as well as a rally by over 150,000 supporters of the opposition Union of Democratic Forces (UDF), representing the culmination of a week of organized protests against the slow pace of democratic reform [for start of protests on Feb. 25 see p. 37254].
At least 50,000 UDF supporters staged a demonstration in Sofia on March 9 to protest at the continuing near-monopoly of the Bulgarian Communist Party over the press.
Under an agreement reached at the round table in January the UDF newspaper Demokratsiya was permitted a maximum circulation of 70,000 copies a day [see p. 37193], but this compared with 760,000 copies of the BCP daily Rabotnichesko Delo.
Legalization of strikes
Strikes were legalized for the first time in Bulgaria's history when on March 6 the National Assembly passed a bill on settling collective industrial disputes.
Strikes were only permitted, however, as a last resort in the event of failure of a lengthy arbitration process.
When industrial disputes arose the bill first prescribed direct talks between workers and management, followed in the event of a breakdown in these talks by mediation for up to 14 days by an independent arbitration; if mediation failed a strike could then be called subject to the strike organizers' giving seven day's notice to management.
Strikes remained proscribed in the armed forces, police, postal services, power industry and medical services.
Since the start of the political reform process in Bulgaria in November 1989 there had been a rash of strikes in many sectors of the economy against low pay, poor working conditions and unpopular or incompetent management.
Trade union independence
Moves under way since December 1989 by the official Central Council of Trade Unions (CCTU) to end its affiliation to the BCP culminated in its reconstitution at a congress in Sofia on Feb. 17-18 as the Confederation of Independent Bulgarian Trade Unions.
Krustyu Petkov was named as chairman of the new confederation, having served as chairman of an interim CCTU executive committee since the December 1989 dismissal of former BCP politburo member Petur Dyulgerov as CCTU chairman [see p. 37109].
The independent trade union federation Podkrepa ( "Support" ), which had emerged from underground in October 1989 [see p. 36980]and was one of the movements represented in the opposition UDF [see p. 37110], held its founding congress on March 18.
The delegates, numbering about 900 and representing more than 100,000 members, elected the union's founder, Konstantin Trenchev, as president.
The congress resolution rejected co-operation with the Confederation of Independent Bulgarian Trade Unions, alleging that it was "still bound to the BCP" .
Private property law
The National Assembly on March 6 passed a new property law removing limitations on real estate ownership.
Previously, Bulgarian citizens had been allowed to own at most one apartment, a country home and a garage, and they had been allowed to sell their property only at fixed prices through the local state authorities.
EUROPE
WARSAW PACT
Start of Soviet troop withdrawals from Czechoslovakia and Hungary
Following the conclusion of the agreement on the withdrawal of all 73,500 Soviet troops from Czechoslovakia in February [see p. 37258], the first units and equipment left the country on March 2.
At a joint meeting reviewing the agreement on March 20, both sides noted that in spite of some problems the overall timetable of the withdrawal, which was due to be completed by July 1991, was being fulfilled.
On March 10 the Hungarian Foreign Minister, Gyula Horn, and his Soviet counterpart, Eduard Shevardnadze, signed a similar agreement in Moscow, providing for the withdrawal of all 49,700 Soviet troops from Hungary also by July 1991, with two-thirds of the troops and equipment due to be removed by the end of 1990.
The withdrawal began almost immediately after the signing ceremony, on March 12.
EUROPE
UNITED KINGDOM
Labour by-election gain
The opposition Labour Party achieved a spectacular victory in a parliamentary by-election in Mid-Staffordshire on March 22, overturning a 1987 general election Conservative majority of 14,654 [see p. 35286]to win by a majority of 9,449.
The by-election swing from Conservative to Labour of 21 per cent was the largest such since 1935, and the result represented only the 13th Labour by-election gain from the Conservatives since 1945 (the most recent being the Vale of Glamorgan in May 1989 — see p. 36740).
The Labour candidate secured 49 per cent of the vote compared with 25 per cent in 1987 while the Conservative share fell from 51 to 32 per cent; the Liberal Democrat received 11 per cent and the Social Democrat 2@1/2 per cent , whereas the Liberal/Alliance candidate had had 23 per cent in 1987.
The vote for the Green Party, which did not contest the seat at the general election, was only 2 per cent.
The election was timed to take place two days after presentation of the 1990-91 budget [see below].
The main issues in the by-election campaign which worked to the disadvantage of the governing Conservative Party were the community charge (poll tax) being introduced in England and Wales at the beginning of April [see below], high interest and mortgage rates [see also p. 37165], reform of the National Health Service [see pp. 36503; 37158], and education reforms [see pp. 36502; 37158].
Resignation of Welsh Secretary
Peter Walker, the Secretary of State for Wales, confirmed on March 4 that he intended to leave the government at a future point in order to be able to spend more time with his family; it was subsequently announced on March 14 that he would be succeeded in late May by David Hunt, currently Minister for Local Government and Inner Cities, who would enter the Cabinet for the first time.
Walker, who apart from the Prime Minister herself (Margaret Thatcher) and Sir Geoffrey Howe was the only remaining member of the Conservative Cabinet formed in 1979 (and who had also been a member of Edward Heath's Cabinet in 1970-74), had for a considerable time been regarded as in many ways out of sympathy with certain aspects of Thatcher's political philosophy.
Budget
The Chancellor of the Exchequer, John Major, on March 20 presented his first budget — for the financial year 1990-91 (to the beginning of April 1991)— which he described as "a saver's budget" .
Whereas in March 1989 a public-sector debt repayment (PSDR) of nearly £14,000 million in 1989-90 had been forecast [see p. 36529], this was now expected to be only just over £7,000 million, and a broadly similar PSDR of £6,900 million was currently projected for 1990-91.
The main tax rates remained unchanged, while most tax allowances and excise duties were increased in line with inflation (7.7 per cent over the 12 months to December 1989), although some duties went up by 10 per cent.
Among new measures (i) a new "tax exempt special savings account" would be introduced from January 1991; and (ii) the rate of pool betting duty would be reduced for a five-year period to release funds to be devoted to the improvement of safety and conditions at football grounds [for April 1989 Hillsborough stadium disaster see p. 36597].
In order to help people with moderate savings (principally pensioners), Major announced that certain means-tested social security benefits would be available to those with a level of savings higher than hitherto.
An increased ceiling was also to apply in respect of rebates for the community charge (poll tax) which was being introduced in England and Wales from April 1, 1990, to replace domestic rates [see below].
Following fierce protests over the treatment of Scotland, it was announced on March 22 that retrospective ex gratia payments would also be available on a broadly comparable basis in respect of the community charge levied in Scotland a year earlier, i.e. from April 1, 1989 [see pp. 35341-42].
Protests against introduction of poll tax
During March there were violent protests in a number of areas throughout England over the introduction of the community charge or poll tax, which was to take effect from the beginning of the following month in both England and Wales under the terms of the Local Government Finance Act 1988 [see p. 36501].
(The term "poll tax" , initially used pejoratively, had become the common usage, although government ministers continued to avoid using it.)
The government had in November 1989 (after the incorporation of a number of modifications to the detail of the new scheme) indicated that the average community charge per person for 1990-91 in England would be £278, with a corresponding average of £173 in Wales.
However, charges subsequently set by individual local councils were almost without exception in excess of this level, and on March 21 Chris Patten, the Secretary of State for the Environment, stated that the average actual charge for England had turned out to be £363; he blamed this excess principally on the actions of Labour controlled councils (and announcements on April 3 and 10 listed a total of 21 local authorities which were to be "capped" — i.e. their expenditure limited to a level determined by the central government).
(For Wales the weighted average community charge was expected to be £222.)
Moreover, for large numbers of individuals the new per capita charge represented a considerable increase over their equivalent share of the rates which had hitherto been based on notional values of the homes which they occupied.
As a result, as local councils set their own poll tax rates there was widespread opposition, including campaigns of non-registration and of potential non-payment.
Such attitudes were evident not only among traditional opponents of the Conservative government but also among many of its previous supporters, and in some areas groups of councillors resigned their Conservative whip.
Meanwhile Dick Douglas, MP for Dunfermline West (Scotland), resigned the Labour whip in the House of Commons on March 14 in disagreement with his party's refusal to support a campaign of non-payment of the poll tax.
Major demonstrations, not only outside the council offices where the charges were being debated and fixed but also in some cases involving violence within the council chambers themselves, occurred in particular over the period March 5-12 as councils took their final decisions.
On March 31 a demonstration in London organized by the All-Britain Anti-Poll Tax Federation ended in large-scale violence, in fights between police and groups among the participants, and in looting of premises.
Over 340 arrests were made.
While leaders of all the main political parties expressed their condemnation of the March 31 violence, David Waddington, the Home Secretary, asserted on April 1 that certain Labour MPs who advocated non-payment must bear some of the blame for the events of the previous day, and Patten called for the Labour whip to be withdrawn from them.
Demonstrations were also held on March 31 in Cheltenham (where a Conservative Party Central Council conference was being attended by the Prime Minister and where over 50 arrests were made) and in Glasgow.
EUROPE
IRELAND
Refusal to extradite escaped IRA prisoners
In a unanimous decision the Irish Supreme Court on March 13 refused to return to the United Kingdom two escaped prisoners, both members of the Irish Republican Army (IRA), on the grounds that they risked being assaulted by prison staff.
Dermot Finucane and James Pius Clarke were wanted by the Northern Ireland police following their escape from the high-security Maze prison near Belfast during a mass breakout in 1983 by members of the IRA [see p. 32808].
Both were serving long sentences at the time, Finucane for possessing firearms and ammunition and Clarke for the attempted murder of a member of the Ulster Defence Regiment (a part-time regiment of the British Army).
Arrested in Ireland in 1987 and 1984 respectively [see pp. 36238; 33940], their appeals against extradition had previously been rejected by the High Court.
In its decision on Finucane the court referred to "the probable risk" of his being "assaulted or injured by illegal action by prison staff" in Northern Ireland.
He was immediately released, as was Clarke on the same grounds following a separate court action.
The ruling was said to be partly based on a case brought in a British court by a Maze prisoner who had alleged maltreatment by prison officers.
He had been awarded £3,000 in damages, and in early 1990 damages were also awarded in out-of-court settlements to 19 other prisoners involved in the 1983 breakout who had made similar claims.
The UK Prime Minister, Margaret Thatcher, described the ruling as "grossly offensive and totally unjustified" and claimed that "such a judgment will encourage terrorists to the view that they will probably find a safe haven in Ireland" .
The Irish government, which had brought the extradition case, accepted the decision, referring critics to the separation of the executive and judicial branches of government under the Irish Constitution.
EUROPE
WEST GERMANY
SPD successes in local elections
The opposition Social Democratic Party (Sozialdemokratische Partei Deutschlands — SPD) made significant gains in local elections in the states of Bavaria and Schleswig-Holstein on March 18 and March 25 respectively.
In Bavaria the SPD won a number of local councils from the dominant Christian Social Union (Christlich Soziale Union — CSU), the sister party of the Christian Democratic Union (Christlich Demokratische Union — CDU) and a junior coalition party at federal level.
Another important feature of the election was the relatively weak showing of the extreme right-wing Republicans (Republikaner), who gained seats in several councils for the first time but whose votes lagged far behind those obtained in the European elections in June 1989 and forecast in recent opinion-poll findings.
In Schleswig-Holstein, the SPD beat the CDU into second place at local level for the first time.
Both results (running counter to the trend in the East German elections of March 18 — see pp. 37300-02) were widely interpreted as indicative of West German voters' concern at the costs and pace of the German unification process.
Confirmation of Lafontaine as candidate for Chancellor
An SPD deputy chair and the Minister President of Saarland, Oskar Lafontaine, was officially confirmed as the party's candidate for federal Chancellor in the general election due in December.
The party executive unanimously approved the nomination on March 19.
Lafontaine's nomination had looked almost certain since January, when he led the SPD to victory with an increased majority in the Saarland elections [see pp. 37197-98].
EUROPE
SPAIN
Loss of PSOE majority
In the continuing controversy over election results in a small number of parliamentary seats [see pp. 36983-84 for October 1989 general election], the regional High Court in Murcia on March 2 awarded the one seat still at issue there back to the ruling Spanish Socialist Workers' Party (PSOE).
The court made this ruling after obtaining the original documentation covering the Murcia results and satisfying itself as to their authenticity.
Voting did not therefore need to be repeated in two polling areas, as the Constitutional Court had ordered in the event that the necessary documentation could not be obtained by the Murcia court.
United Left (IU), which had been awarded the seat in a recount on Nov. 11, appealed to the Constitutional Court against the decision.
The Murcia ruling gave the PSOE 176 seats, a majority of one in the 350-seat Congress of Deputies.
Subsequently, however, the PSOE lost one seat (to the Popular Party — PP) in repeat elections in the North African enclave of Melilla on March 25.
The Constitutional Court ordered the Melilla rerun on the grounds of irregularities in the original voting.
The PSOE also lost the constituency's two Senate seats, likewise to the PP.
Despite the Melilla result, the PSOE effectively retained a voting majority in the Congress, since four Basque deputies belonging to United People (HB) had still not taken up their seats because of legal quibbles over swearing allegiance.
Government-employers' agreement
On March 6 the government and employers' representatives signed an outline agreement with the aim of improving industrial competitiveness and combating inflation, in preparation for the introduction by the European Community (EC) countries of the single internal market by December 1992.
In return for various fiscal concessions mainly connected with exports and foreign investment, the employers stated their readiness to stand firm against high wage demands from the trade unions even in the event of worsening labour conflict.
A joint commission was to be set up to examine current fiscal legislation and elaborate reforms to promote investment and expenditure savings.
ETA parcel bombs
The Basque separatist organization ETA claimed responsibility on March 13 for sending five parcel bombs (one addressed to the Interior Minister), one of which seriously wounded Fernando de Mateo Lage, the judge presiding over the Audienca Nacional (the court charged with handling terrorism cases), when it exploded in his hands in Madrid on Feb. 27.
ETA apologized for the injury of two postal workers when one bomb addressed to a prison officer exploded in the Madrid post office on Feb. 28.
EUROPE
FRANCE
Disunity at Socialist Party congress
The 10th congress of the ruling Socialist Party (Parti socialiste — PS), held in Rennes on March 15-18, was overshadowed by deep-seated differences among the main contenders for the leadership of the party.
For the first time in the PS's history the congress ended without agreement on a basic political programme.
Laurent Fabius, a former Prime Minister (in 1984-86), appeared to have the support of President Mitterrand, but was opposed by the faction associated with Pierre Mauroy, the PS first secretary and also a former Prime Minister (in 1981-84), and Lionel Jospin, a former first secretary and the current Minister of National Education, Youth and Sport.
The faction led by the current Prime Minster, Michel Rocard, refused to take sides.
In the pre-congress elections among party members, the Mauroy-Jospin faction had gained 28.9 per cent of the votes, the Fabius faction 28.8 per cent and the Rocard faction 24.3 per cent; smaller factions led by Jean-Pierre Chevènement, the Defence Minister, and Jean Poperen, Minister for Relations with Parliament, had gained 8.5 per cent and 7.2 per cent respectively; two other platforms gained the remaining 1.4 per cent .
The Chevènement faction subsequently pledged its support to Mauroy-Jospin, while Poperen supported Fabius.
The crisis was temporarily defused at a meeting of the PS executive committee on March 20, when delegates approved a general statement of intent, confirmed Mauroy as first secretary, and redistributed senior party posts to reflect the respective strengths of the various factions.
EUROPE
ITALY
Decision to relaunch Communist Party
At an extraordinary congress of the Italian Communist Party (PCI) in Bologna on March 7-10, a motion put forward by the general secretary, Achille Occhetto, for a relaunch of the party as a broad left-wing grouping along social democratic lines and under a different name, was adopted by 726 (67 per cent) of the delegates.
The transformation programme would be discussed in a "constituent phase" of conferences attended by all the PCI factions and representatives of the non-communist left, and finally a congress would be held to launch the new party.
On defence issues, Occhetto urged the rejection of the proposed transfer by 1991 of NATO F-16 fighter-bombers from Spain to Italy [see pp. 36716-17]and the negotiation of an agreement to remove NATO and US bases from Italy.
A Young Communist motion calling for Italy's withdrawal from NATO was defeated by 498 votes to 353, with 53 abstentions.
An opposing motion proposed by veterans Pietro Ingrao and Alessandro Natta, Occhetto's predecessor as general secretary, refusing any opening to the non-communist left, defending the ideals of Italian communism and conceding organizational changes only, received 322 votes (30 per cent), while 37 delegates (3 per cent ) voted for a neo-Stalinist motion opposing any changes, put forward by Armando Cossutta.
A new central committee, elected at the congress to oversee the process of change, re-elected Occhetto as general secretary on March 11 by 213 votes to 23 with 71 abstentions.
EUROPE
SWITZERLAND
Demonstration against "state snooping" 
In the country's largest demonstration since the early 1980s, an estimated 30,000 protesters gathered in Berne, the capital, on March 3 to demand an end to state surveillance of citizens' political activities.
The demonstration (which led to some violence) was organised by the "Stop State Snooping" committee, whose members included representatives of the Social Democratic Party, one of the four governing coalition parties.
It was prompted by the disclosure in November 1989 by a parliamentary commission investigating the Kopp affair [see p. 37261]that the federal prosecutor's office held 900,000 secret files on 200,000 Swiss citizens and foreign residents deemed to be threats to state security.
It emerged that these included some 70 MPs, and anti-nuclear lobbyists and feminist leaders as well as terrorist suspects, and that the information contained in the files included details unrelated to any security considerations, such as foreign travel and participation in legal political activities.
In February 1990 more secret files were found at both the Defence and Justice Ministries.
Adoption of money-laundering law
In the aftermath of the Kopp case, the States Council (Ständerat), the upper house of parliament, unanimously approved a law against money laundering on March 19.
The National Council (Nationalrat), the lower house, had already approved it, also unanimously, on Nov. 28, 1989.
The new law, which was due to enter into force on July 1, made premeditated money laundering a crime punishable by fines of up to 1,000,000 Swiss francs (US$1,500,000) and by prison terms of up to five years.
Furthermore, a professional in the financial sector who failed to exercise "due care" in obtaining the identification of customers could incur an unspecified fine or a term of up to one year in prison.
In a report published in March 1989, a federal judge had criticized prosecuting authorities for not doing enough to fight international crime, including the laundering of proceeds from the drugs and arms trades.
EUROPE
CYPRUS
Collapse of intercommunal talks
UN-sponsored negotiations in New York between the leaders of the Greek and Turkish Cypriot communities, aimed at ending the division of the island broke down on March 2 because, in the words of UN Secretary-General Javier Pérez de Cuéllar, "both sides are not ready to proceed on these talks because of several difficulties" .
Both sides disagreed on the precise reasons for the breakdown, but in essence the talks between Georgios Vassiliou, President of Cyprus, and Rauf Denktash, President of the Turkish Republic of Northern Cyprus (TRNC, recognized only by Turkey), foundered over Denktash's demand that the Greek side recognize the Turkish community's right to self-determination.
More specifically, there was an impasse over whether the Turkish Cypriots should be classified as a "people" or a "community" .
In UN parlance the former classification entailed the right to self-determination, while the latter generally did not.
Denktash insisted that a future federal constitution recognize the Turkish Cypriots as a separate people with the right to self-determination (with its implication of possible secession and partition).
Denktash accused Vassiliou of intransigence, while Vassiliou in turn accused Denktash of trying to change the terms of the negotiations, which had been based on a long-standing UN-sponsored plan for a bizonal federal republic, with no provision for secession or dissolution.
The intercommunal talks had reopened on Feb. 26 after having been broken off in July 1989 following an incident on the "green line" between the Greek and Turkish sectors of the island, when more than 100 Greek Cypriots were arrested by Turkish Cypriot police [see p. 36822].
Cyprus was de facto divided between two states, the (Greek Cypriot) Republic of Cyprus and the (Turkish Cypriot) TRNC in 1975 after the civil war which had been precipitated in 1974 by a coup by Greek Cypriot supporters of union with Greece which was followed by an invasion by Turkish troops.
Calling of early elections in TRNC
Following his return to Cyprus, Denktash resigned on March 15 and called early presidential elections for April 22.
He told a press conference that negotiations had entered a difficult phase and that he therefore wanted to obtain a new mandate from his people to defend the principles he had upheld in the New York talks.
MIDDLE EAST — ARAB WORLD
LEBANON
End of ceasefire between rival Christian forces
Fighting broke out in East Beirut on March 1, and again on March 9 after a week-long truce, between the rival Christian forces of Gen. Michel Aoun, the former Army C.-in-C. and self-declared interim Premier of Lebanon, and of Samir Geagea, leader of the Lebanese Forces (LF), the armed militia of the Phalangist Lebanese Front.
In the March 1 fighting Aoun's troops attacked LF positions in the Ashrafieh and Nabaa districts, capturing two streets and setting the Dora commercial district ablaze.
At least 75 people were reported killed and 150 wounded.
This outbreak of hostilities ended a fragile 13-day ceasefire arranged by the Maronite Patriarch, Mgr Nasrullah Sfeir [see p. 37265].
The week-long truce began after Sfeir threatened on March 2 to excommunicate all Christians who refused to lay down their arms and stop inter-Christian fighting in Beirut.
Aoun's troops immediately withdrew from some of the positions they had gained, and a ceasefire was called.
International pressure on Aoun continued to grow with the arrival on March 5 of a Vatican mediator, Mgr Alberto Sozzi, and on March 9 Aoun announced in an interview with the daily newspaper An Nahar that he was willing to hold talks with the LF to end the fighting and to discuss without preconditions the accord reached by the Lebanese Parliament in Taif, Saudi Arabia on Oct. 22, 1989 [see p 36986].
(Aoun had previously dismissed this agreement as a "blank cheque" for Syria's ambitions in Lebanon.)
Elias Hrawi, the West Beirut-based (Christian) President, reportedly responded by saying that there would be no deal with Aoun until he gave up the presidential palace at Baabda and the Army command at Yarzeh.
The rival Christian forces traded rocket and machine gun fire in Beirut on March 9, killing two people and ending the week-long truce.
On March 13 heavy shelling was resumed, following a warning from Aoun that mediation efforts had made no progress.
No further serious clashes were reported until March 25 when a 90-minute battle in the suburbs of Ashrafieh, Sin el-Fil, Saloumi and Dora, killed 11 people.
Sfeir called all Christian leaders to a peace conference at his palace at Bkerke on March 29, and they agreed to ask President Hrawi to intervene in the conflict.
Aoun refused to attend, and his troops shelled the Patriarch's palace hours before the meeting.
Sfeir threatened — for the second time in a month — to excommunicate those refusing to lay down their arms.
Gen. Emile Lahud, C.-in-C. of the Lebanese Army, announced on March 30 the opening of the port road between West and East Beirut, in what was seen as a conciliatory gesture towards the Maronite Christians supporting President Hrawi.
The fighting escalated with Aoun launching attacks in East Beirut and in 20 villages north-east of Beirut.
Fighting between Moslem militias
In southern Beirut on March 13 clashes took place between the two rival Shia Moslem militias, the Syrian-backed Amal and the Iranian-backed Hezbollah, killing seven people and wounding 34, before the Syrian army intervened to stop the fighting.
The Syrians were involved again in fighting with Hezbollah on March 27 when troops at a checkpoint in the southern Beirut suburbs opened fire on a car carrying a Shia leader, Sheikh Sobhi Tofeili, who escaped unharmed.
Attempted arrest of Central Bank Governor
The government of President Hrawi faced a political crisis following the attempted arrest on March 15 of the governor of the (West Beirut-based) Central Bank (Banque du Liban), Edmond Naim, by security forces acting on the orders of the Minister of the Interior, Ilyas al Khazin.
The Prime Minister, Selim al-Hoss, called for Khazen's resignation, but Hrawi refused to accept it, claiming that to do so would weaken his government.
The security forces had been sent to the bank to escort Naim to a meeting with Khazen to discuss the bank's refusal to advance money to pay for a contract to print 1,000,000 passports.
Death of US missionary
A Christian evangelist missionary from the United States, William Robinson, was shot dead by gunmen, claiming to be from the Lebanese Communist Party, in the southern Lebanon village of Rashaya Foukhar on March 27.
Robinson ran a school for retarded Christian children and had clashed with local villagers, who accused him of setting up the first Israeli settlement in Lebanon.
Israeli attacks on Lebanon
Five members of Hezbollah were killed by Israeli troops on March 8, near the Shumariyah Pass on the edge of Israel's self-imposed security zone in southern Lebanon.
An Israeli air strike on March 9 on Palestinian bases of the Popular Front for the Liberation of Palestine — General Command, in northern Lebanon, killed four people and wounded eight others.
MIDDLE EAST — ARAB WORLD
IRAQ
Execution of Observer journalist
Farzad Bazoft, an Iranian-born freelance journalist with British residency rights working for the London-based Sunday newspaper the Observer, was hanged as a spy in Baghdad on March 15.
Daphne Parish, a British nurse, was sentenced to 15 years' imprisonment as his accomplice.
[For detention of Bazoft and Parish in September 1989 see p. 36987.]
A third defendant, an Iraqi, said to have provided Bazoft with information about an explosion at the al-Iskandariya missile base [see p. 36905], received a 10-year prison sentence.
Bazoft had been sentenced to death on March 10 after a three-day trial.
The United Kingdom government and many world leaders, including UN Secretary-General Javier Pérez de Cuéllar and King Hussein of Jordan, appealed to the Iraqi President, Saddam Hussein, to spare Bazoft's life.
Saddam Hussein reportedly refused to consider the matter while under "political and media pressure" .
On the day of the execution the Iraqi press carried a "confession" in which Bazoft allegedly admitted to spying for the UK and for Israel.
[For earlier release of a videotaped "confession" see p. 36987.]
Bazoft's execution aroused widespread condemnation in the West.
The Arab League and many Arab countries supported Iraq's action as a defence of its national sovereignty, in the face of renewed criticism of Iraq's human rights record in the Western media.
UK Prime Minister Margaret Thatcher called the execution "an act of barbarism" , and the British ambassador was recalled from Iraq for consultations; planned ministerial and trade visits were cancelled and Iraqi students attending Ministry of Defence training courses in the UK were sent home.
However, the government refrained from imposing trade sanctions or other punitive measures which, it said, would harm the UK more than Iraq (the UK had a $720,000,000 trade surplus with Iraq in 1989, and credit agreements for exports worth a further $400,000,000 had been signed in November 1989).
The government was also anxious to protect the interests of some 2,000 British citizens living in Iraq, including Parish and Ian Richter, a businessman serving a life sentence after being convicted in 1987 of corruption.
Interception of suspected nuclear triggers
Relations between the UK and Iraq were further strained by the seizure on March 28 of 40 restricted military devices at London's Heathrow airport, en route for Baghdad.
Four people were arrested, including Ali Daghir, a businessman with joint UK-Iraqi citizenship and a director of Euromac Ltd, an import-export company based in Thames Ditton, Surrey.
Omar Latif, a manager with Iraqi Airways in London, was deported from the UK on March 31.
The 40 devices were said to be krytrons — high-speed electronic switches used to detonate the conventional explosive charges in a nuclear warhead.
An Iraqi government statement issued on March 30 said that the devices were "merely electrical capacitors, used for many industrial, scientific and technical purposes" .
In September 1988 Euromac Ltd had contacted the CSI corporation of San Marcos, California, USA, a firm which assembled krytrons, regarding the supply of military-grade krytrons.
CSI informed the US customs service, which supervised the delivery of the krytrons, described as computer-room air-conditioning equipment, to Heathrow airport for transhipment to Iraq.
An indictment, issued by a Californian grand jury on Feb. 23 and kept secret until after the arrests, stated that payment for the krytrons had been authorized by the Iraqi embassy in London.
The news aroused speculation that the Iraqi nuclear programme was only two or three years away from completion, despite the setback caused by the Israeli air raid on the Osirak nuclear reactor site in June 1981 [see pp. 31908-09].
In an explicit warning to Israel, Saddam Hussein said in a radio broadcast on April 2 that Iraq had no need of nuclear weapons, since it had binary chemical weapons capable of destroying "half of Israel" in the event of an Israeli attack.
REFERENCES.
Reference article pp. 36566-68; August 1989 explosion at Iraqi defence site, September detention of Bazoft and Parish pp. 36905; 36987.
MIDDLE EAST — ARAB WORLD
IRAN
Approval of 1990/91 budget
On March 19 the Majlis (Islamic Consultative Assembly) ratified the proposed budget for the Iranian year 1369, beginning on March 21.
Certain unspecified revisions were made at the request of the Council of Constitutional Guardians.
The general budget was set at 13,156,288.6 million Iranian rials.
The general budget comprised the government budget (some 40 per cent of the total) and the budget for state-owned companies, due to be sold off in order to reduce the state's role in the economy (US$1.00=IR71.1848 as at March 19, 1990).
In the original presentation to the Majlis on Feb. 20, the government budget had been set at IR5,596,000 million and revenue at IR4,009,000 million, giving a projected deficit of IR1,587,000 million.
The deficit was subsequently reduced to IR1,430,000 million, still 19 per cent higher than the previous year.
The budget allowed for $5,400 million in foreign investment credits, to be repaid in full within five years.
The hard-currency budget of the National Iranian Oil Company (NIOC) was doubled to $2,600 million, with the offshore projects allocation increasing from $16,000,000 in 1989/90 to $348,000,000.
The direct war reconstruction budget was set at IR81,000 million, 20 per cent below the previous year's figure, despite complaints about the slow pace of reconstruction.
The budget was the first to be based on President Hashemi Rafsanjani's development plan for 1989-93, which had been adopted after considerable debate at the end of January 1990.
One source of controversy had been the plan's provision for a total of $27,000 million in foreign investment, especially in the oil and petrochemicals sector, which hardliners saw as compromising the country's independence.
The plan allowed for IR4,500,000 million in agricultural investment, and was expected to create 2,000,000 new jobs.
MIDDLE EAST — ARAB WORLD
LIBYA
Rabta fire
It was reported on March 19 that the Libyan authorities had detained several unidentified people suspected of causing a fire which on March 15 had seriously damaged the high-security Rabta chemical plant, 80 km south-west of the capital, Tripoli.
At least two people were reported to have been killed.
The official JANA news agency blamed the fire on Israeli and United States sabotage.
Additional accusations by the Libyan leader, Col. Moamer al Kadhafi, of the possible involvement of the West German intelligence services had provoked a demonstration of an estimated 2,000 people outside the West German embassy in Tripoli on March 15.
The plant had been the subject of persistent international criticism, spearheaded by the US government, over its alleged role as a manufacturer of chemical weapons in spite of Libyan counter-claims that its sole purpose was to produce pharmaceuticals [see pp. 36385; 36411; 36439].
US President George Bush on March 17 denied direct US involvement but admitted that he was "uncertain" whether the fire had been an accident or the result of sabotage.
A strongly worded White House statement on March 7 had appealed for international support in stopping the operation of the Rabta plant.
General People's Congress
The 16th session of the General People's Congress (GPC) assembled in Tripoli on March 2-10 to decide on future government policy [see p. 37214 for report on March 1989 GPC session].
In spite of a budget deficit which had necessitated borrowings of an estimated US$1,445 million, delegates broke with precedent and rejected government attempts to reduce public-sector employment (estimated to comprise 60 per cent of the working population) and to cut subsidies on basic goods and services.
In addition they called for lower taxes, free health care, cheaper housing loans and increased spending on state-owned industries.
These demands, reportedly based on views expressed in local Basic People's Congresses, were criticized by Kadhafi in his congressional address on March 6, on the grounds that they were not representative of true public opinion.
In response to widespread criticism, Kadhafi strongly attacked corruption and favouritism in the government administration.
During the Congress Communications and Transport Secretary Mubarak al-Shamikh resigned in protest at the exorbitant fares and corruption in the state-owned Jerma bus company, and Secretary for Higher Education Ahmed Ibrahim also resigned, reportedly after criticism from delegates.
The Congress, in giving a high priority to agreements with Arab countries, affirmed its support for the consolidation of the Arab Maghreb Union [see pp. 36474; 37200-01]and for the Palestinian intifada.
It also affirmed that closer ties with Egypt were dependent upon Egypt's taking steps to sever ties with Israel.
NORTH AFRICA
TUNISIA
Cabinet reshuffle — Student demonstrations
In a Cabinet reshuffle announced by President Zine el-Abidine Ben Ali on March 3, Ismail Khelil, the governor of the Central Bank of Tunis and architect of the current economic reform programme, was appointed as the new Foreign Minister.
This was seen as evidence of the government's continued commitment to economic re-structuring and of its need to have an experienced negotiator to deal with the mounting foreign debt [see pp. 37216-17].
Khelil was replaced as Central Bank governor by his deputy, Mohamed el-Beji Hamda.
Abdelhamid Escheikh, the previous Foreign Minister and a former Joint Chief of Staff, became the new Interior Minister.
This appointment was expected to produce a hardening of the government's stance towards militant Islamic fundamentalist students, whose campaign against liberalizing reforms in higher education had escalated during February.
The leaders of the General Union of Tunisian Students (UGTE) were among 583 protesters reported to have been arrested by Feb. 23, 283 of whom had been drafted into military service, a further 190 held for interrogation and 110 released by Feb. 25.
A violent confrontation took place between police and students at Tunis University on Feb. 27, with 15 students reported injured, but by March 4 the majority of campuses across the country were reported to have resumed lectures [ibid. for 1989 and January 1990 disturbances].
In order to re-affirm his declared commitment to a liberal and secular state, Ben Ali retained Mohamed Charfi as Minister for National Education, Higher Education and Scientific Research; fundamentalist students had demanded his resignation.
In other Cabinet changes the former Interior Minister Chedi Neffati took over the Justice portfolio from Mustapha Bouaziz, who became Minister of State Domains, a new ministry with the responsibility of overseeing public properties and of monitoring the public sector.
The portfolio of Mohamed Ghanouchi was altered from Planning and Finance to Economy and Finance; Tahar Azaiez took up the new post of Minister of Professional Training and Employment; Ahmed Khaled became Minister of Culture and Information; and Ali Chabi was appointed as Secretary of State for Religious Affairs.
MIDDLE EAST — ARAB WORLD
ALGERIA
Scheduling of local and provincial elections
The Council of Ministers announced on March 7 that June 12 had been set as the date for multiparty local and provincial elections (to the assemblées populaires communales and the assemblées populaires de wilayas), postponed from December 1989 and then again from March 1990 [see p. 37218]to allow more time for newly-created political parties to prepare their campaigns.
Since the adoption in July 1989 of a law legalizing political parties [see p. 36834], 20 parties had been recognized, with the fundamentalist Islamic Salvation Front (Front islamique du salut — FIS) claiming over 3,000,000 supporters.
On March 11 former President Ahmed Ben Bella's party, the Movement for Democracy in Algeria (Mouvement pour la démocratie en Algérie), was legalized although Ben Bella himself remained in exile in Switzerland, the Algerian judicial authorities having not yet reached a decision on whether to drop charges against him.
The National Assembly on March 19 adopted the government's amendments to the July 1989 electoral law [ibid.], apparently tabled in view of the perceived strength of the FIS, which introduced proportional representation to increase the share of seats won by smaller parties, rather than allowing parties with over 50 per cent of the vote to take all the seats in that locality.
Where no party won a majority, the leading party would get half the seats.
The threshold for representation was lowered from 10 to 7 per cent of the vote.
Approval of draft law on information
The Assembly also approved the draft law on information, providing for prison terms of five to 10 years for publishing "erroneous or tendentious information threatening state security or the national interest" and prison terms of six months to three years for offending Islam or other religions.
New non-specialist periodicals were to be in Arabic unless permission for the use of a foreign language was obtained from the government-appointed Higher National Council for Information and Communication [see p. 37218 for adoption in July 1989 of information code creating this Council].
President Chadli Benjedid, at a March 13 press conference, said that there was no question of dissolving parliament at present, but that this could be considered if a consensus were to emerge on the matter; legislative elections were due in 1992 but could be brought forward if necessary, and Chadli accepted the possibility of the ruling National Liberation Front (Front de libération nationale — FLN) finding itself in a minority after such elections.
MIDDLE EAST — ARAB WORLD
ARAB LEAGUE
Transfer of headquarters to Cairo
Arab League Foreign Ministers, at the conclusion of a summit meeting in Tunis on March 10-11, agreed unanimously to move the League's general secretariat back to Cairo, almost 11 years after Tunis was chosen as the League's "temporary" headquarters in reaction to Egypt's signing of the 1979 Camp David peace accord with Israel.
Although no date was fixed for the transfer, Egyptian Foreign Minister Ahmed Esmat Abdel Meguid expressed the hope that it would be completed by Sept. 1.
The decision, less than a year after Egypt's readmission to the Arab League at the 1989 Casablanca summit [see p. 36669], followed intensive lobbying by Egyptian diplomats who claimed that in terms of the League's founding charter, Cairo should be its permanent home, and refurbishing of the League's former headquarters on the banks of the Nile was already well under way.
Several institutions of the 22-member Arab League were to retain their offices in Tunis, including the Interior Ministers' Council, the Arab Organization for Education, Science and Culture, and the Arab Broadcasting Union.
Arab diplomats compared the future role of Tunis with that of Geneva as the UN's "alternative" centre.
INTERNATIONAL
COMECON
Agreement on reduction of functions
Senior officials of the 10 member countries of the Council for Mutual Economic Assistance (CMEA or COMECON) agreed on March 27 to abolish two of the organization's most important functions: multilateral co-operation and the co-ordination of economic planning.
Trade relations between member countries would in future be conducted primarily on a bilateral basis.
The decisions, tantamount to a significant downgrading of COMECON (as also indicated by a sharp staff reduction at the Moscow secretariat), and which were expected to be approved at a future summit meeting, were the outcome of an undertaking made at the summit meeting in January [see p. 37202]to review existing COMECON arrangements to allow for the wider operation of market principles.
In addition the Czechoslovak Finance Minister, Vaclav Klaus, on March 22 announced that his country was withdrawing from three multilateral agreements, the most important of which was an exchange-rate agreement governing trade between COMECON countries.
Czechoslovakia would be the first country to withdraw from this system and would set its own exchange rates after a mandatory three-month delay.
On the same day the Soviet Union and Hungary agreed to conduct their bilateral trade in hard currency from 1991 onwards, replacing previous barter arrangements.
REFERENCES.
Reference article pp. 37020-21; January 1990 summit meeting p. 37202.
INTERNATIONAL
ENVIRONMENT
North Sea conference
At the third international North Sea Conference, held in The Hague, Netherlands, on March 7-8, it was agreed to seek to reduce by 50 per cent or more the levels of North Sea pollution by 37 of the most significant pollutants.
Lead, mercury, cadmium and dioxin levels were to be cut by 70 per cent by 1995.
It was also agreed that sewage dumped in certain "sensitive" areas of the sea would be given secondary treatment.
States dumping sewage in areas not designated as sensitive would have to demonstrate that primary treatment was sufficient to safeguard water quality.
In addition it was agreed to destroy, rather than store, all PCBs (polychlorinated biphenyls) as these were phased out of use by 1999.
There were estimated to be 250,000 tonnes of carcinogenic PCBs in Europe.
West Germany was to be entrusted with storing PCBs which remained in pieces of equipment until final disposal.
The conference was attended by Environment Ministers from Belgium, France, Denmark, West Germany, the Netherlands, Norway, Sweden, and the United Kingdom, with the Irish Environment Minister present as an observer.
Before the start of the conference, the UK Agriculture Minister, John Gummer, announced that industrial dumping would be phased out in the UK by 1992, except in the case of ICI and Sterling Organics (responsible for 78 per cent of all industrial waste dumped in the North Sea) which would be licensed to dump until 1993.
(As part of the 1987 North Sea agreement all industrial dumping was to have ended by 1989 — see pp. 36052-53.)
The UK also announced that raw sewage dumping would be phased out by 1998.
On the final day of the meeting, progress was overshadowed by the UK's refusal to agree not to dispose of radioactive waste under the seabed.
Christopher Patten, the UK Environment Secretary, assured ministers that there were no plans to dispose of nuclear waste in this way, but insisted that the UK wanted the option to remain open.
Padraig Flynn, the Irish Environment Minister, called for the closure of the nuclear reprocessing plant at Sellafield, on the north-west coast of England, and Norway, Sweden and Denmark called for the plans for another such plant at Dounreay in Scotland be cancelled.
A special conference in Copenhagen was scheduled for 1993 in addition to the next regular meeting in 1995.
Verdicts on Alaskan oil disaster
On March 22 the captain of the oil tanker Exxon Valdez, Joseph Hazelwood, was acquitted of three major charges and convicted of one misdemeanour in connection with the oil spill caused by his vessel off the Alaskan coast in March 1989, the worst in US history [see pp. 36541, 36606].
Convicted of negligent discharge of oil, Hazelwood was sentenced to 1,000 hours' community service to help clean up oil-polluted beaches and was ordered to pay US$50,000 in restitution to the state for his part in the spill.
He was also sentenced to 90 days in prison and to a fine of US$1,000, both of which were suspended.
The jury cleared him of the charges of criminal mischief, reckless endangerment and operating a vessel while intoxicated.
The prosecution's case had turned primarily on the allegation that he was drunk when his ship ran aground.
INTERNATIONAL
UNESCO
Criticism of Director-General's staffing proposals
High-level staff appointments announced in early March by the UNESCO Director-General Federico Mayor provoked sharp criticism from both delegates and employees of the organization.
More than 800 employees stopped work for two hours on March 14 in protest at plans to appoint 44 staff members and outside consultants to senior executive positions and create 20 new senior posts over the next two years at an estimated cost of US$6,200,000.
Delegates complained that Mayor had not consulted the executive board, which was scheduled to meet in May to consider the proposals.
Particular anger was expressed by Western delegates over the appointment of a former deputy director of Soviet State Radio and Television, Henrikh Juskevicius, to the post of deputy director-general in charge of communications and information.
UK decision not to rejoin UNESCO
On the issue of United Kingdom participation in UNESCO (the United States, United Kingdom and Singapore having withdrawn from the organization in 1984-85 — see pp. 33499-501) Mayor held talks on Feb. 28 with the UK Under-Secretary of State at the Foreign and Commonwealth Office, Timothy Sainsbury, and on March 15 the House of Commons foreign affairs committee issued its first report on reforms within UNESCO, indicating that if Mayor succeeded in reforming the organization's administration, the UK should rejoin.
However, on April 3 Sainsbury announced that, despite improvements, the UK government did not feel that the changes justified renewed membership.
Meetings on education and media
On March 5-9 UNESCO jointly hosted an education conference in Jomtien, Thailand, with UNICEF, the UNDP and the World Bank, when delegates endorsed the idea of universal primary education for all by the year 2000.
At the same time the World Bank pledged to double its lending to Third-World educational projects.
At a meeting in Paris on Feb. 27-28 UNESCO had given encouragement to the exchange of expertise between the Western news media and the media in Eastern Europe.
INTERNATIONAL
WORLD HEALTH ORGANIZATION
Resignation of AIDS programme director
Jonathan Mann, director of the World Health Organization's global programme on AIDS, which he founded in 1986 and which had an annual budget of over US$100,000,000, announced his resignation on March 16, citing disagreements with the WHO Director-General, Hiroshi Nakajima.
Kathleen Kay, Mann's immediate subordinate in the AIDS programme, resigned in solidarity.
Michael Merson was named as acting director.
Causes of disagreement appeared to include whether AIDS should remain one of WHO's highest funding priorities; the provision of AIDS drugs and a possible future vaccine to poorer countries of Africa, South America and Asia; and protection of the human rights of AIDS sufferers and those carrying the virus (HIV).
More than 200,000 cases of AIDS had been officially reported to WHO by more than 150 countries by the end of 1989, and it was estimated that between 5,000,000 and 10,000,000 people were HIV-positive.
INTERNATIONAL
OPEC
87th meeting
The 87th regular ministerial-level meeting of the Organization of Petroleum Exporting Countries (OPEC) was held on March 16-17 in Vienna, when delegates discussed the problems of over-production and the corresponding slump in world oil prices.
The meeting broke up, however, without any agreement on a cut in production, which might have pushed up prices, meaning that OPEC retained the official total production ceiling of 22,086,000 barrels per day (bpd) which had been agreed at the November 1989 meeting [see p. 37053].
Industry sources reported that many member states were exceeding their production quotas under the existing agreements, and that total output was actually around 23,700,000 bpd.
The failure of the meeting was widely blamed on the reported refusal of Kuwait and the United Arab Emirates, two of the main over-producers, to offer production cuts.
Libya was also reported to be pressing for an increase in its quota.
After the meeting, world petroleum prices fell well below the $18 per barrel reference price agreed at the November meeting, even though buyers' stocks were at their lowest levels since 1974.
On March 19, for example, the superior-grade Brent crude was fetching only $17.93 per barrel.
REFERENCES.
86th meeting in November 1989 p. 37053.
INTERNATIONAL
COMMODITIES
Extension of cocoa agreement
The council of the 41-member International Cocoa Organization (ICCO) on March 30 voted almost unanimously to extend the 1986 International Cocoa Agreement between producers and consumers [see p. 35294]for a two-year period from Oct. 1, but without its provisions to regulate world supplies and prices, which had been suspended since 1988.
As part of the agreement (i) the 250,000-tonne buffer stock of cocoa beans (bought in an effort to support prices) would be frozen for two years;(ii) the levy of US$30 paid by producers on their exports and by consumers on imports from non-ICCO countries would be abolished from April 15;(iii) producers undertook to attempt to repay the accumulated arrears on levy payments (amounting to US$140,000,000); and (iv) some of the buffer stock could be sold to raise funds.
A scheme under which producers would have held supplies back from the market, approved in March 1988 but never implemented due to a shortage of funds, was formally abandoned.
Failure to extend the agreement would have meant selling the buffer stock over a 4@1/2-year period from October, with potentially damaging consequences for prices, which were already at their lowest point for many years after five seasons of glut.
According to ICCO figures, the accumulated world surplus of cocoa beans, including the ICCO's own buffer stock, reached a record 1,200,000 tonnes in March, equivalent to nearly seven months' world consumption.
In the week following the decision, cocoa prices rose significantly, although observers attributed this more to other factors, such as political unrest in the world's largest producer, Côte d'Ivoire [see pp. 37307-08], continuing dry weather in West Africa and Brazil, and the impact of the anti-inflation policies announced by the new Brazilian government [see pp. 37312-13].
INTERNATIONAL
DISARMAMENT
New round of CFE talks
The sixth round of the negotiations on Conventional Forces in Europe (CFE), which had first begun in March 1989 [see p. 36539], opened in Vienna on March 15, with new proposals being presented by the North Atlantic Treaty Organization (NATO) on the destruction of surplus weapons and by the Warsaw Pact on the reduction of troop levels in Europe to around 700,000 for each military bloc.
ASIA — PACIFIC
CHINA
BASIC DATA
Area: 9,571,300 sq km.
Population: 1,112,298,677 (1989).
Capital: Beijing.
Languages: Mandarin and local dialects; the Tibetans, Uighurs, Mongols and others have their own languages.
Religion and philosophy: Confucianism, Buddhism and Daoism; Islam and Christianity (minorities).
Av. life expectancy: 70 yrs (women), 68 yrs (men)(1989).
Armed forces: Some 3,030,000 (about 1,350,000 conscripts — men and women aged 18-22), being reduced.
GNP per capita: US$290 (1987).
Currency: yuan or renminbi yuan (US$1.00=4.7367 yuan as at March 12, 1990).
The People's Republic of China, a unitary state consisting of 22 provinces, five autonomous regions and three municipalities, was established in October 1949 following the victory of communist forces led by Mao Zedong.
Under the terms of the 1982 Constitution legislative authority is vested in the National People's Congress (NPC), the 2,978 members of which are indirectly elected (most recently in 1988 — see p. 36101) for five years.
It convenes annually, and when not in session is represented by a 155-member Standing Committee.
Executive power is exercised by the State Council (Cabinet) which is elected by the NPC.
Effective political control is in the hands of the Communist Party of China (CCP — which currently has almost 48,000,000 members) and since 1980 has been dominated by China's "elder statesman" leader, Deng Xiaoping.
On Nov. 9, 1989, Deng retired as the chairman of the Central Military Commission (CMC), his last official party post [see p. 37040; see also p. 37318 for Deng's resignation from his final government post in March 1990].
The first session of the seventh NPC on April 8, 1988, elected Yang Shangkun as President in place of Li Xiannian.
On the following day Li Peng was confirmed as Premier of the State Council and on April 12 the NPC approved the appointment of a new State Council [see pp. 36102-03].
Towards the end of June 1989 the dismissal of the reformist CCP general secretary, Zhao Ziyang, signalled the victory of conservative elements in a two-month power struggle provoked by conflicting responses to pro-democracy demonstrations by students [see pp. 36721-22].
Li Peng Premier; Minister in charge of State Commission for Restructuring the Economy Yao Yilin Vice-Premier Tian Jiyun Vice-Premier Wu Xueqian Vice-Premier Li Tieying State Councillor; Minister in charge of State Education Commission Qin Jiwei State Councillor; National Defence Wang Bingqian State Councillor; Finance Song Jian State Councillor; Minister in charge of State Scientific and Technological Commission Wang Fang State Councillor; Public Security Zou Jiahua State Councillor; Minister in charge of State Planning Commission Li Guixian State Councillor; Governor of People's Bank of China Cheng Xitong State Councillor Chen Junsheng State Councillor Luo Gan Secretary General Qian Qichen Foreign Affairs Ding Henggao Minister in Charge of Commission of Science, Technology and Industry for National Defence Ismail Amat Minister in Charge of State Nationalities Affairs Commission Jia Chunwang State Security Wei Jianxing Supervision Cui Naifu Civil Affairs Cai Cheng Justice Zhao Dongwan Personnel Ruan Chongwu Labour Zhu Xun Geology and Mineral Resources Lin Hanxiong Construction Huang Yicheng Energy Resources Li Senmao Railways Qian Yongchang Communications Lin Zongtang Aeronautics and Astronautics Industry Qi Yuanjing Metallurgical Industry He Guangyuan Machine Building and Electronics Industry Gu Xiulian Chemical Industry Zeng Xianlin Light Industry Wu Wenying Textile Industry Yang Taifang Posts and Telecommunications Yang Zhenhuai Water Resources He Kang Agriculture Gao Dezhan Forestry Hu Ping Commerce Zheng Tuobin Foreign Economic Relations and Trade Liu Suinian Materials He Jingzhi Culture (acting) Ai Zhisheng Radio, Film and Television Chen Minzhang Public Health Wu Shaozu State Physical Culture and Sports Commission Peng Peiyun Minister in charge of State Family Planning Commission Lu Peijian Auditor-General of Auditing Administration 
State Council
POLITICS/SECURITY
Crime, corruption and crisis of confidence prior to June 1989
Increasing crime and large-scale disturbances in 1988 led to the addition of mobile units and anti-terrorist squads to the public security apparatus.
The measures were decided at a politburo meeting in July.
Apart from riots in Tibet in October 1987 and March 1988 [see pp. 35716-17; 35808], there were also reports of ethnic disturbances in the north-western Autonomous Region of Xinjiang.
The Far Eastern Economic Review of Aug. 25 reported that students had in June 1988 demonstrated in Urumqi (the capital of Xinjiang) in protest at the reintegration of Han and ethnic minority students in university dormitories.
On Nov. 3 the magazine cited cases of riots at sports gatherings, confrontations between peasants and police, mass looting and attacks on government officials and property.
Mass robbery attacks on the railways were also reported in Guangdong province and Shanghai.
In December 1988 and January 1989 Chinese and African students clashed violently in the eastern city of Nanjing.
The trouble originated at the city's Hehai University and prompted widespread anti-African demonstrations.
This upsurge in lawlessness, coupled with a worsening economic situation and the rise of corruption among officials [see pp. 37002-03], meant that the people's confidence in the CCP fell during 1988 and 1989.
The elimination of corruption from the party was one of the major demands of the pro-democracy movement which flourished for seven weeks between April to June 1989 before being brutally suppressed by the armed forces.
Faced with a loss of power in 1988, party officials made increasing use of what remained for their own personal gain.
In December 1988 the then general secretary of the CCP, Zhao Ziyang, told a meeting of the central committee secretariat that the 1988 anti-corruption campaign had failed and that new measures needed to be introduced; he proposed the establishment of a network of centres to report on bureaucratic corruption.
Another regulation stipulated that government and party officials were to resign from commercial posts by the end of March 1989, although this remained hedged about with exceptions.
Despite these measures, public disillusionment with the party remained widespread.
Revolutionary slogans and models were no longer able to inspire the people, as illustrated by the short-lived attempt in March 1989 to revive the Lei Feng cult [see below].
Strengthening of anti-corruption drive in post-Tiananmen era
Following the crushing of pro-democracy demonstrations in June 1989 [see pp. 36720-22], the party launched in July yet another anti-corruption drive in an attempt to counter increasing public resentment [see p. 36815].
A series of articles in the (CCP) People's Daily in November noted that the CCP's popularity had ebbed mainly as a result of corruption among party members.
On Nov. 23 the party announced that 12,500 of its 48,000,000 members had been expelled in 1989, largely for corruption.
Another 60,000 had been punished for misdeeds but retained their party membership, while a further 120,000 were still under investigation.
It was officially reported that 36,000 possible offenders had surrendered by a Nov. 10 deadline imposed in August by the Supreme People's Procuratorate.
A third of those who surrendered, including a large proportion of party members, were convicted of "economic crimes" ; some were executed, but most were imprisoned.
On Nov. 23 it was announced that 100,000 cases of corruption had been uncovered during 1989, three times more than in 1988.
Crimes included bribery, speculation, illegal issue of loans by banks, theft of state property, illegal construction and tax evasion.
The Minister of Supervision, Wei Jianxing, said that the campaign would continue into 1990.
The closing of a total of 2,651 business enterprises run by government ministries and party organs was reported in November 1989 and January 1990.
 "Six evils" campaign
On Nov. 13, 1989, a national campaign to eliminate the "six evils" was launched by the State Council in concert with the new emphasis on socialist morality and anti-bourgeois liberalization.
The six evils were:(i) prostitution and the use of brothels;(ii) the production, sale and dissemination of pornography;(iii) the abduction and sale of women and children;(iv) the cultivation and consumption of and trafficking in drugs;(v) the organization of gambling; and (vi) the use of feudal and superstitious beliefs to swindle and harm people.
The official New China News agency (Xinhua) reported that in the first nine months of the year 11,503 people had been arrested for such crimes.
By mid-December as many as 350,000 offenders had been "punished" as a result of the campaign.
The Minister of Public Security, Wang Fang, said that foreigners would also be punished if found to be involved in any of the above activities.
Strengthening of CCP leadership and unity in late 1989 and early 1990
Divisions within the CCP, apparent well before the crushing of the pro-democracy movement, were reportedly exacerbated in the run-up to the fifth plenum of the 13th CCP central committee, which was held in Beijing on Nov. 6-9, 1989 [see p. 37040].
Conservatives and moderates appeared divided over how to resolve key political and economic questions, including the future of Zhao Ziyang, and over whether to launch a purge of the party.
The fifth plenum announced austerity measures to tackle the worsening economic situation and called for stronger party leadership and unity.
However, the People's Daily of Nov. 11 noted that some people did not have "a good understanding" of the need for austerity measures, and that such an attitude should be "resolutely rectified" .
Speaking on implementing the guidelines laid down by the fifth plenum, government spokesperson Yuan Mu said on Nov. 22: "The main problem behind the many mistakes which have occurred in China in the past lies within the party and it is therefore necessary first to focus attention on the party itself in solving the problem" (of "dilution and weakening of party leadership, neglect of ideological and political work, and neglect of the building of party style" ).
As part of the drive to restore party unity Jiang Zemin's speech to the fifth plenum, released on Nov. 21, urged party members to "urgently" go back to studying Marxism-Leninism and to build the party's "fighting power" to "combat strength" [see p. 37040].
A People's Daily editorial of Jan. 16, 1990, entitled Leadership must be in the hands of loyal Marxists, called for the dismissal of party leaders "who do not have a firm political stand or staunch political qualities" , while Qiao Shi (a member of the politburo standing committee who had risen to prominence in the immediate aftermath of the Tiananmen massacre — see p. 36721) called for "particular efforts" to be made in strengthening party centralism and unity, and urged increased supervision over the implementation of central committee decisions at all levels.
At an Army political work conference on Dec. 17 the "absolute" leadership of the party was reaffirmed by Liu Huaqing, Vice-Chairman of the CMC.
An article in the Army paper the Liberation Army Daily (Jiefangjun Bao) on Nov. 21 dismissed the separation of the Army from the party as a "bourgeois liberal"  "plot to overthrow the party leadership in favour of the multiparty system" .
The party also called for strengthening leadership over trade unions, Communist Youth League organizations and women's federations which had been affected by "rampant" bourgeois liberalization.
On Feb. 1, 1990, the central committee issued a circular warning against "the widespread trend of bourgeois liberalization and erroneous concepts on democracy" in the forthcoming local elections for people's congresses due in the run-up to the annual NPC meeting held in March-April and called on party committees to take control of the voting.
Fears of loss of control also led to a revival of criticism of the deposed party leader, Zhao Ziyang [see p. 36815].
On Dec. 29, 1989, an article in the Guangming Daily criticized Zhao Ziyang's theory of remoulding ideological and political work in the party as supporting bourgeois liberalization, "a trend against the Communist Party leadership and socialism" .
Dissent — Continued crackdown on pro-democracy demonstrators
In November 1989 a press campaign was mounted to vilify leaders of the Paris-based dissident organization Federation for a Democratic China and its sympathizers.
The federation had been formally set up in Paris on Sept. 22 by leaders of the pro-democracy movement who had fled China, including leading economists Yan Jiaqi and Chen Yizi, and Wan Runnan, head of China's biggest private company, the Stone Co. [see also p. 36815].
(Yan Jiaqi and student dissident leader Wuer Kaixi had in early July released a videotaped statement in France announcing the formation of a differently named organization — see p. 36815.)
Lengthy articles in the People's Daily and Liaowang denounced Yan Jiaqi, investigative journalist Liu Binyan, university lecturer Liu Xiaobo, writer and lecturer Su Xiaokang and Wuer Kaixi as "historic criminals" and "scum" who had betrayed the motherland.
Physicist Fang Lizhi, sheltering in the United States embassy in Beijing [see pp. 36722; 36815], was also criticized for "slandering" Marxism, and was stripped of his membership of the Chinese Academy of Sciences.
Liu Binyan and Su Xiaokang were expelled from the official Chinese Writers' Association for their "anti-government activities abroad" .
A one-week meeting of the NPC Standing Committee ended on Oct. 31 after revising the draft law on demonstrations.
The revised law laid down strict rules on the issuing of permits for demonstrations and forbade government and party officials from participating.
The revision followed the situation in May and June when government officials including State Council employees joined the pro-democracy demonstrations.
Regulations for registering social organizations were also issued on Oct. 31.
It was reported that a new wave of investigations into participants in the April-June pro-democracy protests was launched in November.
University students in Beijing were questioned again about their activities, while arrests of those involved in the "counter-revolutionary rebellion" continued, albeit without the publicity surrounding earlier mass arrests [see pp. 36720-21].
Two underground escape networks were "smashed" by the Chinese authorities in November and December, and two leading activists, Wang Juntao and Chen Ziming, were arrested, along with several Hong Kong and Macao residents.
On Dec. 8 two men were sentenced to death in Beijing for the murder of an armed policeman on June 4.
Also in December it was reported that secret trials of Beijing students who had participated in the protests had begun.
According to the Washington Post of Jan. 16, 1990, more than 800 people including university students had been sentenced to prison terms of up to 10 years for "counter-revolutionary crimes" , including such acts as putting up posters.
The story was dismissed by a Chinese official as "sheer fabrication" .
The trials of more than 40 political activists such as Wang Dan, Cao Siyuan and Ren Wanding, held in a maximum security Beijing prison, were imminent, according to Chinese sources.
In the first signs of protest since the events of June, students from the Beijing Aeronautical Institute held a demonstration in violation of martial law on Dec. 9, criticizing China's economic performance and media censorship.
Several students were reported to have been arrested.
On Dec. 27 government spokesperson Yuan Mu was hissed at during a packed meeting with Beijing University students on current events when he said that China would not deviate from the socialist road, despite current events in Romania [see pp. 37104-05].
(Illegal posters acclaiming the overthrow and execution on Dec. 25 of the Romanian leader, Nicolae Ceausescu, had reportedly been put up on university campuses but quickly removed by the authorities.)
The students also questioned Yuan Mu about the fate of Zhao Ziyang and the selection of Jiang Zemin as Zhao's successor but received no answers.
Tightening of CCP control over press
Well before the demonstrations of May and June 1989, the media had been warned by the party over its "negative" coverage [see pp. 36588; 36640].
The official newspaper of the Communist Youth League had reportedly been criticized for publishing investigative reports against party orders, and its editors had been threatened with a period in the country.
At the end of April Qin Benli, editor of the pro-reformist paper World Economic Herald, was suspended for publishing articles critical of the party in the aftermath of the death of the former party general secretary Hu Yaobang in mid-April [see p. 36640; for Hu's death see p. 36587].
The paper was taken over by the Shanghai party committee.
During the May and June protests journalists took a leading part in demanding greater freedom of the press, and sympathetic reports of the pro-democracy movement briefly appeared in newspapers and broadcasts.
Following the military crackdown in Beijing the Central People's Broadcasting Station was occupied by martial law troops and a widescale purge of the press was ordered, resulting in the dismissal of a number of newspaper executives including on July 15 Li Zisong, the publisher of the Hong Kong-based Wen Wei Po, funded by China and a de facto organ of the CCP, which had openly condemned the Chinese government over the Tiananmen massacre.
In a stern warning to national editors on Nov. 29, Jiang Zemin, said that the party must strengthen its leadership over the media and warned against remnants of bourgeois liberalization.
He called for "positive publicity" representing the "party spirit" of press reporting.
Following the lifting of martial law and its reporting restrictions on Jan. 11, 1990, new regulations for foreign journalists were brought into effect on Jan. 19.
The regulations placed the Foreign Ministry in charge of foreign news affairs and stated that journalists "shall not distort facts, fabricate rumours or resort to inappropriate means" in their reporting.
Activities "harmful to China's national security, unification or social and public interests" were also banned.
The new rules also said that official permission should be sought for travel outside the capital.
Strengthening of party control over education
Two months after the military crackdown in Beijing in June 1989, it was announced that university student intake would be cut from 640,000 to 610,000 in the next academic year, and that "specialities mainly in the social science fields which the State has deemed for a long time to have turned out personnel not qualified for socialist construction" would be suspended.
Beijing University's intake alone was cut by more than half.
In August it was announced that all first-year Beijing University students would undergo a year of military and political training, while two other top universities were to devote the first five weeks of the new term to the study of documents issued by the central authorities on the "truth" about the "counter-revolutionary rebellion" .
On Nov. 17 a code of conduct for students was issued which stipulated that students should "love the socialist motherland" , support the leadership of the party and the socialist system, study Marxism diligently, and have a "firm and correct" political understanding.
It was reported in October that the party's Rural Policy Research Centre, the leading agricultural research group, was being closed down because of its links with Zhao Ziyang and the pro-democracy movement.
Arrest of Catholic bishops
Citing church sources, the Western media reported early in 1990 that 12 Roman Catholic bishops had been arrested in the previous few months, including Mgr Antoine Zhang Guangyi, 83, who had already served 30 years in prison.
The arrests were part of a new drive against members of the underground Catholic Church who remained loyal to the Pope and who refused to join the officially sanctioned Patriotic Catholic Association.
Appointments and dismissals
Wu Shaozu, hitherto political commissar in the Commission of Science, Technology and Industry for National Defence, replaced as Sports Minister Li Menghua whose dismissal, linked to China's poor performance in the 1988 Seoul Olympics, was announced on Dec. 29, 1988.
Also announced was the replacement of Chen Junshen by Luo Gan as Secretary-General of the State Council.
Luo Gan had been Minister of Labour from April 1988, and a member of the State Planning Commission since July 1988.
On July 6, 1989, the NPC Standing Committee confirmed the appointments of Ruan Chongwu, former Vice-Minister in charge of the State Science and Technology Commission, as Minister of Labour, succeeding Luo Gan, and of Gu Xiulian, hitherto Governor of Jiangsu Province, as Minister of the Chemical Industry, replacing Qin Zhongda.
On Sept. 4, 1989, the NPC Standing Committee formally relieved of his post the Minister of Culture, Wang Meng, who had reportedly resigned due to poor health.
He Jingzhi was confirmed as Acting Minister of Culture, following the acceptance of his resignation from the NPC Standing Committee.
Zhu Houze was dismissed on Dec. 26, 1989, from his posts of vice-president and first secretary of the All-China Federation of Trade Unions and replaced by Yu Hongen, former president of the National Coal Development Corporation.
Zhu was reportedly dismissed because of his links with liberal policies, and might have been held responsible for the participation of union members in the pro-democracy protests of May and June.
Deaths
Ulanhu (also spelt Ulanfu), a former Vice-President of China, died in Beijing on Dec. 8, 1988, aged 82.
Born in what was now Inner Mongolia, Ulanhu became one of the first Mongol members of the CCP when he joined in 1925.
By 1949 he had become a central party figure, often acting as spokesman on minority issues.
Disgraced during the 1960s Cultural Revolution for allegedly attempting to set up an "independent kingdom" , Ulanhu was rehabilitated in 1973 as a member of the CCP central committee.
He was elected to the Politburo in 1977 [see p. 28722]and was Vice-President from June 1983 until April 1988 [see pp. 32503; 36102].
Huan Xiang, an influential figure in foreign affairs, died in Beijing on Feb. 28, 1989, aged 80.
Educated at a missionary school and in Japan, Huan Xiang left the Kuomintang to join the CCP in 1947.
After 1949 he joined the Foreign Ministry and served in London between 1954 and 1962.
During this time he participated in the negotiations in Geneva to end the war in Indochina.
In 1976 Huan was made ambassador to Belgium and to the European Communities, and in 1979 became vice-president of the Chinese Academy of Social Sciences.
Most recently he had been appointed director of the Centre for International Studies by Zhao Ziyang, where he advised on foreign affairs.
Legislation on environment and joint ventures approved by NPC standing committee
Meeting on Dec. 20, 1989, the NPC Standing Committee approved the Organic Law of the Urban Neighbourhood Committees, the Environment Protection Law and the Urban Planning Law.
The Environment Protection Law set fines for those who polluted "beyond limits" , and enabled projects to be halted on environmental grounds.
The Urban Planning Law gave priority to protecting the long-term interests of the state against immediate, local interests.
The session also approved changes to the Sino-Foreign Joint Venture Law to attract foreign investment.
Changes included a clause to protect joint ventures against nationalization, removal of the stipulation that the chairman of a joint venture should be from the Chinese participant, and greater freedom in setting the contract period.
Draft laws on the protection of military installations and on city planning were also discussed.
Military affairs — Enlarged meeting of CMC
Ranks were restored in the People's Liberation Army as from Oct. 1, 1988, and 17 generals were appointed for the first time in 23 years [for adoption by NPC in July 1988 of regulations re-introducing military ranks see p. 36104].
It was reported on Sept. 28 that China had launched the Jiulong-1 missile into the East China Sea from a submerged Xia-class nuclear submarine.
This marked the first launch of its kind in China.
Liberation Army Daily reported the introduction of a new-type mine-sweeper on Oct 11, and a domestically built jet fighter on Oct 8.
Following his resignation from the CMC on Nov. 9, 1989 [see p. 37040], Deng Xiaoping addressed the commission on Nov. 10 on the role of the People's Liberation Army (PLA) for the following year.
At the same meeting the new CMC Chairman, Jiang Zemin, said that Deng's "thought and theory on Army building during the new period will remain our treasure" .
He added: "We must earnestly study and implement his thought and theory." 
Jiang praised the armed forces for their loyalty and "high degree of political awareness" in quelling the "counter-revolutionary rebellion" in June, calling the PLA "a strong pillar of the people's democratic dictatorship and a great wall of steel for the socialist motherland" .
He urged the strengthening of the concept of national defence, and called on the party and state to support the Army.
President Yang Shangkun, as the new First Vice-Chairman of the CMC, emphasized the party's leadership over the Army and political building within it by education in the Four Cardinal Principles (the socialist system, the dictatorship of the proletariat, the leadership of the Communist Party and Marxism-Leninism and Mao Zedong Thought) and by opposing bourgeois liberalization.
The meeting agreed that 70 per cent of training would be devoted to political studies, with the remaining 30 per cent for military training.
Conference on political work
An Army political work conference was held on Dec. 10-17, 1989, the first of its kind for "many years" , according to Xinhua.
A document on political work was issued which summed up new experiences gained in political work, especially after the June events, and clarified ideological issues "confounded by the ideas propounded by bourgeois liberalization" .
The document said that study of Marxism-Leninism and Mao Zedong Thought must be intensified.
Criticizing the "neglect and relaxation in political construction" , Gen. Yang Baibing, director of the PLA general political department (and younger half-brother of Yang Shangkun), said: "Strengthening the firm political stand of cadres and fighters and guaranteeing that the rifles are really held by politically reliable people are matters of top importance" for ensuring the Army's response to the party's commands in future "political storms" .
He further commented that political work was a "lifeline" .
According to the Far Eastern Economic Review of Feb. 1, 1990, more than 3,500 officers were under investigation for suspected involvement in the pro-democracy movement.
Jiefangjun Bao had reported in October that "a small number" of soldiers had been "confused" .
 "Learn from Lei Feng" campaign
In December 1989 "a new upsurge in the Army on learning from Lei Feng" was reported, following a call by Yang Baibing in August to learn from the "lofty communist moral character" of model soldier Lei Feng [for resurgence of Lei Feng cult in early 1988 see p. 36103].
According to the official hagiography, Lei Feng was a soldier in Shenyang, the capital of Liaoning province, who died at his post in 1962 when a washing pole fell on his head.
He allegedly left behind a diary as a record of his selfless good deeds and faith in socialism, and became a model in a campaign initiated by former leaders Mao Zedong, Zhou Enlai and Marshal Zhu De.
Army units were issued with 300,000 copies of Lei Feng's diary to launch the new campaign.
ECONOMY
Economic indicators
GNP growth 4% (end 1989)
National income growth 11.4% (1987)
Trade balance +US$3,270 m. (1989)
Non-trade foreign exchange balance +US$3,910 m. (1988)
Budget deficit 7,855 m. yuan (1988)
Foreign loans 12,800 m. yuan (1988)
Foreign debt US$44,000 m. (1989)
Debt service ratio (as % of export earnings) under 10% (1988)
National income 1,153,300 yuan (1988)
Gross national product 1,385,300 m. yuan (1988)
Inflation rate: prices 17.8% (1989)
Inflation rate 20.7% (1988)
Unemployment 4% (1989)
Total industrial output value 1,810,000 m. yuan (1988)
Total agricultural output value 561,800 yuan (1988)
Principal trading partners Exports: Hong Kong and Macao, USA, Japan; Hong Kong and Macao, Japan
The Far Eastern Economic Review of Feb. 8, 1990, reported end-1989 figures including gross national product (GNP) which had increased by 4 per cent over the previous year, the slowest rate since 1976.
There was a dramatic fall in light industrial output, while savings went up by 133,400 million yuan, the largest rise ever.
Retail price rises averaged 17.8 per cent for the year, but foreign economists said that in the fourth quarter inflation scarcely rose above zero.
The fall in output had affected employment, especially in urban areas, and it was estimated that unemployment stood at 4 per cent in 1989, double the previous year's figure.
The grain harvest reached a record 407,900,000 tonnes, 600,000 tonnes over the previous all-time high of 1984.
This was achieved despite a decline in output in the great grain-growing provinces of Liaoning and Jilin, which had suffered severe drought earlier in the year.
Exports increased by 6.5 per cent to US$43,270 million, while imports fell 3.9 per cent to $40,000 million.
However, international sanctions meant that foreign loan agreements were down by 51 per cent to $4,800 million.
On Nov. 22 government spokesperson Yuan Mu said that China's foreign debt stood at $44,000 million, and overall repayments for 1990 were estimated to be within the target $7,000-$8,000 million.
Domestic debt (money owed by state industrial units and commercial enterprises to each other), which was seen to pose a greater problem, stood at 80,000 million yuan, repayments reaching a peak with 30,000 million yuan payable in 1990.
In June compulsory purchase bonds worth 12,000 million yuan were issued.
In December the State Council held a national planning conference at which it was announced that there would be no change in the rural household contract system, the enterprise contract system, the factory director responsibility system, the development of the private and collective sectors, local government financial autonomy, or special policies for Special Economic Zones and coastal regions.
In a speech delivered at the conference, Li Peng said that 1990 would be a "turning point" in improving the economic environment and rectifying economic order.
Saying that it would be a year of difficulties, with China entering the peak repayment period of domestic and foreign debt, he further stated that people would have to "live an austere life for a few years" .
Outlining the tasks for 1990, he laid great emphasis on the development of agriculture through increased funding, largely from local sources, through improved technology and through greater control over the supply of inputs.
A readjustment of prices for agricultural produce would also be needed.
Regarding industry he stressed the importance of developing medium and large enterprises and of strengthened planning for "important means of production" .
Saying that controls would be maintained on capital construction, currency issuance, and expenditure and imports, he called for growth in exports to increase foreign exchange reserves, variously stated to be between $14,200 and $16,300 million at the end of 1989.
FOREIGN
Relations with Soviet Union
Visit by CPSU delegation
Valentin Falin, head of the international department of the Communist Party of the Soviet Union (CPSU) central committee, arrived in Beijing on Dec. 23, 1989, for a week of talks with senior Chinese leaders.
According to the Far Eastern Economic Review Falin's visit was seen as a response to a visit to China earlier in the month by the US National Security Adviser Gen. Brent Scowcroft [see p. 37122].
During his visit Falin briefed Chinese leaders, including Jiang Zemin, on the US-Soviet Malta summit in early December [see pp. 37110-11]and on other aspects of the international situation, including events in Eastern Europe.
During his meeting with Falin on Dec. 28 Jiang Zemin said that China opposed interference in its internal affairs, and would never interfere in the affairs of other countries.
According to The Times of Dec. 29 this was a reference to events in Eastern Europe and a warning to the Soviet Union not to interfere in China's socialist system.
Chinese criticism of Soviet Union
In late 1989 and early 1990 Hong Kong and Western media reported criticism of President Gorbachev among the Chinese leadership [see also p. 37186].
The International Herald Tribune of Nov. 23, 1989, quoted a senior CCP source claiming that Deng Xiaoping, in a meeting with senior officials in October 1989, had warned of the infiltration of ideas of political change from the Soviet Union.
The report cited Deng as saying that in the period to June 1989 the Chinese media had reported too widely on political change within the Soviet Union, spreading destabilizing ideas.
Deng reportedly also said that events in Eastern Europe had been a result of Gorbachev's influence combined with weak leadership in the countries concerned.
A CCP internal policy memorandum distributed in late December allegedly criticized Gorbachev for having "subverted" socialism by encouraging change in Eastern Europe, the Hong Kong paper Ming Pao reported.
Normalization and border talks
In mid-June 1988 Chinese Vice-Foreign Minister Tian Zengpei and his Soviet counterpart Igor Rogachev, held the 12th round of Sino-Soviet normalization talks in Moscow [see pp. 35839-40 for 10th and 11th rounds of normalization talks].
Chinese and Soviet generals met in Beijing in April 1988 and March 1989 to discuss aerial photography issues as part of ongoing border negotiations.
According to the Soviet new agency Tass the third round of official border talks was held in Moscow on Oct. 20-31, 1988, between Tian Zengpei and Rogachev.
The Chinese Foreign Ministry said on Nov. 3 that "unanimity" had been reached on delineating the major part of the 2,600-km eastern border.
This was taken to mean the Argun, Amur and Ussuri rivers, although no details were given [for previous rounds of border talks see pp. 35840; 36320].
Official working group discussions regarding the western border took place in Beijing on March 30-April 15, 1989, in a "frank, businesslike atmosphere" , the Moscow paper Izvestiya reported.
The fourth round of Sino-Soviet border talks was held in Beijing on Oct. 20-31 between delegations headed by Tian Zengpei and Rogachev respectively.
Xinhua reported that the talks took place in "an earnest atmosphere" .
In discussing the boundary alignment of as yet unresolved sectors "some" progress was reported, and the two sides pointed out the "great significance" of the May 1989 Sino-Soviet summit to the border talks.
Development of economic ties
The third meeting of the Sino-Soviet commission on economy, trade, scientific and technical co-operation was held in Beijing on June 3-8, 1988.
Yury Maslyukov, head of the Soviet side of the commission, a First Deputy Chair of the Soviet Council of Ministers and Chair of the Soviet State Planning Committee (Gosplan), and Chinese Vice-Premier Tian Jiyun signed three documents which included agreements on joint ventures and a summary of the meeting.
On March 3, 1989, a protocol on Sino-Soviet trade for 1989 was signed in Moscow, Tass reported.
The agreement called for a trade turnover of 4,800 million Swiss francs, an increase of 17 per cent over 1988.
The Soviet Union also offered a SFr200,000,000 low-interest loan to renovate the Baotou Iron and Steel Works in Inner Mongolia, one of the original Soviet-aided projects from the 1950s, according to the Financial Times.
On May 15 the Soviet Union agreed to provide an $80,000,000 loan in the form of materials for the construction of a 460-km railway link in Xinjiang Autonomous Region, according to a report which quoted local trade officials.
Following the normalization of relations in May 1989, a number of local trade and co-operation agreements were reached in Heilongjiang province and in Inner Mongolia and Xinjiang Autonomous Regions.
An agreement on the opening of air traffic and direct telecommunications was signed between Hulun Buir in Inner Mongolia and Chita oblast in the Soviet Union, Hohhot (Inner Mongolia) radio reported on Nov. 28.
Moscow radio reported on Jan. 9, 1990, that an agreement had been signed on direct co-operation between the Kurchatov Atomic Energy Institute in Moscow and the High-Tech Co. of China.
The Soviet Union completed delivery of 25 Tu-154M passenger aircraft to China in December 1989, Moscow radio also reported, adding that another batch of aircraft would be supplied in 1990.
A regular meeting of the joint committee on economic, trade, scientific and technological co-operation concluded in Beijing on Jan. 23.
A summary of the meeting pointed out "the tremendous potential of continuing co-operation in the next few years" .
Relations with USA
Chinese arms sales issue — US response to improved Sino-Soviet ties
During a visit to China on July 14-16, 1988, the then US Secretary of State, George Shultz, raised the question of the sale of missiles to the Middle East, an issue provoking strong reaction in the US Congress, since the missiles could threaten Israel.
A confidential US Defence Department report had concluded that China's sale of missiles to Saudi Arabia [see pp. 36254; 36312]had been the result of a decision taken at the highest level of government to confront the USA in the Middle East.
However, others saw a commercial rather than a political motivation behind the sale.
According to Xinhua Shultz quoted Chinese leaders as saying that missiles had only been sold to Saudi Arabia, despite reports of sales to Iran [see pp. 35160; 35966; 36671], Libya and Syria [see p. 36180].
The Independent of July 16 noted that no agreement had been reached on limiting arms sales.
Nevertheless, Shultz was reported as promising that the USA would "do its best" to maintain the flow of US high technology to China [for March 1988 lifting of US sanctions on high-technology exports to China see p. 35966].
The then US Defence Secretary Frank Carlucci visited China on Sept. 5-9.
At a press conference on Sept. 6 following his talks the previous day with the Chinese Defence Minister Qin Jiwei, Xinhua reported that Qin Jiwei had said that the volume of China's arms sales was "limited and insignificant" and "a fraction" of US and Soviet arms sales.
Given that China was still developing, he said, China would "even in the future" not sell armaments "in large quantities" .
According to the Japanese news agency Kyodo Tsushin, Qin said that China would continue to sell arms to the Middle East, as it was only "natural" to do so.
The Far Eastern Economic Review of Sept. 8 noted that the Chinese response to US representations over missile sales showed a lack of concern over Sino-US strategic relations.
The US State Department announced on Sept. 9 that US enterprises would be permitted to use Chinese launching facilities for communications satellites, and according to Kyodo on Sept. 12 the USA had agreed to provide China with anti-tank helicopters, anti-submarine torpedoes and radar systems.
After meeting with Chinese leaders during his September visit, Carlucci reiterated the US view that improved Sino-Soviet relations would not threaten US or world security, a view reiterated by Li Peng.
On Feb. 21, 1989, the Guardian reported that the CCP had decided to keep relations with the USA "one step ahead" of ties with the Soviet Union.
Also in February US President George Bush paid a 40-hour visit to China as an indication of continuing close relations [see p. 36455].
Further repercussions of June massacre
Following the imposition of sanctions and the freeze on official exchanges immediately following the Tiananmen Square massacre [see pp. 36722; 36815], Qian Qichen held "frank discussions" with US Secretary of State James Baker at a UN meeting in New York on Sept. 28, in which he called for practical measures on the part of the USA to improve the situation.
Former US President Richard Nixon paid an unofficial visit to China at the invitation of the Chinese government on Oct. 31 to Nov. 2, 1989, during a meeting with Deng Xiaoping on Oct. 31 the latter commented: "Frankly speaking, the USA was involved too deeply in the turmoil and counter-revolutionary rebellion which occurred in Beijing not long ago" , and reportedly called on the USA to take the initiative in improving Sino-US relations.
At a banquet hosted by Yang Shangkun on Nov. 1 Nixon described the June crackdown as "excessive and unjustified" , saying that it had damaged US respect and confidence in the Chinese leadership and, speaking to Li Peng, he argued that the two countries' differences over the events in June were "huge and unbridgeable" , but that Sino-US relations should not be allowed to founder over the issue.
During a visit on Nov. 8-10 by former US Secretary of State Henry Kissinger, Qian Qichen on Nov. 8 reiterated that China expected the US government to take the initiative in restoring good bilateral relations.
An amendment to the US State Department Authorization Bill was adopted by the US Congress on Nov. 15 and 16, 1989, providing for sanctions against China and covering arms sales, US satellite exports, police equipment, an end to nuclear co-operation, a freeze on further liberalization of export controls and the suspension of investment insurance.
The Chinese Immigration Emergency Relief Bill, aimed at relaxing the rules governing the length of stay of the estimated 40,000 Chinese students in the USA, was also passed by Congress on Nov. 19 and 20.
Statements condemning these actions were issued by the Chinese Foreign Ministry, the NPC foreign affairs committee and the CCP central committee Foreign Affairs Committee, and on Nov. 19 and 24 the US ambassador was summoned to the Foreign Ministry for "serious representations" .
China warned that Congress's acts threatened student exchanges and further "poisoned" relations, and called on the US government to match its words with actions or face the "serious consequences" of "wantonly interfering in China's internal affairs" .
On Dec. 2 Bush vetoed the student bill, but requested a block extension of Chinese student visas.
On Dec. 19 he lifted the ban on the export of three communications satellites and ended the suspension of US Export-Import Bank financing of business with China, Xinhua reported.
The vote on Jan. 22 by the US House of Representatives to override the presidential veto on the student bill provoked an angry reaction from China, and on Jan. 25 the US Senate narrowly voted to sustain Bush's veto; a two-thirds majority was needed in both houses of Congress to overturn a presidential veto.
On Jan. 20 Li Tieying, the Minister in charge of the State Education Commission, had promised that there would be no investigation of returned students, and the People's Daily of Jan. 26 dismissed as "sheer nonsense" claims that students returning to China faced persecution, and linked the US action to attempts to undermine socialism in China by means of sanctions.
The Far Eastern Economic Review of Nov. 9 reported that Chinese military officers had been allowed to resume work in the USA on upgrading F-8 fighter aircraft, which had been suspended in June.
According to the Financial Times, subsidized grain sales to China were renewed on Dec. 5.
Under the Export Enhancement Programme, 1,000,000 tonnes of wheat were made available to China.
On Jan. 9, 1990, the US administration announced its support for the restoration of World Bank loans to China which met "basic human needs" ; the International Herald Tribune reported on Jan. 13 that this covered about $2,000 million of the $7,000 million sought by the World Bank.
A White House spokesperson said that the decision had "nothing to do" with the lifting of martial law on Jan. 11 [see pp. 37185-86]and did not reflect a change in policy.
Following the US decision the president of the World Bank, Barber Conable, recommended the release of emergency loans for China worth $90,000,000.
Of this $60,000,000 was for the relief of extreme poverty in Jiangxi province and $30,000,000 for repairing earthquake damage in Shanxi and Hebei provinces [see p. 36815 for deferral of World Bank loans].
Relations with Japan
Anger over Japanese attitude to Second World War
Qian Qichen on Feb. 24, 1989, attended the funeral in Japan of Emperor Hirohito [see pp. 36462-63].
This low-level representation reflected China's anger over remarks to the Japanese Diet (parliament) on Feb. 18 by then Prime Minister Noboru Takeshita denying the Emperor's responsibility for atrocities committed by the Japanese in China during the Second World War.
Also on Feb. 24 Qian had an unscheduled meeting with Takeshita when he told him that full normalization of Sino-Japanese relations could hinge on Japan's "correct understanding of history" .
At a separate meeting the then Japanese Foreign Minister Sosuke Uno expressed regret that Takeshita's remarks had not been fully understood, but "seriously" accepted Qian's view.
Gradual restoration of economic relations
A Japanese business delegation, organized by the Japan-China Association on Economy and Trade and the Federation of Economic Organizations (Keidanren), on Nov. 9-13, 1989, visited China to "seek methods for resuming bilateral economic co-operation" , according to Xinhua, after the suspension of the Japanese aid programme following the June crackdown on pro-democracy demonstrators in Beijing [see p. 36722].
During the visit Li Peng and Zheng Tuobin, the Minister of Foreign Economic Relations and Trade, asked Japan to lift the freeze on loans, Kyodo reported.
Noting that Japanese businesses were losing ground to their US rivals, Li Peng commented that sanctions had brought "some difficulties" to China but had also harmed those who had imposed them.
On Nov. 13 the Japanese delegation met Deng Xiaoping, who urged the resolution of the deadlock in bilateral relations.
However, in spite of Chinese appeals and criticism a Japanese government spokesperson said on Nov. 13 that it was "too early" to consider a resumption of the 1990-95 suspended loan programme worth 810,000 million yen (approximately $5,600 million).
Western reports said that Japan was waiting for signals from the USA and international finance bodies before committing itself.
On Dec. 5 Japan extended a grant-in-aid worth 4,876 million yen which officials said had been promised in 1988 and therefore did not affect Japan's temporary ban on economic co-operation.
Visit by Zou Jiahua to Japan
Zou Jiahua, Minister in charge of the State Planning Commission, visited Japan on Jan. 16-25, 1990, ending Japan's suspension of high-level exchanges since June 1989.
Government-to-government contacts had been restarted in early December with the convening in Beijing of consultations on cultural exchanges.
However, Japan said that the visit did not mark a return to business as usual, even though Japanese banks and businesses had been rapidly reviving business activities.
Nevertheless, during Zou's visit Japan announced that limited government loans for "human needs" would be resumed.
According to Kyodo, Zou asked for an early resumption of the 1990-95 loan package.
In response, Foreign Minister Taro Nakayama and Prime Minister Toshiki Kaifu called for China to remove "impediments" to improved ties, saying that recent steps were "not enough" to bring a return to business as usual.
Although a preparatory process for the restoration of loans had been initiated during a recent visit to Beijing by a Japanese government official, no "concrete" commitment had been made in this regard, Kyodo reported.
During talks with former leaders Noboru Takeshita and Shintaro Abe and with leading industrial figures, Zou promised to improve further the domestic environment for foreign investment and said that China's repayment of its foreign debt was guaranteed, adding that the lifting of martial law on Jan. 11 was a sign of stability.
Zou promised that China would do "its share" to raise Sino-Japanese relations to a new level.
Relations with Eastern Europe
Reaction to events in Eastern Europe
Speaking at a press conference in Dhaka on Nov. 19, 1989, during a visit to Bangladesh [see also below], Li Peng said: "The changes in Eastern Europe are making some people happy and others worried," and advised "certain people not to feel happy too soon" .
He reiterated that China had never interfered in the internal affairs of other countries and other political parties.
According to Beijing radio, Li Peng added: "I cannot say that the developments in Eastern Europe will have no impact at all on China.
However, China will unswervingly uphold the socialist system."
In a meeting with Hong Kong journalists in Beijing on Dec. 21 Jiang Zemin said that "China is very different from Eastern European countries" , according to Beijing radio.
Vice-Premier Yao Yilin observed that it was "too early" for the West to celebrate the changes in Eastern Europe, the Hong Kong paper Ta Kung Pao reported on Dec. 23.
Qian Qichen, in an interview with Liaowang on Dec. 25, said: "Conflicts between different social systems and ideologies have become more complicated and intense [but]" socialism has not failed, nor has capitalism attained victory."
After the fall of Ceausescu in Romania, the Chinese Foreign Ministry said that "external and internal forces" had crippled communism in Eastern Europe, adding that Gorbachev's liberal policies needed "careful and serious study" , the news agency United Press International (UPI) reported on Dec. 29, adding that the political bureau had held a special meeting to discuss its response to the fall of Ceausescu.
Visit by senior Polish minister
The Deputy Chairman of the Polish Council of Ministers, Jan Janowski, arrived in Beijing on Jan. 16, 1990, for an eight-day visit to promote economic co-operation.
His visit, the first by a senior East European official since the collapse of communism there, had been delayed because of political turmoil in China and Poland, according to a Polish official.
Janowski held talks with Song Jian, Minister in charge of the State Scientific and Technological Commission, who stressed the traditional friendship and co-operation between China and Poland "no matter what storm has occurred" .
Relations with UK
Following a visit to China in April 1988 by the then UK Secretary of State for Trade and Industry, Lord Young of Graffham, the then Minister for Overseas Development, Chris Patten, signed an agreement on aid and trade worth £300,000,000 (approximately US$500,000,000) in Beijing on Sept. 19.
The agreement, which provided for soft loans or mixed credits over the next three years, was made on more generous terms than the £300,000,000 soft loan package extended in 1986 [see p. 34675].
On Nov. 8 the UK Overseas Development Administration (ODA) signed aid finance agreements providing £17,000,000 in support of £56,000,000 worth of exports.
On Nov. 10, 1989, the British Broadcasting Corporation (BBC) World Service accused China of "regular and severe" jamming of BBC broadcasts, the first such instance of systematic jamming.
Voice of America (VOA) broadcasts were also affected.
Also in November China imposed controls on facsimile machines following a drive by European and US magazines, in concert with exiled Chinese dissidents, to get their readers to send by facsimile material in support of the democracy movement into China.
Relations with Middle East
Accompanied by Finance Minister Wang Bingqian, Yang Shangkun began a Middle East tour with a visit to Egypt on Dec. 19-23, 1989.
He then went on to the United Arab Emirates (UAE) on Dec. 23-24, Kuwait on Dec. 24-26 and Oman on Dec. 26-28.
Talks focused on economic relations and reaffirming ties.
According to the Far Eastern Economic Review of Dec. 28, Yang stressed that military topics were not on the agenda.
On Jan. 20, 1990, Xinhua announced that the China Great Wall Co. was to launch a communications satellite for Arabsat at the end of 1991.
Relations with south Asian countries
South Asian tour by Li Peng
Li Peng began a tour of Pakistan, Bangladesh and Nepal on Nov. 14, 1989, accompanied by Qian Qichen and the Minister for Foreign Economic Relations and Trade, Zheng Tuobin.
The People's Daily of Nov. 24 said that the foreign tour was the first by a Chinese leader since the June massacre and showed that "the vast numbers of Third-World countries are our trusted genuine friends" .
In Pakistan Li Peng held talks on Nov. 14 and 15 with the Pakistani Prime Minister Benazir Bhutto.
The two leaders reached "complete understanding" on regional and international developments, including Afghanistan, according to Islamabad radio.
Three agreements and a protocol on economic co-operation were signed, including aid worth 50,000,000 yuan for development projects in Pakistan.
At a press conference on Nov. 16 Li Peng announced that China would provide Pakistan with a 300,000 kw nuclear power plant.
He said that no agreement on defence had been signed, but that it was "known to all" that China sold weapons to Pakistan [see p. 36467].
Li Peng held "very fruitful" talks with President Hossain Mohammad Ershad during his visit to Bangladesh on Nov. 17-19, signing four agreements and a note of exchange, including a long-term trade agreement for 1990-94 and a soft loan for Bangladesh worth about $40,000,000.
Li Peng visited Nepal on Nov. 19-21, when he held talks with Prime Minister Marish Man Singh Shrestha.
On Nov. 20 an agreement was signed on grant assistance for new and existing projects.
At a press conference Li Peng referred to India's trade blockade of Nepal saying: "Nepal expressed its understanding of the suppression of the counter-revolutionary rebellion in Beijing.
Now Nepal has encountered difficulties and China will support it morally and in other fields."
Li Peng also said that China supplied arms to Nepal for its defence.
ASIA — PACIFIC
TIBET
BASIC DATA
Area: 1,228,000 sq km.
Population: 2,030,000 (1986).
Capital: Lhasa.
Language: Tibetan and Chinese.
Religion: No official religion, but almost 100% Tibetan (yellow sect) Bhuddism.
Av. life expectancy: 63.7 yrs (1989).
Armed forces:(Chinese) PLA and Armed Police (ests. vary between 100,000 and 500,000).
GNP per capita: Currency: Chinese yuan (US$1.00=4.7367 yuan as at March 12, 1990).
Hitherto a semi-independent region of western China ruled by a Dalai Lama, the head of Tibet's Buddhist clergy and thus its spiritual leader, Tibet was in 1950 occupied by the Chinese communist People's Liberation Army (PLA).
A series of revolts against Chinese rule over several years culminated in the unsuccessful armed uprising of 1959.
The 14th Dalai Lama, His Holiness Tenzin Gyatso, fled to India, where he was granted political asylum and in 1964 China declared him to be a traitor.
Tibet became an autonomous region of China in 1965, but the Tibetans continued to regard the Dalai Lama as their "god-king" and to resent the Chinese presence.
As an autonomous region, Tibet (Xizang) has its own legislature (Local People's Congress, whose Chairman is currently Ngapoi Ngawang Jigme) and is administered by a People's Government (whose Chairman is currently Doje Cering); since pro-independence demonstrations in September and October 1987 [see pp. 35716-17]security has been largely controlled from Beijing, and since March 1989 Lhasa has been under martial law [see pp. 36521-22].
POLITICS/SECURITY
Demonstrations in 1988 and late 1989
A major demonstration occurred in early March 1988 on the occasion of the Great Summons prayer festival (Moinlam Qenmo).
The Chinese government had wanted this festival, revived in 1986, to serve as a demonstration of religious freedom in Tibet, but most lamas (Bhuddist monks) boycotted it.
The protests began on the final day (March 5) with young lamas shouting slogans.
Violent incidents included stone-throwing and attacks on a police station and the Buddhist Association offices.
Xinhua (the New China News Agency) reported that 60 lamas took part, injuring 309 policemen, one fatally.
Western news agencies claimed that at least eight had died — one monk, four civilians and three policemen — with 300 lamas involved and a crowd of 10,000.
All means of communication to the outside world were cut shortly after the demonstration began.
Over the next few days at least 100 lamas were arrested, including a senior Buddhist official and Yuluo Dawuaciren, a "living Buddha" .
On March 10, on the anniversary of the 1959 uprising, a large show of military force stopped a repetition of the protests.
However, monks and nuns staged small vocal demonstrations in April, June and on the anniversary of the autumn 1987 protests.
These were swiftly put down by a detachment of the newly established Armed Police firing tear gas into the crowds.
A further demonstration occurred on Dec. 10, 1988, the 40th anniversary of the Universal Declaration of Human Rights.
Xinhua reported that one person was killed and 13 injured and that there were 100 "troublemakers" (including 30 lamas and nuns) and 10,000 onlookers.
Tibetan and Western sources claimed that more than 200 were involved, with 18 dead and 50 wounded.
On Dec. 7 Hu Jintao replaced Wu Jinghua as regional secretary of the Chinese Communist Party, apparently because of the latter's failure to dampen the persistent Tibetan nationalist unrest.
At the end of December between 60 and 150 Tibetan students in Beijing and 300 in Lhasa demonstrated, calling for respect for Tibetan culture and the reinstatement of Tibetan as the official language.
The imposition of martial law on Lhasa on March 7, 1989, following violent clashes between Tibetans and Chinese police [see p. 36521]effectively put a stop to further mass demonstrations.
Two smaller protests took place, however, on the news of the award of the Nobel Peace Price to the Dalai Lama in October 1989 [see p. 36990]; and in December celebrations turned to violence as the Dalai Lama went to Norway to receive the award.
Other protests were reported during October and November in Xigazê, Gyangzê and Zêtang, where restrictions were in force.
Public celebration of the Grand Summons festival was prohibited in 1990 and, owing to a massive military presence, there were no reported protests.
Tibetan sources reported armoured personnel carriers, convoys of trucks carrying about 2,000 soldiers, a dozen howitzers and several tanks parading through the Barkhar market, around the Jokhang temple, Tibet's most hallowed Buddhist shrine.
Human rights — Attempts at negotiation with China
China strongly repudiated a report in January 1988 by Asia Watch, a United States-based human rights group, claiming serious human rights abuse in Tibet, including torture, unfair imprisonment, discrimination and lack of basic freedoms.
The United Kingdom Parliamentary Human Rights Group Report, published on April 4 — the day the Dalai Lama arrived in the UK for a nine-day pastoral visit — and alleging that over 1,000,000 Tibetans had died between 1950 and 1984 as a direct result of Chinese rule, brought the same response.
China repudiated a report in February 1989 by the UN Commission on Human Rights which condemned its record in Tibet between October 1987 and March 1988, and expressed indignation in March when the European Parliament and the US Congress both passed resolutions condemning the declaration of martial law.
In June 1988 the Dalai Lama made a major policy speech before the European Parliament in Strasbourg, France, developing his five-point plan, first outlined in September 1987 before a US Senate foreign relations committee in Washington [see p. 35717].
For the first time conceding a measure of Chinese control, he proposed a "self-governing democratic political entity" to be set up "in association with" China, with the latter maintaining some control over foreign affairs and defence.
China rejected the proposal outright, while the speech was regarded by many Tibetans as a betrayal of the cause of Tibetan independence.
China's initial response was that the speech could not be considered as a basis for talks "because it has not at all relinquished the concept of the independence of Tibet" , but on Sept. 23 disclosed an offer to hold direct negotiations to which the Dalai Lama responded positively.
On Oct. 25 he offered to hold talks with China in Geneva in January 1989, but after initial agreement, China rejected the offer as "insincere" , particularly as the Dalai Lama himself would not be a member of the negotiating team.
The Chinese cancelled all further contact with the Dalai Lama following the massive pro-democracy demonstrations in Beijing in May and June 1989.
Meanwhile, the announcement in October 1989 of the award of the Nobel Peace Prize to the Dalai Lama [see above]had been denounced by the Chinese government as "an affront to the Tibetan people" .
Economic indicators
Agriculture output 741 m. yuan (1989)
Industrial output 221 m. yuan (1989)
Grain production 532.5 m. kg (1989)
Average per capita income of farmers/herdsmen 397 yuan (1989)
Value of goods exported from Tibet US$15.55 m. (1989)
Tourists 3,600 (1989)
ASIA — PACIFIC
MONGOLIA
BASIC DATA
Area: 1,565,000 sq km.
Population: 2,086,000 (est. 1988).
Capital: Ulan Bator.
Language: Khalkha Mongolian; Kazakh is spoken in the province of Bayan-ölgiy.
Religion: No state religion, but traces of Buddhist Lamaism and Shamanism still survive.
Av. life expectancy: 64 yrs (1988).
Armed forces: 21,500 (perhaps 17,000 conscripts) 91988-89).
GDP per capita: US$1,054 (1989).
Currency: tugrik ($1.00=3.3495 tugrik as at March 26, 1990).
In the Mongolian People's Republic, which was established in 1924, effective political control is in the hands of the (communist) Mongolian People's Revolutionary Party (MPRP).
Mongolia has a unicameral legislature, the People's Great Hural, whose 370 deputies are elected every five years by universal suffrage from a single list of officially nominated candidates.
They in turn elect a Presidium, whose chairman is the head of state, and the Council of Ministers.
Since December 1989 peaceful demonstrations have taken place in the capital, Ulan Bator, in support of political and economic reforms.
The demonstrations, organized in the main by the Mongolian Democratic Union, prompted widespread leadership changes in March 1990 [see p. 37317].
On March 23 the People's Great Hural voted to abolish the MPRP's guaranteed monopoly of power; deputies also approved a new electoral law allowing for multi-candidate elections.
Sharavyn Gungaadorj Chairman Myatavyn Peljee Deputy Chairman; Chairman of Commission for COMECON Affairs Puntsagiyn Jasray First Deputy Chairman; Chairman of Planning and Economy Commission Dashiyn Byambasuren Deputy Chairman Luvsanbaldangiyn Nyamsambuu Deputy Chairman; Chairman of State Committee for Construction (vacant) Deputy Chairman; Agriculture, Livestock Breeding and Food Industry Choynoryn Süren Deputy Chairman; Light Industry Irvüüdzijn Noravjav Communications Budyn Sum'yaa Culture Lt.-Gen.
Luvsangombyn Molomjamts Defence (vacant) External Economic Relations and Supply Demchigjavyn Molomjamts Finance Tserenpilyn Gombosuren Foreign Affairs Choyjiljavyn Tserennadmid Health Origiyn Jambaldorj Justice Uthany Mavlyet National Environmental Protection Byambyn Devaasüren People's Education Sodovyn Bathuyag Power, Mining and Geological Industry Lt.-Gen.
Agvaanjantsangiyn Jamsranjav Public Security Tümengiyn Demchigdorj Communal Economy and Services Badarchiyn Sharavsambuu Trade and Procurement Dogoyn Yondonsuren Transportation Chuvaandorjiyn Molom Chairman of People's Control Committee Gochoogiya Hüderchuluun Chairman of General Committee of State Bank Davaagiyn Dashdovdon Chairman of State Committee for Physical Culture and Sports Monhdorjiyn Dash Chairman of State Committee for Science, Technology and Higher Education Lhagvajabyn Dzantav Chairman of State Committee for Information, Radio and Television Lhamyn Tserendondog First Deputy Chairman of State Committee for Construction Tömöriyn Namjim First Deputy Chairman of State Planning Commission Öldziyhutagiyn Ganhuyag First Deputy Chairman of People's Control Committee Namsrain Sodnom President of Academy of Sciences
Council of Ministers
POLITICS 
1989 government changes
Choidoryn Tümendelger became Chairman of the State Committee for Information, Radio Broadcasting and Television following the death of Lhagvagyn Zantav in May 1989.
In September Lt.Gen.
Luvsangombyn Molomjamts replaced Col.-Gen.
Jamsrangiyn Yondon as Minister of Defence on the latter's retirement.
SECURITY
Troop reductions
In the wake of the March 1989 Soviet announcement of troop withdrawals [see p. 36523], the Defence Minister, Lt.-Gen.
Luvsangombyn Molomjamts, announced in November 1989 that Mongolian forces troops would be cut by 13,000 by end-1990.
It was reported in the Army newspaper Ulaan Od in February 1990 that a new defence law would be drafted and the national service law renewed; more officers would be trained at home and fewer abroad.
Opening of labour camp to journalists
In June Mongolian journalists were permitted to visit a labour camp near Ulan Bator.
A government spokesman said that of the 5,200 inmates in such camps, 81 per cent were guilty of murder, rape or theft of socialist property and 50 per cent were habitual offenders.
ECONOMY
Economic indicators
Trade balance -US$358 m. (1988)
Budget US$1,970 m. (1978)
Gross national product US$3,620 m. (1986)
Unemployment 27,480 (January 1989)
Principal trading partners Soviet Union; COMECON 
Domestic economy
The rural economy experienced increasing labour shortages, low standards of living and poor performance during 1989; the food supply had not kept pace with the increase in population and storage and transport facilities were inadequate.
However, after several years of poor livestock production, a record 24,500,000 head were reported in 1989; the government attributed this partly to a contract and leasing system introduced in 1988 [see also p. 36704], by which rural workers contracted to supply specified products for wages, with their collective or the state farm supplying cattle, implements, machinery and land.
Over half of all farmers and herdsmen and 90 per cent of workers on state farms signed contracts.
10th five-year plan
Economic plans for the coming five years revealed in February 1990 included increased emphasis on the processing of raw materials and on agriculture; changes in the pricing system; the introduction of some private ownership; and the setting of production targets for only 10 out of 2,000 products.
Foreign trade
Foreign trade turnover in 1989 grew to US$1,200 million as a result of vigorous government efforts and new measures under the policy of perestroika.
The Chamber of Commerce became an independent organization, with 120 corporate industrial members having the right to deal directly with foreign countries.
Mongolimpex, an organization set up to facilitate direct trade with foreign countries, was formed in September 1989.
FOREIGN
During 1989 Mongolia continued its policy of expanding relations with the West and with Asia, especially in economic areas.
Mongolia became a member of the Group of 77 in June and applied to join the Non-aligned Movement in 1991.
Relations with Eastern Europe
By October 1989, 20 per cent of Soviet troops stationed in Mongolia had been withdrawn, and military equipment, facilities and the base at Ulaan Orhon had been handed over to the Mongolian government [for start of withdrawal in May 1989 see p. 36657].
In spite of increasing grassroots criticism in Mongolia of Soviet involvement, the leadership continued to emphasize the importance of the Mongol-Soviet relationship.
Batmönh paid a working visit to the Soviet Union in July 1989 and in October Soviet military representatives participated in the 50th anniversary celebrations of the defeat of the Japanese at Khalkhiin Gol in 1939.
However, some change in the traditional relationship was signalled when the then Foreign Minister Tserenpilyn Gombosüren had economic discussions in Moscow in December, focusing on pricing, efficiency of joint ventures and eventual dealing in hard currency.
The political changes of 1989 in Eastern Europe were favourably received and reported in the Mongolian press.
Following the execution in December 1989 of the Romanian leader Nicolae Ceausescu, the 1988 decree awarding him the Order of Sükhbaatar was annulled.
Justin Papajorgi presented his credentials as Albanian ambassador on July 10, 1989, resuming a relationship suspended since 1962.
Relations with China
The government treated the crushing by Chinese troops of the pro-democracy demonstrations in Beijing in June 1989 [see pp. 36720-22]as a purely Chinese internal affair, so that bilateral relations were unaffected.
In August the new Chinese ambassador to Ulan Bator, Zhang Delin, presented his credentials and inter-party relations were re-established between the MPRP and the Chinese Communist Party (CCP).
The Chinese Foreign Minister, Qian Qichen, visited Ulan Bator on Aug. 31-Sept. 4, 1989, when he discussed economic cooperation, signed a treaty of cooperation in civil and criminal matters, and invited the then President, Jambyn Batmönh, to visit China.
The Sino-Mongolian border treaty signed in November 1988 [see p. 36704]came into force on Oct. 5, 1989.
A then North Korean Deputy Premier, Cho Se Ung, visited Ulan Bator in August 1989, discussing joint ventures and signing a protocol on scientific and technical cooperation.
Relations with Japan
The then Japanese Foreign Minister Sosuke Uno visited Mongolia in May 1989 and offered a grant of 60,000,000-yen grant (approximately US$440,000) for purchasing medical and audio-visual equipment.
Other agreements with Japan in 1989 included projects to search for the burial place of Chingis Khan and for development in the Gobi desert.
The then Premier, Dumaagiyn Sodnom, visited Japan on Feb. 27-March 4, 1990, when Mongolia was granted most-favoured-nation status and promised medical supplies worth 450,000,000 yen and aid to construct a steel mill at Darkhan and a colour television factory in Ulan Bator.
Relations with the West
Punsaalmagiyn Ochirbat, then Minister of External Economic Relations and Supply, was in July 1989 the first minister to visit the United Kingdom, when he reached agreement with British companies on wind power, oil prospecting, the paper industry and tourism.
He then visited the United States for talks with the UN Development Programme (UNDP).
The second Mongol-British Round Table met in the UK in November 1989 and Uthany Mavlyet, Minister for the Protection of Nature and the Environment, came to the UK on Feb. 17-24, 1990, to study methods of protecting the environment.
Mongolia established diplomatic relations with the European Communities (EC) on July 21, 1989.
ASIA — PACIFIC
INDIA
BASIC DATA
Area: 3,287,263 sq km.
Population: 833,421,982 (1989).
Capital: New Delhi.
Languages: Hindi (official spoken by 30%) and English; 16 regional languages are recognized by the Indian Constitution.
Religion: Hinduism (80%), Islam (11%); Christianity, Sikhism, Buddhism and Jainism.
Av. life expectancy: 58 yrs (women), 57 yrs (men)(1989).
Armed forces: 1,260,000 (1989).
GNP per capita: US$300 (1987).
Currency: Indian rupee (US$1.00=Rs16.8218 as at March 12, 1990).
The Union of India (comprising 25 self-governing states and seven union territories) is according to its Constitution (with amendments which came into force in January 1977) "a sovereign socialist secular democratic republic" .
Executive power is vested in the President, elected for a five-year term by an electoral college consisting of the elected members of the upper and lower Houses of Parliament (the Rajya Sabha and the Lok Sabha respectively) and of the Legislative Assemblies of the States.
The President appoints a Prime Minister and, on the latter's advice, a Council of Ministers, all of whom are responsible to Parliament.
Most of the 244 members of the Rajya Sabha are indirectly elected by the state assemblies (one-third being replaced every two years) while all but two of the 544-members of the Lok Sabha are directly elected for a five-year term by universal adult suffrage.
The legislative field is divided between the Union and the states, the former possessing exclusive powers to make laws with respect to matters grouped under 97 headings in the Constitution including foreign affairs, defence, citizenship and trade with other countries.
Elections to the Lok Sabha held on Nov. 22-26, 1989, resulted in a defeat for the Congress (I) Party and victory for the Janata Dal-dominated National Front coalition, led by V. P. Singh.
Although Congress (I) emerged from the elections with the largest single block of the 525 seats contested, the party lacked a working majority [see pp. 37030-31].
On Dec. 1 President Ramaswamy Venkataraman received assurances of "outside" support for a minority National Front government from the Bharatiya Janata Party and the Left Front parties; the next day V. P. Singh was sworn in as the Prime Minister, in place of Rajiv Gandhi.
Singh appointed a new Council of Ministers on Dec. 5-6 [see pp. 37125-26].
V. P. Singh Prime Minister; Defence; Personnel, Public Grievances and Pensions; Science and Technology; Atomic Energy; Electronics; Ocean Development; Space; Environment and Forests and other subjects not allocated to any other Cabinet Minister or Minister of State Devi Lal Deputy Prime Minister; Agriculture Madhu Dandavate Finance George Fernandes Railways Ajit Singh Industry Sharad Yadav Textiles; Food Processing Industries Mufti Mohammad Sayeed Home Affairs Arun Kumar Nehru Commerce; Tourism Arif Mohammad Khan Energy; Civil Aviation Ram Vilas Paswan Labour and Welfare Nilamani Routray Health and Family Welfare I. K. Gujral External Affairs M. S. Gurupadasamy Petroleum and Chemicals P. Upendra Information and Broadcasting; Parliamentary Affairs K. P. Unnikrishnan Surface Transport; Communication Dinesh Goswami Steel and Mines; Law and Justice Murasoli Maran Urban Development Nathu Ram Mirdha Food and Civil Supplies Minsters of state with independent charge Manobhai Kotadia Water Resources Ministers of state Maneka Gandhi Environment and Forests; Programme Implementation M. G. K. Menon Science and Technology; Human Resource Development Raja Ramanna Defence 
Council of Ministers
POLITICS
National Front plans and initiatives
On Dec. 20, 1989, President Venkataraman outlined the new government's programme in an address to a joint session of both houses of Parliament.
The address stated that the primary objective of the government would be to "restore the dignity of the nation and of the individual" .
Stress was laid upon the healing of regional, communal and ethnic divisions through national reconciliation, but separatism was to be resisted.
A National Integration Council would be set up as a forum for discussions on these issues.
Devolved local council government would be introduced, and the policy of reservation of jobs for members of the lower castes would continue for a further 10 years.
This last measure provoked rioting in northern states, mostly by students protesting at "favouritism" given to scheduled castes and tribes.
An interstate council was to be established to monitor relations between the states and central government.
The government also said that it would consider implementing the recommendations of the Sarkaria Committee [see p. 36031]about the relationship between the states and central government [see above].
Other election promises to be fulfilled included measures on rural development, ex-servicemen, education and minorities.
The government also proposed a new media policy, giving the television service, Doordarshan, and All-India Radio autonomy by turning them into public corporations, similar to the status enjoyed in the United Kingdom by the British Broadcasting Corporation (BBC).
Legislation to achieve this was introduced on Dec. 29.
Previously the broadcasting media had come under the direct control of the Ministry of Information and Broadcasting.
The Official Secrets Act was to be amended to allow freedom of information, and changes were to be made to the postal service to protect privacy.
The Commissions of Inquiry Act was to be amended to prevent the withholding of vital information.
An ombudsman system was to be established, comprising a panel of three serving or former Supreme Court justices, to investigate allegations of corruption in government with jurisdiction extending to the Prime Minister's office.
All these measures were part of a wider concern to curb corruption in public life and to allow a free flow of information.
The advent of the new government also resulted in changes in the senior levels of the civil service, with the dismissal or transfer of civil servants identified as close to Rajiv Gandhi.
The Cabinet, Financial and Home Secretaries were all transferred, while some of those civil servants who had suffered demotion under the Congress (I) administration were rehabilitated.
Appointments
Rajiv Gandhi carried out some minor changes to the Council of Ministers during 1989 [for 1988 changes see p. 36028].
On Jan. 25 Moti Lal Vora, hitherto Minister of Health and Family Welfare, was appointed Chief Minister of Madhya Pradesh [see above].
On April 22 K. K. Tewari, hitherto Minister of State for External Affairs, was appointed Minister of State for Information and Broadcasting.
On July 4 Gandhi promoted a number of junior ministers (see pp. 36027-28 for previous portfolios); D. L. Baitha was promoted to Minister of State for Defence Production replacing Chintamani Panigraphi who had been appointed Governor of Manipur a few days earlier [see above]; Mahavir Prasad became Minister of State for Mines; P. Namgyal became Minister of State for Parliamentary Affairs and Chemicals and Petrochemicals; Sumati Oraon became Minister of State for Environment and Forests; Radhakrishna Malaviya became Minister of State for Labour and Parliamentary Affairs; Saroj Khaparde was shifted from Minister of State for Health to Textiles; Giridhar Gomango was given independent charge of the Communications Ministry (following the death of the Communications Minister in May — see p. 36657); and Rafiq Alam became Minister of State for Health and Family Welfare (independent charge), a post which had been vacant since the January appointment of Moti Lal Vora as Chief Minister of Madhya Pradesh.
Sabyasachi Mukerjee was appointed Chief Justice of India with effect from Dec. 18 after the retirement of E. S. Venkataramiah, who himself was only sworn in on June 17 but who had reached the retirement age of 65.
Earlier, on Oct. 5, Meera Sahib Fathima Beevi had been appointed the first woman member of the Supreme Court.
Other justices appointed were V. Ramaswamy, P. B. Sawant, Narendra Mohan Kasliwal, M. M. Punchi and J. Ramaswamy, bringing the composition of the Court up to the full strength of 26.
On Jan. 20, 1990, it was reported that Raja Ramanna, a former chairman of the Indian Atomic Energy Commission, had been appointed Minister of State for Defence.
Additional responsibilities were also given to the two other ministers of state: Maneka Gandhi was given the portfolio of Programme Implementation and M. G. K. Menon given Human Resource Development.
Central government order on resignation of state governors
In mid-January the government embarked on a wholesale reshuffle of the state governors, sending out a message from the President requesting all governors to submit their resignations [see above for appointment of new governors to individual states].
Sayeed justified the action by saying that the governor was the central government representative and should enjoy the confidence of the central government.
The Janata Dal general secretary, Jaipal Reddy, said that some of the governors were becoming too partisan and politically involved.
In its election manifesto the Janata Dal-led National Front had accused Congress (I) of eroding and devaluing institutions such as the governorship for party advantage.
It had been anticipated that several of the governors appointed by Congress (I) would be replaced by the new government, but rather than make selective changes of those appointees of the former regime the government decided to ask all governors to resign with the intention of reinstating some of them later.
Congress (I) leaders accused the government of vindictiveness and of seeking to install its own supporters as governors, and further maintained that the actions also went against the spirit of the Constitution and against the recommendations of the Sarkaria Committee which had suggested that governors should be persons not too closely or recently involved in party politics and that governors from one political party should not be imposed on a state governed by an opposing party.
Ayodyha dispute
On Feb. 9 the fundamentalist Hindu movement Vishwa Hindu Parishad (VHP) agreed to requests from V. P. Singh to delay for four months the next stage of construction of the so-called "Babri Masjid-Ram Janmabhoomi" shrine at Ayodhya in Uttar Pradesh.
The revival of the Hindu-Moslem dispute, which had played an important part in the November election campaign [see pp. 36977; 37030], had threatened to provoke further communal tensions in the period leading up to the Bihar state assembly elections at the end of February [see p. 37245].
Formation of new party
On Aug. 21 Syed Shahabuddin, the Lok Sabha member for the Janata Party, formed a new party, with himself as its sole MP, called the Insaf (Justice) Party.
He said that the party would be committed to democracy, socialism and universal social welfare, but it was expected to attract mostly Moslems after the convention of Moslems organized by Shahabuddin on July 8-9 had asked him to organize a national party for minority groups.
Population: 12,900,000 (1981) Ruling party: Janata Dal Chief Minister: Om Prakash Chauthala Population: 4,300,000 (1981) Ruling party: Bharatiya Janata Party Chief Minister: Shanta Kumar Population: 6,000,000 (1981) Ruling party: Under Governor's rule Population: 16,800,000 (1981) Ruling party: Under President's rule Population: 110,900,000 (1981) Ruling party: Janata Dal Chief Minister: Mulayen Singh Yadav 
STATES
Northern states
Haryana Capital: Chandigarh
Himachal Pradesh Capital: Simla
Jammu and Kashmir Capital: Srinagar (summer) Jammu (winter)
Punjab Capital: Chandigarh
Uttar Pradesh Capital: Lucknow
Punjab
Charging of Mann in Indira Gandhi assassination case — Conviction in Vaidya killing
On April 7, 1989, four Sikhs, Simranjit Singh Mann, the imprisoned former president of the Unified Akali Dal [see p. 36693], Atinder Pal Singh, leader of the Khalistan Liberation Force, and two college lecturers, Jagmohan Singh and Dalip Singh, were formally charged in connection with the assassination in October 1984 of the Prime Minister, Indira Gandhi.
The accused were charged with conspiracy to eliminate Gandhi, to establish a separate Sikh state and to destabilize the country through terrorism.
In January 1989 two Sikhs were executed for their part in Gandhi's assassination [see p. 36395].
A court in Pune (Maharashtra) on Oct. 24 convicted and sentenced to death two militant Sikh separatists, Harjinda Singh and Sukhdev Singh, for the assassination in Pune in August 1986 of a former Army Chief of Staff Gen. Arun Vaidya [see p. 35249].
The other defendant, Nirmal Singh, was acquitted.
Extension of President's rule
On May 9 the Lok Sabha approved a resolution extending President's rule for a further six months from May 11 [President's rule had first been imposed in May 1987 — see pp. 35247-48 — and had been renewed since at six-monthly intervals].
The then Minister for Home Affairs, Buta Singh, defended the extension against protests from opposition members saying that it was necessary to proceed with the panchayat (local council) system as a prelude to assembly elections in the state, and that the continued detention of some Sikh leaders was necessary to prevent them from causing further trouble in the region.
President's rule, first declared in 1987, was again extended for another six months in October.
Violent incidents, August to November 1989
Eleven people were killed and 29 injured on Aug. 18 in a terrorist bomb attack on a bus in Chintpurni, just over the border in the state of Himachal Pradesh.
Suspected Sikh terrorists killed 19 Hindu students visiting the town of Patiala for a students' festival on Nov. 10 as they slept in dormitories.
The killings were seen as an attempt by Sikh extremists to disrupt the ongoing general election campaign.
Akali Dal (Mann) success in November general election
In the elections to the Lok Sabha in November 1989 the faction of the Sikhist Akali Dal led by Simranjit Singh Mann [see above]won six of the 13 Punjabi seats, with three independents supported by the Mann faction also being elected [for full election results see pp. 37124-25].
Mann himself was elected by a large majority while still in prison.
Other militants elected included Bimal Khalsa, the widow of one of Indira Gandhi's suspected assassins [see p. 33987].
The success of the Akali Dal (Mann) faction was seen as a rejection by voters of the other, divided, Akali Dal factions led by Surjit Singh Barnala and Prakash Singh Badal, as being in support of a more militant stand and as a protest against police actions [for various factions within Akali Dal see p. 36693].
One of the last actions of the outgoing Congress (I) government was to release Mann on Dec. 2 and to drop all conspiracy charges against him.
Other leading Sikhs released from detention included Gurcharan Singh Tohra and Badal.
New initiative by V. P. Singh
The new government of V. P. Singh made clear its intention to undertake a fresh initiative to find a peaceful political solution to the Sikh militants' demand for an independent homeland of "Khalistan" .
Soon after his appointment as Prime Minister on Dec. 2 [see p. 37031], Singh stated that Punjab would be a major priority of his new National Front coalition administration.
On Dec. 7 he put this intention into action by visiting Amritsar, accompanied by his most senior ministers, where he received a warm welcome from large crowds.
While in Amritsar he visited and prayed at the Golden Temple, Sikhism's most hallowed shrine which had been the subject in 1984 of an Army assault [see pp. 33223-24], in a gesture of reconciliation.
All-party conference
The government called an all-party conference on Dec. 17 to discuss the Punjab issue.
The Sikh parties boycotted the conference and Congress (I) refused to endorse the final communiqué.
However, the conference decided that the government should take action against those guilty of the deaths of Sikhs in the aftermath of Indira Gandhi's assassination in 1984 [see pp. 33220-21], which had been one of the Sikhs' main demands.
Further Sikh demands were met at the end of December when the Lok Sabha approved the repeal of a constitutional amendment adopted by the previous Lok Sabha in March 1988 [see p. 36692]allowing the declaration of a state of emergency in Punjab.
Mann stressed that he wished to see a solution based on substantial autonomy given to Punjab, within the framework of the Indian Constitution, but without recourse to an independent state.
Mystery death of Akali Dal (Mann) MP
Jagdev Singh Khudian, one of the Akali Dal (Mann) MPs elected in November, disappeared on Dec. 28.
His clothes were later found by the side of a canal in which his body was discovered a week later; no clear reason for his death could be discerned.
In response to Sikh accusations V. P. Singh agreed to the holding of a judicial inquiry into his death.
Second Singh visit to Punjab
V. P. Singh visited Punjab again on Jan. 11, 1990, for an all-party rally at Ludhiana; only Akali Dal and Congress (I) politicians did not attend.
Mann, however, did meet Singh at Ludhiana airport.
At the rally Singh announced the rehabilitation of Sikh soldiers who had deserted after the 1984 Army assault on the Golden Temple and a review of those detained for minor offences.
That review prompted Mukarji to order the release of about 1,600 people detained for minor offences such as harbouring terrorists [for release of remaining "Jodhpur detainees" in March 1989 see p. 36525].
The violence in the state continued, however, the most notable incident being on Jan. 10 when Gobind Ram, a leading police officer accused of brutality by militant Sikhs, was killed with three other policemen by a terrorist bomb at his headquarters in Jullundur.
Assassination of Sandhu
On Jan. 24 Harminder Singh Sandhu, the general secretary of the All-India Sikh Students' Federation (AISSF) and a leading advocate of the establishment of Khalistan, who had been released from prison on Dec. 4, was assassinated in Amritsar, by, it was widely speculated, factions struggling for supremacy within the Sikh militant movement.
Mann's position under threat
By the end of January Mann's own position within the Akali Dal seemed under threat from those of his supporters unhappy with his policy of talking to the government about autonomy, as well as from the militant groups such as the AISSF whom he had failed to convince of the need to abandon the concept of a full independent state.
Rajdev Singh, deputy leader of the party in the Lok Sabha was suspended from the party and Baba Joginder Singh, father of Sant Jarnail Singh Bhindranwale, the militant Sikh leader killed in the assault on the Golden Temple, seemed to have withdrawn his support for Mann.
Jammu and Kashmir
Deterioration in security situation during 1989
On April 30, 1989, Chief Minister Farooq Abdullah announced a Cabinet reshuffle after pressure from the central government forced him to include certain Congress (I) leaders in his Jammu and Kashmir National Conference (JKNC-Farooq) and Congress (I) adminstration, increasing the number of Cabinet members from 19 to 30.
The security situation within Kashmir deteriorated during the latter half of 1989 as militant groups pursued their aims in the face of a state government unable to give any effective response.
Violent incidents resumed after the end of the Moslem fast during the month of Ramadan and continued with strikes and civil unrest, matched by growing police and paramilitary repression.
On Aug. 22 Abdullah stated that there had been 170 bomb explosions in the state in the previous 12 months.
On Aug. 23 the Legislative Assembly passed a press bill giving the authorities the right to stop the publication of particular news items, powers of censorship and a range of penalties for non-compliance.
The bill raised strong opposition from the media, and the Press Council of India described it as "inherently inimical to the freedom of the press" .
The bill was withdrawn at the end of October.
By the end of 1989 the security situation [see p. 37183]had effectively undermined Abdullah's alliance administration, with the imposition of a military curfew and the prospect of direct rule by central government.
On Dec. 20, after talks in Delhi with the central government, all the Cabinet ministers resigned to allow Abdullah to conduct another Cabinet reshuffle.
Uttar Pradesh
On Sept. 29, 1989, the State Assembly passed a bill making Urdu the official language of the state.
Strong opposition against the measure came from the Hindu communalist Bharatiya Janata Party (BJP) and other Hindu groups.
Clashes in Baduan district in the west of the state between supporters and opponents of the bill led to 23 deaths.
The full result for the elections to 421 seats of the 425-member Legislative Assembly held in November was as follows: Janata Dal 204, Congress (I) 94, BJP 57, Bahujan Samaj Party (BSP) 13, Communist Party of India (CPI) 6, Communist Party of India-Marxist (CPI-M) 2, Lok Dal 2, HMS 1, Janata Party 1, SSD 1, independents 40 [for partial results see p. 37125].
Mohammad Usman Arif resigned as Governor of Uttar Pradesh in mid-January 1990, following a central government call for the resignation of all State governors [see above].
Arif, a Congress (I) member, had held the post since March 1985.
He was replaced on Jan. 31, 1990, by B. Satya Narain Reddy.
Haryana
Hara Anand Barari resigned as Governor of Haryana in mid-January, following a central government call for the resignation of all governors [see above].
Barari had been appointed Governor in February 1988 [see p. 36028].
He was replaced on Jan. 31, 1990, by Dhanik Lal Mandal.
Himachal Pradesh
In line with a January 1990 central government request for the resignation of all State governors, Vice-Adml. (retd) Rustom Khushro Shaporjee Gandhi resigned as Governor of Himachal Pradesh, a post he had been appointed to in April 1986.
He was replaced on Jan. 31 by B. Rachaiah.
Population: 600,000 (1981) Ruling party: Congress (I) Chief Minister: Gagong Apang Population: 19,900,000 (1981) Ruling party: Asom Gana Parishad Chief Minister: Prafulla Kumar Mahanta Population: 69,900,000 (1981) Ruling party: Janata Dal Chief Minister: Lallu Prasad Yadav Population: 1,400,000 (1981) Ruling party: United Legislature Front Chief Minister: Raj Kumar Ranbir Singh Population: 1,300,000 (1981) Ruling party: Meghalaya United Parliamentary Party (MUPP) Chief Minister: B. B. Lyngdoh Population: 500,000 (1981) Ruling party: Congress (I)(in coalition) Chief Minister: Lalthanhawla Population: 800,000 (1981) Ruling party: Congress (I) Chief Minister: S. C. Jamir Population: 26,400,000 (1981) Ruling party: Janata Dal Chief Minister: Biju Patnaik Population: 300,000 (1981) Ruling party: Sikkim Samgram Parishad Chief Minister: Nar Bahadur Bhandari Population: 2,000,000 (1981) Ruling party: Congress (I)(in coalition) Chief Minister: Sudhir Ranjan Majumber Population: 54,600,000 (1981) Ruling party: Communist Party of India (Marxist — in coalition) Chief Minister: Jyoti Basu 
Eastern states
Arunachal Pradesh Capital: Itanagar
Assam Capital: Dispur
Bihar Capital: Patna
Manipur Capital: Imphal
Meghalaya Capital: Shillong
Mizoram Capital: Aizawl
Nagaland Capital: Kohima
Orissa Capital: Bhubaneswar
Sikkim Capital: Gangtok
Tripura Capital: Agartala
West Bengal Capital: Calcutta
Arunachal Pradesh
Relations between the governments of Arunachal Pradesh and of Assam deteriorated during 1989, with each ruling party accusing the other of supporting its opponents.
In addition a long-standing border dispute between the two states was aggravated by the Bodo agitation and the refugee problem caused by it [see above; p. 36694].
Assam
Elections for the 14 Assam seats in the Lok Sabha did not take place in as scheduled in November 1989 because electoral rolls were incomplete [see p. 36977].
Polling was initially postponed until January 1990 [see p. 37030], but as of early April elections had not been held.
Harideo Joshi, who had resigned as Governor of Rajasthan in January 1988 [see p. 36028], was appointed Governor of Assam and Meghalaya in late april 1989 in place of Bishma Narayan Singh.
In July Joshi relinquished the governorship of Meghalaya [see above]and in December he resigned as Governor of Assam in order to return to Rajasthan as Chief Minister [see p. 37125; for his subsequent removal in March 1990 see p. 37246].
As of early April 1990, the post of Governor of Assam remained vacant.
Bodo rebellion
In the continued insurgency by members of the Bodo tribe seeking a separate homeland [for background see p. 36694]the violence of the earlier part of the year intensified during the summer [see p. 36851].
At the end of August talks were held between the Chief Minister P. K. Mahanta, the All Bodo Students Union (ABSU) and the central government observer and then Minister of State for Welfare, Rajendra Kumari Bajpai.
As a consequence of the talks the Assam government lifted restrictions imposed under the Disturbed Areas Act on Sept. 1 and asked the ABSU to stop the violence in response.
The leader of the ABSU, Upendra Nath Bramha, said that a cessation of violence would automatically follow the lifting of repressive measures by the government.
Further talks were held in New Delhi on Oct. 5, when all parties noted with approval of the lessening of violence in Bodoland since the beginning of September and the ABSU agreed to stop the violence to create an atmosphere for a political solution to the problem.
The demands of the ABSU for a separate Bodo homeland, however, were resisted by both state and central government.
Bihar
Jagannath Pahadia resigned as Governor of Bihar in mid-January 1990 following a central government call for the resignation of all governors [see above].
Pahadia, a Congress (I) general secretary who had been appointed to the governorship in February 1989, was succeeded on Jan. 31, 1990, by Yunus Saleem.
Continued agitation, some of it violent, by Jharkhand tribes for a separate Jharkhand homeland, covering the tribasl regions of the states of Bihar, Orissa, West Bengal and Madhya Pradesh, led to talks on May 31, 1989, between the Jharkhand Co-ordination Committee and the Bihar state government.
These were followed by further talks between the then Bihar Chief Minister, Satyendra Narayan Sinha, the central government and Jharkhand groups.
The central government remained opposed to the concept of a Jharkhand state, but conceded that greater autonomy and support for tribal languages could be granted.
The state of Bihar was particularly affected by the communal violence which erupted in October during the processions of the bricks for the construction of the temple at Ayodhya in Uttar Pradesh [see also above; pp. 36977; 37030].
On Oct. 23-25 more than 35 people were killed in fighting between Hindus and Moslems in Sitamarhi, Bhagalpur and Madhubani and an estimated 200 people throughout the state by the end of the election campaign.
Manipur
On July 1, 1989, Chintamani Panigrahi, a former Minister of State for Defence Production [see above], was sworn in as Governor of Manipur.
Meghalaya
The Congress (I) government headed by W. A. Sangma resigned in late March 1990 after a vote of no confidence was carried.
Within a few days a new Meghalaya United Parliamentary Party government was sworn in, headed by B. B. Lyngdoh.
On July 1, 1989, A. A. Rahim was sworn in as Governor of Meghalaya, the first separate governor for the state.
Mizoram
On July 1, 1989, Capt. W. A. Sangma, a former Chief Minister of Meghalaya, was sworn in as Governor of Mizoram.
Sangma resigned in mid-January 1990, in line with a central government call for the resignation of all governors [see above].
He was succeeded on Jan. 31 by Swaraj Kaushal.
Nagaland
On April 25, 1989, S. C. Jamir and Prafulla Kumar Mahanta, the Chief Ministers of Nagaland and Assam respectively, signed an agreement on the border dispute between the two states and on greater co-operation to prevent a recurrence of the violent outbreaks, such as the attack on three villages on April 7 [see p. 36694], by Naga guerrillas of the National Socialist Council of Nagaland (NSCN) in the border area.
The Assam government had filed a suit in the Supreme Court arguing that its boundary with Nagaland should be based on the 1925 boundaries of the then Naga Hills district.
Jamir objected to the settling of "foreign nationals" , mainly Bangladeshis, in the border zone, while Mahanta called the recognition by Nagaland of 98 Naga villages in Assam as part of Nagaland "illegal and provocative" .
Seven soldiers and two guerrillas of the NSCN were killed on Sept. 1 after an attack on a border post on the border with Manipur.
On July 1 Gopal Singh was sworn in as Governor of Nagaland after the transfer of Gen. (retd) K. V. Krishna Rao to Jammu and Kashmir [see above].
Orissa
Yagya Dutt Sharma was appointed Governor of Orissa on Jan. 31, 1990, in place of S. Nurul Hassan.
The latter, who had been appointed to the post in November 1988 [see p. 36694], had resigned in mid-January following a central government call for the resignation of all state governors [see above].
He was transferred to the governorship of West Bengal.
Sikkim
S. K. Bhatnagar resigned as Governor of Sikkim in mid-January 1990 following a central government call for the resignation of all state governors [see above].
Bhatnagar, who had been appointed to the post in February 1989, was replaced on Jan. 31, 1990, by Adml. (retd) Radhakrishnan Hariram Tahiliani.
Tripura
Raghunath Reddy was appointed as Governor of Tripura on Jan. 31, 1990.
West Bengal
On March 20, 1989, Thanga Velly Rajeshwar (Governor of Sikkim since 1985 — see p. 34680) was sworn in as Governor of West Bengal, replacing S. Nural Hassan who had been appointed Governor of Orissa in November 1988 [see p. 36694].
On Jan. 31, 1990, Hassan was again appointed Governor of West Bengal, following Rajeswar's resignation.
In the Gurkhaland Hill Council (established in 1988 — see p. 36695) the chairman of the ruling Gurkha National Liberation Front (GNLF), Subhash Ghising, was faced by dissidence within in his own party and the formation of a rival Gurkha Liberation Organization (GLO) led by Chattray Subba, formerly assistant general secretary of the GNLF.
Population: 1,100,000 (1981) Ruling party: Progressive Democratic Front [see text]Chief Minister: Churchill Alemao Population: 34,000,000 (1981) Ruling party: Janata Dal Chief Minister: Chimanbhai Patel Population: 52,200,000 (1981) Ruling party: Bharatiya Janata Party Chief Minister: Sunderlal Patwa Population: 62,800,000 (1981) Ruling party: Congress (I) Chief Minister: Sharad Pawar Population: 34,300,000 (1981) Ruling party: Bharatiya Janata Party Chief Minister: Bhairon Singh Shekawat 
Western states
Goa Capital: Panaji
Gujarat Capital: Gandhinagar
Madhya Pradesh Capital: Bhopal
Maharashtra Capital: Bombay
Rajasthan Capital: Jaipur
Goa
The political deadlock in Goa caused by Congress (I) and the opposition Maharashtrawadi Gomantak Party (MGP) each having 18 seats in the state Legislative Assembly after the November 1989 elections [see p. 37125], was broken after Congress (I) on Jan. 9, 1990, won elections to the two seats where voting had been countermanded.
The Congress (I) Chief Minister, Pratap Singh Rane, who had been acting in a caretaker capacity after the legislative elections, was sworn in for a third term as Chief Minister.
The administration won a vote of confidence on Jan. 23 although, with the election of a Congress (I) member as Speaker, Congress (I) had a majority of only one in the Assembly (with the support of one of the two independents).
In July the Goa Congress, a breakaway group from Congress (I) formed in 1983 by Wilfred de Souza after the failure of his attempt to remove Rane as Chief Minister, merged back with Congress.
The Goa Congress had attracted most of its support from the Christian and Konkani-speaking southern area of the state, and in large part the election in November was fought on communal lines with the Hindu-dominated MGP campaigning for recognition of Marathi as a full official language for the state.
Rane resigned as Chief Minister on March 25, 1990, after losing majority support in the State Assembly.
On April 6 Churchill Alemao was sworn in as Chief Minister at the head of a Progressive Democratic Front (PDF) government.
The newly formed PDF comprised members of the Legislative Assembly from the MGP and seven members from the recently founded Congress (I) breakaway Goan People's Party.
The Speaker of the outgoing Legislative Assembly, Dayanand Narvekar, resigned on Sept. 16, 1989, after opposition pressure which had included a hunger strike, over an alleged indecent assault.
Gujarat
Madhya Pradesh
Arjun Singh was replaced as Chief Minister of Madhya Pradesh on Jan. 25, 1989, by Moti Lal Vora, hitherto central Minister of Health and Family Welfare.
Singh had himself replaced Vora as Chief Minister of Madhya Pradesh in February 1988 [see p. 36027].
Vora resigned the post in December 1989 following the poor showing of the Congress (I) in the state in the earlier Lok Sabha elections [see p. 37125].
Mahmood Ali was appointed Governor of Madhya Pradesh on Jan. 31, 1990, replacing Sarla Grewal, who had been sworn in in March 1989 [see p. 36695].
Grewal, a Secretary to the former Prime Minister Rajiv Gandhi, had resigned in mid-January following a central government call for the resignation of all governors [see above].
Maharashtra
C. Subramaniam was appointed Governor of Maharashtra on Jan. 31, 1990, in place of K. Brahmanadu Reddy who had been appointed to the post in February 1988 [see p. 36028].
Reddy had resigned in mid-January following a central government call for the resignation of all state governors [see above].
Subramaniam was a veteran Congress (I) member who had held a number of high-level portfolios during Indira Gandhi's premiership in the early 1970s.
A severe storm on July 23 and 24, 1989, led to the deaths of 342 people throughout the state, according to official figures.
The storm caused widespread damage and heavy flooding, disrupting services and communications.
Rajasthan
Debi Prasad Chattopadhyay was appointed Governor of Rajasthan on Jan. 31, 1990, succeeding Sukhdev Prasad who had been appointed to the post in February 1988 [see p. 36028].
Prasad had resigned in mid-January following a central government call for the resignation of all state governors [see above].
Chattopadhyay had served as a Minister under Indira Gandhi in the 1970s; following the November 1989 Lok Sabha elections he had unsuccessfully called for the resignation of Rajiv Gandhi as Congress (I) leader and had eventually resigned from the party.
Population: 53,500,000 (1981) Ruling party: Congress (I) Chief Minister: Marri Cheni Reddi Population: 37,100,000 (1981) Ruling Party: Congress (I) Chief Minister Veerendra Patil Population: 25,500,000 (1981) Ruling party: Communist Party of India (Marxist)(in coalition) Chief Minister: E. K. Nayanar Population: 48,000,000 (1981) Ruling party: Dravida Munnetra Kazhagam Chief Minister: M. Karunanidhi 
Southern states
Andhra Pradesh Capital: Hyderabad
Karnataka Capital: Bangalore
Kerala Capital: Trivandrum
Tamil Nadu Capital: Madras
Andhra Pradesh
Krishna Kant was appointed Governor of Andhra Pradesh on Jan. 31, 1990, replacing Kumud Behn Joshi who had been appointed to the post in November 1985.
Joshi had resigned following a central government call in mid-January for the resignation of all state governors [see above].
On April 25, 1989, the Constitution Bench of the Supreme Court ordered the release of 32 members of the Youth Congress (I) who were jailed for contempt after a demonstration in the State Assembly in March following remarks allegedly made by the General Secretary of the ruling Telugu Desam Party, Ashok Gajapathi Raju, that Rajiv Gandhi was responsible for the death of his mother Indira and had benefited from it.
However, the Speaker of the Andhra Pradesh Assembly on Sept. 14 claimed that the legislature had power to rule on breaches of privileges inside and outside the Assembly and issued a fresh warrant against the 32 youths.
The Supreme Court replied by asking for an explanation and threatening proceedings for disobedience if the request was ignored.
The annual convention of Telugu Desam was held at Gandipet, near Hyderabad, on May 27.
The activities of Naxalite left-wing terrorists continued throughout the year, particularly in Andhra Pradesh, where Naxalites of the People's War Group of the Communist Party of India (ML) carried out a series of kidnappings of politicians and local council leaders.
Between June and September Naxalites kidnapped six local Telugu Desam leaders, killing one of them.
The Chief Minister, N. T. Rama Rao, attempted to negotiate with the terrorists, offering a 30-day truce, effective from June 13, suspending police action and promising the rehabilitation of those Naxalites who surrendered with their weapons.
However, violent incidents continued and on Dec. 23 a Telugu Desam member of the Legislative Assembly (MLA), Venkateswara Rao, was kidnapped by Naxalites demanding the release of seven companions who were either in prison or facing trial.
The new Congress (I) Chief Minister, Marri Chenna Reddi (appointed following the November 1989 elections — see p. 37125), rejected the Naxalites' demands and on Dec. 26 a Congress (I) MLA was also kidnapped.
The two MLAs were finally released by the end of the week and six Naxalites facing charges under the Terrorists and Disruptive Activities (Prevention) Act were released on bail.
Karnataka
On Aug. 4, 1989, the Karnataka High Court upheld the constitutional validity of the imposition in April of President's rule in the state [see p. 36591], and on Oct. 12 the Lok Sabha approved its extension for a further six months from Oct. 21.
It effectively ended when a new Legislative Assembly was formed following the November state elections.
Kerala
Sarup Singh was appointed Governor of Kerala on Jan. 31, 1990, replacing Ram Dulari Sinha who had been appointed to the post in February 1988 [see p. 36028].
Sinha had resigned in mid-January following a central government call for the resignation of all state governors [see above].
On Aug. 2, 1989, the CPI-M-led Left Democratic Front government in Kerala confirmed its decision to proceed with investigations into the former Congress (I) Chief Minister, K. Karunakaran, and his Education Minister, T. M. Jacob, after the report of a commission into irregularities surrounding the publication of pre-degree examination results in 1986.
Tamil Nadu
The two opposing factions of the opposition All-India Anna Dravida Munnetra Kazhagam (A-IADMK) party merged in March 1989 to form a united front against the ruling Dravida Munnetra Kazhagam (DMK), and on July 12 R. M. Veerapan, formerly one of the strongest critics of the A-IADMK leader, Jayalalitha Jayaram, returned to the party and was appointed joint general secretary.
At the end of October it was confirmed that the A-IADMK would be supporting Congress (I) in the elections to the Lok Sabha.
Population: 189,000 and Haryana states) Population: 452,000 Population: 104,000 Population: 6,200,000 Population: 40,000 Population: 604,000 
Union Territories
Andaman and Nicobar Islands Headquarters: Port Blair
Chandigarh Headquarters: Chandigarh is (joint capital of Punjab
Dadra and Nagar Haveli Headquarters: Silvassa
Daman and Diu Population: 1,100,000
Delhi Headquarters: Delhi
Lakshadweep Headquarters: Kavaratti
Pondicherry Capital: Pondicherry
Delhi
The Sarkaria Committee, formerly chaired by Justice R. S. Sarkaria, presented its report on the reorganization of the administration of Delhi on Dec. 14.
The Home Minister, Mufti Mohammad Sayeed, recommended that its proposed reforms should be put into effect.
The committee had investigated all aspects of the capital's administration and its relationship with the central government.
It seemed likely that the capital would be granted statehood, a promise made by both Janata Dal and the BJP during the November election campaign.
On Jan. 6, 1990, the Delhi Municipal Corporation was suspended and its powers transferred to the city's Chief Secretary, V. K. Kapoor, to act as Administrator.
Pondicherry
Mrs Chandravati was appointed as Lt.-Governor of Pondicherry on Jan. 31, 1990, in place of Lt.-Gen. (retd) R. S. Dyal.
Andaman and Nicobar Islands
Lt.-Gen. (retd) R. S. Dyal, hitherto Lt.-Governor of Pondicherry, was appointed Lt.-Governor of the Andaman and Nicobar Islands on Jan. 31, 1990, replacing Romesh Bhandari who had held the post since December 1989.
SECURITY
On Oct. 6, 1989, the government confirmed that it had agreed to buy another squadron of MiG-29 fighter aircraft from the Soviet Union, bringing its complement up to three squadrons.
At the end of September 1989 India's first locally constructed submarine, built in collaboration with a West German company, was launched.
ECONOMY
Economic indicators
GDP growth 9% (1988-89)
Current-account balance -US$5,000 m. (1987-88)
Trade balance -US$4,500 m. (1988-89)
Overall balance of payments -US$1,499 m. (1985)
Budget deficit US$5,240 m. (1988-89)
Budget deficit (as a % of GDP) 8.5% (1989)
Total external debt US$54,636 m. (1988)
Debt service ratio (as a % of export earnings) 27% (1988)
Gross national product US$231,000 m. (1987)
Inflation rate 9.1% (1988-89)
Unemployment 10% (1987-88)
Principal trading partners (1986) Exports: USA (21.7%), EC (20.8%), Soviet Union (16.7%); Imports: EC (33.2%), Japan (12.4%), USA (9%)
Economic situation in 1989
India's economy grew rapidly during 1989, helped by increases in agricultural and industrial production and a rise in exports.
The economy continued to suffer, however, from persistent inflation, balance-of-payments and budget deficits, and a shortage of foreign exchange reserves, the management of which posed problems for the incoming National Front government.
A favourable monsoon season and a record harvest in 1988-89 of 172,000,000 tonnes of food grain were not enough to prevent the need to continue to import rice and wheat in order to maintain distribution and to provide food for the country's growing population; however, the improvement in the agricultural sector did contribute to a major increase in gross domestic product (GDP), of 9 per cent in real terms in 1988-89, helped by increases in industrial and manufacturing production.
According to estimates by the Reserve Bank of India, GDP growth was expected to fall back to 5-6 per cent during 1989-90.
The value of imports rose during 1989 to Rs276,900 million assisted by demand for grain, foodstuffs, machinery and raw materials.
The value of exports rose by 29 per cent to Rs202,800 million, helped by the depreciation by about 12 per cent of the rupee and liberalization measures.
Exports remained weak as a whole, however, comprising only about 6 per cent of production.
The resulting trade deficit and shortage of incoming foreign exchange added to the country's balance-of-payments problem.
By mid-1989 foreign exchange reserves were estimated to be sufficient to cover only two months of imports.
The government of Rajiv Gandhi remained determined, however, not to seek the assistance of the International Monetary Fund (IMF) to overcome the problem which would have involved agreeing to the conditions imposed by the Fund for a structural adjustment policy.
Meeting of international aid donors
A meeting of international aid donors to India was held in Paris on June 19-20 under the auspices of the World Bank to discuss India's future aid requirements.
The World Bank recommended that total commitments for 1989-90 should total US$6,700 million, with 60 per cent of the total to be provided on concessional terms.
The World Bank noted that India should continue with policies to reduce its budget deficit and the rate of inflation, combined with further measures for the liberalization of trade.
Details of eighth five-year plan
In September the Planning Commission released details of the eighth five-year plan to cover 1990-95.
The plan envisaged annual growth of 6 per cent.
Targets included universal provision of drinking water by 1995, greater land and power generation availability and a rise in the standard of living.
Exports would have to continue to increase, with further foreign aid and investment to provide foreign exchange, while measures would be needed to cope with India's debt (the fourth largest total debt in the developing world) and budget deficit.
National Front policies
On assuming office V. P. Singh's new government discovered that the budget and current-account deficits were worse than at first thought.
On Dec. 13 the new Minister of Finance, Madhu Dandavate, said that selective import controls would be necessary in the short term to protect foreign exchange reserves.
Imports would only be allowed where "necessary and inevitable" , with curbs to cut out unnecessary consumer goods.
Plans to introduce an interim budget were abandoned after it became clear that the budget deficit would be larger than anticipated.
The deficit for the financial year 1988-89 totalled Rs118,000 million, compared with a further revised estimate of Rs86,000 million, and the deficit for 1989-90 was also expected to exceed targets.
The need to tackle the budget deficit and to reduce inflation was expected to lead to tight fiscal policies, especially if the government wanted to avoid asking the IMF for the estimated requirement of $2,000 million to boost foreign exchange reserves, and instead to raise the money in the commercial market [for March 1990 budget see pp. 37315-16].
The new government's attitude to foreign investment was also seen as an important indicator of future economic policy.
Foreign investment in India remained at a low level during the 1980s when compared with similar international investment elsewhere in south and south-east Asia, despite the introduction of liberalization measures in 1985-86 which had boosted industrial investment and output.
The proposed investment by PepsiCo Inc. in a bottling plant in the country was seen as a test of the new government's commitment to encouraging foreign investment.
On Dec. 22 a report commissioned by the government from the Economic Advisory Council advocated controls on imports and argued that currency depreciation and export growth would not be sufficient to stem inflation or to reduce the trade deficit.
National Front "action plan" 
On Jan. 1, 1990, the government announced a 35-point "action plan" including a timetable for legislation and policy announcements.
Among the proposals for the economy were the scheduled announcement of a new three-year import-export policy on April 1, simplified procedures and a new export policy.
The government also proposed to introduce debt-waiver on loans of up to Rs10,000 for small farmers and allocation of up to 50 per cent of available resources for investment in the agricultural sector and rural development--one of the National Front's election promises.
Dandavate estimated that the cost of the debt-waiver would be between Rs130,000 and 140,000 million.
In early January the Planning Commission started a review of large industrial projects with a view to allowing resources to be transferred to the agricultural sector.
It was expected that some of the larger projects approved by the Gandhi government would be postponed.
Although the government continued to say that appropriate foreign investment would be welcomed, the 40 per cent ceiling on equity participation by foreign companies in Indian companies, which the Gandhi government had proposed to raise to 51 per cent, remained.
FOREIGN
National Front policies
The new National Front government's foreign policy objectives, as outlined in the President's address on Dec. 20, 1989, were for a strengthening of links with India's neighbours and co-operation through the medium of the South Asian Association for Regional Co-operation (SAARC), continued dialogue with China leading to a resolution of the two countries' border dispute, development of the traditional friendship with the Soviet Union and of a new relationship with the United States, and economic co-operation with Japan and the European Communities (EC).
The government emphasized the need to improve relations with neighbouring countries, which had become strained during the last year of Rajiv Gandhi's government.
In early January 1990 meetings were held with the Foreign Ministers of Nepal and Sri Lanka, with the King of Bhutan and with Pakistani envoys [see pp. 37184-85; 37356; 37357; 37183-84].
A negotiated solution to the trade dispute with Nepal, the withdrawal of the Indian Peace Keeping Force (IPKF) in Sri Lanka [for which see p. 37316]and a political solution for the Tamil areas of that country had been primary objectives outlined in the National Front's election manifesto.
The "regional policeman" policy of Rajiv Gandhi during the last years of his administration was interpreted by many observers as part of a desire to strengthen India's position as a regional superpower, despite the country's avowed non-aligned policy.
A continuing military buildup and updating of equipment, especially in the development of the Navy and Air Force, seemed to point to ambitions in the region beyond immediate land borders.
However, such an interventionist foreign policy also created anti-Indian sentiment, particularly in Sri Lanka and Nepal.
Only in the Maldives was Indian intervention generally welcomed [see p. 37354].
Relations with China
Relations with China, which had been strained for many years since the 1962 war between the two countries, gradually improved after Rajiv Gandhi's visit to Beijing on Dec. 19-23, 1988, the first to China by an Indian Prime Minister for 34 years.
One of the results was the creation of a joint working party to resolve the border disputes between the two countries.
India claimed an area north of Kashmir, seized by the Chinese in 1962, while the Chinese claimed an area of land in the state of Arunachal Pradesh [see p. 34947].
The first meeting of the group was held in Beijing between June 30 and July 4, 1989.
The first meeting of a joint group on trade, science and technology ended on Sept. 21 with agreements to increase bilateral trade, when a trade delegation led by Zheng Tuobin, Chinese Minister for Foreign Economic Relations and Trade, concluded a visit to New Delhi.
Chinese Vice Premier Wu Xueqian arrived in India on Oct. 11 for a week-long visit to discuss bilateral and international matters, becoming the highest-ranking Chinese official to visit India since 1962.
Both sides described the prospects of settling the border issue as "good" .
It was later reported that both sides had scaled down the number of troops along the border.
The Indian government had sought to maintain good relations with China by not condemning the crushing of the June pro-democracy demonstrations [see pp. 36720-22].
Relations with Soviet Union
Relations with the Soviet Union continued to be friendly, building on the traditional links between the two countries and on the more recent visit by the Soviet President, Mikhail Gorbachev, to Delhi in November 1986 [see p. 34946].
Gorbachev returned for a second visit on Nov. 18-21, 1988, accompanied by the Foreign Minister, Eduard Shevardnadze, and the Deputy Chairman of the Council of Ministers, Vladimir Kamentsev.
Earlier in November 1987 the Soviet Prime Minister, Nikolai Ryzhkov, had made a six-day visit to India to discuss economic co-operation and international issues.
Indo-Soviet trade, which had been increasing rapidly, was expected to grow further after the signing of a trade protocol worth Rs70,000 million in 1989, a 35 per cent increase over the sum for 1988.
Trade between the two countries was conducted in non-convertible currency, with technical credits being used to account for imbalances in imports and exports.
This allowed India to acquire Soviet defence equipment and technology at preferential rates without using scarce foreign exchange.
The meeting also agreed on details for the construction of two 1,000 MW nuclear power stations in southern India and on additional thermal and hydro-electric generating capacity with the aid of credit lines worth 3,200 million roubles.
During 1989 speculation grew, however, that Indo-Soviet relations had cooled as a result of new directions in Soviet foreign policy, economic restructuring within the Soviet Union, and the availability to India of superior technology from Japan and the USA.
Relations with USA
Relations with the USA, which had improved during the first years of Rajiv Gandhi's government, came under strain in 1987 due to the US decision to grant large military aid packages to Pakistan, including early warning surveillance aircraft, and to Indian fears of a Pakistani nuclear bomb.
Other points of conflict between the two countries included the reluctance of the US administration to allow India to buy certain items of advanced technology, including a "supercomputer" and defence items, because of fears that such grants would breach technology transfer restrictions and perhaps lead to the items falling into the hands of the Soviet Union through India's close ties with that country [see p. 34947].
The US government finally agreed to India's purchase of a Cray XMP 14 "supercomputer" , but not the more advance model which the Indians had requested.
On April 4, 1988, the then US Secretary of Defence, Frank Carlucci, visited New Delhi to discuss regional security issues and to put together a US arms package.
This included sophisticated equipment and "fly-by-wire" technology to allow India to build the light combat aircraft (LCA) planned as the principal fighter aircraft of the Indian Air Force in the late 1990s, and for which the US administration had already granted use of the F-404 engine from General Electric.
The then Indian Minister of Defence, Krishna Chandra Pant, visited Washington in July 1989 for talks on security issues and said that US attitudes towards providing the technology for the aircraft project had been "positive" .
At the end of May 1989 India was named as a priority country for action under the "Super 301" clause of the 198 US Trade Act [see pp. 36925-26].
This clause named countries which the USA thought had restrictive or unfair trade practices and which could be targeted for retaliatory sanctions if negotiations failed to bring about an improvement.
The Indian government rejected the allegations, but as the USA was India's principal trading partner, any sanctions had the potential to cause serious damage to imports of vital items and exports of high-value foreign exchange earners.
ASIA — PACIFIC
SRI LANKA
BASIC DATA
Area: 64,453,600 sq km.
Population: 16,881,130 (1989).
Capital: Colombo.
Languages: Sinhala (spoken by more than 70%); Tamil and English.
Religion: Buddhism (70%), Hinduism (15% — Tamil speakers), Christianity and Islam (minorities).
Av. life expectancy: 72 yrs (women), 67 yrs (men)(1989).
Armed forces: 47,000 (incl. recalled reservists).
GNP per capita: US$400 (1987).
Currency: Sri Lanka rupee (US$1.00=Rs39.5716 as at March 12, 1990).
The Democratic Socialist Republic of Sri Lanka (formerly Ceylon) adopted a presidential form of government in October 1977 and this was confirmed in the Constitution in September 1978.
Executive powers are vested in the President who is directly elected for a six-year term.
The President has the power to appoint or dismiss members of the Cabinet, including the Prime Minister, and is also empowered to dissolve the 168-member Parliament.
Following the re-election of President Junius Jayawardene in October 1982 for a further term, the current term of Parliament, due to expire in August 1983, was extended for another six years under a constitutional amendment approved by Parliament, the government and a national referendum in late 1982 [see pp. 32076-78].
In response to Tamil demands for a separate state in the Northern and Eastern provinces of Sri Lanka, Parliament in August 1983 approved an amendment to the Constitution making the advocation of separatism illegal [see p. 32632].
Ranasinghe Premadasa, the Prime Minister and candidate of the ruling United National Party (UNP), was elected President in national elections held on Dec. 19, 1988 [see pp. 36394-95].
A general election under proportional representation was held for the first time on Feb. 15, 1989, the UNP winning a comfortable 25-seat majority [see pp. 36467-68].
Ranasinghe Premadasa President; Defence; Buddha Sasana; Policy Planning and Implementation D. B. Wijetunge Prime Minister; Finance Wijayapala Mendis Transport and Highways A. C. S. Hameed Higher Education; Science and Technology Gamini Dissanayake Plantation Industries M. Vincent Perrera Justice; Parliamentary Affairs Lalith Athulathmudali Agriculture, Food and Co-operatives Festus Perera Power and Energy S. Thondaman Textiles; Industrial Development Ranil Wickramasinghe Industries Ranjith Atapattu Labour; Social Welfare P. Dayaratne Lands, Irrigation and Mahaweli Development Joseph Michael Perera Fisheries and Aquatic Resources W. J. M. Lokubandara Education; Cultural Affairs; Information Alick Aluvihare Posts and Telecommunications C. Nanda Mathew Youth Affairs; Sports A. R. Mansoor Trade and Shipping U. B. Wijekoon Home Affairs; Public Administration; Provincial Councils Renuka Herath Health; Women's Affairs A. M. S. Adikari Tourism B. Sirisena Cooray Housing and Construction Ranjan Wijeratne Foreign Affairs *For Cabinet list after March 30, 1990, reshuffle see p. 37316.
Cabinet*
POLITICS
During September 1989 the UNP government continued its political initiative to include the opposition parties in an all-party process to secure peace, and to bring the banned militant leftist Sinhala Janata Vimukti Peramuna (JVP) into the democratic political process [see pp. 36851; 36893].
As a first step to restoring peace the UNP on Sept. 27 joined five opposition parties in calling on all armed groups to stop engaging in violence.
In early October a UNP working party proposed fresh elections as a way of restoring Parliament's credibility and of allowing the JVP to participate in the political process.
The opposition parties threatened to withdraw from the next meeting of the all-party conference on Oct. 12 unless some of their demands were met [for first talks, on Sept. 13, see p. 36893].
However, on Oct. 6 following talks on the same day with Sirimavo Bandaranaike, the leader of the opposition Sri Lanka Freedom Party (SLFP), President Ranasinghe Premadasa agreed to consider the formation of an interim all-party administration and the holding of a referendum on the country's executive presidential system; the latter had been a major demand of the SLFP, which opposed the concept of the executive presidency.
The all-party talks on Oct. 12 proved inconclusive, and on Oct. 29 the SLFP withdrew its support for such talks, claiming that it had lost confidence in the government's will to solve the country's problems and that none of the opposition proposals had been put into effect.
On Jan. 12, 1990, the government defeated by 41 votes a parliamentary motion of no confidence tabled by the opposition parties.
SECURITY
The dramatic counteroffensive by the security forces against the JVP after the capture or death in November 1989 of most of its leadership [see p. 37042]continued during December 1989 and January 1990 as the government sought to reimpose its authority in the south of the country.
Although many people returned to work and there were fewer strikes, the high level of violence continued, killings and massacres being perpetrated in the central and southern parts of the island both by the JVP and by pro-government vigilante forces and the Army.
In the worst recorded incident over 200 Sinhalese were killed in the vicinity of Hambantota on Dec. 20.
Blame for the attack was put on pro-government "death squads" operating in retaliation for the killing of government supporters by the JVP.
At the beginning of February 1990 the government stated that 6,700 suspected left-wing JVP members were being detained in prisons and security-force camps.
On Dec. 29, 1989, the government announced that the new leader of the JVP's military wing, the Deshapremi Janatha Viyaparaya (DJV), Saman Piyasiri Fernando, had been killed in an exchange of gunfire after being arrested and leading police officers to a house used as a JVP headquarters in Colombo.
The six occupants of the house also died in the battle.
On Dec. 13 the human rights organization Amnesty International issued a report claiming that hundreds of innocent people had been killed in the previous six months and criticizing the provisions of the emergency powers decreed in early November which allowed the disposal of bodies by the security forces without a post-mortem or inquest [see p. 37007].
Amnesty also produced evidence linking the "death squads" to the security forces or to members of the UNP.
North-Eastern Province
In the North-Eastern Province clashes continued in late 1989 between the various Tamil groups as the Liberation Tigers of Tamil Eelam (LTTE, or Tamil Tigers) sought to replace their rivals, principally the two pro-Indian groups, the Eelam People's Revolutionary Liberation Front (EPRLF) and the Eelam National Democratic Liberation Front (ENDLF), and the Tamil Eelam Liberation Organization (TELO), in the areas vacated by the Indian Peace Keeping Force (IPKF).
The Indians attempted to provide support against the LTTE by arming and training a Tamil National Army (TNA — a coalition of three pro-IPKF Tamil militias).
Many of the TNA members, however, proved to be forcibly conscripted teenagers and of little use against the LTTE guerrillas, leading in December 1989 and January 1990 to the TNA's rapid defeat and withdrawal from areas vacated by the IPKF [see pp. 37126; 37184-85].
The LTTE was also accused of killing several EPRLF members of the Provincial Council.
In January 1990 George Thambiraja, an EPRLF leader in Trincomalee, deputy chairman of the Provincial Council and a founder of the TNA, was killed in an ambush, followed by the killing of the deputy Speaker of the Provincial Council, S. G. Ganeshamoorthy.
The EPRLF and the Chief Minister of the North-Eastern Province, Annamalai Varatharaja Perumal, accused the government of colluding with the LTTE in not intervening to stop the violence against the anti-LTTE groups, describing it as "state-aided banditry" .
The LTTE in contrast said that the EPRLF and the other Tamil groups were "stooges of India" .
At the beginning of February 14 opposition parties, led by the SLFP, called on Premadasa to stop "the massacre and extortion" by Tamil militants in the areas vacated by the IPKF and to stop giving further tacit support to the LTTE.
At the end of January the government confirmed that the proposed referendum on whether the temporary merger of the Northern and Eastern provinces should be made permanent [see p. 36735]would be postponed for a further six months.
Commentators considered that the delay was designed to give the LTTE time to negotiate with the Moslem and Sinhalese communities in the Eastern Province in order to prevent them from joining to vote for the reinstatement of a separate Eastern Provincial Council.
ECONOMY
Economic indicators
GDP growth 2.6% (1988)
Current-account balance -US$403.7 m. (1988)
Trade balance -US$544.2 m. (1988)
Overall balance of payments -US$96.8 m. (1988)
Budget deficit US$670 m. (1988)
Budget deficit as a % of GDP 15% (1988)
Total external public debt US$4,109 m. (1987)
Debt service ratio (as a % of export earnings) 19.2% (1987)
Gross domestic product US$6,040 m. (1987)
Inflation rate 14% (1988)
Unemployment 20% (1987 est.)
Principal trading partners Exports: USA, West Germany, UK; Imports: Japan, USA, UK
Sri Lanka's economy continued to be adversely affected by the violence afflicting the country, preventing growth and investment and diverting resources away from vital sectors.
On Oct. 13, 1989, the International Monetary Fund (IMF) approved the second instalment of 66,900,000 special drawing rights (SDRs--approximately US$84,200,000) in support of the three-year structural adjustment facility (SAF) agreed in March 1988 [see p. 37008].
This second tranche of the SAF had been withheld for six months until Sri Lanka had agreed to the implementation of a policy framework paper outlining the conditions for the government's stabilization programme.
The conditions included the reduction of the budget deficit from 15 per cent of gross domestic product (GDP) in 1988 to 8 per cent in 1992.
This would be achieved through cuts in the civil service, the freezing of public-sector wages and the privatization of state enterprises.
Tax and trade liberalization measures would also be introduced with the aim of increasing government revenue, encouraging investment and improving a currently worsening balance of payments.
Heavy spending by the UNP government prior to the presidential elections in December 1988 had contributed to the unsustainable rise in public spending with an accompanying increase in the budget deficit, in defiance of the agreements reached with the IMF.
The loss of revenue from areas of the country affected by civil unrest had also contributed to the deficit.
The IMF had stated that it anticipated that the balance-of-payments deficit would increase during 1989 and would be worsened by capital outflows from the country and a deteriorating trade balance.
By July 1989 it was estimated that the country possessed foreign exchange sufficient only to cover three weeks' worth of imports.
The government reacted by allowing the rupee to depreciate, by proposing a cut in wheat subsidies and by cutting public expenditure programmes.
The government's Janasaviya programme [see p. 37008]remained effectively suspended.
Real growth in GDP was projected to be maintained at 2-3 per cent during 1989-90, although many observers regarded such a figure as optimistic.
On Oct. 17, following the agreement with the IMF, a major meeting of international aid donors to Sri Lanka in Paris, under the auspices of the World Bank, pledged $785,000,000 in aid for 1990--$5,000,000 more than the figure requested by the Bank.
The World Bank had also requested that a greater proportion of the aid should be in the form of fast disbursing loans to aid the balance-of-payments stabilization, rather than project aid.
The bank estimated that Sri Lanka would require a total of $2,400 million during 1990-92 to finance the current-account deficit, to repay short-term loans contracted during the suspension of the SAF and to restore foreign exchange reserves to an acceptable level.
In January 1990 it became clear that donor countries were by threatening to cut the size of their aid programmes, placing pressure on the Sri Lankan government for an improvement in the country's human rights record.
The Netherlands government stated that it would consider reducing its aid provision if there was no improvement by June, and other countries, such as Sweden, Canada, West Germany and Norway, were thought to be adopting a similar approach.
FOREIGN
The advent of the new government of Indian Prime Minister V. P. Singh in December 1989 led to a steady improvement in relations between the two countries, despite the extension of the deadline for the final withdrawal of the IPKF to March 31, 1990 [see pp. 37126; 37184-85].
In the event, the withdrawal proceeded rapidly, so that by the end of January Trincomalee remained the only substantial area still under IPKF control.
The Chief Minister of Tamil Nadu, K. O. P. M. Karunanidhi, was given the responsibility of talking to the various Tamil groups to persuade them to come to a peaceful settlement after the withdrawal of the IPKF.
ASIA — PACIFIC
MALDIVES
BASIC DATA
Area: 298 sq km.
Population: 200,000 (1988).
Capital: Malé.
Language: Dhivehi (Maldivian).
Religion: Islam (Sunni majority).
Av. life expectancy: 63 yrs (women), 60 yrs (men)(1989).
GNP per capita: US$300 (1987).
Currency: rufiyaa (US$1.00=Rf9.3864 as at March 12, 1990).
The Republic of Maldives (called the Maldive Islands until 1969) has an executive President elected for a five-year term by universal adult suffrage, a Cabinet appointed and presided over by the President and a 48-member Citizens' Assembly (Majilis), 40 of whose members are elected for five years and the remaining eight appointed by the President.
There are no political parties.
The current President, Maumoun Abdul Gayoom, who first took office in July 1978, was re-elected for the second time in a referendum held on Sept. 23, 1988 [see p. 36350].
Maumoun Abdul Gayoom President; Defence; Finance Fathhulla Jameel Foreign Affairs Abdul Sattar Mossa Didi Health and Welfare Mohamed Zahir Hussain Education Abdulla Jameel Fisheries and Agriculture Ahmed Mujuthaba Tourism Ilyas Mujuthaba Trade and Industries Abdulla Hameed Atolls Administration; Speaker of Majilis Umar Zahir Home Affairs; Sports Ahmed Zaki Attorney-General Mohamed Rashid Justice Abbas Ibrahim Transport and Shipping Abdulla Kamaal Dheen Public Works and Labour 
Cabinet
FOREIGN
Indian troop withdrawal
The last contingent of 160 officers and men of the Parachute Battalion of the Indian Army left the Maldives on Nov. 3, 1989, a year after a detachment totalling 1,200 men of the same unit had intervened at the request of the Maldivian President, Abdul Gayoom, to put down an attempted coup [see p. 36350].
The Indian External Affairs Minister, I. K. Gujral, arrived in Malé on Jan. 12, 1990, for the first meeting of the Indo-Maldivian Joint Commission.
The talks led to an agreement for the Maldives to use the Indian communications satellite (INSAT-ID), which was to be launched in July 1990.
The meeting also agreed proposals for the abolition of the visa system, for flights between the two countries and for bilateral co-operation on development projects, such as the planned construction with Indian aid of a hospital.
However, Gayoom said that he did not see the need for a formal defence treaty between the two countries although India would continue to train the Maldives' security forces.
The Maldives government also claimed the right to host the fifth summit of the South Asian Association for Regional Co-operation (SAARC) instead of Sri Lanka, which as current chair had been due to do so in 1989, but which had refused owing to the continuing presence in Sri Lanka of Indian troops [see also p. 37357].
Small states conference
A conference of representatives from 15 small island states in the Caribbean, the Mediterranean and the Indian and Pacific Oceans, was held in the Maldives in mid-January 1990 to discuss some of the problems facing small countries.
In particular, concern was expressed at the possible effects of "global warming" causing storms and a rise in the sea level.
The Maldives was judged to be at particular risk due to its composition of low-lying coral islands and atolls.
The Secretary-General of the Commonwealth, Shridath (Sonny) Ramphal, called on the larger industrialized countries to provide more aid for countries at risk.
Economic indicators
GDP growth 8% (1987)
Trade balance -US$42.7 m. (1987)
Revenue from fish exports US$17 m. (1987)
Number of tourists 131,000 (1987)
Budget surplus Rf41.4 m. (1987)
Total external public debt US$70 m.
(December 1988)
Gross domestic product US$84 m. (1985)
Inflation rate 14% (1988)
Principal trading partners (1987) Exports: Thailand, Western Europe, Sri Lanka; Imports: Japan, Western Europe, Thailand
ASIA — PACIFIC
AFGHANISTAN
BASIC DATA
Area: 652,225 sq km.
Population: 14,825,013 (1989).
Capital: Kabul.
Languages: Pashtu and Dari are most important.
Religion: Islam (majority Sunni Moslems); Hinduism, Sikhism and Judaism.
Av. life expectancy: 42 yrs (women), 43 yrs (men)(1989).
Armed forces: 55,000 (1989).
GNP per capita: Not known.
Currency: Afghani (US$1.00=61.6076 afghanis as at March 12, 1990).
Afghanistan, which had been a monarchy until a coup in 1973, was declared a Democratic Republic in 1978 following a second coup led by the communist People's Democratic Party of Afghanistan (PDPA), which installed a government largely comprising its own members.
Legislative functions were assumed by a Revolutionary Council, which elected a Presidium and, on the recommendation of the PDPA central committee, the Council of Ministers (Cabinet).
The regime was given strong backing by the Soviet Union but failed to gain widespread popular support.
Following the imposition of rigorous communist policies a coup in December 1979 supported by the entry of about 80,000 Soviet troops installed a more moderate communist regime.
At the end of 1986 the PDPA leadership announced a programme of "national reconciliation" designed to end the conflict with the anti-government mujaheddin guerrillas, who control large areas of the country.
This culminated in the approval of a new Constitution on Nov. 30, 1987 [see pp. 35782-83], at a meeting of the Loya Jirga (Grand National Assembly or Supreme Council — a nationwide traditional gathering of tribal and other leaders).
The new Constitution restores the name Republic of Afghanistan, and provides for an executive President and a bicameral National Assembly, the lower house of which would be elected for a five-year term, with the upper house being partly elected and partly appointed.
The President would appoint the Council of Ministers, subject to the approval of the National Assembly.
The PDPA would also lose its monopoly on political power.
Najibullah, the PDPA general secretary since May 1986 and hitherto Chairman of the Revolutionary Council Presidium, was on Nov. 30, 1987, elected by the Loya Jirga as President of the Republic and C.-in-C. of the Armed Forces for a (renewable) seven-year term [ibid.].
Elections to the National Assembly were held on April 5-14, 1988 [see p. 35972].
The final withdrawal of Soviet troops took place in February 1989 [see pp. 36448-49]as stipulated under the Geneva accords signed in April 1988 by Afghanistan, Pakistan, the Soviet Union and the United States [see pp. 35970-71].
Details of a newly formed 20-member Supreme Council for the Defence of the Homeland, headed by Najibullah, were broadcast by Kabul radio on Feb. 19, 1989.
The new Council was established hours after a state of emergency had been declared and was described as the country's "supreme military and political organ" [see p. 36449].
Also on Feb. 19 Mohammad Hassan Sharq resigned as Prime Minister, and on Feb. 21 Sultan Ali Keshtmand (Sharq's predecessor as Prime Minister) was appointed Chairman of a newly created Executive Committee of the Council of Ministers [ibid.].
The year following the final Soviet withdrawal of troops was marked by the collapse of the mujaheddin as a real military threat to the Kabul government, and by the failure of its government to present itself as a viable political alternative.
Despite launching sustained attacks on Kabul and other cities such as Jalalabad, Kandahar and Khost, they failed to take political or military advantage of the pullout and in the process lost ground and morale.
The Islamic Interim Afghan Government (IIAG), elected from the seven Pakistan-based mujaheddin groups in February 1989 [see p. 36449], was marred by disunity and came under heavy criticism from both Afghan opposition groups and the United States government as being unrepresentative, excluding as it did representatives of the eight factions based among 2,000,000, mainly Shia, refugees in Iran, and largely lacking representation of field commanders based inside Afghanistan.
Sultan Ali Keshtmand Chairman of Executive Committee of Council of Ministers Mohammad Sarwar Mangal Deputy Prime Minister Sayed Amanoddin Amin Deputy Prime Minister Mahbubollah Koshani Deputy Prime Minister Mahmud Barialay Deputy Prime Minister Mohammad Hakim Deputy Prime Minister Lt.-Gen.
Shahnawaz Tanay Defence Hamidollah Tarzi Finance Mehr Mohammad Ejazi Higher and Vocational Education Lt.-Gen.
Gholam Faruq Yaqubi State Security Sayed Amir Zara Public Health Abdol Wakil Foreign Affairs Borhanoddin Ghiasi Commerce Soltan Hosayn Planning Mohammad Ghofran Agriculture and Land Reform Solayman La'eq Border Affairs Sayd Ekram Paygir Returnees' Affairs Gholam Rasul Education and Training Sher Jan Mazduryar Civil Aviation Khalilollah Transport Mohammad Eshaq Kawa Mines and Industries Raz Mohammad Paktin Water and Electricity Nazar Mohammad Construction Affairs Maj.-Gen.
Mohammad Aslam Watanjar Internal Affairs Mohammad Asef Zaher Revival and Rural Development Abdollah Bahar Light Industries and Foodstuffs Mohammad Bashir Baghlani Justice Bashir Ahmad Roygar Information and Culture Abdol Ghafur Baher Islamic Affairs and Endowment Mir Azmoddin Communications Khodaydad Basharmal Education and Training Maulawi Nur Ahmed Barets Without Portfolio 
Council of Ministers
SECURITY
Missile attacks on Kabul
Mujaheddin attacks on Kabul in October 1989 killed and injured many people including at least 30 when a surface-to-surface missile struck a bus shelter in a busy shopping district of old Kabul on Oct. 10.
Rocket fire closed the international airport on two occasions at the end of the month.
On Nov. 26, in one of the most destructive rocket attacks by the mujaheddin on Kabul in the entire Afghan conflict, 31 people were killed and 96 injured.
In the first few days of December more missiles hit the city than in the whole of November.
The mujaheddin marked the 10th anniversary of the Soviet intervention in Afghanistan on Dec. 27 in similar fashion by launching at least 52 rockets into Kabul killing dozens of people according to a government spokesperson.
Most of the fire was concentrated in the areas of the airport, the Intercontinental Hotel and densely populated suburbs, hitting military garrisons, ministries, schools and houses.
The attack followed a 30-rocket barrage on the city on Dec. 26 which left eight dead and 27 injured.
Mujaheddin release of Soviet prisoners
On Nov. 27, 1989, mujaheddin representatives handed over two Soviet prisoners of war to the Soviet ambassador to Pakistan in Peshawar; this was the first occasion on which the rebel forces had released any Soviet prisoners.
Mujaheddin sources said that the soldiers were returned on humanitarian grounds; there was no indication of an exchange of prisoners despite earlier reports that the Kabul government was prepared to exchange 73 mujaheddin prisoners for the two Soviet servicemen.
UNGOMAP extension
In January 1990 the UN Security Council agreed to extend the mandate for a further two months of the detachment of 40 officers from 10 countries making up the UN Good Offices Mission in Afghanistan and Pakistan (UNGOMAP), created to monitor the withdrawal of foreign troops from Afghanistan as well as other aspects of the Geneva Accords of 1988.
Visit by US delegation to Pakistan
On Jan. 16, 1990, a US government delegation led by Under-Secretary of State for Political Affairs Robert M. Kimmitt opened talks with Pakistan political and military leaders to explore new ways of achieving a negotiated peace in Afghanistan's civil war.
On Jan. 17 it met Pakistan Prime Minister Benazir Bhutto before moving on to meet mujaheddin leaders in Peshawar.
The mission, said to reflect a growing realization that the Afghan resistance had failed to achieve the US administration's objective of overthrowing the Kabul government, was in anticipation of a meeting later in the year between US Secretary of State James Baker and Soviet Foreign Minister Eduard Shevardnadze and also came amid accelerating efforts by the UN to secure Soviet support for its own peace initiative.
New mujaheddin leadership formula
On Jan. 17, 1990, the IIAG Prime Minister, Abdur-Rabbur Rasul Sayaf, announced a 16-point formula to find a new leadership to oppose the Kabul government.
Instead of the elections earlier promised for April 1990, it provided for a loya jirga or grand assembly of over 2,000 members (10 from each of 216 districts in Afghanistan plus 15 from each of the seven groups based in Peshawar, either elected or chosen by local councils) which would select first a new government and parliament.
According to Islamabad radio, Sayaf said that "all Afghans belonging to any school of thought will be eligible to take part freely" although it did not allow for participation of Afghanistan's ruling communists (as demanded by Moscow).
By Jan. 19 it was announced that six groups had agreed to the formula, but the proposal received strong opposition from the Pakistan-based Hezb-e Islami, led by Gulbuddin Hekmatyar.
A statement issued by that party on Jan. 20 described the scheme as impractical and a futile attempt to form yet another selected shura (an Islamic consultative council) in order to prolong the tenure of the interim government which was due to expire in February.
The Hezb-e Islami, which had suspended its participation in the interim government on Aug. 29, 1989, saying that it would not attend meetings until elections were held in Afghanistan, instead called for one-person, one-vote elections based on proportional representation, to be held in the refugee camps and liberated areas of the country to broaden the base of the mujaheddin government.
Economic indicators
Gross domestic product US$3,520 m. (1985)
Current-account balance -US$556.3 m. (1986)
Capital-account balance +US$225.7 m. (1986)
Public foreign debt US$1,400 m. (1988)
Foreign reserves US$280 m. (1988)
Per capita income US$250 (1985)
Merchandise exports US$791 m. (1987)
Merchandise imports US$1,190 m. (1987)
ASIA — PACIFIC
BHUTAN
BASIC DATA
Area: 46,500 sq km.
Population: 1,534,122 (1989).
Capital: Thimphu.
Language: Dzongkha (official).
Religion: Mahayana Buddhism (state religion).
Av. life expectancy: 47 yrs (women), 49 yrs (men)(1989).
Armed forces: The strength of the Royal Bhutanese Army is classified information.
GNP per capita: US$150 (1987).
Currency: ngultrum (US$1.00=16.8218 ngultrum as at March 12, 1990, at par with Indian rupee).
The Kingdom of Bhutan is a hereditary limited monarchy in which power is shared between the King (assisted by a Royal Advisory Council), the Council of Ministers, the National Assembly (Tsogdu) and the monastic head of the Kingdom's Buddhist priesthood (currently Venerable Dorji Lopon Tenzin Dhondrub).
Elections for 105 seats in the 151-member Tsogdu are by universal suffrage of all adults over the age of 17; 10 are reserved for religious bodies and the remainder are occupied by officials, ministers and members of the Royal Advisory Council.
The Tsogdu is required to pass a vote of confidence in the King by a two-thirds majority every three years and has the power to replace the monarch.
The present King, Jigme Singye Wangchuk, acceded to the throne in July 1972 [see p. 25412].
Princess Dechhen W. Wangchuk Agriculture Princess Sonam Chhoden Wangchuk Finance Lyonpo Dawa Tsering Foreign Affairs; Secretary of Council of Ministers HRH Namgyel Wangchuk Home Affairs Lyonpo T. Tobgyal Social Services; Communications; Tourism 
Council of Ministers
POLITICS
New administrative structure
The creation of a zonal level of administration directly under the Home Affairs Ministry was announced at the end of 1988 with the 18 existing districts or dzongkhags to be grouped under four zonal administrative headquarters.
The zonal administrators would co-ordinate policies and plans, thus reducing pressure of work on ministries in Thimphu.
By December 1988 two zones had been announced based at Chhukha and Demphu.
In August 1989 the third zone based at Gaylegphug was inaugurated and the fourth at Yongphalu was set up in September.
Royal marriage ceremony
On Oct. 31, 1988, a formal religious ceremony was held to confirm publicly the marriage of King Jigme to four sisters which was said to have taken place privately nine years earlier.
Its main purpose was to give legitimacy to the nine-year-old Crown Prince and thereby to prevent other claims to the Bhutanese throne.
ECONOMY
Economic indicators
GDP growth 14% (fiscal year 1987)
Current-account balance -US$48.9 m. (1988)
Trade balance -US$44.3 m. (fiscal year 1988)
Total external public debt US$39.3 m.
(March 1988)
Gross domestic product US$252 m. (fiscal year 1987)
Inflation rate 10.1% (1986)
Principal trading partner India 
FOREIGN
King's visits to India
King Jigme arrived in New Delhi, the Indian capital, on July 9, 1989, at the start of a four-day visit.
The following day the then Indian Prime Minister, Rajiv Gandhi, called on the King and they exchanged views on bilateral matters.
The King's invitation to visit India had been issued by the Indian President, Ramaswamy Venkataraman, during the latter's four-day visit to Bhutan on Oct. 18-21, 1988, the first visit by an Indian President since 1974.
During the visit Venkataraman inaugurated the 336 MW Chhukha hydroelectric project in Bhutan which was designed and built with full Indian technical and financial assistance and which would export 85 per cent of its power to India.
The King paid another visit to India on Jan. 31-Feb. 4, 1990.
During his stay he had talks with the new Indian Prime Minister, V. P. Singh, and other political leaders.
Relations with China
The fifth round of bilateral boundary talks between Bhutan and China were held in Beijing on May 10-14, 1988 [for previous talks see pp. 35384; 34175].
The Bhutanese delegation was led by Vice-Minister for Trade and Industry Dasho Om Pradhan while the Chinese delegation was headed by Vice-Foreign Minister Liu Shuqing.
A report by the New China News Agency (Xinhua) said that the two delegations had exchanged views on the boundary issue (whereby China disputed Bhutan's western and eastern borders — see map on p. 33858) in a cordial and friendly atmosphere.
On May 14 a joint communiqué was issued outlining the guiding principles for settling the demarcation of their common border, which included not using force to resolve the issue.
Bhutanese Minister of Foreign Affairs Lyonpo Dawa Tsering arrived in Beijing on Oct. 29, 1989, for the sixth round of border talks.
During his visit he met the Chinese President, Yang Shangkun, Premier Li Peng and Foreign Minister Qian Qichen.
Relations with Pakistan
Bhutan formally established relations with Pakistan on Dec. 15, 1988, with the cross-crediting of ambassadors in New Delhi, giving Bhutan formal relations with all six other member countries of the South Asian Association for Regional Co-operation (SAARC).
ASIA — PACIFIC
NEPAL
BASIC DATA
Area: 147,181 sq km.
Population: 18,699,884 (1989).
Capital: Kathmandu.
Languages: Nepali (official); Maithir and Bhojpuri.
Religion: Hinduism (majority); Buddhism and Islam.
Av. life expectancy: 49 yrs (women), 50 yrs (men)(1989).
Armed forces: 35,000 (1989).
GNP per capita: US$160 (1987).
Currency: Nepalese rupee (US$1.00=NRs28.3647 as at March 12, 1990).
The Kingdom of Nepal is a constitutional monarchy, with executive power vested in the King (Birendra Bir Bikram Shah Deva) who presides over a 140-member unicameral legislature, the Rashtriya Panchayat.
A Constitution introduced by the King in 1962 embodied a multi-tiered system of panchayat (council) democracy, under which there are elected councils at village level which in turn elect members to district councils and thence to zonal councils.
A referendum held in 1980 rejected the restoration of political parties (proscribed by the King in 1961) but decided in favour of retaining the panchayat system with limited reforms, namely;(i) the election to the Rashtriya Panchayat by universal adult franchise of 112 members for a five-year term (the remaining 28 members being nominated by the King); and (ii) the appointment of the Council of Ministers on the recommendation of the Prime Minister (elected by the Rashtriya Panchayat).
The last general election to the Rashtriya Panchayat was held in May 1986 and resulted in the election of a number of members opposed to the panchayat system [see p. 34423].
Marich Man Singh Shrestha Prime Minister; Defence; Royal Palace Affairs Shailendra Kumar Upadhya Foreign Affairs Hari Bahadur Basnyat Water Resources Pashu Narayan Chaudhary Education and Culture Prakash Chandra Lohani Housing and Physical Planning Bharat Bahadur Pradhan Finance; Industry Mohammad Mohsin Tourism; Works and Transport Prakash Bahadhur Singh Panchayat Affairs and Local Development Lila Raj Bista Labour and Social Welfare Krishna Charan Shrestha Agriculture Badri Prasad Mandal Law and Justice 
Council of Ministers
SECURITY
Security Act amendments
On Aug. 19, 1989, the Rashtriya Panchayat adopted amendments to the 1961 Public Security, Jail and State Offences (Crime and Punishment) Acts, abolishing the death sentence for crimes against the state and curtailing district authorities' powers of arrest and detention.
The changes also included reducing the sentence for security offences from life imprisonment to 10 years.
Although the August amendments to the Public Security Act had made chief district officers (CDOs) more accountable by ordering them to maintain law and order through district police, on Oct. 6 the government announced that CDOs had been armed with unlimited powers under the Security Act, as amended in September, to hold anyone in preventive detention for the maintenance of law and order.
In view of mounting criticism both within Nepal and from abroad about the lack of minimum basic freedom in the country, the government stated that departmental action would be taken against local officers if it could be proved that detention orders were issued with bad intentions.
Opposition arrests
Opposition leaders Ganesh Man Singh and Girija Prasad Koirala (leader and general secretary respectively of the banned Nepali Congress Party) and Manmohan Adhikari (leader of the Nepali Communist Party — also banned) were briefly arrested on Dec. 15, 1989, after demanding the immediate abolition of the existing political system in Nepal and the formation of a national government.
The following day King Birendra addressed a rally in Kathmandu marking the 29th anniversary of the abolition of multiparty government and its replacement by a non-party system.
[For house arrest of Singh and Koirala in February 1990 following pro-democracy demonstration see p. 37247; for mass arrests of opposition activists in September 1989 see p. 37008.]
ECONOMY
Economic indicators
GDP growth 9.75% (1988)
Current-account balance -US$133 m. (1987)
Trade balance -US$443 m. (1988)
Budget deficit US$425 m. (1988-89)
Total external public debt US$1,100 m. (1988)
Debt service ratio (as % of export earnings) 9.7% (1987)
Gross domestic product US$3,100 m. (fiscal 1988)
Inflation rate 10.9% (fiscal 1988)
Unemployment 5%; unemployment estimated at 25-40% (1987)
Principal trading partners (fiscal 1987) Exports: India (43%), USA (26%), UK (10%); Imports: India (40%), Europe (13%), Japan (13%)
IMF structural adjustment facility
In November 1989 the International Monetary Fund (IMF) announced that it had approved the drawing of the final sum, equivalent to 7,460,000 special drawing rights (SDRs — approximately US$9,500,000), in support of Nepal's economic and financial programme for 1989-90 under the SDR26,110,000 structural adjustment facility (SAF) first agreed in October 1987 [see also pp. 36008-09].
The aim of this programme was to mitigate the effects of the trade blockade with India [see also below]which had resulted in energy shortages, increased import costs and a slowdown in revenue collection.
It included measures to eliminate imbalances which had emerged in 1988-89, to improve external competitiveness and to promote reforms in the financial sector.
FOREIGN
Indian economic blockade
A meeting on Sept. 4, 1989, between King Birendra and the then Indian Prime Minister, Rajiv Gandhi, at the Belgrade summit of the Non-Aligned Movement [for which see pp. 36907-08], failed to produce a breakthrough in the conflict with India over trade and transit rights [see p. 37009].
Following the November 1989 change of government in India, however, two days of talks on ending the nine-month trade and transit dispute took place on Jan. 4-5, 1990, between the new Indian External Affairs Minister, I. K. Gujral, and his Nepalese counterpart, Shailendra Kumar Upadhya.
The government of V. P. Singh expressed its willingness to reach an early mutually acceptable and beneficial solution to all outstanding issues with Nepal but concrete proposals to break the deadlock remained undecided.
Pakistan economic support
On July 27, 1989, the Pakistani Minister of State for Finance, Ehsanul Haq Piracha, opening the third session of the Nepal-Pakistan Joint Economic Commission in Kathmandu, assured Nepal of support to help it overcome problems resulting from the trade blockade with India.
He also announced a $1,000,000 credit to Nepal for importing machinery and capital goods from Pakistan, and called on both countries, as members of the South Asian Association for Regional Co-operation (SAARC), to strive to improve the wellbeing of the people in the region as a whole.
Completion of Sino-Nepalese border inspection
The second session of the Sino-Nepalese joint boundary inspection committee was held in Kathmandu on Aug. 1-7, 1988 (the first session having been held in February 1987).
On the basis of an earlier agreement jointly to inspect the border once every five years, teams had been dispatched to the border in May and June.
The committee reported that all teams had completed the tasks successfully and it agreed to initial a protocol of the joint inspection at the third session to be held in Beijing in November.
ASIA — PACIFIC
SAARC
Full title: South Asian Association for Regional Co-operation.
Foundation: Dec. 8, 1985 [see p. 34243].
Status: Regional co-operation association.
Members: Bangladesh, Bhutan, India, Maldives, Nepal, Pakistan and Sri Lanka.
Chair: Benazir Bhutto (Pakistan).
Foreign Ministers' meeting
The seventh session of the SAARC Council of Foreign Ministers was held in Islamabad, the capital of Pakistan, on Nov. 8-9, 1989.
Opening the session, which had been preceded by a standing committee meeting, the Prime Minister of Pakistan and current chair of the organization, Benazir Bhutto, called on the seven member countries to work out a partnership to meet their security concerns, as well as the social and economic means to realize the potential of the region as an economic power.
India's Foreign Secretary, S. K. Singh, however, rejected at the standing committee meeting a proposal to open SAARC to external bodies, on the grounds that such a move would be "premature" when the association itself still had not entered areas of co-operation such as trade, industry and finance.
The meeting had originally been scheduled to start on July 1, but had been delayed as a result of Sri Lanka's announcement on June 24 that it would not participate because of India's refusal to agree on the withdrawal of the Indian Peace Keeping Force (IPKF) from Sri Lanka by the latter's deadline of July 29 [see p. 36735].
Postponement of fifth summit
At its November meeting the Council failed to set a date for the next SAARC summit, originally scheduled for 1989, after Sri Lanka formally declared its refusal, while Indian troops remained on its soil, to host the meeting as decided at the fourth summit in December 1989 in Islamabad, Pakistan [for which see p. 36485].
In January 1990 the Maldives pressed its claim to hold that year's summit, as had also been decided at the Islamabad summit.
The Maldives took the view, along with several other SAARC states, that bilateral problems among members should not impinge on the SAARC and that Sri Lanka's decision to refuse to host the 1989 summit could set a bad precedent.
New Secretary-General
Abul Ahsan (a member of the Bangladesh foreign service) completed his tenure as the first Secretary-General of SAARC at the end of October 1989; his successor, K. K. Bhargava (India), took up the post at the Secretariat in Kathmandu, the capital of Nepal.