

SOVIET UNION-UNITED STATES
Washington summit
The Presidents of the Soviet Union and the United States, Mikhail Gorbachev and George Bush, held their second summit meeting in Washington on May 31-June 3.
Following on from the informal Malta summit in December 1989 [see p. 37110], the meetings were hailed as a new beginning in US-Soviet relations, despite acknowledged continuing differences on a number of key bilateral and international issues.
The main concrete results of the summit were (i) the signing of an agreement banning the production of chemical weapons;(ii) a set of accords normalizing commercial relations between the two countries for the first time in 50 years; and (iii) a provisional treaty on nuclear weapons.
Comprehensive agreements on reductions in strategic nuclear arms (START) and conventional forces in Europe (CFE), which at the time of the Malta summit had been thought imminent, were not achieved but were expected to be concluded by the end of 1990.
The issue which provided the main focus of disagreement, and which had also thwarted progress on the CFE and START negotiations, had been the future political and military status of a united Germany.
The US and Soviet delegations held four sessions of formal talks on May 31 and June 1.
The various agreements were signed on June 1.
On June 2 the two leaders held informal talks at Camp David outside Washington, covering general and bilateral issues as well as a wide range of regional issues (including the conflicts in Afghanistan, Cambodia, El Salvador, the Horn of Africa, Kashmir and the Middle East).
On June 3 they held a joint news conference.
The meetings and discussions in Washington were part of a week-long visit to North America by Gorbachev, who visited Canada on May 29-30, and the US cities of Minneapolis on June 3 and San Francisco on June 4 (when he also met President Roh Tae Woo of South Korea, in the first contact at the highest level between the two countries).
While in Minneapolis Gorbachev also opened the Gorbachev-Maxwell Institute of Technology, jointly funded by a prominent British publisher, Robert Maxwell, and the state of Minnesota to foster joint US, European and Soviet work on a wide range of problems in the fields of environmental conservation, communications, information, health and nutrition.
Background and build-up to summit
After the Malta summit the Bush administration had repeatedly expressed support for Gorbachev's reform initiatives in the Soviet Union, but the Soviet reaction to the declaration of independence by Lithuania in March [see p. 37299]threatened to throw the preparations for the Washington summit off course.
The US administration, under pressure from Congress, had then sought the ending of the Soviet economic blockade against Lithuania.
It was suggested that the USA would not otherwise sign the planned trade agreement, which contained concessions regarded by the Soviet side as very important in making possible the restructuring of the Soviet economy and the introduction of a regulated market economy.
(Bush on June 3 denied, however, that there had been a linkage between the trade agreement and the Lithuania issue.)
The relative lack of progress on START and in particular the multilateral CFE negotiations (being conducted in Vienna within the framework of the Conference on Security and Cooperation in Europe, CSCE — see p. 37335) since the Malta summit were widely attributed to Soviet concern over the pace and implications of German unification, and whether a unified Germany could be allowed to be a member of NATO.
On the eve of the summit Gorbachev reaffirmed the sharp differences over this issue [see also p. 37535], but both sides indicated that they were seeking a mutually acceptable solution.
In his welcoming remarks Bush stressed that "the success of this summit depends not on the agreements we will sign but on our efforts to overcome division and discord, to build a world of peace in freedom" ; Gorbachev also highlighted the symbolic significance of the summit as marking the end of the "prejudice, mistrust and animosity" of the Cold War.
Bilateral agreements
At a formal ceremony on June 1 the two leaders signed a framework agreement on the major elements of a treaty on strategic arms reductions (START), involving a reduction of each side's long-range nuclear missiles by about one-third over a seven-year period.
It was announced that remaining unresolved issues would be taken up by the START negotiating teams in Geneva, and both sides stressed their determination to complete the drafting by the end of 1990.
Key bilateral agreements were signed on arms control, trade, and co-operation in the transport, energy, education and cultural fields.
The agreement to stop production of chemical weapons, and to eliminate all but 5,000 tonnes of existing stockpiles, was intended as a catalyst for an agreement on a worldwide ban on the development, production, use and possession of chemical weapons currently under negotiation at the UN Conference on Disarmament in Geneva [see p. 37224], and both sides undertook to destroy all their stocks once such a ban was in force.
Protocols to the US-Soviet 1974 Threshold Test Ban Treaty [see pp. 26614-15]and the 1976 Peaceful Nuclear Explosions Treaty [see pp. 27813-14]dealt with verification issues regarding permissible nuclear tests.
A trade agreement provided for a reduction of customs duties on goods traded by the two countries (thus extending most favoured nation status to the Soviet Union and improving the competitiveness of each country's goods in the other's markets); the agreement also provided for better copyright protection for US companies and for reductions in the time US companies would have to wait for approval to begin commercial operations in the Soviet Union.
[For relaxation of COCOM restrictions on East-West trade see p. 37552.]
Contingent economic agreements provided for a repeal of the US ban on the import of Soviet gold coins, the lifting of restrictions on Soviet borrowing from the US government's Export-Import Bank (which was expected to stimulate US companies' interest in setting up joint ventures in the Soviet Union), and payment by the Soviet Union of a debt of US$674,000,000 owed for supplies furnished under the Lend-Lease programme during the Second World War.
A long-term grain accord regulated the sale of US wheat, feed grains, soybeans and other commodities to the Soviet Union, increasing the total amount from the current 9,000,000 tonnes annually to 10,000,000 tonnes [see also p. 37324].
An agreement to extend commercial air travel between the two countries (equivalent to a quadrupling of existing services) added four US and six Soviet destinations to current airline routes and allowed one more Soviet and six more US airlines to fly the new routes.
Regulations governing maritime transport between the two countries were also simplified.
On energy, there would be enhanced co-operation on fusion energy, on basic nuclear research and on safety in nuclear reactors.
On culture, student exchanges would be increased and reciprocal cultural and information centres opened in Washington and Moscow.
Joint concluding press conference
At their joint concluding press conference on June 3 the two leaders pronounced their summit a success.
Gorbachev said that it had been an "event of enormous importance for our bilateral relations and in the context of world politics" and that one could now speak of a "new phase of co-operation" between the USA and the Soviet Union, describing Bush as "the kind of person to do business with" .
Bush also spoke of "a new era" in US-Soviet relations and praised Gorbachev's "forthright spirit" .
Both stressed in particular the importance of the informal Camp David meetings in strengthening mutual understanding and trust.
The two leaders agreed that they would meet on a regular basis in the future, perhaps annually and with less formality, and Gorbachev invited Bush to the Soviet Union.
Although no formal announcements were made, it was widely thought that the two leaders might meet twice more in the near future, to sign the CFE and the START treaties, planned for later in 1990.
Both sides singled out the framework agreement on START as the most important document signed during the summit.
On the economic front Gorbachev in particular also stressed the importance of the trade agreement as well as several other agreements with US firms in helping to transform the Soviet economy.
Both leaders also acknowledged continuing disagreements on a number of key issues.
On Germany, Bush said that he was not sure whether differences over the terms for German unification had been narrowed, although each side now understood the other's concerns better.
Gorbachev said that "we did not reach agreement but that does not mean our efforts were futile" .
Bush said that the Lithuanian independence crisis was "one of the thorns in the side" of US-Soviet relations.
He stressed the US government's commitment to self-determination for Lithuania and the other Baltic states, urging Gorbachev to begin a "good-faith dialogue" with the Lithuanian government.
Gorbachev appealed for understanding for his "very cautious" approach to the independence movement.
While welcoming moves to allow more Soviet Jews to emigrate, Bush said he wanted to see "unfettered emigration" .
He declared that he would submit the trade agreement for the required congressional approval only after the passage of a more liberal emigration law currently being debated by the Soviet parliament.
Gorbachev warned Israel that he would "give thought" to suspending exit visas for Soviet Jews if some of them continued to be settled on the Israeli-occupied West Bank and Gaza Strip.
Bush also reiterated the US government's opposition to Jewish settlements in the occupied territories.
 "I will try to persuade the government of Israel that it is counterproductive," he declared.
AMERICAS
CANADA
Collapse of Meech Lake Accord
The Meech Lake Accord, a package of amendments to the Canadian Constitution, collapsed on June 23, having failed to achieve the necessary ratification by the legislatures of all 10 provinces within two years of its passage by the federal House of Commons (on June 22, 1988).
Whilst the Accord provided for increased powers for the provinces and a reform of the federal Senate, its most controversial element was its attempt to induce Quebec to sign the 1982 Constitution in return for a recognition that the French-speaking province was a "distinct society" .
Although the Accord was approved by most of the provinces by the end of 1988, Manitoba and New Brunswick had withheld ratification on the grounds that it offered insufficient protection to Quebec's English-speaking minority.
Following a change of government in Newfoundland in 1989, the new Liberal administration of Premier Clyde Wells also expressed opposition to Quebec's special status and, in April 1990, the Newfoundland provincial legislature rescinded its original ratification of the Accord.
The impasse was deepened by the refusal of Quebec's Liberal Premier, Robert Bourassa, under pressure from the growing separatist Parti Québecois opposition, to contemplate a revision or excision of the "distinct society" clause.
Resignation of Bouchard as Environment Minister and from PCP — Resignation from PCP of other Quebec MPs — Calling of Premiers' conference — Non-ratification by Manitoba and Newfoundland
As the two-year deadline for final ratification approached, pressure increased upon federal Prime Minister Brian Mulroney to rescue the Accord [see p. 37413].
On May 21 one of the most senior members of the federal Cabinet, Lucien Bouchard, a native of Quebec, resigned as Environment Minister because of the continued opposition to Meech Lake and because of alleged government attempts to dilute the "distinct society" clause.
Bouchard, a close ally of Mulroney for over 30 years, also resigned from the ruling Progressive Conservative Party (PCP) in order to sit as an independent.
His example was immediately followed by two other Quebec members of the PCP's parliamentary caucus.
(A further PCP MP was reported to have resigned on June 16.)
On June 3 Mulroney summoned a conference of provincial Premiers in the federal capital, Ottawa, in a last-ditch effort to break the deadlock.
Eventually, Wells, Gary Filmon and Frank McKenna, the Premiers of Newfoundland, Manitoba and New Brunswick respectively, were on June 10 persuaded to place ratification motions before their respective legislatures, in return for the promise that if the "distinct society" clause infringed the country's Charter of Rights and Freedoms then the latter could be strengthened.
English 15,334,000 63.1% French 6,160,000 24.3% Italian 456,000 1.8% German 439,000 1.7% Chinese 267,000 1.0% Ukrainian 208,000 0.8% Other European 811,000 3.3% Indian and Inuktituk 95,000 0.4% Other Asian 60,000 0.3% Arabic 41,000 0.2%
Canadian population by native language
(derived from 1986 census)
Despite signing this compromise Wells remained opposed to the Accord and suggested that he wanted an extension of the deadline in order to have time to hold a provincial referendum on the issue.
Both the federal government and Quebec indicated that such a move was unacceptable, however, and Wells finally agreed to hold a free vote in Newfoundland's 52-member provincial legislature (in which the Liberals held 31 seats) on June 22.
The New Brunswick legislature approved the Accord on June 15.
In Manitoba, despite all-party agreement, the position reached an unexpected impasse as the ratification vote was blocked by the filibustering of a single Cree Indian legislator.
Elijah Harper used procedural rules to delay the vote on the grounds that the Accord did not recognize the 350,000 native Canadians (Indians and Inuits) as a distinct society.
The Manitoban ratification process was also delayed by a provincial rule which required that any constitutional amendment be subject to public hearings prior to a vote in the legislature.
This regulation was exploited by over 1,000 pro-Indian individuals and organizations each applying for the opportunity to participate in the hearings and thereby assist Harper in delaying a vote.
The Manitoba assembly was adjourned for the weekend on June 22 after Harper refused to allow an extended sitting.
In the final hours, as it became clear that Manitoba would not have time to approve the Accord, the federal government announced that it would ask the Supreme Court for an extension of the ratification deadline.
In a speech to the Newfoundland legislature Wells expressed outrage over this Mulroney initiative, on the grounds that, at the Premiers' conference earlier in the month, the Prime Minister had repeated ruled out any such extension as unconstitutional.
The Newfoundland legislature was then adjourned, and the deadline of midnight on June 23 passed with neither the Newfoundland nor Manitoba assemblies voting upon the Accord.
Consequences of Meech Lake collapse
The Accord's collapse made more likely the prospect of Quebec's secession from the 123-year-old Canadian confederation.
Bourassa, who in the past had opposed separatism for his province, declared his intention not to participate in further constitutional talks, and suggested that his administration would prepare a new policy for Quebec's status, but gave no further details.
He also stated that his government would confine its discussions with the federal government to matters of immigration, communications and labour, and would maintain bilateral relations with individual provinces on issues of mutual concern.
The failure of the Accord was also a severe blow to Mulroney and prompted opposition calls for his resignation.
Mulroney added to his own discomfort by admitting that he had deliberately waited until the last moment before calling a conference of Premiers, in an effort to increase the pressure upon the dissenting provincial leaders.
A further three MPs from Quebec resigned from the PCP on June 26 and, with others amongst the Quebec caucus threatening resignation, there emerged a possibility that the PCP could lose its overall majority in the federal parliament.
Election of new Liberal Party leader
Amongst Mulroney's most fierce critics was Jean Chrétien, 56, the newly elected leader of the federal Liberal Party who, in 1980, had led the "no" campaign in the referendum on independence for Quebec.
A staunch opponent of the Accord, Chrétien was elected leader at a party convention on June 23.
He stated that he was in favour of Quebec remaining as part of Canada under the principle of "10 equal provinces" , i.e. without "distinct society" provisions.
The convention also chose Don Johnston, likewise an opponent of the Accord, for the administrative position of party president.
Two of the small number of Liberals representing Quebec in the federal parliament resigned from the party in response to Chrétien's election.
Visit by Queen Elizabeth II
Notwithstanding the constitutional turmoil, a five-day visit by Queen Elizabeth II — originally planned to coincide with a ceremonial signing of the Meech Lake Accord — went ahead on June 27.
After spending four days in Alberta, the Queen celebrated Canada Day on July 1 with a speech in French and English to a crowd of 100,000 in Ottawa, during which she expressed her "anxiety and deep concern" over the country's constitutional problems.
She called upon Canadians to remember their tradition of "honourable accommodation" of differences, and declared her confidence that "after a period of calm reflection" the country would resolve its current difficulties.
Despite warnings by Quebec separatists to stay out of the province, the Queen made a brief visit to the town of Hull, just inside Quebec, where she encountered a peaceful protest by several hundred Quebec nationalists.
EUROPE
EUROPEAN COMMUNITIES
Dublin summit of European Council
At a meeting in Dublin, the Irish capital, on June 25-26, the heads of state and government of the 12 member states of the European Communities (EC) formally convened parallel inter-governmental conferences in Rome for Dec. 13-14, 1990, to amend the 1957 Treaty of Rome in order to allow the introduction of political, economic and monetary union by Jan. 1, 1993.
The East German Prime Minister and Foreign Minister, Lothar de Maiziere and Markus Meckel respectively, attended the summit.
A basic minimal consensus on political union had been achieved at an informal meeting of the Council of (Foreign) Ministers in Parknasilla (Ireland) on May 19-20.
Gerard Collins, the Irish Foreign Minister, said that there had been general agreement that foreign policy should be better co-ordinated and that community institutions should be strengthened without substantially increasing the powers of the European Parliament (EP).
The president of the West German Bundesbank, Karl Otto Pöhl, on June 11 proposed a "two-speed" process of monetary union, which was however coolly received.
Speaking after a meeting with EC Finance Ministers in Luxembourg he envisaged that a smaller number of countries with low inflation (France, West Germany, Belgium, Netherlands and Luxembourg) would enter a European central banking system and that others who had not reached the same degree of economic convergence, or were not ready to give up sufficient sovereignty rights, would be invited to enter later.
Summit communiqué
Progress towards European union.
Recent progress was welcomed towards the establishment of the internal market, notably in the previously excluded sectors of water, energy, transport and telecommunications, in the financial services sector, and on company taxation.
The summit called for rapid completion or progress as regards investment services and insurance, intellectual property, takeovers, the liberalization of road transport as called for in a Dutch memorandum, the harmonization of animal and plant health standards, and the adoption by the end of 1990 of new value added tax and excise duty arrangements and of guidelines on trans-European transport networks.
Noting that the first stage of economic and monetary union (EMU) would come into effect on July 1, 1990, the summit decided that the intergovernmental conference to establish the final stages of economic and monetary union would open on Dec. 13 and would conclude its work rapidly with a view to member states ratifying the results by the end of 1992.
The intergovernmental conference on political union, based on the Franco-German initiative put to the extraordinary Dublin summit in April [see p. 37363], would open on Dec. 14, with a similar mandate to conclude its work rapidly.
An annex to the communiqué, based on a paper prepared by the Irish presidency, stated the objective of political union to be "the transformation of the Community from an entity mainly based on economic integration and political co-operation into a union of a political nature, including a common foreign and security policy" .
Considerations to be explored at the December conference included the scope of union, for example the degree of further transfer of competence; the functioning of the institutions, for example the strengthening of the Commission with regard to implementing Community policies; strengthening democratic control and accountability for member-states, possibly via increased involvement of the European Parliament or of national parliaments; and the application and definition of the principle of "subsidiarity" .
On German unification, the conclusion of the inter-German state treaty, which would accelerate the integration of East Germany into the EC, was welcomed.
Progress towards a people's Europe.
On the environment the summit noted that the areas of scientific uncertainty had been narrowed down and a response could no longer be delayed, and adopted a declaration on guidelines for future action.
This affirmed the right of citizens to a clean and healthy environment in regard to the quality of air and water, food and drinking water, protection against noise and contamination of soil, soil erosion and desertification, the preservation of fauna and flora and the natural heritage, and amenities in residential areas; and a commitment to global environmental preservation, especially as regards the Antarctic, the ozone layer, and tropical forests.
In central and eastern Europe remedial measures must be taken to clear up environmental problems developed through years of neglect.
On the free movement of persons the summit welcomed the signature of an asylum convention [see p. 37535]and urged the rapid implementation of measures towards a Europe without frontiers contained in the Palma document.
On illegal drugs the summit urged the establishment of a European central drugs intelligence unit before the end of 1990 and greater police co-operation.
A declaration was adopted deploring recent manifestations of anti-semitism, racism and xenophobia, including prejudice against foreign immigrants, and calling for vigorous measures to combat them.
External relations.
The summit called on the Commission to prepare urgent (by October, according to Jacques Delors, the President of the European Commission) proposals for "short-term credits and longer-term support for structural reform" in the Soviet Union.
(This was in spite of explicit links drawn by the West German Federal Chancellor Helmut Kohl in a pre-summit letter to his colleagues between the granting of such aid and a "constructive" Soviet approach to "anchoring a future united Germany within NATO and the EC" .
Kohl and the French President François Mitterrand had already appealed for emergency aid when they met in Assmannshausen on June 22, and on the same day West Germany announced that it had agreed to guarantee a DM5,000 million (approximately US$2,980 million) loan to the Soviet Union.)
The summit called on the forthcoming Paris summit of member states of the Conference on Security and Co-operation in Europe (CSCE), proposed for Nov. 19, 1990, to establish a common position on future security arrangements, economic co-operation and democratic consolidation in Europe.
The summit acknowledged the recent important changes in Southern Africa, notably the independence of Namibia, peace talks with UNITA in Angola and the release of Nelson Mandela and the implementation of reforms in South Africa.
Stating that the objective of the EC member states was the complete and immediate dismantling of the apartheid system by peaceful means, the summit expressed willingness to consider a gradual relaxation of sanctions against South Africa when there was further clear evidence of change.
(Ireland and Denmark were particularly opposed to lifting sanctions without profound and irreversible reforms, while the United Kingdom and Portugal wished them to be relaxed and certain other countries supported a partial relaxation.)
On the Middle East, the summit appealed for progress towards a settlement of the Arab-Israel conflict and deplored the lack of respect for human rights in the Israeli-occupied territories.
The mandate of Delors was renewed for 1991-92.
Major's proposals on EMU
In a speech in London on June 20 John Major, the UK Chancellor of the Exchequer, set out a gradualist alternative to the Delors plan for economic and monetary union [see p. 36598], envisaging the introduction of the "hard ecu" , a new parallel Eurocurrency in its own right.
Major's proposals, based on a paper presented in May by the British Invisible Exports Council, were designed to apply to the medium-term future, after completion of Stage 1 of the Delors plan.
The UK had rejected proposals for subsequent stages culminating in a single EC currency and a joint central bank, Prime Minister Margaret Thatcher having stated in interview on June 18 that the decision on a single currency was "not for our generation to take" .
Noting that the EC central bank proposed by Delors would not be accountable to elected governments, Major proposed instead to build on to Stage 1 further steps to promote convergence of economic performance, low inflation and stable exchange rates by building up the existing EC currency, the ECU.
As a "first practical step" the use of the existing ECU would be encouraged by the issue of ECU banknotes for general circulation in the EC, which could provide a "natural currency" for tourists and business travellers.
This would require the creation of a European monetary fund (EMF) to act as a currency board and to provide ECUs on demand in exchange for EC currencies while avoiding increasing the EC's overall supply of money.
At this stage the EMF would play no role in setting interest rates.
As a further stage, Major proposed the creation of a new "hard ecu" whereby the ECU would no longer be defined as a basket of currencies but would become a genuine international currency in its own right; managed by the EMF, the hard ecu would (inside the ERM) stay within its margins and at realignments would never devalue against other EC currencies.
The EMF would issue hard ecu deposits or notes in exchange for national currencies and set interest rates on hard ecu, initially on the interest bearing deposits it took, largely from commercial banks, and later "by the normal central banking techniques, namely through the creation of money market shortages which would then be relieved at the chosen interest rate" .
Effective safeguards could be built in to prevent the inflationary dangers inherent in parallel currency systems, particularly in that the central banks of all member states would be obliged to repurchase their own currencies from the EMF for hard currencies.
Official linkage of Belgian franc and D-Mark
The Belgian Prime Minister Wilfried Martens announced on June 16 that the government had officially tied the franc to the D-Mark, formalizing the practice it had followed for the past four years.
The Delors plan allowed for the permanent fixation of parities in Stage 2 of EMU.
Conference on future of European Parliament
A delegation of European MPs joined the Council of (Foreign) Ministers and the European Commission in Strasbourg on May 17 for a preparatory inter-institutional conference on the role of the European Parliament in the context of political, economic and monetary integration.
Addressing MEPs on the eve of the conference, Kohl said that steps must be taken to strengthen the powers of the EP before the next elections in 1994, and that further national rights should only be relinquished to European institutions "if there exists a clear parliamentary control at European level" .
Reforms put to the meeting, proposing co-decision by the parliament, the right of legislative initiative, and the parliamentary election of the President of the Commission, were particularly strongly supported by West Germany but were opposed by France or Ireland [see also p. 37133].
MIDDLE EAST — ARAB WORLD
IRAN
Earthquake
North-western Iran was hit at 2.50 a.m. local time on June 21 by a major earthquake, measuring between 7.3 and 7.7 on the Richter scale, with its epicentre about 190 km north-west of Tehran under the Caspian Sea.
A further severe tremor followed 12 hours later in the same area (measuring 6.5) and others on June 24 around Rasht (5.7), together with numerous other aftershocks and tremors on June 24-25 including one in the Farsan region of southern Iran on June 24 (4.9).
The first shock was felt in the capital, Tehran, and in Baku in Soviet Azerbaijan.
President Hashemi Rafsanjani, who declared three days of national mourning, in early July announced that the death toll was between 35,000 and 36,000; this compared with a figure of 40,000 bodies so far recovered, given by the Red Crescent (the Moslem equivalent of the Red Cross) on June 27, and much higher estimates initially.
Relief officials in Tehran said that 60,000 had been injured, and hundreds of thousands were believed to have been left homeless.
The areas worst affected by the minute-long earthquake and its aftershocks were the provinces of Gilan and Zanjan; all of Gilan's coastline was affected, and more than half the total casualties were in Zanjan, notably in Roudbar (6,000 dead and all buildings destroyed).
The towns of Binab and Abhor were completely destroyed.
Rescue operations were hampered by the mountainous terrain.
In some villages there were no survivors.
Badly affected towns included Rasht (Gilan's provincial capital 240 km north-west of Tehran), Manjil, Qazvin, Tarom-e Oleya and the Kurdish town of Sanandaj.
An immediate response was co-ordinated by the Red Crescent working with the Iranian government, which launched its own $14,000,000 relief effort in the worst affected areas.
The International Committee of the Red Cross (ICRC) reported from Geneva on June 22 that the government needed antibiotics, tents and blankets, trucks and bulldozers.
However, the ICRC also reported that Iran would not accept doctors, technicians or other professionals (with which it was well equipped as the result of its war with Iraq), sniffer dogs or blood plasma (on religious grounds), or satellite communications equipment; it also insisted that food must conform to Islamic rules, and that those delivering the aid would be granted 24-hour visas only.
The Iranian authorities said on June 22 that help would be welcome from any source except South Africa and Israel, and on June 24 the Foreign Ministry confirmed that acceptable sources included the United States.
However, US relief workers who flew into Tehran on June 25 with medical supplies and food were reported to have been prevented from going to the affected provinces, while Kayhan, one of Iran's largest-circulation newspapers, accused the USA of being mean with its aid and of hoping to reap diplomatic benefits by offering "one or two million dollars" .
Many countries which had broken off diplomatic relations with Iran sent messages of condolence and aid consignments, including the United Kingdom (whose first relief aircraft flew in on June 23), Saudi Arabia and even Iraq.
The European Commission promised aid to the value of $2,400,000.
President Rafsanjani on July 2 sent messages of thanks to about 100 governments and organizations, excluding, however, the United States, the UK, Iraq and Saudi Arabia.
AFRICA
SOUTH AFRICA
Partial lifting of state of emergency
President F. W. de Klerk announced on June 7 that the nationwide state of emergency, renewed annually since its imposition in June 1986 [see p. 34663], would not be renewed when it expired at midnight on June 8.
However, emergency measures would remain in Natal province, where fighting between rival black groups continued.
De Klerk insisted that the government's decision had "nothing to do with pressure from any quarter or with any wish to gain political capital" ; nonetheless, he said that the move removed one of the "stumbling blocks" in the way of negotiation with the black majority on constitutional reform.
One of the preconditions set by the African National Congress (ANC) for negotiation was the lifting of the state of emergency in its entirety.
De Klerk declared that the point had now been reached when the "remaining vestiges of violence could be countered with the ordinary laws of the land" , except in Natal, where the "destruction of human life and property" and what he described as the "exceptionally high level of intimidation which exists there" had "assumed shocking proportions" and needed to be countered "by the strongest means available" .
He announced an R814 million (approximately US$205 million) package to boost recruitment and morale in the security services.
Senior ANC figures criticized the retention of the state of emergency in Natal, describing de Klerk's announcement as a half-measure.
Even without a state of emergency the security forces under existing legislation, notably the Internal Security Act (1982), retained broad powers, including those of arrest and unlimited detention without charge.
Official figures showed that killings had increased under the state of emergency, from an overall total of about three per day in June 1986 to between six and 10 per day.
In the same speech to Parliament de Klerk criticized the ANC for delaying disclosure of its reaction to the report of the working party set up after the government-ANC talks at Cape Town in May [see pp. 37440-41], which attempted among other things to define a political prisoner.
De Klerk announced as "a gesture" towards the implementation of the report the release (implemented on June 9) of 48 people described by the ANC as political prisoners.
The ANC, by its definition, maintained that more than 3,000 activists remained imprisoned for politically motivated acts.
By-election
The ruling National Party (NP) on June 6 narrowly won a (whites-only) by-election to the House of Assembly in the suburban constituency of Umlazi (Natal), in what was seen as an indicator of white opinion regarding President F. W. de Klerk's reform measures.
The NP, which in September 1989 had won the seat with a majority of 2,835, saw this cut to 547 by a strong challenge from the pro-apartheid Conservative Party (CP), whose campaign played on confusion and fear among white voters at the extent and pace of de Klerk's reforms.
The turnout was 61.2 per cent of eligible voters.
Commentators calculated that without tactical voting by supporters of the liberal Democratic Party (which fell to third place after coming second in 1989), the NP would have lost.
The NP held 102 seats in the 178-seat House of Assembly.
Rightist militancy
The authorities confirmed on June 21 that investigations were under way in connection with an alleged coup plot planned by the neo-Nazi Afrikaner Resistance Movement (AWB) involving the assassination of, among others, de Klerk and five Cabinet ministers; acts of sabotage, including the destruction of power stations and poisoning of Soweto's drinking water, were to be carried out to create chaos and anarchy prior to the coup.
Mandela was to be assassinated by a sniper on his return from abroad in mid-July.
The allegations, made in the Afrikaans newspaper Vrye Weekblad, implicated the Civil Co-operation Bureau, the activities of which were currently under investigation by the Harms commission [see p. 37234].
In mid-June Piet Rudolph, the deputy leader of the extremist Boerestaat (Boer Homeland) Party (BP), wanted by the police in connection with an arms theft in April [see p. 37364], issued a call to arms to Afrikaners by means of a video recording sent to newspapers.
A new grouping, the Boere Weerstandsbeweging (BWB — a splinter group of the AWB formed on June 11 and describing itself as the armed wing of the BP), pledged solidarity with the BP in its aim of re-establishing former Boer republics.
Also in June, right-wing extremists were blamed for bomb attacks on (i) a war museum in Pretoria;(ii) the National Union of Mineworkers offices in Welkom [see also pp. 37440-41]; and (iii) two offices used by government ministers in the Transvaal.
On the 14th anniversary of the Soweto uprising of 1976 [see p. 27886-88]on June 16, the deaths of four black policemen and the shooting of a black youth by police near Johannesburg were reported in separate incidents.
AFRICA
ANGOLA
UNITA truce proposal — Inconclusive talks
The departure of government forces from Mavinga in May and June under a counterattack by the forces of the Uniao Naçional para a Indepéndencia Total de Angola (UNITA)[see p. 37558]appeared to indicate a strengthening in UNITA's military position and hence its bargaining position with the ruling Popular Movement for the Liberation of Angola (MPLA).
On June 7 a UNITA communiqué proposed a three-month truce starting from June 22, the first anniversary of the short-lived ceasefire agreement reached in Gbadolite (Zaïre)[see p. 36726].
The proposal was dismissed as a "diversion" by the government news agency.
After two days of talks held near Lisbon (Portugal), between MPLA-PT and UNITA representatives, UNITA on June 18 announced the withdrawal of its delegation "for consultations" ; the two sides reportedly agreed only that further talks would be held [see p. 37365 for April 1990 first official direct talks between the two sides].
In early June it was reported from the United States that the Bush administration was seeking congressional approval for an additional US$10-15,000,000 in "covert" military aid to UNITA, to supplement a $50,000,000 CIA assistance programme.
UNITA was now reinforcing its northern front, centred on the town of Beu in Uige province some 50 km from the border with Zaïre, its supplies augmented by the US military equipment which was flown in by Hercules transport aircraft via Zaïre.
Meanwhile some 2,600,000 people in the central and southern provinces were suffering from the effects of a 60 per cent fall in agricultural production attributed to drought and conflict.
The UNITA leader, Jonas Savimbi, appealed for the first time for the creation of "peace corridors" to allow emergency relief to people in areas controlled by UNITA.
Government appointments
In a reshuffle on June 14 (i) Aguinaldo Jaime replaced Augusto Teixeira de Matos as Minister of Finance;(ii) Boavista da Silva Cardoso was appointed to the new portfolio of Information; and (iii) José de Franca Dias Van Dúnem was appointed Minister of Planning in place of António Henriques da Silva.
On June 18 (i) Lt.-Col. Antonio Francisco de Andrade was appointed Deputy Minister for Armaments and Military Technology; and (ii) Pedro da Cunha Neto replaced Antonio da Silva Inacio as governor of the Central Bank; the deputy governor was also replaced.
AFRICA
ZAMBIA
Coup attempt following protests
An increase of over 100 per cent in the price of maize meal on June 19, as part of an economic recovery programme [see pp. 37142-43; 37559], provoked widespread discontent which culminated in violence after a demonstration by some 2,000 students in Lusaka on June 25.
Marching on State House, the students called for the restoration of the price subsidy, the resignation of President Kenneth Kaunda, and an end to the single-party political system.
Whereas similar protests in December 1986 (which had led to the eventual abandonment of a programme backed by the International Monetary Fumd (IMF)— see p. 34923) had focused only on economic grievances, discontent now extended to the role of Kaunda himself and to the entrenched position of the ruling United National Independence Party (UNIP) as the sole legal party.
Violence erupted after police shot a student during the demonstration and the protest spread to Lusaka's townships.
Shops were looted and vehicles stoned.
Troops were deployed and a curfew imposed as the unrest continued into the third day; at the end of this time 26 people were reported dead and over 500 had been arrested.
In a message to the nation on June 28 Kaunda insisted that the economic reforms would go ahead, and asserted that he crack down on rioters.
In a pre-dawn raid on June 29 troops stormed the university campus; 34 campus residents were detained and about 1,000 were sent away to the provinces.
Later that day Kaunda blamed the rioting on advocates of a multiparty system, but announced that a referendum on the adoption of a multiparty system would be held on Oct. 17 [for agreement to hold such a referendum see p. 37446].
Broadcast announcement of coup
Early on June 30 a small group of Army officers led by Lt. Mwamba Luchembe succeeded in broadcasting at regular intervals over 90 minutes a message on national radio saying that the Army had taken over in response to the food price rises.
During this time people briefly took to the streets in Lusaka and in the provincial towns of Mufulira, Ndola and Kitwe, before Luchembe was arrested by troops loyal to the government.
His message was denounced by the UNIP secretary-general Alexander Grey Zulu as "the work of one indisciplined soldier" who had "no friends or supporters in what he announced" .
The popular response to Luchembe's broadcasts, however, was thought to have been a severe personal blow to Kaunda, the "father of the nation" .
Reshuffle of security posts
On July 1 the Army Commander Lt.-Gen.
Gary Kalenge was replaced by his deputy Maj.-Gen.
Francis Sibanda; Lt.-Gen.
Hanniah Lungu, hitherto Air Force Commander, was appointed Minister of Defence, succeeding Frederick Hapunda, who advocated a pluralist democracy and who had been dismissed on June 7, officially for being "ineffective" in carrying out his duties.
At the same time the Inspector-General and Commissioner of Police were both dismissed, as was Axon Soko from the party's central committee, on which he chaired the economics and finance committee.
AFRICA
COTE D'IVOIRE
Military appointments
Col. Robert Guei, hitherto commanding officer of Korhogo region, was appointed Chief of General Staff of the Armed Forces on June 7, replacing Gen. Félix Ory.
Ory and his deputy, Gen. Gustave Houphouët Koassi, were assigned to other unspecified duties.
French-trained Col. Guei had also been chief of the national fire brigade.
The change was thought to be a direct consequence of the protest action taken by conscripts in May.
AFRICA
CAMEROON
Party congress
President Paul Biya, in his address on June 29 at the congress of the sole legal party, the Cameroon People's Democratic Movement (Rassemblement démocratique du peuple camerounais — RDPC), hinted at a possible future adoption of a multiparty system when he declared that the party "must be prepared to face possible competition" .
He also announced liberal reforms including greater press freedom and the abolition of laws governing subversion.
Biya on June 30 was re-elected party leader [for previous congress, in 1985, see p. 34345]
Resignation of vice-president of RDPC
John Ngu Foncha, a former Vice-President, had on June 8 resigned as vice-president of the RDPC, protesting among other things at the shooting in May of six people at a pro-democracy demonstration in Bamenda.
AFRICA
FRANCE-AFRICA
16th Franco-African conference
The 16th Franco-African conference was held in the French resort of La Baule on June 20-21.
A total of 35 delegations attended, with 22 countries being represented by heads of state.
Notable absentees included President Doe of Liberia, currently threatened by a rebellion; President Houphouët-Boigny of Côte d'Ivoire, who was facing mounting dissent; and President Mobutu of Zaïre, who was dealing with a crisis over the alleged massacre of students at Lubumbashi.
Mauritania, still in dispute with Senegal, was not represented by its head of state, and there was no delegation from Nigeria, which had been represented in Casablanca in December 1988 [p. 36717]; however, President Yoweri Museveni of Uganda attended for the first time.
Many of the participating countries were in the throes of profound economic and social crises; at the same time popular dissatisfaction with entrenched regimes was becoming more vociferous.
The French government was being criticized in the French media for its traditionally paternalistic relationship with former colonies, with the implication that it was content to support repressive African regimes.
Meanwhile the effectiveness and cost of aid from France (the largest aid donor to Africa among industrialized countries) was being increasingly scrutinized.
In a speech outlining French policy towards Africa, President Mitterrand announced a reduction in the debt repayments which would be required from four middle-income countries — Cameroon, Congo, Côte d'Ivoire and Gabon.
These would now pay 5 per cent interest on loans from France's Caisse centrale de co-opération économique instead of an average of 10 per cent, thus reducing payments by some F250 million overall.
(The Financial Times of June 21 noted that these countries had in any case serviced only about 5 per cent of these debts in 1989/90.)
Mitterrand also said that French aid to the least developed countries, those with a national average annual income of less than US$500 per head, would henceforth be in the form of outright grants.
In future, however, France's contribution would be "more enthusiastic" towards countries where there was progress towards greater democracy.
This emphasis was reportedly welcomed by some participants, including the Presidents of Senegal and Benin, but greeted less favourably by others including Rwanda and Congo.
Mitterrand affirmed that, if requested, France would provide military assistance in response to an external threat, but not in internal conflicts, and would not "try to organize internal political changes by plot or conspiracy" .
AMERICAS
UNITED STATES
Primary elections
Democratic and Republican voters in nine states participated in primary elections on June 5 to select candidates for legislative and gubernatorial contests due in November 1990.
The results of these, and other primaries held during June, included important political breakthroughs for women and black candidates.
In California Dianne Feinstein became the first woman to win a major party gubernatorial nomination in the country's most populous state.
Feinstein, a former mayor of San Francisco, secured the Democratic nomination by coming from behind to defeat John Van der Kamp, the state's Attorney General, in an expensive and frequently ugly campaign.
Her victory meant that she would face the Republican nominee, Senator Pete Wilson, in what many predicted would be the most expensive gubernatorial election ever held.
The forthcoming contest was of importance not merely because of California's size and prestige, but also because the state was expected to gain another six or seven seats in the federal legislature as a result of the redistribution due to follow the 1990 census.
The governor's key role in the "redistricting" process — deciding precisely where the new electoral boundaries were to be drawn — offered the possibility of considerable political reward for the party which controlled the office.
A series of propositions also included on the California ballot papers included two attempts to increase the role of the Republican party in the redistricting, both of which were defeated.
A proposition to double the state's 9 cent per gallon petrol tax to increase expenditure on roads was accepted.
The vote was seen as of particular significance because in the late 1970s California had been the source of the political campaign to reduce taxes, a policy which achieved national application when former governor Ronald Reagan became President in 1981.
Harvey Gantt became the Democratic party's first black Senate nominee in North Carolina in the 20th century when he defeated Mike Easley by 57 to 43 per cent of the vote.
The victory of Gantt, a liberal who professed support for the right to abortion, and opposed the death penalty and high defence spending, meant that he would face Republican Jesse Helms, the right-wing conservative incumbent who, in his three terms in the Senate, had campaigned prominently against civil rights, federal spending and permissiveness.
In Iowa the state's House Speaker Don Avenson, an abortion-rights advocate, defeated an anti-abortionist colleague to secure the Democratic nomination for governor.
He was due to face the Republican incumbent, Terry E. Branstad, an opponent of abortion, in the November election.
In Montana Allen Kolstad won the Republican nomination to challenge Senator Max Baucus, the Democratic incumbent.
In New Mexico, former governor Bruce King and former state legislator Frank Bond secured the Democratic and Republican gubernatorial nominations respectively.
In Alabama Guy Hunt, who became the state's first Republican governor in 1986, secured his party's gubernatorial nomination; the initial contest for his Democratic opponent was inconclusive, but a run-off election on June 26 was won by Paul Hubbert.
There were also primary contests in South Dakota and Mississippi.
Incumbent Bill Bradley, an unsuccessful contender for the Democratic presidential nomination in 1988, was selected in New Jersey as his party's choice for the Senate.
Another leading Democrat widely perceived as a contender for the party's next presidential nomination, Governor Mario Cuomo of New York, had announced his intention on June 4 to run for a third term and was automatically nominated as his party's choice.
On June 13 Theo Mitchell became the first black politician to win a major party nomination for a statewide office in South Carolina when he secured the Democratic gubernatorial nomination with 59 per cent of the vote; Mitchell was to face Republican incumbent Carroll Campbell.
In Arkansas on the same day black Republican Kenneth Harris won 86 per cent of the vote to defeat self-styled "white supremacist" Ralph Forbes in a run-off for the Republican nomination for lieutenant-governor.
Forbes, an evangelist with the Sword of the Lord Good News Ministries, had surprised observers by winning 46 per cent of the vote in the May primary, only 5 per cent short of the simple majority required for nomination.
Presidential veto of Hatch Act revision
An amendment to the Hatch Act, which would have lifted many of the restrictions preventing federal workers from participating in partisan political activity, was vetoed on June 15 by President George Bush.
In exercising the 12th veto of his presidency, Bush stated that it was necessary to maintain the prohibitions of the Hatch Act in order "to preserve the impartial, evenhanded conduct of government business" , and to avoid exposing civil servants to "unstated but enormous pressure to participate in partisan political activity" .
The Hatch Act was passed in 1939 to prevent federal workers from being coerced into helping with the re-election campaign of President Franklin D. Roosevelt.
Since its inception, however, it had developed into a complex web of regulations which prevented civil servants from participating in most political activities.
The House had radically amended the bill in April 1990 by lifting almost all restrictions on off-duty political activity, but the version passed in the Senate — by 67 votes to 30 on May 10 — retained prohibitions against running for partisan political office or soliciting funds from the public.
The House of Representatives passed the Senate's version of the bill on June 12 by 334 votes to 87, an action characterized by William D. Ford (Dem., Michigan), chairman of the House post office and civil service committee, as the "political emancipation of 3,000,000 federal workers" .
The House responded to Bush's intervention by voting on June 20, by 327 votes to 93, to override the presidential veto, a margin which comfortably exceeded the requisite two-thirds majority.
The administration was successful in persuading three Republican senators to alter their stance on the bill, however, so that on June 21 the vote in the Senate was 65 to 35, or two votes below the required majority.
Bush thus maintained his record of never having had a veto overridden in Congress.
Supreme Court ruling against anti-flag-burning legislation — Failure of constitutional amendments
A new federal law prohibiting the destruction of the US flag was struck down by the Supreme Court on June 11.
The Flag Protection Act had been passed in October 1989 following a Supreme Court decision four months earlier which overturned a similar Texas statute.
In both cases the Court ruled by five to four that the prohibition of flag burning violated the Constitution's guarantee of freedom of speech.
In presenting the majority opinion, Justice William J. Brennan noted that the new statute had been framed to penalize all flag burning, regardless of motive, but contained "the same fundamental flaw" in that it suppressed expression with which the legislators disagreed.
Whilst Brennan accepted that "desecration of the flag is deeply offensive to many" , he emphasized that punishing such behaviour "dilutes the very freedom that makes this emblem so revered and so worth revering" .
A dissenting opinion, presented by Justice John Paul Stevens, adjudged that the government had the right to protect "the symbolic value of the flag" , and that the prohibition of flag burning did not interfere with the right of protesters to communicate their ideas.
The Court's decision re-ignited the campaign for a constitutional amendment to protect the flag, a process requiring approval by two-thirds of the House and of the Senate and ratification by 38 of the 50 state legislatures.
Whereas the Republican party was eager to exploit the issue in the run-up to the November congressional elections, leading Democrats sought to distance it from party considerations but promised to facilitate an early congressional vote on the subject of a constitutional amendment.
President George Bush, a leading advocate of such an amendment, stated on June 12 that flag burning "endangers the fabric of our country" and that "what the flag encapsulates is too sacred to be abused" .
The Speaker of the House of Representatives, Thomas S. Foley (Dem., Washington), stated his opposition to any amendment of the Bill of Rights, however, arguing that the issue of flag burning was not so important as to make it "worth tampering with the most important repository of personal liberty that any country has ever established in its history" .
Anti-flag-burning amendments to the Constitution were passed in both the House (on June 21) and the Senate (June 26) but each fell short of the two-thirds majority necessary for adoption.
After an emotional seven-hour debate the House amendment was approved by 254 votes to 177, with 95 Democrats and 159 Republicans voting for the measure and 160 Democrats and 17 Republicans voting against.
In the Senate the proposal was passed by 58 votes to 42, with 20 Democrats and 38 Republicans voting for and 35 Democrats and seven Republicans voting against.
Sentencing of Poindexter
Former White House National Security Adviser John M. Poindexter was sentenced to six months in prison on June 11.
The sentence followed Poindexter's conviction in a federal District Court on April 7 on all five felony counts (including obstructing and lying to Congress) arising from his role in the Iran-contra scandal [see pp. 37368-69].
The most senior member of the Reagan administration to be tried in connection with the Iran-contra case, Poindexter was also the first to receive a custodial sentence.
The six others to have been convicted had received fines and periods of probation and, in the case of Oliver North, a suspended prison sentence.
More serious charges originally brought against Poindexter were dropped after the Reagan and Bush administrations refused to release confidential documents requested by the prosecution.
In passing sentence Judge Harold H. Greene stated that any punishment other than imprisonment "would be tantamount to a statement that a scheme to lie and to obstruct Congress is of no great moment" .
Poindexter remained at liberty after sentence, however, pending an appeal against his conviction.
Opening of trial of Marion Barry
The trial of Marion Barry, the mayor of Washington, accused of cocaine possession and perjury, opened on June 4 with the lengthy process of jury selection.
The commencement of the trial ended a period of intense speculation that Barry would reach a plea bargain with the federal authorities.
Despite last-minute manoeuvring by both sides, no compromise could be found between the mayor's reported willingness to plead guilty to one or more of the 11 misdemeanour charges in return for a non-custodial sentence, and the US Attorney's Office's insistence that any plea bargain should include at least one of the three felony charges of lying to the grand jury.
The felonies would usually carry a prison sentence, which would rule Barry ineligible to remain in office.
Barry had been indicted on Feb. 15 on three felony and five misdemeanour charges after he had been arrested in a hotel room on Jan. 18, having been filmed smoking crack cocaine with a former lover, Hazel "Rasheeda" Moore.
Barry had been invited to the hotel by Moore who had agreed to co-operate with the authorities in their campaign to acquire evidence of the mayor's widely alleged use of illegal drugs.
Barry was indicted on a further six misdemeanour charges on May 10, five of which related to drug possession and one to conspiracy; the mayor pleaded not guilty to the fresh charges on May 15.
In an interview in The Washington Post published on May 30, Barry admitted having smoked crack but blamed the federal authorities for having led him on and accused them of having tried to "kill" him by allowing him to consume the illegal drug.
In what was widely interpreted as an attempt to influence pre-trial public opinion, Barry portrayed himself as a victim of harassment by the white establishment, but warned that the prosecution case would founder in the event of only "one juror saying" I'm not going to convict Marion Barry, I don't care what you say "" .
Whilst the process of jury selection was still under way, Barry made a television address on June 13 in which he announced that he would not stand for re-election for a fourth term in November 1990, but would serve the remainder of his current four-year term, due to expire on Jan. 2, 1991.
Barry stated that "stepping aside now is good for the city" , and denied suggestions that the move was aimed at eliciting sympathy from the jury.
The decision increased the degree of uncertainty surrounding the 1990 mayoral election, as none of the candidates for the Democratic primary, scheduled for the Sept. 11, had managed to establish a clear lead.
Jury selection was completed on June 18.
The final 18-strong panel — 12 jurors and six reserves — consisted of five whites and 13 blacks.
On June 19 prosecution counsel Richard Roberts and defence lawyer Kenneth Mundy made their opening statements.
Sentencing of Bensonhurst attackers — Opening of jogger rape trial
Joseph Fama and Keith Mondello, two white American-Italian teenagers convicted in May in connection with the 1989 murder of black youth Yusuf Hawkins, each received a heavy prison sentence at the Brooklyn Supreme Court, New York City, on June 11.
Fama, who had been found guilty of shooting Hawkins as he entered the predominantly white area of Bensonhurst, ostensibly to buy a used car, was sentenced to 33@2/3 years to life.
Mondello, who had been acquitted on murder and manslaughter charges but who admitted having incited a 30-strong mob to attack Hawkins, received 5@1/3 to 16 years in the form of four consecutive sentences for riot and other felony charges.
The severity of the sentences served to defuse the explosive ramifications of a case which had been portrayed by members of the black community as a latter-day lynching.
Black spectators stood and applauded as the sentences were imposed and Hawkins's father later described the prison terms as "a small joy for myself but a great victory for black people all over the city" .
The Rev. Al Sharpton, a black clergyman who had led several protest marches in connection with the case, stated that "we are proud to see a young man's life paid for with some measure of justice" .
Fama's lawyer complained that the length of his client's sentence was the direct result of the racial elements of the case.
Whilst the Bensonhurst sentences closed a chapter in one of New York City's most notorious racial crimes, a second was opened on June 13 with the start of the trial of three black youths, aged 15 and 16, who were accused of attempted murder, and of rape and sodomy arising from an attack upon a 29-year-old white female banker who was jogging in Central Park.
The three were alleged to have been part of a 30-strong gang which rampaged through the park on April 19, 1989, making a series of unprovoked attacks which culminated in the gang-rape of the jogger who was left unconscious with severe head injuries.
The crime received extensive media coverage, in part because of its ferocity and its racial overtones, but also because of its apparently random nature.
After their arrest the three accused made police statements in which they admitted to having gone "wilding" on the night in question, a term meaning the perpetration of motiveless assaults.
The confessions, which were expected to be challenged by the defence, provided the heart of the prosecution case, as the victim was unable to remember the attack or to identify her assailants and forensic tests were inconclusive.
The sensitive nature of the case was further inflamed by the woman's near-complete recovery — after an initial medical prognosis had suggested that she would remain brain-damaged for life — a development which led some members of the black community, including Rev. Sharpton, to suggest that aspects of the attack had been fabricated.
AMERICAS
LATIN AMERICA
US trade and debt plan
United States President George Bush announced on June 27 an "Enterprise for the Americas Initiative" for Latin America and the Caribbean, proposing (i) a new investment fund to promote free-market investment, free trade and privatization schemes to which the US government would donate US$100,000,000 and would ask West European countries and Japan to follow suit;(ii) the reduction of the region's US$12,000 million debt to the USA, on condition that debtor countries adopted International Monetary Fund (IMF) and World Bank approved economic reforms;(iii) Inter-American Development Bank (IDB) grants of up to US$300,000,000 to assist specific reforms to create free-market conditions conducive to foreign investment; and (iv) preferential trade benefits to countries which reduced trade barriers with the long-term aim of achieving a free trade zone across the American hemisphere.
Bush stated that prosperity depended on "trade not aid" and that the initiative was also intended to bolster the economic and political changes already taking place in the region.
Latin American governments welcomed the proposals.
AMERICAS
CENTRAL AMERICA
Eighth regional summit
The Presidents of Guatemala, El Salvador, Honduras, Nicaragua and Costa Rica (with the Panamanian President Guillermo Endara present as an observer) signed the Antigua Declaration at the close of their summit meeting held in Antigua, Guatemala, on June 15-17.
The Declaration welcomed the current peace initiatives in El Salvador and Guatemala [see pp. 37372; 37527], and the disbanding of the contra rebels in Nicaragua [see pp. 37370; 37527].
The five Presidents reiterated their commitment to the 1987 Esquipulas II or "Arias" peace agreement [see pp. 35440-42], and emphasized the need to respect human rights and to develop measures to protect the environment.
The main focus of the statement was on the need to guarantee peace through enhanced regional economic integration in order to achieve "a process at the national and regional level which permits an accelerated reconstruction and transformation of production and technology of the Central American countries as a base for the efficient and dynamic insertion of the region into the world market" .
To facilitate this aim the Presidents had signed an Economic Action Plan for Central America and agreed that discussions should proceed on the revival of the Central American Common Market.
The Presidents also appealed to the developed countries for more aid.
The United States Secretary of State James Baker, who arrived at the close of the summit, proposed that aid to the region could be modelled on the G-24 financing plan for Poland and Hungary agreed in December 1989 [see p. 37130], in which the US would share the burden for economic reconstruction with the European Communities, Canada and Japan.
AMERICAS
HONDURAS
Strike wave — Murder of opposition leaders
An estimated 5,000 public-sector health workers, taking action against government privatization plans, were joined on strike in late June by 8,500 banana workers, who came out both in solidarity with them as well as to demand a 60 per cent wage increase to offset the effects of the government's March austerity plan.
By June 29 a further solidarity strike had halted production at the country's only oil refinery.
A general strike of civil servants on May 4-10 had been supported by teachers, state agricultural workers and hospital workers and had reportedly closed 50 per cent of government offices.
The protest was held in opposition to government plans to dismiss 25,000 state employees in order to reduce fiscal spending by 42 per cent.
The murder on June 1 of Francisco Javier Bonilla, a well-known leader of the Institute of Social Services union (SITRAIHSS), and the June 3 killing of a student leader, Ramón Antonio Briceño, provoked accusations from church groups and union leaders that the government and security forces were involved in the systematic suppression of opposition.
AMERICAS
COSTA RICA
Austerity programme
An government austerity programme which went into effect on June 1 raised rates for public utilities by up to 30 per cent and planned for a further devaluation of the colón and a C6,000 million reduction in public spending (as at June 18 the official exchange rate was US$1.00=C88.8).
The price of fertilizers was expected to rise by 20 per cent and that of grain by between 21 and 27 per cent.
Union leaders announced that they would resist the plan, and employers forecast increased redundancies.
On June 7 the government announced that a letter of intent had been signed with the International Monetary Fund (IMF), clearing the way for talks about loans worth US$103,000,000 over the next two years.
Death of Figueres
José Figueres Ferrer died on June 8 at the age of 83.
Figueres had become President of a ruling junta (1948-49) after leading the Caribbean Legion of exiles in overthrowing the autocratic government of Rafael Calderón in the civil war of 1948.
Elected twice subsequently as President, for the terms 1953-58 and 1970-74, he was acknowledged as the founder of modern Costa Rica.
He abolished the Army, nationalized the banks, reformed taxes, and provided a social security system, to consolidate a social democratic tradition based on free elections and representative democracy.
AMERICAS
GUATEMALA
Peace accord
An agreement was signed on June 1 following three days of peace negotiations between 17 representatives of the Guatemalan National Revolutionary Unity guerrilla movement (URNG), members of the government-backed National Reconciliation Commission, and the leaders of nine opposition parties.
The talks, hosted by the UN and held in San Lorenzo de El Escorial, 50 km from the Spanish capital Madrid, were the first negotiations in three decades of conflict.
They were marked by an unexpected degree of mutual respect and by the URNG's acceptance of guarantees of future reforms, in place of its previous insistence that certain social problems had to be solved as a precondition to any agreement.
The accord allowed for (i) the ratification of the March 1990 Oslo accord to seek peace through political means [see p. 37372];(ii) the promotion of democracy via constitutional and judicial reforms in order to incorporate all political and social sectors in a society based on respect for the law and the independence of the state, and capable of providing for general welfare, social justice and independent economic development;(iii) the incorporation of the URNG into the main political process and its participation in a National Constituent Assembly to be convened by the political parties in 1991; and (iv) periodic meetings between the URNG and representatives of political parties to accelerate the achievement of the objectives of the peace process.
The URNG, although refusing to offer a total ceasefire, promised to halt attacks on communication links and economic targets for the period of the campaign for the presidential elections due to be held in November.
However, speculation remained that the Army distrusted the peace process, and that it believed that the URNG's motives were designed to buy time and international prestige while it regrouped its forces.
AMERICAS
NICARAGUA
Final disbanding of contras
On June 27 Israel Galeano, the "contra" military chief known as Commander Franklyn, and 100 of his soldiers handed in their weapons to UN forces in a formal act marking the end of 11 years of civil war.
President Violeta Chamorro was joined by the Roman Catholic Archbishop of Managua Cardinal Miguel Obando y Bravo to witness the disarming, which took place in San Pedro de Lóbago, 160 km east of the capital Managua.
Hours later UN forces received 72 Red Eye anti-aircraft missiles, the most important weaponry handed in to date.
On June 21 there had been reports that 200 Miskito Indians out of the estimated 2,000 belonging to the Yatama resistance movement had disbanded on the Atlantic coast.
An estimated 2,000 contras belonging to the Southern Front had demobilized on June 25, joining the 2,500 who had demobilized in El Almendro, 270 km south-east of Managua, on June 9.
The original deadline for demobilization had been June 10 [see p. 37450].
By June 22 UN military observers stated that 16,642 contras had been disbanded, the figure rising to an estimated 19,197 by June 26.
Many former rebels were expected to remain within two government development zones covering 25,000 sq km in the south region bordering the San Juan River, to be policed by 300 armed former contras.
Their resettlement was to be assisted by a US$47,000,000 aid package approved by the United States Congress.
Army reduction
On June 15 Chamorro announced that the Army would be reduced by 50 per cent to fewer than 41,000 soldiers by her 100th day in office and that military conscription would formally end on Dec. 7; further reductions would depend on the overall military balance in the region.
The (Sandinista) Chief of the Armed Forces Gen. Humberto Ortega stated that the demobilization was also conditional on US guarantees to respect the "integrity" of Central America.
AMERICAS
DOMINICA
Appointment of new Cabinet
Following the narrow victory of the Dominica Freedom Party (DFP) in the general election of May 28 [see pp. 37448-49], Eugenia Charles was sworn in for a third consecutive five-year term as Prime Minister and in early June announced sweeping changes to her Cabinet.
Opposition criticism of the new Cabinet focused upon its inclusion of two non-elected members: Dermott Southwell, a businessman, and Rupert Sorhaindo, former principal of a technical college.
Charles, who had been criticized as increasingly authoritarian during her 10 years in office, dismissed opposition complaints by claiming that "we have always realized that elections don't throw up the best people" .
* (Mary) Eugenia Charles Prime Minister; Finance; Defence *Brian Alleyne External Affairs Charles Maynard Agriculture; Trade; Industry; Tourism; Lands and Survey Alleyne Carbon Communications; Public Works and Road Construction; Housing *Henry George Community Development; Social Affairs *Heskeith Alexander Labour and Immigration **Rupert Sorhaindo Education **Allan Guye Health **Jenner Armour Attorney General **Dermott Southwell Minister Without Portfolio **Maynard Joseph Minister Without Portfolio *Altered portfolio.
**New appointment.
New Dominican Cabinet
The Prime Minister's decision to expand the Cabinet from seven to 11 members (five new appointments being made because of the retirement from politics of Ronan David, hitherto Minister of Health, Water and Sewage) was interpreted by some observers as an attempt to reinforce the loyalty of her 10 DFP parliamentary colleagues as, with an overall majority of only one, the ruling party was particularly vulnerable to opposition-induced defection.
AMERICAS
PERU
Presidential elections
Alberto Keinya Fujimori, 51, of Change 90 (Cambio 90) defeated Mario Vargas Llosa, 54, of the Democratic Front (FREDEMO) in the second round of the presidential elections, held on June 10.
In a reportedly high turnout of the 10,000,000 electorate, Fujimori received 4,522,463 votes (56.53 per cent).
Vargas Llosa, who had led on the first round on April 8 [see p. 37371], now won only 2,713,442 (33.92 per cent).
There were 627,552 (7.84 per cent) blank and spoiled votes, and 136,421 (1.7 per cent ) officially recorded abstentions.
Attempting to disrupt the election, the Maoist Shining Path (Sendero Luminoso) guerrillas called "armed strikes" which were, however, only partially observed in the Andean highlands.
Bomb attacks disrupted electricity supplies in several cities and the capital, Lima, but 350,000 police and military personnel had been mobilized nationally to ensure security.
The result accurately reflected the election campaign, which had sharply polarized the country on political, racial and class lines, despite the similarity, if not the style of presentation, of both candidates' short-term economic adjustment policies.
The middle classes, the business community and the traditional conservative parties endorsed Vargas Llosa's "economic shock" programme to solve the current economic crisis.
This was rejected by organized labour and, significantly, by the predominantly mixed races making up the bulk of the poor and underprivileged in cities, towns and in Andean Indian communities.
Here there was support for Fujimori, based on the belief that his Japanese immigrant origins made him more sympathetic.
Fujimori also attracted the votes given to the ruling APRA and other left-wing parties in the first round.
Fujimori, a Catholic himself, nevertheless received the support of the country's growing evangelical movement (especially strong in Andean regions).
The attempt by Lima's Roman Catholic hierarchy to mobilize Catholic opinion against him, was seen to have failed when he won in Lima and in Arequipa, the country's second largest city and Vargas Llosa's birthplace.
Fujimori, due to take office on July 28, immediately called for a government of national unity.
Raid on guerrilla headquarters
Police on June 4 raided six "safe houses" used by Sendero Luminoso in Lima, including the headquarters recently used by Sendero leader Abimael Guzmán Renoso.
The raids resulted in the arrest of 35 alleged guerrillas, and the seizure of plans for past and future Sendero missions and the identity cards of 176 rebels.
The outgoing President, Alan García Pérez, described the raid as "the greatest blow against the guerillas in 10 years" .
AMERICAS
BRAZIL
Opposition to government economic measures
The Supreme Court on June 6 ruled unconstitutional the government's emergency legislation banning independent labour tribunals from awarding inflationary wage increases.
The Congress had rejected the legislation on May 31, having already defeated in mid-May the government's attempt to introduce emergency measures to raise taxes on financial transactions (to restrict the expansion of credit) and to cut the wages of public employees covered by statutory job security.
The government had insisted that the measures were crucial to the success of its anti-inflationary policy launched in March [see pp. 37312-13].
Inflation had risen from 3.2 per cent in April to 7.8 per cent in May and was expected to reach 10 per cent in June.
The freeze on private bank deposits [ibid.]was also judged a failure, with some estimates putting the "leakage" into the economy as high as US$47,000 million.
During June there was increasing labour unrest.
Strikes, many of them "indefinite" , were staged for wage increases and against redundancies by public-sector workers, private bank employees, Sao Paulo metal workers, dockers at all major ports and workers at power plants.
Employees at the state oil company PETROBRAS began an all-out strike on June 13 in protest over plans to dismiss 13,000 workers.
The government had announced on May 19 a proposal to dismiss 360,000 state employees by June 18, but this proposal was not put into force as joint talks between government and union leaders broke down.
Unions also opposed a further government emergency measure of June 26, creating a new wage indexing mechanism, which could only be used twice in a year and which forbade employers to pass on increased wage costs to consumers through higher prices.
On June 26 the government announced that import barriers would be removed by July 1, that tariffs would be reduced from 105 per cent to an average of 20 per cent and that subsidies to inefficient industries would be cut.
Amnesty report
A report by the human rights organization Amnesty International prepared over the previous five years, and released on June 19, concluded that government inaction had allowed the proliferation of death squads run by prison officers and off-duty policemen.
The report also stated that physical and psychological torture was routinely used against those in police custody and in prison.
The victims of the death squads were usually the poor and destitute, most of whom were abandoned street children and petty criminals.
In the overcrowded prisons, Amnesty claimed that 25 prisoners had been deliberately killed by the police and prison guards in 1989.
Amnesty called on the government to translate into reality its constitutional obligations to protect human rights.
Plan to protect Amazon
To coincide with world environment day, the government announced Operation Amazonia on June 5 as the first stage in a drive to combat the destruction of the rainforest.
The four-month operation aimed to reduce the area of forest cleared in 1990 to nearly 78,000 sq km, compared with double that area of forest cleared in 1989.
It was to involve 300 conservation officers of the state environmental agency IBAMA, supported by the Army's Amazon command and by military helicopters, the government having reportedly won the co-operation of the Army by linking environmental protection with ant-drug operations.
AMERICAS
CHILE
Discovery of mass graves
On June 7 the Supreme Court ordered a judicial inquiry into the deaths of 18 left-wing political prisoners whose bodies had been discovered in a mass grave in Pisagua, 1,700 km north of Santiago (the capital), on June 5.
The site of the grave in the Atacama desert had ensured the preservation of the corpses which were readily identified.
The bodies of two suspected drug traffickers were also unearthed.
On June 16 police used water cannon and tear gas against demonstrators in Santiago demanding the resignation of Gen. Augusto Pinochet Ugarte, the former President and still Army Chief of Staff, who, they claimed, was responsible for the killings.
A further mass grave containing the bodies of 18 peasant leaders was discovered in Chihuio near the southern city of Valdivia on June 23.
In March three bodies of members of the Communist Party (PCCh) had been discovered on land formerly owned by the army at La Colina near Santiago.
The Pisagua dead, 14 of whom were reinterred in a joint funeral attended by thousands of people on June 16, had been bound and shot.
An extensive search was started in expectation that more bodies would be discovered since at Pisagua there had been a concentration camp for between 1,500-2,000 prisoners following the military coup of September 1973.
On June 28 the National Commission for Truth and Reconciliation, established by the coalition government of President Patricio Aylwin Azócar to investigate human rights abuses, closed the first stage of its registration of those disappeared and dead, having received evidence of an estimated 2,000 cases.
It was reported on June 17 that the Army had issued a communiqué signed by Pinochet and 160 generals and colonels justifying the repression of 1973 as an "act of war" .
Pinochet also claimed no direct knowledge of events at Pisagua and there were widespread fears that the case would be handed over to military jurisdiction.
However, human rights groups were reported to be confident that the evidence supplied by the mass graves would prove that the Army had committed "crimes against humanity" which were not covered by the 1978 amnesty law which pardoned officers accused of human rights violations.
Aylwin, reflecting demands from the Catholic church and from left- and right-wing politicians for a full inquiry, stated on June 21 that, if the courts determined individual responsibilities for human rights abuses, one of the consequences would be "the retirement of those guilty of such responsibilities" .
AMERICAS
ECUADOR
Congressional elections
Elections were held on June 17 to choose 60 provincially elected members for a four-year term in the 72-member unicameral National Congress.
Last held in June 1986, these elections were effectively mid-term; the rest of the Congress members, the 12 elected on national lists concurrently with presidential elections in 1988, were not due for re-election until 1992.
The voting reportedly passed off peacefully and was marked by apathy among the electorate of 5,200,000.
The ruling social democratic Democratic Left (ID) suffered significant losses and retained only 11 seats, and its Christian Democratic allies in government, the People's Democracy party (DP), won only three, whereas the main right-wing opposition Social Christian Party (PSC) gained ground, winning 17 seats.
Of the remaining seats (with one result from Galapagos not yet known), the populist Ecuadorean Roldosista Party (PRE) won nine, the Socialist Party (PSE) seven, the centre-left Concentration of Popular Forces (CFP) three, the Liberal Radical Party (PLR) three and the Conservative Party (PCE) two.
Parties winning one seat each were the Left Broad Front (FADI), the Democratic Popular Movement, the Alfarista Radical Front (FRA) and the Ecuadorean Popular Revolutionary Alliance (APRE).
AMERICAS
ARGENTINA
Debt-equity agreement
On June 28 the government announced Latin America's largest debt-for-equity transaction when it completed the sale of 60 per cent of the state-owned telecommunications company Empresa Nacional de Telecommunicaciones (Entel).
Under the sale two new companies were created.
For Entel South, the Spanish company Telefónica SA paid US$114 million in cash and bought back on Argentina's behalf US$2,18O million of the country's foreign debt, with added interest of US$540,000,000.
For Entel North, Bell Atlantic of the United States paid US$100,000,000 in cash and bought back US$1,860 million of debt, with added interest of US$372,000,000.
The agreement attracted little of the expected political controversy or opposition from trade unions, and paved the way for the privatization of the state airline Aerolíneas Argentinas, for which bidding was due to open on July 6.
The privatization of up to 40 state-owned companies was at the centre of the governments economic recovery plan.
AMERICAS
COLOMBIA
New military commanders
President-elect César Gaviria Trujillo who was due to take office on Aug. 7, made new military appointments on June 15 in what was seen as a move to strengthen his hand in the fight against the Medellín drug cartel.
Gen. Eduardo Rocca was named as Army Commander, Vice Adml.
Carlos Enrique Espina Cubillo as Chief of General Staff, Gen. Farouk Yanine as Deputy Army Commander, and Gen. Jaime Forero Quinoñez as Air Force Commander.
Adml.
Edgar Garay was confirmed as Navy Commander and Gen. Oscar Botero Restrepo retained his post as Defence Minister.
On June 19 the Deputy Commander of Police, Carlos Arturo Casadiego, was ordered to resign, and on June 21 the Medellín police commander, Brig. -Gen.
Humberto Camero Maldonado was transferred amid rumours that the city's entire 4,000-strong police force would be replaced to avoid further infiltration by the drug traffickers.
Maldonado was replaced by Col. Jorge Ernesto Ferrero Echeverry.
AMERICAS
DOMINICAN REPUBLIC
Election recount
On June 11 the Central Electoral Board announced that the incumbent President, Joaquín Balaguer, had won a narrow victory in the May 16 presidential election [see p. 37448].
His rival Juan Bosch of the Dominican Liberation Party (PLD), whose accusations of electoral fraud had forced a recount, said on June 13 that there would be "a popular explosion of anger" if the Electoral Board proclaimed Balaguer the winner.
According to the June 11 figures, Balaguer, the candidate of the Social Christian Reformist Party (PRSC), had won 678,268 votes (35.7 per cent of votes cast), or 25,145 votes more than Bosch, whose total was recorded as 653,123 votes (34.4 per cent).
ASIA — PACIFIC
SRI LANKA
Serious fighting in North-Eastern Province
An attack by guerrillas of the Liberation Tigers of Tamil Eelam (LTTE, the main Tamil separatist group) on Army and police targets in eastern Sri Lanka in mid-June quickly escalated into a full-scale military contest.
The attack, the first major violation of a ceasefire signed by the LTTE and government security forces in June 1989 [see p. 36735], dashed hopes that a breakthrough had been achieved in the search for a peaceful settlement to the conflict.
On June 1 President Ranasinghe Premadasa had held talks with LTTE leaders in Colombo, and on June 6 the government conceded a key LTTE demand, announcing that it would dissolve the North-Eastern Provincial Council (elected in late 1988, when the province was under the control of Indian troops, and in the face of an LTTE election boycott — see p. 37007) and hold fresh elections.
Following the withdrawal of Indian forces in late March 1990 the Council had stopped functioning, and most of the deputies, from two pro-Indian Tamil militia groups, had fled to India.
As a final gesture the Council had passed a resolution declaring independence for the North-East [see p. 37316].
During the early June talks, the LTTE also called for the repeal of the Sixth Amendment of the Constitution which had been passed in August 1983 and obliged all MPs to take an oath forswearing separatist aspirations [see p. 32632].
Hostilities broke out on June 11 when LTTE guerrillas launched a series of attacks on police stations throughout the east.
At the same time an Army convoy was attacked in Amparai district and 10 soldiers were killed.
According to the LTTE the offensive was launched after police had attacked a group of Tigers in Batticaloa early on June 11, a claim denied by the government.
The LTTE offensive appeared to take the government by surprise, and over 20 police stations were quickly taken over by the LTTE.
Approximately 600 policemen, mostly Tamils, were apparently abducted and according to unconfirmed reports over 100 of them were massacred in Amparai district on June 12.
The Justice Minister, A. C. S. Hameed, attempted to negotiate a ceasefire with the LTTE on June 12, but the fighting intensified the following day.
Attacks were launched on military camps in the east and the north while the Army began to deploy reinforcements in the troubled areas.
Hameed attempted to negotiate another ceasefire on June 15; the next day was relatively peaceful, but fresh fighting broke out on June 17.
The situation deteriorated on June 18 when Ranjan Wijeratne, the Plantation Industries Minister and Minister of State for Defence, told Parliament that "from now on it is all-out war" .
The Army took to the offensive after Wijeratne's announcement, and by June 22 the government claimed to have driven the LTTE from the east, including their stronghold in Batticaloa town.
The Army and the police remained under intense pressure in the Jaffna peninsula where many camps and stations were under siege.
Towards the end of the month the military launched a series of air attacks on LTTE positions in Jaffna town itself and elsewhere on the peninsula.
According to LTTE reports, the air assaults killed large numbers of civilians and caused extensive damage to the town's infrastructure.
In Colombo on June 27 the government detained hundreds of Tamils after receiving reports that LTTE hit-squads had entered the city.
Meanwhile thousands of Sinhalese youths responded to radio appeals and started enlisting in the Army.
By the end of June as many as 1,000 people had died in the fighting and thousands of others had been made homeless.
India, which had removed the final contingent of Indian Peace-Keeping Force (IPKF) troops from Sri Lanka in March 1990 [see p. 37316], expressed concern for the plight of Tamil civilians but made it clear that it would not permit its territory to be used to support militant activity.
ASIA — PACIFIC
PAKISTAN
Sind crisis — Budget
Stand-off between Army and Bhutto over Sind
The outbreak of serious ethnic violence in Sind in late May 1990 [see pp. 37452-53]brought about a deterioration in relations between the central government and the Army in June.
The Army had been deployed in Sind in late May to help quell the tension between ethnic Sindhis and Muhajirs which had left some 300 people dead.
The Prime Minister and Pakistan People's Party (PPP) leader Benazir Bhutto had ordered the Army to assist Sind's PPP government in suppressing the violence.
However, by early June it was clear that the Army was hesitant, claiming that it was functioning without full constitutional cover.
Senior Army personnel pressed Bhutto to suspend the state's civil judicial system and to establish military courts to ensure an unbiased anti-terrorist operation (the implication being that the state government was being unduly harsh on Muhajirs).
Bhutto refused the Army's demands, which some PPP politicians claimed would amount to an undeclared resort to martial law.
The impasse between the Army and Bhutto increased speculation that President Ghulam Ishaq Khan, who was thought to be sympathetic to the Army's demands, might dismiss the central and provincial governments and call a fresh general election.
1990-91 budget
On June 7 Ehsanul Haq Piracha, Minister of State for Finance, presented the 1990-91 budget to the National Assembly [see p. 36736 for details of 1989-90 budget].
Opposition MPs staged a walkout during the budget session after accusing Piracha of corruption.
Expenditure for 1990-91 was estimated at Rs230,200 million, 7 per cent higher than revised figures for 1989-90, with an estimated budget deficit of Rs66,400 million (US$1.00=Rs21.4709 as at June 11, 1990).
Revenue for 1990-91 was estimated at Rs141,200 million and would be partly financed by an increase in tax revenues of 8.4 per cent.
As in the previous budget, defence and debt servicing accounted for a large percentage of planned current expenditure.
Increased tension with India over Kashmir [see pp. 37377-78; 37451-52]ensured that the defence budget was increased to Rs63,300 million in 1990-91 after it had been effectively frozen during the previous budget period.
Debt servicing rose from Rs63,300 million to Rs68,400 million.
ASIA — PACIFIC
INDIA
Unrest in Kashmir and Punjab — New government in Nagaland
Measures to reduce border tension
India and Pakistan each withdrew troops from their common border in early June in an attempt to defuse tension caused by the unrest in Kashmir.
The Indian Defence Ministry announced on June 1 that the Army had made a unilateral withdrawal of some of its field formations from the Mahajan range in Punjab.
The next day, Pakistan announced that it would reciprocate India's gesture.
The Indian Prime Minister, V. P. Singh, stated in an interview on June 3 that a set of new proposals had been sent to Pakistan aimed at reducing the risk of war over Kashmir.
The contents of the Indian proposals were not made public.
A Pakistan Foreign Office spokesperson stated on June 4 that the Indian proposals were under serious consideration, "notwithstanding the fact that [they]do not address the central issues which are the root cause of the current tension" .
Two days later the Pakistan government indicated to Indian diplomats in Islamabad that it favoured "a commencement of talks on these proposals" .
An Indian External Affairs Ministry official said on June 18 that India had agreed to a meeting of Indian and Pakistani foreign secretaries in the first half of July to discuss reducing tension on the border.
Launch of first rebel rocket attack in Srinagar
Guerrillas in Kashmir used rockets for the first time on June 19, in an attack on two waterfront hotels in Srinagar which were being used as barracks by Indian security forces.
At least four policemen were killed in the attack and nine others were wounded.
According to a report in the Guardian of June 20 the attack was probably carried out in retaliation for the killing by security forces on June 18 of Mohammed Abdullah Bangroo, field commander of the Hizbul-Mujahidin, one of the largest guerrilla groups operating in Kashmir.
Formation of "provisional government" by Kashmiri rebels
Amanullah Khan, chair of the Kashmir Liberation Front (KLF), announced on June 18 that a 24-member "provisional government" had been established to represent Kashmiris living under Indian occupation.
Khan made the announcement from Muzaffarabad, capital of Azad Kashmir (the northern Pakistani-controlled sector).
The "government" was dominated by KLF members, but also included Sayyed Ali Shah Gilani, leader of the Jamaat-i-Islami.
Appointment of new Governor in Punjab — Bombings and killings
Nirmal Mukarji resigned as Governor of Punjab on June 2 after holding the post for less than six months [see p. 37124 for Mukarji's appointment].
Virendra Verma, a Janata Dal member of the Rajya Sabha, was sworn in as the new Governor on June 14.
Commenting on the appointment, The Hindu of June 8 stated that Verma assumed charge at a critical time "when terrorist activity has increased as compared to last year, and the law and order machinery appears demoralized" .
Increased tension and violence in Punjab marked the sixth anniversary of the Army assault on the Golden Temple in Amritsar on June 6, 1984 [see p. 33223].
Bombs exploded in Amritsar and Patiala on June 4, killing eight people and injuring 35 others.
The following day police shot dead 13 "militants" in a state-wide security operation; a further 22 people were killed in separatist-related incidents.
Another 14 people, including three "militants" and three security officials, were killed on June 7.
New government in Nagaland
Nagaland's United Legislature Front (ULF) government led by K. L. Chisi collapsed on June 13 after less than a month in office [see p. 37452 for formation of ULF government from a coalition of Congress (I) defectors and the Nagaland People's Council — NPC].
The crisis arose when 12 NPC members withdrew support from Chisi and formed a Joint Legislature Party (JLP) with the 24 Congress (I) members.
A JLP government headed by Vamuzo of the NPC was sworn in on June 19.
I. K. Sema of the Congress (I) was appointed as Deputy Chief Minister.
ASIA — PACIFIC
NEPAL-INDIA
Restoration of trade and transit treaties
India's 15-month partial economic blockade of Nepal ended in June after India agreed to restore trade and transit concessions withdrawn in March 1989 [see pp. 37009; 37357].
The announcement was made on June 10 at the end of a three-day visit to India by the Nepalese Prime Minister, Krishna Prasad Bhattarai (appointed in April — see p. 37362).
The first of 13 dormant trade/transit points along the Indo-Nepali border was ceremonially reopened by Bhattarai on June 18.
The partial blockade had caused severe economic hardship in Nepal, including shortages of food, fuel and medicine, since virtually all external trade was transported over the land border with India.
The roots of the trade and transit dispute lay in the Nepalese decision to purchase weaponry from China in 1988, a move which seriously offended India's security perceptions.
Before leaving for New Delhi, Bhattarai announced on June 6 that the Nepal government had deferred indefinitely the importation of a final consignment of Chinese weaponry "as a gesture of goodwill and to accommodate Indian susceptibilities on this issue" .
During their talks, Bhattarai assured his Indian counterpart V. P. Singh that Nepal would in future consult India on important defence-related matters.
ASIA — PACIFIC
CHINA
Tiananmen Square anniversary — Release of Fang Lizhi
Anniversary of Tiananmen Square massacre
The first anniversary of the Tiananmen Square massacre on June 3-4, 1989 [see pp. 36720-22], passed without any major incidents, although the actions of the Chinese authorities during May and June demonstrated their evident apprehension over a possible resurgence of pro-democracy agitation.
In many other parts of the world, including Hong Kong, demonstrations to mark the anniversary took place on June 4.
Around the time of the anniversary, the Chinese authorities sought to demonstrate what Prime Minister Li Peng described on June 7 as a more lenient policy towards those involved in the "turbulence" , releasing from detention a number of pro-democracy activists arrested in the aftermath of the June 1989 massacre.
On May 10 and June 6, groups of 211 and 97 detainees respectively were released from prison [see p. 37186 for release of 573 detainees in January].
The National People's Congress (NPC, the Chinese legislature) announced on June 18 that a total of 355 people remained in detention for their part in the unrest, a figure that was significantly lower than estimates made by Western human rights organisations.
Other actions by the authorities, however, ran counter to Li Peng's call for leniency.
Three of China's leading pro-democracy supporters were taken into "precautionary" detention on May 30, only hours before a planned press conference to commemorate the massacre.
All three — economist Zhou Duo, who had been amongst the 211 released on May 10, Taiwanese-born folk singer Hou Dejin, and newspaper editor Gao Xin — were released in mid-June.
During late May the Chinese media also gave prominent coverage to country-wide mass executions of criminals, while in Beijing a heavy security operation was launched in early June, especially around Tiananmen Square and the University.
The authorities closed the Square itself during early June, citing a number of apparently spurious events, including a mass driving lesson for the city's taxi-drivers on June 4.
In a June 4 editorial entitled Stability overrides all other considerations, Renmin Ribao (the People's Daily), the Communist Party newspaper, commented that "China would be in great chaos now" if the 1989 "rebellion" had not been quelled.
The official news agency Xinhua reported on June 4 that "millions of Beijing residents" had peacefully spent the day in "busy work and pleasant rest" .
Xinhua also noted that there had been some unrest at Beijing University late on June 3.
In the Western media the University unrest was given prominent and extensive coverage, although it appeared to amount to little more than a mass bout of bottle throwing, which was nevertheless an act of political defiance aimed at the country's "elder statesman" leader, Deng Xiaoping, whose last name was a homonym for the words "little bottle" .
Release of Fang Lizhi — Effect on Sino-US relations
Fang Lizhi, an astrophysicist and China's leading dissident, and his wife Li Shuxian, were allowed to leave China for the United Kingdom on June 25.
Fang and Li had spent over a year sheltering in the United States embassy in Beijing, having sought refuge there in the aftermath of the Tiananmen Square massacre [see p. 36722].
Shortly after they entered the embassy the Beijing authorities had issued a warrant for their arrest for their involvement in the "disturbances" .
The Public Security Ministry announced on June 25 that Fang and Li had been given "lenient treatment today" and had "gone abroad for medical treatment" .
The pair were said to have admitted their opposition to the "Four Cardinal Principles" (namely, the socialist system, the dictatorship of the proletariat, the leadership of the Communist Party, and Marxism-Leninism-Mao Zedong thought) and had given assurances that they would "not engage in activities directed against China after they leave the country" .
Fang and Li travelled to the UK on June 25 on a US military aircraft.
Fang took up a senior research post at Cambridge University's astronomy department.
The release of Fang and Li removed the major obstacle to improved relations between China and the USA.
A statement issued by the US administration on June 25 welcomed their release as a "far sighted significant step that will improve the atmosphere for progress in our bilateral relations" .
Some commentators suggested that the Chinese decision vindicated US President George Bush's attitude towards Beijing in the aftermath of the Tiananmen Square massacre.
Although Bush had imposed some sanctions immediately following the massacre [see pp. 36722; 36815], he had subsequently faced a great deal of congressional criticism for his "soft" China policy [see p. 37341].
Bush encountered fresh criticism following his recommendation, on May 24, that most favoured nation (MFN) trading status for China be unconditionally renewed.
Military reshuffle — Appointments
Details emerged in June of a major military reshuffle which had apparently taken place unannounced during April and May.
The reshuffle was believed to be a delayed reaction to the events of mid-1989, with promotions being secured by those who played a role in the military crackdown on student demonstrators.
The Times of June 20 reported that the reshuffle had been initiated by President Yang Shangkun, who was also First Vice-Chairman of the Central Military Commission (CMC), and his brother, Yang Baibing, CMC secretary-general.
The Far Eastern Economic Review of June 14 reported that major changes had taken place in six of China's seven military regions.
The most significant change was in Beijing military region where Gen. Wang Chengbin and Maj.-Gen.
Zhang Gong, both close associates of Yang Baibing, were appointed commander and political commissar, respectively.
On June 28 Liu Zhangyi replaced He Kang as Minister of Agriculture.
He Kang's dismissal was apparently connected with recent domestic criticism of the country's agricultural policy.
ASIA — PACIFIC
THAILAND
Resignation of Gen. Chaovalit
Gen. Chaovalit Yongchaiyut's abrupt resignation as Deputy Prime Minister and Defence Minister on June 11 prompted speculation about the stability of the country's six-party coalition government.
Gen. Chaovalit had entered the Cabinet on March 28, a day after resigning as Army C.-in-C. [see p. 37317].
Background to Chaovalit's resignation
Gen. Chaovalit resigned his post ostensibly following a verbal exchange with a Cabinet colleague over the issue of corruption.
One of Chaovalit's many Cabinet responsibilities had been to head the government's Counter Corruption Commission (CCC).
In late May, Chaovalit delivered a speech at a conference in Bangkok in which he said that he felt "quite ashamed" when travelling abroad "because everyone knows about the corruption" in Thailand.
If the problem of corruption was not solved, he said, then it might possibly "bring about the end of the country" .
His speech drew an angry response in early June from Police Capt. Chalerm Yubamrung, one of seven Ministers attached to the Prime Minister's Office.
The relationship between Chalerm and Chaovalit was already strained after a CCC investigation into the television company Mass Communication Organization of Thailand had found its director-general Rachan Husen — a close associate of Chalerm — guilty of irregularities.
In his response to Chaovalit's speech Chalerm said that if people were to criticize the government, then they should clearly join the opposition; he also attacked Gen. Chaovalit's wife, to whom he referred as a "moving jewellery case" .
Coup fears
Chalerm's attack on Chaovalit and Prime Minister Chatichai Choonhaven's refusal to mediate in the dispute caused offence within the armed forces.
In the days prior to Chaovalit's resignation, officers appeared on the Army's Channel 5 television station to denounce attacks on their former commander.
When Chaovalit's resignation was announced early on June 11 (the day on which the Prime Minister was due to embark on a tour of the United States) there were immediate fears that a coup attempt might be launched, as soldiers in Bangkok and other areas began demonstrating within their barracks.
Chaovalit's successor as Army C.-in-C., Gen. Suchinda Kraprayoon, was forced to cut short a visit to Singapore to return to Bangkok.
Gen. Suchinda and other senior military leaders accompanied Chatichai to southern Thailand for a meeting with King Bhumibol Adulyadej.
After this meeting, Gen. Suchinda publicly assured the Prime Minister that the Army would remain loyal, and Chatichai was confident enough to leave for the United States on schedule.
Chaovalit's future
Following Chaovalit's resignation there was great speculation over his future role in Thai politics.
According to press reports Chaovalit, who was not a member of any political organization, was being courted by a wide spectrum of parties including the opposition grouping Ekkaparb (founded in April 1989 — see p. 37082).
On June 15 the military expressed their support for Gen. Chaovalit by appointing him as a special adviser to the Internal Security Command, the Supreme Command, and the combined armed forces.
Five days later Chatichai appointed Chaovalit as a personal adviser on national security, foreign affairs and drugs prevention, but on June 21 Chaovalit announced that he had refused to accept this post.
Banharn Silpa-Archa, Minister of the Interior, issued a statement on June 27 claiming that Chaovalit was to join the Chart Thai Party (the main component of the ruling coalition) led by Prime Minister Chatichai.
ASIA — PACIFIC
VIETNAM
Relations with China — National Assembly session
Visit by Chinese Deputy Foreign Minister
Xu Dunxin, China's Deputy Foreign Minister in charge of Asian affairs, visited Vietnam on June 9-15 for talks with senior government officials.
Xu was the most senior Chinese official to visit Hanoi since early 1979 when Han Nianlong, another Deputy Foreign Minister, had attended talks in the aftermath of China's "punitive" invasion of northern Vietnam [see pp. 29869-76].
Discussions centred on the Cambodian problem, the principal issue blocking normalization of Sino-Vietnamese relations.
However, the two sides made little progress despite indications beforehand that relations were improving.
During a visit to China in early May, the Vietnamese First Deputy Foreign Minister, Dinh Nho Liem, had agreed for the first time to discuss the "internal" aspects of the Cambodian problem with Chinese officials.
Prior to Dinh's visit there had been other indications that relations were improving; the Vietnamese, for instance, had allowed the family of top-level Vietnamese defector Hoang Van Hoan to visit him in Beijing [see p. 29876 for Hoan's defection in 1979].
In another significant gesture, Nguyen Van Linh, the general secretary of the Communist Party of Vietnam, met for talks with the Chinese ambassador to Vietnam, Zhang Dewei, on June 5.
National Assembly session
The seventh session of the eighth National Assembly was held in Hanoi on June 14-30 [for sixth session in December 1989 see p. 37123].
Pham Vam Kai, Chair of the State Planning Commission, presented a socio-economic report to the Assembly on June 22.
Pham told delegates that there had been a rapid increase in export turnover during the first half of 1990, but that the production of export goods was threatened by the major socio-economic changes in Eastern Europe, which had forced some countries to cancel contracts, and that "the dilatory payment and overdue debts to the export goods manufacturers fail to encourage the production of export goods" .
Legislation was passed on tax, foreign investment, criminal procedure, maritime law and trade unions.
In addition the Assembly passed a resolution on granting tax exemptions of up to 50 per cent for peasants during 1990-91 in accordance with the political testament of the late President Ho Chi Minh.
ASIA — PACIFIC
CAMBODIA
Japanese-Thai peace initiative — Military situation
Tokyo meeting of Cambodian factions
A meeting held in Tokyo in early June between the warring Cambodian factions failed to achieve a breakthrough in the search for peace.
The meeting, sponsored by the Japanese and Thai governments, constituted a significant foreign policy development for Japan which customarily adopted a passive attitude to regional disputes in Asia.
The Tokyo meeting was preceded by a great deal of diplomatic activity during May.
The five permanent members of the UN Security Council held their fourth round of talks on the conflict in New York on May 25-26.
Before the UN meeting Gen. Chaovalit Yongchaiyut, then Thailand's Foreign Minister, had managed to secure the agreement of all the Cambodian factions on a broad ceasefire plan.
The Tokyo meeting, on June 4-5, was attended by representatives of all four Cambodian factions, namely Hun Sen, Premier of the State of Cambodia (SOC), and, from the three elements of the National Government of Cambodia (NGC, formerly known as the CGDK — see p. 37249), Prince Norodom Sihanouk, NGC President (the Prince had resigned from the presidency for three weeks during May), Son Sann, NGC Prime Minister and leader of the Khmer People's National Liberation front (KPNLF), and Khieu Samphan, NGC Vice-President and Khmer Rouge representative.
The meeting started badly when Khieu Samphan refused to attend the first session, opposing the seating arrangement which treated the NGC as a single body, rather than three separate, equal groups.
The meeting, attended by Hun Sen, Sihanouk and Son Sann broke up after only 25 minutes and the conference never fully reconvened; informal discussions continued behind the scenes.
Communiqué
Despite the apparent collapse of the meeting a communiqué was issued on June 5, signed by Hun Sen, Sihanouk and Son Sann.
Khieu Samphan refused to sign the communiqué, which he claimed was fundamentally different from the Thai document approved by the four groups in May.
The signatories agreed to exercise "voluntary self-restraint" in the use of force once a Supreme National Council (SNC) of prominent Cambodians had been formed.
(An annex to the communiqué stipulated that the SNC should be formed by the end of July 1990.)
The SNC was to be composed of equal numbers from both the SOC and the NGC.
The communiqué also called for a reconvening of the international Paris peace conference which had met in mid-1989 [see pp. 36848-49]and for the designation of Angkor Wat as a non-hostility area.
After the Tokyo talks Hun Sen, Sihanouk and Son Sann all nominated representatives for the SNC.
Hun Sen named six people and Sihanouk and Hun Sen two others, thereby leaving two seats for representatives of the Khmers Rouges.
However, in a statement issued on June 30 the Khmers Rouges made it clear that they would only accept a SNC with representation from the four parties on an equal footing.
Rebel assault on Kompong Thom
The possibility that a ceasefire might be imposed in late July spurred the NGC forces into heavy military action against the SOC regime during June, despite the onset of the rainy season.
In a major success on June 18 they defeated SOC forces at Kompong Thom, and then held the town for a short time before withdrawing.
Kompong Thom, a provincial capital, lay 100 km north of Phnom Penh.
Despite claims that most of the fighting around the town had been carried out by Sihanoukist forces, Western commentators saw the offensive as the work of the Khmers Rouges.
ASIA — PACIFIC
LAOS
Publication of draft constitution — National financial conference — SPA session
On June 4 the draft text of the first Lao People's Democratic Republic (LPDR) constitution was published in Pasason, the daily newspaper of the ruling Lao People's Revolutionary Party (LPRP).
A Constitution Drafting Committee, which had been established soon after the formation of the LPDR in late 1975 [see pp. 27541-43], had made little progress during the LPDR's first decade.
However, in March 1989 it was announced that a constitution would be promulgated within a year by the newly elected Supreme People's Assembly (SPA)[see p. 36523].
The draft consisted of 73 articles covering the political, legal and socio-economic system and the rights and obligations of Lao citizens.
Lao National Radio reported on June 15 that the first phase of a campaign to organize discussions on the draft among cadres and individuals had "yielded good results" .
The report stated, however, that some problems needed to be solved, principally that of lack of encouragement of cadres and individuals to exercise their democratic right of freedom of expression.
The country's first national financial conference opened in Vientiane on June 20.
According to Lao National Radio on that day, the conference would "examine thoroughly the performance of each financial agency and locality; evaluate correctly the achievements made by the financial sector over the past 15 years; and assess the current economic and financial situation and remaining problems so as to find effective measures to open the way for socio-economic development with new mechanisms" .
The SPA convened on June 25-27 and laws were passed on ownership of property, inheritance, contractual obligations, court fees and the establishment of a national bank.
ASIA — PACIFIC
SOUTH KOREA-SOVIET UNION
Meeting between South Korean and Soviet leaders
The South Korean government's policy of nordpolitik — the improvement of relations with communist regimes previously loyal to communist North Korea — pursued since 1988, entered a new phase on June 4 when President Roh Tae Woo met President Mikhail Gorbachev for the first direct talks between a South Korean and Soviet head of state.
The one-hour meeting, which occurred in San Francisco after Gorbachev's Washington summit with United States President George Bush [see pp. 37518-19], ended with an agreement to establish diplomatic relations in the near future.
Although no timetable for the process was arranged, Roh stated that the two leaders had agreed that the normalization of relations should occur "very soon" .
At a news conference Roh described the meeting as "an epoch-making event for peace and stability on the Korean Peninsula" , a region which he characterized as "the last area of tension of the Cold War" .
He also stated that he had expressed the hope that the Soviet Union's relationship with communist North Korea would improve and that Gorbachev could assist in encouraging the North Korean government to undertake a programme of political and economic reform.
Gorbachev declined to comment on the talks, other than to indicate that they had been inspired by the scale of the commercial links which already existed between their countries.
The Soviet Union was South Korea's second-largest communist trading partner (after China); in 1989 bilateral trade between the two countries amounted to US$599 million, and in 1990 it was expected to exceed $1,000 million.
In an apparent effort to soothe North Korean fears, the official Soviet news agency Tass played down the significance of the meeting, suggesting that diplomatic relations would develop within the context of a general improvement in relations throughout the region.
In a clear allusion to North Korea, it was stated that "political dialogue with other countries in no way means that we give up our principled positions and priorities or forgo the interests of third parties" .
The USA on June 6 also stressed that the San Francisco meeting did not threaten the security interests of North Korea.
Nevertheless, a statement carried by the official North Korean state news agency on June 7 denounced the talks as "unpardonable, traitorous bargaining" and described Roh as a "fool" , a "flunkyist traitor" and an "imperialist colonial stooge bereft of any independence" .
ASIA — PACIFIC
SINGAPORE
Release of final two "Marxist conspiracy" detainees
The last of the 22 people detained in 1987 for their alleged involvement in a "Marxist conspiracy" to overthrow the Singapore government [see p. 35462]were conditionally released in June.
Teo Soh Lung, a lawyer, and 21 others were first arrested under Singapore's Internal Security Act (ISA) in May and June 1987.
Along with many of the other detainees Teo made a televised "confession" of her role in the conspiracy and was released after four months in detention.
However, in April 1988 Teo, along with eight other original "conspirators" , issued a public statement claiming that they had been coerced into making their televised confessions [see p. 36353].
Teo was immediately re-arrested, and although her detention was challenged in Singapore's courts on at least four occasions [see p. 37086], she was deemed to have been fully "rehabilitated" only on June 1, 1990, when the Home Ministry suspended her ISA detention order.
The conditions of Teo's release prohibited her from issuing public statements and from associating with others arrested under the ISA.
In addition she required government approval to leave Singapore or to participate in the activities of any organization.
Vincent Cheng, a Roman Catholic lay worker and the alleged leader of the "Marxist conspiracy" , was released on June 19 upon the expiry of his final 12 month detention order.
Cheng had been under continuous detention since his arrest in May 1987.
Before his release he was made to sign a written undertaking that he would not use religious groups for political ends.
According to the Far Eastern Economic Review of June 28 Cheng was released despite objections from the government's Internal Security Department which claimed that he was not fully rehabilitated.
ASIA — PACIFIC
PHILIPPINES
New political movement — Dismissal of charges against Enrile
During a speech on June 12 President Corazon Aquino announced the launch of a new political movement known as Kabisig, a Tagalog word meaning "arm-in-arm" or "brotherhood" .
The announcement was made at a rally in Manila to celebrate the 92nd anniversary of the Philippines' independence from Spain, during which Aquino emphasized that the new organization was designed not as a political party but as a vehicle for "all citizens who want to help the Philippine nation" .
Many commentators interpreted Aquino's action as an attempt to revive her reputation as a populist and to distance herself from the charges of nepotism, corruption and incompetence which had been increasingly directed against her government by critics from both the right and the left.
The move was also widely seen as an attempt to create an independent political organization with which Aquino could — notwithstanding her previous pledges to the contrary — contest the 1992 presidential election.
Quashing of charges against Enrile
Earlier in the month Aquino had suffered a political setback when the Supreme Court on June 5 quashed charges of "rebellion complexed with murder" against Senator Juan Ponce Enrile and 22 other alleged participants in the December 1989 coup attempt.
The Court ruled by 11 votes to two that the offence had been abolished by presidential decree in 1986 — when Aquino dismantled much of the coercive apparatus of former President Ferdinand Marcos shortly after taking power — but stated that the government could file charges of "simple rebellion" , a lesser offence which carried a lighter penalty of 12 years' imprisonment.
The decision was seen as particularly embarrassing for Aquino as the original charge had been selected because of its severity, in an attempt to deter further coup attempts by demonstrating a new determination to punish insurrectionists.
ASIA — PACIFIC
JAPAN
JSP by-election victory
The Japan Socialist Party (JSP), the country's leading opposition grouping, comfortably retained a seat in the House of Councillors (the upper chamber of the Diet) at a by-election in Fukuoka Prefecture, in southern Japan, on June 10.
The result was of particular significance because the ruling Liberal Democratic Party (LDP), which had lost its majority in the Upper House for the first time in the 1989 elections, devoted massive resources to the by-election campaign.
The by-election also coincided with opinion polls which suggested that LDP leader Toshiki Kaifu was the most popular Prime Minister on record.
The LDP's failure to win the seat, therefore, was interpreted as indicative of continuing popular distrust of the party in the aftermath of the Recruit shares-for-favours scandal [see pp. 36463-64; 36589; 36655; 37041-42].
EUROPE
EUROPEAN COMMUNITIES
 "Mad cow disease" — French, West German and Italian ban on British beef imports
The West German government with effect from June 1 banned the import of British beef, including live cattle, because of fears that bovine spongiform encephalopathy (BSE), or "mad cow disease" , might be passed on to humans who ate meat from affected animals.
Similar steps had been taken on May 31 by France and were taken on June 6 by Italy, while the Belgian government warned against eating British beef and set up a health inquiry.
The French Agriculture Minister, Henri Nallet, said that the ban, which his United Kingdom counterpart John Gummer described as "unwarranted, unjustified and contrary to EC law" , would be lifted as soon as he had satisfactory guarantees that BSE (not hitherto officially confirmed in French cattle) posed no threat to human health.
Both France and West Germany (respectively the UK's largest and third largest beef export markets) ignored an ultimatum from the Commission of the European Communities (EC) to revoke the ban by the evening of June 4, and an emergency Council of (Agriculture) Ministers was convened in Brussels on June 6.
After 24 hours of intensive talks France, West Germany and Italy agreed on June 7 to lift their import bans in return for a UK undertaking to provide certification that meat on the bone came from farms where no BSE had been detected in any cattle in the past two years, and that boneless meat exports had been stripped of all offal and other tissues which could harbour BSE; live cattle could be exported only when under six months old and provided that they were not the calves of infected animals.
BSE, a disease which attacked the brain and nervous system, was believed to have been passed on to cattle through cattle feed containing the remains of sheep infected with scrapie, a similar disease endemic in the UK for over 200 years which apparently posed little risk to human health.
According to the UK Ministry of Agriculture, Fisheries and Food, there was no human health risk from BSE as (since November 1989) nervous tissue and certain offal liable to harbour the infection were removed from the carcasses of all slaughtered cattle.
However opinion on this was sharply divided among scientists.
According to the Agriculture Ministry, since BSE was first identified in May 1986 a total of 13,849 cases had been confirmed in Britain as of May 23, 1990, and another 1,000 over the next four weeks; the disease was made notifiable throughout the EC on April 1, and the Republic of Ireland had 18 notified cases.
Due to increased public fears that BSE might be transmittable to humans, exacerbated by the deaths of three cats in May-June from a disease resembling BSE, British beef was in May withdrawn from school menus in numerous local authority areas in the UK, and on June 11 the (UK) National Farmers' Union announced a voluntary code of practice to combat the spread of BSE, including a complete ban on all animal feeds containing "specified" beef offal.
West Germany had imposed a separate unilateral ban on unboned British beef in November 1989.
Existing EC regulations in effect since August 1989 banned British exports to other EC states of live cattle born before July 1988 (the date when the UK prohibited the incorporation into cattle feed of sheep remains which could contain scrapie) and the European Commission on Jan. 23, 1990, extended the ban (with effect from March 1) to all cattle over six months old.
It emerged in May that a Commission ruling signed in February 1990 banned the export to other member states of live calves born to cows with BSE, but Gummer on May 17 ruled out any restrictions on such calves for use in Britain.
A dozen non-EC countries had recently restricted the import of live cattle from the UK, including the Soviet Union, Australia, Canada, New Zealand and the USA.
Signature of Schengen agreement
Belgium, France, West Germany, the Netherlands and Luxembourg signed an agreement in Schengen (Luxembourg) on June 19 committing them to the abolition of all controls at their internal borders, including passport controls at airports for flights between the signatory countries.
The signature of the agreement had been delayed from December 1989, partly over the question of East German access to the Schengen area, it being finally agreed that border controls would apply only at East Germany's borders with Poland and Czechoslovakia and not at the existing inter-German border.
The treaty was due to enter into force after ratification by the parliaments of the five signatories by Jan. 1, 1992.
The Schengen agreement provided for the harmonization of visa regulations for third countries, the exchange of information on criminals and the establishment of common criteria for granting political asylum.
The police forces of each country would have the right of "hot pursuit" of suspects across their borders for up to 10 km and to make arrests in each other 's countries, except in France, and a common data bank to track down criminals was to be set up in Strasbourg.
The Netherlands retained its open policy on drug use but would help other members to combat trafficking, and there would be greater co-operation to stop the illegal movement of guns, ammunition and explosives.
Trevi Group meeting
The Trevi Group of Justice and Interior Ministers of the EC, formed in 1976 [see pp. 34883; 36492]met in Dublin on June 15-16 and formally agreed on an action programme to combat terrorism, drug trafficking and organized crime.
This included the establishment of a European central drugs intelligence unit, a centralized data information bureau and a training unit for drug enforcement agents.
At the same meeting an asylum convention was signed by all the members except Denmark under which each asylum case would be handled by only one member-state and thereby end the so-called "orbiting" of refugees from one country to another.
European Court ruling on status of UK legislation
The European Court of Justice (ECJ) ruled on June 19 that UK courts were empowered to suspend an act of parliament on the grounds of its alleged incompatibility with European Community (EC) law.
The ruling also provided UK courts with the power to grant injunctions (not available under British law) to suspend the application of legislation, in order to prevent hardship while claimants awaited a final ruling on a case in the European Court.
The UK Prime Minister Margaret Thatcher expressed concern at the constitutional implications of the judgment but pointed out that it was left to UK courts to decide whether to exercise the powers.
The decision arose from a claim lodged with the ECJ by a group of mainly Spanish-owned fishing companies, employing vessels registered as British, that amendments to the UK 1988 Merchant Shipping Act which excluded 95 of their vessels from British waters were illegal under EC law and had exposed them to financial ruin.
The amendments had been introduced to put a stop to "quota hopping" whereby foreign vessels flying the British flag were plundering fishing quotas.
EUROPE
EFTA
Relations with EC — Meeting on EES
The heads of government of Austria, Finland, Iceland, Norway, Sweden and Switzerland — the six member countries of the European Free Trade Association (EFTA)— met in Gothenburg (Sweden) on June 14 to celebrate the 30th anniversary of the organization's formation.
At the same time the Ministerial Council of Foreign Ministers met on June 13-14 to discuss the proposed establishment by the end of 1992 of a European economic space (EES) embracing the countries of EFTA and the European Communities (EC)[see p. 37134].
Jacques Delors, the President of the European Commission, and Frans Andriessen, the EC Commissioner for external relations, also attended the meetings.
As established in exploratory talks which took place in January-March 1990, a major obstacle to the achievement of the EES in the forthcoming negotiations with the EC was EFTA's demand for equal status with the EC in a joint decision-making body, particularly sought by Switzerland which was due to take over the presidency of EFTA on July 1.
The European Commission had approved a draft negotiating mandate only on May 8, and this was adopted by the EC Council of (Foreign) Ministers on June 18, two days before full negotiations were due to open.
The European Parliament (EP) on June 13 adopted a report by its members warning that the proposed EES must not be allowed to compromise the EC's autonomy of decision-making, undermine the EP's powers or affect the pace of economic and political integration in the EC.
A joint declaration issued by the EFTA heads of government and ministers stated that "we are now on the verge of taking a new step forward in the integration of Europe by forging a close and structured partnership with the EC" .
It noted that the relevant EC legislation to be integrated into the EES treaty as a common legal basis had been broadly identified and would in principle be acceptable, but that the question of joint management and development of EES legislation would have to be resolved, and an appropriate legal and institutional framework established.
The creation of a genuine joint decision-making mechanism was a basic prerequisite for a politically acceptable agreement, to ensure that "neither side is presented with a fait accompli" .
The June meeting was attended by Hans Brunhart, the head of government and Foreign Minister of Liechtenstein, which was involved in EFTA via a special protocol to the Stockholm Convention; Brunhart said on April 3 that his country had been accepted as the seventh EFTA negotiating and contracting partner in the EES and was ready to become a full member of EFTA or strengthen institutional ties with the organization once an EES agreement was concluded.
Joint declarations of co-operation were signed on June 13 between EFTA and Czechoslovakia, Hungary and Poland.
EUROPE
EAST-WEST GERMANY
Second round of "two-plus-four" talks
The second ministerial-level round of the so-called "two-plus-four talks" on the unification of Germany took place in Berlin on June 22, when the Foreign Ministers of France, the Soviet Union, the United Kingdom, and the United States (the four post-war occupying powers and guarantors for Berlin) met with delegations from East and West Germany to discuss the security implications of unification [for first round of talks in May see p. 37466].
On the same day the Checkpoint Charlie crossing point in Berlin was also removed.
The talks were stalled, however, by differences over the status of a future united Germany, and especially over its defence alliances.
The Soviet Foreign Minister Eduard Shevardnadze expressed concern about the likelihood that a reunited Germany would mean the immediate transfer of East Germany from the Warsaw Pact to the North Atlantic Treaty Organization (NATO).
He proposed on June 22 that the four allies' rights and responsibilities should be extended for a period of five years after unification, and that only then would Germany have the sovereign right to conclude international agreements such as a treaty of membership of NATO.
The idea was immediately rejected, however, by James Baker, the US Secretary of State.
The East German Premier Lothar de Maizière also rejected on June 27 as "not feasible" an alternative Soviet proposal that East Germany should have joint membership of both NATO and the Warsaw Pact after unification [ibid.].
Parliamentary ratification of economic and monetary union
The state treaty on economic and monetary union signed on May 18 [ibid.]was approved on June 21 and 23 by the West German Bundestag and Bundesrat (lower and upper house respectively of the legislature) and on June 21 by East Germany's unicameral Volkskammer.
Approval of the treaty had at first been opposed by West Germany's Social Democratic Party (SPD) on the grounds that it offered inadequate protection for East German industry, and that environmental guarantees were insufficient.
Right-wing parties for their part had complained that it entailed the abandonment of the country's constitutional claim to all territory within the German borders of 1938, including lands east of the Oder and Neisse rivers which were now in Poland or the Soviet Union.
Presenting the treaty to the Bundestag, Helmut Kohl, the West German Federal Chancellor, declared, however, that this was the necessary price of unity with East Germany, and the house voted in favour by 445 votes to 60 (the Greens and some SPD delegates) with one abstention.
In the Bundesrat only the SPD-led governments of Lower Saxony and Saarland voted against.
In the Volkskammer the voting was 302 to 82 (opponents including members of the Party of Democratic Socialism — PDS--the former ruling Socialist Unity Party).
Also on June 21 both the Bundestag and the Volkskammer approved a resolution recognizing the inviolability of Poland's borders as established after the Second World War and guaranteeing the Oder-Neisse border with Poland as the eastern border of a future united Germany.
The 400-member Volkskammer approved this resolution with only six deputies opposing and 18 abstentions, while the Bundestag voted 487 to 15 (opponents including the CDU deputy who was president of the "association of expellees" ).
Kohl was known to favour the formal unification of East and West Germany on Dec. 9 or Dec. 16, 1990, immediately following simultaneous parliamentary elections in the two countries.
The East German government on June 27 announced that it favoured Dec. 16.
It had already been announced that the East German SPD would merge with its West German counterpart in September, and that the two Christian Democratic Unions would merge in October.
Agreement on property rights
Agreement was reached on June 15 concerning the ownership of East German land and other property seized from what were now West German citizens since the 1949 inauguration of the German Democratic Republic (East Germany).
East German tenure of such property would be secured even if its ownership reverted to the original owners.
Expropriations carried out between 1945 and 1949 would not be reversed.
Rejection of import tariff
The Volkskammer rejected on June 28 a government plan announced in late May to impose an 11 per cent duty on imports from West Germany, in an effort to stabilize the country's trade deficit.
The duty, which was to have been phased out over a nine-month period to March 1991, was dismissed as ineffective because shoppers would be able to circumvent it by buying in the West after July 1.
Privatization programme
On June 29 Detlev Rohwedder, chairman of the West German engineering group Hoesch, was appointed chair of the Treuhandanstalt, the body created in March to oversee the privatization of the 8,000 state-owned industries in East Germany [see p. 37302].
On May 29 the government had complained that only 170 firms had so far been transferred to the private sector.
A full set of privatization laws was not expected to be ready before October 1990.
Meanwhile concern was mounting about the unemployment which would result as heavily over-manned East German state industries adapted to a profit-oriented market economy.
The West German Institute for Economic Research predicted on June 27 that East German unemployment would rise from the present 130,000 to 1,400,000 or 16 per cent of the workforce; the government had said, however, that 1,000,000 workers would be retrained in 1990, in preparation for the new business environment, and that the numbers of apprenticeships for young workers would quintuple between June and September.
The East German government estimated on June 17 that the country's total industrial funding requirement would be between DM5,000 million and DM6,000 million (approximately US$2,980 million-3,577 million) per month after unification, and that up to one-third of all East German companies would be totally dependent on foreign credits.
The Treuhandanstalt would guarantee creditors against losing money lent to businesses unsuccessfully attempting to adapt to unification.
Agreement on aid package to Soviet Union
Shevardnadze met the West German Foreign Minister, Hans-Dietrich Genscher, in the Soviet town of Brest on June 11, when the two sides held closed talks on the unification issue.
It was subsequently reported that West Germany had agreed to a request by Shevardnadze for a DM 5,000 million government-guaranteed loan to the Soviet Foreign Trade Bank, with which to finance the Soviet balance of payments deficit.
Commentators described the arrangements as the price paid for Soviet co-operation on unification.
Replacement of East German SPD leader
An extraordinary conference in Halle on June 9 elected Wolfgang Thierse as the East German SPD chairman.
Thierse replaced Markus Meckel, the Foreign Minister, who had been standing in since the March resignation of Ibrahim Böhme [see p. 37302].
Arrests of West German extremists
A major political scandal developed following the arrest by East German police of nine persons suspected of extremist attacks in West Germany on behalf of the Red Army Faction (RAF) and in particular over allegations that the former communist authorities had provided a safe haven for them.
Susanne Albrecht, who was wanted for the 1977 murder of the banker Jürgen Ponto, and Inge Viett, wanted for the 1974 murder of the judge Günter von Drenkmann, were arrested on June 6 in East Berlin, and on June 14 Werner Lotze, Monika Helbing, Ekkehard von Seckendorff-Gudent and Christine Dümlein (all wanted in connection with other attacks) were also held, as was Sigrid Sternebeck on June 15.
On June 18 Silke Maier-Witt (wanted in connection with the 1977 murder of the industry federation leader Hanns-Martin Schleyer) and Henning Beer (wanted after a bomb attack in Ramstein in 1981) were arrested in Neubrandenburg.
The West German police announced on June 21 that they had started investigations into allegations that Erich Honecker, the former East German head of state, and Erich Mielke, the former head of the intelligence service [see p. 37107], had actively colluded in offering RAF activists a safe refuge in East Germany.
The official East German news agency ADN also reported on June 29 that Honecker had been formally charged with murder in connection with the shoot-to-kill policy consistently adopted toward escape attempts to the West during his period of office.
EUROPE
NORTHERN IRELAND
Overturning of "Maguire Seven" convictions
The Director of Public Prosecutions (DPP) announced on June 14 that the convictions of the "Maguire Seven" , imprisoned in 1976 for possession of explosives in connexion with the 1974 Guildford and Woolwich public house bombings [see pp. 26870-71; 27739], were "unsafe and unsatisfactory" .
The announcement halted the judicial inquiry under Sir John May which had been set up in March to investigate all the convictions connected with the pub bombings.
The Home Secretary, David Waddington, later on June 14 told the House of Commons that the convictions could not be allowed to stand.
The Maguire Seven were Anne Maguire and Patrick Maguire; their sons Vincent Maguire and Patrick Joseph Maguire (respectively 17 and 14 at the time of their sentencing); Patrick's brother-in-law Guiseppe Conlon (Gerard Conlon's father), who died in prison in 1980; Anne's brother Sean Smyth; and a family friend named Patrick O'Neill.
The seven had been implicated in the bombings by confessions (later discredited) made under pressure by Gerard Conlon and Paul Hill, two of the "Guildford Four" who were imprisoned for the Guildford and Woolwich bombings [see p. 27739]but who were released in October 1989 when their convictions were declared unsafe [see p. 36983].
They had been sentenced to between five and 14 years' imprisonment on the basis of forensic evidence from hand swabs indicating that they had handled nitroglycerine.
No trace of explosives was found in their houses.
The DPP statement on June 14 said that the jury in the 1976 trial might not have realised from the scientific evidence provided that the seven could have been innocently contaminated with nitroglycerine, but that "in the light of current scientific knowledge this was a real possibility, however remote" .
The May inquiry was told on June 15 by counsel for the Maguires that inspection of the records of the scientists involved in the forensic tests showed that a second series of tests on the hand swabs had been carried out and had proved negative.
The scientists involved, including Douglas Higgs, the chief scientific officer for the Crown during the Maguire trial, had not told the trial that substances other than nitroglycerine on the defendants' hands could have given a positive reading, or that "rogue" positive results could occur, nor had they disclosed this to the May inquiry.
The inquiry also heard that the actual tests had been carried out by a then 18-year-old trainee, who refused to give evidence at the hearings.
IRA activity
A series of attacks carried out in Britain and West Germany in June were presumed to be the work of the Irish Republican Army (IRA).
Hooded men on June 1 shot dead a young soldier, Pte.
William Robert Davies, 19, and two others were wounded as all three waited in civilian clothes at a railway station in Lichfield (Staffordshire).
On June 9 a bomb placed on the roof of the headquarters of the Honourable Artillery Company in London injured 17 civilians, mainly students, who were attending a 21st birthday party there.
About 400 people were evacuated from a Royal Air Force base at Stanmore, north London, on June 21 after a patrol discovered a bomb, which later exploded.
In an attack on a non-military target, a bomb planted several feet inside the doorway of the exclusive Carlton Club in central London, frequented by leading Conservative Party figures, exploded at about 8.30 p.m. on June 25, injuring a porter seriously and wounding several others, and causing a fire and extensive damage.
In West Germany a British Army officer in civilian clothes, Maj. Michael Dillon-Lee, was shot dead in Dortmund on June 2, and on June 14 a bomb damaged a British Army training centre in Hamelin.
Dutch and Belgian police on June 16-19 arrested four people whom they suspected of being members of an IRA active service unit on the continent.
The four were Donna Maguire, arrested in Turnhout, Belgium, on June 16, who was wanted in connexion with attacks in West Germany in 1989; Gerard Majella Harte, arrested over the Dutch border on June 16, after evading Belgian police near Turnhout, with a man provisionally named as Michael Collins who escaped in handcuffs but was later picked up over the Dutch border in Chaam, on June 18; and Paul Hughes, who drove through a police checkpoint in Chaam on June 18 and was arrested there on June 19.
Maguire had been acquitted by a Dublin court in February 1990 and Harte had been extradited from the Irish Republic to Northern Ireland in 1988.
It was announced on June 26 that three of the four were to be charged with the murder on May 27 of two Australians from London, Nick Spanos and Stephen Melrose, who had been shot dead in Roermond in the Netherlands, where they had stopped for a meal, by two gunmen who drove off towards Belgium with a third man.
An IRA statement from Dublin on May 28 had admitted that the active service unit involved "tragically mistook" the men for British Army personnel and that the IRA "deeply regrets this tragedy" .
EUROPE
SPAIN
Ruling on Basque deputies
The Constitutional Court ruled on June 21 that the four United People (HB) deputies elected in October 1989 could take up their seats in the Congress of Deputies by swearing an amended version of the oath of allegiance to the Constitution.
Members of HB, the political wing of the Basque separatist organization ETA, had been expelled from the Congress on Dec. 4 for qualifying the swearing-in formula with the words "due to legal imperative" [see p. 37135].
The distribution of seats in the Congress of Deputies was Spanish Socialist Workers' Party (PSOE) 175 seats, combined opposition parties 175.
The ruling PSOE retained an effective majority of one, however, because one HB deputy, Angel Alcalde, who was on the run from the police, had not taken up his seat.
Elections in Andalucia
In elections to the regional parliament of Andalucia on June 23 the PSOE won an absolute majority with 61 of the 109 seats and 50 per cent of the vote.
However, with voting taking place during a severe heatwave, the turnout was only 55.5 per cent of the electorate of some 5,000,000, compared with 71 per cent in 1986.
The main loser was United Left (IU) which lost eight seats.
The new parliament was expected to be constituted on July 16.
Percentage Seats Percentage Seats PSOE 49.6 61 46.3 60 Popular Party* 22.9 27 21.8 28 United Left 12.7 11 17.5 19 Andalucian Party 10.8 10 5.8 2 Democratic and Social Centre 1.2 0 3.2 0 Social Democracy 0.5 —-— Others 3.1 0 5.3 0 *Formed part of Popular Coalition in 1986.
Election results 1990 1986
EUROPE
SOVIET UNION
Market economy reform plan
The USSR Supreme Soviet on June 13 ordered major revisions to a programme drawn up by the government to introduce a market economy.
Since its submission for debate at the end of May the plan, and especially the swingeing price rises it entailed, had aroused fierce opposition among politicians and the public.
However, in calling for revisions the Supreme Soviet backed acceleration of the introduction of market reforms.
Drafting of reform plan
In December 1989 Nikolai Ryzhkov, the Chairman of the USSR Council of Ministers (Prime Minister), had won approval from the USSR Congress of People's Deputies for a programme intended to achieve economic recovery by 1993 and to introduce a "socialist market economy" by 1995 [see p. 37127].
By March 1990 this programme was already being adjudged inadequate in the light of statistics showing dismal economic performance in January-February, and on March 11 the Council of Ministers had instructed Deputy Premier Leonid Abalkin to produce by May 1 draft measures to achieve a more rapid switch to a market economy.
However, in late April the Presidential and Federation Councils had return Abalkin's draft proposals for further work [see p. 37298].
From statements by senior officials it was clear that President Mikhail Gorbachev and his advisers had backed away completely from "shock therapy" for the economy (like that currently being attempted in Poland — see pp. 37130; 37194), for fear of a nationwide backlash of strikes and social unrest.
Nevertheless, members of the government, prominent economists and the official press continued to make statements which appeared designed to prepare the Soviet public for the presentation of drastic proposals for economic reform.
Notably, the Communist Party (CPSU) newspaper Pravda on April 29 gave a devastating assessment of the state of the economy, based on statistics for the first quarter of 1990 which showed falls of 1.0 per cent in gross national product and 1.2 per cent in industrial productivity; an inflation rate in the consumer sector of 8.0 per cent(but featuring increases in food prices of up to 20 per cent ); and a balance-of-trade deficit of 1,700 million roubles (approximately US$2,800 million).
Presentation of package to Supreme Soviet — Suggested referendum
Ryzhkov presented the programme of reforms to the USSR Supreme Soviet on behalf of the USSR Council of Ministers on May 24.
It involved a gradual transition to a "regulated" market.
The formulation of the legal foundations would be completed by the end of 1990.
Reform of pricing, taxation and the credit system, and the introduction of a social security system, would take place in the second stage (1991-92).
 "Intensive development" of the market would take place in the third stage (1993-95), involving cuts in centralized economic administration, "intensification" of competition (including an "active anti-monopoly policy" ) and other structural changes in economic relations.
Ryzhkov assessed that by the second stage the situation in the consumer market should have improved radically, that material and financial market equilibrium could be achieved in 1992, and that economic growth and an improvement in living standards was possible from 1993.
Restructuring of the credit system would feature the introduction of a two-tier banking system: the USSR State Bank would regulate money supply and set interest rates, while new commercial banks would provide credits to enterprises.
Interest rates were set to rise from the current 2.5 per cent to between 6 and 11 per cent in 1991.
The reform of pricing was central to the transition to a market economy.
Ryzhkov declared that current prices, as fixed by the state, reflected neither the real costs of production nor world price levels (many prices for goods and services had been unchanged since the 1930s), and ignored the relationship between supply and demand.
Rejecting the simultaneous freeing of prices for most goods and services (the so-called "Polish variant" ), Ryzhkov announced "a stage-by-stage introduction of market methods of price formation combined with state control over the level and movement of prices" .
The first stage of the transition to market prices would mean dividing prices into three categories: by the end of 1991 only 55 per cent of goods would be sold at fixed state prices, 30 per cent would be "regulated" , and prices for the remaining 15 per cent of goods would be freed completely.
Ahead of these comprehensive reforms, it was proposed to treble bread prices on July 1, 1990, albeit accompanied by compensatory wage or pension increases.
Ryzhkov said that 135,000 million roubles (70 per cent of the revenue from increased retail prices) had been earmarked for wage increases and social security payments to alleviate the effect of the price rises in 1991, and he stressed that as the gradual transition to free prices was carried out there would be wage indexation.
At a press conference on May 23 to discuss details of the programme, First Deputy Premier and State Planning Committee Chairman Yury Maslyukov declared that since "such a sharp transition [to a market economy]is impossible without national consent" , the Supreme Soviet should order a nationwide referendum on the reform programme.
He added that if the referendum rejected the programme the government would have to resign.
Ryzhkov made no mention of a referendum in his address on May 24, however, and subsequently officials appeared to be distancing themselves from the idea.
All talk of a referendum had been dropped by the time the Supreme Soviet came to vote on the programme.
Official reaction to Ryzhkov plan
In the Supreme Soviet debate following Ryzhkov's May 24 address radicals and conservatives alike denounced the market reform proposals as ill-conceived.
There was particular criticism of the plan to embark almost immediately on price rises but to delay "structural" reforms, and of the lack of detail on reform proposals.
Members of the radical Inter-regional group went so far as to table a motion of no confidence in the government, but a vote on whether to consider this motion was heavily defeated on May 29.
The outcome of the voting on June 13 was portrayed by observers as a victory for supporters of radical economic reform.
The Supreme Soviet, having endorsed the government's outline plans, called on the government to submit by Sept. 1 a more coherent programme including specific proposals for more immediate institutional and structural changes.
Furthermore, the Supreme Soviet signalled support for radical institutional market reforms by voting to ask Gorbachev to issue a series of presidential decrees from July giving new legal backing to small businesses and entrepreneurs, bringing in anti-monopoly measures, establishing joint-stock companies and a stock exchange, and de-nationalizing state enterprises.
Gorbachev was also called upon to enforce laws already passed but as yet barely implemented on property rights, land ownership, leaseholding and local economic autonomy.
On June 14 the Supreme Soviet rejected overwhelmingly the government's proposal to treble bread prices from July 1.
Ryzhkov had argued on May 25 that the price rises were needed immediately, because the Soviet Union could not otherwise afford to import grain, but the Supreme Soviet decided to postpone further discussion until its next session, beginning in September.
Panic buying — Gorbachev's appeal for calm — Rationing in Moscow
The announcement of the government's plan for price rises immediately sparked a nationwide wave of panic buying.
This prompted Gorbachev on May 27 to make a televised address to the country to try to calm fears about the market reform plan and to appeal for support.
The panic buying forced the Moscow city council on May 28 to announce a temporary ban on the sale of food and consumer goods in city shops to anyone unable to produce a Moscow residence permit (such restrictions had already been operating for many weeks in Leningrad and a number of other cities).
However, there was evidence that such restrictions were exacerbating a breakdown in the distribution system, with officials in the neighbouring regions of Kalinin, Smolensk and Vladimir retaliating by ordering the withholding of food supplies destined for Moscow, since local people were now debarred from travelling to the capital to find the best-stocked food shops.
Corporation tax law
The Supreme Soviet on June 14 passed what was in effect the country's first corporate taxation law, setting in place a crucial element of market economic reform.
This taxed enterprise profits at a flat rate of 45 per cent(10 per cent lower than the government's original proposal), tax revenue being split almost equally between union and republican budgets.
New law on enterprises
New legislation passed by the Supreme Soviet on June 4 established uniform rights and obligations for all types of enterprise, from state-owned companies and joint ventures to collective farms and private co-operatives.
These included:(i) the right to set their own prices (except where the enterprise had a monopoly, in which case prices would continue to be regulated by the state);(ii) freedom to set wages and issue stocks and bonds; and (iii) the right of employee councils in state enterprises to reject state plans.
Among other things the new law also abolished mandatory election of managers in state enterprises (introduced by 1987 legislation on enterprise autonomy — see p. 35842), and established a mechanism to declare bankruptcy.
The law was due to come into force on Jan. 1, 1991.
Formation of Russian Federation Communist Party
Communists in the Russian Federation, the Soviet Union's largest republic, on June 19 convened in Moscow for a conference which became the founding congress of a Russian Federation Communist Party (CP), subordinate to the ruling Communist Party of the Soviet Union (CPSU).
The evident ascendancy of conservatives, who succeeded in getting one of their number elected as leader of the new party, appeared to bode ill for President Mikhail Gorbachev, the CPSU general secretary, at the crucial 28th CPSU congress, due to open only a fortnight later.
Alone of the 15 union republics, the Russian Federation previously had been without its own Communist Party, its party organizations being an integral part of the CPSU.
The last Russian Communist Party had ceased to exist in 1925 upon its transformation into the All-Union Communist Party (Bolsheviks), the immediate forerunner of the CPSU.
Convening of conference
In February 1990 an initiative group for the creation of a Russian CP had been set up in Leningrad.
On April 21-22 this group, which appeared dominated by hardline conservatives, had organized (without approval by the CPSU central committee) an "initiative congress" in Leningrad attended by around 800 delegates from throughout Russia to promote the idea of the new party.
The June conference, meanwhile, had been called by the CPSU central committee in March as a forum for debate on the need for a Russian CP by the 2,744 delegates from the Russian Federation to the forthcoming CPSU congress.
According to commentators Gorbachev had been opposed to the formation of the party, for fear of allowing conservatives to create a power base and of exacerbating splits in the CPSU.
However, he unexpectedly declared on June 16 that the founding of a Russian CP "should not be delayed" , his remarks being addressed to members of the CPSU Russian buro (set up in December 1989 and chaired by him — see p. 37128), representatives of regional party organizations in Russia, and the organizing committee of the forthcoming conference.
Attacks on Gorbachev by delegates
Giving the opening address on June 19, Gorbachev put forward the proposal that the conference should become the Russian Federation CP's founding congress.
He went on to deliver a strong warning about the dangers which the "ever strengthening isolationist mood in Russia" posed for the integrity of the Soviet Union, and also stressed that a new Russian CP should aim to "consolidate" the CPSU.
The address also featured criticism of both the radical and conservative wings of the CPSU, and a robust defence of perestroika and of plans for market economic reforms [see above].
Gorbachev's address received lukewarm applause, and in the speeches which followed he found himself sharply under attack by delegates.
Ivan Osadchy, a regional party official, declared that the CPSU leadership had lost the political initiative and had been reduced to "crouching unarmed in the trenches under massive shelling by anti-socialist forces" .
On June 20 Yegor Ligachev, the most prominent conservative in the most senior CPSU ranks, accused Gorbachev of making crucial political and economic decisions without consulting the party, and hinted that Gorbachev should resign, commenting: "One cannot head the party, this leading force, without dedicating one's time to it." 
Earlier that day, Gorbachev had himself appeared to raise the possibility of his stepping down as general secretary at the CPSU congress when, clearly stung by the ferocity of the criticisms being levelled at him, he complained that "people are not taking the general secretary, the President of the country, very seriously" , and added: "It is not a question of me: tomorrow or in 10 or 12 days' time someone else might be general secretary or party chairman." 
Vote on establishing party — Polozkov's election as first secretary
It was decided overwhelmingly on June 20 to endorse the proposal to turn the conference into the founding congress of the new party.
On June 21 the congress formally voted into existence the Communist Party of the Russian Soviet Federative Socialist Republic.
Ivan Polozkov, the conservative CPSU first secretary in Krasnodar kray (territory) who in May had been defeated by Boris Yeltsin for the post of President of the Russian Federation [see pp. 37459-60], was elected to the post of first secretary of the Russian Federation CP on June 23.
He led a field of seven candidates in an inconclusive first round, and in the second round run-off he defeated Oleg Lobov, currently the second secretary of the Armenian CP and regarded as a pro-Gorbachev reformer.
In a well received speech on June 21 he had accused the current CPSU leadership of "ideological confusion" and of allowing radicals to wage "an organized campaign to destroy the party from within" .
However, in statements after his election Polozkov appeared at pains to emphasis his loyalty to Gorbachev and support for perestroika, and to refute his reputation for conservatism.
Despite the strength of the conservatives, the congress on June 23 endorsed the draft platform for the forthcoming CPSU congress, which as published in February featured plans for radically restructuring the party leadership and backed a multiparty system and a "regulated market economy" [see pp. 37234-35].
The congress was suspended on June 23 after adopting a resolution on the party's "primary tasks" .
It was due to resume after the CPSU congress to adopt a party programme and to finalize the composition of its leading bodies.
Sovereignty declarations by three republics — Republican leadership changes
The Russian Federation (RSFSR), Uzbekistan and Moldavia all issued sovereignty declarations during June.
The RSFSR, the Soviet Union's largest and most powerful republic, on June 12 was declared a sovereign state by its Congress of People's Deputies (constituted in May — see pp. 37459-60).
The declaration appeared to have enormous implications for the future state structure and division of powers within the Soviet Union, but had been significantly watered down since its submission in draft form, in order to satisfy the broadest range of deputies from conservative hardliners to radical reformers (there were no fewer than 27 factions within the Congress).
A key clause of the 15-article declaration proclaimed the primacy of the RSFSR's constitution and laws throughout its territory, and the right of the RSFSR to suspend USSR acts which contravened RSFSR sovereign rights.
However, it was stated that disagreement in this area between the republic and the Union would be resolved "according to the procedure established by the [proposed]Union treaty" .
The declaration proclaimed further that the Russian people had the sole right to own, utilize and dispose of Russia's natural wealth; that the RSFSR had the right to form its own diplomatic links with other Soviet republics and foreign states; and that it had the right to participate in the exercise of powers which it had voluntarily passed to the Union.
It also stated that the RSFSR "reserves the right freely to leave the USSR" according to procedures established by USSR law.
The declaration was adopted by 907 votes to 13, with nine abstentions.
The most important modification of the draft, agreed after several hours of reportedly heated debate, was the omission of a clause whereby the declaration would take immediate effect.
Instead, it was described solely as "the basis for elaborating a new constitution for the RSFSR and for the conclusion of a new Union treaty" [see also below].
The Uzbek Supreme Soviet on June 20 adopted after "sharp debate" a declaration on Uzbekistan's sovereignty within a "renewed Soviet federation" .
In wording similar to Russia's sovereignty declaration it proclaimed the supremacy of Uzbekistan's laws on its territory and provided for Uzbek jurisdiction over domestic and foreign policy issues.
Moldavia's Supreme Soviet adopted a sovereignty declaration on June 23, but in the absence of deputies representing the Russian and other minority communities, who had walked out following a stormy debate on the issue.
According to the Soviet news agency Tass the Moldavian declaration proclaimed that "land, mineral and other resources on the republic's territory, as well as the entire economic, scientific, technical [and]financial potential and national valuables" were the exclusive property of Moldavia.
In asserting the supremacy of the Moldavian constitution and laws throughout the republic's territory, and that "laws and other normative acts" would take effect in Moldavia only subject to ratification by the Moldavian Supreme Soviet, it appeared to go further than the Russian and Uzbek sovereignty declarations and to be closer in spirit to the more radical declarations of the Baltic and Transcaucasian republics, since it did not appear to allow for arbitration in the event of conflict with the USSR Constitution and laws.
In addition, the Moldavian Supreme Soviet on June 23 endorsed a report by a special parliamentary commission, declaring illegal the 1940 Soviet annexation from Romania of Bessarabia (most of which now formed Soviet Moldavia) and other territories.
It proclaimed that June 28, the anniversary of Bessarabia's "reunification" in 1940 with the tiny Moldavian Autonomous Soviet Socialist Republic (at that time part of the Soviet Ukraine), would no longer be a public holiday.
On June 24, thousands of Moldavians and Romanians converged at a bridge on the Prut river, on the frontier between Soviet Moldavia and Romania, for a ceremonial linking of hands to commemorate the 50th anniversary of Bessarabia's seizure by the Soviet Union.
One of the first acts of the new Moldavian Supreme Soviet, which had convened on April 16, had been to adopt on April 27 as the republic's official flag the red, yellow and blue tricolour of Romania, in place of the variation on the Soviet red flag previously in use [see pp. 37257-58].
New Ukrainian President and Communist Party leader — Re-election of Ukrainian Premier
The new Ukrainian Supreme Soviet on June 4 elected Volodymyr (Vladimir) Ivashko, as its Chair (de facto President of the Ukraine).
Ivashko defeated three other candidates, polling 278 votes for and 61 against.
Ahead of the voting 110 of the Supreme Soviet's 450 deputies — members of the radical Democratic Bloc uniting the parliamentary groups from the nationalist Rukh organization, the Ukrainian Language Society and the new Republican Party (founded on April 30)— had walked out of the chamber in protest at Ivashko's candidacy, on the grounds that he was also currently the first secretary of the Ukrainian Communist Party (CP), and that the acting Speaker of the chamber had refused to read out a statement by the Democratic Bloc to the effect that combining state and party posts in this way was impermissible.
The Democratic Bloc deputies were supported by up to 10,000 demonstrators gathered outside the Supreme Soviet building while the election was taking place.
Afterwards the deputies declared that they would refuse to recognize Ivashko's election, denouncing it as a "farce" .
For his part Ivashko promised following his election to give up the Ukrainian CP leadership, and at a party congress on June 22-23 he was replaced as first secretary by his former deputy, Stanislav Gurenko.
After four attempts to elect a Chair of the Ukrainian Council of Ministers, the outgoing holder of the post, Vitaly Masol, was re-elected on June 28, despite having been blamed by some deputies during the election debate for the Ukraine's current economic problems.
One round of voting on June 27 was annulled as fraudulent after a number of deputies attempted to vote more than once using voting cards entrusted to them by absent colleagues.
In the final round Masol beat Volodymyr Chernyak by 229 votes to 134.
Election of Russian Premier and Vice-President
The Russian Congress of People's Deputies on June 9 elected a new bicameral Russian Supreme Soviet.
This in turn elected Ivan Silayev as Chair of the Russian Council of Ministers on June 15.
Currently a Deputy Chair of the USSR Council of Ministers and Chair of its Bureau for Machine Building, and regarded as a moderate reformer, Silayev defeated Mikhail Bocharov (reportedly Russian President Boris Yeltsin's favoured candidate) in an inconclusive first round, and standing unopposed and with Yeltsin's public endorsement in a second round he was backed by 163 of the 220 deputies present.
Silayev's election was given the necessary approval by a large majority in the Russian Congress on June 18.
He was released from his USSR government posts on July 2.
Earlier election of Moldavian President and Premier
Mircha Snegur was elected by the Moldavian Supreme Soviet as its Chair (i.e. President of Moldavia) on April 27.
Previously he had been Chair of the Supreme Soviet Presidium.
He defeated Moldavian CP leader Pyotr Luchinsky.
On May 25 Mircha Druk was elected Chair of the Moldavian Council of Ministers.
[These appointments were omitted inadvertently from the roundups of republican appointments on p. 37384 and p. 37460.]
Moratorium on Lithuania's independence declaration
Lithuania's Supreme Council (parliament) on June 29 voted to suspend for 100 days its March 11 declaration of independence in order for negotiations to be held with the Soviet authorities on Lithuania's future status.
In return the Soviet economic blockade in force since mid-April was lifted.
of blockade
Discussion of new union treaty by Federation Council — Gorbachev's meeting with Baltic presidents — Partial lifting
Lithuania's President Vytautas Landsbergis attended for the first time on June 12 a meeting of the USSR Council of the Federation, comprising the Presidents of the 15 union republics (previously he had refused to participate on the grounds that he was the head of a foreign state).
The meeting heard outline proposals by President Mikhail Gorbachev for a new union treaty, which would transform the Soviet Union into a "union of sovereign states" in which some republics might continue to give up many powers to the centre, as in the current federal structure, while others might give up virtually none, as in a confederation.
After the Council session Landsbergis, together with President Arnold Rüütel of Estonia and President Anatolijs (Anatoly) Gorbunovs of Latvia, held a separate meeting with Gorbachev to discuss their republics' moves towards independence.
Gorbachev apparently told Landsbergis that negotiations with Lithuania could begin if it suspended its independence declaration, if only for the duration of those negotiations.
On June 13 Lithuania's Prime Minister Kazimiera Prunskiene met Soviet Prime Minister Nikolai Ryzhkov to discuss the lifting of the Soviet economic blockade in return for suspension of the independence declaration.
Ryzhkov told Prunskiene that the Soviet authorities were to allow unconditionally the partial resumption of natural gas and raw material supplies to selected Lithuanian enterprises (the gas supplies resumed on June 16).
Lithuanian government proposal for suspension of independence declaration — Adoption by Supreme Council
On behalf of her government Prunskiene on June 15 proposed to the Supreme Council that it declare a moratorium on the independence declaration while negotiations with the Soviet authorities were held.
Debate on the issue did not begin, however, until June 26, and in the meantime commentators suggested the existence of deep divisions not only within the Supreme Council but also between the pragmatic Prunskiene and the more hardline nationalist Landsbergis.
On June 19 the council of the nationalist Sajudis movement, of which Landsbergis was chair and which claimed a majority of Supreme Council deputies as members or sympathizers, passed a resolution urging the Supreme Council to reject the moratorium proposal.
On the same day several hundred Sajudis demonstrators protested outside the Supreme Council building, some of them calling on Prunskiene to resign.
The debate on the moratorium had to be suspended on June 27 in order to allow Landsbergis and Prunskiene to fly to Moscow for urgent clarification of the Soviet position on Lithuania's status should the moratorium be declared.
Landsbergis, meeting Gorbachev in Moscow at the latter's request on June 26, had been told that a moratorium would signal a return by Lithuania to its pre-March 11 status, and Landsbergis claimed that this meant that negotiations would formally be between the Soviet Union and one of its constituent republics.
Prunskiene, on the other hand, claimed that in a telephone conversation later on June 26 Gorbachev had assured her that negotiations would be held on an "inter-state" basis, implying equality between the negotiating parties.
Reporting back to the Supreme Council on June 28, Prunskiene quoted Gorbachev as confiding that the Lithuanians and the Soviets should be able to interpret the moratorium in whatever way suited them, so that honour could remain satisfied on both sides.
A formal statement suspending the independence declaration, and all legislative acts deriving from it, was approved by the Supreme Council on June 29 by 69 votes to 35.
It followed a stormy and agonized debate, but Landsbergis's stated support for the moratorium appeared to have swayed many deputies.
A significant amendment to the government's original proposal was the 100-day time limit, included as a concession to radical nationalists, although Prunskiene expressed confidence that negotiations would resolve the key questions within that time.
The moratorium would begin on the same day as negotiations opened.
The oil supply to the Mazeikiai oil refinery was restored on June 30, and on July 2 Ryzhkov confirmed that the entire range of economic sanctions against Lithuania was being ended.
Estonian immigration law
The Estonian Supreme Soviet on June 27 passed a law which restricted immigration into Estonia from the rest of the Soviet Union, as well as from abroad, by establishing quotas for immigrants and introducing permanent and temporary residence permits.
Exempted from the new regulations were people who had held citizenship of the pre-1940 independent Estonia and their descendants.
Deputies from Estonia's Russian minority boycotted the vote on the new law, describing it as discriminatory and claiming that it violated the constitution of Soviet Estonia, although Estonian nationalist deputies countered that that document had ceased to be valid since the March 30 declaration of a transition to independence [see pp. 37322; 37461-62].
Ethnic violence in Kirghizia
The Soviet Union faced another ethnic conflict when rioting and intercommunal violence flared in the Central Asian republic of Kirghizia.
After more than two weeks of clashes involving Kirghiz and Uzbeks, official reports spoke of at least 193 people killed and 1,275 injured.
The violence began on June 4 in the city of Osh, which had a majority Uzbek population, sparked off by a dispute over the use of farmland for housing (the scarcity of housing in Central Asia had become a major political issue in recent years, and had already been a factor in ethnic violence between Uzbeks and Meskhetians in the nearby Fergana valley in June 1989, and in rioting in Tadjikistan in February 1990 — see pp. 36744-45; 37256-57).
A rally was held in a field on an Uzbek-run collective farm on the outskirts of Osh to discuss rival claims for its use, a group of around 1,500 Kirghiz having illegally occupied the field and demanded the right to divide it into housing plots, and around 10,000 Uzbeks having arrived to oppose them.
Attempts at mediation by officials, including Kirghizia's Prime Minister Apas Dzhumagulov, broke down when a large group of Kirghiz arrived, whereupon the Uzbeks rushed the cordon of around 900 police officers keeping the rival nationalities apart.
The troops fired blanks into the air, but were attacked by the Uzbeks with stones and petrol bombs, and only succeeded in clearing the area by firing live rounds over the heads of the crowd.
However, instead of dispersing, the Uzbeks rampaged into the city centre, smashing cars and setting fire to houses, shops and buses along the way.
They tried to storm Interior Ministry buildings but were repulsed by police, who opened fire on them.
In total, the events of June 4 in Osh left 11 people dead and 210 injured.
The Presidium of the Kirghiz Supreme Soviet immediately declared a state of emergency (including a night-time curfew and street patrols) in Osh and surrounding districts.
This failed to prevent the violence from spreading, with clashes between Uzbeks and Kirghiz, pogroms, and attacks on Interior Ministry buildings occurring in several localities in Osh oblast (region) from June 5.
Regular Army units were despatched from Turkmenia to help restore order.
The unrest spread on June 6 to Kirghizia's capital, Frunze, where student demonstrators demanded the dispatch of a volunteer force to protect the Kirghiz population in Osh, and threw stones at a senior Communist Party official attempting to address them, prompting the security forces to fire warning shots.
In the city's markets Uzbek traders were beaten up by Kirghiz students.
The state of emergency was extended to Frunze on June 7 following overnight rampages and a siege of government buildings by student demonstrators demanding the resignation of Kirghizia's leaders [for Frunze demonstrations in February see p. 37256].
Uzbekistan's President, Islam Karimov, on June 8 decreed a state of emergency in districts in Uzbekistan's Andizhan oblast bordering Osh oblast, and warned that the Osh violence could escalate into a full-scale inter-republican armed conflict.
Interior Ministry troops, who on June 6 had sealed border crossings between Uzbekistan and southern Kirghizia, had fought to prevent up to 15,000 Uzbeks armed with makeshift weapons from crossing into Osh oblast to join the fighting on June 7, while gangs of Kirghiz, similarly armed, were reported to have massed on their side of the border.
The security services on June 10 managed to prevent the holding of a nationalist rally in Frunze called by a group calling itself the Kirghiz Democratic Movement.
On the following day, which was declared a day of mourning by Kirghizia's leaders, the security situation both in Frunze and in Osh oblast was reported to be stabilizing, although deaths were reported in Osh up to June 22.
The conflict was discussed at a meeting in Osh city on June 11 between Dzhumagulov and his Uzbek counterpart Shakurulla Mirsaidov, the latter denouncing calls during the conflict by Uzbek nationalists for the areas of Kirghizia with a majority Uzbek population to be declared autonomous or even ceded to Uzbekistan.
Law on press freedom
The USSR Supreme Soviet on June 12 passed a long-awaited law on the press and mass media, featuring detailed guarantees of press freedom and the rules for journalistic practice, and the abolition of censorship.
The law was due to come into force on Aug. 1.
The new law stated that citizens were guaranteed by the USSR Constitution "the right to express opinions and beliefs,[and]to seek, select, receive and disseminate information and ideas in any form" .
It stated further that "censorship of mass information is not permitted" , but listed a number of publishing or broadcasting activities which were proscribed, including disclosure of state secrets, calls for the violent overthrow of the state and social system, expression of racial or religious intolerance, pornography and incitement to commit criminal acts.
The law also featured legal guarantees of privacy for individuals, and defined the procedures for redress in cases of slander or libel of an individual or organization.
A key clause defined freedom of information: journalists had the right to demand information (including access to documents) from state bodies, social organizations and officials, and to appeal to higher bodies or officials and ultimately to the courts if their demands were refused.
The right to "found a mass information medium" was granted (subject to official registration) to state bodies, political parties, social organizations, mass movements, creative unions, associations "formed in accordance with the law" , work collectives and individual citizens.
A monopoly on any medium was forbidden.
Editorial offices had the right of complete economic and financial autonomy.
The law was welcomed by leading Soviet journalists, but it was widely assessed that true press freedom would only be achieved when state control of paper production and of distribution and ownership of print works was ended.
Moreover, prospects for new publishing ventures seemed bleak at a time when the print runs of even state-owned newspapers were being crippled by an acute paper shortage caused by inefficiency and technological obsolescence in the timber and pulp-and-paper industries.
New Russian Orthodox Patriarch
A Local Council of the Russian Orthodox Church (only the fourth such gathering to be held under Soviet rule) on June 7 elected Metropolitan Aleksei of Leningrad and Novgorod as its Patriarch, in succession to Patriarch Pimen, who had died in May.
He was enthroned in Moscow's Epiphany Cathedral on June 10 as Patriarch Aleksei II of Moscow and All Russia.
An ethnic Estonian born Aleksei Ridiger in 1923 in Tallinn (then in independent Estonia), he was described by The Times of June 5 as "a populist figure with a reformist reputation" .
Reportedly he was chosen from a field of at least three candidates after two rounds of secret balloting; commentators suggested that this bore out rumours of divisions within the Church between conservatives and reformers seeking to capitalize on greater freedom from state control by playing a more assertive role in society.
EUROPE
ITALY
Referendums on hunting and use of pesticides
In three referendums held on June 3-4, majorities of around 93 per cent in each case supported proposals to revoke existing laws on game hunting and the use of pesticides in agriculture.
The intention of the environmentalists who had campaigned for the referendums was to make it necessary for parliament to pass new legislation, since this would give them the opportunity to press their demands for much stricter controls.
However, due largely to pro-abstention campaigns waged by the hunting and agribusiness lobbies, only about 44 per cent of a total electorate of some 46,000,000 voted, i.e. less than the legal effective minimum participation of 50 per cent.
The referendum results were thus automatically invalidated — the first time that this had happened.
ASIA — PACIFIC
AFGHANISTAN
Re-naming of PDPA
The ruling People's Democratic Party of Afghanistan (PDPA) held its second congress on June 27-29 (the first having been the founding congress in January 1965; for national conferences in 1982 and 1987 see pp. 31541; 35783-84).
The congress approved the renaming of the PDPA as the Homeland Party (Hezb-e Watan).
Najibullah, the Afghan President and PDPA general secretary, was unanimously elected chair of the Homeland Party.
Four vice-chairs were elected: Solayman La'eq, Farid Ahmad Mazdak, Najmoddin Kawiani and Nazar Mohammad.
A further 144 full members and 59 candidate members were elected to the party's central council (Shura-e Markazi), and 33 members were elected to an Executive Board (Hay'at-e Nezar).
A 14-member Executive Council (Hay'at-e Markazi) was also elected.
EUROPE
YUGOSLAVIA
Second-stage economic package
The Yugoslav government presented on June 30 a second package of economic measures designed to restrain the boom in both public and private spending, which had pushed inflation rates to levels approaching 1,000 per cent at the end of 1989.
The new measures supplemented and renewed the first, interim austerity package introduced in December 1989 [see p. 37194], most of whose provisions were due to expire on July 1.
Presenting the package to the Federal Assembly on June 30, Prime Minister Ante Markovic said that the first stage had reduced the month-on-month inflation rate from 64 per cent in December 1989 to zero in April 1990.
He then announced a partial relaxation of the wage freeze imposed in the original package, but only for employees of companies which were making profits.
At the same time he said that new rules would be drawn up on the ownership of property, in preparation for the privatization of numerous state enterprises; in this context he demanded a cut in bank interest rates, from a typical level of 50 per cent to around 20 per cent, so as to encourage private investment in industry, where he said that productivity had fallen by 10 per cent since the start of the year.
Markovic said that the country's fortunes now rested largely on the conduct of the various republics and autonomous regions which made up the federation.
He called on their respective governments to cut their public spending by up to 18 per cent, to exercise monetary restraint (banknote issuing by local authorities having been a major factor in the inflationary spiral of the previous year), and to co-operate more fully with national policy decisions.
EUROPE
CZECHOSLOVAKIA
General election — New federal government
Czechoslovakia's first free and secret general election since 1946 was held on June 8-9.
The twin citizens' movements, Civic Forum in the Czech Lands and Public Against Violence (PAV) in Slovakia, emerged as the clear winners with about half the total votes cast; there was a turnout of 96.7 per cent of the electorate of 11,247,000.
New federal and republican (Czech and Slovak) governments were appointed at the end of June.
The elections at federal level were for 300 seats in the Federal Assembly — 150 in the Chamber of the People (reduced from 200) and 150 in the Chamber of Nations.
In the Chamber of the People 101 seats were reserved for the Czech Republic and 49 for the Slovak Republic; in the Chamber of Nations each republic had 75 seats.
Parties had to exceed a 5 per cent threshold of votes in either the Czech Lands or Slovakia in order to win seats; votes for unsuccessful parties were redistributed proportionally among successful ones.
Simultaneously elections were also held for the Czech and Slovak National Councils, which had 200 and 150 seats respectively.
Parties had to exceed the 5 per cent limit to win seats in the Czech National Council, but the threshold in Slovakia was only 3 per cent.
Main parties' programmes
The campaign was dominated by the theme of completing the dismantling of communism in the country and the transition to full democracy.
Linked with this were the revival of the economy through a change to a market system, the restoration of the environment, improvement and protection of social conditions, linking the country to pan-European structures, and relations between Czechs and Slovaks.
Party campaigns tended to stress differences in style and personalities as much as policies.
Civic Forum and PAV emphasized that economic prosperity would only come about after sacrifices and hard work, leading to the emergence of a fully-fledged market economy, with a variety of forms of economic ownership.
Civic Forum contested the elections as a coalition of groups and parties from the conservative to the far left, and favouring approaches varying from the centre-liberal to the social democratic sections of the political spectrum.
PAV stressed its commitment to extensive devolution of powers from the federal to the republican governments, but argued for the federal government to retain strong powers for the economic good of the country and to maintain Czech-Slovak co-operation.
PAV campaigned in the elections in coalition with the Independent Hungarian Initiative, a group of members of the Hungarian minority in southern Slovakia.
The coalition of the Christian and Democratic Union (CDU) and the Christian Democratic Movement (CDM) proposed a conservative programme of extensive privatization of state assets and a stress on Christian moral values.
The CDU/CDM coalition had been announced on April 3 by the People's Party (one of the minor parties allied to the Communist Party of Czechoslovakia (CPCz) before November 1989, which had since undergone extensive changes in its leadership and policy) and two parties formed since the November revolution, the (Czech) Christian Democratic Party and the (Slovak) CDM.
The CPCz, in a low-profile campaign, supported the introduction of a market economy but stressed the risks for particular groups, and advocated a continued state role, especially in industry.
The party emphasized the need for the existence of the CPCz (now reformed) as part of a truly pluralist system.
President Vaclav Havel played a prominent role in the campaign, touring the country extensively and urging citizens to use their vote to achieve democratic change.
He was received everywhere with great acclaim, except in Bratislava and Komarno where he was heckled by small groups of Slovak nationalists.
Although he had been nominated for the presidency by Civic Forum (of which he was a founder member) and PAV, it was understood that he would remain strictly neutral in the election campaign.
However, opposing parties complained that his presence at Civic Forum and PAV rallies contravened election rules.
On May 17 Havel addressed a Civic Forum rally in Prague to mark the half-anniversary of the student demonstration which had begun the revolution in November 1989; at this occasion he said that he would vote for named Civic Forum candidates who were government ministers.
The Central Electoral Commission criticized television coverage of this and other Civic Forum and PAV rallies, and ordered that all other parties be given 10 minutes' extra air time to compensate.
Bomb explosion in Prague
A crude home-made bomb exploded in the Old Town Square in Prague on June 2, injuring 18 people.
This was the first major incident of its kind since the beginning of the November revolution.
Richard Sacher, the federal Interior Minister, said that the explosion was politically motivated.
No group claimed responsibility, but Jan Urban, a leading figure in Civic Forum, described it as an attempt to disrupt the elections, and blamed former members of the Statni Bezpecnost (StB — State Security or secret police), which had been abolished on Feb. 1 [see p. 37255].
Urban had earlier accused former StB agents of seeking to disrupt the elections by spreading false rumours and denunciations against candidates standing for election.
Security was increased during the elections to ensure public order and to prevent any interference with polling stations.
Controversy over politicians' links with StB
Jan Ruml, the federal Deputy Interior Minister, issued on June 6 a statement accusing Josef Bartoncik, chairman of the People's Party and Deputy Chairman of the Federal Assembly, of being "an unprincipled man who is trying to hide his past" , and who was therefore unfit to be a deputy in the future Federal Assembly.
The People's Party reacted by rejecting the allegations, and accused Ruml of violating the election law ban on campaigning within the 48 hours before polling began.
At a press conference on June 9 (after the close of polls), it was revealed that Bartoncik had attended a meeting with Havel and his advisers on June 5, when he was shown documentation indicating his involvement as a paid informer for the StB for 17 years.
He had been invited either to refute the allegations publicly or to withdraw from the elections, and reportedly chose to take the second option.
On the same evening he had been admitted to hospital with heart trouble, but although his condition was reported to be good the next day, he did not withdraw his candidacy.
The People's Party central committee on June 14 decided to suspend Bartoncik's chairmanship of the party until his case was settled after further investigation.
Also on June 9, immediately after the close of polls, Jan Budaj, Deputy Chairman of the Slovak National Council (parliament) and a leading PAV candidate for the Council, announced that he was withdrawing his candidacy, saying that he had been registered as a collaborator with the StB in the 1970s.
He had been forced to sign a co-operation agreement in order to obtain a passport, although he had never actually collaborated.
Many parties (including Civic Forum and PAV) had asked the Interior Ministry to screen their candidates for possible collaboration with the StB in the past, and 166 candidates were reported to have withdrawn by the eve of the elections.
Election results
In the Czech Lands Civic Forum won about half the total votes, and in Slovakia PAV emerged as the clear winner, although the latter had been expected until shortly before the election to come second to the CDM.
The success of the two movements was attributed to their association with the highly popular Havel and to the fact that their candidates included some of the most prominent ministers in the government of national understanding.
The CPCz did better than expected, becoming the second largest force in the Federal Assembly and in the Czech National Council.
Despite having lost half its membership since November 1989, the CPCz still had some 900,000 members, more than any other single party.
The CDU/CDM coalition came fourth in the Federal Assembly, the CDU coming third in the Czech National Council while the CDM emerged as the second strongest group in the Slovak National Council.
The CDU's showing was thought to have been affected by the allegations against Bartoncik on the eve of the elections.
Smaller groups which also gained representation in the Federal Assembly were (i) the Movement for Self-governing Democracy-Society for Moravia and Silesia (MSD-SMS), which sought the restoration of separate government for the historic territory of Moravia-Silesia;(ii) the Slovak National Party, demanding total internal autonomy for Slovakia, favouring the retention of links with Prague only in foreign affairs and defence (although with separate representation abroad for Slovakia), and seen by many as basically hostile to the Czechs and to the Hungarian minority in Slovakia; and (iii) Coexistence (also known by its Hungarian name Egyutteles), a coalition of the Hungarian, Polish and other minority nationalities, which formed an electoral alliance with the Hungarian Christian Democratic Movement, and polled heavily among the Hungarian minority in southern Slovakia.
Among other parties, unexpectedly low levels of support were recorded for the Green Party (which did, however, win seats in the Slovak National Council), the Socialist Party and Social Democrats.
A total of 24 parties, movements and coalitions contested the federal elections.
Chamber of the People Party/group Percentage Seats Civic Forum/PAV 46.6 87 CPCz 13.6 23 CDU/CDM 12.0 20 MSD-SMS 5.4 9 Slovak National Party 3.5 6 Coexistence 2.8 5 Others 16.1 0 Chamber of Nations Civic Forum/PAV 45.9 83 CPCz 13.7 24 CDU/CDM 11.3 20 Slovak National Party 3.6 9 MSD-SMS 6.2 7 Coexistence 2.7 7 Others 16.6 0 
Federal election results
New federal and republican governments
Formation of federal government
Negotiations on the formation of a coalition federal government began immediately after the elections.
Civic Forum and PAV, while enjoying a simple majority in the Federal Assembly, did not have the three-fifths majority required to pass constitutional amendments.
Marian Calfa, Prime Minister in the outgoing federal government, was nominated by Civic Forum and PAV and designated by President Havel to begin negotiations with other parties.
Civic Forum and PAV leaders expressed a wish to include Jan Carnogursky, Deputy Premier in the outgoing government and a leading figure in the CDM, but the CDM initially refused to join the government because it felt that the poor showing of the CDU/CDM in the elections would prevent the implementation of anything in its programme.
However, it was persuaded to change its decision, although Carnogursky himself preferred to participate in the new Slovak government [see below]rather than federal level.
The federal Cabinet announced and sworn in on June 27 contained only 16 members, of whom nine had served in the outgoing government.
Civic Forum was represented by four ministers, PAV by three and the CDM by one, while the Cabinet also contained eight unaffiliated "experts" by agreement between the coalition partners.
The new Cabinet held its first session on June 28, and agreed on proposals to restructure the government, in particular by merging a number of specialized ministries into a Ministry of Economy.
A minor controversy arose briefly because the resignation of the outgoing Cabinet and the appointment of the new Cabinet had taken place before the closing of the first session of the new Federal Assembly on June 27, contravening the Constitution.
To resolve matters, the new Cabinet resigned on the morning of June 29 and was immediately reappointed in its entirety.
Appointment of new Slovak and Czech governments
Vladimir Meciar (PAV), Interior Minister in the outgoing Slovak government, was appointed Prime Minister of the Slovak Republic on June 27; Carnogursky was appointed First Deputy Premier.
The Slovak government named on the same day included a total of 13 ministers from PAV, seven from the CDM and three from the Democratic Party.
Meciar held a press conference on June 28 to outline changes in government structure similar to those approved by the federal Cabinet.
He also said that Carnogursky would be responsible for co-ordinating the work of the Ministries of Education, Culture, Health, and Labour and Social Affairs, and for dealing with issues connected with the national minorities.
Petr Pithart, Prime Minister of the outgoing Czech government [see p. 37255], was reappointed on June 29.
The new Czech government appointed on the same day included a total of nine ministers from Civic Forum, two from the People's Party, one from the MSD/SMS and nine without party affiliation.
Election of federal parliamentary leaders
At the first joint session of both chambers of the Federal Assembly on June 27, Alexander Dubcek was re-elected Chairman of the Federal Assembly.
Earlier, the Chamber of the People had elected Rudolf Battek (Civic Forum) as its Chairman, while Milan Sutovec (PAV) was elected Chairman of the Chamber of Nations.
*Marian Calfa (PAV) Federal Premier *Vaclav Vales (unaffiliated) Federal Deputy Premier responsible for economic reform Pavel Rychetsky (unaffiliated) Federal Deputy Premier Jozef Miklosko (CDM) Federal Deputy Premier responsible for human rights sphere, including information policy *Jiri Dienstbier (Civic Forum) Federal Deputy Premier; Minister of Foreign Affairs *Miroslav Vacek (unaffiliated) Federal Minister of National Defence Jan Langos (PAV) Federal Minister of the Interior *Vaclav Klaus (Civic Forum) Federal Minister of Finance *Slavomir Stracar (PAV) Federal Minister of Foreign Trade *Vladimir Dlouhy (Civic Forum) Federal Minister in charge of Ministry of Economy Pavel Hoffmann (unaffiliated) Federal Minister in charge of Ministry of National Economic Strategy *Petr Miller (Civic Forum) Federal Minister of Labour and Social Affairs Jiri Nezval (unaffiliated) Federal Minister of Transport Theodor Petrik (unaffiliated) Federal Minister of Communications Josef Vavrousek (unaffiliated) Federal Minister *Kvetoslava Korinkova (unaffiliated) Federal Minister *Member of outgoing Cabinet.
Czechoslovak coalition government
EUROPE
BULGARIA
BSP election victory
In democratic elections held on June 10 and 17, Bulgaria, alone among the countries of Eastern Europe, returned to power the former ruling party, the erstwhile Bulgarian Communist Party which had been renamed the Bulgarian Socialist Party (BSP) on April 3 [see pp. 37380-81].
Whereas rejection of Soviet dominance had been seen as an element in the poor support for communists and ex-communists elsewhere, the Economist of June 16 suggested that Bulgarians were comparatively well disposed to Russians, regarding them historically as "Slav brothers who freed Bulgaria from the Turks in 1878" .
As a result, there was less of a clash between communist and nationalist interests.
Election campaign
Bulgaria's lack of a democratic tradition and organization was a stumbling block for the main opposition grouping, the Union of Democratic Forces (UDF), which was also seen as striking too negative a tone in its campaign, and as having made a tactical error in spending time campaigning abroad, thus exacerbating the UDF's image as a party of the intellectual urban elite.
On May 19 Petar Beron, the UDF secretary, claimed during a tour of Western countries that the UK Foreign and Commonwealth Secretary Douglas Hurd was preparing a European Community (EC) declaration which would rule out assistance for communist governments.
The existence of such a draft statement was immediately denied.
UDF posters showing mass graves recently unearthed [see p. 37381]were seen as distasteful by much of the population.
One Bulgarian woman was quoted in the Financial Times on June 5 as saying: "The two main parties have turned the media and the campaign into a slanging match." 
The campaign was marred by violence which intensified as the election drew near.
Several UDF supporters were killed, including one activist who was shot dead by an Army officer in the northern town of Shumen on June 7.
While both the BSP and the UDF had called for calm, the UDF had refused to sign a BSP-inspired non-violence declaration (which many opposition parties rejected as a BSP propaganda ploy), issuing instead on May 27 its own non-violence declaration, which included the rejection of violence, government overthrow by force and racial discrimination.
Results
The election was conducted according to an electoral law agreed during the round table talks, which provided for half the 400 Grand National Assembly seats to be elected on a constituency basis and the remainder by proportional representation [see p. 37380].
Voter turnout was high.
In the first round on June 10, 90.79 per cent of the 6,976,620 eligible voters cast votes to elect constituency members, and 90.6 per cent of the electorate cast votes to determine the distribution of the remaining 200 seats on a proportional basis.
A second round was held on June 17 in 81 constituencies, where no candidate had succeeded in obtaining the necessary first round overall majority; the turnout in this second round was 84.14 per cent of those eligible.
Seats* Percentage Proportional Constituency Total of vote** representation seats BSP 47.15 97 114 211 UDF 37.84 75 69 144 BZNS 8.03 16 0 16 MRF 6.03 12 11 23 Fatherland Union *** 0 2 2 BSDP 0.05 0 1 1 Fatherland Party of Labour *** 0 1 1 Independents *** 0 2 2 Others 0.90 0 0 0 Total 200 200 400 *Only parties receiving at least 4 per cent of valid votes in all multi-member constituencies could win seats on a proportional basis (although other parties could and did win direct election).
**Represents percentage of vote won on a proportional basis on individual party lists.
***Did not stand in the proportional elections for party electoral lists.
Election results
Support for the BSP, led by former BCP ideology chief Alexander Lilov, was strongest in the countryside, where communists in local party or mayoral offices still dominated politics.
The BSP Prime Minister Andrei Lukanov described the result as "a vote of confidence" .
By contrast Sofia, the capital, was the stronghold of the UDF, which comprised some 16 different parties or movements ranging from the environmental group Eco-Glasnost (which had been the first to oppose the former communist regime — see p. 36980) to Podkrepa, the rapidly growing free trade union movement.
Zhelyu Zhelev, president of the UDF, described the results as "positive for us, considering that the BSP is forced to establish a definitely weak government, while we shall be a very strong opposition, without which no one can adopt any decisions" .
The BSP would need UDF support to pass legislation requiring a two-thirds majority, including major economic changes and the adoption of a new constitution.
Immediately after the election the UDF refused the BSP's offer of a coalition government.
The Movement for Rights and Freedoms (MRF), led by a 36-year-old philosophy professor Ahmed Dogan, did better than expected.
The MRF represented the interests of Bulgaria's Turkish minority and Islamicized Bulgarians, who had been subject to widespread discrimination [see pp. 36747; 36662; 36771].
Before the elections Beron had maintained that the MRF should be banned on the basis that it was a militarized organization founded on an ethnic basis (and therefore not allowed to contest the election).
Dogan issued a statement on June 6 denying this allegation and reiterating the MRF's right to function as a party.
After the election, opposition groups again protested against allowing the MRF to operate as a political party.
A report on June 27 stated that signatures were being collected insisting on the cancellation of its registration, but on the following day the Council of Ministers announced that the charges against the MRF were groundless.
The Bulgarian Agrarian People's Union (BZNS) was formerly the only legal political party besides the BCP, with which it had been allied.
After the fall of the Zhivkov regime in November 1989 the party had split, and a breakaway Nikola Petkov Agrarian Party allied itself with the UDF.
The Fatherland Front (the former umbrella organization of the BCP and the BZNS) changed its name at an extraordinary congress on March 30-April 1, 1990, to the Fatherland Union in an attempt to avoid the "front-line sound" of its name.
The aims of the Fatherland Union were set out as being "to protect national interests, strengthen national unity and concord and unite everybody in the name of Bulgaria" .
The Bulgarian Social Democrat Party (BSDP) had originally called itself the Bulgarian Socialist Party, but redesignated itself as the Bulgarian Social Democratic Party (non-Marxist), at its first national conference held on March 31 in Sofia, thereby ceding the BSP name to be adopted by the BCP [see p. 37380].
The party, banned more than 40 years beforehand, had elected Petur Dertliev as party chair.
The only seat won by the nationalist Fatherland Party of Labour was won by the party's leader Dimitar Arnaudov in the town of Kurdjali, where according to the Guardian of June 18 there had been an "ugly backlash against the restoration of the rights of Bulgaria's ethnic Turkish minority" earlier in 1990.
Conduct of elections
Foreign observers declared the elections fair, but irregularities (such as lack of voter privacy, and the presence of uniformed officers and local mayors canvassing outside polling stations) were reported to be more pronounced in the second round.
Observers did not deem them serious enough to put the election results into question, and the UDF, which had described the elections as dishonest and unfair on June 14, issued a statement on June 22 supporting the Central Electoral Commission.
On June 11 in Sofia, after the first round of elections, as many as 100,000 students and opposition supporters called for fresh elections to be held.
Similar protests and sit-ins took place across the country, in at least 12 other cities and towns.
On June 14 the UDF television station screened a videotape of a demonstration held outside the National Assembly building on Dec. 14, 1989, in which President Petar Mladenov could be heard saying: "The best thing to do is to bring the tanks in." 
Mladenov dismissed the videotape as a fraudulent "montage" , but students demanded a full public investigation.
Other demands included the resignation of television director-general Pavel Pisarev, whom the students accused of maintaining a news blackout over the election irregularities and over protest demonstrations.
On June 25 in Sofia 40,000 people (including UDF officials) marched through the streets in support of these student demands.
EUROPE
ROMANIA
Violent end to Bucharest demonstration
University Square in central Bucharest, which had been occupied by anti-communist demonstrators since April 22, was cleared by police in a dawn raid on June 13, provoking three days of the most violent clashes seen in Romania since the December revolution.
Twice the planned inauguration of President-elect Ion Iliescu had to be postponed and the announcement of the new government correspondingly delayed.
Bucharest sit-in against Iliescu and NSF
Several attempts were made to open a dialogue between the government and protestors, who were demanding the resignation of all high-ranking former communists from Iliescu's provisional National Salvation Front (NSF) government.
Adopting as a mark of defiance the name golani ( "tramps" ), as Iliescu had disparagingly described them, they claimed that the NSF had "stolen" the revolution and had only won the May 20 general election by deceit and intimidation [see pp. 37441-42].
Government spokesmen had indicated on June 11 a willingness to consider one of the protestors' later demands, namely the opening up of an independent television station.
On June 12, however, it acceded to a request made by the Prosecutor's Office to restore order in the square, the latter saying that the area where the protestors and hunger strikers had erected their tents, had become a "temporary haven for drug trafficking, prostitution and black marketeering" .
In the early hours of the morning of June 13 riot police armed with truncheons and electric prods moved in, burning down the tents and arresting 263 people.
Riots in Bucharest
The police action brought thousands of protestors back to the centre of Bucharest.
Unidentified groups of rioters attacked and set on fire the city police headquarters, where it was believed that some of those arrested earlier in University Square were being held.
Others attacked the Ministry of the Interior, formerly the headquarters of the Securitate (secret police), the Romanian Information Service and the Romanian Television building.
For a while the television channel went off the air as protesters swarmed into the building, before troops and government supporters pushed them out.
Amid mounting chaos, Iliescu issued a radio appeal to factory workers and others to come on to the streets to defend the revolution.
 "We are facing an organized attempt to remove by force and violence the country's elected leaders," he said, and he called on workers to "support the action of eliminating this fascist rebellion" .
Miners' violent attack on protesters
Miners (who had come to Bucharest once before, in February, to demonstrate their support for the NSF — see p. 37252) were brought into Bucharest by truck, train and bus in the early hours of June 14.
They set about attacking anyone suspected of being an anti-government protestor, using clubs and iron bars.
According to Health Ministry figures, four people had been killed and 93 injured up to the time of the miners' arrival on the scene.
By the end of the three days of what one eyewitness described as a "vigilante rampage" , the Health Ministry announced that six people were dead and 502 hospitalized, seven in a serious condition.
The figures gave the overwhelming impression that the miners (estimated at around 10,000) were responsible for most of the injuries.
One of the first to be beaten up and hospitalized was Marian Munteanu, the President of the League of Students and one of the leaders of the University Square protest.
He was later arrested along with Dumitru Dinca and Nica Leon, president of the National Democratic Party, and all three were charged with inciting violence.
The government claimed that the miners had come to Bucharest "spontaneously" but admitted that they were fed and lodged in government-owned sports halls.
They were centrally directed (some said by officers of the former Securitate) and not only attacked anyone resembling a student, but also attacked gypsies and the homes of prominent opposition politicians.
They ransacked the offices of the two main opposition parties and smashed their way into the offices of the leading opposition newspaper, Romania Libera, demanding that it be closed.
Print workers refused to publish the paper and called for its banning, along with Dreptatea and 22, the journal of the independent intellectuals' association, the Group for Social Dialogue.
Iliescu's thanks to miners — Sacking of Interior Minister
Before leaving Bucharest to return home on June 15, the miners were congratulated on their action by Iliescu.
He told them: "I thank you once again for what you have demonstrated: that you are people who can be counted on, especially in difficult moments." 
However, the Prime Minister, Petre Roman, admitted that the miners at times had been out of control and had committed violence against innocent people, although he supported their mobilization to aid the government.
Given the ineffectiveness of the police and indecisive action by the Army, Iliescu called for the establishment of a specially-trained national guard, at the same time banning the Committee for the Democratization of the Army, a group of young, reform-minded officers who wanted their leaders who had served under the previous Ceausescu regime ousted [see p. 37252].
He also replaced the Interior Minister, Gen. Mihai Ghitac, with Doru Viorel Ursu, a lawyer and president of the Bucharest Military Tribunal.
Foreign reaction to violence
Western governments swiftly condemned the brutality and threatened to block economic assistance to Romania.
The United States declared that all non-humanitarian US economic support would be withheld "until the democratic process is restored" ; nor would action be taken on Romania's bid to regain "most favoured nation" trade status, which would allow low tariffs for exports to the USA.
The European Communities (EC) suspended a trade and co-operation agreement which had only been initialled on June 8, and withdrew an invitation to Romania to attend a meeting of the G-24 nations in Paris in July.
The financial consequences of this action would be to exclude Romania from EC budget funding set up to help Romania and three other East European countries.
Return of protesters to University Square
With the withdrawal of the miners, protestors again returned to University Square on June 18, but the new Interior Minister embarked on a series of talks with student leaders to defuse the situation.
Inauguration of Iliescu
On June 20 Iliescu was sworn in as President.
The ceremony was boycotted by the US ambassador despite the fact that the government had on June 16 announced the opening of an inquiry into the events surrounding the violence.
In his inaugural address Iliescu referred to the "excesses" committed by the miners, but remained unapologetic about his decision to call them in.
Formation of new government
Iliescu also announced on June 20 the nomination of Petre Roman as Prime Minister, calling on him to form a new government, which was presented to parliament on June 28.
In introducing the 23 ministers, only two of whom, apart from the Prime Minister himself, had served in the previous interim administration, Roman stressed their youth and their "clean" past.
They "did not belong to the higher party and state hierarchy of the former regime" , he declared.
At the same time he unveiled a radical economic programme which called for the rapid transition to a market economy, and the "liquidation of inertia and conservatism" in the state bureaucracy.
He said it was the government's intention to privatize 30-40 per cent of state assets and he asked for a six-month moratorium on trade union pay demands.
The speech was welcomed by the opposition who saw these developments in sharp contrast to the more cautious approach to change signalled by Iliescu during the election campaign.
Petre Roman Prime Minister Anton Vatasescu Minister of State responsible for industry and commerce Ion Aurel Stoica Minister of State responsible for quality of life and social security Eugen Dijmarescu Minister of State responsible for economic orientation Adrian Severin Deputy Premier; Minister for Reform and Relations with Parliament Adrian Nastase Foreign Affairs Col.-Gen.
Victor Atanasie Stanculescu Defence Theodor Stolojan Finance Doru Viorel Ursu Interior Victor Babiuc Justice Mihail Zisu Resources and Industry Constantin Fota Trade and Tourism Ioan Tip Agriculture and Food Industry Andrei Chirica Communications Doru Pana Public Works, Transport and Territorial Planning Stefan Gheorghe Education and Science Valeriu Eugen Pop Environment Andrei Gabriel Plesu Culture Bogdan Marinescu Health Catalin Zamfir Labour and Social Security Bogdan Nicolae Niculescu Duvaz Youth and Sports Romulus Neagu Secretary of State at the Ministry of Foreign Affairs Andrei Tugulea Secretary of State at the Ministry of Education and Science 
Members of the Council of Ministers
28 June 1990
Prison sentence for Ceausescu's brother
On June 21 Lt.-Gen.
Nicolae Andruta Ceausescu, the younger brother of executed former President Nicolae Ceausescu, was sentenced by a military tribunal of the Supreme Court to 15 years' imprisonment and demoted.
As commander of the training school for secret police officers at Baneasa, near Bucharest, he was accused of "instigation of genocide, aggravated murder and violation of firearms regulations" , in connection with the massacre of demonstrators outside the Intercontinental Hotel in Bucharest on Dec. 21, 1989 [see p. 37104].
EUROPE
POLAND
Disputes within Solidarity
A major political dispute arose during June 1990 between Lech Walesa, the chairman of the trade union Solidarity, and the government of Solidarity sympathizers, led by Tadeusz Mazowiecki, over the future structure of the union.
Coinciding as it did with the announcement of major price rises for key consumer products, and with growing concern about rising levels of unemployment, Walesa's stated ambition to foment "permanent political war" within the Polish system threatened a severe destabilization of the Government's political platform.
The dispute was, however, temporarily resolved at the end of the month, after appeals by leading intellectuals, and after a vote by the union's leading body against a government proposal for a new national structure.
The government wanted Solidarity to restructure itself, replacing its single national co-ordinating committee with a new system headed by a national federation of the committees which conducted its day-to-day operations.
It sought formal Solidarity support for the government through a permanent representation committee.
Walesa argued, however, that such a system would politicize the union, and that it would undermine the rights of the thousands of non-government supporters who currently belonged to Solidarity.
[For discussion of political issues at January 1990 Solidarity conference see p. 37383.]
Further divisions concerned the date for presidential elections which all sides agreed should supersede the mid-1989 elections [see p. 36828]in the light of the constitutional reforms enacted since then.
Walesa wanted an election in the autumn of 1990, and had already been nominated as a candidate by the Centre Alliance (a new political grouping formed by his supporters on May 18), with the additional support of the Green Party.
Mazowiecki preferred delaying elections until the spring of 1991.
Many Solidarity leaders, including Adam Michnik, the editor of the Solidarity newspaper Gazeta Wyborcza, accused Walesa of exploiting the dispute with the government in order to further his presidential ambitions.
Michnik, who had written on June 7 that Walesa was behaving "like a Caesar" , resigned in protest from the union's national civic committee on June 24, together with Zbigniew Bujak and Henryk Wujec (both founding members of the union committee), after Walesa had dismissed Wujec from his post as secretary of the committee.
The dispute within Solidarity reached its height during the June 29-July 1 meeting of the Solidarity citizens' committees in Warsaw, at which some observers feared a complete break-up of the union, and at which Michnik publicly appealed to Walesa to step back from a potentially ruinous confrontation with the government.
On June 30, however, the delegates voted by a large majority against creating any new national structures of the type favoured by the government: 89 voted in favour of the status quo, compared with 11 in favour of appointing the proposed national body and 10 in favour of a compromise suggestion that Solidarity should develop a "formula of co-operation" with the government which did not entail setting up permanent structures.
EUROPE
POLAND-SOVIET UNION
Discovery of more wartime graves
It was disclosed during June that mass graves containing more remains of about 15,000 Polish Army officers massacred by their Soviet captors in 1940 had been located near Kharkov in the east Ukraine and at Mednoye near Kalinin in western Russia.
Previously, the remains of some 4,000 of the massacre victims had been unearthed, at Katyn forest near Smolensk in 1943 [for April 1990 Soviet admission of massacre see pp. 37383-84].
The newspaper Moscow News reported on June 11 that a local KGB (State Security Committee) official had confirmed that the graves in a forest outside Kharkov, uncovered in April, contained the remains of Polish officers interned at the camp run by the NKVD (the KGB's forerunner) at Starobelsk, as well as the remains of Soviet citizens executed by the NKVD in the Stalinist purges before the Second World War.
On June 19 the Polish government revealed that Soviet officials had reported the discovery at Mednoye of what appeared to be the remains of Polish officers interned at the Ostashkov NKVD camp.
MIDDLE EAST — ARAB WORLD
ISRAEL
Formation of new Likud-led government — Implications for peace process
Formation of new coalition
Itzhak Shamir, caretaker Prime Minister since March and leader of the right-wing Likud Party, announced on June 8 the formation of a new government following the signing of a coalition agreement and a series of policy guidelines with six religious and nationalist parties.
Shamir reached the coalition agreement only hours before the deadline set by President Chaim Herzog for the formation of a new government.
Israel had been in political crisis since March 15, when the previous ruling coalition between Labour and Likud collapsed in disagreement over how to proceed with the Middle East Peace process [see pp. 37303-04].
The Labour leader, Shimon Peres, had proved unable to achieve a majority [see pp. 37391-02]and Shamir was invited to try on April 27.
This was followed by weeks of bargaining with the smaller parties over ministerial posts and policies.
Herzog's original deadline of May 18 was extended by 21 days to allow negotiations to continue.
Shamir would have preferred to have formed a broad coalition government with Labour, but this became impossible for him in view of statements made by Labour Ministers suggesting that they supported contacts with the PLO, and in view of pressure from hardline Likud members such as Ariel Sharon to form a right-wing government.
In his June 8 announcement Shamir claimed to have the allegiance of 62 members of the 120-seat Knesset (parliament): 40 seats from Likud, the rest from three small religious parties (Shas, Mafgal (the National Religious Party) and Degel Hatorah) and three right-wing nationalist parties (Moledet, Tehiya and Tzomet), and three individuals, including a Labour Party defector, Ephraim Gur.
The agreed guidelines for the new government pledged "to further the cause of peace in accordance with the Camp David Accords and the May 1989 [Shamir]peace initiative [see p. 36670]" .
They also emphasized the "right of Jews to settle in all parts of Greater Israel" , and said that the government would "enhance, expand and develop" Jewish settlement in the West Bank and Gaza Strip.
Vote of confidence — New Cabinet — Labour leadership issue
The new government won a vote of confidence in the Knesset on June 11, by 62 votes to 57 with one abstention.
The debate was acrimonious, with opposition parties denouncing Shamir's deals with defectors from other parties to win his working majority.
The position of the ultra-orthodox Agudat Yisrael party, allied with the Labour Party, remained unclear.
One of its five members, Rabbi Eliezer Mizrahi, voted for the new government and another, Rabbi Averham Verdiger, abstained [see p. 37392].
It was reported that Shamir intended to persuade Agudat Yisrael to join his coalition government.
The 19-member Cabinet presented to Herzog on June 11 was described by commentators as the "most right-wing in the country's history" .
The Labour Party labelled the new government "a national disaster, which contradicts the interests and needs of the State of Israel" .
Labour leader Shimon Peres said: "The government was created in sin.
Most of its time will be spent in holding it together, instead of advancing the state."
He angrily denounced Gur (the Labour Party defector), Mizrahi and the Shas party for supporting the new government, having originally agreed in April to support a Labour government [see pp. 37391-92]
Itzhak Rabin of the Labour Party raised on June 12 the issue of who should lead the party in opposition.
Pressure had been growing for a change of leadership since the failure of Peres to form a government in April [see pp. 37391-2].
A report by an internal party committee set up to review Labour's failure in elections in November 1988, which had been presented to the central committee on May 27, strongly criticised Peres for running a campaign based on the cult of his own personality.
Police began investigating on June 10 allegations that the new Interior Minister, Arie Der'i, a member of the Shas Party, had illegally channelled government funds to religious institutions to reward political supporters.
Itzhak Shamir (Likud) Prime Minister, Environment, Labour and Social Affairs David Levi (Likud) Vice Prime Minister and Foreign Affairs Moshe Nissim (Likud) Vice Prime Minister; Trade and Industry Moshe Arens (Likud) Defence Itzhak Moda'i (Likud) Finance *Ariel Sharon(Likud) Housing and Construction Ehud Olmert (Likud) Health Dan Meridor (Likud) Justice Moshe Katsav (Likud) Transport Gideon Patt (Likud) Tourism Ronni Milo (Likud) Police *David Magen (Likud) Economy and Planning Itzhak Peretz(Independent) Immigration and Absorption Arie Der'i (Shas) Interior *Rafael Pinhasi (Shas) Communications Zevulun Hammer (Mafgal) Education and Culture *Avner Shaki (Mafgal) Religious Affairs *Yuval Ne'eman (Tehiya) Science and Energy *Rafael Eitan (Tsomet) Agriculture *New members.
New Israeli Cabinet
International reaction to new government
The new government was greeted with dismay in the United States because of its perceived reluctance to proceed with a US-brokered plan for talks in Egypt with Palestinians [see pp. 37303-04].
US Secretary of State James Baker, addressing the foreign affairs committee of the House of Representatives on June 13, said that the stance of the new government could be summed up as "there will be no dialogue unless the Palestinians accept our position in advance" .
Without some "really good-faith affirmative action" on Israel's part, he added, there could be no progress towards peace.
He listed the White House telephone number and in a message to Shamir said "when you're serious about peace, call us" .
The PLO on June 11 described the government as a "war Cabinet" , which could be expected to increase repression against the Palestinians.
Palestinian leaders in the occupied territories called for an escalation of the intifada, in response to the formation of what they called a "terrorist" government.
The Arab world was alarmed at the implications of the new Cabinet for the peace process, formed as it was at a time when the USA was considering breaking off its 16-month dialogue with the PLO, following the abortive raid on the Israeli coast on May 30 [see this page for breaking off of dialogue on June 20].
The state-controlled Egyptian newspaper al-Akbar said that the new government was "controlled by hawks, shedders of blood and the most mad extremists who call for war" and that "it is a government to cause regional disasters" .
Shamir's peace gestures
The new Cabinet met for the first time on June 12 and Shamir attempted to head off Arab-led calls for a special UN Security Council team to visit the West Bank and Gaza [see p. 37443]by proposing that a UN envoy, Jean-Claude Aimé, should visit the area in their place.
The move was immediately denounced as a "surrender" by one of the three far-right parties in the coalition.
On June 18 Shamir continued his efforts to appear committed to the peace process, proposing in an interview with the Egyptian magazine Mayyu to invite President Hafez al-Assad of Syria to visit Jerusalem for peace talks, and declaring his willingness to talk to any "elected Arab representative" from the West Bank or Gaza (but not Jerusalem).
There was very little expectation that Assad would accept the invitation.
In a further gesture part of the Arab University of Al Quds, closed since the beginning of the intifada, was reopened on June 16.
MIDDLE EAST — ARAB WORLD
PALESTINIAN AFFAIRS
Suspension of US-PLO dialogue
The Middle East peace process encountered another stumbling block in mid-June when the United States suspended its 18-month-long dialogue with the Palestine Liberation Organization (PLO).
The cessation of the talks prompted speculation that Palestinian moderates would come under increased pressure to abandon their policy of negotiation and formally resume the armed struggle against Israel.
The USA had begun diplomatic contact with the PLO in December 1988 [not 1987 as erroneously stated on p. 37444]after PLO Chairman Yassir Arafat had "totally and absolutely renounced all forms of terrorism" [see p. 36438].
The US ambassador to Tunisia, Robert Pelletreau, had led the US delegation in a series of regular meetings in Tunis with PLO representatives.
The USA first threatened to call off talks with the PLO in the immediate aftermath of the May 30 seaborne attack on the Israeli coast by guerrillas of the Palestine Liberation Front (PLF)[see pp. 37443-44].
The USA insisted that Arafat denounce both the attack and the PLF leader, Mahmoud Abul Abbas, a member of the PLO Executive Committee.
Arafat denied any involvement in the planning of the attack, but refused to denounce what he claimed was a "military" mission (the Israelis, however, claimed that the attack was aimed specifically at civilians).
Following intervention by Sweden (which had played a major role in initiating the US-PLO dialogue in 1988), the PLO issued a statement on June 11 which declared that the organization remained "against any military action which targets civilians, regardless of the nature of such actions, and we condemn it" .
The US administration, which was under heavy congressional pressure to break off its dialogue with the PLO, expressed its "disappointment" at the statement.
Bush's statement calling off dialogue
During a visit to Alabama on June 20 US President George Bush announced that he had "decided to suspend the dialogue between the USA and the PLO pending a satisfactory response from the PLO on the steps it is taking to resolve problems associated with the recent acts of terrorism" .
He had taken the decision reluctantly, he said, and in the face of opposition from some of the USA's strongest allies.
 "At any time the PLO is prepared to take the necessary steps," he went on, "we are prepared to resume the dialogue." 
These "necessary steps" , Bush said, included "condemning the [May 30]operation, dissociating itself from it, and beginning to take steps to discipline Abul Abbas, the perpetrator" .
Reaction to US decision
On June 20 Jamil Hilal, the director of the PLO information department in Tunis, described Bush's decision as an "unfriendly and provocative act" and "a blow to the peace process" .
He said that the PLO would call on all Arab states to implement economic sanctions against the USA.
On the same day the Israeli embassy in Washington stated that the decision would "enhance and promote the peace process" by encouraging "those Palestinians seeking peace with Israel to seize upon this opportunity to begin a direct dialogue with Israel" .
The Egyptian government expressed regret over the US decision on June 21 and stated that direct negotiation and continuous dialogue were the only way to resolve the dispute.
Radical Palestinian groups claimed that the US decision demonstrated that the path of moderation adopted by the PLO at the 19th session of the Palestine National Council (the Palestinian "parliament in exile" ) in November 1988 [see p. 36438]was redundant.
Nayef Hawatmeh, leader of the Democratic Front for the Liberation of Palestine (DFLP), issued a call on June 21 for the PLO to revise its "peace strategy" .
Georges Habash, leader of the Popular Front for the Liberation of Palestine (PFLP), had issued a statement on June 9 calling for a PNC session to evaluate the PLO's "previous experiment" .
Both Hawatmeh and Habash had voted against the moderate "political statement" adopted at the 19th PNC session, but had agreed to accept the Council's majority decision.
Palestinian "rejectionist" groups, who had not even attended the 19th PNC session, also called for a change in PLO policy.
In a statement on June 21 Ahmed Jabril's Popular Front for the Liberation of Palestine — General Command described the US decision as "a historic opportunity for the PLO to conduct a stringent, critical review of its policies" and called on Arafat to return to the policy of armed struggle.
MIDDLE EAST — ARAB WORLD
LEBANON
Return of Phalangist leader to government — Foreign visits — Peace initiatives
George Sa'adah, the Phalangist Party leader, re-entered the government of Selim al-Hoss on June 5, returning to the post of Minister of Telecommunications and Posts from which he had resigned in mid-January.
A statement issued by the Phalangist Party on June 5 claimed that the withdrawal of Sa'adah's resignation was linked to a "working plan to revive state institutions and solve the people's problems" .
President Hrawi's foreign tour
President Elias Hrawi, accompanied by Hoss, visited Egypt, Libya and Tunisia on June 5-10.
In a report on Hrawi's tour on June 10, the (Phalangist) Voice of Lebanon radio stated that the President had been seeking Arab support for the implementation of the October 1989 Taif Accord for Lebanese national reconciliation [see p. 36986].
Voice of Lebanon also reported that Egypt and Libya had agreed to provide light weaponry to the Lebanese gendarmerie, but had refused to contribute weapons to the Army.
In late June Hrawi and Hoss paid visits to a number of Gulf States including Bahrain, Qatar, Kuwait and the United Arab Emirates.
Establishment of international assistance fund
The Arab League's "troika" committee on Lebanon (comprising Saudi Arabia, Morocco and Algeria — see p. 36669) announced on June 22 the establishment of an International Fund for Assisting Lebanon, which aimed to raise US$1,000 million to "serve reconstruction in Lebanon and reinject life in its economic structures" .
Vatican and French peace initiatives
The Vatican and the French government both made efforts during June to bring together the Hrawi regime and the rival regime of Gen. Michel Aoun, the former Army C.-in-C. and self-declared interim Premier of Lebanon, who had vehemently opposed the Taif Accord when it was accepted by the majority of Lebanese MPs in October 1989.
The Vatican initiative involved a proposal by papal nuncio Pablo Puente that Aoun be invited to join the Hoss Cabinet as a first step towards a re-examination of the Taif Accord.
The Hoss Cabinet, however, proclaimed on June 19 that "there can be no bargaining over the [Taif]accord and there can be absolutely no talk about giving a sop to anyone" .
The director-general of the French Foreign Ministry, François Scheer, subsequently visited Beirut to meet with the leaders of the various factions.
According to press reports, Scheer was seeking Gen. Aoun's unconditional acceptance of the Taif Accord.
Voice of Lebanon radio reported on June 24 that Gen. Aoun had told Scheer that he was not demanding amendments to the accord, but simply a reconsideration of some of its provisions.
MIDDLE EAST — ARAB WORLD
IRAN-IRAQ
Renewed controversy after exchange of peace letters
Letters from the Iraqi government in May, which reportedly called for direct talks with Iran, apparently elicited some initial positive responses in Iran, but the initiative was overtaken by renewed controversy following the Arab League summit on May 28-30 in Baghdad, the Iraqi capital [see p. 37473].
Iranian leaders in early June reacted adversely to a resolution passed at the summit on May 29, which supported Iraq's long-standing claim to full sovereignty over the Shatt-al Arab waterway.
The Algiers accord of 1975, whose repudiation by Iraq had been a major factor precipitating the Iraq-Iran war in 1980, gave both countries access to the Shatt-al Arab waterway.
Regional press reports of the May 1990 Iraqi initiative had suggested that President Saddam Hussein of Iraq was now considering accepting the Algiers accord.
Hussein had written on May 1 to Hojatoleslam Hashemi Ali Akbar Rafsanjani, the Iranian President, calling for a direct meeting between the two heads of state.
On May 24 a senior Iranian Foreign Ministry official said that a "positive response" had greeted a second Iraqi letter.
In an address to the Arab League summit on May 27, Hussein referred to "an exchange of letters" between the two countries, which he hoped would lead to "direct and deep dialogue which would result in a comprehensive peace" .
He said that he was "reaching out for peace with Iran" as a response to the "sinister designs being concocted against both countries and the Gulf region by hostile forces" [for Iraqi "supergun" affair see pp. 37390-91; 37471].
Rafsanjani declared in a Tehran press conference on June 6 that the Iranian government had "not responded negatively" to the Iraqi approach, and that "when Iraq sent the letters we were hopeful that Saddam Hussein had serious intentions" , but that "what he did at the Baghdad summit shook our confidence" .
In a speech on June 7 the Iranian Foreign Minister, Ali Akbar Vellayati, described the Arab summit resolution as "in contrast to the Iraqi regime's claims that it wants peace" , and dismissed as "illogical" its proposal for prisoner-of-war exchange to be conducted outside the framework of the peace negotiations.
He reaffirmed that Iran's "main condition" was that direct talks under UN mediation should be based on the 1975 Algiers accord and UN Security Council Resolution 598 of August 1987.
MIDDLE EAST — ARAB WORLD
IRAN
Anniversary of Khomeini's death
The first anniversary of the death of Ayatollah Ruhollah Khomeini (on June 3, 1989) was commemorated in Tehran on June 4 by huge crowds of mourners, estimated by organizers at 8,000,000 but believed by Western observers to number several hundred thousands.
A new golden-domed mausoleum marked the grave of the late Imam (spiritual leader) in the Behesht Zahra martyr's cemetery, where Khomeini's successor, Ayatollah Seyed Ali Khamenei, made a speech attacking the United States, Saudi Arabian and Israeli regimes.
Khamenei described the USA as "the pinnacle of sedition and corruption" which had "a profound enmity with the Iranian nation" .
He went on to say that "the revolution will in no way reconcile with them and they will not reconcile with the revolution" .
He condemned "the cancerous tumour which is Israel" and accused the Saudi regime of "implementing US policies to the letter" .
This followed Iran's May 20 announcement that it would boycott the annual pilgrimage to Mecca (the haj) for the third successive year after Saudi Arabia had refused to withdraw its 45,000 quota limit for Iranian pilgrims.
The official ceremonies to mark Khomeini's death began on May 31, when the Iranian President, Hojatoleslam Hashemi Ali Akbar Rafsanjani, said in an address at Beheshte-Zahra that "the one important thing the Imam did was [resolve]the issue of the leadership" .
Renewed death sentence against Rushdie
In a speech on Tehran radio on June 5 Hojatolislam Seyed Ali Khamenei, Iran's spiritual leader, repeated the demand that the British novelist Salman Rushdie should be handed over to British Moslems "so that he can be killed for blasphemy against Islam" , as first decreed by fatwa issued in February 1989 by the late Ayatollah Khomeini after publication of Rushdie's novel The Satanic Verses [see pp. 36450-51].
Two days previously an Iranian Foreign Ministry spokesman had told the Sunday Times that Iran might revoke the decree if the UK "declared respect for Islam" ; this was described by the UK Prime Minister Margaret Thatcher on June 5 as "a very significant olive branch" from Iran.
However Iran later insisted that the official had been misquoted.
Rushdie personally contributed £5,000 to help victims of the Iranian earthquake, but Hojatoleslam Sadeq Khalkhali on June 26 rejected this as "blood money" and reiterated the fatwa.
MIDDLE EAST
KUWAIT
Election of National Assembly
According to official figures 62.26 per cent of the electorate (an estimated 62,000 out of a population of 2,000,000) voted on June 10 to elect 50 members to a new National Assembly.
A further 25 seats to the 75-member Council were to be directly appointed by the Amir, Shaikh Jabir al Ahmad al Jabir as Sabah.
The complete results were not released, nor were the names of defeated candidates; it was officially claimed that 503 candidates took part.
Opposition groups, centred on 32 former members of the National Assembly dissolved in 1986 [see pp. 34767-68], had campaigned for a boycott of the elections, claiming that they were unconstitutional and were designed to elect a council "without teeth" .
They alleged that electoral rolls had been tampered with and that people had been either pressurized to vote, refused a vote, or discovered that others had voted in their place.
Certain Western journalists had been barred from covering the elections.
The elections, which had been announced on April 23 following negotiations in response to unprecedented pro-democracy street rallies in December 1989 and January 1990 [see pp. 37428-29], fell short of opposition demands for the full restoration of parliament.
Press censorship was maintained and several opposition leaders, including members of the dissolved parliament, were arrested for addressing illegal gatherings (diwwaniya) which police were reported to have dispersed with tear gas and baton charges.
New Cabinet
On June 13 Crown Prince Shaikh Saad al Abdullah as Salim as Sabah was confirmed as Prime Minister and a new Cabinet appointed on June 20. *Shaikh Sabah al Ahmad al Jabir as Sabah Deputy Prime Minister; Foreign Affairs Badr Jasim al Yaqub Affairs of National Council *Shaikh Jabir Mubarak al Hamad as Sabah Information Jabir al Abdullah al Jabir Social Affairs and Labour Jasim Mohammed al Musa Public Works Habib Jawhar Hayat Communications Hamud Abdullah al Raqabah Electricity and Water Rashid Salim al Amiri Oil *Shaikh Salim as Sabah as Salim as Sabah Interior Sulayman Abdullah al Razzaq al Muttawa Planning *Dari Abdullah al Uthman Justice and Legal Affairs **Abdel-Rahman Abdullah al Awadi Cabinet Affairs Abdel Yusuf al Ghunaym Education Abdel al Wahab Sulayman al Fawzan Public Health *Shaikh Ali al Khalifah al Adhibi as Sabah Finance **Anwar Abdullah al Nuri Higher Education Fahd Abdullah al Hassawi Municipal Affairs Mohammed Nasir al Hamdan Waqfs and Islamic Affairs Nasir Abdel Allah al Rawdan Commerce and Industry *Shaikh Nawaf al Ahmad al Jabir as Sabah Defence Yahya Fahd al Sumayt Housing *No change.
**Altered portfolio.
New Kuwaiti Cabinet
MIDDLE EAST — ARAB WORLD
ALGERIA
Fundamentalist success in local elections
The fundamentalist Islamic Salvation Front (FIS), led by Abbasi Madani, won control of a majority of municipal and provincial assemblies in the first multiparty poll since independence, held on June 12.
The following day, before the final results were declared, Madani demanded the dissolution of the National Assembly after his party's surprise victory, although he stressed that he was not calling for the replacement of President Chadli Bendjedid, whose third five-year term would not expire until 1993.
Interior Minister Mohammed Saleh Mohammedi announced at a news conference on June 14 that 65.15 per cent of the electorate had voted.
The FIS had won 55.42 per cent of the vote and obtained a majority in 853 municipalities and 32 provinces, while the ruling National Liberation Front (FLN) won only 31.64 per cent, 487 municipalities and 14 provinces, and the Rally for Culture and Democracy (RCD) won 5.65 per cent , 87 municipalities, and the province of Tizi Ouzou.
Independents obtained a majority in 106 municipalities and in the province of Tindouf, and three parties each won two municipalities — the Social Democratic Party, the National Party for Development and Solidarity, and the Algerian Renewal Party.
The final results excluded two municipalities, one where voting was postponed and the other where the poll was officially annulled.
Chadli, speaking after a Cabinet meeting on June 14, said that he was pleased that the poll had been democratic and peaceful.
In the face of the fundamentalists' electoral success, the FLN political bureau on June 17 issued a statement rejecting "all attempts to return Islam to the era of charlatanism and myths or to use it as an instrument of demagogy and political opportunism" .
The statement also called for consultations among political leaders "to define the conditions to consolidate the democratic process" , with a view to forming an alliance against the FIS.
Prime Minister Mouloud Hamrouche on June 23 rejected FIS demands that the National Assembly be dissolved, saying that local elections could not "be translated politically on a national level" and that "the important thing is to deepen the reforms and bring them to fruition" .
Background to elections — Developments in April and May
On April 3 the Front of Socialist Forces (FFS) led by Hocine Aït Ahmed announced that it would boycott the June elections, which it described as "a real farce because everything is done in accordance with FLN interests" .
The other major party to boycott the poll was the Movement for Democracy in Algeria of former President Ahmed Ben Bella.
Both parties wanted the government to hold parliamentary elections first.
In the Berber heartland of Kabylie east of Algiers the boycott appeal by Aït Ahmed resulted in only a quarter of the electorate voting.
Among the parties to be registered before the June elections were Hezbollah, the Algerian Party for the Maghreb Rebirth, and the Arab and Islamic Union.
In May 1990 an alliance was announced between the Social Democratic Party, the National Party for Development and Solidarity, the Liberal Social Party, the National Front for Renewal, and the People's Society for Unity and Action.
On April 29 the FLN official newspaper El Moudjahid called for an alliance of left-wing parties, including the communists, to present a "democratic" alternative to voters attracted to the Islamic fundamentalism of the FIS.
It said that the party would only triumph by developing alliances with "groups of the broad patriotic and democratic family" , an allusion to left-wingers and members of the Socialist Vanguard (communist) Party.
The paper had called earlier in 1990 for a purge from the FLN's ranks of members who had established links with the FIS.
In the run-up to the elections, rival supporters of the FIS, of the FLN, and of pro-democracy groups, organized marches through Algiers.
Thousands of fundamentalist supporters, all of them male, marched on the presidential palace on April 20, demanding the dissolution of parliament within three months and the introduction of sharia (Islamic law).
This demonstration was organized by the FIS but boycotted by most other Islamic groupings following an appeal for calm by the influential Shaikh Sahnoun.
A counter-demonstration planned on the same day by the FLN was postponed.
Reacting to the FIS march, Chadli on May 7 told religious scholars attending a conference on the future of Islam that religion should not be mixed with politics and party manoeuvring.
On May 10 tens of thousands took part in a pro-democracy march called by the RCD and the Socialist Vanguard Party, while on May 17 the FLN itself organised a march, which it described as "complementary and not in opposition" to the other pre-election demonstrations.
The FIS held a large election rally in Algiers on June 4, attended by over 100,000 supporters, at which Madani warned the Army against attempting a coup.
MIDDLE EAST — ARAB WORLD
TUNISIA
Local elections
The ruling Constitutional Democratic Rally (RCD) won control of all but one of the 245 municipal councils in local government elections on June 10, which were boycotted by opposition parties.
The RCD won 3,750 council seats while the remaining 34 went to independents, most of them defectors from the RCD.
Interior Minister Abdelhamid Escheikh announced on June 11 that the turnout of voters had been 79.37 per cent.
Commenting on the boycott by the opposition, he said: "Whilst the state provided all the facilities and preconditions for the success of the pluralist experiment, for widening the scope of the political scene and for the active participation of tendencies and parties, many opposition parties preferred not to participate and to adopt a negative stance towards the development of this experiment." 
Opposition spokesmen claimed that the real turn-out was far lower than the official figure.
Members of the Islamic Nahdah movement (Mouvement de la renaissance), led by Rachid Ghanouchi, were reported as saying that they had not put up candidates because of the government's continued refusal officially to recognise the party.
Mohamed Moada, leader of the small opposition Mouvement des démocrates socialistes (MDS), commented in relation to the triumph of Islamic fundamentalists in the Algerian elections on June 12 [see p. 37549]that "if we do not solve the Islamic problem, the political process will remain at an impasse" .
INTERNATIONAL
WARSAW PACT
Moscow summit
Leaders of the seven member countries of the Warsaw Treaty Organization (Warsaw Pact) attended their annual session in Moscow on June 7, the first such summit since the collapse of communist governments in Eastern Europe.
Dominating the summit was the issue of transforming the Warsaw Pact from a "military-political" to a "political-military" organization, to take into account the new circumstances resulting from East-West detente, the election of democratic governments in Eastern Europe, and the prospect of German unification.
Prior to the meeting, delegates spoke openly about their differences, and the summit itself was notable in its decision to open its proceedings to journalists.
Hungary expressed its desire to leave the alliance, while Czechoslovakia favoured retaining the Pact until the creation of a pan-European security system.
A communiqué issued at the end of the meeting endorsed a consensus which committed member states to retain the alliance for a transitional period while agreeing to appoint a committee to review the Pact on the basis that it represented "sovereign and equal states…built upon democratic principles" .
The committee was expected to submit its report to an extraordinary summit of Warsaw Pact leaders scheduled for November 1990.
The communiqué also noted that while the trend towards overcoming "the bloc model of security" was "becoming irreversible" , it sought "a new, pan-European system of security" based on closer co-operation with NATO and with neutral and non-aligned states.
On the question of German unification, the communiqué observed only that any development "must take into account the security of Germany's neighbours and of all other states" .
Despite Soviet President Gorbachev's proposals to include a united Germany as an "associate member" of both NATO and the Warsaw Pact [see p. 37466], it emerged on June 14 that the Soviet Defence Minister, Marshal Dmitri Yazov, had opposed all proposals which did not endorse a united Germany as part of "a bloc-free European collective security system" .
Defence Ministers' meeting
On June 14-15 Defence Ministers from the Warsaw Pact countries met in Strausberg (in East Germany, near Berlin) and agreed in a communiqué to press for "radical restructuring" with a view to "the withdrawal of Soviet forces from the territory of allied states" .
Decision on Hungarian withdrawal
On June 8 the Hungarian Defence Minister Lajos Für announced in Moscow that Hungary would cease to participate in Warsaw Pact military exercises and wished to leave the alliance by the end of 1991.
Hungarian Prime Minister Jozsef Antall confirmed on June 9 that Hungary would withdraw from the Pact even if the alliance planned to dissolve eventually [see p. 37465 for political support in Hungary for ending membership in the Warsaw Pact].
On June 26 the Hungarian parliament voted unanimously in favour of withdrawing Hungary from the Warsaw Pact by the end of 1991 in consultation with other Warsaw Pact members.
INTERNATIONAL
CONFERENCE ON SECURITY AND CO-OPERATION IN EUROPE
Human rights conference
The second Conference on the Human Dimension was held in Copenhagen (Denmark) on June 5-29 as a further follow-up to the Vienna review session of the Conference on Security and Co-operation in Europe (CSCE)[for first conference in May-June 1989 see pp. 36749-50].
It was attended by Foreign Ministers and delegates from the 35 CSCE countries, namely every European country except Albania (which on this occasion was represented as an observer), Canada, the Soviet Union and the United States.
The third and final conference was due to take place in Moscow in 1991 [see p. 36413].
All seven Warsaw Pact countries attending had undergone changes of government since the 1989 human rights conference.
Requests by the Baltic states of Lithuania, Latvia and Estonia for observer status were rejected, the Soviet Deputy Foreign Minister Vladimir Petrovsky reminding the delegates that only sovereign states could be represented.
Nevertheless their Foreign Ministers were able to hold talks with US and UK delegates and with the Danish Foreign Minister, Uffe Ellemann-Jensen.
Soviet announcement of nuclear weapons cuts
Addressing the conference on the opening day the Soviet Foreign Minister, Eduard Shevardnadze, announced further unilateral reductions in tactical nuclear forces in Europe, intimated that both the North Atlantic Treaty Organization (NATO) and the Warsaw Pact could undergo "transformations" at their forthcoming summits [for Warsaw Pact summit in June see p. 37559], and underlined the need for new broader structures of security and co-operation based on the CSCE.
Shevardnadze said that in order to create favourable conditions for negotiations on the reduction of short-range nuclear weapons, the Soviet Union proposed to withdraw from central Europe by the end of 1990, 60 tactical missile launchers, over 250 nuclear artillery units, and 1,500 nuclear warheads.
By the end of the year a total of 140 nuclear launchers and 3,200 nuclear guns would have been removed (and this, he said later, would leave only a "relatively very small amount" of Soviet battlefield nuclear weapons in Europe).
The plan, he affirmed, had been introduced at the previous week's meeting between President Bush and President Gorbachev in Washington [see p. 37518].
The US Secretary of State James Baker met subsequently with Shevardnadze and welcomed the proposed cuts at a joint press conference, although he had earlier expressed doubts as to whether the cuts were in fact new or were made up in part by other previously announced withdrawals.
Conference declaration
A declaration guaranteeing the rights of citizens and committing governments to multiparty democracy was agreed at the end of the conference.
It recognized that "pluralistic democracy and the rule of law are essential for ensuring respect for human rights and fundamental freedoms" and that the development of societies based on these principles was a prerequisite for progress in setting up a lasting order of peace, security, justice, and co-operation in Europe.
A definition of pluralism and the rule of law as understood by the conference was given, encompassing regular free elections, the separation of party and state, an independent judiciary, and the right of free expression, organization and assembly.
The document affirmed the right of national minorities to use their own language, to have their own educational and religious establishments and to set up associations.
However, certain passages had been modified to overcome, in particular, French and Greek objections, and Greece and Bulgaria added "interpretive statements" on the issue.
Similar modifications were included at Greek request to passages on the right to conscientious objection.
(The conference had been lobbied by gypsy delegations for their recognition as an ethnic minority.)
Measures to strengthen mechanisms to monitor human rights were shelved, as were Danish proposals to abolish the death penalty in the CSCE countries.
INTERNATIONAL
INDUSTRIALIZING COUNTRIES
Group of 15 meeting
The inaugural summit meeting of the "Group of Fifteen" (G-15) industrializing countries (formed after the Non-aligned Movement summit in September 1989 — see pp. 36907-08) took place in Kuala Lumpur on June 1-3.
Countries represented by their heads of state or government were Malaysia (the host country), Argentina, India, Indonesia, Senegal, Venezuela, Yugoslavia and Zimbabwe, while senior ministers represented Algeria, Brazil, Egypt, Jamaica, Mexico, Nigeria and Peru.
Malaysian Prime Minister Mohamed Mahathir criticized industrialized countries for using trade restrictions to "foist their democratic norms on others" ; he and other delegates emphasised the problem of high Third-World debt (the G-15 countries having total debts of some US$600,000 million).
There was also concern that the interests of poorer nations were not being considered in the current General Agreement on Tariffs and Trade (GATT) Uruguay Round [for which see pp. 37227-28].
A communiqué issued on June 3 described existing measures to reduce Third-World debt as inadequate, and called instead for a "positive approach, and not punitive measures, to the problems of arrears with multilateral financial institutions" .
Underlining the relationship between debt and commerce, the communiqué appealed to industrialized countries to allow greater access to their markets.
The next meeting of the Group was scheduled to take place in Caracas, Venezuela, in June 1991.
INTERNATIONAL
SPACE RESEARCH
Failure of Hubble Space Telescope
The United States Congress requested officials of the National Aeronautics and Space Administration (NASA) to attend an emergency hearing on June 29 to explain the failure of the Hubble Space Telescope and also a decision to ground all space shuttle craft.
Major flaws in the optical system of the US$1,500 million Hubble telescope, which was launched on April 29 and was expected to revolutionize astronomical research [see p. 37394], were discovered in late June.
Engineers were reported to suspect that one of the telescope's two mirrors had been manufactured to slightly incorrect specifications, resulting in a distortion of images in the visible spectrum.
In order to reduce costs the mirrors had never been tested together on the ground.
Some of the instruments on the telescope, especially those operating in ultra-violet light, were not expected to be seriously affected.
The earliest repair mission was expected to be in 1993.
Grounding of space shuttles
On June 29, in what was viewed as a further serious setback comparable to that of the Challenger shuttle disaster of 1986 [see pp. 34266-68], NASA grounded its entire space shuttle fleet.
The decision followed a hydrogen leak from the fuel system of the Atlantis shuttle, due for launch in mid-July with a secret military payload.
A similar problem had forced the cancellation of the May launch of the shuttle Columbia.
Historic Voyager photograph
A photograph from the edge of the solar system, received from the US planetary probe Voyager 1 launched in 1977, was released by NASA on June 6.
From a distance of 4,000 million miles Voyager 1 captured Neptune, Uranus, Saturn, Jupiter, the Earth and Venus in a single frame.
Mars and Mercury were hidden in the sun's glare and Pluto was too small and distant to appear.
INTERNATIONAL
WORLD HEALTH ORGANIZATION
Sixth international AIDS conference
The sixth international conference on AIDS (acquired immune deficiency syndrome) was attended by over 10,000 delegates on June 20-24 in San Francisco, United States [for fifth conference in June 1989 see p. 36752].
It was boycotted, however, by over 100 organizations and groups, including the International Committee of the Red Cross (ICRC), the European Communities (EC), and the French and United Kingdom governments, in protest at visa restrictions imposed by the US immigration authorities on those tested as positive for the human immunodeficiency virus (HIV) which could caused AIDS.
Since 1987, people declaring on their visa applications that they were HIV-positive could be debarred entry to the USA (under legislation to control serious and infectious diseases, dating originally from 1951).
In January 1990, however, the authorities discontinued the practice of stamping bearers' passports to show that they were HIV-positive.
Later it was also decided that special 10-day visas would be issued covering the period of the conference.
During the conference thousands of demonstrators protested against the US visa restrictions and over alleged inadequate government funding of AIDS research and patient care.
Incidence of HIV and of AIDS worldwide
There were currently 6,000,000-8,000,000 worldwide of HIV infection, according to estimates given by Michael Merson, the recently appointed director of the WHO Global Programme on AIDS [see p. 37474].
Two-thirds were in less-developed countries, whereas five years previously about half the world's known HIV infections had been in developed countries (mostly in the USA).
The global level of HIV infection was expected to rise to 15-20,000,000 by 2000, of which at least three-quarters would be in the developing world.
Three-quarters of all the cases would have resulted from heterosexual transmission.
As compared with a June 1990 total of 266,098 registered AIDs cases, the WHO estimated the actual number as nearer 700,000, and predicted a cumulative total of between 5,000,000 and 6,000,000 by 2000.
Scientists were optimistic about the prospect of developing an AIDS vaccine.
Fragments common to many strains of the AIDS virus had been identified and a candidate vaccine was being developed which was expected to produce antibodies against more than 80 per cent of these strains.
INTERNATIONAL
ENVIRONMENT
Ozone layer: Montreal protocol revision conference
A total of 98 governments were represented at a 10-day conference in London on June 19-29 held to agree revisions to the Montreal protocol on the protection of the ozone layer.
The protocol (to the 1985 Vienna convention — see p. 34270), was originally signed in September 1987 [see p. 35678]and entered into effect on Jan. 1, 1989 [see p. 36412].
Its principal provisions had included a commitment to halve the use of chlorofluorcarbons (CFC) by 2000, and to freeze the production of halons at 1992 levels.
The revisions had the effect of substantially strengthening the protocol.
The main points agreed were as follows.
(i) A complete phase-out of CFCs by the year 2000;(ii) a phase-out of production of halons by 2000, with the exception of a few used for medical purposes;(iii) a commitment to "responsible" use of hydrochlorofluorocarbons (HCFCs, developed by chemical companies as an "ozone-friendly" CFC substitute but themselves causing limited damage to the ozone layer), with a view to phasing them out by 2020-40;(iv) a complete phase-out of carbon tetrachloride (a solvent used in certain paints and pharmaceuticals) by 2000; and (v) a phase-out of methyl chloroform (used in electronics and metalworking) by 2005.
The majority of West European countries, together with Canada, Australia and New Zealand, had pushed for a ban on CFCs by 1997.
They had been opposed by Japan, the Soviet Union and the United States.
One of the key issues at the conference had been the question of providing financial incentives to industrializing Third-World countries, notably India and China, to enable them to abandon use of ozone-depleting chemicals in favour of benign, but more expensive, alternatives.
This was seen as essential if such countries were to co-operate in efforts to protect the ozone layer.
Despite initial US reluctance, the conference eventually agreed to establish a Global Fund, on the basis of a proposal by Mostafa Tolba, the executive director of the United Nations Environment Programme (UNEP).
Under the agreement, the industrialized countries would establish a US$160,000,000 fund, with an additional $80,000,000 to be injected once India and China had acceded to the protocol.
The Global Fund would be managed by a 14-member committee representing the World Bank, UNEP and the UN Development Programme.
INTERNATIONAL
DISARMAMENT
Vienna CFE talks
In what United States officials described as a "very positive" development for the 23-country Vienna negotiations on conventional forces in Europe (CFE), the Soviet Union on June 27 signalled its acceptance of a Polish-French plan for limiting tank numbers to 20,000 each for the Warsaw Pact and NATO forces.
The impetus for arms control agreements had been boosted by the US-Soviet summit meeting on May 31-June 3 [see pp. 37518-19], while both alliances had simultaneously been discussing their possible transformation in the light of the acknowledged end of the Cold War, the Warsaw Pact at its June 7 summit meeting [see p. 37550]and the NATO Foreign Ministers at their June 7-8 meeting in Turnberry in Scotland [the July news digest].
The CFE talks in Vienna, however, had appeared to be making little progress since the eighth round began on May 17.
Major obstacles remained over combat aircraft numbers, especially with regard to land-based naval aircraft, which the Soviet side had insisted on excluding unless a CFE agreement was to be extended to cover naval arms control in general.
It was unexpectedly suggested by United Kingdom Prime Minister Margaret Thatcher, following her three-day visit to the Soviet Union (from June 7, and including meetings with Soviet President Mikhail Gorbachev on June 8), that this issue might be left for subsequent negotiation.
A first CFE treaty could then be signed quickly to implement cuts in troop numbers in Europe to 195,000 on either side.
The June 27 breakthrough on tank numbers had been anticipated on June 14, when the Polish-French proposal was recorded at a CFE plenary session without Soviet disagreement, but had then apparently been frustrated when the Soviet representative raised technical objections at a working group meeting later in the day.
It entailed acceptance of a definition of tanks by weight, whether wheeled or tracked, in excess of 16.5 tonnes unladen.
Each side could also retain 18,000 armoured infantry combat vehicles weighing between 6 and 16.5 tonnes, and 12,000 lighter armoured vehicles.
INTERNATIONAL
EAST-WEST TRADE
Relaxation of COCOM restrictions
The annual high-level meeting of the 17 member countries of the Co-ordinating Committee for Multilateral Export Controls (COCOM — involving NATO countries except Iceland, but with the addition of Australia and Japan) was held in Paris on June 6-7.
Restrictions on East-West trade were reviewed in line with recommendations made by a meeting of the COCOM member country trade experts in Paris on Feb. 14-15, to reduce limitations on security-sensitive exports to Eastern Europe and the Soviet Union.
At United States insistence this review would proceed more cautiously with regard to the Soviet Union.
The US National Security Council had agreed on Jan. 19 to relax US policy, but the February meeting had revealed the desire of other countries, notably West Germany, to go further than the USA could accept in this regard.
The list of restricted exports was modified to remove 30 items of minor strategic value, with another eight items to be derestricted from August.
The control regime was liberalized for computer, machine tool and telecommunications technology (microcomputer exports having been permitted since August 1989); companies seeking exceptions to remaining restrictions would have to wait only eight weeks for permission, rather than 12 weeks as hitherto; and countries such as Czechoslovakia, Hungary and Poland, if they were prepared to introduce their own controls on use and re-export, might expect more favourable treatment.
Preparations were set in motion to introduce by the end of the year a much shorter "core" list of restricted items, affecting only 30-50 per cent of the 116 items on the current list.
As part of the June agreement, most restrictions were also lifted on technology exports to East Germany, which was to set up immediately its own special foreign trade monitoring office to prevent re-export.
INTERNATIONAL
ILO
77th Conference — Night work convention
The 77th International Labour Conference, held in Geneva on June 6-27, approved a new Convention on Night Work.
The convention lifted the previous 1948 convention's general ban on night work for women (except for pregnant women) while also improving conditions for night workers regardless of sex.
Night work for women could, however, only be introduced if both employers' and employees' representatives for the relevant industry in a given country reached agreement on conditions.
AFRICA
ZAIRE
BASIC DATA
Area: 2,344,885 sq km.
Population: 33,615,000 (1988).
Capital: Kinshasa.
Languages: French (official); over 400 Sudanese and Bantu dialects.
Religion: Traditional beliefs and Christianity.
Av. life expectancy: 53 yrs (1988).
Armed forces: 51,000 (incl.
Gendarmerie)(1989).
GNP per capita: US$170 (1988).
Currency: zaïre (US$1.00=Z529.1927 as at May 4, 1990).
The Republic of Zaïre (known until 1971 as the Republic of the Congo), became independent from Belgium in June 1960.
Under the 1978 Constitution, the leader of the sole legal political party, the Popular Movement for the Revolution (Mouvement populaire de la révolution — MPR) is ex officio the head of state, with executive powers.
Mobutu Sese Seko came to power in a coup in 1965, was elected President (unopposed) in 1970, and was re-elected in 1977 and 1984.
Legislative power is vested in a unicameral National Legislative Council (CNL), elected for a five-year term (most recently in September 1987 — see p. 35748) by compulsory, direct and universal adult suffrage, all candidates being proposed by the MPR.
Following an attempt at "political liberalization" during 1977-80, the powers of the legislature were effectively curtailed when in August 1980 President Mobutu created the MPR central committee, which had the power to overrule the CNL.
New political reforms were announced in April 1990, to include the introduction of a three-party system after a one-year transitional period.
Mobutu resigned as chairman of the MPR and appointed a Prime Minister (First State Commissioner) as head of government.
POLITICS
President Mobutu Sese Seko carried out a reshuffle of the Council of Ministers on Jan. 11, 1990, the changes affecting more than one-third of its members.
SECURITY
At a meeting on public security on Sept. 20, 1989, President Mobutu issued 24 directives to senior Army officers, including the confinement to barracks of "all soldiers" , as well as the dismissal from the Army of those with criminal records or found guilty of wrongdoing.
The move followed the court martial and sentencing to death of 10 soldiers, allegedly involved in a series of murders and robberies in Kinshasa.
A number of civilians were similarly sentenced.
ECONOMY
Economic indicators
GDP growth 1.6% (1980-87)
Current-account balance -US$705 m. (1987)
Budget deficit US$69 m. (1989)
Total external public debt US$8,630 m. (1987)
Debt service ratio (as % of export earnings) 12.8% (1987)
Gross domestic product US$5,770 m. (1987)
Inflation rate 53.5% (1980-87), 100% (January 1989 est.)
Principal trading partners Belgium, France, West Germany
Prime Minister Kengo wa Dondo submitted the 1990 draft budget to the National Assembly on Oct. 23, 1989.
Providing for an increased deficit of Z30,000 million, as against the 1989 target of Z21,000 million, the draft budget put total projected expenditure for 1990 at Z584,000 million — a rise of 67 per cent.
On Feb. 18, 1990, however, President Mobutu introduced emergency measures to revise the budget, stating that public spending would have to be cut and limited to priority areas.
The announcement came after weak commodity prices for almost all raw material exports had cost the country an estimated US$450 million in lost export revenues in the first quarter.
FOREIGN
Relations with Belgium
Belgium announced a freeze on loans to Zaïre on May 25, 1990, following Belgian press reports that some 50 students died on May 11 when a unit of the presidential guard suppressed anti-government demonstrations at Lubumbashi University in the south of the country.
Three alleged police informers were murdered in the course of the demonstrations.
The Zaïrean authorities denied the newspaper reports, while acknowledging that there had been student unrest, and refused requests for an international inquiry into the alleged incident.
Earlier, on Feb. 15, 1990, the two governments had approved a co-operation agreement.
[For rift in bilateral relations which had emerged in November 1988 see p. 36390; for July 1989 Rabat agreement to resume relations see p. 36805.]
AFRICA
RWANDA
BASIC DATA
Area: 26,338 sq km.
Population: 6,657,000 (1988).
Capital: Kigali.
Languages: French and Kinyarwanda (official).
Religion: Animism and Christianity (approximately 50% each).
Av. life expectancy: 49 yrs (1988).
Armed forces: 5,200 (1989).
GNP per capita: US$310 (1988).
Currency: Rwanda franc (US$1.00=RF78.4304 as at April 2, 1990).
The Republic of Rwanda, hitherto, as part of Ruanda-Urundi, administered by Belgium as a UN trusteeship, gained independence in July 1962.
Executive power is vested in the President, elected for a five-year term by universal adult suffrage, who is assisted by a Council of Ministers.
Legislative power is exercised jointly by the President (currently Maj.-Gen.
Juvénal Habyarimana) and the 70-member National Development Council (CND), whose members are also directly elected for five years from a list of candidates put forward by the sole legal party, the National Revolutionary Movement for Development (Mouvement révolutionnaire national pour le développement — MRND).
Presidential and legislative elections were held in December 1988 [see p. 36482].
Maj.-Gen.
Juvénal Habyarimana President; President of Council of Ministers; Defence Anastase Nteziryayo Agriculture, Livestock and Forests François Habiyakare Civil Service and Labour Juvénal Uwilingiyimana Economy and Consumption Benoît Ntigulirwa Finance Casimir Bizimungu Foreign Affairs and Co-operation Placide Ngendayhoyo Health and Social Affairs Charles Nyandwi Higher Education and Scientific Research Col. Aloys Nsekalije Industry and Handicrafts Jean-Marie Vianney Mugemana Interior and Community Development Theoneste Muryanama Justice Calixte Nzabonimana Planning André Ntagerura Transport and Communications Daniel Mbangura Primary and Secondary Education Joseph Nzirorera Public Works, Energy and Water Maj. Augustin Ndindiliyimana Youth, Sports and Co-operative Societies Siméon Nteziryayo Minister at the Presidency Antoine Ntashamaje Minister in charge of Institutional Relations 
Council of Ministers
POLITICS
Party central committee changes
President Juvénal Habyarimana reshuffled the MRND central committee on Aug. 3, 1989.
There were five new members: Casimir Bizimungu, Minister of Foreign Affairs, Antoine Ntashamaje, Minister in charge of Institutional Relations, Jean-Marie Vianney Mugemana, Minister of the Interior and Community Development, Theodore Sindikubwabo, the president of the CND, and Frederic Karangwa, the Butare prefect.
Four people left the committee: François Ngarukiyintwali, Vincent Ruhamanya and Thomas Habanabakize, the former Ministers of Foreign Affairs, of Finance and of the Interior respectively (dismissed in the January 1989 Cabinet reshuffle — see p. 36482), along with Claudien Habarushaka, the Butare prefect.
The committee now had a membership of 27 instead of the 26 previously.
Imprisonment of former Finance Minister
Ruhamanya, the former Economy and Finance Minister and a director of the Petrorwanda oil company, was on Dec. 14, 1989, sentenced to six years' imprisonment and fined RF100,000, after being found guilty of embezzling RF30,000,000, and of forgery.
SECURITY
Refugees in Uganda
The estimated 70,000 Rwandan refugees in Uganda, many of whom as members of the Tutsi ethnic minority had left Rwanda in the 1960s after extensive communal violence [see pp. 20085-86], were the subject of bilateral talks in November 1989.
It was agreed that the UN High Commissioner for Refugees (UNHCR) would conduct an independent survey of the refugees, and was to report in April 1990.
On Jan. 20, 1989, Habyarimana had advised the refugees to remain in their place of asylum, although a Rwandan special refugee commission, to help and monitor refugees, was formed in Kigali in February 1989 [see below for Rwanda-Uganda contacts].
ECONOMY
Economic indicators
GDP growth 2.4% (1980-87)
Current-account balance -US$131 m. (1987)
Overall balance of payments -US$4,000 m. (1989 est.)
Total external public debt US$632 m. (1987)
Debt service ratio (as % of export earnings) 11.3% (1987)
Gross domestic product US$2,100 m. (1987)
Inflation rate 4.5% (1987)
Principal trading partners Exports: West Germany, Belgium, Italy; Imports: USA, Belgium, West Germany 
Emergency food appeal
The government on Dec. 6, 1989, launched an initial appeal for emergency food aid for 60,000 people, mainly in the north, the deteriorating situation being blamed on drought and crop disease, combined with the economic crisis [see below].
The European Communities (EC) responded with a donation of US$6,250,000 worth of food, and at a meeting in Kigali on Jan. 19, 1990, when foreign diplomats were told that up to 600,000 people could be affected, the World Food Programme offered food aid worth $2,600,000.
1989 and 1990 budgets — Austerity measures
The 1989 budget, finally adopted by the CND on Aug. 11, 1989, was for a total of RF37,810,000, including a development budget of RF14,190,000.
The government's financial planning had been badly affected by an economic crisis brought about by the slump in the world price of coffee — which accounted for 90 per cent of Rwanda's export earnings — following the collapse of the International Coffee Agreement in July [see pp. 36836].
A total budget for 1990 of RF40,960 million was adopted by the CND on Jan. 19, 1990.
The administrative budget was for some RF26,000 million, a reduction in real terms over the previous year, and the investment budget stood at RF14,320,000, of which some RF5,500 million came from domestic financing and the remainder (61 per cent) from external sources.
Austerity measures introduced to combat the continuing economic crisis included cutbacks in the financial privileges enjoyed by government ministers and civil servants.
There was to be an import ban on construction materials for which local substitutes were available, and cuts in subsidies to coffee producers and exporters were to be made by April.
An economic policy document released in December 1989 estimated that gross national product (GNP) fell by 6.3 per cent in 1989 (compared with a fall of 3.4 per cent in 1988).
A new economic commission was set up to monitor the success of the austerity measures.
FOREIGN
Habyarimana on Oct. 22-23, 1989, held friendly talks on bilateral relations with President Mobutu of Zaïre in Gbadolite, northern Zaïre.
A Rwandan delegation held talks on border conflicts and on the Rwandan refugees in Uganda with the government in Kampala, the Ugandan capital, on Nov. 10-14, 1989.
This was followed on Jan. 8, 1990, by a one-day private visit to Uganda by Habyarimana.
The Belgian Prime Minister, Wilfried Martens, visited Kigali on Sept. 17-21, 1989, and announced a US$38,000,000 credit and aid programme.
Jacques Pelletier, the French Minister for Co-operation and Development, also strengthened bilateral co-operation on Feb. 9, 1990, by signing five aid agreements worth RF180,700,000.
The government in early 1990 donated 4,000 kg of coffee to West Germany for distribution among refugees from East Germany.
AFRICA
BURUNDI
BASIC DATA
Area: 27,834 sq km.
Population: 5,450,000 (1989).
Capital: Bujumbura.
Languages: French and Kirundi (official); Swahili and French (used commercially).
Religion: Christianity (more than 60%); Animism.
Av. life expectancy: 53 yrs (women), 50 yrs (men)(1989).
Armed forces: 7,200 (incl.
Gendarmerie)(1989).
GNP per capita: US$230 (1988).
Currency: Burundi franc (US$1.00=FBu176.8853 as at April 2, 1990).
Formerly a Belgian trusteeship under the UN, the Republic of Burundi was declared in 1966, four years after independence, upon the overthrow of the monarchy.
Col. Jean-Baptiste Bagaza, who had come to power in a coup in 1976, and had been elected President by direct suffrage in August 1984, was overthrown in early September 1987 in a bloodless armed forces coup led by Maj. Pierre Buyoya [see pp. 35631-32].
Following the coup, the civilian Constitution of 1981 was suspended and all members of the previous government, the judicial council and leaders of the sole political party, the Union for National Progress (Union pour le progrès national — UPRONA), were dismissed.
A Military Council for National Salvation (CMSN) was established to rule the country, electing Buyoya President.
Maj. Pierre Buyoya President of the Republic; Chair of Military Council for National Salvation; Defence Adrien Sibomana Prime Minister Cyprien Mbonimpa Foreign Relations and Co-operation Jumaine Hussein Agriculture and Animal Husbandry Gerard Niyibigira Finance Gabriel Toyi Rural Development and Handicrafts Evariste Niyonkuru Justice Lt.-Col. Aloys Kadoyi Interior Bonaventure Kidwingira Commerce and Industry Maj. Simon Rusuku Transport, Posts and Telecommunications Evariste Simbarakiye Public Works and Urban Development Gilbert Midende Energy and Mines Norbert Ngendabanyikwa Public Health Didace Rudaragi Civil Service Charles Karikurubu Employment and Professional Training Pia Ndayiragije Family and Women's Affairs Julie Ngiriye Social Affairs Frederic Ngenzebuhoro Information Adolphe Nahayo Youth, Sports and Culture Basile Sindaharaye Tourism, Land Use and Environment Nicholas Mayugi Higher Education and Scientific Research Gamariel Ndaruzaniye Primary and Secondary Education Fridolin Hatungimana Secretary of State for Economic Co-operation Salvator Sahinguvu Secretary of State for Planning in Prime Minister's Office 
Council of Ministers
POLITICS
Refusal to accept resignation of Hutu ministers
The Prime Minister, Adrien Sibomana, and several other Hutu ministers offered to resign in early November 1989 as a protest against an incident involving the humiliation of a Hutu officer cadet in the Tutsi-dominated Army.
President Pierre Buyoya refused to accept their resignations, amid an increased atmosphere of tension after a bomb, thought to have been planted by members of the minority Tutsi group, exploded in Bujumbura on Nov. 4, 1989.
Buyoya had appointed Sibomana in October 1988 to demonstrate a commitment to reconciliation after ethnic massacres [see pp. 36328-29; 37056-57].
SECURITY
Libere Bararunyeretse, the secretary-general of UPRONA, claimed on Jan. 30, 1990, that 98 per cent of the refugees created by the ethnic violence of 1988 had now returned home.
A presidential visit to northern Burundi in August 1989 sought to spread a message of national unity and harmony.
ECONOMY
Economic indicators
GDP growth -6.3% (1987)
Current-account balance -US$132 m. (1987)
Trade balance -US$103 m. (1987-88)
Overall balance of payments -US$132 m. (1987)
Budget deficit US$11.97 m. (1986)
Total external public debt US$745 m.
(December 1988)
Debt service ratio (as % of export earnings) 9.9% (1987)
Gross domestic product US$1,137 m. (1987)
Inflation rate 13% (1989)
Principal trading partners Exports: West Germany, Finland, Japan; Imports: Belgium/Luxembourg, Iran, France
Buyoya announced on Jan. 10, 1990, that, due to weather conditions and the drop in world coffee prices [for which see p. 36836], Burundi's economic performance was very poor during 1989.
Gross domestic product (GDP) increased by only 0.4 per cent and inflation increased to 13 per cent.
The Burundi franc was devalued by 9 per cent on Nov. 23, 1989, and the budget introduced in December 1989 involved cuts of US$36,700,000 to reduce the deficit.
State revenues increased from FBu23,000 million to FBu32,000 million during 1989.
FOREIGN
Buyoya began a six-day visit to the United States on Jan. 29, 1990, when he met US government figures, World Bank and International Monetary Fund (IMF) officials and the UN Secretary-General, Javier Pérez de Cuéllar.
A major feature of the talks was Buyoya's wish to establish a universal quota system under the International Coffee Organization (ICO — see p. 36635).
A presidential visit to Rwanda, due to start on Sept. 19, 1989, was postponed due to the non-availability of Maj.-Gen.
Juvénal Habyarimana, the Rwandan President.
However, bilateral talks on refugees and cross-border trade took place on Nov. 5-8, 1989, between Lt.-Col. Aloys Kadoyi, the Minister of the Interior and his Rwandan counterpart, Jean-Marie Vianney Mugemana.
AFRICA
ANGOLA
BASIC DATA
Area: 1,246,700 sq km.
Population: 9,421,000 (1988).
Capital: Luanda.
Languages: Portuguese (official); African languages (principally Ovimbundu, Kimbundu, Bakongo and Chokwe).
Religion: Traditional beliefs; large Christian minority (Roman Catholic).
Av. life expectancy: 45 yrs (1988).
Armed forces: 100,000 (1989).
GNP per capita: Not available.
Currency: kwanza (fixed officially since May 1976 at US$1.00=29.9180 kwanza).
The People's Republic of Angola achieved full independence from Portugal in November 1975, the Popular Movement for the Liberation of Angola becoming the party of government; this was restructured in 1977 as a Marxist-Leninist vanguard party, the Popular Movement for the Liberation of Angola — Workers' Party (Movimento Popular de Libertaçao de Angola-Partido do Trabalho — MPLA-PT).
Elections to the National People's Assembly, postponed since 1983, took place in late 1986 [see p. 35175], the Assembly being composed of 289 full and 29 alternate members elected indirectly for a five-year term.
Effective political control is exercised by the MPLA-PT, the sole legal party, which according to the 1975 Constitution is responsible for Angola's political, economic and social leadership.
The chairman of the party, currently José Eduardo dos Santos, is also head of state.
José Eduardo dos Santos C.-in-C. of the Armed Forces; Chairman of Council of Ministers; Minister of State for Economic and Social Sector Kundi Paihama Minister of State for Inspection and Control; State Security António Henriques da Silva Planning Col.-Gen.
Pedro Maria Tonha "Pedalé" Defence Lt.-Col. Pedro de Castro Van-Dúnem "Loy" External Relations Fernando José França Van-Dúnem Justice Augusto Lopes Teixeira "Tutu" Education Flavio Joao Fernandes Health Augusto Teixeira de Matos Finance Domingo das Chagas Simoes Rangel Foreign and Internal Trade, Industry Zeferino Cassa Yombo Petroleum and Energy Col. António Paulo Kassoma Transport and Communications Diogo Jorge de Jesus Labour and Social Security Fernando Faustino Muteka Agriculture Lt.-Col. Francisco Antonio Magalhaes Paiva "Nvunda" Interior Joao Henriques Garcia Construction Domingos Ramos da Cruz Fisheries José Carlos Moco Youth and Sports José Leitao da Costa e Silva Secretary of the Council of Ministers 
Angolan Council of Ministers
POLITICS
Cabinet changes
On Feb. 13, 1989, President dos Santos dismissed Industry Minister Henrique de Carvalho dos Santos "Onambwe" , responsibility for Industry passing to Domingo das Chagas Simoes Rangel, who had been appointed to the Internal Trade portfolio on Jan. 13 [see p. 36481], as well as heading a new industrial management commission set up by the President.
At the same time José Carlos Moco was appointed Minister for Youth and Sports.
On March 28 Interior Minister Lt. Gen. Manuel Alexandre Rodrigues "Kito" was dismissed and replaced by former Deputy Defence Minister Francisco Antonio Magalhaes Paiva "Nvunda" .
Carlos António Fernandes was dismissed as Minister of Transport and Communications on May 5, 1990, along with the Secretary of State for Town Planning, Housing and Water, reportedly for "sluggishness and non-implementation of directives" .
Fernandes was replaced by Col. António Paulo Kassoma, hitherto Deputy Minister of Defence for Armaments and Military Strategy.
Col. Domingos Hungo on Feb. 27, 1990, replaced Manuel Francisco Tuta "SKS" as commissar of Cuando Cubango province.
Reform proposals
Further political reform proposals were announced by the government in late February 1990 for consideration by the third congress of the MPLA-PT, due to be held in December.
The proposals envisaged (i) the separation of the posts of President of the Republic and president of the party, both of which were currently held by dos Santos; and (ii) the appointment of a Prime Minister as head of government [see also p. 37176].
SECURITY
Battle for Mavinga
Some of the fiercest fighting in 14 years of civil war took place during February and March 1990 in the battle for control of the south-eastern town of Mavinga, held by the South African-backed Uniao Naçional para a Indepêndencia Total de Angola (UNITA).
Mavinga, an important advance base for UNITA and a depot on its supply route to northern Angola, represented a key target for the government, with an airstrip suitable for use by its Air Force for attacks on UNITA's headquarters at Jamba, 300 km to the south-east.
The government first claimed that its forces (Forças Armadas Populares de Libertaçao de Angola — FAPLA) had captured the town on Feb. 2, after killing more than 500 UNITA guerrillas, but this was denied by UNITA leader Jonas Savimbi, who said that the town was firmly under UNITA control and alleged that Soviet and Cuban forces had been involved in the fighting.
Savimbi had earlier cut short a European tour after a visit to Portugal [see p. 37176]in order to return to direct military operations from Jamba.
On Feb. 6, however, the Portuguese news agency Lusa reported that the Angolan government had presented new peace proposals to Zaïrean mediators.
Dos Santos was quoted as saying: "Despite the action against Mavinga the government continues to seek peace.
Our government does not want to obtain a total military victory."
He added that he was willing to allow "independent candidates" to participate in one-party elections.
Diplomatic sources commented that the government evidently hoped to use its successes at Mavinga to increase its bargaining power at ceasefire negotiations.
The heads of state of Cameroon, Congo, Gabon and Zaïre met in Kinshasa, the capital of Zaïre, on Feb. 7, noting that the Angolan situation had become "alarming" ; all four governments were members of the eight-country group charged with overseeing the Gbadolite peace process [see pp. 36726; 36885].
Conflicting reports continued to emerge from the area, the government's claims to have captured the town being repeatedly denied by UNITA.
On Feb. 23 the Angolan news agency Angop quoted chief of staff Lt.-Gen.
Antonio dos Santos França "Ndalu" as saying that the armed forces had achieved their objectives in the region; França reiterated that the government had taken Mavinga, but did not make clear whether they still held it.
On Feb. 24 the government claimed to have bombed Jamba, a claim later acknowledged to be true by UNITA.
A further attack was reported on March 2.
On Feb. 23 the government denied UNITA claims that it had used chemical weapons in the area.
The claims appeared to have received independent confirmation from a team of Western experts, including a Belgian professor, Aubin Heyndrickx of Ghent University, which visited the area to collect samples and inspect victims.
Heyndrickx issued a statement on Feb. 21 saying that "the clinical and toxicological study show clearly that chemical bombs have gassed the population in this region, recently and for many years" .
Implicit confirmation of government successes came with Savimbi's statement on UNITA radio on March 5 that he was ready to accept an immediate ceasefire, under the mediation of Zaïre's President Mobutu Sese Seko, provided the government abandoned its military gains of the past two months.
Savimbi said that the ceasefire should be followed by direct talks between UNITA and the government, followed by the formation of a transitional government.
The onset of the rainy season brought a halt to the government's south-eastern offensive.
UNITA counteroffensive
The meeting in April 1990 in Portugal between government and UNITA representatives [see p. 37365]was the first attempt at relaunching the negotiating process since the short-lived Gbadolite ceasefire agreement of June 1989.
On May 1, 1990, Savimbi reiterated his wish for peace talks with dos Santos, recognizing him as head of state but refusing to accept the MPLA-PT as the legitimate government.
In spite of this UNITA staged a counteroffensive in early May, its supplies replenished by a renewed airlift of weaponry from the United States via the Kamina air base in southern Zaïre.
The supplies had been temporarily halted during 1989, apparently in an attempt to force UNITA into negotiations.
Some US$50,000,000 in aid to UNITA had been budgeted by the US Congress for the present fiscal year.
During May-June 1990 FAPLA withdrew from the Mavinga region, UNITA describing the withdrawal as a "resounding defeat" for the government.
Meanwhile the seriousness of a second UNITA offensive on a new front north-east of Luanda was indicated by the transfer on May 7 of França Ndalu away from the Mavinga front to command a new Cuanza-Bengo front, in an area between Luanda and Uige province.
UNITA's strong military position appeared to facilitate its offer, made known on June 7, of a three-month truce to begin on June 22 [see p. 37523].
Visit by South African Foreign Minister
South African Foreign Affairs Minister Roelof "Pik" Botha had on March 1, 1990, paid the first official visit by a South African minister since Angola's independence in 1975.
Botha, who met dos Santos and his Angolan counterpart, Lt.-Col. Pedro de Castro Van-Dúnem "Loy" , said at a press conference that a solution to the conflict in Angola should be achieved "by Angolans" , although he added that South Africa was prepared, if asked, to "make its contribution" .
Van-Dúnem spoke of the need for the two countries to co-operate in establishing the basis for economic integration in the region.
Progress of withdrawal of Cuban forces
The second stage of the withdrawal of Cuban forces was completed by the end of April 1990, one month behind schedule as a result of the January suspension [see p. 37175]; the total number of disengaged Cuban troops was now 33,048.
Capture and release of hostages
UNITA on Feb. 21, 1990, attacked a FAPLA column between Caxito and Ambriz, 60 km north-east of Luanda, and captured a French technician, Jean-François Grossbancher, as well as 15 FAPLA personnel.
Grossbancher, an executive with the French company Bouygues Offshore, had been working with the Angolan state oil company Sonangol.
He was released into the hands of Zaïrean officials in the week ending March 3.
A separatist rebel group, FLEC (the Front for the Liberation of the Enclave of Cabinda — an area bordering on Congo and Zaïre which had no common border with Angola), on April 27 attacked a petroleum installation on the Congolese border, seizing four French and three Congolese workers, who they said were "violating Cabindan territory" .
Henriques Tiago Nzita, claiming to be the FLEC leader, said on May 12 that the hostages had been released.
ECONOMY
Economic indicators
GDP growth 9.2% (1988)
Current-account balance -US$228 m. (1987)
Trade balance +US$891 m. (1987)
Total external public debt US$3,800 m. (1987)
Debt service ratio (as % of export earnings) 29% (1987)
Gross domestic product 146,600 m. kwanza (1987)
Principal trading partners (1988) Exports: West Germany, USA, Brazil; Imports: Brazil, France, Netherlands 
Launch of emergency programme
The government appealed for $273,000,000 in external aid at the launch of its emergency relief programme for 1989/90 at a meeting with international donors in Luanda on Sept. 21-22, 1989.
The programme aimed to provide food, clothing and medical supplies to 1,500,000 people, as well as meeting transport costs.
The people to be assisted included around 638,000 Angolans displaced in southern provinces by the civil war and by drought, as well as 140,000 affected by flooding in the north.
The remaining beneficiaries were to include former UNITA members who were to be re-integrated into society, as well as refugees returning from neighbouring countries, Europe and the United States.
After the meeting, Van-Dúnem announced that donors had pledged $10,000,000, adding that the "promises made by donors did not fully reflect the Angolan government's needs" .
The disappointing response to the appeal was said by observers to reflect the donors' view that the government was squandering resources on the civil war.
Agreement on debt rescheduling
The Paris Club of official creditors in July 1989 agreed a rescheduling of debt service payments totalling $432,000,000 due in the following 15 months.
Repayment was to be over 10 years, with a six-year grace period.
Negotiations on the agreement had begun in May 1988.
AFRICA
ZAMBIA
BASIC DATA
Area: 752,614 sq km.
Population: 7,875,448 (July 1989).
Capital: Lusaka.
Languages: English (official); main African languages are Nyanja, Bemba, Tonga, Lozi, Lunda and Luvale.
Religion: Christianity (70%), Islam, Hinduism and animism.
Av. life expectancy: 54 yrs (1988).
Armed forces: 16,200 (1989).
GNP per capita: US$290 (1988).
Currency: Zambian kwacha (US$1.00=K39.2645 as at June 11, 1990).
The Republic of Zambia became an independent state within the Commonwealth in October 1964.
Since December 1972 the sole legal political organization has been the United National Independence Party (UNIP).
Executive power is vested in the President, currently Kenneth Kaunda, who is also leader of the UNIP.
Legislative power is vested in the National Assembly, elected by direct popular vote for a five-year term.
All candidates are required to be members of UNIP and have their candidatures endorsed by the party's central committee.
Elections to the 125 elective seats in the Assembly last took place in October 1988; at the same time the President was re-elected for a further five-year term, having held the office since independence [see pp. 36264-65].
The Cabinet, appointed by the President, is subordinate to the party's central committee.
Gen. Malimba Masheke Prime Minister; Co-operatives Alex Shapi Secretary of State for Defence and Security Lt.-Gen.
Hanniah Lungu Defence Gen. Kingsley Chinkuli Home Affairs Luke Mwananshiku Foreign Affairs Gibson Chigaga Finance and National Commission for Development Planning Justin Mukando Agriculture Paul Malukutila Water, Lands and Natural Resources Frederick Chomba Legal Affairs; Attorney General Arnold Simuchimba Information and Broadcasting Services Rabson Chongo Commerce and Industry Bernard Fulembo Mines Brig. -Gen.
Enos Haimbe Power, Transport and Communications Pickson Chitambala Tourism Lavu Mulimba Labour, Social Development and Culture Mavis Muyunda Health Eli Mwanang'onze General Education, Youth and Sport Lameck Goma Higher Education, Science and Technology Haswell Mwale Works and Supply 
Zambian Cabinet
POLITICS
Opposition to multiparty system
The fifth UNIP national convention, held in Lusaka on March 14-17, 1990, rejected proposals for moves towards a multiparty system and voted to retain "one-party participatory democracy" .
President Kaunda told delegates that Zambia's experience could not be compared to that of the Soviet Union or of East European countries which had recently opted for political pluralism.
The convention also turned down proposals to limit the President's tenure to two five-year terms, to allow more than one presidential candidate and for members of the UNIP central committee and other party officials to be elected by popular vote.
On April 14 Kaunda told Radio Zambia that in view of Zambia's experiences in the first few years after independence, when more than one party had operated, "the question of whether the multiparty system will solve Zambia's problems is a yes-and-no situation which has to be considered very cautiously" .
UNIP secretary-general Alexander Grey Zulu added his voice to the official rejection of multiparty politics, when he said in Kitwe on May 21 that those advocating the reintroduction of multiparty politics "should not beat about the bush as to their real motive, which was to acquire power" .
On the other hand Frederick Chiluba, chairman of the Zambia Congress of Trade Unions, said that he supported the introduction of a multiparty system.
On May 28 in a speech to the UNIP national council, Kaunda again criticized the multiparty system as likely to lead to "tribal conflicts" , but promised that there would be a free vote in the nationwide referendum which he proposed should be held on the issue [see p. 37523].
Appointment of Canadian as central bank governor
Jacques Bussières, a Canadian, was appointed as governor of the Bank of Zambia (central bank) with effect from January 1990, the first foreigner to hold the post.
Kaunda said that"Zambianization has not succeeded in this particular area.
We have learnt the hard way and we must admit it".
[For dismissal of previous governor, Francis Nkhoma, and his trial on corruption charges in November 1989 see p. 37142.]
SECURITY
Treason trial — Alleged foreign support for coup
In January 1990, at the continuing trial of former Army commander Lt.-Gen.
Christon Tembo and three other officers accused of high treason [for start of trial in November 1989 see p. 37142], an Army officer giving evidence as a state witness claimed that President Robert Mugabe of Zimbabwe had pledged support for the plotters before their planned coup attempt in October 1988 [see p. 36264].
The witness added that the West German government had offered US$500,000,000 to back the coup.
ECONOMY
Economic indicators
GDP growth 2.7% (1988)
Current-account balance -US$90 m. (1988)
Trade balance +US$270 m. (1988)
Budget deficit US$275.1 m. (1988)
Total external public debt US$7,000 m. (1989)
Gross domestic product US$2,738 m. (1988)
GDP per capita US$366 (1988)
Inflation rate 68% (1988-89)
Principal trading partners EC, Japan, South Africa, USA 
Agreement with IMF on new austerity programme
In March 1990 the International Monetary Fund (IMF) and World Bank officially approved the government's new economic austerity measures, which included further devaluation, cuts in public spending and food subsidies, and a tightening of the money supply, as well as the introduction of a two-tier foreign exchange rate [see below]to encourage exports and to increase hard currency earnings.
The new structural adjustment programme would be based on concessional aid of at least $600,000,000 annually over three years.
The IMF's approval of the government's economic measures prompted the European Communities (EC) to grant 20,000,000 European currency units (approximately equivalent to $24,200,000) in quick disbursing aid to finance imports.
On May 28 Kaunda announced plans to sell 40 per cent of shares in public utilities and services and 49 per cent of shares in state mining, industrial and commercial enterprises, as well as to set up a stock exchange, a move perceived as a way of attracting more aid from Western donors.
Two-tier exchange rate
The central bank announced that a two-tier exchange rate system would be in operation as from Feb. 19, 1990, comprising an official and a market exchange rate.
The market rate for buying and selling would initially be fixed at $1.00=K40, while the official rate at the time under the "crawling devaluation" system stood at $1.00=K23.
FOREIGN
A draft agreement was signed with Mozambique on Dec. 2, 1989, on ways of controlling the movement of people along the border between Chipata province in Zambia and Tete province in Mozambique.
On Feb. 21, 1990, a Zambian fisherman was shot dead and two others were wounded by Zaïrean soldiers while fishing in the Luapula river on the common border; Zaïre claimed that the Zambians had strayed into its territory.
A Zambian minister said in late March that the demarcation of the frontier along the Luapula was not yet complete, although "considerable progress" had been made in resolving the border dispute with Zaïre [see also pp. 36920; 37143].
AFRICA
MALAWI
BASIC DATA
Area: 118,484 sq km.
Population: 8,155,000 (1988).
Capital: Lilongwe.
Languages: English (official); Chichewa.
Religion: Traditional beliefs; Christianity (50%), Islam and Hinduism.
Av. life expectancy: 46 yrs (1988).
Armed forces: 7,250 (1989).
GNP per capita: US$160 (1988).
Currency: Malawi kwacha (US$1.00=K2.8377 as at June 11, 1990).
The Republic of Malawi was established in July 1966, two years after the country gained independence from the United Kingdom.
The Republic, which retains membership of the Commonwealth, is a one-party state with an executive President.
Following an amendment to the Constitution, the current head of state, Hastings Kamuzu Banda, was proclaimed Life President in July 1971, having ruled Malawi since independence.
Legislative power is vested in the unicameral National Assembly, whose 112 elected members are chosen for a five-year term by direct popular vote; the President is empowered to appoint an unlimited number of deputies to the Assembly.
A general election was held in May 1987, in which all candidates were required to be members of the Malawi Congress Party, although voters had a choice of candidate in 69 constituencies.
The President appoints Cabinet Ministers, the Chief Justice, senior civil servants, and senior officers of the armed forces.
Hastings Kamuzu Banda Life President; Head of Government; Minister of External Affairs, Agriculture, Justice, Works and Supplies Maxwell Pashane Without portfolio Wadson Bini Deleza Labour Louis Chimango Finance Robson W. Chirwa Trade and Industry; Tourism Michael Mlambala Education and Culture Katola Phiri Health Stanford Demba Forestry and Natural Resources; Local Government Dalton Katopola Transport and Communications Mfunjo Mwakikunga Community Services 
Malawi Cabinet
POLITICS
Dissolution and reappointment of Cabinet
After dissolving his Cabinet on Jan. 30, 1990, President Banda appointed a new one on Feb. 23 in which former Minister of Health Edward C. I. Bwanali took over Local Government from Mfunjo Mwakikunga, who became the new Health Minister.
On April 27 Banda announced another Cabinet dissolution; in the new Cabinet announced on May 2, Mwakikunga was moved from Health to Community Services, in an exchange of portfolios with Katola Phiri, and Bwanali was dropped from the Cabinet, with his portfolio of Local Government taken by Minister of Forestry and Natural Resources Stanford Demba.
SECURITY
Denial of human rights allegations
In November 1989 a government spokesperson described as "false and unfounded" a report by the human rights organization Amnesty International which contained allegations of human rights abuses and torture and ill-treatment of prisoners.
Death in Zambian prison of fire-bomb suspect
Ishmail Zimba, a Malawian citizen, died in his prison cell in Lusaka, Zambia, on Nov. 20, 1989, two days after being arrested for questioning.
Zimba was suspected of involvement in a fire-bomb attack on Oct. 13, 1989, on the home in Lusaka, the Zambian capital, of an exiled opponent of the Malawian regime, Mkwapatira Mhongo, in which nine people were killed [see p. 36993].
ECONOMY
Economic indicators
GDP growth 3.7% (1989)
Current-account balance -US$99.9 m. (1988)
Trade balance -US$101.7 m. (1988)
Overall balance of payments -US$91.6 m. (1988)
Budget deficit US$71.6 m. (1988)
Budget deficit (as % of GNP) 5.5% (1988)
Total external public debt US$1,200 m. (1989)
Debt service ratio (as % of export earnings) 48% (1989)
Gross domestic product US$1,370 m. (1988)
Inflation rate 12.9% (June 1989)
Principal trading partners (1986) Exports: UK, West Germany, USA; Imports: South Africa, UK, Japan
Despite the reduction of inflation to 12.9 per cent(compared with a 1989 target of 15 per cent ) and a growth rate in 1989 which was expected narrowly to exceed population growth, the economy's structure remained largely unchanged, particularly in agriculture, with a prominent division between estates producing commodities for export, and a peasant sector where successful farmers were in a tiny minority.
To promote increased agricultural output and alleviate the medium-term threat of hunger, aggravated by widespread crop failure in 1989, economists urged measures to broaden markets and increase the purchasing power of small farmers.
Cancellation of US debt — ESAF arrangement
In December 1989 the United States cancelled debts valued at US$40,400,000, in view of the favourable economic performance and commitment to the International Monetary Fund (IMF) structural adjustment programmes.
The cancellation, representing 3.6 per cent of Malawi's total external public debt of $1,200 million, followed a decision by the US Congress to reward 11 sub-Saharan African countries adopting IMF and World Bank economic reform measures.
The IMF on Aug. 30, 1989, announced approval of two semi-annual loans totalling the equivalent of 18,600,000 special drawing rights (approximately US$23,300,000) in support of the second annual arrangement under the enhanced structural adjustment facility (ESAF).
Malawi had already drawn SDR18,600,000 under the first annual programme of the three-year ESAF approved in July 1988 [see p. 36993].
Commodities
The value of the 1989 tobacco crop was significantly reduced from the record 1988 level, despite a large increase in burley tobacco sales, when prices fell to their lowest level in three years.
At the IMF's suggestion, the government was to consider introducing burley as a cash crop for small farmers; production had hitherto been restricted to commercial estates.
Overall, the value of tobacco, accounting for 60 per cent of exports in 1989, was K362,000,000, down by K24,000,000 from the 1988 level.
Sugar was the third most important export after tobacco and tea, providing about 10 per cent of export earnings.
Privatization
Malawi's privatization programme, centred on the Malawi Agricultural Development and Marketing Corporation (ADMARC), incurred opposition from the multinational company Lonrho in its efforts to break the latter's monopoly of the sugar industry and to introduce competition.
Lonrho managed two of ADMARC's largest investments, the sugar estates of Sucoma and Dwangwa Sugar Company.
By late 1989 ADMARC had succeeded in disposing of most of its 25 agricultural estates, many to Malawian entrepreneurs, but also to the Commonwealth Development Corporation and the US-based multinational Cargill.
1990 budget
Finance Minister Louis Chimango presented the 1990 budget on March 23, 1990, announcing a reform of the tax system involving tax cuts, a broadening of the tax base and improved collection measures.
The highest rate of individual tax was now 45 per cent, payable above a threshold of earning of K36,000 per year (increased from K24,000).
Projected expenditure was K1,600 million for 1990/91, to include K412,000,000 development expenditure.
Of the K1,200 million recurrent budget, debt servicing accounted for slightly less than one-third.
The budget deficit was K514,000,000 before taking into account grants and loans, which were expected to leave an overall deficit of K102,000,000 [see p. 36993 for previous year's budget figures].
Chimango predicted a gross domestic product (GDP) growth rate of 4.7 per cent for the forthcoming year, but noted that poor rainfall in March could have a negative impact on the growth rate.
AFRICA
ZIMBABWE
BASIC DATA
Area: 390,759 sq km.
Population: 9,257,000 (1988).
Capital: Harare.
Languages: English (official); main African languages are Chishona and Sindebele.
Religion: Majority of Africans follow traditional beliefs; Asian minority usually follow Islam or Hinduism; Christianity (approx. 20%).
Av. life expectancy: 63 yrs (1988).
Armed forces: 49,500 (1989).
GNP per capita: US$580 (1989).
Currency: Zimbabwe dollar (US$1.00=Z$2.4703 as at June 11, 1990).
The Republic of Zimbabwe achieved independence within the Commonwealth in April 1980.
Legislation enacted in November 1987 amended the 1980 pre-independence Constitution to provide for the creation of the post of executive President, combining the posts of head of state and head of government.
The new President, Robert Gabriel Mugabe, who had been Zimbabwe's Prime Minister since independence, was elected by Parliament in December 1987 [see p. 35626].
When the pre-independence Lancaster House agreement on the Constitution expired in April 1990, the former bicameral parliament set up at independence in 1980 was replaced by a new single-chamber parliament, the House of Assembly, with 150 members (120 elective, 10 traditional chiefs, eight provincial governors appointed by the President and 12 other presidential appointees).
In December 1987 an agreement on unification was reached between the ruling Zimbabwe African National Union-Patriotic Front (ZANU-PF, led by Mugabe) and the other main party, the Patriotic Front-Zimbabwe African People's Union (PF-ZAPU), and the country became a de facto one-party state [see pp. 35626; 36415; 37116].
In a general election held in March 1990 ZANU-PF won 116 of the 120 elective seats in the House of Assembly [see p. 37307].
POLITICS
Death of minister
Ernest Kadungure, the Minister of State for Political Affairs responsible for Youth, died in Harare on May 31, 1990.
A long-serving member of the Cabinet, he had been appointed to President Robert Mugabe's first independence government as Minister of Transport and Power in March 1980, and was also a member of the ruling party's political bureau, where he was Secretary for Youth.
Continuing opposition to one-party state
After the ZANU-PF election victory in March 1990 [see p. 37307], described by Mugabe as "a convincing mandate for a one-party state" , attacks and intimidation against defeated opposition candidates continued until May in some areas.
The Catholic Commission for Justice and Peace, a human rights monitoring group, said that it appeared that the violence had been sanctioned to frustrate opposition to the formation of a one-party state.
It was not until late May, when the violence threatened to get out of hand, that government ministers spoke out against it.
Also in May, while Mugabe reaffirmed his commitment to a one-party state, the Minister of Finance, Economic Planning and Development, Bernard Chidzero, was quoted by The Chronicle newspaper as saying that moves away from one-party systems in Africa should be encouraged.
Observers interpreted the low turn-out of 54 per cent in the March elections as the rejection by a large part of the electorate of ZANU-PF intentions to abolish the multiparty system.
On May 30, students at the University of Zimbabwe in Harare called for the formation of a mass democratic movement to campaign against the establishment of a one-party state, claiming support from elements within the ZANU-PF central committee and the Cabinet.
SECURITY
Terrorism trials
Three white Zimbabweans were each sentenced on June 9, 1989, to 40 years' imprisonment for taking part in bomb attacks in Harare in May 1986 by the South African Army on premises used by the then banned South African group the African National Congress (ANC)[see p. 34662].
The three, Kevin Woods, Barry Bawden and Michael Smith, were all members of the (pre-independence) Rhodesian Army, and two of them had already been sentenced to death for the car-bomb killing in January 1988 of a Zimbabwean driver at an ANC house in the south-western town of Bulawayo (in which Barry Bawden's brother Kit Bawden was also implicated — see p. 36415).
On June 30, 1989, former British Army corporal Dennis Beahan was sentenced to life imprisonment for his part in an abortive attempt to free five Zimbabwean saboteurs (including the above three) from prison in June 1988.
Introduction of national service
The government announced on Nov. 14, 1989, that males aged 18 to 30 would have to begin registering that month for national service which would comprise six months of military training and six months of non-military instruction, followed by a third unspecified period.
The authorities had earlier mooted compulsory national service as a way of alleviating the worsening unemployment situation, with over 1,000,000 of the population out of work [see also p. 36416].
Imprisonment of spy for South Africa
Shadreck Ndlovu, a former member of the Zimbabwean paramilitary forces, was sentenced to 42 years' imprisonment on June 1, 1990, after confessing to spying for South Africa on the Zimbabwean Army and the ANC between September 1989 and May 1990.
ECONOMY
Economic indicators
GDP growth 3% (1989)
Current-account balance +US$75 m. (1988)
Trade balance +US$450 m. (1988)
Budget deficit US$575 m. (1988-89)
Budget deficit (as % of GDP) 11% (1988)
Total external public debt US$2,700 m. (1988)
Debt service ratio (as % of export earnings) 24% (1989)
Gross domestic product US$5,600 m. (1988)
Inflation rate 13% (June 1990)
Unemployment 30% (1990)
Foreign exchange reserves US$175 m.
(June 1989)
Principal trading partners EC, South Africa, USA 
1989-90 budget
Chidzero on July 27, 1989, announced a stringent budget for 1989-90 aimed at reducing by 11 per cent the previous year's budget deficit, and bringing the deficit down to 9 per cent of gross domestic product (GDP).
The projected deficit reduction depended on government revenue rising 22 per cent in 1989, and on spending increasing by only 15 per cent.
There was doubt that this was possible, given that economic growth in 1989 had fallen to 3 per cent, from 5.6 per cent in 1988.
Chidzero announced some minor income tax concessions, raising the basic abatement and adjusting tax bands so that the top rate of 60 per cent would apply at Z$40,000 instead of Z$33,000.
Duty on drink and tobacco was raised.
The allocation for subsidies remained high, at Z$350,000,000, accounting for 9 per cent of the budget.
The other main allocations went on education (19 per cent), debt service (15 per cent ), and defence (13.5 per cent ).
New investment rules
On April 18, 1989, Mugabe announced a combination of investment incentives and the easing of administrative controls which investors had said were stifling economic growth.
The new policies, aimed at increasing the flow of local and foreign capital, included (i) the decision to establish an Investment Centre to streamline investment approvals;(ii) the decision to join the World Bank's Multilateral Investment Guarantee Agency;(iii) the negotiation of bilateral investment protection agreements with foreign governments; and (iv) the introduction of a range of measures on remittance of after-tax profits, redefinition of foreign-controlled companies and the associated relaxation of domestic borrowing ceilings for foreign firms.
Strikes and labour unrest
The government on June 5, 1990, invoked state of emergency legislation [see p. 37175 for renewal of state of emergency in January 1990]on June 5, banning strikes in essential services in order to break a two-week strike by non-graduate teachers which had closed virtually all state-run schools, and in response to mounting industrial unrest over pay levels in the public sector.
On the following day riot police used tear gas against a demonstration of some 3,000 teachers, supported by pupils, demanding a 33 per cent pay increase and protesting at the ban.
A similar demonstration in Bulawayo was also dispersed.
Press reports noted that Mugabe had during the March 1990 general election campaign promised public-sector pay increases and salary restructuring, but that senior staff had been the main beneficiaries.
A strike by junior nurses, soon after the election, had ended after the government promised to review their case.
The teachers were joined by workers at the Zisco iron and steel parastatal, and by some administrative civil servants.
Later in the month teachers who failed to return to work were dismissed.
Land reform
Mugabe said on May 2, 1990, that the government would amend the Constitution to speed up and simplify the redistribution of land, following the lapsing in April 1990 of the entrenched clauses of the Lancaster House agreement of 1980, which stated that the government could only buy land which was freely offered for sale.
From independence until 1989 only 52,000 families had been resettled.
ZANU-PF had promised to redistribute among the country's 5,000,000 peasants some of the fertile land owned by over 4,000 white commercial farmers.
However, after the March 1990 elections ministers reassured white farmers that their interests would be protected and that they had nothing to fear.
On May 18 Justice, Legal and Parliamentary Affairs Minister Emmerson Munangagwa said that farmers whose land was compulsorily purchased would no longer be paid compensation in foreign currency remittable abroad, as provided for by the Lancaster House agreement.
FOREIGN
On Dec. 5, 1989, Zimbabwe and Somalia established relations at diplomatic level.
AFRICA
MOZAMBIQUE
BASIC DATA
Area: 799,380 sq km.
Population: 14,967,000 (1988).
Capital: Maputo.
Languages: Portuguese (official); African languages including Ronga, Shangaan and Muchope.
Religion: Traditional beliefs; Christian (Roman Catholic) and Moslem minorities.
Av. life expectancy: 48 yrs (1988).
Armed forces: 71,000 (about 10,500 conscripts)(1989).
GNP per capita: US$100 (1988).
Currency: metical (US$1.00=948.0249 meticais as at June 11, 1990).
The People's Republic of Mozambique gained independence from Portugal in June 1975.
Under the terms of the Constitution, power "belongs to the workers and peasants united and led by Frelimo [Frente de Libertaçao de Moçambique — the Front for the Liberation of Mozambique — the sole legal political organization]" , which is described as "the leading force of the state and society" .
Executive power is vested in the president of Frelimo, who is head of state and C.-in-C. of the Armed Forces.
Legislative power is vested in the People's Assembly, which is indirectly elected, and is composed of the central committee, executive committee, and permanent commission of Frelimo, the Council of Ministers, the provincial governors and representatives from the armed forces and each of the 10 provinces.
A general election was last held in 1986 [see p. 35684].
The current head of state, Joaquim Alberto Chissano, succeeded Mozambique's first President, Samora Machel, who was killed in an air crash in October 1986 [see p. 34791].
Mario da Graça Machungo Prime Minister; Planning Lt.-Gen.
Alberto Joaquim Chipande Defence Lt.-Gen.
Antonio Hama Thai Chief of General Staff of the Armed Forces, Deputy Minister of Defence Pascoal Mocumbi Foreign Affairs Maj.-Gen.
Jacinto Soares Veloso International Co-operation Lt.-Gen.
Armando Guebuza Transport and Communications Aniceto dos Muchangos Education Mariano Matsinhe Security Manuel António Interior José Oscar Monteiro Minister in the President's Office for State Administration Abdul Magid Osman Finance Leonardo Simao Health Teodato Hunguana Information Joao Maria Salomao Construction and Water Daniel Filipe Gabriel Tembe Trade Alexandre José Zandamela Agriculture António José Lima Rodrigues Branco Industry and Energy Joao Kachamila Mineral Resources Ossmane Ali Dauto Justice Luís Bernardo Honwana Culture Feliciano Gundana Minister in the President's Office without Portfolio Aguiar Real Mazula Labour 
Mozambique Council of Ministers
POLITICS
Details of draft constitution
President Chissano unveiled the draft of a new constitution at a public rally in Maputo on Jan. 9, 1990.
The draft, to be circulated for public debate, would have to be ratified by parliament before elections scheduled for 1991, he said.
The people would be given the opportunity to choose between a single-party or multiparty system, he added, although he argued in favour of the former: "Creating national unity is a fundamental task for our people.
The foundation of several parties might obstruct this vitally important strategic goal."
The constitution, if adopted, would remove Frelimo's power to choose the President.
 "We are proposing that the President of the Republic be elected by secret vote, and that any citizen can be a candidate for the presidency within certain criteria," said Chissano.
Hitherto, the Frelimo president was also President of the Republic; the proposed change followed discussions at the fifth Frelimo congress in July 1989, which centred on ways to broaden popular support for the party and strengthen national unity [see p. 36804].
Under the new constitution, presidential elections would be direct and secret, with no President serving more than three five-year terms.
Any citizen aged between 40 and 65 would be eligible to run for the presidency, provided he or she was proposed by at least 5,000 people, at least 200 of them from each province.
Parliament would have the power to override presidential vetoes on legislation with a two-thirds majority.
Parliament would also be reformed, being directly elected by universal suffrage by constituencies.
The other "organs of sovereignty" would be the Council of Ministers and the Supreme Court.
Chissano also outlined a number of human rights issues which would be reflected in the constitution, including the abolition of capital punishment, legal defence for the poor, land tenure for farmers, compensation for those who suffered from illegal acts by the state, and recognition of the right to strike, the last being a particularly topical issue in view of the wave of strikes affecting the country [see below].
The Central Office for Organizing and Discussing the Draft Project for Revising the Constitution, set up to co-ordinate the national debate, held its first meeting in Maputo on March 9, 1990.
Headed by Frelimo political bureau member Rafael Maguni, the office had central and regional commissions with members drawn from all social groups.
SECURITY
Peace negotiations
Presidents Robert Mugabe of Zimbabwe and Daniel arap Moi of Kenya, who had been attempting to mediate between the government and the anti-government movement the Mozambique National Resistance (Resistência Nacional Moçambicana — MNR or Renamo), met in Nairobi, the Kenyan capital, on Sept. 20, 1989, to review the previous month's discussions between church leaders and the MNR [see p. 36841].
The 16-point plan presented by the rebels at this meeting had been rejected by the government, but on Oct. 15 Chissano announced that MNR rebels would be allowed to stand in the 1991 elections if they renounced violence and laid down their arms.
Mugabe and Moi met again in Nairobi on Dec. 8 and approved a report recommending direct talks between the two sides without preconditions.
Foreign Affairs Minister Pascoal Mocumbi said in Maputo on Jan. 2, 1990, that the time was becoming ripe for direct talks between the two sides and praised the efforts of the mediators.
On Jan. 23, however, Chissano, on his return from a summit of front-line African leaders in Lusaka, the Zambian capital, denied rumours to the effect that a date for talks had been set.
He said that he was awaiting a reply from the mediators concerning conditions for the talks.
The MNR responded with a statement issued in Nairobi saying that it had accepted the mediators' invitation to direct talks but that Chissano was delaying "to extend his time in power" .
By the end of April the main issue of disagreement appeared to be the choice of venue for the talks, Chissano having proposed Malawi or Zimbabwe, with the MNR insisting on a meeting in Nairobi.
The MNR reportedly agreed to Malawi as a venue in early June, after which it was suggested that talks would begin imminently.
A senior Mozambican delegation arrived in Blantyre, Malawi, in mid-June, but despite the reported presence of MNR leader Afonso Dhlakama, the two sides did not meet, and the Mozambican delegation returned home.
MNR attacks — Offensives by armed forces
Despite attempts to bring the two sides together for peace talks, rebel action against the civilian population continued.
Sabotage attacks by the MNR caused repeated power cuts in Maputo during September and October 1989, and again in May 1990, when power lines from South Africa were cut.
Exceptionally heavy rains in early 1990 limited the ability of Mozambican and Zimbabwean troops to protect possible targets, giving the MNR a tactical advantage.
Attacks on the Beira corridor pipeline to Zimbabwe were stepped up in the early weeks of 1990.
These attacks, plus an incident in which two men, a Briton and a Zimbabwean, were kidnapped and held for a month by the MNR in February-March, led to renewed doubts about the security of the Beira corridor between Zimbabwe and the central Mozambican port, which provided a major fuel and transport artery for Zimbabwean trade.
One of the worst incidents was an attack on a train near Ressano Garcia, 75 km north-west of Maputo, on Feb. 15, in which at least 77 people were killed.
The government claimed that the attackers had crossed the nearby border from South Africa.
A similar attack on a passenger train near the same town occurred on May 12, when at least 40 people were killed, most of them miners returning from South Africa.
The combined Mozambican and Zimbabwean force launched major offensives in February and May, concentrating on rebel strongholds in Manica and Sofala provinces.
On May 18 the Army claimed to have destroyed a rebel logistics centre near the South African border.
Defence Ministry dismissals
Three senior Defence Ministry officials were dismissed on March 9, 1990, according to an announcement from Chissano's office.
The three were Lt.-Gen.
Joaquim Munhepe, director-general for training and cadres, Col. Ismail Mangueira, director-general of logistics, and Maj. Lazaro Mathe, director-general of weaponry.
No reasons were given for the dismissals.
ECONOMY
Economic indicators
GDP growth 5.5% (1989)
Current-account balance -US$372 m. (1987)
Trade balance -US$739 m. (1989 est.)
Budget deficit US$56 m. (1990)
Total external public debt US$4,400 m. (1988)
Debt service ratio (as % of export earnings) 32% (1988)
Gross domestic product 450,000 m. meticais (1987)
Gross national product US$2,135 m. (1987)
Inflation rate 40% (1989)
Principal trading partners (1987) Exports: USA, Japan, East Germany; Imports: Italy, South Africa, USA 
National meeting on emergency — 1990 appeal
International Co-operation Minister Maj.-Gen.
Jacinto Soares Veloso warned that Mozambique faced "critical" shortages, at the opening of the seventh national meeting on the emergency situation in Maputo on Nov. 6, 1989.
The shortages were due, he said, to donors' failure to respond adequately to the government's 1989 emergency appeal, launched in April at a donor conference in New York [see pp. 36608; 36805].
The meeting brought together representatives of UN organizations, donor countries and agencies and officials concerned with relief efforts in all 10 provinces.
Describing the donor response as "feeble" , Veloso said that only 387,000 tonnes of food had been pledged by donors, out of 916,000 tonnes requested; less than 20 per cent of the amount requested had actually arrived in Mozambique.
Veloso said that 5,600,000 people were now displaced or affected by the emergency, 1,000,000 more than at the time of the April appeal.
Military successes against the MNR had complicated the situation, he said, because people in areas formerly under rebel control were now in need of direct assistance.
In addition, numbers of Mozambican refugees had been repatriated from neighbouring countries.
However, he also pointed out that the government's policy of combining "actions of immediate relief with medium-term rehabilitation" was starting to show results, the distribution of seeds and tools to displaced people allowing them to produce at least some of their own food.
Reflecting the disappointing response to the 1989 appeal, the government requested only US$136,000,000 in emergency aid in its 1990 appeal, launched at the UN headquarters in New York on April 26.
The figure represented the absolute minimum considered necessary by the government and the UN to provide basic food needs for 1,400,000 people worst affected by the civil war.
After the meeting, donors were reported to have responded with pledges of $120,000,000.
The funds sought included $57,000,000 to buy 229,000 tonnes of food, $34,000,000 for logistical support and $21,000,000 for assistance with health, education and agriculture and assistance to refugees returning from neighbouring states.
Consultative group meeting — ESAF arrangement
Prime Minister Mario da Graça Machungo called for international assistance to increase production and improve social services at the third consultative group meeting co-ordinated by the World Bank for Mozambique in Paris on Nov. 16, 1989.
At the meeting, attended by representatives of 22 countries and 11 international organizations, Machungo announced measures to combat poverty, which he said afflicted 90 per cent of the population.
As part of a strategy to achieve self-sufficiency in food, he said, the government was to initiate a three-year pilot programme concentrating resources on 40 districts most able to contribute to food security efforts.
The government planned to distribute farm implements and seeds, repair small-scale irrigation systems, and improve productive and social infrastructure.
He also announced measures to alleviate the social impact of the economic recovery programme, begun in 1987 with International Monetary Fund (IMF) and World Bank assistance [see pp. 35688; 36609].
Up to 100,000 families without sources of income would benefit from a cash food allowance in 1990, and extra income support would be provided for workers heading large households.
A programme to help the poor buy food and medicine would be set up, provision of school books would be subsidized and alternative energy sources would be developed.
Reporting on progress on the economic recovery programme, Machungo said that the measures taken had had a "positive effect" , with a gross domestic product (GDP) growth rate of 4 per cent a year and increases in agricultural production.
However, he stressed that economic growth was still heavily dependent on continued flows of external assistance, since the programmes under way would take a long time to carry out.
Mozambique's needs for external assistance in 1990 were put at a total of $1,400 million.
After the Paris meeting it was announced that about 85 per cent of this amount had been pledged, with donors promising $300,000,000 in debt relief and between $800,000,000 and $900,000,000 in grants and loans, mainly to finance imports required for the economic recovery programme.
The IMF on June 4, 1990, announced approval of a three-year arrangement in an amount equivalent to SDR85,400,000 ($112,800,000) under the enhanced structural adjustment facility (ESAF) and the first annual arrangement thereunder.
Of this amount, SDR24,400,000 ($32,200,000) would be available under the first annual arrangement, of which the first semiannual loan of SDR9,150,000 ($12,100,000) was made available for disbursement on June 15, 1990.
The ESAF arrangement followed Mozambique's three-year arrangement under the structural adjustment facility (SAF), which expired in June [see pp. 35688; 36609].
Mozambique's quota in the Fund was SDR61,000,000 and its outstanding financial obligations to the Fund, composed entirely of outstanding SAF loans, currently totalled the equivalent of SDR42,700,000 ($56,400,000).
1990 budget — Prime Minister's report on economy
Increased military spending was announced by Finance Minister Abdul Magid Osman in his 1990 budget speech to the People's Assembly on Dec. 16, 1989.
The armed forces were to receive 36.9 per cent of the total government budget of 285,000 million meticais, although this represented a smaller proportion of the total than in 1989, when defence spending accounted for 42 per cent of the final budget figure of 225,000 million meticais.
Civil servants' salaries were to take 17 per cent of government expenditure in 1990, with a further 14.7 per cent devoted to foreign debt service and 8.2 per cent to subsidies on food and to state companies.
A budget deficit of 45,000 million meticais was projected, compared with a final deficit of 24,000 million meticais in 1989.
A special investment budget worth 380,000 million meticais was announced, largely dependent on foreign grants for its financing.
Osman noted that although state income in 1989 had been higher than expected — 214,000 million meticais as opposed to the 190,000 million meticais originally projected — spending had also been higher than budgeted, at 238,000 million meticais.
Machungo, presenting a report on the economy to the People's Assembly, said that GDP growth in 1988 had been 5.5 per cent, rather than the 4.1 per cent originally estimated.
The increase was due to much higher than expected growth in agricultural production, of around 7.2 per cent.
Machungo said that he was confident that growth had continued in 1989, although full figures were not yet available.
It was estimated that marketed production of maize had risen by 29.8 per cent(to 78,400 tonnes), of cotton by 64 per cent (to 31,400 tonnes) and of cashew nuts by 12.1 per cent (to 50,400 tonnes).
Rice production had fallen, however, by 29 per cent(to 29,300 tonnes), because rehabilitation work on the Massingir dam in Gaza province had made it impossible to supply sufficient water to irrigated land normally planted with rice in the Limpopo valley.
Industrial production, he said, had grown by 5.5 per cent in 1989, less than expected because of interrupted production in the second half of the year due to sabotage of power transmission lines to Maputo from South Africa.
Machungo said that priorities for 1990 included cutting inflation from 40 to 15-18 per cent, with GDP growth targeted at between 4 and 6 per cent .
He reported that export earnings in 1989 had reached only $92,000,000, down from $102,000,000 the previous year, mainly due to a fall in world prices for prawns and cashew nuts, which accounted for 67 per cent of export revenues.
Export earnings covered only 12 per cent of imports in 1989, down from 14 per cent in 1988.
The government put the current-account deficit for the year at $890,000,000 and equivalent to 70 per cent of GDP.
Grants covered about 43 per cent of the deficit.
Debt servicing rose from 9 per cent of GDP in 1988 to 18-19 per cent in 1989.
Continued devaluations
The government announced on Dec. 2, 1989, that the value of the metical would in future be linked to that of a basket of currencies, of undisclosed content, rather than to the US dollar as had been the case since Jan. 31, 1987.
The announcement was accompanied by a further small devaluation against the dollar, by 2.09 per cent to $1.00=814 meticais.
Subsequently, the value of the currency was allowed to fluctuate on a daily basis.
Wave of strikes
A series of strikes in late 1989 and early 1990, the longest bout of industrial unrest since independence, led to significant changes in industrial relations procedures.
Initial strike action by workers at the Cifel iron foundry and on the weekly magazine Tempo, in support of a demand for an end-of-year bonus ended after promises by the management to pay.
These apparent successes encouraged similar action by others, notably railway workers at the Maputo port workshops, who went on strike from Jan. 2 to 4 demanding pay owed since 1987 as well as payment of the traditional "13th month" bonus.
Again, management promises of payment secured a return to work.
A series of other strikes followed in Maputo, involving workers at the state housing authority, a textile factory, the health services and the bus company.
Strikes also spread to other parts of the country, including Beira and Nampula.
The official response was restrained, even though strikes were technically outlawed by security legislation passed in 1979.
On Jan. 8 riot police were called in to control striking nurses and orderlies who were stoning the buildings at Maputo central hospital.
The health workers were seeking a 100 per cent wage increase and improved conditions.
Two days later the official trade union movement, the Mozambique Workers' Organization, previously silent on the strikes, came out in support of the workers' actions, saying: "We consider that most of the strikers' grievances are justified." 
It added, however, that strike action should only be used when "legal channels of dialogue and negotiation have been exhausted" .
Two decrees were issued by the Labour Ministry on Jan. 10, 1990,(i) announcing a nationwide 16 per cent wage increase for workers in state enterprises, stating that this was within the framework of the economic recovery programme; and (ii) stating that strikes might legally be called by trade union committees or mass meetings of workers but that notice should be given to both the employer and the ministry and that strike action should only be used as a last resort.
Workers on strike would not be paid, but would receive social security benefits, and employers would be prevented from recruiting substitute labour during a strike.
Machungo and other government members met trade union officials and management representatives on Feb. 2 to discuss the labour unrest.
Machungo told the meeting that, despite the high cost of living, there was no alternative to the economic recovery programme.
The start of the new school year was suspended by the government on Feb. 20 after teachers went on strike demanding a 100 per cent pay increase.
The government rejected the demand, describing it as "absolutely insupportable" .
Riot police broke up a demonstration in protest at the government's response but most teachers returned to work when the schools reopened on March 5.
AFRICA
NAMIBIA
BASIC DATA
Area: 824,269 sq km.
Population: 1,550,000 (1989).
Capital: Windhoek.
Languages: Afrikaans and English (official); African languages and German.
Religion: Christianity (about 90%).
Av. life expectancy: 57 yrs (1988).
GNP per capita: Not available.
Currency: South African rand (US$1.00=R2.6638 as at June 11, 1990).
The Republic of Namibia achieved independence in March 1990 [see pp. 37296-97], having been a colony since 1884, first under German and, since 1915, under South African rule.
A 1920 League of Nations mandate allowing South Africa to rule the territory was terminated by the UN in 1966, and the South African presence was ruled illegal by the International Court of Justice (ICJ).
Agreement was finally reached in December 1988 on the implementation of a UN-sponsored independence plan for Namibia [see p. 36380].
Under the 1990 Constitution, Namibia is a multiparty republic.
The head of state is the executive President, elected directly for a maximum term of five years and limited to a maximum of two such terms.
The first holder of the post, Sam Nujoma, whose South West Africa People's Organization (SWAPO) had spearheaded the struggle for independence since 1960, was elected on Feb. 16, 1990, by a unanimous vote of the Constituent Assembly [see p. 37296].
The President exercises the functions of government with the assistance of a Cabinet headed by a Prime Minister.
Legislative authority rests with the parliament: the Constituent Assembly (elected by direct, secret universal adult suffrage in November 1989 — see pp. 37031-32) was converted upon independence into the lower house of a bicameral parliamentary structure, to be known as the National Assembly and with 72 members serving a five-year term.
A proportional representation system is to apply to future elections.
An upper house representing regional leaders is to be created two years after independence.
SECURITY
Deteriorating security in north
Concern about security in northern Namibia increased in the early part of 1990 due to a number of cross-border raids from Angola into north-east Ovamboland and Kavangoland.
The raids were largely attributed by the UN Transition Assistance Group (UNTAG) to elements of the Angolan (South African-supported) rebel group Uniao Nacional para a Independência Total de Angola (UNITA), under pressure from an Angolan government offensive.
Discoveries of arms caches in the area also led to rumours that former members of the South African-trained Koevoet ( "Crowbar" ) counterinsurgency unit were involved.
ECONOMY
Economic indicators
GDP growth 2.3% (1988)
Current-account balance -US$37 m. (1988)
Trade balance +US$79 m. (1988)
Budget deficit R30 m. (1989-90)
Gross domestic product R3,750 m. (1988)
Inflation rate 13.4%
Principal trading partners SACU members 
Establishment of central bank — Investment code — Application for IMF membership
Finance Minister Otto Herrigel confirmed at a mid-April 1990 conference that Namibia would continue to use the South African rand as its currency until 1992.
He added, however, that a Namibian central bank was being set up, with assistance from International Monetary Fund (IMF) advisers.
In the meantime, the South African Reserve Bank (the South African central bank) would continue to carry out the functions of a central bank.
Herrigel said that no decision had been taken about whether the new currency would be linked to the rand or to a basket of international currencies.
It would take two years to decide whether the country would leave the Southern African Customs Union (SACU), he said, but it was hoped that Namibia would be able to set up "a foreign exchange control system more liberal than the one which we must accept at present" .
Foreign Affairs Minister Theo Ben Gurirab, addressing on April 30 the UN General Assembly special session on economic co-operation [see p. 37476], said that Namibia was drawing up foreign investment legislation to provide the guarantees which "international investors normally expect" , with special incentives for projects promoting investment and training.
Namibia requested some US$270,000,000 for each year of its 1990-92 reconstruction programme at a donors' conference in New York on June 21-22.
Little more than $200,000,000 for the first year was pledged, however, with some $60,000,000 of this on concessional terms; further pledges of $150,000,000 were forthcoming for the 1991-93 period.
In June 1990 Namibia formally applied for membership of the IMF.
Severe drought in north
The worst drought for 30 years was reported to have hit northern Namibia in late 1989, with no rain at all falling between September, the normal start of the rainy season, and mid-January 1990.
Farmers in Ovamboland were reported to be unable to plant crops and to be facing severe stock losses.
A UN inter-agency mission organized by special representative Martti Ahtisaari visited northern regions in mid-January, reporting that a total of almost 100,000 farmers and livestock herders in Ovamboland, Damaraland and Kaokoland were affected by drought.
FOREIGN
Relations with South Africa
South Africa opened an "interests office" in Windhoek on Dec. 13, 1989, offering a full range of consular services, including issue of passports and visas; the deputy head of the office said: "South Africa demonstrates by this that we want to be good neighbours and hope it will be possible to retain normal and friendly relations with the neighbouring state." 
South Africa published a bill on March 21, 1990, Namibia's independence day, declaring that no child born in Namibia after that day would be entitled to South African citizenship.
South African citizens normally resident in Namibia would also lose their citizenship on that day, unless they or their parents or grandparents were born in South Africa.
International affiliations
Namibia was formally admitted to the UN as the organization's 160th member on April 23, 1990.
Earlier, on April 11, the UN Council for Namibia, set up as an alternative to South Africa's illegal rule, holding its first meeting on Namibian soil, voted to dissolve itself and to hand over its assets to the government.
On April 30 Namibia was also formally admitted as a full member of the World Health Organization (WHO), of which it had previously been an associate member.
Diplomatic relations
Countries establishing diplomatic relations with Namibia in the months following independence on March 21, 1990, included Bulgaria, Colombia, Czechoslovakia, Denmark, Finland, France, India, Iran, Libya, Morocco, Poland, Tunisia and Venezuela.
In early June relations were established with the Polisario Front (Western Sahara).
AFRICA
BOTSWANA
BASIC DATA
Area: 582,000 sq km.
Population: 1,256,000 (1989).
Capital: Gaborone.
Languages: English (official); Setswana (national).
Religion: African religions and Christian minority.
Av. life expectancy: 68 yrs (1988).
Armed forces: 4,500 (1989).
GNP per capita: US$1,030 (1987).
Currency: pula (US$1.00=P1.8742 as at June 11, 1990).
The Republic of Botswana became independent within the Commonwealth in 1966.
Executive power is vested in the President as head of state, who is elected by universal suffrage for a renewable five-year term.
The President, currently Quett K. J. Masire, appoints a Vice-President from among the members of the National Assembly (legislature), and the Cabinet, over which he presides.
Elections to the 34 directly elective seats in the National Assembly are held every five years (there are four specially elected seats and two held ex officio).
A total of seven political parties contested the general election of October 1989, but only two obtained representation in the Assembly, the Botswana Democratic Party winning 31 of the directly elected seats and the Botswana National Front three.
The 15-member House of Chiefs considers draft legislation relating to alterations to the Constitution or to chieftaincy matters, and may make representation to the President on matters affecting the tribes or tribal organizations.
Peter Mmusi Vice President; Minister of Local Government and Lands Kebatlamang P. Morake Health Gaositwe K. T. Chiepe External Affairs Archibald M. Mogwe Mineral Resources and Water Affairs Patrick Balopi Labour and Home Affairs Ponatshego Kedikilwe Commerce and Industry Chapson Butale Works, Transport and Communications Festus Mogae Finance and Development Planning Lt.-Gen.
Mompati Merafhe Presidential Affairs and Public Administration Ray Molomo Education 
Botswana Cabinet
POLITICS
Formation of new party
The Botswana Labour Party, registered in September 1989, said that it would not align itself either with communism or capitalism; most of its officials were former members of the opposition Botswana National Front.
The party did not contest the October 1989 general election.
SECURITY
South African violations of airspace
A Commonwealth report on South African acts of destabilization in the frontline states released in October 1989 accused the South African Defence Force (SADF) of having committed 23 violations of Botswana's airspace between February 1985 and August 1988.
The report added that according to the police and the Botswana Defence Force (BDF), the SADF had carried out 20 direct attacks or acts of sabotage against Botswana up to February 1989, killing 31 civilians, of whom 70 per cent were Botswanan citizens, the rest being refugees or visitors.
[For March 1988 SADF raid see p. 36755.]
US defence assistance
In February 1989 the United States Defence Department announced a US$7,900,000 military support programme which would provide the BDF with armoured personnel carriers, Tow launchers and missiles and Vulcan anti-aircraft guns.
Imprisonment of ANC guerrillas
Five members of the (then banned) South African African National Congress (ANC) were sentenced in July 1989 in Gaborone to five years' imprisonment in July 1989 for possessing AK-47 rifles and ammunition.
ECONOMY
Economic indicators
GDP growth 9.7% (1989-90)
Trade balance +US$696 m. (1989)
Budget surplus US$369.1 m. (1988-89)
Total external public debt US$428 m.
(December 1988)
Gross domestic product US$1,940 m. (1988-89)
GDP per capita US$1,600 (1989)
Inflation rate 11.3% (December 1989)
Foreign exchange reserves US$2,800 m.
(October 1989)
Principal trading partners Switzerland, USA, UK
Although diamond production continued to fuel economic growth, making Botswana the fastest expanding economy in Africa, efforts were maintained to reduce dependence on the mineral sector for foreign exchange.
As well as creating more economic activity to absorb diamond earnings and generate sustained growth rates, the government also had to find job opportunities for the 27,000 school-leavers joining the job market every year.
Manufacturing, non-diamond mining and tourism were considered the most likely areas for diversification.
In May 1990 a campaign was launched to attract Asian investment in manufacturing, offering tax cuts and other incentives to induce companies to invest in an export processing zone.
1990-91 budget
In his budget speech on Feb. 19, 1990, Finance and Development Planning Minister Festus Mogae announced the highest ever recorded budget surplus of P769,000,000 for 1988-89, a 50 per cent increase on the previous year.
Gross domestic product (GDP) growth in 1989-90 was 9.7 per cent.
Foreign exchange earnings from the three main commodities — diamonds, copper and beef — rose by 32 per cent during the first 10 months of 1989.
For 1990-91 revenues and grants were forecast to increase by P653,000,000 over the revised 1989-90 budget to total P3,318 million, 63 per cent of which was expected to come from mineral exports.
Total expenditure was expected to grow by 24 per cent to P2,899 million, resulting in an overall budget surplus of P419,000,000; recurrent expenditure was set at P1,357 million, with 20 per cent of this allocated to education; development expenditure totalled P1,286 million, with the largest allocations earmarked for roadbuilding, primary schools and village infrastructure; on-lending to parastatals and so on totalled P339 million.
Mogae said that the BDF received large allocations totalling some P282,500,000 "in recognition of the continued security situation" .
Mogae also warned that Botswana could not continue to depend on diamond exports.
In 1989-90 non-mineral exports would total P225,000,000 less than current expenditure, breaking the pattern of the previous decade.
Mineral revenues would have to finance nearly 20 per cent of recurrent expenditure, which Mogae described as "a disturbing trend indicating our dependence on the mineral sector" .
Teachers' strike
On Sept. 25, 1989, some 12,000 primary school teachers called off a three-week strike over demands for pay increases and dissatisfaction with job evaluation; the government had withheld strikers' salaries and threatened to dismiss those continuing industrial action.
FOREIGN
Termination of Zimbabweans' refugee status
In terms of a tripartite agreement reached between Botswana, Zimbabwe and the UN High Commissioner for Refugees (UNHCR), as from the end of July 1989 the refugee status of Zimbabweans at the Dukwe refugee camp was terminated, and almost all the 600 former refugees returned home freely and voluntarily [for relations with Zimbabwe and dispute over activities at Dukwe refugee camp see pp. 33445; 35693].
AFRICA
SWAZILAND
BASIC DATA
Area: 17,363 sq km.
Population: 737,000 (1988).
Capital: Mbabane (administrative); Lobamba to become legislative capital.
Languages: English and siSwati (official).
Religion: Christianity (approx. 60%); traditional beliefs.
Av. life expectancy: 56 yrs (1988).
Armed forces: Umbutfo Swaziland Defence Forces: 2,657 (1983).
GNP per capita: US$790 (1988).
Currency: lilangeni (US$1.00=2.6638 emalangeni as at June 11, 1990).
The Kingdom of Swaziland became independent within the Commonwealth in September 1968.
Succession to the throne is governed by Swazi law and custom; the present King, Mswati III, acceded in April 1986.
Under the terms of the 1978 Constitution, considerable executive power is vested in the King, and is exercised by a Cabinet appointed by him.
There is a bicameral legislative body, the Libandla, composed of a 20-member Senate and a 50-member House of Assembly, with limited powers.
The 1978 electoral law provides for the election by the people of each of the 40 traditional chieftaincies (Tinkhundla) of two members of an Electoral College; this elects 40 members of the Assembly and 10 senators; the King appoints a further 10 members of the Assembly and 10 senators.
All political parties were banned under the 1978 Constitution.
Elections to the Libandla were held on Nov. 5, 1987 [see p. 36008].
Obed Dlamini Prime Minister (acting) Sipho Hezekiel Mamba Agriculture and Co-operatives Douglas Ntiwane Commerce, Industry, Mines and Tourism (vacant) Defence; Youth Chief Sipho Shongwe Education Sibusiso Barnabas Dlamini Finance Sir George M. Mamba Foreign Affairs Fanny Friedman Health Senzenjani Enoch Tshabalala Interior and Immigration Reginald Dladla Justice Prince Nqaba Natural Resources, Land Utilization and Energy Wilson Mkhonta Works and Communications Ben Nsibandze Labour and Public Service 
Swaziland Cabinet
POLITICS
Coup plot allegations
Allegations of a planned coup attempt emerged in court cases linked to the detention without trial of nine people in March 1989.
The detentions formed part of an investigation launched after the escape and recapture of a Mozambican, Armando Lekule, from police custody in January of that year.
After his recapture, Lekule alleged that Prince Mfanasibili Dlamini, a prominent member of the royal family found guilty of high treason in November 1987 [see p. 36008], had been plotting to escape from prison.
All those detained were later released, the last of them in July 1989, but at court hearings it was alleged that Prince Mfanasibili had planned to seize power with the aid of a group of mercenaries.
SECURITY
Labour and student unrest
Labour unrest spread throughout the kingdom in the second half of 1989, raising fears for Swaziland's image with foreign investors.
In mid-August about 500 citrus plantation workers were dismissed after striking over overtime allowances.
Later that month, railway workers belonging to the Swaziland Transport and Allied Workers' Union struck for two days over union recognition.
In mid-October 300 town council employees from Manzini, approximately 40 km south-east of Mbabane, were dismissed following a strike over unpaid allowances.
On Nov. 18-19 workers at the Havelock asbestos mine, one of the kingdom's largest employers, rioted after pay negotiations with management broke down.
Police were reported to have opened fire on the workers, wounding four.
The miners had been seeking a 25 per cent pay increase, but the mine faced an uncertain future, with reserves expected to run out by 1996.
The government also faced discontent in schools and universities.
At the end of September King Mswati ordered the closure of the University of Swaziland for one month after students returning for the new term boycotted classes in protest at a severe shortage of staff.
Students had defied an earlier instruction from the King to end the boycott, the second in six months.
The earlier student strike, in April, was set off by the dismissal of law teacher Dominic Mngomezulu, which students believed was due to his union activities.
A threatened school teachers' strike was averted in November, but not before a meeting of school students in support of their teachers had been broken up by riot police.
Arms and drugs seizures
Two South Africans and a Swazi were arrested after the discovery of the country's largest arms haul, according to a Swazi police statement of March 9, 1990.
The weapons, including rifles, hand grenades, limpet mines and ammunition, had been seized in Manzini during investigations into a bank robbery.
The discovery followed a three-week operation in co-operation with the South African drug squad against illegal cultivation of cannabis in the western highlands.
More than 5,000,000 marijuana plants were said to have been destroyed in the operation in an attempt to curb the flow of illegal drugs from the kingdom into South Africa.
Drugs worth more than US$4,300,000 were reported to have been seized by police in Swaziland in late December 1989.
FOREIGN
King's overseas tour — Establishment of relations with Angola
King Mswati made his first official foreign visits in October 1989, in a three-week tour which began on Oct. 6 in Mozambique where he met President Joaquim Chissano.
This was followed by a two-day stay in Zambia, where he met President Kenneth Kaunda, and a private visit to the United Kingdom.
The King addressed the UN General Assembly in New York on Oct. 12, continuing to Kuala Lumpur, Malaysia, for the Commonwealth heads of government summit on Oct. 18 [see pp. 36963-64].
He finally visited Taiwan, a leading investor in Swaziland in recent years, on Oct. 23-27.
Diplomatic relations were established with Angola on Nov. 8, 1989.
Economic indicators
GDP growth 9% (1988)
Current-account balance +US$71 m. (1988)
Trade balance -US$62 m. (1988)
Total external public debt US$275 m. (end 1987)
Debt service ratio (as % of export earnings) 6.9% (1988, projected)
Gross domestic product 1,102 m. emalangeni (1987)
Gross national product US$539 m. (1987 est.)
Inflation rate 11% (July 1988-June 1989)
Principal trading partners (1986) Exports: EC, South Africa, Canada; Imports: South Africa (90%), UK, Australia
AFRICA
LESOTHO
BASIC DATA
Area: 30,355 sq km.
Population: 1,673,000 (1988).
Capital: Maseru.
Languages: English and Sesotho (official).
Religion: Christianity (90%--mainly Roman Catholic, Lesotho Evangelical and Anglican Churches).
Av. life expectancy: 56 yrs (1988).
Armed forces: 2,000 (1989).
GNP per capita: US$365 (1988).
Currency: loti (US$1.00=2.6638 maloti as at June 11, 1990).
The Kingdom of Lesotho became an independent hereditary monarchy within the Commonwealth in October 1966.
The Constitution was suspended in January 1970, and effective power then rested with the Prime Minister until January 1986.
During this period the power of the King was considerably curtailed.
The Prime Minister was deposed in a bloodless coup by the armed forces in January 1986 and executive and legislative powers were conferred upon the King.
The Military Council, however, became the effective ruling body, advising the King (currently King Moshoeshoe II) and appointing the Council of Ministers.
From March 1986 all political activity was banned.
In March 1990 Maj.-Gen.
Justin Metsing Lekhanya, the Chairman of the Military Council, formally removed executive and legislative powers from the King [see p. 37238], and announced that he would rule in conjunction with the Military Council.
Maj.-Gen.
Justin Metsing Lekhanya Defence and Internal Security; Public Services; Youth and Women's Affairs; Cabinet Office; Agriculture, Marketing and Co-operatives Chief Evaristus Retselisitsoe Sekhonyana Finance Lt.-Col. M. V. Mokoni Transport and Telecommunications; Works L. Thoahlane Health Tom Thabane Foreign Affairs; Information and Broadcasting Patrick Molapo Interior, Chieftaincy Affairs and Rural Development Col. Alexander Lesole Jane Water, Energy and Mining A. K. Maope Law, Justice and Prisons; Constitutional and Parliamentary Affairs; Attorney-General Lehlohonolo Machobane Education Moletsane Mokoroane Trade and Industry Lt. Pius Molapo Employment, Social Security and Pensions Chief Lechesa Mathealira Tourism, Sports and Culture Maj. Meharensin Habe Highland Water and Energy Anna Matlelima Hlalele Minister of State for Youth and Women's Affairs 
Lesotho Council of Ministers
POLITICS
Aftermath of Lekhanya's assumption of King's powers
Maj.-Gen.
Justin Lekhanya, the Chairman of the ruling Military Council, on Feb. 23, 1990, announced a programme of political and economic reforms which included the immediate formation of two task forces headed by Foreign Minister Tom Thabane and Finance Minister Evaristus Retselisitsoe Sekhonyana respectively, the first to recommend a timetable for a return to democracy by June 1992 and the other to seek ways of streamlining expenditure and achieving efficiency in government or semi-state-owned enterprises.
Lekhanya promised that privatization of state enterprises would be the hallmark of his administration, starting with Lesotho Airways and Lesotho Freight Air Transport.
On April 30 Lekhanya announced proposals to set up a national constituent assembly to draw up a new constitution.
On May 3 all seven registered political parties decided that they would not participate in the proposed assembly, in view of the Military Council's determination to continue the suspension of political activity.
The 109-member Constituent Assembly, comprising members of the Council of Ministers, representatives of the police and local government, traditional chiefs and in addition invited politicians, met for the first time in late June 1990.
Lekhanya indicated that King Moshoeshoe II would play no effective role in Lesotho affairs until the promised return of democracy in 1992, and the military authorities warned the King against jeopardising the future of the monarchy by failing to heed the advice of the military government.
Col. Thaabe Letsie and Col. Aloysius Kethang Mosoeunyane, who had been arrested on Feb. 19, 1990, and expelled from the Military Council and dismissed from the Army, were released from detention in Maseru in early March.
Lt.-Col. Sekhobe Letsie, who had also been arrested was on March 21 formally charged with the murder of two former government ministers and their wives in 1986 [see p. 34789].
SECURITY
BCP denial of involvement in armed clash
After an incident at Thaba Ntso on Feb. 12, 1990, in which three insurgents and a government soldier were killed, the leader of the Basotho Congress Party (BCP), Ntsu Mokhehle, denied that his party was involved, adding that the Lesotho Liberation Army, a guerrilla force which he had formerly commanded, had been disbanded after its members had returned to Lesotho between December 1988 and February 1989 [see p. 36677].
Mokhehle had strongly opposed the King's policy of allowing the African National Congress (ANC) of South Africa to operate from bases in Lesotho.
Closure of university
The National University of Lesotho was closed indefinitely on April 4, 1990, following a three-day boycott of lectures by students in protest against fee increases.
In October 1989 a judicial commission had been set up to inquire into alleged destabilization at the university; some lecturers feared that the findings of the inquiry would be used as a pretext to dismiss teaching staff and to suppress trade union activity on the campus.
ECONOMY
Economic indicators
GDP growth 5.5% (1989-90)
Current-account balance -US$61 m. (1987)
Trade balance -US$316 m. (1987)
Overall balance of payments -US$7 m. (1987)
Budget deficit US$38.4 m. (1989-90)
Total external public debt US$235 m.
(December 1988)
Gross domestic product US$354 m. (1988)
GDP per capita US$213 (1988)
Gross national product US$610 m. (1988)
Inflation rate 9.2% (1988)
Unemployment 23% (1988)
Principal trading partners South Africa, EC
With land, labour and substantial quantities of exportable water as its only resources, Lesotho's economy remained heavily dependent on South Africa, and remittances from Basotho workers employed in South African mines continued to provide vital foreign exchange.
Progress on the Lesotho Highlands Water Project, expected to become an important additional source of income and employment, was not expected to be affected by the political crisis in February 1990; the military government confirmed its intention of proceeding with the scheme under which hydroelectricity was to be generated in Lesotho and water was to be diverted from a catchment area in Lesotho to South Africa's industrial heartland in the Transvaal [see pp. 31304; 34789; 35815].
Twelve consortia and seven individual companies had submitted bids for the four main contracts under phase 1A of the project by the deadline of April 20, 1990.
1989-90 budget
In June 1989 the Finance Minister, Chief Evaristus Retselisitsoe Sekhonyana, announced a budget of 593,000,000 maloti, of which 425,000,000 maloti was allocated for recurrent expenditure and 168,000,000 maloti for development.
He noted that "serious constraints" still affected the economy, including the limited range of natural resources, dependence on miners' remittances from South Africa and Lesotho's share of the customs revenue pool in the Southern African Customs Union.
FOREIGN
King Moshoeshoe, prior to his removal from power, had paid a two-day state visit to Zimbabwe on Oct. 28-29, 1989, during which he appealed for aid to help reduce Lesotho's economic dependence on South Africa.
Relations were established with Singapore in January 1990.
In April 1990 relations with Taiwan, suspended seven years previously, were re-established.
China in response immediately announced the severance of diplomatic relations with Lesotho.
AFRICA
SOUTH AFRICA
BASIC DATA
Area: 1,221,037 sq km.
Population: 33,938,000 (1988).
Capital: Pretoria (administrative), Cape Town (legislative), Bloemfontein (judicial).
Languages: Afrikaans and English (official); main African languages are Xhosa, Zulu and Sesotho.
Religion: Christianity (about 30% of whites belong to the Dutch Reformed Church, about 20% of African Christians belong to African Independent Churches, others belong to Methodist and Anglican Churches); Hindu and Moslem minorities.
Av. life expectancy: 61 yrs (1988).
Armed forces: 103,000 (incl. 64,000 white conscripts; 3,200 women)(1989).
GNP per capita: US$2,290 (1988).
Currency: rand (US$1.00=R2.6638 as at June 11, 1990).
The Union of South Africa, formed in 1910 by the unification of four self-governing British colonies, achieved independence within the Commonwealth in December 1931.
The Republic of South Africa was established in May 1961, having left the Commonwealth earlier in the same year.
South Africa's social and political structure is based on the policy of racial segregation (apartheid); under the Constitution of 1984, there is a tricameral Parliament, with a House of Assembly (178 members) representing whites, a House of Representatives (85 members) representing people of mixed race ( "Coloureds" ), and a House of Delegates (45 members) representing Indians, but no representation for the majority black population.
In each of the three houses of Parliament there is a Ministers' Council, each chamber having separate responsibility for the affairs of the population group it represents (including housing, social welfare, health, education), while joint parliamentary responsibility is taken for "general" or national affairs (including foreign policy, defence, finance, law and order), each of these functions at national level being reflected in a portfolio in the Cabinet itself.
F. W. de Klerk was sworn in on Sept. 20, 1989, as the new executive President, chosen on Sept. 14 (following elections on Sept. 6 to all three houses of the tricameral Parliament) by an electoral college composed of 50 members of the House of Assembly, 25 members of the House of Representatives, and 13 from the House of Delegates [see pp. 36880-81].
The National Party, the party of government since 1948, continues to command a majority in the House of Assembly.
A 60-member President's Council acts as an advisory body, to which are referred, among other things, disagreements on general affairs among the three chambers of Parliament.
Ten parts of South Africa (not necessarily contiguous geographical entities but based on ethnic groupings) have been designated by the government as "homelands" for Africans; four of these have been declared independent sovereign states but are recognized only by South Africa and by each other; the remainder are at various stages of "self-government" .
Roelof F. Botha Foreign Affairs Gerrit van N. Viljoen Constitutional Development Gen. Magnus A. Malan Defence D. W. de Villiers Minerals and Energy, Public Enterprises; Privatization Kobie (H. J.) Coetsee Justice, Chair of the Ministers Council of the House of Assembly Barend J. du Plessis Finance Adriaan J. Vlok Law and Order Gert J. Kotze Environment and Water Affairs Kent D. S. Durr Trade and Industry, Tourism Jacob de Villiers Agriculture Gene Louw Home Affairs; National Education Eli van der M. Louw Manpower W. J. de Villiers Administration and Economic Co-ordination George S. Bartlett Public Works and Land Affairs, Transport E. H. (Rina) Venter National Health and Population Development C. J. van der Merwe Education and Development Aid Hernus J. Kriel Planning and Provincial Affairs 
South African Cabinet
POLITICS
Dismantling of NSMS
President F. W. de Klerk announced on Nov. 28, 1989, that he intended to dismantle the secret National Security Management System (NSMS) through which, its critics maintained, since its introduction by former President P. W. Botha in 1986, the military and the police had usurped the authority of the civilian government.
This decision was perceived as a major setback for the "securocrats" (the police, Army and military intelligence) whose structure had penetrated South Africa's civilian administration at all levels and in every region in their efforts to combat a perceived "revolutionary onslaught" against South Africa.
The NSMS operated through nine joint management centres (JMCs), each with a military officer as chairman, 82 sub-JMCs and 320 mini-JMCs.
The JMCs had no power of their own, except persuasion, but reported directly to the State Security Council (SSC), formerly presided over by P. W. Botha, which was considered by some to have become the de facto government where the real decisions affecting the country were taken.
The JMCs were to be replaced by regional co-ordinating committees which would meet when necessary, the sub-JMCs would disappear and the mini-JMCs would form local co-ordinating committees which would also meet only when necessary.
De Klerk also ordered the dismantling of the SSC secretariat, whose functions would be handled by a Cabinet committee for security matters.
In an attempt to "depoliticize" the role of the police, de Klerk on Jan. 17, 1990, told 500 police in Pretoria that the government would "stop asking you to fight in the front trenches in political battles" , and said that henceforth police would "not be required to prevent people from marching to gain support for their views" ; instead police should concentrate on combating crime.
PAC and AZAPO conferences
The Pan-Africanist Congress (PAC) and the Pan-Africanist Movement (the mass organization launched by the PAC in South Africa in November 1989 — see p. 37033), held a consultative meeting in Harare, the Zimbabwean capital, on March 2-4, 1990, after which a spokesperson declared that the PAC did not believe that the South African government had created conditions conducive to negotiations.
The meeting passed a number of resolutions which, among other things, called for:(i) the setting up of a head office in Johannesburg;(ii) the phased and progressive return of PAC leaders and members to South Africa;(iii) the continuation and intensification of all forms of struggle, including the armed struggle; and (iv) the continuation and intensification of economic sanctions and the isolation of the South African regime.
The PAC also asserted that there was no basis for genuine negotiations at present.
[For deaths in April 1990 of prominent PAC members see p. 37364.]
Previously, on Nov. 29, 1989, a communiqué released in Johannesburg by the PAC and its internal allies following a weekend conference in Harare, had rejected out of hand negotiations with the South African regime as long as apartheid legislation remained on the statute books.
The Azanian People's Organization (AZAPO) held its congress on March 3, 1990, when the 1,000 members present elected a new central committee, most of whom were former Robben Island prisoners, and elected Humeleng Mosala, a theology lecturer at the University of Cape Town, as the organization's new president.
The Black Consciousness Movement asserted that negotiations with the government would amount to negotiating blacks into a "subtler form of subjugation" .
ANC meetings with business and military communities
In the context of the May 1990 preliminary talks between the African National Congress (ANC) and the government [see p. 37440], two other notable encounters between the nationalist movement and the white establishment occurred in the same month:(i) on May 23 the ANC met liberal representatives of the business community in Johannesburg, during which ANC deputy president Nelson Mandela, in what was seen as an attempt to reassure investors, declared that the ANC did not have a blueprint for nationalization; at the conclusion of the conference, with the former chairman of the company Anglo American, Gavin Relly, he emphasized the need to abolish institutionalized inequalities and to redistribute resources equally; and (ii) on May 24 fighters from the ANC's armed wing and members of the ANC national executive committee (NEC) met with retired and serving officers of the South African Defence Force (SADF), military conscripts and, among others, members of the End Conscription Campaign at a conference in Lusaka, the Zambian capital; these discussions included the structure and role of a post-apartheid defence force.
Abolition of Separate Amenities Act
As previously foreshadowed, a bill was passed on June 19, 1990, repealing the 1953 Reservation of Separate Amenities Act, one of the so-called "pillars" of apartheid.
The act had legalized the provision of separate (and invariably unequal) public facilities for different racial groups.
In the (white) House of Assembly the bill was passed by 105 votes to 38 with one abstention, the Conservative Party voting against the measure; in the separate Coloured and Indian houses it was passed unanimously.
The bill was to become law on Oct. 15.
(Several city councils, Pretoria being the notable exception, had already moved to abolish those aspects of "petty apartheid" given a legal basis by the 1953 act — see p. 36881 and below.)
The cities of Durban and East London on Oct. 3, 1989, announced measures to end the racial segregation of municipal facilities, including buses, parks and swimming pools.
The Johannesburg city council on Jan. 30, 1990, approved a recommendation that trading areas in the city should be open to all races, thereby enabling blacks to own business property and to operate businesses anywhere in Johannesburg.
On the same day the Pretoria city council agreed to open a number of municipal facilities to all races and to end the whites' monopoly of the central trading areas in what was described as a "courageous move" by The Times, given the extent of the Conservative Party's support in Pretoria.
Moreover, in Klerksdorp, some 150 km south-west of Johannesburg in the heart of rural Afrikanerdom, the council also voted on Jan. 30 to abolish racial trading barriers.
The Minister of National Health and Population Development, E. H. (Rina) Venter, on May 16 announced limited reforms to the system of racial segregation in most state-run hospitals.
Stating that while "the available capacity of beds in all hospitals must be accessible to all persons" , the minister affirmed that implementation of the reform should also take into account "the principle of acceptability" and "consideration of cultural, religious, social and language groups" .
In this context it was noted that:(i) 90 per cent of whites used private health facilities [see also below]; and (ii) there was a surplus of 11,700 beds for whites and a shortage of 7,000 beds for blacks in the state system.
Government's proposals for future constitution
The Minister of Constitutional Development, Gerrit van N. Viljoen, in the budget debate in Parliament on May 9-11, 1990, outlined a plan for a future constitutional dispensation which, according to the state-owned media, showed that "the government is striving to cater for minorities" [usually understood in a South African context to mean principally white people, but also Asians and "coloureds" ]and "assures people that the values and aspirations of minorities will not be set aside through majority rule" .
Viljoen stated that group rights, including language, culture and religion, needed to be protected, and added that minorities "because of their particular values and aspirations, should have a special voice in the new constitutional dispensation" ; he referred to the undesirability of a one-party state being imposed by an "unsophisticated majority vote" .
The ANC, which rejected the notion of "group rights" , strongly criticized the outline plan.
End of rent boycott — Other political developments
The Transvaal provincial authorities on Oct. 2, 1989, met with a "Soweto People's Delegation" , which included Archbishop Desmond Tutu, Cyril Ramaphosa (the general secretary of the National Union of Mineworkers — NUM) and Albertina Sisulu, the wife of leading ANC member Walter Sisulu [for whose release from prison in October 1989 see p. 36964], and agreed to negotiate an end to the three-year rent boycott in the black township of Soweto, which included a partial write-off of nearly US$100,000,000 in accumulated rent arrears.
Until this meeting the provincial administration had refused to consider holding negotiations on the rent strike with anyone other than the township's black councillors, who had been elected in an 11.5 per cent turnout in October 1988 [see p. 36333].
This change of policy was perceived to be an example of de Klerk's desire to negotiate some form of power-sharing with legitimate black leaders.
The national congress of the Democratic Party, which had been formed in February 1989 [see p. 36453], on Oct. 7, 1989, voted to retain its collective three-person leadership, comprising Zach de Beer, Wynand Malan and Denis Worrall.
Gene Louw, the Minister of Home Affairs, announced on March 1, 1990, that 10,412 people had migrated to South Africa in 1989, whereas only 4,465 had emigrated.
SECURITY
Reduction in military service — Armed forces cuts
Following a presidential announcement on Dec. 7, 1989, that national service for white adult males was to be reduced from two years to one from 1990, Defence Minister Gen. Magnus A. Malan announced on Jan. 29, 1990, that the period of community service for religious objectors was being halved and that those serving a mandatory six-year prison sentence for refusing the draft would be eligible for remission of up to 50 per cent.
On Jan. 19 SADF had announced drastic cuts throughout the Army, Air Force and Navy, including reduced personnel numbers and cancellation of 11 weapons procurements, to render the armed forces "smaller and more cost effective" ; taken together with shortened national service, military analysts said that total personnel could be reduced by 30-40 per cent.
In early December 1989 Malan had stated that the SADF would stop making cross-border raids and that there was no longer any need to support anti-government groups in other countries.
The policy changes were attributed to improved East-West relations and the belief that the ANC and the front-line states had ceased to pose a serious military threat.
Maj.-Gen.
Johan Swart, the newly appointed Police Commissioner for the Soweto area, announced on Jan. 3, 1990, that all 20 armoured personnel carriers, known as Casspirs, would be replaced in Soweto by ordinary police patrol vehicles.
Swart urged the public to see this measure as a tangible sign of police goodwill, but a spokesperson for the Soweto Civic Association stated on Jan. 4 that blacks had no illusions about the attitude of the policy in enforcing apartheid laws.
Lt.-Gen.
George Meiring on Feb. 28 succeeded Lt.-Gen.
Kat Liebenberg as chief of the South African Army.
Other internal security developments
In December 1989 the following security developments were reported:(i) the seizure by the police on Dec. 5 of a large arms cache and the arrest of five people suspected of being members of a white extremist assassination squad;(ii) the acquittal of 12 police officers and a soldier on Dec. 11 by the Cape Town Supreme Court in South Africa's first private prosecution for murder, arising from the 1985 "Trojan Horse" ambush in which three people were killed, and brought by the father of Shaun Magmoed, 16, one of those killed in the attack; and (iii) the setting aside on Dec. 15 of the convictions against all 11 defendants in the "Delmas" treason trial, which had ended in December 1988 [see p. 36913].
In January 1990 (i) two people were on Jan. 22 shot dead and nine injured in the gold-mining town of Carletonville, 60 km south-west of Johannesburg, when police opened fire on a crowd of 5,000 blacks who were protesting at the death the previous week of a 16-year-old boy while held in detention; and (ii) using razor wire, water cannon and plastic bullets, the police on Jan. 23 dispersed an illegal gathering of 8,000 demonstrators in Cape Town who were supporting the National Education Crisis Committee's protest against the black education system.
ECONOMY
Economic indicators
GDP growth 2% (1989)
Current-account balance +R4,100 m. (1989)
Overall balance of payments +R2,800 m. (1988)
Budget deficit R8,000 m. (1990 est.)
Budget deficit (as % of GDP) 1.6% (1989)
Total external public debt US$22,000 m. (1989)
Inflation rate 14.7% (1989)
Principal trading partners USA, UK, West Germany, Japan 
1990/91 budget
Finance Minister Barend J. du Plessis in his budget speech on March 14, 1990, announced expenditure of R72,900 million (an increase of 9.7 per cent over the 1989/90 budget — see p. 36915); revenue was expected to reach just under R65,000 million, up by 7.3 per cent on the previous year, leaving a deficit before borrowing which amounted to 2.8 per cent of gross domestic product (GDP).
(This figure in the 1989/90 fiscal year had been revised from initial budget estimates of 4.1 per cent to 1.6 per cent relative to GDP.)
Overall government spending was to increase by 11 per cent, well within the current inflation rate; in the previous fiscal year government expenditure had risen by 16.5 per cent .
Du Plessis announced that about 40 per cent of the budget would go on social services, with health education receiving substantial increases.
The defence allocation was increased by nearly 2 per cent, from R9,900 million to R10,070 million.
Total spending on security, including defence, police and prisons increased by R691 million, approximately 5 per cent.
The government's policy goal was defined as being "to control government spending so that the tax burden does not subvert income-and job-creation, and to avoid using loans to finance consumption spending" ; a five-year programme of tax reform was under way and was to include the introduction of value added tax (VAT) in October 1990.
Industrial disputes
A 12-week strike by members of the South African Railway and Harbour Workers Union (SARHWU), which led to more than 35 deaths and which was described as South Africa's "bloodiest strike since 1922" , ended on Jan. 27, 1990, when SARHWU and their employers, the South African Transport Services (SATS), reached a settlement.
The strike began on Nov. 1, 1988, when SARHWU, which was affiliated to the Congress of South African Trade Unions (COSATU), demanded an increase in the monthly minimum wage from R600 to R1,500 and recognition of the trade union by SATS.
In the most violent incident, seven people were killed and 70 injured in a clash on Jan. 9, 1990, between striking and non-striking workers at the Germiston railway station, near Johannesburg.
SARHWU claimed that 500-800 of its members were attacked by 1,000 strike-breaking vigilantes as they disembarked from trains at Germiston.
The union alleged that this was the "latest in a series of attacks launched by SATS and the South African police in an attempt to break the 10-week-old strike" and that it was part of a "carefully orchestrated campaign against striking workers" .
A police spokesperson declared on Jan. 10 that allegations of police support for the so-called vigilantes was a "blatant lie" .
Charles Nupen, a strike mediator, announced on Jan. 26 that a settlement between the two sides had been reached whereby SATS agreed to recognize SARHWU and to negotiate wages and conditions of service with the union in areas where it obtained registrations under the Labour Relations Act.
All 27,000 dismissed and striking workers would be permitted to return to employment in the same job and at the same grade and wage as at the beginning of the strike, provided that they returned to work in the period from Jan. 31 to Feb. 6.
The workers were to receive their annual bonus for 1989 and they would be reinstated in the SATS pension scheme, but they were forced to forfeit benefits for the period of the strike.
It was estimated that during the strike the workers had lost R45,000,000 in wages and damage to SATS property was believed to have cost R38,500,000.
In an earlier dispute 8,000 diamond miners belonging to the NUM had cut diamond production by the De Beers mining company by a third in mid-October 1989 in support of a demand for a 26.6 per cent wage increase.
Miners began to return to work on Oct. 26 after the NUM had accepted De Beers' offer of wage increases ranging from 16.5 to 18 per cent; the De Beers offer was backdated two months earlier than the normal settlement date of July 1 and the company also conceded June 16, "Soweto Day" , as a public holiday.
The Chamber of Mines on Oct. 4, 1989, won an industrial court action allowing 28,000 miners to join its mine employees pension fund.
This decision upheld an earlier ruling that it was unfair labour practice to exclude skilled black miners, purely on the basis of race, from the pension scheme.
Privatization measures
The South African government was reported to be implementing a policy of privatization, in combination with deregulation, which it believed was vital to achieve improved economic performance.
Johannesburg radio reported on Sept. 29, 1989, that de Klerk had offered shares in the state-owned company Iscor (Iron and Steel Corporation) to the public as part of the government's first major step towards privatization.
It was reported in mid-October 1989 that the government intended to increase the privatization of the health services.
Various services and facilities were to be contracted out or sold, and the possibility of privatizing 44 hospitals was to be investigated.
This policy announcement, which was designed to curb heavy state spending in the health sector, had been made possible by the strong growth of medical aid schemes in all communities [see above for plan to desegregate some state hospitals].
Inflation — Other developments
The government announced on Jan. 22, 1990, that the average inflation rate for 1989 was 14.7 per cent, which represented a small increase over the 1988 figure of 12.9 per cent , but a decline on the previous two years of 16.1 per cent in 1987 and 18.6 per cent in 1986.
Previously, on Oct. 9, 1989, the Reserve Bank of South Africa (central bank) had raised interest rates for the third time that year by 1 per cent to 18 per cent to protect the capital account of the balance of payments.
The Urban Foundation, a private group funded by South African business interests and supported by multinational companies and foreign backers, on Oct. 5, 1989, announced the establishment of a R3,000 million mortgage loan programme to give low-income black families access to mortgage finance.
It was estimated that 40,000 houses would be built over three years with this money, to house some 250,000 people.
The Rand Mines Group's new R690,000,000 platinum mine at Crocodile River, near Brits, 60 km north of Johannesburg, was officially opened on Nov. 20, 1989, with ore production expected to reach 160,000 tonnes per month by the end of 1990.
FOREIGN
AFRICA
REGIONAL ORGANIZATIONS
PTA
Full title: Preferential Trade Area for Eastern and Southern African States.
Date of foundation: 1981.
Objective: Improvement of commercial and economic co-operation in the region.
Member states: Burundi, Comoros, Djibouti, Ethiopia, Kenya, Lesotho, Malawi, Mauritius, Mozambique, Rwanda, Somalia, Sudan, Swaziland, Tanzania, Uganda, Zaïre, Zambia, Zimbabwe.
Secretary-General: Bax Nomvete.
PTA summit
The PTA held its eighth annual summit in Nairobi, the Kenyan capital, on Nov. 30-Dec. 1, 1989.
In his report, PTA Secretary-General Bax Nomvete said that there had been "significant progress" compared with the situation two years earlier, when few of the organization's plans for economic integration had been fulfilled.
Nomvete said that nine of the 12 countries identified for the organization's programme of gradual reduction of tariffs on trade among PTA members had already published their tariffs.
There had also been progress in compiling the common list of exportable products, which had grown from 312 items in 1987 to more than 700.
Nomvete reported that 73 per cent of all intra-regional trade transactions now passed through the PTA clearing house, with 59 per cent of clearing house trade done in national currencies.
Trade through the clearing house had doubled to 335,000,000 PTA units of account (equivalent to about US$436,000,000) in the first 10 months of 1989.
A ministerial task force was appointed to consider removal of all remaining barriers to trade between members, to establish a monetary union and to promote inter-state joint ventures.
The final communiqué exempted Angola from implementation of the tariff reduction programme for up to three years, and from use of the clearing house for up to four years.
It was also announced that Sudan and Zaïre had joined the PTA, bringing total membership to 18.
SADCC
Full title: Southern African Development Co-ordination Conference.
Date of foundation: April 1980 (preparatory conference July 1979).
Objective: Integration of development plans and reduction of region's economic dependence on South Africa.
Member states: Angola, Botswana, Lesotho, Malawi, Mozambique, Namibia, Swaziland, Tanzania, Zambia, Zimbabwe.
Executive Secretary: Simbarashe Makoni.
SADCC conference
The SADCC held its 10th annual conference on co-operation in Lusaka, the Zambian capital, on Feb. 1-2, 1990.
Representatives of 33 donor governments and 30 international agencies attended.
The SADCC's annual progress report said that demand for and prices of exports of SADCC member states were higher in 1988 than in 1987, leading to an appreciable rise in export earnings.
Low inflation in industrialized countries restrained increases in import prices, resulting in a general improvement in the terms of trade.
World Bank statistics reported a 4.5 per cent growth in gross domestic product (GDP) for the region in 1988; this rate was largely attributable to good agricultural output.
Growth rates, however, could only be maintained if aid increased by 4 per cent a year in real terms.
Meanwhile the region's debt servicing currently accounted for $9,000 million a year.
The latest estimates put the SADCC's total target for funds at $6,300 million for a total of 490 projects, of which $3,000 million was already in place, 80 per cent of it in the form of foreign aid.
During the conference, Nordic countries announced the establishment of the Norsad fund, a revolving fund with initial capital of $32,000,000, designed to assist joint ventures between private companies in SADCC and Nordic countries.
Namibia, the SADCC's 10th member state, was formally welcomed to the organization at a summit meeting in Lusaka on March 31, 1990, 10 days after becoming independent [see pp. 37296-97].
The meeting marked the 10th anniversary of the SADCC's launching on April 1, 1980.
CEEAC
Basic data
Full name: Economic Community of Central African States.
Founded: 1983.
Membership: Burundi, Cameroon, Central African Republic, Chad, Congo, Equatorial Guinea, Gabon, Rwanda, Sao Tomé and Principe, Zaïre (observer: Angola).
Executive Secretary: Lunda-Bululu.
Sixth summit
The sixth annual CEEAC summit was held in Kigali (Rwanda) on Jan. 25-26, 1990.
Members were represented by their heads of state, except for Cameroon and Chad, which were represented by the Minister of foreign Affairs and the Minister of Trade and Industry respectively.
Angola, which had observer status, was represented by a member of the political bureau of the ruling party, the Popular Movement for the Liberation of Angola (MPLA).
The summit approved measures designed to accelerate economic integration among member states; these included the setting up of a regional bank specializing in inter-community trade, measures to improve transport links, and the holding of a trade fair in Kinshasa (Zaïre) in July 1990.
The free circulation of certain categories of citizens within the sub-region — mainly students, researchers and border-dwellers — was authorized as of January 1991.
In the context of shortage of funds for projects, the member states discussed the effects of a likely fall in the allocation of resources to Africa from the industrialized world in favour of the emerging democracies in eastern Europe.
CEPGL
BASIC DATA
Full name: Economic Community of the Great Lakes Countries (Communauté economique des pays des Grands Lacs).
Date of foundation: 1976.
Members: Burundi, Rwanda, Zaïre.
Headquarters: Gisenyi, Rwanda.
Principal officials: Antoine Nduwayo, Executive Secretary.
Summit meetings: Annual — 1988 in January in Bujumbura, Burundi, 1989 in January in Gisenyi, Rwanda, and 1990, the 12th summit, in late February in Bukavu, Zaïre.
Current chairman: President Pierre Buyoya of Burundi chairs the organization for the current year from February 1990, with Rwanda holding the chairmanship of the Council of Ministers.
Activity: The 11th summit in 1989 reaffirmed the importance of collective security and established a tripartite security commission.
The 12th summit in 1990 set targets to complete in the coming year the ratification of a convention on the free movement of people, goods, services and capital, an agreement on customs co-operation, and a protocol on preferential tariffs for trade between member countries.
It also welcomed the realization of the joint hydroelectric power station project Ruzizi-II, and progress on co-operation in scientific research.
ASIA — PACIFIC
ASEAN
Full title: Association of South-East Asian Nations.
Date of foundation: August 1967.
Objective: Acceleration of economic progress and stabilization of South-East Asian region.
Member states: Brunei, Indonesia, Malaysia, Philippines, Singapore and Thailand.
Secretary-General: Rusli Noor.
In November 1989 the Foreign Ministers of the ASEAN member countries met in Brunei to discuss the feasibility of an "ASEAN-United States Initiative" (AUI) which would establish a free trade agreement with the USA.
The proposal was made in the context of the new Pacific rim economic organization (Asia-Pacific Economic Co-operation Council — APEC) established in the same month in Canberra, Australia [see p. 37044], and highlighted differing attitudes to APEC within ASEAN.
While Singapore was enthusiastic, Malaysia remained cautious, and Indonesia called for a greater concentration on intra-ASEAN rather than external economic relations [for Indonesian relations with ASEAN countries see p. 37580].
The eighth ASEAN-European Communities (EC) meeting was held in Kuching, Sarawak, Malaysia, on Feb. 16-17, 1990.
The ASEAN delegates were concerned about possible changes in the relationship with the EC after 1992, and with their position as aid recipients amid the developments in Eastern Europe.
The EC delegation raised questions about the ASEAN members' continued status as "developing countries" given their favourable balance of trade with Europe.
It was also suggested that as highly competitive traders they would in fact probably benefit from the more open European market after 1992.
ASIA — PACIFIC
THAILAND
BASIC DATA
Area: 513,115 sq km.
Population: 54,469,000 (1988).
Capital: Bangkok.
Languages: Thai (national); small minorities of Chinese, Malays and indigenous hill peoples.
Religion: Buddhism (Theravada); Islam (4%) and Christian minority.
Av. life expectancy: 65 yrs (1988).
Armed forces: 283,000 (1989).
GNP per capita: US$1,000 (1988).
Currency: baht (US$1.00=B25.4567 as at June 11, 1990).
The Kingdom of Thailand (formerly Siam) is a constitutional monarchy with a bicameral parliament consisting of a 261-member Senate appointed by the monarch, currently King Bhumipol Adulyadej, on the recommendation of the Prime Minister, and a 347-member House of Representatives elected for a four-year term by universal adult suffrage.
The King appoints the Prime Minister on the advice of the National Assembly, and the Council of Ministers on the advice of the Prime Minister.
Martial law was declared in 1976 and remains in force although some powers have been relaxed.
The armed forces have traditionally played a prominent role in Thai politics.
On April 29, 1988 [not 1987 as stated on p. 37082], the then Prime Minister, Gen. Prem Tinsulanonda, unexpectedly dissolved parliament and called a general election.
In voting on July 24 no party won an overall majority, but the Chart Thai party gained the most seats.
On Aug. 4, 1988, Maj.-Gen.
Chatichai Choonhaven (the Chart Thai leader) was appointed Prime Minister at the head of a new six-party coalition government [see pp. 36148-50].
Maj.-Gen.
Chatichai Choonhaven Prime Minister Pong Sarasin Deputy Prime Minister Chuan Leekpai Deputy Prime Minister Gen. Tienchai Sirisamphan Deputy Prime Minister Gen. Chaovalit Yongchaiyut Deputy Prime Minister; Defence (vacant) Minister attached to Prime Minister's Office Boon-eua Prasertsuwan Minister attached to Prime Minister's Office Korn Dapparungsi Minister attached to Prime Minister's Office Anuwat Wattanapongsiri Minister attached to Prime Minister's Office Chaisiri Ruangkanchanaset Minister attached to Prime Minister's Office Supatra Masdit Minister attached to Prime Minister's Office Col. Phol Rerngprasertvit Minister attached to Prime Minister's Office Police Capt. Chalerm Yubamrung Minister attached to Prime Minister's Office Pramual Sabhavasu Finance Air Chief Marshal Siddhi Savetsila Foreign Affairs Lt.-Col. Sanan Khachornprasart Agriculture and Co-operatives Montree Pongpanit Communications Subin Pinkayan Commerce Maj.-Gen.
Pramarn Adireksarn Industry Police Lt.-Gen.
Chamras Mangkalarat Justice Prachuab Chaiyasan Science, Technology and Energy Gen. Mana Rattanakoses Education Marut Bunnak Public Health Banharn Silpa-Archa Interior Thavich Klinprathoom University Affairs 
Thailand Council of Ministers
POLITICS
Criticism of Prime Minister
Prime Minister Chatichai Choonhaven faced severe criticism after he commented lightly on Nov. 6, 1989, on the extent of devastation and relief effort following Typhoon "Gay" which had struck southern Thailand on Nov. 3-4.
He later retracted the comments and explained that they were made after visiting an area which had suffered lightly from the storm and that he was unaware of the true extent of the devastation.
Chatichai subsequently cancelled official visits to the United States, Japan and Denmark, which were to have begun on Nov. 12, in order to oversee the relief effort.
Logging scandal
A special police force led by assistant police director Lt.-Gen.
Prathin Santiprabob arrested 156 workers of Suan Kitti Reforestation Co. at a eucalyptus tree reafforestation area in Chachoengsao province on Jan. 22, 1990.
The workers were charged with forest encroachment and illegal logging.
Suan Kitti was a subsidiary of the Soon Hua Seng agro-industrial conglomerate, the president of which, Kitti Damnerncharnwanit, was a senator and an economic adviser to Chatichai.
Agriculture and Co-operatives Minister Lt.-Col. Sanan Khachornprasart of the Democrat Party was subsequently criticized by the opposition for allegedly favouring Kitti in granting reafforestation permits.
[See p. 36794 for government's January 1989 ban on commercial logging.]
Calls to amend press law
About 300 reporters and editors issued a joint communiqué on May 13, 1990, demanding the immediate and unconditional abrogation of a law governing the Thai press known as Decree No. 42.
Introduced after the 1976 military coup, it gave the government sweeping powers to close newspapers without warning and without the right of appeal.
The Cabinet had agreed on March 20 that Decree No. 42 should be discarded but it was understood that some members of the Cabinet favoured new press legislation to replace the decree, while others thought that the existing criminal code was enough to ensure a responsible press.
SECURITY
Military reshuffle
A military reshuffle involving 323 senior officers of the three armed forces was announced on April 14, 1990.
New C.-in-C.
Gen. Suchinda Kraprayoon [for whose appointment in March 1990 see p. 37317]consolidated his position by installing his colleagues from Class 5 of Chulachomklao military academy in key positions of the Army.
All but six of the 20 most senior posts in the Army (the most powerful of the three armed services) were held by Class 5 graduates.
Analysts noted that former Army C.-in-C.
Chaovalit had been cultivating Class 5 in order to underpin his political ambitions [for 1988 and 1989 military reshuffles see p. 37083].
Crackdown on crime
Police Gen. Sawaeng Thirasawat, the police director-general, announced on May 16, 1990, that a 100-member police commando unit would be deployed in the south-eastern province of Chon Buri following a wave of violent crimes linked to business disputes.
Chon Buri was at the centre of the eastern seaboard development project and there were fears that the high rate of violent crime, described in the Thai press as "Mafia-style gangsterism" , could jeopardise both domestic and foreign investment in the area.
The crackdown was prompted by the murder of three men on May 4 by a group armed with AK-47 and M-16 rifles and an M-79 grenade launcher.
One of those killed was a suspect turned witness in the April 1989 murder of a prominent property developer.
ECONOMY
Economic indicators
GDP growth 10% (1989 est.)
Current-account balance -US$2,500 m. (1989 forecast)
Trade balance -US$4,900 m. (1989)
Budget deficit US$900 m. (1989)
Total external public debt US$25,000 m. (1989 forecast)
Debt service ratio (as % of export earnings) 13% (1988)
Inflation rate 5.4% (1989)
Principal trading partners Japan, Singapore, USA 
Concern over inflation — New central bank governor
The rapid pace of growth, led by surging export demand and private investment, continued in 1989 and early 1990.
Gross domestic product (GDP) growth rate in 1989 was estimated at just over 10 per cent, slightly lower than the 1988 growth rate of 11 per cent .
Export volume rose by 23 per cent and import volume by 19 per cent in 1989, but the increase in the value of imports outpaced that of exports and the trade deficit increased by over US$1,000 million to $4,900 million.
With a 1989 inflation rate of 5.4 per cent, the Council of Economic Ministers approved a new set of anti-inflation measures on Dec. 11, 1989, although Finance Minister Pramual Sabhavasu refused to raise interest rates, rejecting a request from the Bank of Thailand (the central bank) for a 1.5-2 per cent increase in the maximum loan rate.
Pramual said that he would not allow "millions" of borrowers, including small businesses and individuals with home loans, to suffer from higher interest rates.
However, on March 17, 1990, shortly after the appointment of a new Bank of Thailand governor [see below], a 1.5 per cent increase in the maximum commercial bank lending rate, from 15 to 16.5 per cent, was introduced.
Pramual dismissed Bank of Thailand governor Kamchorn Sathirakul on March 6, 1990, and replaced him with the deputy governor, Chavalit Thanachanan.
Kamchorn had faced criticism from other central bankers since December 1989 when he was unable to force Pramual to raise interest rates as part of an anti-inflation package.
Senior Bank of Thailand staff, worried that the central bank was losing its independence, had mounted a campaign in February to pressure Kamchorn into taking a more independent and decisive stand on the formulation and implementation of monetary policy.
Exchange liberalization
Sweeping liberalization of foreign exchange dealings were introduced on May 21, 1990, elevating Thailand from compliance with Article XIV to compliance with Article VIII of the International Monetary Fund (IMF) Agreement.
Under Article VIII members were obliged to avoid any restrictions on current international payments and any discriminatory currency practices.
In a message officially acknowledging Thailand's decision to comply with Article VIII the Managing Director of the IMF, Michel Camdessus, said that it was a "clear indication of the country's economic strength and its willingness to support a liberalized foreign exchange system" .
Thailand became the 68th country out of the 152 IMF members to comply with Article VIII.
On the same day Pramual announced that Thailand would repay by May 31 all existing loans owed to the IMF in the form of special drawing rights (SDRs) worth SDR53,900,000 (equivalent to approximately $71,580,000).
The repayment was made 3@1/2 years before the original deadline.
Ending of dockworkers' strike after military leader's intervention
All 6,200 dockworkers' at Klong Toey, Bangkok's port and the busiest in Thailand, went on strike on Jan. 30, 1990, to protest against a government plan to privatize a new deep-sea container port at Laem Chabang, on the eastern seaboard development area, which was due to begin operations in 1991.
Thailand's four labour congresses and unions representing state utility workers and other service sectors threatened to stage a general strike if the government did not accede to the dockworkers' demands.
Gen. Chaovalit Yongchaiyut, then Army C.-in-C., ended the crisis on Feb. 2 when he persuaded the dockworkers to return to work in exchange for the government reconsidering the privatization issue.
Observers noted that some members of the military had interests on the boards of several state enterprises and that they were thought to oppose wide-ranging privatization plans.
Shortly before the dockworkers' strike the then armed forces Chief of Staff Gen. Sunthorn had reportedly warned that privatization could damage national security.
FOREIGN
Trade disagreement with USA — Relations with Japan and Soviet Union
The US Representative for Trade Negotiations, Carla Hills, announced on April 28, 1990, that under Section 301 of the US Trade Act Thailand would remain on a priority watch list of countries which had not made enough progress in improving intellectual property protection.
Brazil, India and Japan were also on the list for allegedly contravening the principles of free trade [see pp. 36925-26].
The US trade deficit with Thailand in 1989 was $2,100 million, $838,000,000 higher than in 1988.
In a report released in late March Hills outlined a long list of trade practices which she alleged were unfair and were hampering the growth of US exports to Thailand.
In addition to inadequate protection of intellectual property rights these included a range of import tariffs, import licensing and customs practices.
Chatichai led an 82-member delegation to Japan on April 6, 1990, for a nine-day visit.
Accompanying him were, among others, Foreign Minister Air Chief Marshal Siddhi Savetsila and Commerce Minister Subin Pinkayan.
The primary purpose of the visit was to boost economic and trade co-operation and Chatichai also urged Japan to "explore and exploit" new opportunities for trade and investment in Burma, Cambodia, Laos and Vietnam.
An apparent suggestion by Chatichai during a visit to Thailand by the Japanese Director-General of the Defence Agency, Yozo Ishikawa, on May 3, that Thailand and Japan hold joint naval exercises in the South China Sea caused concern among Thailand's regional allies in the Association of South-East Asian Nations (ASEAN).
The suggestion was criticized in the press in both Malaysian and Singapore (two of Thailand's five ASEAN partners — see p. 37571).
Chatichai explained on May 14 that his proposal had been "misinterpreted" and that he had suggested "joint training" and not joint exercises.
ASIA — PACIFIC
MALAYSIA
BASIC DATA
Area: 329,758 sq km.
Population: 16,921,000 (1988).
Capital: Kuala Lumpur.
Languages: Bahasa Malaysia (official); English widely used and Chinese, Tamil and Iban spoken by minorities.
Religion: Islam (about 53%), Buddhism (about 19%), Hinduism, Christianity and Animism.
Av. life expectancy: 70 yrs (1988).
Armed forces: 114,500 (1989).
GNP per capita: US$1,920 (1988).
Currency: ringgit or Malaysian dollar (US$1.00=2.7068 ringgits as at June 11, 1990).
The Federation of Malaysia, consisting of the 11 states of Peninsular Malaysia and the two states of Sarawak and Sabah situated on the northern coast of the island of Kalimantan (Borneo), is an independent member of the Commonwealth and a parliamentary monarchy.
A Supreme Head of State (Yang di-Pertuan Agong) is elected every five years from among their own number by the nine hereditary Malay rulers of Peninsular Malaysia.
The Yang di-Pertuan Agong (currently Sultan Azlan Muhibbuddin Shah — see below for his installation in September 1989) appoints a Cabinet headed by a Prime Minister.
Malaysia has a federal government with a bicameral Parliament (legislature), residual legislative power resting with the State Assemblies.
Parliament (Parlimen) consists of:(i) a 69-member Senate (Dewan Negara) serving a six-year term, two members of which are elected by the Legislative Assemblies of each of the states, the remaining 43 members being nominated by the Yang di-Pertuan Agong; and (ii) a 177-member House of Representatives (Dewan Rakyat) elected by universal adult suffrage for a five-year term and by simple majority in single-member constituencies.
In August 1986 the governing multiracial National Front (Barisan Nasional) coalition was returned to power in the House of Representatives with 148 seats, and also retained an absolute majority in simultaneous elections in all 11 Peninsular Malaysian state assemblies [see pp. 34742-43].
Datuk Seri Dr Mahathir Mohamed Prime Minister; Home Affairs and Justice Encik Abdul Ghafar Baba Deputy Prime Minister; National and Rural Development Kasitah Gaddam Minister in the Prime Minister's Office Datuk Dr Mohamad Yusof Nor Minister in the Prime Minister's Office Tengku Ahmad Rithauddeen Defence Datuk Dr Ling Liong Sik Transport Datuk Amar Stephen Yong Science, Technology and Environment Datuk Haji Abu Hassan Omar Foreign Affairs Datuk Mustaffa Mohammad Welfare Services Datin Paduka Rafidah Aziz Trade and Industry Encik Daim Zainuddin Finance Ng Cheng Kiat Health Datuk Seri Sanusi Junid Agriculture Datuk Mohamad Rahmat Information Lee Kim Sai Housing and Local Government Lim Keng Yaik Primary Industries Datuk Dr Sulaiman Daud Land and Regional Development Datuk S. Samy Vellu Energy; Telecommunications and Posts Datuk Leo Moggie Works Datuk Seri Haji Mohamed Najib Tun Razak Youth and Sports Dato Napisah Omar Public Enterprises Encik Anwar Ibrahim Education Datuk Haji Sabbaruddin Chik Culture and Tourism Datuk Lim Ah Lek Labour 
Malaysian Cabinet
Enthronement of new ruler — Government changes — Developments in party and government leadership struggle
Sultan Azlan Muhibbuddin Shah was formally installed in Kuala Lumpur as the ninth Yang di-Pertuan Agong on Sept. 19, 1989 [see p. 36523 for his election in March].
A Cabinet reshuffle on June 14, 1989, resulted in few significant changes.
Labour Minister, Lee Kim Sai of the Malaysian Chinese Association (MCA) who was moved to Housing and Local Government, was replaced by Lim Ah Lek, who had been the victorious MCA candidate in the recent Bentong by-election [see below].
Ng Cheng Kiat (MCA), hitherto Minister for Housing and Local Government, was appointed Minister of Health, vacant since the death of Chan Siang Sun in March.
The Minister for Works, Samy Vellu of the Malaysian Indian Congress (MIC) exchanged posts with Leo Moggie, Minister for Energy and for Telecommunications and Posts.
Prime Minister Mahathir on Dec. 28, 1989, advised UMNO (Baru) that Deputy Prime Minister Abdul Ghafar Baba should succeed him as leader of the party and of the government.
In February 1989 Ghafar Baba had formally assumed the duties of acting Prime Minister in order to allow Mahathir to recuperate from cardiac surgery.
Mahathir resumed work on April 3.
On Jan. 31, 1990, Musa bin Hitam, a former Deputy Prime Minister, announced that he would rejoin the United Malays National Organization (Baru)— UMNO (Baru, the dominant party in the National Front coalition)— after having resigned from UMNO (UMNO (Baru) 's predecessor organization deregistered in February 1988 — see p. 36555) in 1986 [see p. 34294].
His return and his subsequent appointment in September 1989 as special envoy to the UN, was interpreted as evidence of growing political reconciliation [for developments following establishment of UMNO (Baru) see pp. 36555-56].
Federal and State Assembly by-elections
The government candidate, Ong Tee Kiat (MCA), won a federal by-election in eastern Kuala Lumpur on Jan. 29, 1989.
Ong polled 35 per cent of the votes while his strongest opponent, Harun Idris, endorsed by the former Industry Minister Razaleigh Hamza, the leader of the political faction trying to oust Mahathir [see p. 35459], polled 28 per cent.
In Bentong, east of Kuala Lumpur, Lim Ah Lek [see above]won the parliamentary seat on May 13 by polling 60 per cent of the votes.
In the Tambatan by-election in Johor state on Aug. 5 the Barisan Nasional candidate, Abdul Kadir Annuar, polled 7,598 votes, defeating the candidate of Razaleigh's newly established Semangat"46 [see p. 36657], who polled 6,523.
A loss of support for the federal government was indicated by an unexpected victory of the ruling Parti Bersatu Sabah (PBS) over the People's Justice Party (Angkatan Keadilan Rakyat — Akar) formed in September 1989 by breakaway members of the PBS, in the Ranau by-election to the Sabah State Assembly on Dec. 9.
Relations between the federal government and the PBS were strained after the 1985 state elections when the PBS ousted the Berjaya party (Bersatu Rakyat Jelata Sabah, then a federal coalition member — see p. 33778).
The government lost the Teluk Pasu by-election in Trengganu state on June 24, when its candidate was narrowly defeated by the Pan-Malayan Islamic Party (Parti Islam Se Malaysia — PAS) whose total representation rose to three in the 32-seat Trengganu State Assembly.
Creation of opposition front — Election of Semangat"46 leaders — New party
It was announced in June 1989 that an opposition front, the Moslem Unity Front (Angkatan Perpeduan Ummah — APU), consisting of Semangat"46, PAS and Berjasa (Barisan Jama'ah Islamiah Semalaysia, which left the National Front to join the APU), had been established.
At its inaugural congress on Oct. 12, 1989, Semangat"46 elected Razaleigh as president.
Three vice-presidents were also elected, as were 20 members of a supreme council.
The formation of the United Indian Malaysian party, only the second Malaysian Indian party after the MIC, was announced in June 1989.
Resignation of Deputy Speaker — Continuation of proceedings against Bar Council president
On Feb. 23, 1990, D. P. Vijandran, the MIC secretary-general, resigned as Deputy Speaker of the federal House of Representatives following allegations in December 1989 that he had appeared in pornographic films.
However, he remained the MP for Kapar, Selangor.
In March 1989 the Malaysian Bar Council confirmed that contempt of court proceedings would continue against the former Lord President, Abdul Hamid Omar, who was accused of obstructing a session of the Supreme Court [see p. 36556].
Opposition to Islamic laws
There was growing opposition during 1989-90 from non-Moslem groups to Islamization in some states.
The latest controversy centred on an amendment to its Islamic Law Administration Act passed by the Selangor State Assembly on July 19, 1989, which permitted formal conversion to Islam of minors without parental consent, on the grounds that Islamic law deemed a person an adult from the onset of puberty.
In December 1989 eight Chinese deputies belonging to the MCA threatened to resign from the Selangor assembly in protest against the new law.
While a Supreme Court ruling in early March 1990 upheld the constitutional right of parents to decide the religious affiliation of their children under 18, State Assemblies continued to be constitutionally empowered to pass Islamic laws.
Expansion of powers for Bernama
It was announced in March 1990 that proposed new legislation would grant exclusive rights to the national news agency, Bernama, to receive incoming news.
The announcement was criticized in press circles as another sign of heightened press control [see pp. 35772-73; 36557].
SECURITY
Developments following end to communist insurgency
It was announced that despite the signing of the peace agreement between the government and the Communist Party of Malaya (CPM) on Dec. 2, 1989 [see p. 37124], the Internal Security Act (ISA) would continue to be enforced for the time being and that there were no plans to legalize the CPM as a political party.
It was reported on Dec. 9 that the outlawed North Kalimantan Communist Party had agreed to end its 30-year guerrilla struggle in the Sarawak jungles of Borneo.
Release of detainees — Amendment of ISA
On April 19, 1990, Lim Kit Siang, parliamentary leader of the opposition Democratic Action Party (DAP) and his son Lim Guan Eng were released unconditionally.
They were the last of the 106 detainees arrested in October 1987 under the ISA [see pp. 35772; 36557].
On June 26 Parliament decided by 93 to 26 votes to remove from the courts the power of judicial review in ISA cases, so that the executive would make the final decision.
The move was criticized by the DAP, the Malaysian Bar Council and the human rights organization Amnesty International as an attack on human rights and on the independence of the judiciary.
Bomb explosion in Kuala Lumpur
A bomb explosion outside the British Council Language Centre in Kuala Lumpur on April 10, 1989, injured four people.
The explosion was believed to be a protest by Moslem extremists against the novel The Satanic Verses by Salman Rushdie, published in the United Kingdom [see pp. 36450-51].
Establishment of human rights society — Imposition of death sentences
The formation of a National Human Rights Society led by the former Prime Minister, Tunku Abdul Rahman, was announced on Aug. 29, 1989.
In October 1989 an Amnesty International report underlined the increasing use of the death penalty for drug-related offences.
On Oct. 4 six men were sentenced to death for trafficking in cannabis and on Nov. 9 five men, aged between 35 and 46, were sentenced to hang for similar offences [see also pp. 34485; 36557].
Arrests of tribespeople for anti-logging activities — Imposition of timber export levies
In mid-September 1989 a total of 71 Penans, a nomadic Sarawak tribespeople, were arrested, of whom 63 were detained for disrupting logging operations [for disruption in 1987 of commercial logging operations in Sarawak by Penans and other Dayak tribespeople see pp. 35460; 36250].
The Penans, who as on other occasions had combined to mount human blockades to prevent access to logging sites, received increasing support from environmentalists both domestically and internationally.
In November 1989 the government announced that it wanted gradually to stop all exports of logs, ostensibly to help domestic enterprises, and it was announced on March 9, 1990, that the government would impose levies and quotas on some sawn timber and veneer exports, starting on June 1.
ECONOMY
Economic indicators
GDP growth 8.7% (1988)
Current-account balance +US$1,800 m. (1988)
Trade balance +US$5,550 m. (1988)
Total external public debt US$24,640 m. (1988)
Gross domestic product US$27,580 m. (1987)
Gross national product US$32,670 m. (1988)
Inflation rate 2.5% (1988)
Unemployment 8.1% (1988)
Principal trading partners ASEAN, Japan, USA, EC
Although the sustained overall economic growth over the years 1987-89 brought the country to the verge of being given NIC (newly industrialized country) status, early forecasts predicted that gross domestic product (GDP) growth would slow down in 1990 to around 6.5 per cent, from an estimated 7.3-7.5 per cent in 1989 and from 8.7 per cent in 1988.
Attempts to "cool" the economy were made partly for fear of rising inflation; in October 1989 the Finance Minister, Daim Zainuddin, acknowledged that rapid economic expansion had fuelled inflation from 2.5 per cent in 1988 to 4 per cent in 1989 with only a marginal change expected in 1990.
Unemployment, however, was expected to fall from 8.1 per cent in 1988 to 7.9 per cent in 1989 due mainly to increased job opportunities in the manufacturing sector, whose contribution to GDP was estimated to have expanded from 24.4 per cent in 1988 to 25.6 per cent in 1989.
Manufacturing output increased by 15.5 per cent in 1988, while manufacturing growth was estimated at 13 per cent for 1989.
Agriculture continued to provide a large share of GDP: its contribution in 1989 was estimated to be 20.2 per cent, an increase of 3.1 per cent .
Nevertheless, agricultural output showed signs of deceleration due to a steady decline in the international commodity prices of rubber, cocoa and especially palm oil which was the subject of a vigorous campaign in the United States to raise public awareness of the relationship between consumption of saturated fats and heart disease.
Agricultural production was also affected by nationwide strikes in January and February 1990 by more than 65,000 plantation workers demanding a monthly wage scheme.
The government's programme to clear more land for agricultural production and to boost timber exports, which accounted for almost 7 per cent of GDP in 1989, also provoked a crisis in September 1989 when environmentalists backed aboriginal Penans in Sarawak in disrupting logging operations.
The generally depressed commodity prices did not, however, markedly affect export earnings.
In January 1990 official figures showed that commodity export earnings, including petroleum, rose from 28,910 million ringgits in 1988 to about 30,000 million ringgits in 1989.
While this figure represented only 46.15 per cent of total export earnings as against 52.23 per cent in 1989, it was believed to be linked to a rise in the export of machinery and transport equipment which accounted for 32.3 per cent of total export earnings.
A surge in imports and increased foreign investment were, however, expected to reduce the trade surplus from 14,600 million ringgits in 1988 to 11,200 million ringgits in 1989.
Foreign investment in 1989 rose by almost 76 per cent to 8,600 million ringgits, and it was expected that the upward trend would be maintained for 1990.
Local investment, particularly in manufacturing projects, tended, however, to decline; local investment proposals in new projects slipped to 3,500 million ringgits in 1989, 675 million ringgits less than in 1988, while new Malaysian equity investment in approved manufacturing projects dropped from 1,500 million ringgits in 1988 to 1,200 million ringgits in 1989.
Continuing "financial war" with Singapore
Escalating what was described as a "financial war" with Singapore, the head of the Kuala Lumpur stock exchange warned on Dec. 29, 1989, that he would not recognize a new market in Malaysian shares about to be launched in Singapore.
For nine years until 1973 the Malaysian and Singapore markets were a single entity, and after their separation companies from each country were routinely listed on both exchanges.
However, on Oct. 27, 1989, the Malaysian government ordered Malaysian companies to delist from the Singapore stock exchange.
The Singapore government retaliated by instructing Singapore companies to delist in Malaysia and by setting up its over-the-counter market in Malaysian shares.
FOREIGN
Negotiations for an estimated £1,500 million (approximately equivalent to $2,700 million) arms sale from the United Kingdom agreed in September 1988 [see p. 36558]were initially held up following the Malaysian government's request for extra landing rights at London's Heathrow airport for the Malaysian Airline System, to which the UK government eventually acceded in March 1989, leaving the way open for individual contracts to be signed.
In May the government denied reports in the British newspaper the Observer that UMNO (Baru) had received commission from the UK totalling £60,000,000 (equivalent to approximately $93,000,000) in connection with the arms deal.
However, in June the UK Prime Minister, Margaret Thatcher, acknowledged that the question of UK aid had been discussed during the negotiations, despite an express prohibition contained in the UK's 1966 Overseas Aid Act on the use of aid as a means of getting defence sales.
An agreement with the UK to take joint action against drug trafficking was signed on Oct. 17, 1989, in Kuala Lumpur.
Criticism over deportation of Vietnamese "boat people" 
The government was accused in August 1989 by the UN High Commissioner for Refugees (UNHCR) of breaching an international agreement on the asylum and resettlement of Vietnamese "boat people" [see pp. 34104; 36526; 36558].
By mid-August boats carrying more than 1,200 Vietnamese were reported to have been forcibly towed out to international waters in the direction of Indonesia by the Malaysian Navy.
In December 1989 officials refused to comment on reports that nine men arrested by police in August had been spying for Singapore.
Mahathir visited Thailand on March 24-25, 1990, during which he discussed the question of common refugee camps for Cambodian refugees.
It was announced on Feb. 12, 1990, that five joint ventures in trade, manufacturing and technology would be established with the Soviet Union.
It was also reported on Feb. 19 that a joint co-operation agreement had been signed to establish a Malaysian-Yugoslav business council.
ASIA — PACIFIC
SINGAPORE
BASIC DATA
Area: 622.6 sq km.
Population: 2,639,000 (1988).
Capital: Singapore City.
Languages: Malay (national); Chinese (Mandarin), Tamil and English.
Religion: Daoism, Buddhism, Islam, Christianity and Hinduism.
Av. life expectancy: 73 yrs (1988).
Armed forces: 55,500 (34,800 conscripts)(1989).
GNP per capita: US$9,100 (1988).
Currency: Singapore dollar (US$1.00=S$1.8474 as at June 11, 1990).
The Republic of Singapore, a member of the Commonwealth, was declared an independent, sovereign state in December 1965, retroactive to the previous August when the Prime Ministers of Malaysia and Singapore had concluded an agreement on the separation of Singapore from Malaysia.
Singapore has a unicameral Parliament of 81 members elected by universal adult suffrage for four years, with a limited number of "non-constituency" seats for unsuccessful opposition candidates.
Parliament elects a President for a four-year term (the current President, Wee Kim Wee, having been re-elected for a second term in August 1989 — see below) who appoints a Cabinet headed by a Prime Minister and responsible to Parliament.
In a general election held on Sept. 3, 1988 [see pp. 36352-53], the People's Action Party (PAP — which had been in continuous majority since 1959) won all but one of the 81 elective seat.
Lee Kuan Yew Prime Minister Goh Chok Tong First Deputy Prime Minister; Defence Ong Teng Cheong Second Deputy Prime Minister Suppiah Dhanabalan National Development Tony Tan Keng Yam Education Ahmad Mattar Environment Yeo Ning Hong Communications and Information; Second Minister for Defence (Policy) Shanmugam Jayakumar Home Affairs; Law Richard Hu Finance Lee Yock Suan Labour Wong Kan Seng Community Development; Foreign Affairs Brig. -Gen. (reserve) Lee Hsien Loong Trade and Industry; Second Minister for Defence (Services) Yeo Cheow Tong Health (acting); Senior Minister of State 
Singapore Cabinet
POLITICS
Succession issue
After a year of hints and signals, Lee Kuan Yew announced in October 1989 that he would retire as Prime Minister during 1990 [see p. 36976].
In his New Year message in January 1990 Lee designated the First Deputy Prime Minister and Defence Minister, Goh Chok Tong, 48, as his successor, indicating that he would take over "before the end of 1990" [see also p. 37085].
According to some sources Goh was not Lee's first choice for the succession; at least one other minister reportedly declined the post.
Generally regarded as more liberal and more affable than Lee, Goh was seen as lacking his charisma and there was some speculation as to how long Goh would remain in the post.
Some observers regarded his appointment as an interim one, pending the elevation of Lee's son, the Trade and Industry Minister, Brig. -Gen. (reserve) Lee Hsien Loong.
While denying that he would be merely a stopgap premier, Goh nevertheless stated in December 1989 that "it is obvious that Lee Hsien Loong will be after me" .
Moves to introduce "nominated MPs" and executive presidency
Two proposed changes to the Constitution, both affecting the role of Parliament, caused controversy in the latter part of 1989 and the beginning of 1990.
These involved the introduction of a number of nominated rather than elected MPs, and the creation of an executive presidency in place of the existing ceremonial one.
On Nov. 29, 1989, the second reading began in Parliament of a bill which would empower the government to nominate six non-elected members to the 81-seat legislature [see p. 33403 for introduction of constitutional amendment in 1984 which created three "non-constituency" seats in parliament for unsuccessful opposition candidates thereby ensuring a limited opposition to the PAP].
According to the government this reform would increase the voice of "non-political" Singaporeans, and those such as civil servants forbidden by their employment from standing for Parliament.
The issue exposed considerable divisions within the PAP, raising the possibility of increased factionalism as Lee approached retirement.
Many government MPs supported the bill only because of the pressure of the party whip.
The two opposition members of parliament were firmly opposed to what they saw as a further extension of government power.
On March 14, 1990, the government announced that it would proceed with a controversial proposal first mooted in 1984 for an elected executive presidency [ibid.].
According to the proposals, the new presidency would have the final say on a range of important decisions relating to economic policy and government appointments.
Inevitably the resuscitation of the proposal was associated by many observers with Lee's impending retirement.
While the Prime Minister himself denied that he would be the first executive President, in the absence of any obvious independent candidates, there was an assumption that whoever did take up the office would closely reflect Lee's views.
It was likely, moreover, that candidates would be restricted to former ministers and senior civil servants.
A call by the opposition for a referendum on the issue was rejected by the government.
Earlier, on Aug. 31, 1989, the non-executive President, Wee Kim Wee, had been unanimously re-elected by Parliament for a four-year term.
Government plans on religious education in schools — Political activities of religious groups
In October 1989 Shanmugam Jayakumar, the Home Affairs Minister, outlined in Parliament plans to phase out religious education in Singapore's schools.
The new law, which was expected particularly to affect Catholics, would initially ban religious instruction during normal school hours.
Such instruction was to be replaced by "civics" courses.
The move attracted especial attention because compulsory religious education had been introduced in schools with considerable publicity only in 1982.
The new restrictions were thought to derive from the Prime Minister's concern at what he saw as the growing influence of "exclusivist" religions such as Christianity and Islam.
The same concern was assumed to be behind a White Paper introduced in Parliament in December 1989 outlining proposed restrictions on "political activities" by religious groups.
The new regulations allowed for an initial warning to groups and individuals by the Minister of Home Affairs which, if unheeded, would be followed by heavy fines and terms of imprisonment.
In January 1990 the Catholic Archdiocese of Singapore issued a statement expressing major reservations about the proposed legislation and insisting that religion and politics could not be unambiguously separated.
There could be, the statement affirmed, "an overlap between the secular and the religious" and it expressed concern "about the possible misuse of the proposed legislation to silence lawful dissent and legitimate criticism" .
Beginning of proceedings by Jeyaretnam against Singapore government
In October 1989 former opposition MP J. B. Jeyaretnam began libel proceedings in London against the Singapore government and its high commissioner in the United Kingdom.
The action arose out of a Privy Council hearing of his appeal against his dismissal from the Singapore bar following his conviction for fraud, when the Privy Council had found that he had been the victim of "grievous injustice" and expressed "deep disquiet that by a series of misjudgments [he had]been fined, imprisoned and publicly disgraced for offences for which [he was]not guilty" [see p. 37086].
During the hearings the government had published, through the high commission, a series of press advertisements relating to the case which Jeyaretnam held to be defamatory.
SECURITY
Lee libel action
In September 1989 a hearing began in the Singapore High Court in which Lee Kuan Yew sought damages for defamation against the Far Eastern Economic Review.
Lee claimed that he had been libelled in an article published in December 1987 dealing with the arrest earlier that year of a group of Catholic lay workers supposedly involved in a "Marxist conspiracy" [see p. 37086].
The article quoted the former editor of the Catholic News, Edgar D'Souza, who accused Lee of using the controversial Internal Security Act (ISA) against the Church and of "tricking" the Catholic Archbishop of Singapore, Gregory Yong Sool Nighean, into appearing at a press conference in support of the government over the arrests.
Lee claimed that his intention was merely to discourage religious interference in politics in Singapore's delicately balanced multicultural society.
He was also, according to his lawyer, determined that "the foreign press should not become involved in Singapore's domestic politics" .
After a three-week hearing the court found in favour of Lee and ordered the Far Eastern Economic Review to pay damages of S$230,000.
The judge ruled that Lee was entitled to "aggravated damages" because of the "express malice" shown by the magazine and the conduct during the trial of its lawyer, Geoffrey Robertson, a British barrister.
The case was the latest episode in a long history of antagonism between the government and the Far Eastern Economic Review, the circulation of which had been severely restricted in Singapore.
The Asian Wall Street Journal, published like the Far Eastern Economic Review in Hong Kong by the United States Dow Jones company, was also restricted.
Its agency reporter was refused an extension of his residence permit and his successor denied a visa.
 "Marxist conspiracy" case
In February 1990 the High Court dismissed a habeus corpus application on behalf of Vincent Cheng, one of the Catholic lay workers detained under the ISA in 1987 accused of being among the ringleaders of the Marxist conspiracy [see p. 37086].
Although having made a "confession" after his arrest, Cheng later retracted it, claiming to have been subjected to extreme pressure by the police.
The court ruled, however, that the Cabinet had the ultimate power of decision under the ISA and was under no obligation to produce evidence in support of its decisions.
ECONOMY
Economic indicators
GDP growth 9.2% (1989)
Current-account balance +US$1,704 m. (1989)
Trade balance +US$1,106 m. (1989)
Foreign reserves $16,977 m. (1989)
Budget surplus US$3,360 m. (1988)
Budget surplus (as % of GDP) 4.07% (1988)
Total external public debt US$136 m. (1989)
Debt service ratio (as % of export earnings) 0.4% (1989)
Gross domestic product US$24,500 m. (1988)
Unemployment 2.2% (1989)
Principal trading partners USA, Japan, Malaysia 
1990 budget
On March 2, 1990, Finance Minister Richard Hu introduced the annual budget.
Analysts saw the proposals for the year from March 1990 as cautious rather than radical.
Growth in gross domestic product (GDP) for 1990 was expected to be slightly less than the 9.2 per cent of 1989.
Corporate income tax was reduced by one percentage point to 31 per cent and there was to be a one-off rebate of 5 per cent in personal income tax.
It was announced that legislation would be brought forward in 1990 for the introduction of value added tax (VAT).
Overall government revenue was expected to increase only marginally in 1990-91 to S$15,600 million while expenditure would increase by 9.1 per cent to S$14,100 million.
The surplus of S$1,500 million would be 38 per cent lower than in the previous year.
The budget promised more liberal rules on foreign labour.
The introduction of severe new penalties for illegal immigrants in 1989 had led to an exodus of some 12,000 workers, mostly Indians and Thais.
Labour shortages occurred across the economy, particularly in the construction industry [see pp. 37085-86].
State of economy in 1989
The 1989 growth in GDP of 9.2 per cent was down from the 11 per cent of the previous year but unemployment during the year was at a record low of 2.2 per cent.
Although growth was slower, it was more broadly based across the major sectors of the economy.
Average annual growth over the decade was 7.1 per cent, despite a sharp recession in 1985.
The growth rate in 1990 was expected to continue to decline as it did in 1989, partly because of a predicted economic slowdown in the USA which was the destination of 30 per cent of Singapore's exports.
Manufacturing, which had been the leading sector in 1989, was expected to be less significant in 1990, with a world fall in demand for computer hardware.
Conversely, construction and financial services were expected to have a more significant role.
The events in China during 1989 raised the possibility of a boost to the economy following a decline of confidence in Hong Kong.
In the second half of the year the major Japanese banks were already concentrating more effort in Singapore following a downturn in lending to China and a simultaneous rise in business with the Association of South-East Asian Nations (ASEAN).
The government appeared to discourage any such speculation, however.
Lee Hsien Loong, as Trade and Industry Minister, insisted that the best situation would be continuing strong economies in both centres.
If Hong Kong were to decline, he said, "then perhaps some of the business will come to Singapore, but on the whole that would be far the second-best choice" .
FOREIGN
In October 1989 the government announced an agreement with the United States for greater use by the latter of naval maintenance and repair facilities in Singapore and increased visits by US Air Force aircraft.
This represented a dilution of an earlier suggestion that the USA should consider the establishment of a major military base.
This proposal had caused considerable concern in the region, particularly among Singapore's ASEAN neighbours [see pp. 37086-87].
Following the October announcement, the Malaysian Foreign Ministry accepted the increased US use of Singapore's existing facilities but reiterated that Malaysia would be unhappy with a permanent US base in Singapore.
On Oct. 9, 1989, Queen Elizabeth II of the United Kingdom began a three-day visit to Singapore (her first since 1982) on her way to the Commonwealth heads of government meeting in Kuala Lumpur, the Malaysian capital [see pp. 36963-64].
Opposition groups were critical of the visit, the Workers' Party describing it as "a condonation of recent government measures which deny the values believed in by the Commonwealth" .
The Queen, however, was notably warm towards Lee in her speeches, describing him as one of the Commonwealth's "sturdiest sheet anchors, prudent in counsel and wise in judgment" .
Singapore was the UK's main trading partner in the region and the destination of exports worth £600,000,000 (approximately $1,022 million) in 1988.
Lee visited Hong Kong in January 1990, when he expressed doubts about the feasibility of introducing democratic structures before assimilation by China in 1997.
The "one country, two systems" concept agreed by China was based on Hong Kong's colonial administration system rather than on parliamentary democracy, he warned.
Taken along with his restrained reaction to the repression of the pro-democracy movement in China itself [see pp. 36720-22], his attitude gave rise to some suggestions that he saw a role for himself as a potential mediator in the Hong Kong issue.
ASIA — PACIFIC
BRUNEI
BASIC DATA
Area: 5,765 sq km.
Population: 243,000 (1988).
Capital: Bandar Seri Begawan.
Languages: Malay; Chinese and English.
Religion: Islam (official; mainly Sunni Moslems); majority of Chinese are Buddhists, Confucians or Daoists; majority of Europeans and Eurasians are Christians.
Av. life expectancy: 74 yrs (1988).
Armed forces: 4,200 (incl. 250 women)(1989).
GNP per capita: Not available.
Currency: Brunei dollar (US$1.00=B$1.8474 as at June 11, 1990).
The Sultanate of Brunei (Negara Brunei Darussalam) gained full independence from the United Kingdom on Jan. 1, 1984 [see p. 32741], when a ministerial system of government was established.
The Sultan, Sir Hassanal Bolkiah, in whom the 1959 written Constitution vests supreme executive authority, presides over and is advised and assisted by a Council of Cabinet Ministers, a Religious Council and a Privy Council.
The Sultan has ruled by decree and a state of emergency has been in force since a large-scale revolt in December 1962 which resulted in the suspension of sections of the Constitution [see pp. 19261-62].
Sir Hassanal Bolkiah Sultan; Prime Minister; Defence Prince Jefri Bolkiah Finance Prince Mohamed Bolkiah Foreign Affairs Pehin Dato Haji Abdul Rahman Industry and Primary Resources Pehin Dato Haji Isa Internal Affairs and Special Adviser in Prime Minister's Office 
Principal Brunei Cabinet Ministers
POLITICS
ECONOMY
Economic indicators
GDP growth 2.2% (1988 est.)
Trade balance +US$800 m. (1988)
Gross domestic product US$3,400 m. (1986 est.)
Inflation rate 2% (1988 est.)
Principal trading partners Exports: Japan, South Korea, Singapore, Thailand; Imports: UK, Singapore, Malaysia
The country's fifth national development plan, covering the period 1986-90, was making progress at reducing economic dependence on revenues derived from petroleum and natural gas reserves and helping with the creation of new private-sector industries.
FOREIGN
Brunei assumed the chair of the Association of South-East Asian Nations (ASEAN) in mid-1988, as a result of which the annual Foreign Ministers' meeting was held in Bandar Seri Begawan in July 1989 [see p. 36817].
Close relations were maintained with the United Kingdom; an arms deal, including the sale of 16 Hawk fighter aircraft and three Exocet-armed corvettes worth £250,000,000 (equivalent to approximately $395,000,000), was signed in October 1989.
ASIA — PACIFIC
INDONESIA
BASIC DATA
Area: 1,904,569 sq km.
Population: 174,832,000 (1988).
Capital: Jakarta (on island of Java).
Languages: Bahasa Indonesia (official); about 25 local languages (principally Javanese).
Religion: Islam (78%), Christianity (11%), Hinduism and Buddhism.
Av. life expectancy: 61 yrs (1988).
Armed forces: 285,000 (1989).
GNP per capita: US$430 (1988).
Currency: rupiah (US$1.00=Rp1,841.4827 as at June 11, 1990).
The Republic of Indonesia comprises mainly some 13,700 islands known until 1949 as the Netherlands East Indies; since 1976 it has also included East Timor (when the latter was effectively annexed as the 27th Indonesian province after the withdrawal in 1975 of Portuguese troops, although this act has never been officially recognized by the UN).
Following a brief period as a federation Indonesia in 1950 became a unitary state in which executive power resides in a President (a position held since 1968 by Gen. (retd) Suharto) who governs with the assistance of an appointed Cabinet.
The President is elected for a five-year term by a 1,000-member People's Consultative Assembly (Majelis Permusyawaratan Rakyat), described in the Constitution as the embodiment of the whole Indonesian people.
Of the Assembly's members 500 are from the legislative House of Representatives (Dewan Perwakilan Rakyat, to which 400 were elected for a five-year term by direct universal adult suffrage in April 1987 [see p. 35326]; the remaining 100 were appointed by the President.
The Assembly's other 500 members are government appointees, delegates of the regional assemblies and representatives of parties and groups (appointed in proportion to their elective seats in the House of Representatives).
The government-sponsored Joint Secretariat of Functional Groups (Sekretariat Bersama Golongan Karya or Golkar — an alliance of groups representing farmers, fishermen and the professions, but with a strong presence of members of the Indonesian Armed Forces — ABRI) secured a large majority in the April 1987 elections, providing a continued nominally civilian basis for President Suharto's military regime.
A plenary session of the People's Consultative Assembly held on March 10-11, 1988 [see pp. 36024-25], re-elected Suharto for a fifth five-year term as President.
Co-ordinating ministers Adml. (retd) Sudomo Political Affairs and Security Radius Prawiro Economy, Finance, Industry and Development Supervision Gen. (retd) Supardjo Rustam Public Welfare Ministers Gen. Rudini Internal Affairs Ali Alatas Foreign Affairs Gen. L. B. (Benny) Murdani Defence and Security Lt.-Gen (retd) Ismail Saleh Justice Harmoko Information Johannes B. Sumarlin Finance Arifin Siregar Trade Hartarto Industry Wardoyo Agriculture Air Vice-Marshal Ginandjar Kartasasmita Mines and Energy Radinal Mochtar Public Works Maj.-Gen.
Azwar Anas Communications Maj.-Gen. (retd) Bustanil Arifin Co-operatives Cosmas Batubara Manpower Lt.-Gen.
Sugiarto Transmigration Gen. Susilo Sudarman Tourism, Post and Telecommunication Fuad Hassan Education and Culture Adhyatma Health Haji Munawir Sjadzali Religious Affairs Haryati Subadio Social Affairs Hasrul Harahap Forestry Ministers of state Maj.-Gen.
Murdiono State Secretary Saleh Afif National Development Planning; Chairman of Bappenas (National Development Planning Board) Siswono Judo Husodo Housing Affairs Emil Salim Population and Environment Sarwono Kusumaatmadja Administrative Reform B. J. Habibie Research and Technology; Chairman of Agency for the Assessment and Application of Technology (BPPT) A. Sulasikin Murpratomo Women's Affairs Akbar Tandjung Youth Affairs and Sports Cabinet rank officials Rear Adml.
Sukarton Marmosudjono Attorney General Adrianus Moy Governor of Bank Indonesia Gen. Try Sutrisno Commander-in-Chief of the Indonesian Armed Forces *Excluding junior ministers.
Indonesian Cabinet*
POLITICS
Succession issue
Despite President Suharto's discouragement of such speculation [see p. 36933], the possibility of his retirement and the identity of his successor following the 1993 presidential elections remained a major topic of discussion in the latter part of 1989 and in early 1990.
Suharto himself had suggested in March 1988 after the previous elections that he would not be standing again.
Whether this was a firm intention, which he might reconsider, or a tactic designed to reveal potential rivals for the presidency was itself a component of the speculation.
The dominant role of personal patronage in Indonesian public life sharpened the interest of the political and administrative elite in the outcome of any leadership struggle.
Developments within ABRI and Golkar
A new uncertainty was also evident in the main institutional pillars of the regime, ABRI and Golkar, both of which underwent considerable self-examination in the first half of 1990.
The nature of ABRI's "dual role" (dwi-fungsi) in national security on the one side and in politics on the other, came under examination by the military itself.
The death of former Chief of Staff T. B. Simatupang on Jan. 1, 1990, gave particular impetus to this debate.
His advocacy of a minimal role for the military in politics, which in the past had been rejected by the upper echelons of ABRI, now became a topic of open discussion.
In a speech delivered in Bandung on Feb. 5 the current Chief of Staff, Lt.-Gen.
Edi Sudrajat, cautioned the military against setting "bad precedents" in politics, an intervention which was generally interpreted as a warning against seeking too large a role.
In the same week the secretary-general of the National Defence Council, Rear-Adml.
Machmud Subarkah, told a parliamentary committee that the political role of ABRI was less important than in the past.
He appeared to be advocating a reversal of the process by which military officers were appointed to key posts since the mid-1960s, by calling for the civilianization of a greater proportion of bureaucratic positions.
Among younger officers, who were more distanced from the original "New Order" thinking of the 1960s, there appeared to be increasing interest in the concept of "integralism" , which urged that the administration be drawn from the broadest possible social range.
Despite this interest in a reduced role in the bureaucracy, the military element in parliament was unusually critical of aspects of government policies, particularly in the areas of land reform and wealth distribution.
It was suggested that this criticism was a consequence of resentment at Suharto's failure to follow the military's advice in a number of areas, including the appointment of the Vice-President after the 1988 election [see p. 36933].
For its part, Golkar met criticism of its ineffectual performance in national politics by adopting a more assertive image.
In doing so, however, it appeared to be responding to the urgings of the presidency.
On Oct. 17, 1989, a speech by the Public Welfare Minister, Gen. (retd) Supardjo Rustam, which had apparently been prepared by Suharto himself, called on Golkar to take a more "central position" rather than remain "sitting on the sidelines" .
One view saw Suharto's motive in encouraging greater activism on the part of Golkar as an attempt to acquire a reforming image to help counteract pressure on him to stand down before the 1993 election.
It was noted that his support for a more assertive Golkar did not extend to giving the movement financial autonomy from the government.
New PPP leader
At the end of August 1989 the "state-approved" Islamic party, the United Development Party (Partai Persatuan Pembangunan — PPP), unexpectedly elected a new chairman.
Ismael Hassan Metareum, from the predominantly Moslem province of Aceh in northern Sumatra, was seen as a relative moderate, acceptable to both the armed forces and the government.
The PPP, however, continued to resist government pressure to open its ranks to non-Moslems.
SECURITY
East Timor
Despite its having been declared an open province at the end of 1988 [see p. 36934], anti-Indonesian agitation continued in the former Portuguese enclave of East Timor which was annexed after the invasion of 1975 [see p. 27535].
Tensions created by the suppression of a demonstration during a visit by Pope John Paul II in October 1989 [see p. 36990]increased at the beginning of 1990, when a visit by the United States ambassador to Indonesia, John Monjo, on Jan. 17 was the occasion of further demonstrations.
Commentators noted that the anti-government activity was now coming from young people with no direct experience of the events of the mid-1970s and pointed to youth unemployment and associated social problems as an element in the agitation.
Contradictory signals were given by the military in the aftermath of the demonstrations.
While the local commander was notably conciliatory in his approach, Murdani, on a visit two weeks after the January demonstrations, threatened a full-scale military response to any further agitation.
Murdani, who as a serving officer had been the architect of the 1975 invasion, was reportedly opposed to the demilitarization of the province in 1989.
Virtually every senior Army officer had served in East Timor, which was regarded by the Army command as providing a valuable opportunity for combat experience.
Irian Jaya
At the end of 1989 Jayapura, the provincial capital of Irian Jaya, had also been the scene of anti-Jakarta demonstrations.
On Dec. 14, the first anniversary of the capture of separatist leader Thomas Wainggai, a large number of demonstrators (reportedly about 500, mostly students from Jayapura's Cenderawasih University) were arrested after the raising of the "Free Papua" flag.
The incident assumed a diplomatic dimension when seven of the demonstrators sought refuge in the newly opened Papua New Guinea consulate.
The group left, reportedly after being told by Papua New Guinea officials that the Indonesians would be given permission to remove them by force.
Continued crackdown on "Moslem extremists" 
Trials took place in various parts of the country during 1989 and into 1990 of alleged Moslem extremists accused of involvement in a nationwide conspiracy.
The defendants, on trial in Sumatra, Jakarta and West Nusa Tenggara, were charged under the anti-subversion laws with attempting forcibly to replace Pancasila, the Indonesian secularist state ideology.
Government opponents claimed that the trials were designed to legitimize Army actions in Lampung province, southern Sumatra, in February 1989 in which an unspecified number of villagers was killed [see p. 36934].
Execution of PKI detainees
On Feb. 16, 1990, a further group of four former PKI cadres, in prison since the military seizure of power in 1965, was executed.
The four, who had been members of the late President Sukarno's palace guard, were shot by firing squad in Jakarta, despite widespread pleas for clemency from the international community.
It was announced at the same time that two others had been executed in the Sumatran town of Medan in October 1989.
This confirmed rumours which had been circulating in previous months.
In March 1990 six more political prisoners were reportedly prepared for execution.
On this occasion, however, it appeared that international pressure was successful in preventing the sentences from being carried out.
ECONOMY
Economic indicators
GDP growth 6% (1988 est.)
Current-account balance -US$1,600 m. (1988 est.)
Trade balance +US$5,800 m. (1988 est.)
Total external debt US$40,200 m. (1988 est.)
Gross domestic product US$82,200 m. (1988 est.)
Inflation rate 8% (1988 est.)
Principal trading partners Japan, USA, Singapore, South Korea, West Germany 
Continued moves towards economic liberalization
Moves towards economic liberalization continued in the latter part of 1989 and into 1990.
At the same time, however, increasing concern was being expressed both in and out of government at the social costs of reform.
In November 1989 foreign banks were urged to expand their operations in the country.
In the previous month the Bank of Indonesia had announced the partial deregulation of foreign exchange dealings.
In return for a freer hand in the currency market private dealers were expected to play a more active role in industrial investment.
Similarly, it was announced that from Nov. 1 encouragement would be given to the private development and management of industrial estates, activities hitherto restricted to state agencies.
While this change was designed to attract investment from domestic sources as well as more foreign capital, it was expected to be particularly welcomed by Japanese, South Korean and Taiwanese companies.
The reform was in line with the general restructuring of the economy begun in the mid-1980s as a response to falling oil prices.
Henceforth private investment in the development of the non-petroleum manufacturing sector was to be encouraged in an attempt to absorb Indonesia's rapidly expanding labour force (growing by approximately 2,000,000 annually).
A somewhat more difficult question facing the economic reformers at the end of 1989 was how best to tackle the problem of chronically unprofitable state companies.
The government held a majority share in 189 companies and considerable equity in hundreds more.
The Finance Ministry proposed a range of possible measures to turn round failing enterprises, covering a spectrum from the introduction of outside management teams to liquidation.
These measures were to be applied in 1990.
The government's commitment to the application of market economics in this area, however, came under question when, at the beginning of the year, it bought out one of the country's largest steel companies to save it from collapse.
[For February 1987 statement on privatization see p. 35327.]
Debt problem
Despite apparently positive indications that the economy had become more efficient and successful in the late 1980s, some analysts were sceptical about how much of this was due to the various deregulating reforms.
Instead they pointed to the growth in development funds contributed from abroad, which accounted for about 80 per cent of the development budget at the beginning of 1990.
These analysts were also concerned about Indonesia's debt, which at the end of 1989 stood, according to one estimate, at $58,000 million.
A large proportion of export earnings was required simply to service this borrowing and was not therefore being reinvested in the domestic manufacturing sector as the reformers' plans envisaged.
Along with such doubts as to the actual results of liberalization, there was increasing concern at its socio-economic consequences, particularly over the evidently growing gap between rich and poor.
The government's worries about this, with the approach of the parliamentary election in 1992, were apparent in a number of initiatives.
1990/91 budget
The 1990/91 budget, which was outlined by Suharto on Jan. 4, 1990, and which took effect in April, departed from the general trend of recent years.
A much larger proportion of resources was earmarked for social development, and less emphasis was given to encouraging manufacturing investment by means of fiscal incentives.
The intention was, according to Murdiono, the State Secretary, "to put more stress on distribution" .
The Finance Minister, Johannes Sumarlin, described the budget as representing government concern over "urgent need in various regions, primarily in eastern Indonesia" .
Projected spending was Rp42,800,000 million, which represented an overall real increase of 10 per cent on the previous year.
The political nature of the budget was illustrated by specific areas of projected spending.
These included increases of 23.6 per cent on development projects, 78 per cent on the transmigration (internal resettlement) scheme, 200 per cent on spending on the bureaucracy and an 87 per cent increase in the President's own fund for rural development.
The level of spending was apparently greater than originally planned and it was suggested that the increase was made possible by higher than expected oil revenues for 1989.
A major feature of Suharto's budget speech was a call for private companies to offer up to 25 per cent of their shares to workers' co-operatives, and to facilitate this by providing soft loans.
This was seen as part of an attempt by the government to widen economic reform to include democratization as well as liberalization.
According to the national Constitution the three pillars of the economy were private enterprise, state companies and workers' co-operatives.
Hitherto the focus of economic restructuring had been on the first (and to a lesser extent the second — see above).
The workers in the 34,000 co-operatives, most of them in rural areas, had seen no benefit from the reforms of the late 1980s and were experiencing deteriorating living standards.
The larger businesses showed little enthusiasm for the scheme when it was first announced in January.
On March 4 representatives of the major domestic companies were summoned by Suharto to a special audience where he strongly reiterated his proposals.
If wealth were not better distributed, he was reported as saying, "social gap, social envy, and even social disturbance will happen" .
Particular concern at the President's attitude was felt by the large proportion of ethnic Chinese in the business community.
They saw similarities with the Malaysian Bumiputra system by which ethnic Malays received preferential treatment in business over their Chinese compatriots.
More immediately, there was a fear that the business community would be blamed for the inevitable social side-effects of economic liberalization by a government concerned about its electoral prospects.
Concern to spread any benefits of reform more evenly across the economy was also evident at the beginning of 1990, when the Bank of Indonesia restricted the availability of credit in an attempt to reduce inflationary pressure.
Small businesses were, however, specially protected from the effects of the squeeze, the domestic banks being instructed to reserve at least 20 per cent of their available credit for smaller commercial borrowers, with particular favour to be shown to those in eastern Indonesia.
FOREIGN
The process of normalization in relations with China [see p. 37124]continued with talks held between officials in early December 1989.
One of the main stumbling blocks to renewed diplomatic relations (which were severed in 1967 — see p. 22482) was the existence of debts incurred by the Sukarno regime which the Suharto government had been slow to settle.
The sum involved was calculated at $82,500,000 in early 1989.
The legal position of some 350,000 Chinese nationals living in Indonesia was a further issue remaining to be resolved.
A subsequent meeting held in Beijing on March 27, 1990, was described by Chinese officials as "frank, cordial and co-operative" although they noted that "differences remained in some accounts" .
Full diplomatic relations would be re-established only after a meeting at ministerial level which would be held after the resolution of the remaining issues.
Parallel to the thaw in relations with China, Soviet-Indonesian contacts developed rapidly following Suharto's acceptance of a long-standing invitation to visit Moscow in September 1989 [see p. 36893].
On Jan. 11, 1990, a $5,000,000 joint venture between a Soviet state company and a personal associate of Suharto's, Liem Sio Long, was announced for the building of a palm oil processing plant in the Moscow area.
A further, longer term aim of the venture involved the marketing of Indonesian manufactured goods in the Soviet Union.
The new policy towards the Soviet Union (pursued despite misgivings on the part of the armed forces and the intelligence community) brought suggestions of a significant realignment in Indonesian foreign policy.
Some observers claimed to detect a deliberate move on the part of Suharto and his advisers to distance Indonesia from the USA following criticism by the administration of US President Bush of Indonesia's human rights record and aspects of its economic policy.
A counterview, however, saw the developments simply as the successful outcome of local initiatives by Soviet diplomats.
The Soviet Union, for its part, was reportedly attracted by the potential of the Indonesian domestic market and, specifically, by the possibility that restraints on Indonesian military spending might lead to a shift in procurement away from Western armaments to less expensive Soviet ones.
Some difficulty was caused in relations with the USA in February 1990 when Bush intervened (in a letter to Suharto) over a commercial competition between the US AT&T company and Japan's NEC for the contract to modernize Indonesia's telephone exchange system.
The contract, which was reportedly worth about $2,000 million when re-orders were taken into account, was open to tender but the USA feared that Japan would apply pressure via its aid relationship for preferential treatment for NEC.
The Indonesian reaction was initially cool.
Bush's letter was, according to Murdiono, based on "misinformation" .
In late February, however, it was announced that Suharto had "decided there is no winner this round" and that the contract would be re-tendered.
Relations with Australia continued to improve after the difficulties of the mid-1980s.
The main impetus for this was the conclusion of the Timor Gap agreement between the two countries in December 1989 [see p. 37124].
By the terms of the agreement Australia would have prospecting rights for oil and gas for a 40-year period over 23,550 square miles of seabed.
The benefit for Indonesia was political as well as economic because it implied, as Foreign Minister Ali Alatas pointed out, a recognition by Australia of the legitimacy of Indonesia's claim to East Timor.
The agreement was denounced by Portugal which had always rejected Indonesia's claim to its former colony.
It would, according to the Portuguese government, undermine the search for a diplomatic solution to the problem.
Relations with ASEAN countries
Indonesia showed particular interest in the Australian plan for an Asia-Pacific Economic Co-operation Council (APEC)[see p. 37044].
In common with other recipients of Western development aid, Indonesia was concerned at the possible diversion of resources by donors towards Eastern Europe, and the prospect of a strong regional economic organization was therefore attractive.
Relations with more closely neighbouring states proved more difficult to manage, despite shared membership of the Association of South-East Asian Nations (ASEAN — see p. 37571).
Tensions between Singapore and Malaysia provided both opportunities and risks for Indonesia's diplomacy.
Relations with Malaysia, already dogged by problems over "illegal" Indonesian migrants in Malaysia, were further strained in January 1990 after the execution in Malaysia of an Indonesian for drug offences.
At the end of 1989 joint military exercises were held with Singapore (in Indonesia), and this led to speculation that Singapore might wish to negotiate military training facilities in the country to replace those which it currently used in Taiwan.
Indonesia's ambassador to Malaysia, Sunarso Djajusman, observed: "Perhaps Singapore sees Indonesia as being less of a danger compared with Malaysia…
Perhaps Singapore wants to make Indonesia a counterweight against Malaysia so that Malaysia will not exert too much pressure on it."
ASIA — PACIFIC
PHILIPPINES
BASIC DATA
Area: 300,000 sq km.
Population: 59,686,000 (1988).
Capital: Manila.
Languages: Pilipino (native national language), Cebuano, Tagalog, Iloco, Ifugao; English and Spanish.
Religion: Christianity (Roman Catholicism); Islam.
Av. life expectancy: 64 yrs (1988).
Armed forces: 112,000 (1989).
GNP per capita: US$630 (1988).
Currency: Philippine peso (US$1.00=P22.1233 as at June 11, 1990).
The Republic of the Philippines became independent in July 1946, having been a Spanish colony until 1898 when the islands were ceded to the United States.
In 1965 Ferdinand Marcos became President and retained power thereafter through the increasing use of political corruption and coercion.
In an attempt to rally domestic support and to placate the US government (upon which his regime was heavily dependent), Marcos agreed to hold a presidential election in February 1986.
He was opposed by Corazon Aquino (the widow of the country's most prominent opponent of the Marcos regime until his murder in 1983 — see pp. 32517-18), and although Marcos claimed victory it was generally believed that Aquino had secured a greater number of votes.
In the face of huge popular demonstrations in favour of Aquino and a growing mutiny within the armed forces, Marcos fled the country on Feb. 25 and Aquino was declared President [see pp. 34297-302].
A new Constitution was approved by referendum in February 1987 [see pp. 35319-20].
Under its terms legislative authority is vested in a bicameral popularly elected Congress consisting of a House of Representatives of up to 250 members and a 24-member Senate.
Executive power is in the hands of a directly elected President (bereft of some of the powers used by Marcos) and an appointed Cabinet.
The overwhelming popular approval of the Constitution was accepted as a de facto election of Aquino as President, and in a general election on May 11, 1987, candidates endorsed by the President won a decisive majority in the new Congress [see pp. 35321-22].
Gen. Fidel Ramos Defence Franklin Drilon Justice Jesus Estanislao Finance Catalino Macaraig Executive Secretary Raul Manglapus Foreign Affairs Luis Santos Local Government Fiorello Estuar Public Works and Highways José Concepcion Trade and Industry Senen Bacani Agriculture Florencio Abad Agrarian Reform Mateo Armando Presidential Commission on Good Government Luis Villafuerte Presidential Commission on Government Reorganization Narzalina Lim Tourism Cefrino Follosco Science and Technology Isidro Carino Education, Culture and Sport Fulgencio Factoran Natural Resources Guillermo Carague Budget Dionisio de la Serna Labour and Employment Mamita Pardo de Tavera Social Services and Development Alfredo R. A. Bengzon Health Oscar Orbos Transport and Communications Tomas Gomez Press Secretary Cayetano Paderanga Economic Reform; Director General of National Economic and Development Authority Jiamil Dianalan Director General of Office of Moslem Affairs José Cuisia Governor of Central Bank Adolfo Azcuna Presidential Spokesman and Chief Presidential Legal Counsel 
Philippine Cabinet
POLITICS/SECURITY
Aftermath of 1989 coup attempt
The attempted coup of December 1989 against President Corazon Aquino [see pp. 37120-21]had wider support than initially acknowledged, with an estimated 70 per cent of the armed forces willing to support a regime installed by the coup plotters, according to intelligence sources.
Government officials said that the events had been planned jointly by the Reform the Armed Forces Movement (RAM), an organization of military officers, and supporters of former President Marcos.
Officials believed that a major part of the financing of the attempted overthrow of the government was provided by his supporters, including his widow, Imelda Marcos.
The rebels claimed that they had acted to rid the country of the inefficiency, incompetence and corruption of which, they said, the Aquino government was guilty.
The collapse of the coup was blamed by RAM on strong US support for Aquino, as well as their own failure to attract visible popular support, chiefly because they did not convince enough people that they had the experience to run the country.
As a result, rebel sources said that RAM had changed its name to the Nationalist Revolutionary Alliance and evolved into a more civilian-military association.
The coup attempt sharpened domestic political rivalries.
Vice-President Salvador Laurel, speaking on Dec. 4 during a visit to Hong Kong, went so far as to cast doubts on the President's ability to continue even if the coup was put down: "If Aquino insists on staying in power I don't think that would assist in solving the problem.
I think she would have a very hard time providing leadership, especially now that she is being perceived as more beholden to Washington than to the Filipino people."
Government changes
On Dec. 31, 1989, Aquino announced sweeping Cabinet changes in an attempt to deal with some of the charges made against her by the rebel soldiers, with nine new appointees taking over key government posts [see p. 37121].
Following the coup attempt Aquino had promised to "take stock" and address some of the popular grievances such as breakdowns in transportation and electricity services.
Among the outgoing ministers were Miriam Santiago Defensor, the Agrarian Reform Secretary, and Reinerio Reyes, the Transport and Communications Secretary, who had tackled corruption at the ports but had failed to alleviate worsening traffic problems.
Florencio Abad, a member of Congress strongly opposed to the continued presence of US bases in the Philippines, took over the Agrarian Reform portfolio and Oscar Orbos took over as Transport and Communications Secretary.
Despite the broad nature of the changes, however, the results were perceived by many as change for the sake of change, rather than as the result of the President having found a new formula to deal with the main problems of inflation, the breakdown in government services and the poor state of the economy.
It was not felt that the changes would be likely to deflect future military unrest.
Arrest of military officers — Proposed national police force
Despite the defeat of the current plotters, the main danger to the government was of another coup attempt, which was seen by many as almost inevitable, given the high level of politicization within the armed forces, the almost total lack of respect for the Constitution, and the inability of the President to move decisively and quickly enough against the disaffected elements.
Indeed, the persistent rumours before the current attack had been responsible in some measure for the slowness of the authorities to react on Dec. 1, 1989, and coup rumours continued well into 1990.
In an effort to head off further trouble from the military Aquino initiated a series of two meetings a week with officers for a "free-wheeling dialogue" .
Of the 3,000 troops most immediately involved in the fighting in the capital, the members of the elite corps of Scout Rangers were the most in evidence fighting against the government, especially in the Makati business district of Manila.
In view of the role of the corps the government ordered its members to be dispersed among other units for re-education and retraining.
By March some 54 officers and soldiers accused of participating in the coup were in military custody, including six officers believed to be key leaders, such as Brig. -Gen.
Edgardo Abenina of the Philippine Constabulary and Navy commander Proceso Maligalig.
In a secret interview before his capture Abenina claimed that he had brought together the forces of Gregorio "Gringo" Honasan, the officer cashiered for his part in an earlier coup attempt in 1987, and groups led by a Marcos loyalist, Brig. -Gen.
José Maria Zumel.
The authorities' success in capturing the main instigators of the coup was marred by the escape from detention of some officers, including another of the alleged ringleaders, Lt.-Cdr.
Bilbastro "Billy" Bibit [see p. 37376].
The President underlined her determination to pursue the coup plotters by naming a former police chief, Alfredo Lim, as the new director of a greatly strengthened National Bureau of Investigation.
Lim's sources of information were seen to be much more effective than the Army's compromised intelligence gathering network, as evidenced by the fact that four of the chief rebel officers captured since the coup attempt had been tracked down and arrested by the police.
Worried about the questionable loyalty of the armed forces, the government pressed ahead with plans to form a unified national police force as a counterbalance.
Despite congressional opposition, legislation had been proposed to merge the Manila-based Philippine Constabulary with the Integrated National Police to form a constitutionally mandated Philippine National Police force with an eventual strength of 120,000 members — an increase of nearly 30,000 over the current combined staff of the two forces.
In the meantime, the authorities had added light anti-tank weapons and recoilless rifles to the arsenal of the metropolitan police force.
Communist insurgency
The government gained several notable successes during 1989 in the long running battle against the communists and their New People's Army (NPA)[see p. 36658].
Their spring offensive in Negros Occidental province — "Operation Thunderbolt" — cleared the NPA from an area which they had long regarded as their own, but with heavy civilian casualties giving rise to criticism of their action from the Catholic Church and human rights groups.
In retaliation for what NPA Chief of Staff Romulo Kintanar called "direct US military participation" in the counterinsurgency campaign, the communists in April killed US Col. James Rowe, assigned to the Joint US Military Advisory Group as adviser to Philippine ground combat forces.
They also killed two US service personnel in May 1990 in their continuing campaign against foreign bases in the Philippines.
However, internal feuds and a breakdown of discipline within the ranks of the Communist Party of the Philippines-Marxist Leninist (CPP-ML), which led to a bloody purge of its supporters, seriously affected morale.
Then in July came the arrest of two key members of the party's politburo, Saturnino Ocampo [wrongly given as Satur on p. 36428], the secretary-general, and his wife Carolina "Bobby" Malay.
Considered even more critical in the long term was the defection from the party's ranks of Bernabe Buscayno, a former close confidant of exiled communist leader José Maria Sison.
 "The [communist]movement is starting to fade away, they are alienating themselves from the people," Buscayno told an interviewer.
Cordillera referendum
A referendum was held on Jan. 29, 1990, in the five mountain provinces of north-central Luzon under the October 1989 Cordillera Organic Act [see p. 37042].
As a result the proposed Cordillera autonomous region would consist solely of Ifugao, the only province voting in favour of autonomy, three other provinces — Benguet, Abra and Kalinga-Apayao — voting heavily against, with a much closer result in Mountain Province.
After the referendum government sources stated that the Cordillera Administrative Region, formed in July 1987 [see p. 35324], would cease to exist, with Abra, Benguet and Mountain Province returning to Region 1 (Ilocos) and Kalinga-Apayao to Region 2 (Cagayan Valley).
ECONOMY
Economic indicators
GNP per capita growth 5.5% (1989)
Trade deficit US$2,500 m. (1989)
Total external debt US$28,000 m. (1989)
Inflation rate 10.6% (1989)
Principal trading partners Japan, USA 
Economic repercussions of coup attempt
By December 1989 evidence was mounting that consumption was giving way to investment as the main engine of growth.
A substantial increase in foreign investment was seen by the government and international agencies alike as vital.
Officials predicted that a combination of debt rescheduling, additional aid commitments and improved invisibles such as tourism, would check the balance-of-payments deficit and improve the country's reserves, which by mid-1989 stood at only $500,000,000, down by half since the end of 1988.
Despite the political uncertainties, the communist insurgency and rising crime, the Philippines had begun to attract more foreign investment, particularly from Japan and Taiwan.
According to Japan's Ministry of Finance, direct investment in the Philippines by Japanese companies in 1987 was $72,000,000, while in 1988 the figure rose to $134,000,000, and in the first six months of 1989 the amount was already $101,000,000.
Japanese investor confidence faltered with the news of the coup attempt, one immediate result of which was the postponement of a $35,000,000 plan by the Japanese electronics company Sony to build an audio equipment factory near Manila.
The plant was to have been a symbol of the Aquino government's success in convincing Japanese companies of the country's political stability.
Prior to the coup attempt the applications approved by the Philippine Board of Investments for 1989 had increased by 128 per cent to be worth a total of $781,600,000.
Japan, Taiwan and the USA filled the first three places with other major investments coming from Hong Kong, Singapore and Australia.
With investor confidence shaken by the coup attempt, the government's investment plans for 1990 focused on attracting more Philippine nationals, who last year accounted for 57 per cent of equity investments.
According to the National Statistics Office, the inflation rate in December rose to 14.1 per cent, the highest rate since Aquino came to power, although by January the rate had fallen back to 13.1 per cent , compared with 12.8 per cent for November 1989.
The December figure brought the annual average for 1989 up to 10.6 per cent, exceeding the government's target of 8 per cent .
The government calculated its figures on the basis of the growth rate of consumer prices on an annual basis.
However, the Central Bank, which compared a three-month average on an annual basis, put the December inflation rate figure at 18 per cent.
Rises in petrol prices, higher consumer demand during the Christmas season and the failed coup, which caused speculation and hoarding, had all combined to push prices up.
The double digit inflation and growing trade deficit were the government's most difficult economic problems.
Inflation affected the country's external payments position significantly in 1989.
As the peso's purchasing power lessened, its international exchange value did not depreciate correspondingly, with the result that the value of imports over the year outpaced exports.
Imports for 1989 total $10,400 million, while exports reached only $7,900 million, creating a record trade deficit of $2,500 million.
In order to keep exports competitive and to shore up foreign exchange reserves, the government decided to allow the peso to float freely.
The peso traded at $1.00=P22.44 at the end of 1989, having averaged $1.00=P21.737 for the year against the 1988 average of $1.00=P21.094.
The government projected an exchange rate for 1990 of between $1.00=P21.5 and $1.00=P23.5.
The government in its accord with the IMF [see above]planned to impose austerity measures which would limit increases in government employment.
Critics argued that the government itself had been largely to blame for the country's economic problems.
To rally support the government had raised the pay of military personnel by 20 per cent in 1989, and civil servants had also been awarded pay rises.
The inflationary impact had been made worse by the President acquiescing in the passing of a law in Congress ordering an unprecedented 40 per cent increase in minimum wages in the private sector.
Since there were widespread violations of minimum wage agreements throughout the country, the increase did little to improve the lot of the lowest paid in the labour force.
Instead, it tended to push up wage scales in unionized industries and subsequently pushed inflation even higher.
Cayetano Paderanga, Economic Planning Secretary and Director-General of the National Economic and Development Authority (NEDA), was reported in May 1990 as saying that the government intended to loosen its monetary reins but to keep inflation in check at 11-13 per cent over 1990 by relying on fiscal restraint.
Given current power shortages and high interest rates, the NEDA was reducing its industrial growth target for 1990 to 5.1 per cent from 7.8 per cent.
Investment in industry was also scaled down to 10.2 per cent from a previously projected growth range of 12.8-18.4 per cent.
The NEDA was still hopeful that gross national product (GNP) growth would be about 5 per cent in 1990 compared with an original projection of 6 per cent.
The agency's figures were based on assumptions that the government would move to cut interest rates, normalize the power supplies and restore investor confidence through political stability.
Daily electricity blackouts in Manila were causing industry to lose output valued at $1,100 per day, which could reduce economic growth over the year by as much as 1 per cent.
The government was planning an $8,000 million investment programme to double electricity-generating capacity over the next 10 years, while short-term measures to alleviate the problem involved importing movable power generators aboard floating barges.
Meanwhile, the government filed a law suit against the Westinghouse Corporation claiming that the latter had built a defective 620-MW generating plant in Bataan after having first offered commission to the previous government in order to win the contract.
Flaws in the government's land reform programme were revealed in 1989, halting the advance of the agricultural sector on which the country's economic resurgence depended.
The aim of the programme had been to divide the big farms into smaller plots and to redistribute the land to the workers, but it had bred uncertainty among landowners and entrepreneurs many of whom, unwilling to part with their property, had delayed investment.
Loopholes in the law even allowed landlords to profit from the programme.
Instead of basing landlord compensation on the land's productive value (2@1/2 times the annual harvest) the administration had adhered to the concept of "fair market value" .
This had opened the way for landlords to profit from the programme.
Debt agreements
The International Monetary Fund (IMF) on May 24, 1989, approved the use of fund resources of up to 946,900,000 special drawing rights (approximately US$1,190 million) by the Philippines.
Of this total, SDR660,600,000 would be available over the next three years under an extended arrangement.
The balance of SDR286,300,000 could be available under the compensatory and contingency financing facility (CCFF) to meet the need for additional financing, should adverse external contingencies occur during the period of the extended arrangement.
On Feb. 28, 1990, the Philippines signed an agreement with international banks under the new debt initiative launched in 1989 by Nicholas Brady, the US Treasury Secretary, which switched international debt strategy away from an exclusive focus on new lending towards a reduction in debt burdens [see p. 37016].
Under the agreement the Philippines obtained a $712,500,000 loan from 82 banks, 10 of them from the Philippines.
The loan followed a buy-back of about $1,300 million of Philippine debt from banks at 50 per cent of its face value.
The agreement provided the Philippines with about $1,400,000 million over 1990 and 1991.
In addition, as reported in the Financial Times of March 1 the government had a further $850,000,000 made available from the IMF, the World Bank and the Japanese Export-Import Bank to fund more reductions in debt or the debt-service burden.
FOREIGN
Cancellation of 1990 presidential visits
In a broadcast on Dec. 21, 1989, Aquino announced the cancellation of her foreign visits planned for 1990, including visits to the Soviet Union, United Kingdom and Spain.
EUROPE
UNITED KINGDOM
BASIC DATA
Area: 244,103 sq km.
Population: 57,019,000 (1988).
Capital: London.
Languages: English; Welsh spoken by about one-fifth of the Welsh population.
Religion: Christianity (principally Church of England, but also Roman Catholicism, Methodism, United Reformed Church and Baptism); Jewish, Moslem and Hindu minorities.
Av. life expectancy: 75 yrs (1988).
Armed forces: 311,650 (incl. 16,250 women and some 9,200 enlisted outside the UK)(1989).
GNP per capita: US$12,800 (1988).
Currency: pound sterling (US$1.00=£0.5931 as at June 11, 1990).
The United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland is a constitutional monarchy with a bicameral Parliament.
The head of state is the hereditary monarch, currently Queen Elizabeth II, all acts of parliament being made in his or her name.
The lower house of parliament (House of Commons) comprises 650 members elected directly on a constituency basis at intervals of not more than five years.
The upper house (House of Lords) is appointed on a partly hereditary and partly non-hereditary (life) basis and also includes certain senior judges and 26 bishops of the Church of England; it currently comprises approximately 1,200 members.
The government is formed by the political party enjoying majority support in the House of Commons; while most ministers are members of the Commons, a number are drawn from the House of Lords, and legislation requires approval by both houses before enactment.
The Cabinet as such currently comprises 22 members, while there are outside the Cabinet about 30 ministers of the rank of minister of state or equivalent and a further approximately 50 parliamentary under-secretaries of state, parliamentary secretaries of state, government whips and government spokespersons in the House of Lords.
Since 1945 the government has in effect alternated between the Labour and Conservative parties, the present Conservative administration headed by Prime Minister Margaret Thatcher having been formed in 1979 and re-elected in 1983 and 1987 [see pp. 29645; 32262; 35269].
Margaret Thatcher Prime Minister; First Lord of the Treasury; Minister for the Civil Service Sir Geoffrey Howe Lord President of the Council and Leader of the House of Commons Lord Mackay of Clashfern Lord Chancellor Douglas Hurd Secretary of State for Foreign and Commonwealth Affairs John Major Chancellor of the Exchequer David Waddington Home Secretary Tom King Secretary of State for Defence Nicholas Ridley Secretary of State for Trade and Industry Kenneth Baker Chancellor of the Duchy of Lancaster Kenneth Clarke Secretary of State for Health John MacGregor Secretary of State for Education and Science Malcolm Rifkind Secretary of State for Scotland Cecil Parkinson Secretary of State for Transport John Wakeham Secretary of State for Energy Lord Belstead Lord Privy Seal and Leader of the House of Lords Antony Newton Secretary of State for Social Security Christopher Patten Secretary of State for the Environment Peter Brooke Secretary of State for Northern Ireland John Selwyn Gummer Minister of Agriculture, Fisheries and Food Norman Lamont Chief Secretary to the Treasury Michael Howard Secretary of State for Employment David Hunt Secretary of State for Wales 
UK Cabinet
POLITICS
Launch of Labour Party policy review
The Labour Party published on May 24, 1990, its policy review document, Looking to the Future.
The document was the result of a process begun at the party's 1987 annual conference; final drafts of the review, then called Meet the Challenge, Make the Change, had been released in May 1989 [see p. 36667].
Looking to the Future committed Labour to investment in the regeneration of industry, education and training, and to increasing child benefit and pensions.
In government the party would adhere to the economic and financial disciplines of the European Communities (EC — including an early entry into the exchange rate mechanism of the European monetary system).
It would restore to public control ownership of the water authorities, the electricity grid and British Telecom.
Labour would introduce a lower rate income tax of below 20 per cent and a top rate of 50 per cent, and would abandon higher rate income tax relief on mortgage payments.
A new industrial relations court would be given a conciliation role with full powers of enforcement and damages, the right to take sympathy action would be restored, while secondary picketing would only be allowed where the second employer was directly assisting the first employer to frustrate the dispute.
In the context of cuts in military expenditure made possible by disarmament in Europe, a Defence Diversification Agency would administer a fund within the defence budget to supplement private resources devoted to diversification, in order to encourage investment in civil manufacturing and the retraining of workers within the defence industry.
MP's forthcoming resignation over non-disclosure of business interests
John Browne, the Conservative MP for Winchester since 1979, announced on March 15, 1990, that he would stand down at the next general election.
On March 7 he had been suspended from the House of Commons for 20 days after the Commons select committee on members' interests had on Feb. 19 upheld two allegations against him of failing to declare business dealings in the register of MPs' interests.
Other party political changes
On Jan. 14, 1990, Nina Temple was appointed general secretary of the Communist Party of Great Britain.
She replaced Gordon McLennan, who had held the post since 1975 [see p. 27068].
The 25-member national committee of the Social Democratic Party (SDP) voted on June 3 by 17 votes to five to suspend the party's constitution (and thus effectively to terminate its operstions).
The SDP had been formed in 1981 with the intention of opening up the centre ground of British party politics [see pp. 30911-12], but after the Social and Liberal Democratic Party (SLDP — now termed Liberal Democrats) was formed in March 1988 combining most members of the former Liberal Party and of the SDP [see p. 36501], David Owen led the rump as a "continuing" SDP.
In the May 1990 Bootle by-election the SDP won only 155 votes [see p. 37468]and at its dissolution the party had 6,000 members.
Owen and his two remaining parliamentary colleagues (the other two SDP MPs elected in the 1987 general election--see p. 35269 — having joined the ranks of the SLDP) would continue to work as a team of independent Social Democrats.
Education
The Education (Student Loans) Act 1990 (enacted on April 26, 1990) provided for the introduction of top-up loans to students in higher education as a partial replacement for student maintenance grants.
Five of the banks which had been expected to take part in the scheme, however, had on Dec. 20, 1989, announced that they would not be participating for commercial reasons, although the following day, John MacGregor, Secretary of State for Education and Science, had stated that the objectives, principles and framework of the scheme remained unchanged.
National Health Service
The implementation of the government's proposals for reforming the NHS as outlined in the White Paper Working for Patients in January 1989 [see pp. 36503; 37158]made significant advances in the early part of 1990 to ensure the creation of an internal market uniformly across the country by April 1991.
This replaced an earlier proposal to introduce the placing of contracts with hospitals by authorities over three years to 1994.
Kenneth Clarke, the Secretary of State for Health, told the House of Commons on April 11, 1990, that all districts would be funded to meet the costs of their own services by the 1991 target date.
The National Health Service and Community Care Bill was enacted on June 29.
Nuclear energy
Decommissioning costs for the country's eight Magnox nuclear power stations could more than double to £6,600 million, according to a speech to employees by Lord Marshall of Goring, then chair of the Central Electricity Generating Board (CEGB), leaked on Oct. 17, 1989.
The revelations followed the government's decision in July 1989 to withdraw the Magnox reactors from its privatization plan for the electricity industry [see p. 36820].
The Labour Party energy spokesperson said that it would be "quite outrageous if the public were to be left with a liability of anything like £6,600 million when the profit to fund that liability [was]being passed to the private sector" .
[For announcement on Nov. 9, 1989, that all nuclear power stations would be withdrawn from the privatization programme see p. 37159.]
A report published on June 26, 1990, by Nuclear Electric, the government-owned company controlling the nuclear industry, put the projected cost of the Sizewell B pressurized water reactor (PWR) under construction on the Suffolk coast at £2,030 million (at 1987 prices — almost £2,400 million at 1990 prices) as against a 1987 estimate of £1,690 million.
This increase did not account for almost £200 million written off through a change in accounting practices.
John Wakeham, the Secretary of State for Energy, attributed the increases to the government's decision in November 1989 to freeze until 1994 plans to build three other PWRs, and restated the government's commitment to Sizewell as contributing to a reduction in carbon dioxide emissions (one of the "greenhouse gases" ).
A day later the House of Commons energy select committee published a report entitled The cost of nuclear power: what went wrong?, strongly critical of government ministers.
The committee had not been able to establish clearly the cost of nuclear power but agreed that it was at least 2@1/2 times the cost estimated before privatization was considered.
This difference was partly attributed to differing calculation methods as to the time span over which PWRs should be depreciated and the rate of return expected from investment.
However, it also reflected uncertainty over the costs of reprocessing spent fuel and decommissioning nuclear plants.
 "Unprecedented guarantees" on these latter issues had led the government to drop nuclear power from its electricity privatization programme in November 1989 [see p. 37159], but the committee report described these guarantees as "clearly necessary" .
Mersey oil pollution fine
Shell UK was ordered on Feb. 23, 1990 to pay a fine of £1,000,000 for polluting the Mersey river estuary on Aug. 19, 1989, when 156 tonnes of crude oil had escaped through a fractured underground pipeline causing a 10-mile oil slick which killed up to 300 seabirds and affected some 2,000 others.
The fine was the largest ever imposed for river pollution in the UK.
Clapham rail crash report
On Nov. 7, 1989, the public inquiry chaired by Sir Anthony Hidden, a Crown Court recorder, published its report into the railway accident near Clapham Junction in south London on Dec. 12, 1988, in which 35 people died, and for which British Rail (BR) had accepted responsibility [see p. 36502].
The report found that the direct cause of the accident was faulty rewiring work carried out near Clapham in November 1988, and that BR had to accept collective responsibility for allowing bad working practices to slip to unacceptable and dangerous levels.
Many recommendations were made to prevent another such accident, including introducing rigorous wiring and installation standards, with stricter guidelines for testing, and annual performance appraisal and improved training for technical staff.
Hillsborough stadium disaster report
Lord Justice (Sir Peter) Taylor, a Lord Justice of Appeal, published on Jan. 29, 1990, his final report into the death of 95 people at Hillsborough football stadium in Sheffield in April 1989 [see p. 36597].
An interim inquiry into the disaster published in August 1989 had concluded that its main cause had been the failure of the police to contain the movement of supporters into the stadium.
The final report outlined the case against the introduction of a national football membership scheme [see p. 37158]and made a number of specific recommendations for the improvement of safety at sports grounds, including the progressive conversion of stadiums to all-seater accommodation.
On the same day the government announced that although Part II of the Football Spectators Act, which gave powers to the courts to impose restriction orders on those convicted of football-related offences, would be implemented as soon as possible, Part I of the Act which proposed a national membership scheme would not now go ahead in view of the advice given in the report.
ECONOMY
Economic indicators
GDP growth 2.4% (1989)
Trade balance -£23,100 m. (1989)
Balance of payments on current account -£20,850 m. (1989)
Gross domestic product £508,859 m. (1989)
Gross national product £511,867 m. (1989)
Inflation rate 7.7% (1989)
Unemployment 6.3% (1989)
Principal trading partners EC, USA 
Disclosures of government "sweeteners" in sale of Rover
A number of disclosures were made between November 1989 and February 1990 of secret arrangements between the government and British Aerospace (BAe) in relation to the latter's purchase of the motor manufacturer Rover Group.
(The government had agreed in March 1988 to sell Rover for £150,000,000 as part of its privatization programme — see p. 36504 — and the final terms of the sale had been agreed by the Commission of the EC in July 1988.)
The Guardian revealed on Nov. 30, 1989, the contents of a confidential memorandum from John Bourn, the Comptroller and Auditor General, which disclosed that the Department of Trade and Industry (DTI) had failed to disclose to the EC details of concessions worth £38,000,000 given to BAe to secure its purchase of Rover, and further revealed on Feb. 19 and 28, 1990, other financial details of the purchase.
In a Commons statement on Nov. 30, 1989, Nicholas Ridley, the Secretary of State for Trade and Industry, said that the government took the view that the concessions were consistent with the terms of EC approval and that these arrangements were the least which were necessary to secure the successful transfer of the Rover Group to the private sector.
The Labour Party spokesperson on trade and industry on Dec. 7, 1989, published letters leaked to him which principally disclosed that Lord Young of Graffham, Trade and Industry Secretary at the time of the Rover sale, had offered to BAe chairman Roland Smith a variety of means by which both the government and BAe could avoid parliamentary and EC scrutiny, relating to the date on which the purchase price of Rover would be paid.
On June 27, 1990, after six months of further investigations, Sir Leon Brittan, the EC Commissioner responsible for competition policy (and former UK Trade and Industry Secretary), ordered the repayment of £44,400,000 in illegal "sweeteners" granted by the UK government at the time of the sale in July 1988.
A further £40,000,000 might also have to be repaid in 1991 if amounts allocated for the restructuring of Rover's former commercial division were not fully spent.
House of Fraser report
On March 7, 1990, Ridley announced the publication of a report by government inspectors investigating the acquisition of the House of Fraser (Holdings) plc by the Al Fayed Investment Trust (UK) in 1985 for £615,000,000 [see p. 36529].
Ridley said that the Director of Public Prosecutions had now withdrawn his earlier objections to such a publication, but it would not be in the public interest for him to take any further action on the matter.
The report concluded that the Fayed brothers, Mohamed and Ali, had (i) dishonestly misrepresented their background and wealth to the DTI for the purpose of persuading the Department in 1985 not to refer the acquisition to the Monopolies and Mergers Commission (MMC);(ii) used their connection with the Sultan of Brunei to enable them to acquire the funds used in the acquisition;(iii) repeated their lies to their advisers, who had accepted at face value what they were told and failed to check its accuracy; and (iv) misrepresented the extent of their business assets to both the DTI and to the Office of Fair Trading.
Michael Cole, the media director for the House of Fraser, said on March 7, 1990, that the report was inept and prejudiced, while on the same day Sir Edward Du Cann, chairman of Lonrho (which had itself desired to take over the House of Fraser), criticized the government for refusing to take action against the Fayeds and said that damages would be sought against the brothers through the courts.
The House of Commons select committee on trade and industry published a report on the House of Fraser acquisition on May 23, 1990, in which the DTI was criticized for failing to exercise its role in the regulation and supervision of business.
The report criticized both Ridley, for failing to hand the matter over to the courts, and Lord Young for failing to refer the takeover to the MMC, and put forward over 30 recommendations for the strengthening of financial regulations.
Barlow Clowes report — Government compensation to investors
On Dec. 19, 1989, Ridley announced the publication of the report of the Parliamentary Commissioner for Administration (the Ombudsman Sir Anthony Barrowclough) on the DTI's handling of the affairs of the Barlow Clowes investment management group and the collapse of companies within the group, whose investors faced reported losses of up to £190,000,000.
Although an official inquiry had found in October 1988 that there were no grounds to conclude that the DTI's handling of the affair had caused the investors' losses, in his report the Ombudsman had identified five areas in which there had been significant maladministration by the DTI of the Barlow Clowes affair.
The government, publishing its reply on the same day, stated that it had no legal liability to pay compensation, rejected the report's assertions that actions fell short of the standards appropriate to the regulator, and further asserted that the general handling of the licensing of the Barlow Clowes partnership was careful and considerate.
However, Ridley said that, through ex gratia payments by the government, those who had invested up to £50,000 would be able to recover 90 per cent of their investment; investors would be able to recover 80 per cent of investments between £50,000 and £100,000 and 60 per cent of investments over £100,000.
(As of mid-March 1990 Clowes and six others faced charges relating to fraud, theft and deception in a trial which was not expected to begin until the spring of 1991.)
Channel Tunnel project — Rail link funding
Eurotunnel, the company financing and overseeing the construction of the rail tunnel between France and the UK [see p. 35469], announced on May 28, 1990, that it had secured additional finance from the European Investment Bank, which had agreed to an increase in the project's borrowing commitment from £1,000 million to £1,300 million, and that the majority of the 210 international banks supporting the tunnel project had agreed to allow the project to continue to borrow on its prevailing £5,000 million funding capacity.
Eurotunnel had declared its need for an additional £2,500 million of funding to cover increased costs beyond the £4,800 million estimated in November 1987, while in February 1990 the group had undergone a number of financial and management changes [see p. 37261].
The Cabinet on June 14, 1990, rejected a request from the private-sector European Rail Link (ERL) consortium for partial government funding of a 68-mile-long high-speed rail link between the Channel Tunnel and London.
While the consortium had offered to put up £2,500 million in private capital the project would also have involved ERL taking over a £1,000 million government loan already allocated to BR to improve commuter services along the route, a further £400 million investment by BR (in exchange for which it would have had a 50 per cent stake in commuter services along the route) and a government "capital grant" of £500 million.
Thatcher had stated on June 12: "We do not believe we should subsidize international rail services." 
Industrial relations
On March 7, 1990, a nationwide dispute among manual workers at the Ford Motor Company ended following the acceptance of an improvement on the company's offer of a pay rise of 10.2 per cent.
Although official action had ended after a national ballot on Jan. 24, unofficial action had continued until March after discontent had emerged among Ford's maintenance workers, craftsmen and electricians, causing major disruption of work across the country.
By June 1990, as the result of a campaign launched in May 1989, a total of some 550 agreements had been reached in the engineerng industry for a phased reduction of the basic working week, generally from 39 to 37 hours.
NORTHERN IRELAND
Progress of devolution talks
A number of meetings were held throughout April and May 1990 between Brooke and James Molyneaux, leader of the (Official) Ulster Unionist Party (OUP), and the Rev. Ian Paisley, leader of the Democratic Unionist Party (DUP), and between Brooke and Gerard Collins, the Irish Foreign Minister, as a prelude to the opening of talks on new arrangements for the exercising of political power within Northern Ireland.
Brooke also held meetings with John Hume, leader of the Social Democratic and Labour Party (SDLP).
After an optimistic report on May 30 that an official announcement would be made soon by Brooke stating that formal talks would be forthcoming between the principal constitutional parties about the political future of the province, Brook was on July 5 able to give to the House of Commons only an abridged version of the statement he had hope to make.
The delay in unveiling his initiative in full was caused by the Irish government's insistence that it should be guaranteed involvement at an early stage in the talks.
However, all sides insisted that the initiative had not broken down.
Developments in "Guildford Four" inquiry
A preliminary session was held on Dec. 4, 1989, of the judicial inquiry into the case of the "Guildford Four" , who had been convicted in 1975 of carrying out the Guildford and Woolwich public house bombings [see pp. 26870; 27739], and in October 1989 had been released from their sentences of life imprisonment [see p. 36983].
During the session Sir John May, the inquiry chairman, announced that he would sit at the inquiry with three lay assessors, and that the government had agreed to the granting of immunity from prosecution to witnesses.
May also stated that he could not hear any detailed evidence relating to the Four until any criminal proceedings against police officers had been completed.
It was reported on April 11, 1990, that tapes of an interview held following the 1975 trial, between Gerard Conlon, one of the Four, and Peter (now Sir Peter) Imbert, now Commissioner of the Metropolitan Police, who was at the time of the trial a bomb squad superintendent, were becoming a source of conflict between the police and the defence lawyers at the judicial inquiry.
It was further reported on April 12 that the police inquiry into allegations of malpractice against those officers who had interviewed the Four was being obstructed by the absence of an official transcript of the trial.
Re-emergence of Stalker affair
The so-called Stalker affair re-emerged throughout January 1990 following the collapse on Jan. 18 of fraud charges against Kevin Taylor, a Manchester businessman and alleged criminal with whom John Stalker, the former Deputy Chief Constable of Greater Manchester, was said to have associated and thus to have engaged in discreditable conduct.
Such an association had led in May 1986 to the removal of Stalker as head of a controversial inquiry team into allegations of a "shoot-to-kill" policy by the Royal Ulster Constabulary (RUC)[see pp. 36239-40].
A number of developments followed the collapse of the Taylor trial.
The Director of Public Prosecutions urged the Greater Manchester police to investigate the trial in the light of allegations of police corruption, while the Manchester police authority announced that it was itself to hold such an inquiry.
David Waddington, the Home Secretary, rejected calls for a judicial inquiry into Stalker's original removal from the RUC inquiry team, and Stalker himself claimed that he possessed documents which showed that the removal had been decided by senior Cabinet and Home Office officials.
Waddington stated in a written parliamentary reply on April 4, 1990, that following his study of such documents he had concluded that the removal had been based on straightforward facts.
Allegations of subversive propaganda campaign
A major controversy arose during January and February 1990 in connection with allegations circulating within the British media for a number of years by Colin Wallace — a former information officer with the Ministry of Defence (MOD) at Army headquarters in Northern Ireland — that a campaign of smears and subversion against senior politicians which had existed in the province in the 1970s was extended to the mainland to include many leading British politicians.
On Jan. 31, 1990, Thatcher admitted that she had been misled about the extent of the subversion campaign, while on Feb. 7 the House of Commons select committee on defence announced that it was to hold an inquiry into the MOD's handling of the affair.
Throughout January and February 1990 further revelations emerged in the media from Wallace himself, and from former serving Army officers and government officials, on the details of the wider allegations made.
Review of "Birmingham Six" case
Waddington announced on March 21, 1990, that in the light of new submissions from lawyers representing six men — the "Birmingham Six" — sentenced to life imprisonment in 1975 for the bombing of public houses in Birmingham in 1974 [see pp. 26870; 27346], the Devon and Cornwall police would now investigate the matters raised by such submissions, and that following the outcome of the inquiry he would give further consideration as to whether his intervention in the convictions of the six would be justified.
On Nov. 24, 1989, the European Parliament (EP) had asked its legal affairs committee to conduct an investigation into the case because of growing international concern about such convictions, while in January 1988 the Court of Appeal in London had unanimously rejected an appeal against the convictions [see p. 36237].
Completion of Stevens inquiry
In a statement to the House of Commons on May 17, 1990, the Secretary of State for Northern Ireland, Peter Brooke, announced that the inquiry report into allegations of collusion between the security forces and loyalist paramilitaries was being published that day, following an eight-month investigation by John Stevens, the Deputy Chief Constable of Cambridgeshire [see pp. 36902-03].
The report concluded that the passing of information to paramilitaries did take place, but on a very limited scale, and it recommended procedural and technical improvements.
Release of "Winchester Three" 
The Court of Appeal in London ruled on April 27, 1990, that John McCann, Martina Shanahan and Finbar Cullen, known as the "Winchester Three" , should be immediately released from the prison sentence of 25 years imposed upon each of them at Winchester Crown Court in October 1988, following their convictions on charges of conspiring to murder Tom King, the then Secretary of State for Northern Ireland.
The Court ruled that the case against the three, who had exercised their right not to give evidence at the trial, had been overwhelmingly prejudiced following an announcement by King during the trial of restrictions on the right of silence [see p. 37098].
The three were re-arrested on their release and deported to Dublin.
Violent incidents in Northern Ireland and on UK mainland
Specific violent incidents in Northern Ireland between late 1989 and April 1990 included the attempted murder on Nov. 7, 1989, of David Mellor, an assistant chief constable of the RUC, after the Irish Republican Army (IRA) planted a bomb at his home.
Charles Love, 16, was killed on Jan. 28, 1990, when an IRA bomb exploded during a parade in Londonderry to commemorate 13 people killed by British soldiers in January 1972 [see pp. 25105-06].
Four members of the UDR were killed on April 9, 1990, by an IRA landmine in Co.
Down.
On the UK mainland a car bomb was discovered and defused on Nov. 12, 1989, outside the London home of Lt.-Gen.
Sir David Ramsbotham, commander of the UK Field Army.
Two IRA letter-bomb devices addressed to senior British Army officers in Aldershot were defused on Jan. 16, 1990.
A member of the Woman's Royal Army Corps and a passer-by were injured on Feb. 20 when an IRA bomb fell from underneath a van and exploded in Leicester city centre.
A further IRA bomb exploded at an Army recruiting office in Halifax on Feb. 25.
On May 14 an IRA bomb exploded at the Royal Army Education Corps headquarters in Eltham in London, injuring seven civilians.
One British Army soldier was killed and another was seriously injured on May 16 when an IRA bomb exploded under an Army van at an Army careers information office in Wembley, London.
Renewal of anti-terrorist legislation
The House of Commons on March 6, 1990, and the House of Lords on March 15 approved the continuance in force for a further 12 months of the provisions of the 1989 Prevention of Terrorism (Temporary Provisions) Act, which principally provided for the arrest without warrant and detention for a total of up to seven days of those suspected of involvement in terrorist offences [see pp. 37098-99].
The Commons and the Lords further approved on March 12 and March 19 respectively, the extension for a further 12 months of the emergency provisions and powers contained within the 1978 and 1987 Northern Ireland (Emergency Provisions) Acts [see p. 37099 for last 12-month extension].
Meetings of Anglo-Irish Intergovernmental Conference
The Anglo-Irish Intergovernmental Conference, as provided for in the Anglo-Irish Agreement of November 1985 [see pp. 34070-73], held further meetings early in 1990.
On March 2, 1990, a meeting of the Conference in London discussed the implications of the Stevens report [see above], the progress of a joint working party established to make recommendations about the monitoring of Army patrols by the RUC, and extradition matters.
A further meeting on April 19 in Belfast agreed to review existing extradition arrangements, following the refusals by the Irish Supreme Court on March 13 and April 6 to extradite from Dublin a number of persons wanted on terrorist offences in Northern Ireland [see pp. 37329-30; 37386].
During the meeting Brooke reportedly expressed the dismay of the UK government at these refusals, and reported on progress with unionist parties on the possibility of talks on devolution, while Collins said that the recent judgments on extradition had not been the responsibility of the Irish government.
A scheduled meeting of the Conference on Jan. 31 was postponed following the unavailability of Irish ministers, who had been required to be present in the Dáil (lower house of the Irish Parliament) to secure the passage of their government's budget.
Brooke, however, held unscheduled talks with Collins on Feb. 4 when they discussed European Community (EC) funding, cross-border economic and security co-operation, recent shootings in the province and recent moves towards political dialogue there.
Ryan controversy
Sir Patrick Mayhew, the UK Attorney General, announced in a written parliamentary reply on Feb. 19, 1990, that in view of the decision by the Irish Director of Public Prosecutions in October 1989 that there was insufficient evidence to prosecute Patrick Ryan in Dublin, the case would be regarded as concluded.
Ryan, whom the Irish government had refused to extradite to the UK in December 1988, was wanted there on charges of conspiracy relating to alleged acts of IRA terrorism [see pp. 36492; 37013; 37099].
FOREIGN
EUROPE
IRELAND
BASIC DATA
Area: 70,283 sq km(incl. inland water).
Population: 3,574,000 (1988).
Capital: Dublin.
Languages: Irish (official first language, but use is limited); English.
Religion: Christianity (95% Roman Catholic, 5% Protestant).
Av. life expectancy: 74 yrs (1988).
Armed forces: 13,000 (incl. 60 women)(1989).
GNP per capita: US$7,480 (1988).
Currency: Irish punt (US$1.00=I£0.6313 as at June 11, 1990).
Under its 1937 Constitution the Republic of Ireland is "a sovereign, independent democratic state" with a President (Uachtarán na hÉireann, currently Patrick Hillery) elected for a seven-year term by direct vote.
He is advised by a Council of State and holds specific constitutional powers.
The National Parliament (Oireachtas) consists of the President and two Houses:(i) a 166-member House of Representatives (Dáil Éireann) elected for a five-year term by universal adult suffrage on the basis of proportional representation by means of a single transferable vote; and (ii) a 60-member Senate (Seanad Éireann).
A Cabinet led by the Prime Minister (Taoiseach) exercises executive authority and is responsible to the Dáil.
Following the break-up of the government coalition formed by Fine Gael and the Labour Party in December 1982, an early general election was held on Feb. 17, 1987 [see pp. 35085-86], and in March Fianna Fáil formed a minority government with its leader, Charles Haughey, as Taoiseach.
In another premature general election in June 1989 Fianna Fáil performed less well than in 1982 and Haughey was obliged to form a coalition government with the Progressive Democrats [see pp. 36739; 36820-21].
Charles Haughey Prime Minister (Taoiseach); Irish-Speaking Affairs (Gaeltacht) Brian Lenihan Deputy Prime Minister (Tanaiste); Defence Gerard Collins Foreign Affairs Albert Reynolds Finance John Patrick Wilson The Marine Michael O'Kennedy Agriculture and Food Desmond J. O'Malley Industry and Commerce Bertie Ahern Labour Bobby Malloy Energy Michael Woods Social Welfare Ray Burke Justice and Communications Padraig Flynn Environment Rory O'Hanlon Health Mary O'Rourke Education Seamus Brennan Tourism and Transport 
Irish Cabinet
POLITICS
Sinn Féin conference
The annual conference of Sinn Féin, the political wing of the Irish republican movement, was held in Dublin on Feb. 3-4, 1990, during which Gerry Adams, the party president, said that he was ready at any time to discuss the conditions within which peace and justice could be created.
Adams stated that he intended to continue his recent discussions with some Protestants in Northern Ireland but would not at this time involve leaders of the two principal Unionist parties.
AIDS and contraception
The Dublin district court on May 15, 1990, fined the Irish Family Planning Association (IFPA) I£400 for selling a condom at its "safer sex" counter in a record store in Dublin.
The IFPA maintained that the sale was part of its work to halt the spread of AIDS (acquired immune deficiency syndrome) but conservative groups won their case against the free availability of contraception on the basis of a 1985 law limiting the supply of contraceptives to chemists, sexually transmitted disease clinics, family planning clinics, and doctors' surgeries.
Vote in favour of ordination of women
On May 17, 1990, the general synod of the Church of Ireland voted in favour of the ordination of women as priests and bishops.
On a second vote clergy delegates voted by 126 to 55 in favour (just over the required two-thirds majority) and the lay vote was 172 in favour and 29 against.
ECONOMY
Economic indicators
GNP growth 4% (1989)
Current-account balance +US$660 m. (1988)
Trade balance I£2,088 m. (1988)
Overall balance of payments +US$356 m. (1987)
Budget deficit US$1,800 m. (1988 est.)
Total external public debt (as % of GNP) 61.4% (1988)
Debt service ratio (as % of export earnings) 10.8% (1988)
Inflation rate 4% (1989)
Unemployment 15.5% (1989)
Principal trading partners EC, USA 
1990 budget — National development plan
The 1990 budget was introduced on Jan. 31, 1990, by Albert Reynolds, the Finance Minister [for 1989 budget see p. 37013].
Social welfare payments were increased, as were benefits for the long-term unemployed, supplementary benefits, child benefit and benefits for those caring full-time for elderly relatives.
Although minimum income tax threshold remained unchanged, the basic rate of personal income tax was reduced from 32 to 30 per cent and the top rate cut from 56 to 53 per cent; the basic rate of corporation tax was reduced from 43 to 40 per cent .
Reynolds said that despite the considerable economic progress made by Ireland in the past three years, the size of the national debt [see below]continued to be a major constraint upon development and prevented further tax concessions.
Reynolds had on Nov. 27, 1989, announced a national development plan costing I£8,690 million over the period 1989-93, aimed at improving infrastructure within Ireland in the context of its peripheral position within the European Communities (EC), with the total sum to include contributions from the EC, the state and the private sector.
Charles Haughey, the Prime Minister, announced on Nov. 24, 1989, that a special National Debt Office was to be established within the Ministry of Finance to oversee and manage the country's national debt, which stood at I£25,000 million.
Environmental protection programme
Padraig Flynn, the Environment Minister, announced on Jan. 26, 1990, a programme of environmental protection measures, which included a ban on coal burning in Dublin, proposals to end the release of sewage and industrial waste into rivers, lakes and seas, and the conversion of coal-fired power stations to using smokeless fuel.
Financial assistance would be given to householders to enable them to change to using smokeless coal or to other forms of heating when the ban became effective, and towards the costs of relocation of those companies with good environmental records and to encourage investment in new processes.
FOREIGN
Bilateral visits
Gyüla Horn, the then Hungarian Foreign Minister, visited Ireland on Dec. 5-7, 1989, and held talks with Haughey, Deputy Prime Minister and Minister of Defence Brian Lenihan and Foreign Minister Gerard Collins.
Horn held further talks the next day with President Patrick Hillery and Terry Leyden, Minister of State at the Department of Industry and Commerce.
Collins paid a return visit to Hungary on Feb. 22-23, 1990.
Soviet-Irish consultations were held in Dublin on Feb. 20, 1990, to exchange views on the preparations for forthcoming meetings of the Conference on Security and Co-operation in Europe (CSCE), the first in March in Bonn, the West German capital, on economic co-operation in Europe [see p. 37386], and the second in June in Copenhagen, the Danish capital, on the human dimension of the European disarmament talks [see p. 37550].
EUROPE
SPAIN
BASIC DATA
Area: 504,782 sq km(incl. inland water).
Population: 38,997,000 (1988).
Capital: Madrid.
Languages: Castilian Spanish; Catalan (north-east), Basque (north) and Galician (north-west).
Religion: Christianity (Roman Catholic).
Av. life expectancy: 77 yrs (1988).
Armed forces: 285,000 (210,000 conscripts, some 200 women).
GNP per capita: US$7,740 (1988).
Currency: Spanish peseta (US$1.00=104.4277 ptas as at May 4, 1990).
The Kingdom of Spain is, under its 1978 Constitution, a parliamentary monarchy with the monarch, currently King Juan Carlos I, as head of state.
Legislative authority is vested in the bicameral parliament, the Cortes Generales, which comprises the 350-member Congress of Deputies, elected by proportional representation, and the 280-member directly elected Senate.
Both houses are elected by universal adult suffrage for terms of no longer than four years.
The monarch appoints the President of the Government (Prime Minister — currently Felipe González Márquez) and, on the latter's recommendation, the members of the Council of Ministers.
The Spanish Socialist Workers' Party (Partido Socialista Obrero Español — PSOE) was returned to government in a general election on June 22, 1986 [see p. 34821], winning 184 seats in the Congress of Deputies.
The distribution of seats in the Congress following an early general election on Oct. 29, 1989 [see pp. 36983-84], was not finalized until early April 1990, when the PSOE was allocated 175 — half the total number of seats.
González accordingly remained in power, his government winning a vote of confidence on April 5 [see pp. 37262; 37330; 37387].
Spain is divided into 17 autonomous regions, each with its own elected legislative assembly, a Governing Council with executive and administrative functions, and a regional President of the Government (Prime Minister) elected by the assembly from its members.
Felipe González Márquez President of the Government (Prime Minister) Alfonso Guerra Deputy Prime Minister Narcís Serra Serra Defence José Luis Corcuero Interior Francisco Fernández Ordóñez Foreign Affairs Carlos Solchaga Economy and Finance Enrique Múgica Herzog Justice José Claudio Aranzadi Martínez Industry and Energy *Luis Martínez Noval Labour and Social Security Javier Solana Madariaga Education and Science Joaquín Almunia Public Administration Carlos Romero Herrera Agriculture, Fisheries and Food Jorge Semprún Culture Javier Sáenz de Cosculluela Public Works José Barrionuevo Transport and Communications Julián García Vargas Health and Consumer Affairs Virgilio Zapatero Parliamentary Relations; Secretary to the Government Matilde Fernández Social Welfare Rosa Conde de Espina Government Spokeswoman *Succeeded Manuel Chaves, who resigned on April 20, 1990, to seek election in June 1990 as President of the Andalucian regional government.
Council of Ministers
POLITICS
Death of La Pasionaria
Dolores Ibárruri Gómez, the Civil War heroine known as "La Pasionaria" ( "the passion flower" ), died on Nov. 12, 1989, aged 93.
Tens of thousands of people filed past her body which lay in state at the Communist Party headquarters in Madrid for three days before being buried in Almudena cemetery on Nov. 16, next to the grave of Pablo Iglesias, the founder of the PSOE.
Born into a miner's family in Gallarta in the Basque region in 1895, she was a founder member of the Spanish Communist Party (Partido Comunista de España — PCE) in 1920 and was elected to the Cortes in 1936, representing Asturias.
She was a forceful and charismatic speaker, and her avowal in a July 1936 radio broadcast on the outbreak of the Civil War that "Fascism shall not pass, the executioners of October shall not pass [no pasarán]" became a battle cry for the Republican forces.
Her resistance to Generalissimo Franco's Nationalists endowed her with legendary status.
After the Civil War ended in 1939 Ibárruri lived in the Soviet Union and was leader of the PCE in exile, first as secretary-general in 1942 and then as president from 1960.
She was identified with orthodox communism, but her concern was with party unity and she was aware that the PCE needed to distance itself from Moscow to survive.
In 1968 she delivered the PCE's protest to Moscow at the invasion of Czechoslovakia and supported Santiago Carrillo, her successor as secretary-general, in his espousal of Eurocommunism against Soviet criticisms, despite her own reservations.
Again, in the early 1980s she was to support Gerardo Iglesias against Carrillo when change became inevitable [see p. 32014].
In May 1977 La Pasionaria returned to Spain and the same year won back her seat in the Cortes [see p. 28520].
However, she did not stand for re-election in 1979.
She was elected president of the PCE in 1960.
Death of Carlos Arias Navarro
Carlos Arias Navarro, the last Prime Minister appointed by Gen. Franco, died on Nov. 27, 1989, aged 80.
He took over the premiership in January 1974 after the Basque separatist organization Euskadi ta Askatasuna)(ETA) had killed his predecessor, Adml.
Luis Carrero Blanco, in a bomb attack in Madrid [see pp. 26341-42].
He resigned, however, in July 1976, four months before Franco's death, apparently at the request of King Juan Carlos who appointed Adolfo Suárez González to steer through democratic reforms leading to free elections [see p. 27853].
Arias Navarro had been director-general of the state security service from 1957 to 1965 and was Interior Minister from June 1973 until the time of his appointment as head of government 
Death of Josep Tarradellas
Josep Tarradellas, the former president of the Catalan government and a leading Catalan nationalist, died on June 10, 1989, at the age of 89.
Tarradellas served in the government (Generalitat) of the Catalan republic from 1932.
He fled to France at the end of the Civil War and was imprisoned by the Nazis.
In 1954 he became president of the Generalitat in exile vowing never to return until Spain accepted the principle of autonomy for Catalonia.
After Franco's death and after 38 years' absence he returned to Spain in 1977, at the invitation of Suárez, and was in 1978 appointed president of the Catalonian regional government.
Tarradellas was influential in negotiating a statute of autonomy for the region reconciling Catalonia's traditionally republican aspirations with the demands of the monarchy to which it was subject.
Canaries
The centre-right Democratic and Social Centre (Centro Democrático y Social — CDS) on Jan. 17, 1990, lost the leadership of the Las Palmas council in the Canary Islands to the PSOE following a motion of censure tabled by the PSOE with the support of the PCE and the mixed group.
Earlier, the coalition of the CDS and the Popular Party (Partido Popular — PP)[see p. 36776], had lost its absolute majority on the council on July 9, 1989, when a CDS councillor went over to the mixed group.
Angel Cabrera Batista, a former activist of the Movement for the Self-determination and Independence of the Canaries Archipelago (Movimiento para la Autodeterminación y la Independencia del Archipiélago Canario — MPAIAC) gave himself up on Aug. 13 in Las Palmas after 13 years in hiding.
He had been accused of the murder in 1976 of a tobacco industrialist and a police inspector.
New PP leader
José María Aznar was elected president of the PP on April 1, 1990, in succession to Manuel Fraga Iribarne, the PP's founding president [wrongly given as secretary-general and continuing president respectively on p. 37469].
Aznar had headed the PP list in the October 1989 general election [for January 1989 renaming of Popular Alliance as Popular Party see pp. 36775-76].
Imprisonment of Army officer
Col. Amadeo Martínez Inglés was sentenced to two months' imprisonment on Dec. 12, 1989, for advocating, in a book entitled Defenceless Spain, an end to conscription and its replacement by a professional Army.
SECURITY
Escape of imprisoned Basque deputy
Angel Alcalde, who became a deputy for United People (Herri Batasuna — HB), the political wing of ETA, following the assassination on Nov. 20, 1989, of Josu Muguruza, an HB deputy in the Cortes [see p. 37050], was released from prison by order of the courts on Dec. 1 in order to take up his seat.
The Supreme Court ruled on Dec. 13 that he should be returned to prison but Alcalde had by this time left the country.
Alcalde, who had been awaiting trial for supplying operational information to ETA, had contested the general election from prison; he was not elected, but on the assassination of Muguruza automatically became his successor.
Violence in Basque region in 1989
Following an ETA truce between Jan. 8 and April 7, 1989, which ended after the breakdown of peace talks in Algiers [see pp. 36627-28], violence recommenced with the murder on April 12 of a Civil Guard.
An Army officer was killed on April 24 in Bilbao and three police officers were killed and five people injured when a car bomb exploded in Bilbao on May 24.
A powerful bomb extensively damaged a Civil Guard barracks in Llodio near Bilbao on June 26 but no one was injured.
A bomb apparently intended for the Paris-Madrid express, which, however, was running late, damaged the railway line between France and Spain on June 30.
Two Civil Guards were wounded by a remote-control bomb on Aug. 2 between Pamplona and San Sebastián.
Police on Sept. 17 intercepted a lorry near the French border carrying three members of ETA's Araba commando (believed to be responsible for at least 39 killings), and in the ensuing gun battle at a motorway toll booth shot dead two and wounded the other; 37 members of the commando's support network were subsequently arrested and 270 kg of explosives were seized.
Police officers were shot dead in Irún on Sept. 29, in San Sebastián on Oct. 6, and near Bilbao on Nov. 6.
A man was killed and two people were injured by a car bomb at a Renault car showroom in Pamplona on Nov. 14.
An industrialist was kidnapped in Pamplona on Nov. 24 and was held for 84 days before being freed on Feb. 16 [see p. 37263].
A police officer was killed on Jan. 30, 1990, in Galdakano.
Following the shooting of a prison clerk in San Sebastián on March 13, 1990, a 24-hour strike was staged by prison officers throughout Spain on March 15, 1990 (continuing longer in certain prisons), in protest at the lack of security.
ETA threatened to attack all officials of the Justice and Interior Ministries as "military targets" .
ETA in early 1989 issued threats against leaders of the Basque Nationalist Party (Partido Nacionalista Vasco — PNV) and other moderate Basque parties for having "sold out" to the government.
ETA actions outside Basque region
Two police officers were killed and four injured when a booby-trapped car exploded outside Alcalá-Meco prison near Madrid on May 8, 1989.
Two Army officers were shot dead in central Madrid on July 19 and their driver was seriously wounded.
Carmen Tagle, a senior state prosecutor involved in court cases against ETA, was shot dead on Sept. 12 in Madrid.
A colonel was killed and his chauffeur wounded in Madrid on Nov. 17 and another colonel was wounded in Valencia on Dec. 15.
In the Netherlands, ETA on Nov. 13 tried to murder a Spanish diplomat in The Hague and planted bombs at the Spanish embassy; the Spanish embassy was again attacked on Dec. 6.
Parcel bombs sent in early 1990 to a retired Army officer in Valencia, to a prosecutor who had investigated the 1987 Barcelona supermarket bombing [see p. 35851], and to the Interior Minister, José Luis Corcuera, were defused.
In a message published in the Basque-language newspaper Egin on March 12 ETA noted that its bombs were directed against "military targets" and called for the resumption of negotiations with the government on a truce.
Dispersal of ETA and other prisoners
Following the breakdown of the Algiers talks in early 1989 the Ministry of Justice announced on May 9, 1989, that ETA prisoners and others held for terrorist offences were to be dispersed to prisons throughout the country and to have their separate status and special concessions withdrawn [see also p. 36628].
The primary intention was to end ETA's and other groups' "sanctuaries" in prisons, notably in the two high-security prisons of Herrera de la Mancha and Alcalá-Meco.
The move would also, it was hoped, create the conditions for more ETA prisoners to apply for "reinsertion" , whereby they were offered an amnesty in return for a renunciation of violence.
In the second half of 1989 about one-third of convicted ETA prisoners were also reclassified to make them eligible for early release.
HB councillors in October occupied 140 town halls in the Basque region and in Navarra to protest against the dispersal.
In response to the dispersal decision ETA intensified an existing letter-bomb campaign which had been directed against prison officers since early 1989.
A letter bomb had in March wounded three at a prison officers' union headquarters; another killed an officer's mother in Granada on Aug. 11.
A parcel bomb addressed to an HB leader on Sept. 20 killed a postman in Rentería in the Basque region.
No organization claimed responsibility and it was widely speculated that it had been a mistake by ETA.
Expulsions of "Etarras" from Algeria
Algeria on May 9, 1989, expelled nine ETA members to Cape Verde, and several more were flown to the Dominican Republic in September [for April 1989 expulsions see p. 36597; for November 1986 agreement by Algeria to accept ETA members see p. 35800].
The 11 who officially remained were expelled to Venezuela on May 28.
ETA trials
The Audencia Nacional (National High Court) on Oct. 11, 1989, sentenced ETA members José Antonio López Ruiz and José Miguel Latasa Guetaria "Fermín" to 42 years' imprisonment each, and two others to 36 and 29 years, for attacks and murders dating back to 1984.
Four members of ETA's "Madrid commando" , José Ignacio de Juana, Antonio Troitiño Arranz, Inmaculada Noble and Iñés del Río Prada, were sentenced on Nov. 29 to 348 years in total for their part in the murder of three Army officers, including Ricardo Sáenz de Inestrillas, in June 1986 [see p. 34825]; one other, Estebán Estebán Nieto, was acquitted.
All five were already serving sentences of more than 30 years, three of them (including Nieto) for blowing up a police bus in 1986 [see p. 37050].
ETA arrests in France
A veteran ETA leader, José Manuel Pagoaga Galléstegui, was taken into detention in the French Basque region in June 1989; Eloy Uriarte Díaz de Guereño, regarded as number three in the organizational leadership (and also known as "Señor Robles" ), was arrested on July 11 in Bayonne, south-west France, but was released on July 13 subject to his restriction to a particular area.
Other ETA leaders had been detained in France in April.
In May 1989 Judge Baltasar Garzón travelled to Paris to question the senior ETA leaders Santiago Arróspide Sarasola ( "Santi Potros" — arrested in Anglet in September 1987), José Antonio Urrutikoetxea Bengoetxea ( "Josu Ternera" — arrested on Jan. 11, 1989, in Bayonne — see p. 36406, where the date is wrongly given as Jan. 12), Elena Beloki Resa (arrested with Urrutikoetxea) and Mariano Estebán González Betolaza (arrested on April 14 in Montpellier, southern France); in July Garzón requested the Spanish government to begin extradition proceedings against Arróspide for his part in organizing a May 1987 attack on the Madrid Civil Guard headquarters in which one person was killed.
Arróspide [see also p. 34182]was at the time in a Paris prison awaiting trial for offences committed in France, and his extradition had already been sought for the 1987 supermarket bombing in Barcelona [for which see p. 35851].
A French judge on Jan. 12, 1990, ordered the arrest of ETA leaders Francisco Múgika Garmendía, José Javier Zabaleta Elósegui, José Arcos and José Arregui Erostarbe for questioning about an arsenal discovered in Anglet in December 1989.
Continuing investigation into GAL
The judicial investigation [see p. 36629]into the activities and alleged links with the Spanish authorities of the extreme right anti-Basque Anti-terrorist Liberation Group (Grupo Antiterrorista de Liberación — GAL), responsible for some 28 murders and the wounding of 17 others between October 1983 and July 1987 in the French Basque country, continued into 1990.
The former head of an Interior Ministry special operations group, Commissioner Francisco Alvarez (accused of organizing an attempt to kidnap an ETA member, José María Larretxea Goni, in October 1983 for GAL), told the investigating judge in November 1989 that José Amedo Fouce, formerly of the Basque police [ibid.], had been directly answerable to the chief of the Bilbao Regional Information Brigade as regards his police activities including those outside his immediate police area.
He named Miguel Planchuelo Herresánchez as the chief responsible in 1983-84, and also implicated three successive chiefs.
Dominique Thomas, who had surrendered to the French authorities in July 1988 after being sought in connection with GAL [see p. 36629], and who had since then been detained in Gradignan (Gironde), was released in September 1989.
GRAPO developments
The Galician separatist movement the First of October Anti-Fascist Resistance Group (Grupo de Resistencia Anti-fascista Primero de Octubre — GRAPO) claimed responsibility for killing two Civil Guards in Santiago de Compostela (north-west Spain) on March 10, 1989 [see p. 36777].
The organization carried out a bank robbery in Castellón on July 12 which was thought to have provided it with the means to launch a new offensive, and was held responsible for wounding two Army officers in Madrid on Dec. 13 and Valencia on Dec. 15, for killing a police officer in Barcelona on Dec. 18 and for killing two Civil Guards in Gijón, northern Spain, on Dec. 28.
About 60 GRAPO prisoners went on a hunger strike on Nov. 30 in protest against their dispersal to prisons throughout Spain.
By the end of May one prisoner had died, but there were no reports of the strike having ended, the authorities having ordered in mid-February that the prisoners should be force-fed.
A hospital doctor who had been involved in the force-feeding was shot dead by GRAPO in Zaragoza on March 27, provoking a two-hour strike by doctors throughout Spain.
Arrest of Shi'ite group
A Shi'ite ring apparently containing some members of the extremist Iranian-backed Hezbollah group was dismantled on Nov. 24, 1989, when police arrested eight people in Valencia and Madrid and seized at least 120 kg of explosives.
The group had been under surveillance since arriving in Valencia from Cyprus by sea in September.
Police claimed that the group were planning attacks on international targets in Spain and elsewhere in Europe.
Drugs
The United Kingdom and Spain on June 26, 1989, signed an agreement to extend the powers of the police to combat drug trafficking in each other 's country.
Customs officers from each country would be allowed to travel to either country in pursuit of suspected traffickers.
An agreement to combat drug trafficking at sea was signed with Italy on March 23, 1990.
Nearly 400 people were arrested and a total of 500 kg of drugs seized on Aug. 25-27, 1989, in about 40 resorts along the Mediterranean coast as well as in Majorca, Ibiza, Tenerife, Cádiz and Seville during a crackdown on drug operators.
Some 4,000 police and customs officers took part and stolen cars, cash and weapons were also seized.
Nearly 300 kg of pure cocaine belonging to the Colombian Medellín cartel was seized in Madrid on Jan. 8, 1990, and 11 Colombians and one Venezuelan were arrested.
A Spanish senator, Enrique Bolín Peres Argemi, was sentenced on Sept. 1, 1989, in Gibraltar to four months' imprisonment for cocaine possession.
He was freed on Sept. 19 and returned to Spain.
ECONOMY
Economic indicators
GDP growth 5.2% (1989)
Current-account balance -US$11,640 m. (1989)
Trade balance -US$29,000 m. (1989)
Overall balance of payments +US$7,200 m. (1988)
Budget deficit (as % of GNP) 1.7% (1989)
Total external public debt US$33,000 m. (1988)
Gross domestic product US$300,000 m. (1987)
Inflation rate 6.9% (1989)
Unemployment 16.9% (1989)
Principal trading partners France, West Germany, UK, Italy 
1990 budget
The Economy and Finance Minister, Carlos Solchaga, on March 1, 1990, presented the draft 1990 budget to the Cortes, delayed because of the October general election.
The budget deficit was to be restricted to 1.6 per cent of gross domestic product (GDP), compared with 3 per cent in 1989.
State expenditure would increase by 10.3 per cent in real terms, and spending on education, justice and public works was to be increased.
For 1990 real GDP growth was targeted at 4 per cent and inflation at 5.7 per cent.
Economic measures
In the third economic package in 1989 [for January and May measures see p. 36778], measures were adopted by the Cabinet on July 7 with the aim of cooling the economy by lowering inflation (then running at an annual rate of 6 per cent), by restricting economic growth to 4.5 per cent (from its current annual rate of 6 per cent ), and by withdrawing more than 500,000 million ptas from circulation, and also to stop tax fraud.
Bank liquidity reserve ratios were raised from 18 to 19 per cent, and withholding taxes on high-yielding investment accounts were raised from 20 to 25 per cent .
A widely subscribed single premium life insurance policy (known as the prima unica) was suspended because most of the money invested had never been taxed; insurers were to be legally obliged to disclose the names of policy holders, and primas unicas would in future be subject to withholding taxes.
Six weeks before the October general election, figures in mid-September showed that inflation had dropped sharply in August, rising only 0.2 per cent, while unemployment had fallen the same month to 16.6 per cent of the active workforce, the lowest level since 1982.
Labour relations
Against the background of a broad spectrum of strikes organized on April 21, April 27 and June 2, 1989, by the socialist General Workers' Union (Unión General de Trabajadores — UGT) and the communist Workers' Commissions (Comisiones Obreras — CCOO), the UGT executive decided for the first time on April 25 to give no recommendation to its members to vote for the PSOE in the European Parliament elections in June 1989, on the grounds that a trade union could not be expected to support a government which pursued economic and social policies which were hostile to workers.
The UGT on May 1 held parades and demonstrations jointly with the CCOO for the first time in many years.
The UGT, the CCOO and the Spanish Confederation of Employers' Organizations (Confederación Española de Organizaciones Empresariales — CEOE) agreed at a meeting with Solchaga on Dec. 27 to recommence talks on a social pact which had foundered almost a year previously [see pp. 36406; 36777].
Talks accordingly began on Jan. 11, 1990, on a similar programme to that discussed a year before, based on providing a broader social dimension to the government's economic policies.
Agreement in principle was reached on Jan. 25 on increasing public employees' benefits and pensions by 9 per cent on average and introducing parity between the minimum pension and the minimum wage.
Public employees would also receive a 1.2 per cent pay rise and a lump sum over and above any pay increases negotiated for 1990, and their right to collective bargaining was recognized.
Pensioners and workers would be entitled to automatic revision of income if inflation exceeded forecasts.
[For signature of outline agreement on this issue in March 1990 see p. 37330.]
Stock market reform
A broad reform of the four stock markets (Madrid, Valencia, Barcelona and Bilbao) went into force on July 29, 1989, with the introduction of new trading regulations under legislation passed a year previously.
Government-licensed stockbrokers (agentes) ceased to exist as such and were required to re-register as brokers or dealers.
Luis Carlos Croissier Batista, who had been Industry and Energy Minister in 1986-1988, became head of the new Comisión Nacional del Mercado de Valores, the national stock market commission regulating the new stock markets.
Flotation of Repsol — Decision on utilities
The partial privatization of the state-owned oil company Repsol began on April 20, 1989, with the flotation of 26.5 per cent of its capital, worth US$1,140 million.
Trading began on May 11 and attracted 400,000 private shareholders.
Repsol, launched in 1987, controlled 51 per cent of Spain's refining capacity and was Europe's seventh largest oil company.
The Minister of Industry and Energy, José Claudio Aranzadi Martínez, stated in early October that foreign companies would not be permitted to buy into Spanish utilities.
This followed an offer by a West German company, Rheinisch-Westfalisches Elektrizität (RWE), to buy 5 per cent of Unión Fenosa, one of Spain's largest power suppliers.
The government was anxious to maintain its hold on the energy industry while a national energy plan was being drawn up for 1992 and with a post-1992 liberalization of the power supply market in mind.
Banking developments
Banco de Bilbao and Banco de Vizcaya merged in October 1988 to form Banco Bilbao-Vizcaya (BBV).
However, due to personal rivalries and conflicting management styles, problems arose following the death on Dec. 12, 1989, of one of its co-presidents, Pedro Toledo (Banco de Vizcaya).
The two banks had agreed that BBV should be co-chaired for four years by a member from each side (the other co-president being José Angel Sánchez Asiaín — Banco de Bilbao), but Banco de Bilbao was anxious to appoint a single president.
Intervention by the governor of the central bank, Banco de España, ensued on Jan. 17, 1990, and the two sides agreed on Jan. 20 to appoint a single president, Emilio Ybarra y Churruca, the former deputy president of Banco de Bilbao and BBV's largest single shareholder, and also appointed two vice-presidents, one from each bank, and reorganized the board.
A planned merger between two of the country's largest commercial banks, Banco Español de Crédito (Banesto) and Banco Central, which would have had combined assets of $46,000 million, was cancelled in February 1989, ending a process which had begun in May 1988.
Two large savings banks, Caja de Pensiones and Caixa de Barcelona, decided on Nov. 3, 1989, to begin a merger process.
End to state television monopoly
The government on Aug. 25, 1989, awarded contracts to three private television channels — Canal Plus (25 per cent French-owned), Telecinco (25 per cent owned by the Italian magnate Silvio Berlusconi) and the Spanish-owned Antena 3 — breaking the 33-year monopoly of the state company TVE and finally fulfilling the constitutional requirement for pluralism in the media with respect to television.
Jordi García Candau, a journalist and lawyer, was on Feb. 26, 1990, appointed director-general of Radio Televisión Española (RTVE), replacing Luis Solana who had been appointed at the beginning of 1989 [see p. 36776].
Nuclear energy
The Ministry of Industry and Energy on Nov. 29, 1989, ordered the closure of the Vandellòs 1 nuclear reactor near Tarragona (north-eastern Spain) while safety modifications were carried out which would take an estimated two years.
This followed a serious accident at the reactor on Oct. 19 which had already led to its temporary closure [see p. 36984].
In a report on the accident the Nuclear Safety Council (CSN) criticized safety and emergency procedures at Vandellòs and noted that the operating company Hifrensa had not reported the accident promptly.
Thousands of demonstrators had on Oct. 30 and Nov. 4, 1989, and again on March 18, 1990, demanded that Vandellòs 1 should be dismantled, and the Catalan parliament had approved a resolution on Nov. 17, 1989, calling for its permanent closure.
Natural disasters — Mining accidents and strikes — Zaragoza nightclub fire
Freak storms and torrential rains on Sept. 4-7, 1989, caused serious flooding in the eastern provinces of Valencia, Alicante, Murcia and Almeria and on the islands of Majorca and Ibiza, parts of which were declared disaster areas.
At least 14 people were killed.
Heavy rains and high winds of up to 100 km an hour affected Galicia, the Cantabrian coast and the provinces of Castille-León and Extremadura on Dec. 20-21, and heavy rains accompanied by high winds caused flooding in Andalucia on Dec. 26, a police officer losing his life.
A drought, described as the most severe since 1945, had worsened in mid-1989, affecting Andalucia and Castille-León in particular but also unprecedentedly the north-western region of Galicia.
Irrigation was cut off by the authorities on Aug. 22 in the Andalucian Guadalquivir valley (south-western Spain), and also in Castille-La Mancha at the beginning of October.
Water rationing was introduced in January 1990 in the Basque region, one of Spain's rainiest areas.
Andalucia was further affected by a third outbreak in two years of African equine fever at the end of July 1989, which threatened the lives of large numbers of horses and raised doubts about equestrian events being held in Barcelona in the 1992 Olympics.
Four miners were killed after fire broke out on an underground conveyor belt in Asturias on Dec. 22, while some 280 others escaped.
A general strike was organized in Asturian mines on Dec. 26 over the issue of safety.
There was another accident on Dec. 29 in which two more miners were killed, and this was followed by a further 24-hour strike on Jan. 2, 1990.
More than 70,000 miners went on strike on March 1 in protest at European Community (EC) plans to reduce state subsidies to the coal industry.
A total of 43 people died on Jan. 14, most of them from toxic cyanide fumes, after a fire broke out at a Zaragoza nightclub.
Four people were injured, one severely, and 84 escaped unharmed.
FOREIGN
The Prime Minister, Felipe González, and the French President, François Mitterrand, met for their third bilateral summit in Valladolid on Oct. 23-24, 1989.
With no contentious bilateral issues outstanding, talks centred around European unity, developments in Eastern Europe and action against drugs, against the background of a drug conference involving Spain, Italy and the United States as well as Colombia, Peru and Bolivia, which opened in Madrid on Oct. 24.
[For November 1988 Franco-Spanish summit see p. 36778.]
The then Prime Minister of Turkey, Turgut Özal,(who became President in November 1989) visited Spain on Sept. 14-15, 1989, accompanied by a party of about 30 businesspeople.
It was the first visit by a Turkish head of government since 1959 and talks centred around the purchase by Turkey of transport aircraft and weaponry, economic relations between the two countries and Turkey's application for EC membership.
King Juan Carlos and Queen Sofia paid a state visit to Poland on Oct. 3-5 and González visited Hungary on Nov. 9-10.
King Hassan II of Morocco arrived in Spain on Sept. 25, 1989, for his first state visit.
Talks centred on increasing bilateral trade and plans for a tunnel or bridge link between the two countries.
At a dinner hosted by King Juan Carlos, King Hassan avoided mention of Morocco's claim to the Spanish-administered North African enclaves of Ceuta and Melilla, but King Juan Carlos repeated his call for a referendum to be held in Western Sahara (Spain's former colony) to allow the people to decide their own future.
A previously planned visit to Spain by the Moroccan king had been cancelled after Spain voted in November 1988 in favour of a UN General Assembly resolution proposing the organization of a referendum [see p. 36780].
After Morocco announced greatly increased fines for illegal fishing in its waters, fishermen making up about half the Spanish fishing fleet in March 1990 blockaded the ports of Algeciras, Almería, Huelva and Málaga, and organized a 24-hour general strike in the Algeciras area on March 13.
Civil Guards supported by the Navy put an end to the Málaga blockade on March 8, and the Almería blockade ended on March 12, but action continued in Algeciras.
Spanish fishermen continually faced fines for fishing in Moroccan waters under an agreement signed between Morocco and the EC in February 1988 [see p. 35855], and the European Commission finally agreed to convene a meeting to review the agreement of the mixed committee originally given the responsibility of supervising the agreement.
Under a new agreement signed between Morocco and the EC on March 21, 1990, Spain would pay Morocco compensation for the economic damage which it suffered during the blockade of Algeciras which was normally extensively used by Morocco, and certain matters pertaining to fines were clarified.
EUROPE
PORTUGAL
BASIC DATA
Area: 92,072 sq km(incl. inland water).
Population: 10,162,000 (1988).
Capital: Lisbon.
Language: Portuguese.
Religion: Christianity (Roman Catholic).
Av. life expectancy: 74 yrs (1988).
Armed forces: 75,300 (47,200 conscripts)(1989).
GNP per capita: US$3,670 (1988).
Currency: escudo (US$1.00=Esc148.4578 as at June 11, 1990).
The Republic of Portugal, declared in 1910, was between 1926 and 1974 a right-wing dictatorship.
In April 1974 the regime was overthrown in a bloodless coup led by young Army officers, and in 1976 a new democratic Constitution was promulgated.
According to the provisions of the 1976 Constitution (with revisions made in 1982, and in 1989 — see p. 36857) the head of state is the President (currently Mário Soares), elected by universal adult suffrage for a five-year term.
The President in turn appoints the Prime Minister and, on the latter's recommendation, the other members of the Council of Ministers.
Legislative authority is vested in the unicameral 250-member Assembly of the Republic, elected by universal adult suffrage for up to four years under a system of proportional representation.
Elections held on July 19, 1987 [see pp. 35388-90], following a vote of no confidence in the minority government of the Social Democratic Party (Partido Social Demócrata — PSD), returned the PSD to parliament with an outright majority; the country's first majority government since 1974 was subsequently formed on Aug. 17, 1987, by the Prime Minister, Aníbal Cavaco Silva.
POLITICS
Municipal elections
In local elections on Dec. 17, 1989 [see also p. 37197], the PSD won 31.46 per cent of the vote (as compared with 50.2 per cent in the July 1987 general election when it had become the only party in the post-1974 era to secure an absolute parliamentary majority — see pp. 35388-90).
The reverses were attributed by observers to the impact of inflation and credit controls and the frustration of some of the expectations aroused by recent economic growth.
Another factor was a governmental style widely perceived to be technocratic and averse to consultation.
The Socialist Party (Partido Socialista — PS) emerged with 32.3 per cent as the largest party, attributed partly to government unpopularity but also to the emergence of Jorge Sampaio, elected PS secretary-general in January 1989 [see p. 36945], as a credible successor to Mário Soares at the party's head and to electoral pragmatism which enabled the party to broaden its base.
The two other major opposition parties, the Portuguese Communist Party (Partido Comunista Português — PCP) and the Party of the Democratic Social Centre (Partido do Centro Democrático Social — CDS), won 13 and 9 per cent respectively, emphasizing that the party system had essentially become bipolar with a contest for the middle ground between the PSD and the PS as its major feature.
The elections were also regarded as marking the end of "cohabitation" between President Mário Soares, a former secretary-general of the PS, and the PSD government of Prime Minister Aníbal Cavaco Silva.
In the preceding months the PS had sought to step up pressure on the government; it had joined with the PCP in tabling a censure motion in parliament in October 1989 attacking the government for its low ethical standards; although the motion was defeated, attention was again turned to the then Finance Minister, Miguel Ribeiro Cadilhe, following allegations early in the year of his financial misconduct [see p. 36945].
The PSD announced on April 30, 1990, that it would not put up a candidate against Soares in the next presidential elections, due in 1991.
PCP extraordinary congress
PCP electoral reverses and international changes led to the convening of a special congress in May 1990 at the instigation of Vital Martins Moreira, a reformist supported by party intellectuals and trade union allies.
The party's leadership, however, subsequently sought to limit the congress's terms of reference, having in January 1990 expelled a leading member, Zita Sebrea, who had advocated changing the party's name and abandoning democratic centralism and eliminating Marxist-Leninism from party policy.
At the congress on May 20, delegates reaffirmed the party's hardline stance, re-electing as secretary-general Alvaro Cunhal, 76, who had led the party since 1961 and was last re-elected in 1988 [for December 1988 congress see p. 36945].
A new post of deputy secretary-general was created and Carlos Carvalhos, 48, was elected to the post.
An economist and member of the European Parliament (EP), Carvalhos was expected eventually to succeed Cunhal.
Renunciation of armed struggle by Carvalho
Following the 1989 release from prison of Maj. Otelo Saraiva de Carvalho, the leader of the most radical military faction in the upheavals of 1974 [see p. 36945], it was announced in February 1990 that he had renounced the armed struggle.
His announcement underlined the extent to which revolutionary political possibilities had been foreclosed.
Murder of PSR leader
The leader of the Revolutionary Socialist Party (Partido Socialista Revolucionário — PSR), Francisco Louca, was murdered in October 1989 by thugs identified as skinheads.
They were believed to have sprung from the ranks of alienated youths who had espoused ultra-right-wing political causes.
Resignation of PRD leader
Hermínio Fernandes Martinho, the president of the Democratic Renewal Party (Partido Renovador Democrático — PRD), which had been launched in 1985 in support of the then President, Gen. António dos Santos Ramalho Eanes [see p. 33740], resigned in February 1990.
Martinho's resignation was seen as representing the development of a long-term crisis within a party which had failed to find a suitable replacement for its original leader and whose popular support had been reduced to below 5 per cent of the vote.
Discontent over armed forces pay
In January 1990 differences arose between Soares and Cavaco Silva over armed forces pay.
Soares, as Commander-in-Chief, urged the government to respond to military pressure for changes in pay and professional career structures.
He also threatened the use of his veto to force negotiations to a conclusion.
Later in the month, however, agreements were reached which pre-emptied a crisis although discontent in the military remained and had been a factor in Enrico de Melo's resignation as Defence Minister at the beginning of the year [for which see p. 37197].
ECONOMY
Economic indicators
GDP growth 5.4% (1989)
Current-account balance -US$1,060 m. (1988)
Trade balance -US$5,200 m. (1989)
Budget deficit (as % of GDP) 4.3% (1989)
Total external debt US$16,100 m. (1988)
Ratio of debt to GDP 42% (August 1988)
Inflation rate 12.6% (1989)
Unemployment 5.3% (1989)
Principal trading partner EC 
Privatization
The 1974-76 revolution left 90 per cent of Portugal's financial sector and 53 per cent of all its fixed investment in state hands.
The PSD's post-1987 free market policies encouraged private-sector growth but it was only after the 1989 constitutional changes [see p. 36857]that a more radical privatization programme designed to break up public monopolies could go ahead.
In September 1989 a draft law was presented which aimed to facilitate a large-scale privatization programme over the next five years.
In 1990, for example, it was intended to privatize Portugal's largest commercial bank, the Banco Português do Atlântico.
There were also plans to privatize the steel industry and to sell off majority or minority shareholdings in state-owned cement, food processing, pulp, mining and chemical concerns.
Only defence-related industries were clearly exempt from the process.
1990 budget
The 1990 budget, presented in October 1989, sought a 4 per cent growth rate while reducing inflation to between 9.5 and 10.5 per cent.
Expenditure increases of 15 per cent were envisaged, with special emphasis on education and health, which were expected to absorb 39 per cent of total spending.
This acknowledged the need for a better trained workforce and for a previous lack of expenditure in the welfare sphere.
The budget deficit was expected to grow from Esc439,000 million in 1989 to Esc601,000 million in 1990, or around 7.5 per cent of gross domestic product (GDP)(the 1989 figure of 4.3 per cent of GDP being unusually low, partly because of accelerated revenue collection as a result of tax reforms).
According to Cadilhe, the then Finance Minister, the deficit was entirely explicable in terms of the need to meet interest payments.
Inflation
Provisional figures for the first part of 1990 suggested a lack of progress in combating inflation, which remained over twice the European average.
February's inflation rate showed a 2.3 per cent monthly increase (the biggest monthly rise for four years), representing an annualized rate for early 1990 of just over 13 per cent, substantially above the budget target.
The inflation rate was fuelled by a relatively rapid growth rate which in 1989 reached 5.4 per cent.
Equally, large European Community (EC) grants had been attracted to Portugal which frequently lacked the infrastructure or administrative machinery necessary to absorb them in the most productive manner.
A further factor responsible for injecting money into the economy had been an increase in foreign investment which in 1989 had more than doubled.
Labour relations
Labour relations were adversely affected by inflation, the impact of credit controls, privatization plans, the government's refusal to use existing consultative machinery and new laws allowing for easier legal dismissals.
Thus late 1989 witnessed continuing public-sector strikes in the course of which the government sought consistently to resist significant wage increases, resulting in a limited rapprochement between the pro-communist General Confederation of Portuguese Workers (CGTP) and the General Union of Portuguese Workers (UGTP — created to combat communist influence in the labour movement).
[For industrial unrest in late 1988-early 1989 see p. 36946.]
FOREIGN
Portugal's overriding concern in late 1989 and early 1990 was to adjust to the implications of changes in Eastern Europe.
Visits to Hungary and Czechoslovakia by Soares in late 1989 indicated an intention to acquire some influence in the transformed Eastern Europe and to seize fresh economic opportunities.
In December 1989 the government also declared its intention to intensify relationships with East Germany.
(About 1 per cent of the volume of Portugal's trade in 1985-88 was with Eastern Europe.)
Cavaco Silva indicated in January 1990 his government's desire to renegotiate the 1951 United States-Portuguese treaty governing the use of US bases due to expire in February 1991 [see also pp. 36108; 36946].
The suggested model was the USA's agreement with Spain [see p. 36777], and the stated aim was to take account of the changed international situation.
In March 1990 Cavaco Silva used a meeting with Michel Rocard, the Prime Minister of France, to press for a "south European development pole" .
This appeal arose against the background of anxieties that the channelling of European Community (EC) aid to Eastern Europe could entail the neglect of the interests of the EC's less developed southern members.
During a meeting in February 1990 between Cavaco Silva and Felipe González Márquez, the Prime Minister of Spain, it was agreed to place the relationships of their two countries on the same institutionalized basis as Franco-Spanish relations, with comparable provision for regular ministerial meetings.
Special stress was laid upon the need to co-ordinate policies towards Eastern Europe.
A subsequent agreement removed obstacles which Spain had earlier placed in the way of Portugal's importation of French-generated electricity.
EUROPE
GIBRALTAR
BASIC DATA
Area: 5.5 sq km.
Population: 30,127 (1988).
Languages: English (official); Spanish.
Religion: Christianity (majority Roman Catholic); Islam and Judaism (minorities).
Armed forces: The Gibraltar Regiment (totalling 53 members in 1988) and Royal Navy Reserve Unit; 1,700 British military personnel (1989), to be reduced by nearly half by early 1991 [see also below].
GNP per capita: US$3,500-$5,999 (1988 est.).
Currency: Gibraltar pound (US$1.00=G£0.6024 as at May 4, 1990).
Sovereignty over the strategically important peninsula of Gibraltar was granted to the United Kingdom by the 1713 Treaty of Utrecht but this has since been disputed by Spain.
Under its 1969 Constitution the "City of Gibraltar" was described as "part of Her Majesty's dominions" .
It has a Governor (currently Adml.
Sir Derek Reffell, for whose appointment see below) with executive authority, a Gibraltar Council under a Chief Minister, and a House of Assembly comprising a Speaker (appointed by the Governor), two ex-officio members and 15 elected members serving a four-year term.
In parliamentary elections on March 24, 1988 [see p. 36040], the Gibraltar Socialist Labour Party (GSLP) won eight of the elective seats and the Gibraltar Labour Party-Association for the Advancement of Civil Rights (GLP-AACR) the remaining seven.
The GSLP leader, José (Joe) Bossano, accordingly replaced Adolfo Canepa (GLP-AACR) as Chief Minister.
Three months earlier Canepa had himself taken over from Sir Joshua Hassan when the latter resigned after over 40 years as Gibraltar's dominant politician [see p. 35794].
POLITICS/FOREIGN
During a visit to Gibraltar on Jan. 30, 1989, Sir Geoffrey Howe, the then United Kingdom Secretary of State for Foreign and Commonwealth Affairs, confirmed unofficial reports that the UK government intended to reduce its troop numbers in Gibraltar by withdrawing in 1991 the Army battalion (of nearly 800 men) stationed there.
(The Royal Navy and Air Force would nevertheless continue to maintain their presence — then amounting to around 900 personnel — on the peninsula.)
Annual revenues from military personnel were estimated to total £40,000,000 (about US$70,000,000), and in addition the UK Ministry of Defence employed about 1,700 Gibraltarians — 12 per cent of the workforce.
Howe stressed the UK government's "continuing commitment to the Gibraltarian people" , emphasizing that the decision represented "a sensible adjustment of scarce defence resources" , since there was "no longer a threat from Spain" .
Bossano described the cutbacks as "not as drastic as was being postulated" .
However, Bossano continued to refuse to give his government's assent to a December 1987 Anglo-Spanish agreement providing for Spanish airlines to use Gibraltar's airport [see p. 35794].
The issue remained unresolved at annual Anglo-Spanish Foreign-Minister-level discussions in February 1989 in London which Bossano refused to attend.
At talks on Feb. 26, 1990, in Madrid, the Spanish capital, Francisco Fernández Ordóñez, the Spanish Foreign Minister, warned that his government would study the feasibility of a second airport in the area.
At the February 1990 meeting Ordóñez and Douglas Hurd, by then UK Secretary of State for Foreign and Commonwealth Affairs, also agreed to co-operate in preventing Gibraltar from becoming a base for drug trafficking and its burgeoning offshore finance companies from becoming a centre for money laundering.
They agreed to extend to Gibraltar a 1985 Anglo-Spanish extradition treaty [see p. 34179], a 1989 agreement on the prevention and suppression of illegal drug trafficking, and an agreement on customs co-operation.
On the sovereignty issue Ordóñez declared that "the colony of Gibraltar belongs to the past" , while Hurd reiterated that nothing could be done which went against the will of the Gibraltarians.
Relations between the UK and Spain had become strained following an incident on June 30, 1989, in which four Spanish customs officers were arrested and charged with illegal entry and possession of firearms after they had entered the territory in hot pursuit of three alleged Gibraltarian tobacco smugglers.
On Dec. 1, 1989, Adml.
Sir Derek Reffell took over as Governor and Commander-in-Chief in place of Air Chief Marshal Sir Peter Terry.
ECONOMY
Economic situation
Gross national product (GNP) in 1986-87 was US$182,000,000; gross domestic product (GDP) growth in 1987 was estimated at 10.8 per cent.
At the end of 1987, employment was up by 5 per cent to 13,000.
Revenues from tourism in 1988 totalled £30,000,000.
There were 24,000 registered companies in January 1989; in August, 25 banks had assets totalling the equivalent of $2,000 million.
Joint discussions on development
On Jan. 10, 1989, Bossano met the mayor of the Spanish border town of La Línea to discuss the joint development of the area which could include Spanish use of the port at Gibraltar (although not of the airport).
EUROPE
ANDORRA
BASIC DATA
Area: 467 sq km.
Population: 46,976 (1986 census).
Capital: Andorra la Vella.
Languages: Catalan (official); French and Spanish.
Religion: Christianity (majority Roman Catholic).
GDP per capita: US$13,000 (1987).
Currency: French franc and Spanish peseta (US$1.00=F5.6099=104.4277 ptas as at May 4, 1990).
The President of France and the Bishop of Urgel (in Spain), who are represented in Andorra by the Veguer de França and the Veguer Episcopal respectively, hold joint suzerainty over the Co-principality of Andorra.
There is also a permanent delegation for Andorran affairs in the co-principality headed respectively by the prefect of the French department of Pyrénées-Orientales and a vicar-general from the Spanish Urgel diocese.
The 28-member Consell General de las Valls (General Council of the Valleys), elected for a four-year term, has, since reforms introduced in 1981, appointed an Executive Council, introducing for the first time a separation between the executive and legislative arms of government.
A general election was held in December 1989 and a new President of the Executive Council was sworn in in January 1990 [see pp. 37135; 37198].
POLITICS
In April 1989 a "law on individual rights" was approved which for the first time explicitly recognized the 1948 UN Declaration of Human Rights.
However, the implementation of the Declaration was left up to the relevant ministers and as of early 1990 political parties, trade unions, strikes, civil marriage, divorce and gambling were still not permitted.
ECONOMY/FOREIGN
Spanish accession to the European Communities (EC) in January 1986 [see p. 34244]obliged Andorra to seek its own relations with the EC.
A trade agreement was due to have been concluded within two years of Spanish accession but it was not until Feb. 19, 1988, that the Andorran government appointed a negotiating team.
On Sept. 14, 1989, an agreement was eventually initialled which provided for a customs union with the EC whereby industrial goods would flow freely between Andorra and the EC but the EC's external tariffs would be applied by Andorra to third countries.
On March 15, 1990, the 28 members of the General Council unanimously approved the treaty, the country's first international treaty for 700 years.
EUROPE
TURKEY
BASIC DATA
Area: 779,452 sq km.
Population: 53,772,000 (1988).
Capital: Ankara.
Languages: Turkish (90%), Kurdish (7%).
Religion: Islam.
Av. life expectancy: 64 yrs (1988).
Armed forces: 650,900 (575,800 conscripts)(1989).
GNP per capita: US$1,280 (1988).
Currency: Turkish lira (US$1=TL2,614.6441 as at June 11, 1990).
The Republic of Turkey, consisting of Thrace (Turkey in Europe) and Anatolia (Turkey in Asia), was declared in 1922, after the abolition of the sultanate.
Following a military coup in 1980 legislative and executive powers were assumed by a National Security Council (NSC) led by Gen. Kenan Evren, which in October 1981 set up a Consultative Assembly to draft a new constitution which was approved by referendum in November 1982.
The Constitution provided for a single-chamber legislature, the Grand National Assembly (GNA), first elected in November 1983, and for an executive President, to be elected by the Assembly for a seven-year term and with wide-ranging powers.
As the incumbent President of the NSC Evren continued as head of state for an "interim" seven-year term.
In the general election of Nov. 29, 1987 [see pp. 35909-10], the Motherland Party (Anatavan Partisi — ANAP) led by Turgut Özal was returned to power with an overwhelming majority in the GNA (newly enlarged from 400 to 450 seats) under a new system of proportional representation.
On Oct. 31, 1989 [see p. 36985], Özal was elected by the GNA to succeed Evren as President, taking office on Nov. 9.
Yildirim Akbulut succeeded Özal as Prime Minister [see p. 37051].
Yildirim Akbulut Prime Minister Ali Bozer Deputy Prime Minister; Minister of State; Foreign Affairs Gunes Taner Minister of State Ismet Ozarslan Minister of State Kamran Inan Minister of State Ercument Konukman Minister of State Mehmet Yazar Minister of State Cemil Cicek Minister of State Mehmet Kececiler Minister of State Hüsnü Dogan Minister of State Isin Celebi Minister of State Vehbi Dincerler Minister of State Ibrahim Ozdemir Minister of State Mustafa Tasar Minister of State Kemal Akkaya Minister of State Husamettin Oruc Minister of State Mahmut Oltan Sungurlu Justice Safa Giray National Defence Abdulkadir Aksu Interior Adnan Kahveci Finance and Customs Avni Akyol National Education, Youth and Sports Cengiz Altinkaya Public Works and Housing Halil Sivgin Health and Social Welfare Cengiz Tuncer Communications and Transport Luftullah Kayalar Agriculture, Forests and Village Affairs Imren Aykut Labour and Social Security Sukru Yurur Industry and Commerce Fahrettin Kurt Energy and Natural Resources Namik Kemal Zaybek Culture Ilhan Akuzum Tourism 
Cabinet
POLITICS
Government changes
The resignations in February 1990 of Mesut Yilmaz, the Foreign Minister [see p. 37263], and on March 28 of Ekrem Pakdemirli, the Finance Minister, were reportedly regarded as evidence of the growing alienation of the liberal faction within the ANAP and of a more determined hold within the party of a "Holy Alliance" of Islamic fundamentalists and right-wing nationalists [see also p. 36564].
The appointment of Ali Bozer and Adnan Kahveci, both liberals, as the new Ministers of Foreign Affairs and of Finance and Customs respectively suggested, however, that the power struggle between liberals and conservatives would continue.
The government's fall in popularity in opinion polls to less than 8 per cent, also fuelled speculation that it was in the midst of a serious political crisis.
Other appointments
Upon Akbulut's appointment as Prime Minister in November 1989, his previous post as Speaker of the GNA was taken by Kaya Erdem, an ANAP liberal.
Army commander Gen. Dogan Gures was appointed ground forces commander from Aug. 30, 1989.
Increasing influence of Islamic fundamentalism
A presidential decree on Dec. 28, 1989, cancelled an article in the higher education law resulting from a Constitutional Court ruling of March 1989 which overturned a law permitting the wearing of Islamic head-scarves at universities [see p. 36528].
The decree was in part a response to months of student protest against the court ruling, some of the strongest of which had occurred in November 1989.
It was seen also to reflect the growing strength of the fundamentalist lobby within ANAP believed to be led by a Minister of State, Mehmet Kececiler, who had campaigned publicly for more Islam-oriented legislation.
In early January 1990 the High Education Council (YOK) to lift the ban on female students wearing headscarves while attending classes on campus.
However, on Jan. 13, 1990, Ankara University decided not to withdraw the ban on headscarves for fear that it might provoke unrest on campus.
In December 1989 Kececiler's faction persuaded the government to increase budget spending on the Religious Affairs Department by almost 240 per cent.
Fears of religious extremism were also revived by calls to turn the 6th century cathedral of St Sophia, converted into a mosque in 1453 and a museum since 1934, into a mosque once more, and by attempts in April 1989 to introduce segregated bus services for women students in the city of Konya, 220 km south of Ankara, where fundamentalists controlled the local council.
Moves to lift ban on political parties
In March 1989 Özal, while still Prime Minister, declared that his government intended to repeal Articles 141, 142 and 163 of the penal code banning the formation of communist and religious fundamentalist parties [see also p. 36564].
However, in an address to the European Parliament (EP) on Sept. 27, Özal maintained that the ban on such political parties would be lifted only "when the time is ripe" .
As President, Özal refused to consider an immediate suspension of the constitutional ban on political parties.
On Nov. 21, following his appointment as Prime Minister, Akbulut told an ANAP meeting that his government would continue to discuss possible amendments to Articles 141, 142 and 163.
In the week before Akbulut's statement, 71 deputies from the Social Democratic Populist Party (SDPP) presented parliament with a draft bill which anticipated the annulment of these articles.
Plans for new Marxist party
A group of 150 left-wing intellectuals and politicians, including the writer Aziz Nesin, announced plans in April 1990 to form a Marxist party.
The new grouping, which had the support of three SDPP MPs, was formed to challenge Articles 141 and 142 of the penal code under which communist parties were outlawed.
The announcement of the new party followed the formation of a Democratic Centre Party led by Bedrettin Dalan who, until his defeat in the local elections of March 1989 [p. 36528], had been mayor of Istanbul and a member of the ANAP.
Dalan's party, which held its first meeting on March 15, was expected to attract defectors from the liberal wing of the ANAP.
Resignation of opposition MPs
Nine deputies resigned from the SDPP in November and December 1989 in protest against the expulsion from the party of six Kurdish deputies who had attended a Kurdish conference in Paris in October [see p. 36988].
Their resignation cut the SDPP's representation to 82 seats in the 450-seat parliament.
SDPP leaders in seven south-eastern provinces where Kurds formed a majority also resigned on Nov. 22.
Media developments
A new periodical, Profil, was first published in July 1989, claiming to be the first opposition periodical aimed at the establishment of "an independent forum of thought" .
Cem Dena, head of Turkish Radio and Television (TRT), resigned on April 27, 1989.
Dena, who advocated Greco-Turkish rapprochement, had attracted the hostility of both nationalists and religious fundamentalists.
His successor was named as Kerim Aydin Erdem, who was reported to be sympathetic to the Islamic faction.
SECURITY
Escalation in urban terrorism
During the latter part of 1989 and particularly in early 1990, there was a marked increase in urban terrorism in major cities including Ankara and Istanbul.
On Jan. 31, 1990, a noted jurist and head of the Ankara Bar Association, Muammar Aksoy, was shot dead at his home in Ankara, the hitherto unknown Islamic Revenge Movement claiming responsibility.
Aksoy, who was a member of the SDPP, was known for his outspoken opposition to women wearing headscarves and the conversion of the St Sophia museum into a mosque [see above].
On March 7, 1990, Cetin Emec, a leading journalist on the daily Hürriyet was killed in his car in Istanbul by gunmen who claimed that they belonged to the Turkish Islamic Commandos.
A left-wing group, the Marxist-Leninist Armed Propaganda Union, also claimed responsibility.
Emec, who was regarded as a conservative, had spoken out publicly against religious fundamentalism and had accused Syria of being responsible for the rising wave of terrorism.
On March 8, 1,000 Turkish journalists joined a march in Ankara to honour Emec, demanding tougher action against terrorism.
Other incidents included explosions on April 2 and 3, 1989, which caused damage at the British Cultural Centre in Kizilay; a group calling itself the Revolutionary Left claimed responsibility.
On July 24 a bomb exploded outside the offices of the Istanbul Chamber of Industry causing some damage but no casualties.
On Aug. 16 and 17 explosions killed a child in Aydin and damaged court buildings in Istanbul.
Responsibility was claimed by the outlawed left-wing movement, Dev Sol ( "Revolutionary Way" ).
In separate incidents in November a journalist was shot dead and bombs caused damage to the Istanbul offices of ANAP.
On Jan. 24, 1990, a man carrying a bomb died while attempting to blow up the Istanbul stock exchange.
In February unknown gunmen killed Col. (retd) Rifat Ugurlutan, allegedly for his involvement in the activities of the security services, while on March 10 a police officer was assassinated in Istanbul by members of Dev Sol allegedly for his part in a 1989 May Day shooting incident [p. 36668].
On March 11 anti-terrorist forces stormed a house in Istanbul where three hostages had been held for 17 hours by members of the underground Turkish Revolutionary Party; a police officer and a hostage were killed.
On March 27 three Turkish colonels accredited to the North Atlantic Treaty Organization (NATO) were killed in Brussels.
On March 27, 1990, a military court sentenced to death three members of Dev Sol for acts of "political violence" .
Amnesty International report on torture — Other allegations of torture
A report by the human rights organization Amnesty International of Oct. 31, 1989, claimed that more than 500 people had been tortured since the beginning of 1989, and that the use of torture had continued "unabated" despite Turkey's ratification of international agreements against torture [see pp. 35984; 36565].
It further alleged that 10 prisoners died in 1989 [for death in August of two Kurdish hunger strikers see p. 36857].
In February 1989 the government had admitted that torture was suspected as a factor in the deaths of 32 prisoners mentioned in Amnesty's 1988 report [for which see p. 36565].
In May 1989 the Turkish Human Rights Association claimed that 171 prisoners had died from torture in police custody between 1980 and 1986.
Other allegations of torture came from a New York Bar Association report released in November 1989 and the Turkish Human Rights Association which on Feb. 1, 1990, cited evidence of 37 alleged cases of torture in 1989, 10 of them involving women, in police custody.
On Aug. 18, 1989, a United States congressional delegation expressed concern about the continued abuse of human rights in Turkey.
It estimated that more 6,000 political prisoners were being held in Turkish prisons.
On Oct. 19 the United Kingdom and US embassies in Ankara investigated allegations by a group of Christian evangelists who claimed that they had been blindfolded and tortured at a police station in Ankara.
Introduction of legal reforms — Death sentences
On Sept. 14, 1989, the Justice Ministry announced a series of reforms to abolish torture and the death penalty for 13 different crimes which did not include murder and political violence.
The maximum period of detention without charge was reduced from 15 days to 24 hours and detainees were allowed increased access to lawyers.
The September reforms came shortly before Özal's announcement to the European Parliament in Strasbourg on Sept. 27 that Turkey would henceforth accept the jurisdiction of the European Court of Human Rights.
On Oct. 10 a Turkish court acquitted a schoolboy charged with spreading communist propaganda.
On Dec. 8 the State Council abolished a regulation which required public functionaries to be subjected to a security investigation.
Arrests of returning political exiles
Returning political refugees continued to be interrogated and charged by Turkish police [see also p. 36565].
On April 9, 1989, six political refugees who had left Turkey in 1980 returned and were interrogated by police.
They included members of the banned Confederation of Revolutionary Trade Unions of Turkey (DISK) and the Association of Progressive Youth (IGD).
Five were later freed while one, Gencer Ucar of the IGD, was arrested.
On Sept. 22, 10 members of the United Turkish Communist Party (UTCP — the result of a merger of the TCP and TWP for which see p. 35984), living in exile in West Germany and Greece, returned to Istanbul and were arrested.
One was remanded in custody, while the rest were subjected to interrogation before being released.
On Feb. 20, 1990, the Istanbul State Security Court acquitted three of the 10 who had subsequently been charged with being officials of the UTCP.
On Jan. 8, 60 members of the UTCP were detained by police in the eastern city of Izmir on charges of violating Articles 141 and 142 of the penal code.
Resumption of trial of UTCP members
The trial of Haydar Kutlu and Nihat Sargin of the UTCP resumed on March 9, 1990, before a State Security court in Ankara [for their arrest and indictment see pp. 35984; 36565].
On April 27 Kutlu and Sargin ended a 21-day fast after indications that the government was considering lifting the ban on political parties [see above].
Arrest of members of religious group — Detention of fundamentalist mayor
On March 21, 1990, police in Ankara, Istanbul and Malatya (about 500 km east of Ankara) arrested members of a religious group allegedly committed to the creation of an Islamic state.
The group was charged with the murder in 1987 of a taxi driver and of a Moslem cleric of moderate views.
It was also alleged to have had links with the Kurdish Workers' Party (KWP) and the Kurdish Islamic Revolutionaries organization.
Halil Ibrahim Celik, the mayor of Sanliurfa in south-eastern Turkey, was arrested and detained on April 16, 1989.
Celik, a member of the Moslem fundamentalist Prosperity Party (RP) was charged with violating Article 13 of the penal code prohibiting activity hostile to secularism, following his statement that he "was neither Kemalist, nor secularist, but Moslem" .
Kurdish insurgency
By April 1990 unrest in the eight predominantly Kurdish provinces of south-eastern Turkey appeared to be turning into a mass nationalist uprising.
While official figures put the death toll at between 1,500 and 2,000 since the start of the insurgency in 1984 [see pp. 33037-38], other sources estimated that the figure could be over 2,500 [see also p. 36565].
In early April Özal announced stiff new emergency measures to control the rapidly deteriorating situation in the south-east [see p. 37389].
Reports emerged in June 1989 of two more mass graves in the south-eastern province of Siirt containing the bodies of 100 Kurdish villagers [see also p. 36565].
In August the regional governor of south-eastern Anatolia denied allegations that the government intended to use chemical weapons.
There were further allegations in September that government troops were killing Kurdish civilians and reporting these deaths as those of "terrorists" killed in combat.
Allegations of atrocities committed by Kurdish separatists included the massacre of 21 villagers on the Turkish-Iraqi border in November 1989, which was one of the worst incidents of its kind since 1987.
On March 21 and 22, 1990, Kurdish rebels, said to be KWP members, shot dead nine Turkish mine-workers on their way to work, while others burned down an elementary school in Yukarigungoren village in Agri Dogubeyazit.
The plight of over 36,000 Kurdish refugees who fled Iraq in August-September 1988 [see p. 36567]was highlighted during a visit by Danielle Mitterrand, the wife of the French President, to refugee camps in Diyarbakir in May 1989, but the Turkish government continued to refuse Kurds refugee status [for first international conference on Kurds in Paris in October 1989 chaired by Danielle Mitterrand see p. 36988].
In February 1990 UK scientists confirmed that refugees in Diyarbakir had been poisoned; about 400 Iraqi Kurdish refugees were reported to have received treatment following the third instance of mass poisoning in the camps since 1988.
On Dec. 13, 1989, a State Security court in Erzincan sentenced to death Adil Can for his part in a raid on a police station in Gumushane's Siran district.
On Jan. 31, 1990, a martial law court in Diyarbakir sentenced Mehmet Ozun to death for murder and for membership of an "illegal organization" .
Earlier, in September 1989, eight human rights activists were deported from south-eastern Turkey for representing Kurdish families in suits against the regional authorities.
ECONOMY
Economic indicators
GNP growth 1.7% (1989)
Current-account balance +US$966 m. (1989)
Trade balance -US$4,201 m. (1989)
Overall balance of payments +US$2,766 m. (1989)
Total external public debt US$35,249 m. (1989)
Gross domestic product US$60,820 m. (1987)
Gross national product US$67,400 m. (1987)
Inflation rate 68% (1989)
Unemployment 14.4% (1988)
Principal trading partners OECD, EC, Middle East 
Economic performance
According to government figures released in March 1990, gross national product (GNP) growth fell sharply to 1.7 per cent in 1989 compared with 3.4 per cent in the previous year.
This was the lowest level in six years.
Agricultural production fell by 10.8 per cent, largely due to the effects of the country's worst drought in 50 years.
It was estimated that the consequent loss of exports and the extra imports needed to compensate for the shortfall could cost the economy up to US$2,000,000 million in 1990.
Inflation continued to be high, although official statistics indicated that inflation in 1989 fell to 68 per cent as compared with 75 per cent in 1988.
In its 1990 report on Turkey the Organization for Economic Co-operation and Development (OECD) predicted that inflation would continue at more than 60 per cent due to Turkey's large public deficits, supply restraints and lack of productive investments.
Official figures released in March 1989 suggested that unemployment fell to 14.4 per cent in 1988 from 15.2 per cent in 1987.
External debt in June 1989 was estimated at $35,249 million.
Foreign debt servicing in 1989 totalled $6,586 million.
A current-account surplus of $966 million was achieved in 1989 which was 39 per cent less than in 1988.
Imports, excluding gold, increased from $13,513 million in 1988 to $14,838 million in 1989, while exports in 1989 fell to $11,771 million.
Revenues from tourism rose by 9 per cent in 1989 to around $2,500 million.
1990 budget
On Dec. 27, 1989, the GNA approved a budget for fiscal 1990 totalling around TL63,600,000 million and envisaging a deficit of TL9,400,000 million ($4,196 million).
It projected a 10.4 per cent increase in exports, to $12,863 million, and an 11 per cent increase in imports, to $16,700 million.
It was estimated that TL2,400,000 million would accumulate in the Defence Industry Reinforcement Fund by the end of 1989 and that the fund's end-year total for 1990 would be TL2,000,000 million.
Lira convertibility
On Feb. 25, 1990, as part of a programme to introduce full convertibility of the lira, the upper limit on capital outflows which could be made without ministerial agreement was raised to $50,000,000.
In addition Turkish citizens were now permitted to take foreign exchange abroad up to the value of $5,000 instead of $3,000 as previously.
Foreign investment and privatization
Foreign investment totalled $708,000,000 in 1989, up 74 per cent from $406,000,000 in 1988.
However, the country's privatization programme, intended to streamline the state economic enterprises (SEEs), ran into difficulties particularly on the question of selling state assets to foreigners.
On March 29, 1990, a court cancelled the sale worth $14,500,000 of the airport services company USAS to a consortium led by Scandinavian Airlines System (SAS).
On April 4 a court in Ankara cancelled the sale of a group of five state-run cement factories (Citosan) worth an estimated total of $105,000,000 to the Société des Ciments Français.
Oil production and imports
The amount of crude oil produced in south-east Anatolia in 1989 increased by 25 per cent compared with the previous year, reaching 12,800,000 barrels.
In the first 11 months of 1989, 65 per cent of oil imports came from Iraq, amounting to 11,820,000 tonnes at a cost of $434,000,000.
Total imports of crude oil in the first 10 months of 1989 were 2,380,000 tonnes less than in the corresponding period in 1988, but cost $36,970,000 more.
South-east Anatolian project
Work continued on the South-east Anatolia Project (GAP), which was estimated to cost between $18,000 million and $21,000 million.
On completion the giant hydro-electric project would render productive 76,835 sq km of arid and semi-arid land — nearly 10 per cent of the country's area — covering six provinces.
The centrepiece of the project, the Ataturk Dam, was expected to be operational by mid-1991.
On Feb. 12, 1990, Turkey resumed the flow of the Euphrates river to Syria and Iraq after a month-long total cut-off to fill the dam's reservoir [see p. 37201].
FOREIGN
Relations with USA
On March 1, 1990, "temporary" sanctions imposed in October 1989 [see pp. 36985-86]against the United States military presence in Turkey were lifted.
This followed a defeat in the US Senate of a resolution which sought to declare April 24 as a "day of remembrance" for Armenians killed in Turkey between 1915 and 1923.
About $400,000,000 in military aid and $100,000,000 in economic assistance to Turkey was requested by the US administration for the 1989/1990 financial year [see also pp. 35985; 36564; 37198].
Relations with Western Europe
Relations with the United Kingdom were strained during 1989 over the question of the influx of Kurdish political refugees into the UK and the imposition by the UK government of the requirement from June 23 of visas for all Turkish nationals entering the UK.
Relations between the two countries deteriorated further after a decision by the Turkish government to impose visa restrictions on all Britons visiting Turkey after Nov. 1.
Relations were eased somewhat by the visit on April 25, 1990, of Margaret Thatcher, the UK Prime Minister, who participated in official remembrance ceremonies marking the Gallipoli campaign 75 years earlier during the First World War.
There were also signs of renewed economic contacts: on Jan. 10, 1990, the government and the UK Marconi Group signed a contract worth £96,000,000 (approximately $160,000,000) to manufacture battlefield wireless systems.
Following the rejection of Turkey's application for membership of the European Communities (EC) in December 1989 [see p. 37133], Ali Bozer, then Minister in Charge of Relations with the EC, told The Times in January 1990 that Turkey would continue to press the European Commission for a specific date for Turkish membership as soon as possible after the introduction of the single market on Dec. 31, 1992.
On Feb. 13 Özal declared in Paris that Turkey's membership must not be sacrificed to accommodate new developments in Eastern Europe.
In January 1990 contracts were signed with West Germany to buy two West German frigates.
Relations became strained following the mutual expulsion of diplomats in March and April [see p. 37389].
Difficult relations with Greece became more strained following the Greek government's decision in January 1990 to resettle Soviet Pontic Greeks in Western Thrace which had a population of around 120,000 ethnic Turks [see p. 37516].
An agreement was in January 1990 signed with Spain under which Turkey would manufacture 52 Spanish C-9235 light transport aircraft.
[For September 1989 visit by Özal to Spain see p. 37591].
Also in January 1990 an agreement was signed with France for the purchase of French mobile radar equipment.
In February Özal held talks with President Mitterrand in Paris with a view to encouraging French investment in Turkey.
Relations with China and Eastern Europe.
On Dec. 8, 1989, the Aksu-Caykoy hydro-electric power station was inaugurated in Isparta, southern Anatolia; equipment costing over $1,700,000 was provided by China under an agreement signed in March 1987.
Several trade protocols were signed with the Soviet Union in March 1990.
They included an agreement on March 9 to establish a joint chamber of commerce and industry, a protocol signed on March 14 to develop road transport services between Turkey and the Soviet Union, and an agreement on March 16 to encourage maritime co-operation between the two countries.
Officials estimated that the trade volume with the Soviet Union which totalled $1,200 million in 1989, would grow to $4,000 million by 1994.
In January 1990 the Turkish government sought to avoid straining relations with the Soviet Union following the outbreak of violence between Turkish-speaking Azeris and Armenians in the Soviet Republic of Azerbaijan [see pp. 37168-70].
Although opposition parties, including the True Path Party (TPP), condemned Soviet action in Azerbaijan, Özal stressed on Jan. 27 that any Turkish assistance to Azeris living in Azerbaijan would have to be with the consent of the Soviet Union.
[For Turkish-Soviet relations see also pp. 35137; 36566.]
Exports to Eastern Europe as a whole rose from $830 million in 1988 to $1,100 million in 1989, while imports were up from $1,200 million in 1988 to $1,600 million in 1989.
Relations with Middle Eastern countries
Relations with Iran improved noticeably by the end of 1989, the Iranian government in December expressing satisfaction at the lifting of the ban on headscarves at Turkish universities [see above].
On Feb. 27, 1990, Akbulut paid an official visit to Iran following which an agreement was signed on March 1 to double bilateral trade between the two countries to $2,000 million.
Relations with Syria in 1989 were soured over the shooting down on Oct. 21 by Syrian jet fighters of a Turkish civilian aircraft over Turkish territory, which resulted in the deaths of five people.
Diplomatic tension between the two countries grew steadily during October in the wake of threats by the Turkish government to cut off the flow of the Euphrates river unless Syria ceased its tacit support for the KWP, which was in direct contravention of the Turkish-Syrian agreement of 1987.