

MIDDLE EAST — ARAB WORLD
GULF CRISIS
The continuing Gulf crisis was characterized during September by (i) the progressive strengthening of the military position of the multinational anti-Iraq coalition, as forces arrived to take up positions in the region and further commitments were made;(ii) the tightening of the economic embargo, extended to include interdiction of air traffic from Sept. 25; and (iii) the growing perception on the diplomatic front that a negotiated solution might only be achievable in the context of a wider consideration of conflicts in the region.
United States President George Bush met Soviet President Mikhail Gorbachev in Helsinki for a one-day emergency summit which emphasized the shared opposition of the superpowers to Iraq's seizure of Kuwait, although the Soviet Union repeatedly underscored its belief that any eventual military action must have a basis in UN agreement.
The US Secretary of State James Baker and Treasury Secretary Nicholas Brady were highly successful in efforts in the first half of September to reinforce the anti-Iraqi coalition by securing large-scale financial commitments, notably from Japan and West Germany, while Saudi Arabia and other smaller Gulf sheikhdoms contributed massively towards the cost of the US mobilization of forces.
Meanwhile the adverse economic repercussions, especially for Jordan, Egypt and Turkey, were offset in part by promises of financial assistance, but the position for Jordan in particular was much aggravated by the refugee crisis caused by the displacement of hundreds of thousands of foreign workers from Kuwait and Iraq.
Western governments continued to insist that their policy aims could not be deflected by concern about the fate of their nationals trapped inside Iraq or Kuwait; however, France in particular reacted strongly to forcible Iraqi action against diplomatic premises in Kuwait in mid-month.
Strengthening of multinational forces
Speaking in Brussels on Sept. 9 at a meeting of NATO Foreign Ministers, Baker called on the USA's allies to contribute more to "responsibility-sharing" , not only by helping to transport troops by air and sea, but by committing their own forces.
The USA, he said, "would welcome additional ground-based forces, should countries see fit, even if these were only symbolic" .
By mid-September there were some 150,000 US military and support personnel in the region, but on Sept. 13 the senior US commander in the Gulf, Gen. Norman Schwarzkopf, dampened the growing speculation about a possible move on to the offensive in mid-October, expressing the opinion that he needed two months to bring the forces up to strength.
[See below for remarks by, and dismissal of, US air force commander.]
The United Kingdom choice of the 7th Armoured Brigade for deployment in Saudi Arabia, with 6,000 men and 120 Challenger tanks, was made known on Sept. 14, three days after the announcement that ground forces would be committed.
(On Sept. 7, at the end of a two-day debate for which the UK House of Commons had been recalled from its summer recess, the UK government had won a vote of confidence over its handling of the Gulf crisis, by 437 votes to 35.)
On Sept. 20 UK Defence Secretary Tom King said that British forces might be placed under US command, but that any decision on military action would require consultation.
The 7th Armoured Brigade, known as the "Desert Rats" and currently stationed in West Germany, began leaving for Saudi Arabia on Sept. 28.
In Italy, the government had hitherto emphasized as much as possible the potential for a European-led negotiated solution.
The European Parliament on Sept. 12, in a resolution stating that only a diplomatic solution could settle the crisis (passed by 300 to 70 with 19 abstentions), called on Italy as current holder of the presidency of the European Communities' Council of Ministers to convene a special EC summit to find such a solution.
However, a visit to Italy by Baker was preceded by the Sept. 14 announcement that Italy would add a frigate and eight Tornado aircraft to its initial naval contribution [see p. 37640], and on Sept. 15 Prime Minister Giulio Andreotti issued a statement supporting US strategy including the possible resort to force if absolutely necessary.
President Mitterrand of France announced on Sept. 15 the despatch to Saudi Arabia of over 4,000 troops, with tanks, helicopters and 30 fighter aircraft.
Known as Operation Daguet, and the biggest French military operation since the Algerian war, the French commitment in the region now totalled 13,000 troops, 14 ships and nearly 100 helicopters.
Boats carrying troops and equipment began leaving Toulon on Sept. 21 and arriving at the Red Sea port of Yanbu in Saudi Arabia on Sept. 29, while from Sept. 23 the aircraft carrier Clémenceau also began unloading some 500 troops and 42 helicopters in Yanbu, returning afterwards to France.
The French troops in Saudi Arabia moved up to Hafar al-Batin, some 100 km from the Kuwaiti border, placing them effectively in the front line.
Canada announced on Sept. 16 that it was to send a squadron of CF-18 fighter aircraft and 450 troops.
The Netherlands Foreign Ministry announced on Sept. 18 its readiness to send a squadron of F-16 jet fighter aircraft to Turkey if the UN voted for an air embargo on Iraq [see below].
Belgium on Sept. 26 offered four military transport aircraft and a frigate.
In Turkey the government had in early September been voted powers by parliament to contribute forces if it deemed necessary.
Of the Arab countries which had mobilized forces for Saudi Arabia, Egypt announced substantial further commitments (an increase to 10,000 troops announced on Sept. 7, the day before President Mubarak met Baker in Alexandria; an increase to 20,000 announced on Sept. 16, with forces departing immediately; and a government statement on Sept. 25 of readiness to increase the numbers further, to 35,000), as did Syria (an additional 11,000 to Saudi Arabia, with 300 Soviet-made T-72 tanks, announced on Sept. 15, on top of 3,200 Syrians already in Saudi Arabia and 1,000 in the United Arab Emirates).
[For Baker's Sept. 13-14 visit to Syria see p. 37727.]
Troops committed by Pakistan and Bangladesh left for the Gulf in early September, while on Sept. 18 Argentina became the first Latin American country to announce that it would send forces; two frigates, a Hercules aeroplane and 450 soldiers left on Sept. 25, despite opposition claims that this action violated the Constitution and was inconsistent with Argentina's diplomatic tradition of neutrality in overseas conflicts.
Foreign Minister Domingo Cavallo on Sept. 28 denied reports that Kuwait's exiled leaders had contributed the US$22,000,000 needed to finance the Argentine deployment, stating that the money would come from a multinational fund managed by the UN.
Reports in mid-September that Saudi Arabia was to double its own army were linked with prospects of a large-scale US military sales package.
It was anticipated that there would be controversy in the US Congress over this arms package, notably because of the concern of the pro-Israeli lobby over such agreements with Arab countries, and on Sept. 23 Baker said that the request was to be scaled down, from the original package worth $21,000 million to a smaller-scale sale totalling some $7,500 million initially.
Financial contributions to military forces
Baker said on Sept. 10 that $12,000 million was to be provided by Saudi Arabia, the UAE and the Kuwaiti government, half of it to defray the costs of foreign forces, and half to assist Egypt and Turkey [see below, but also p. 37728 for Saudi measures against Jordan, the other state most seriously affected by the economic impact of the Gulf crisis].
An increase in Japan's financial contribution to a total of $4,000 million, announced on Sept. 14, would include an additional $1,000 million for the costs of the multinational forces, as well as $2,000 million in aid for the worst-affected countries of the region [see below].
The German funding package of $2,100 million, announced in mid-September [ibid.]following Baker's talks with Chancellor Kohl at the latter's Oggersheim home on Sept. 15-16, would include over $1,000 million towards forces' costs, while South Korea's Foreign Ministry announced on Sept. 24 a contribution of $220 million over two years, including $120 million for the forces and $100 million for Turkey, Jordan and Egypt.
The size of Egypt's military force commitments, meanwhile, was instrumental in securing the Sept. 7 offer by the US administration (subject to congressional approval) to cancel $7,000 million in debts for past US arms sales.
Tightening of UN embargo — Ship searches
The UN Security Council on Sept. 25 passed by 14 votes to one (Cuba) its Resolution 670 imposing an embargo on air traffic with Iraq, excluding flights on approved humanitarian missions.
The principal remaining air link for Baghdad had been Iraqi Airlines flights to Amman, Jordan, and Jordan stated that it would comply with the mandatory resolution; it remained illegal to open fire on civil aircraft.
The Soviet Union, holding the presidency of the Council for September, had urged that the meeting be held at ministerial rather than the customary ambassadorial level, and all but two of the 15 members responded by sending their Foreign Ministers.
The air embargo had been agreed in principle by the five permanent Council members on Sept. 19, the day after a meeting of the nine-member Western European Union in Paris at which Foreign and Defence Ministers had decided to "take all further measures necessary for the full and effective enforcement of the embargo, with particular attention to air traffic" .
UN Security Council Resolutions
Resolution 666.
Sept. 14.
Passed 13-2 with Cuba and Yemen voting against.
Allowed for an Indian ship to deliver food for its stranded citizens in Iraq, providing for such shipments in humanitarian circumstances, and under supervision by relief agencies.
(The sanctions committee had referred this issue to the Security Council on Sept. 12 after exploring ways of specifying whether food needs in iraq should be categorized as humanitarian.
Cuba, Yemen and also China supported an alternative draft resolution lifting all restrictions on transporting food to Iraq.
On Sept. 19 Prince Sadruddin Aga Khan, appointed by Pérez de Cuéllar to take charge of humanitarian aid, abandoned an attempt to assess the humanitarian needs of foreign refugees in Iraq and Kuwait, having been denied entry to Iraq.)
Resolution 667.
Sept. 16.
Passed unanimously.
Condemned the entry of Iraqi soldiers into diplomatic premises in Kuwait on Sept. 13 and 14, and "aggressive acts" against diplomats, and resolved to discuss measures to tighten the embargo on Iraq.
Resolution 670.
Sept. 25.
Passed 14-1 with Cuba voting against.
Extended the trade embargo against Iraq to cover interdiction of air traffic and took other steps to tighten the embargo.
Also called on member states to detain Iraqi-registered ships entering their ports in violation of sanctions, reminded states of their obligation to freeze Iraqi assets, stated that measures would be considered against a member state whose nationals were found breaking sanctions, and also condemned Iraq's "grave breaches" of the fourth Geneva convention on the rules of war, a reference to its holding of foreign nationals as a "human shield" at key installations.
Measures during September to enforce the trade embargo at sea included (i) US action on Sept. 4 to stop the Iraqi freighter Zanubia, carrying tea from Sri Lanka, which was re-routed without the cargo being impounded;(ii) the searching of the tanker Faur in the Gulf of Oman on Sept. 14;(iii) warning shots fired on Sept. 27 by a US naval vessel prior to the boarding by US Marines of the Iraqi tanker Tadmur, which was allowed to proceed after it was verified that it carried no cargo; and (iv) the first UK action, on Sept. 30, when HMS Jupiter stopped an Indian merchant vessel, Akebar, off Qatar, on its return from delivering humanitarian food supplies, but allowed it to proceed after it was found to be carrying refugees and was declared free of contraband.
Diplomatic activity — Helsinki summit
Intensive diplomatic activity in the first half of September included (i) meetings by the UN Secretary-General Javier Pérez de Cuéllar with Iraqi Foreign Minister Tariq Aziz in Amman on Aug. 31-Sept. 1, which the former described on Sept. 2 as disappointing;(ii) numerous visits to the region and bilateral consultations, including Baker's tour of the Gulf and European capitals, and a Gulf visit on Aug. 31-Sept. 5 by UK Foreign Secretary Douglas Hurd, which was marked by hostile demonstrations in Jordan over British policy; and (iii) the superpower summit meeting in Helsinki on Sept. 9.
The Helsinki summit, arranged at very short notice, dealt almost exclusively with the specific issue of a major regional conflict.
It was widely regarded as presaging a new era of more co-operative meetings between the leaders of the two governments.
Although both sides had hinted prior to the summit that other issues might be raised, such as continuing differences on arms control negotiations, and US economic aid for the Soviet Union, no major announcements were made on these or other issues.
Bush and Gorbachev issued a joint statement demanding that Iraq pull out of Kuwait forthwith, and calling on the world community to adhere to UN sanctions against Iraq.
They declared: "We are united in the belief that Iraq's aggression must not be tolerated.
No peaceful international order is possible if larger states can devour their smaller neighbours…
We once again call upon the government of Iraq to withdraw unconditionally from Kuwait, to allow the restoration of Kuwait's legitimate government, and to free all hostages now held in Iraq and Kuwait.
Nothing short of the complete implementation of the UN Security Council resolutions is acceptable."
[See p. 37639 for UN Security Council resolutions passed in August.]
 "Our preference is to resolve the [Gulf]crisis peacefully," but "if the current steps fail to end it, we are prepared to consider additional ones consistent with the UN charter." 
No such additional steps were specified.
Once Iraq had withdrawn from Kuwait, the Soviet Union and the United States would work with countries in the region to develop regional security structures and measures to promote peace and stability.
Although the joint statement indicated broad agreement, there were some differences over how to deal with the crisis.
Bush acknowledged at the concluding press conference that "we may have a difference" on the use of military force if Iraq refused to accept UN demands.
He refused to rule out the military option, while Gorbachev stressed the need for a "political solution" and pointedly refrained from expressing support for a military move against Iraq.
He also said that there were no plans to send Soviet troops to the Gulf to enforce UN sanctions.
At the press conference Bush confirmed that the US forces would remain in the Gulf area only as long as they were required, and would be withdrawn as soon as the crisis was resolved.
Gorbachev declared that around 150 Soviet advisers remained in Iraq, but that they were leaving as their contracts came to an end.
He was also at pains to stress that the Soviet Union had not been "bought" — it was not co-operating with the USA on the Gulf crisis in order to obtain economic aid.
On the eve of the summit the exiled Amir of Kuwait, Sheikh Jabir al Ahmed al Jabir as Sabah, had appealed to Bush and Gorbachev to adopt "decisive measures" to end the Iraqi occupation of his country, while Iraqi President Saddam Hussein had announced that he would not pull out of Kuwait under any circumstances, warned the superpowers not to interfere in Arab affairs, and urged the Soviet Union not to give in to US demands.
Tariq Aziz had met Gorbachev in Moscow on Sept. 5, but "considerable differences" were acknowledged.
Restatement of US aims
The US government continued its efforts to explain the aims of its policy both to the international community and to US domestic opinion.
In an address to the foreign affairs committee of the House of Representatives on Sept. 4, Baker reiterated the aims which Bush had outlined in August [see p. 37638].
Baker also claimed that the results of the international diplomatic isolation of Iraq, fostered by the USA, had been "extraordinary and unprecedented" , and he praised the UN, the Arab League and the Non-aligned Movement for their co-operation.
He also warned that the importance of defeating "Iraq's unprovoked aggression" lay not merely in the region's vital importance as the centre of the world's energy reserves, but also as a "political test of how the post-Cold War world will work" .
Making a key statement of US policy, Bush on Sept. 11 told a joint session of Congress that the objectives were (i) the unconditional withdrawal of Iraqi forces from Kuwait;(ii) the restoration of "Kuwait's legitimate government" ;(iii) the assurance of stability and security within the Gulf; and (iv) the protection of US citizens abroad.
He also stressed that these goals were not those of the US alone, for "they had been endorsed by the UN Security Council five times in as many weeks" and were shared by numerous countries, many of which assisted the international military effort against Iraq.
 "This is not, as Saddam Hussein would have it, the United States against Iraq," said Bush, "it is Iraq against the world." 
Bush characterized the Gulf crisis as "a rare opportunity to move toward an historic period of co-operation" .
He continued: "Out of these troubled times, our fifth objective — a new world order — can emerge: a new era, free from the threat of terror, stronger in the pursuit of justice, and more secure in the quest for peace.
An era in which the nations of the world, East and West, North and South, can prosper and live in harmony…
This is the vision which I shared with President Gorbachev in Helsinki."
Bush also emphasized the economic dimensions of the current crisis.
"Iraq controls some 10 per cent of the world's proven oil reserves.
Iraq plus Kuwait controls twice that.
An Iraq permitted to swallow Kuwait would have the economic and military power, as well as the arrogance, to intimidate and coerce its neighbours — neighbours who control the lion's share of the world's remaining oil reserves.
We cannot permit a resource so vital to be dominated by one so ruthless.
And we won't."
He also emphasised that the USA had"no quarrel with the Iraqi people.
Our quarrel is with Iraq's dictator and with his aggression.
Iraq will not be permitted to annex Kuwait.
That's not a threat, or a boast, that's just the way it's going to be."
The realization that the US forces might have to be retained in the Gulf for the foreseeable future, or that, having defeated Iraq, the USA might be obliged to address other Middle Eastern issues — particularly the Israeli occupation of Palestinian territory — had caused a small but vociferous revival of right-wing isolationism in the USA.
For the most part, however, the administration's policy had initially received widespread bipartisan support, and it was not until September that the popularity of its stance began to wane significantly.
On Sept. 18 there was pointed criticism from some pro-Israeli Democrats over the extent of proposed US arms sales to Saudi Arabia [see above], while US Assistant Secretary of State for Near Eastern and South-East Asian Affairs John Kelly came under attack before the House foreign affairs committee for the lack of a clear signal to Iraq prior to Aug. 2 that the US would not tolerate any invasion of Kuwait.
The Iraqi government had released the previous week the transcript of a July 25 meeting between Saddam Hussein and the US ambassador to Iraq, April Glaspie, in which she told him that the US "has no opinion on the Arab-Arab conflicts like your border disagreement with Kuwait" .
Dismissal of US Air Force Chief of Staff
Gen. Michael Dugan, the US Air Force Chief of Staff, was dismissed by Defence Secretary Dick Cheney on Sept. 17 for having made remarks to journalists concerning possible future US military strategy in the Gulf.
Whilst on a tour of US forces deployed in the Gulf, Dugan had told reporters that if war broke out then the US would bomb Baghdad and that such an attack would target Saddam Hussein in particular.
Dugan suggested that the military had concluded that air power was the only way of forcing Iraq out of Kuwait if war broke out, and that a massive bombing campaign had been planned in order to "decapitate" the Iraqi leadership by targeting Saddam, his family and his senior commanders.
 "If push came to shove, the cutting edge would be in downtown Baghdad," he stated.
"This would not be nibbling at the edges.
If I want to hurt you, it would be at home, not out in the woods some place.
Saddam is a one man show…
If and when we choose violence he ought to be the focus of our efforts.
I don't see us making a big invasion.
To try and beat Iraq on the ground risks destroying Kuwait in order to save it."
Cheney said that he had dismissed Dugan, who had held his command for only three months, because he had violated standing orders on the public discussion of military operations and had showed "poor judgment at a sensitive time" .
Dugan was replaced on a temporary basis by Air Force Vice-Chief of Staff, Gen. John Loh.
Soviet stance
Although Soviet Foreign Minister Eduard Shevardnadze referred in Vladivostok on Sept. 4 to the possibility of an international conference on all the problems of the Middle East, his spokesman Gennady Gerasimov explicitly rejected on Sept. 6 any "linkage" of an Iraqi withdrawal with other issues.
Shevardnadze in a strong speech at the UN General Assembly in New York on Sept. 25 characterized Iraq's invasion of Kuwait as "an act of terrorism against the nascent new world order" , and, apparently going further than Gorbachev had suggested at Helsinki [see above], stated that the Soviet Union was prepared to support the use of force against Iraq, in a UN framework, if the Iraqi occupation of Kuwait continued; on Sept. 30 he confirmed Soviet willingness to join a UN force if necessary.
Soviet relations with Saudi Arabia — Reported expression of Chinese support for Saudis
Gorbachev met Saudi Foreign Minister Prince Saud al Faisal in Moscow on Sept. 17, when it was announced that diplomatic relations between the two countries, broken off since 1939, were to be resumed.
Travelling on to China, the Saudi Foreign Minister said on Sept. 20 that the Chinese had now expressed "full support" for measures taken by Saudi Arabia to defend itself (whereas previously the Chinese had been critical of the deployment of US and other Western forces there).
Iraqi attempts to establish "linkage" with wider Middle East issues — Calls for holy war — Iranian position
Saddam Hussein, in public statements during September, several times repeated the theme of holy war, but increasingly suggested that some accommodation could be reached if Iraqi concessions were linked with an Israeli withdrawal from occupied Palestinian territories.
On Sept. 5 in a television broadcast he called on the people of Egypt and Saudi Arabia to rise up and overthrow their governments; on Sept. 10 he made an offer to supply oil free to Third-World countries.
On Sept. 18 Iraq's Revolution Command Council decreed the seizure of assets of all countries issuing "arbitrary decisions against Iraq" .
On Sept. 20 Iraq radio broadcast a commentary warning the USA against making a grave mistake by assuming that an attack on Iraq would merely mean regional conflict; it would be an overall war, and Iraqis would take the war into the cities of the attacking nation if they were attacked.
On Sept. 23, repeating his position that the annexation of Kuwait was irreversible (plans for a census there were announced on Sept. 28), Saddam stated that the only basis for a peace initiative was the inclusion of Israeli withdrawal from all occupied territories, and threatened to destroy Israel and set ablaze the region's oil supplies as part of "Iraq's strategic plan" if the Iraqi people were "strangled" or subjected to attack.
On Sept. 30 he called for the first time for dialogue to reach an equitable global settlement, addressing himself particularly to France which he had identified as more flexible [see below for Mitterrand's UN speech], although once again stressing that there would be no compromise over Kuwait belonging to Iraq.
Bush on Sept. 6 accepted an Iraqi offer to broadcast on Iraqi television, which he did on Sept. 16 in a prepared videotaped address warning that Iraq "stands isolated and alone" , and had been brought to "the brink of war" because Saddam Hussein had misled his people into invading Kuwait.
Saddam's message to the American people was broadcast on Sept. 26, saying that sanctions had been opposed because of Iraq's rejection of "the Zionist occupation of the land of Palestine" , but that Iraq's stance was supported by 200 million Arabs.
Iraq was holding foreigners, he said, "to give all parties concerned time to think and to allow time for dialogue" .
King Hussein of Jordan, in a televised message to the US Congress and people on Sept. 23, called for immediate withdrawal of the multinational force and for the pursuit of a solution in an Arab context.
There was support notably from hard-line leaders in Iran for the proposition that opposing US forces was akin to a holy war, a view given prominence when it was articulated by the Iranian spiritual leader Ayatollah Seyed Ali Khamenei in a Sept. 12 broadcast, although Iran continued to affirm its backing for UN sanctions.
[For Syrian President Assad's visit to Iran see p. 37727.]
Mitterrand's UN speech
Addressing the UN General Assembly on Sept. 24, Mitterrand repeated strong French condemnation of Saddam Hussein's actions and his unconciliatory attitude, expressed disgust over the use of foreign nationals as "human shields" , and stated emphatically that "the sovereignty of Kuwait is not negotiable" .
However, in a passage which attracted favourable comment in Baghdad for its unaggressive tone, Mitterrand stressed that his logic was the logic of peace, and that "everything would become possible" if Iraq released foreign hostages and confirmed an intention to withdraw its troops.
He set out a four-point plan, commencing with Iraqi compliance with UN resolutions and withdrawal from Kuwait; the international community could then guarantee the removal of forces, and the restoration of Kuwaiti sovereignty, with arrangements to take account of "the will of the Kuwaiti people" ; an international conference should then be arranged, and comprehensive arms reductions worked out for the whole Middle East region, which would imply dialogue among all concerned, to replace confrontation with "the dynamics of good neighbourliness" .
Economic effects of crisis
Oil prices
Crude oil prices continued to rise, passing US$40 per barrel on Sept. 24 and exceeding the previous peak levels of 1980.
An assessment by the World Bank on Sept. 21 suggested that prices would exceed $65 per barrel in the event of war.
Meanwhile stock exchange indexes fell, between Aug. 2 and the end of September, by 32 per cent in Tokyo, 24 per cent in Paris, 17 per cent in London and 15.4 per cent in New York.
Impact on front-line and South Asian states
Economic consequences were particularly severe for countries which were forced to bear the costs of accommodating large numbers of refugees, such as Jordan [see p. 37639]and Turkey [see p. 37641], or suffer the loss of workers' remittances, such as Egypt, Pakistan, India, Bangladesh and the Philippines.
Loss of earnings and rising cost of oil imports
The drying up of remittance flows was compounded by the rising cost of oil imports, and the loss of earnings stemming from the trade embargo on Iraq and Kuwait.
Jordan, Egypt and Turkey had earned substantial revenues from workers' remittances and trade with Iraq and Kuwait; some middle-income countries such as India relied heavily on oil imports from Iraq and also benefited from sizeable remittance flows; and for some low-income countries, including Pakistan, Sri Lanka, Bangladesh and the Philippines, the loss of remittances and the rising cost of oil imports were expected to slow growth rates to an average of around 1.5 per cent by 1991 and add some $3,000 million to annual Third-World debt interest payments.
A report published in Le Monde on Sept. 19 noted that Egypt's earnings from workers overseas had hitherto been the main source of foreign exchange receipts, amounting to over $2,000 million per year, of which $500 million came from workers in Kuwait alone.
Egypt also stood to lose some $200 million because of the devaluation of Gulf currencies, in addition to $500 million in back pay owed by Iraq to Egyptian workers, and $150-200 million owed by the Iraqi government to Egyptian companies.
Egypt would also suffer from a reduction in its earnings from tourism, which had totalled $2,000 million the previous year, and would earn some $200 million less from Suez Canal traffic, which had fallen off following the trade sanctions against Iraq.
On Sept. 20 it was reported that Turkey was to seek $5,000 million in compensation for the year from August 1990 to cover lost exports and other revenues, and increased oil prices and other costs.
A report in Le Monde of Sept. 20 disclosed that India faced the loss of workers' remittances from Iraq and Kuwait totalling $400 million, and would lose exports to Iraq and Kuwait worth around $185 million, while an oil price increase of $3.00 per barrel would add $1,700 million to its oil import bill.
On Sept. 14 it was reported that Pakistan was seeking $500 million from several Western governments to help offset the $1,000 million in additional costs caused by the loss of remittances from Pakistani workers in Kuwait and Iraq and by a rising oil bill.
The Bangladesh Vice-President, Moudud Ahmed, said on Oct. 4 that Bangladesh would lose about $1,400 million annually from the loss of exports to, and remittances from, Iraq and Kuwait.
International assistance
The response of the international community in assisting countries hard hit by the economic costs of the Gulf crisis included initiatives launched under the auspices of the IMF and the World Bank [see p. 37730], bilateral agreements, and EC funding.
On Sept. 14 Japan announced that it would provide $2,000 million to the frontline states, $600 million of which would be sent immediately.
This was followed by a West German funding package worth $2,100 million, of which $815 million would be in the form of bilateral aid.
On Oct. 1 the EC finalized a package worth $2,000 million in grants and loans for Jordan, Egypt and Turkey.
It was reported on Oct. 4 that Taiwan had also contributed $30,000,000 to the front-line states.
[For other funding see under financial contributions to military forces, p. 37694 above.
For US-chaired Gulf Crisis Financial Co-ordination Committee see p. 37730.]
Repatriation and resettlement of refugees
Hundreds of thousands of foreign workers joined the exodus from Kuwait and Iraq.
On Sept. 6, The Financial Times
reported that more than 470,000 refugees had entered Jordan since the Iraqi invasion of Kuwait.
The Jordanian Interior Ministry for its part had estimated on Sept. 4 that the number of refugees arriving in Jordan could exceed 1,000,000.
Le Monde of Sept. 28 reported that around 54,000 foreign workers, mostly Asians, from Iraq and Kuwait, had sought refuge in Turkey since Aug. 6.
The Jordanian authorities were overwhelmed with demands for relief, especially food supplies, and the repatriation of foreign workers to their countries of origin.
Many Egyptian and Palestinian refugees had passed through the refugee reception camps by the first week of September and gone on to Egypt, to Palestinian settlements in Jordan, and elsewhere.
The UN World Food Programme (WFP) confirmed on Sept. 5, however, that 105,000 refugees still remained to be repatriated.
With regard to South Asian nationals, figures released to the Economist of Sept. 8 by consulates in Amman revealed that as of Sept. 4, there were in Jordan 22,500 Indians, 10,000 Pakistanis, 28,000 Bangladeshis and 16,000 Sri Lankans.
On Sept. 3 Jordan launched an urgent appeal to the international community to assist with the costs of accommodating and repatriating the refugees.
Situation of Western nationals held by Iraq — Attacks on diplomatic premises
Many thousands of Western women and children were eventually able to fly out of Baghdad beginning on Sept. 1, following permission given by Saddam Hussein on Aug. 28 [see p. 37639].
Those thus repatriated included hundreds brought from Kuwait by coaches organized on Sept. 3-6 by British diplomats there.
The US Democrat politician and former presidential candidate, the Rev. Jesse Jackson, whose association with this latest hostage drama was undertaken in his role as journalist for a syndicated television programme, accompanied the first group of US women and children who arrived home on Sept. 2.
Some 5,000 Western men remained trapped in Kuwait and Iraq, however, and there were reports confirming that some 500 of these had been taken as a "human shield" to sensitive installations [see also above].
By Sept. 27 there were reports that the Iraqi authorities, who had introduced rationing at the beginning of the month, were warning that they would not be able to guarantee food supplies for foreigners beyond the end of September, but Iraq stated on Sept. 29 that there were "no plans to deprive foreign nationals of ration coupons" .
Although a number of embassies in Kuwait had defied the Iraqi orders that they should close by Aug.24 [see p. 37639], all but a dozen (including the USA, Canada and eight EC countries) had abandoned them by Aug. 12 because of conditions there.
Iraqi troops entered the Netherlands embassy on Aug. 13, albeit with no significant violence.
The following day Iraqi troops entered the diplomatic premises of Canada, Belgium and France.
From the Canadian premises they took away the consuls of Canada, Ireland, the USA and Australia, but subsequently released them.
The French ambassador's residence was looted and four French personnel taken away, of whom only one, military attaché Edouard Crespin, was later released.
Mitterrand on Sept. 15 announced diplomatic and also military measures in response to what he termed "this new aggression" .
[For UN Security Council resolution, subsequent air embargo, and French military commitments, see above.]
His announcement was backed by opposition leaders Jacques Chirac and Valéry Giscard d'Estaing, attending the first meeting at Saint Maximin of the leadership of their new coalition Union pour la France (UPF).
France expelled 40 Iraqis, including 11 diplomats, and on Sept. 17 the rest of the EC member countries followed this example, with expulsions targeting in particular the military personnel from Iraqi embassies.
(In the UK, for example, eight diplomats and 23 civilians were ordered to leave by Sept. 25.)
Reprisal expulsions were ordered by Iraq on Sept. 21, together with expulsions of US and Egyptian diplomatic personnel, both these countries themselves reciprocating by the end of the month.
Reports of an Iraqi letter to the US ambassador in Baghdad, warning that non-diplomats taking refuge in the embassy could be hanged, was confirmed on Sept. 26 by Baker, who said: "We've read it, it's repugnant, and we reject it." 
SOUTH AFRICA
ANC-government tensions
Negotiations during September between the African National Congress (ANC) and the government of President F. W. de Klerk showed serious tensions between the two sides.
In particular the ANC demanded that the government investigate police behaviour during the Transvaal township violence of August/September, and threatened to resume the armed struggle, suspended only in August.
ANC deputy president Nelson Mandela issued warnings to the government to take strong measures against the perpetrators of the township violence, including "elements within the South African police force" , or the ANC would be forced to reconsider its strategy.
Speaking in a Johannesburg synagogue on Sept. 14, Mandela said: "On the eve of real negotiations, forces determined to wreck the peace process have implemented a strategy of destabilization which has resulted in the very real and terrifying prospect of full-scale civil war breaking out." 
In a reference to the ANC's suspension of the armed struggle in August, Mandela said that this was done to further the peace process but that the movement had nevertheless not forfeited its right to self-defence.
The government released seven ANC members from prison on Sept. 11, and a further 14 security prisoners on Sept. 27, in partial fulfilment of the terms set out in the Pretoria Minute [see p. 37642].
Another 30 people were granted immunity from prosecution.
Statements about future government of national unity
De Klerk told the Orange Free State congress of the National Party on Sept. 5 that if there were free elections, they would lead to the creation of a government of national unity.
This echoed earlier comments by Mandela that the first non-racial government would be a coalition.
De Klerk stressed the need for "built-in guarantees and mechanisms which would prevent South Africa from falling into a one-party state or being delivered into the hands of an irrational dictator" .
There would have to be a bill of rights, regular elections and a free market economic system.
Constitutional Development Minister Gerrit Viljoen said that a bill of rights would protect not only individual rights but also "group values" .
Township violence — "Iron fist" counter-measures
Violence in the Transvaal townships in August and September reached its worst point on Sept. 12-13, when 50 died in riots in Thokoza township and an indiscriminate massacre of commuters took place on a Johannesburg-Soweto train.
In the latter incident on Sept. 13 at least 26 people were shot or hacked to death, and well over 100 injured.
The train attackers escaped and could not be identified.
By this time the total death total from five weeks of violence was estimated at 757.
Although most of the deaths resulted from uncontrolled fighting between hostel-dwelling supporters of the predominantly Zulu Inkatha movement and ANC-supporting township residents, there were repeated reports of police assistance to, or connivance in, Inkatha attacks.
On Sept. 3 troops were also seen to fire on a crowd in Sebokeng, killing 11 people.
At the height of the violence Mandela and de Klerk had meetings to discuss measures to quell the fighting.
De Klerk promised "strong and comprehensive" action, while Mandela claimed that right-wing extremists were fuelling the trouble in an attempt to disrupt the reform process.
 "We are convinced that what is going on is the beginning of Renamo in South Africa," said Mandela on Sept. 14, in a reference to the actions of white-backed rebels in Mozambique.
He claimed that de Klerk agreed with him that there was "some hidden hand" and that the government intended to find it.
Measures to deal with the violence were announced on Sept. 15, in an operation code-named "Iron fist" .
The new measures included a curfew, the cordoning-off of hostels and squatter camps with razor wire and mounting light machine guns on armoured vehicles.
Although some black groups called for a boycott of the curfew, it had the effect of restoring an uneasy calm.
The ANC-affiliated United Democratic Front (UDF) said that it did not believe that the calm would last unless there were more comprehensive measures, such as abolition of the hostel system, arrest and prosecution of Inkatha warlords and a weeding out of elements in the security forces intent on destroying the negotiation process.
In response to criticism of the security forces' behaviour, the President ordered the formation of "special investigative units" , headed by government-appointed deputy attorneys general, to examine allegations of misconduct, including the September Sebokeng killings and train massacre.
Later in the month the ANC and Mandela continued to question the government's response to the township violence.
Mandela requested a judicial commission of inquiry to investigate the source of the violence, telling officials of the Transkei government in Umtata on Sept. 28: "I can say without questioning the integrity of President de Klerk that he himself is serious about making changes in South Africa, but he has serious problems with his constituency." 
He said that he wondered whether the government had lost control of the security forces or whether the security forces were doing what the government wanted.
A meeting on Sept. 27 between Law and Order Minister Adriaan Vlok and two right-wing leaders, Eugene Terre'blanche of the Afrikaner Resistance Movement (AWB) and Jaap Marais of the Reformed National Party (HNP), caused consternation in the ANC, which accused the government of condoning the military training activities of these groups.
In a statement on Sept. 28 the ANC said "in the strongest terms possible" that the "continued militarization of the white community against the oppressed people of our country is a recipe for a disastrous civil war from which no victor can emerge" .
Earlier, police in Pretoria had on Sept. 17 arrested Piet ( "Skiet" ) Rudolph, deputy leader of the far-right Boerestaat party, who had been wanted for the previous four months in connection with bombings and arms thefts.
He had publicly claimed responsibility for the theft of arms and ammunition from the South African Air Force headquarters in April and for bomb attacks on offices of the National Party.
De Klerk's US visit
De Klerk arrived in the United States on Sept. 24 for the first official visit by a South African government leader in 44 years.
He revealed earlier that he had no illusions about his chances of persuading US President Bush to lift economic sanctions against South Africa, but he expressed confidence that South Africa could now demonstrate clear evidence that a process of political change had begun, including moves towards negotiations and a new constitution.
Commentators in Washington noted that Bush's use of the word "irreversible" , to describe the process of change in South Africa, was a stronger form of recognition than that given by European Community member countries.
Under the US 1986 Comprehensive Anti-Apartheid Act, five conditions had to be met for the lifting of sanctions, of which only two had been met by the time of de Klerk's visit (entering into negotiations with black representatives and lifting the ban on democratic parties).
Bush said, however, that he would use his executive discretion to modify or suspend US sanctions when two more of the five conditions were met; administration officials said that they expected the freeing of political prisoners and the lifting of the state of emergency in Natal to be regarded as adequate moves.
The occasion was marred by small but angry demonstrations and the refusal of the congressional black caucus to hold a formal meeting with de Klerk.
However, the South African presidential delegation did have some informal meetings with members of the caucus, of which some members wanted all US sanctions sustained until the fifth condition was met — repeal of the Group Areas Act and of the Population Registration Act.
De Klerk said later that the visit was successful in that it had given the US side "the correct perspective" on developments in South Africa, and that the meeting with Bush had amounted to important progress towards "the final normalization of relations between South Africa and the USA" .
He added that he had found an "eagerness" among US businesses to return to South Africa.
One of the significant sub-themes of de Klerk's visit was his assertion of South Africa's readiness to help revive the economic fortunes of its neighbours in southern Africa.
ASIA — PACIFIC
NORTH-SOUTH KOREA
Meeting of Prime Ministers
Premier Yon Hyong Muk was one of a delegation of seven senior North Korean officials — accompanied by 33 aides and 50 journalists — who made an unprecedented three-day official visit to South Korea on Sept. 4-7.
It was the highest level of direct contact between the two Korean states since their formation in 1948, and was the first official border crossing since September 1985, when family reunions had been arranged under the auspices of the Red Cross [see pp. 34165-66].
During the course of the visit the group had several sessions of talks with seven senior South Koreans including Kang Young Hoon, the South Korean Prime Minister — the first ever meeting between the Prime Ministers of the two states.
Whilst each side recognized the growing demand of the Korean people for reunification, the means through which this was to be achieved remained elusive.
However, during the two days of talks on Sept. 5-6 both Prime Ministers presented their proposals for easing political and military tensions within the Korean peninsula.
Kang put forward a series of proposals — many of which were very generalized — which restated South Korea's belief in securing a gradual improvement in bilateral relations through the promotion of confidence-building measures including multilevel exchanges and various forms of co-operation between the two states.
The proposals included the fostering of economic co-operation through agreements which would encourage freer travel (particularly for members of divided families), communications and trade, and through the establishment of a joint economic co-operation organization.
Political confidence would be instilled through each side ceasing its propaganda efforts and undertaking to recognize and respect the political and social systems of the other until such time as reunification was achieved.
In the military sphere the measures which Kang suggested included the exchange of military personnel and information, the notification of significant troop movements and the establishment of a "hot-line" telecommunications link between the Defence Ministers of the two states.
North Korea's proposals concentrated upon reducing military and political confrontation as a prerequisite to seeking improvements in the economic, cultural or social spheres.
In accordance with suggestions already made by the North Korean government Yon proposed an arms control agreement between the two states which would involve a three-phase troop reduction programme based upon cutting the standing army of each side to fewer than 10,000 men within three or four years.
The agreement would also involve the withdrawal of the 43,000 United States forces stationed in South Korea and the removal of nuclear weapons from the Korean peninsula.
The North Korean Premier also proposed the installation of a communications link between the two sides' military commands, the formation of a joint military group to discuss border disputes and the provision for on-site inspections to ensure that the arms agreement was observed.
North Korea's willingness to accept a phased withdrawal of US troops from South Korea marked an apparent departure from its previous insistence upon their immediate removal.
Nevertheless, Yon reiterated his government's oft-stated demand for negotiations with the USA alone in order to replace the current armistice agreement, in force since the ending of hostilities in 1953, with a full peace treaty to end the Korean war.
This demand remained a precondition for the North agreeing to a non-aggression declaration with the South.
Furthermore, Yon outlined three preconditions for the successful pursuit of inter-Korean dialogue.
These were (i) the release of South Korean dissidents imprisoned for making unauthorized visits to the North;(ii) termination of the annual South Korean-US "Team Spirit" military exercises; and (iii) an end to South Korea's attempts to achieve unilateral entry to the United Nations.
Although South Korea did not make an official response to the preconditions — all of which it had rejected in the past — it did agreed to suspend its pursuit of membership of the UN until the two Korean states had discussed the issue further.
A meeting duly took place on Sept. 18, at the "peace village" of Panmunjom within the Demilitarized zone at which North Korea put forward its advocacy of a single UN seat in order to avoid continuing the country's temporary division.
The South Korean negotiators described this proposal as "unrealistic and unworkable" and reiterated their call for simultaneous entry to the UN by both Korean states.
The negotiators agreed to meet for further discussions but did not set a date.
Although the differences between the two sides remained too great for there to be any substantial agreement upon the outlined proposals, the Prime Ministers agreed to proceed with the second round of scheduled discussions in Pyongyang (North Korea) on Oct. 16-19.
National Unification Minister Hong Sung Chul, the spokesman for the Southern delegation, characterized the talks as more successful than any inter-Korean contacts of the past, as both sides had "proceeded during the meeting with unprecedented sincerity and enthusiasm" .
The North Korean spokesman, An Byong Su, the vice-chairman of the Committee for the Reunification of the Fatherland, echoed this view, suggesting that both delegations had displayed attitudes in direct contrast to the confrontational perspectives of the past.
During the last working day of the visit, Sept. 6, Yon made a courtesy call on South Korean President Roh Tae Woo, and received Roh's personal message for the North Korean leader Kim Il Sung.
Although the proposals contained within Roh's message were not made public, it was confirmed that the South Korean President had requested an early meeting with Kim — in Pyongyang or Seoul (South Korea) or in a third country — for talks aimed at normalizing relations between the two states.
Roh also met with the rest of the North Korean delegation and reiterated Kang's call for confidence-building measures as a prelude to improved bilateral relations.
AFRICA
LIBERIA
Death of Doe — Continuing fighting
Despite the death of President Samuel Doe on Sept. 11 at the hands of Prince Yormie Johnson's rebel group, fighting continued throughout September in the conflict which had ravaged Liberia since December 1989.
The peacekeeping forces of the ECOMOG monitoring group, sent to Liberia under the auspices of the Economic Community of West African States (ECOWAS), had arranged talks between the Doe loyalist faction and Johnson's rebel group.
An argument apparently broke out during these talks, and fierce fighting ensued in which Doe was shot and wounded and a total of 64 men, mostly from Doe's contingent, were believed to have been killed.
The Johnson group seized the wounded Doe and took him away, while the ECOWAS force looked on, apparently helpless.
Johnson undertook to court-martial and interrogate Doe about huge amounts of money alleged to have been illicitly appropriated; however, no public trial took place and Doe's mutilated body was put on display shortly afterwards.
Although Doe's death effectively removed his grouping from its bid to retain power, a substantial number of troops under the command of the newest head of the presidential guard, Brig. -Gen.
David Nimley, remained defending the heavily fortified executive mansion.
The circumstances of Doe's capture and his killing drained much of the credibility built up by the ECOMOG forces, then under the command of Lt.-Gen.
Arnold Quainoo of Ghana.
As ECOMOG tried to continue its peacekeeping role, it was increasingly drawn into a de facto alliance with Johnson's forces.
The latter were left still fighting both the Doe loyalists and their rival rebel group, the National Patriotic Front of Liberia (NPFL), led by Charles Taylor.
Competing claims for leadership — Proposals for elections
As of mid-September, four men laid claim to leadership of the country — Taylor, Johnson, Nimley and Amos Sawyer.
Taylor, who had proclaimed himself head of state in August, claimed that his NPFL forces — thought to number 15,000 — controlled 90 per cent of Liberia, including the second port, Buchanan, and most of the territory containing Liberia's agricultural, mineral and industrial resources.
The day after Doe was killed Johnson proclaimed himself president until an interim government was established; he had earlier declined to declare an interest in the country's leadership.
Johnson claimed that his forces numbered 6,000, but he was thought to command no more than 1,000 men.
The remnants of Doe's forces — also thought to number 1,000 — nominated Nimley as head of state.
A broad spectrum of Liberian politicians meeting in Banjul, the Gambian capital, proposed Sawyer, an academic and lawyer, as head of an interim government.
He put forward in mid-September a peace proposal envisaging the creation of an interim legislative assembly, which would sit for a year pending elections.
Six seats would be allocated to Taylor, who was offered the post of Speaker and could make nominations for the cabinet.
Prince Johnson's group was offered four seats.
Each of the 10 counties were to be allocated a seat, with two each for exiled parties.
While the government-in-exile headed by Sawyer proposed to send representatives to Monrovia to discuss its peace plan, the military conflict continued.
Taylor rejected Sawyer's proposals, apparently convinced that he could win military victory and install himself as president.
In mid-September ECOMOG aircraft responded to NPFL shelling by bombing Taylor's artillery emplacements.
Meanwhile, another 1,000 Nigerian troops left for Liberia to reinforce the ECOMOG force of 4,000 already there.
US intervention — Ceasefire
In a belated effort by the United States government to intervene in the conflict, US Assistant Secretary of State Herman Cohen arrived in Monrovia on Sept. 18.
He held talks with both Johnson and Taylor, which led to the declaration of a truce on Sept. 22.
Taylor announced that he would hold elections for a national assembly on Oct. 10, after which the assembly would meet in the middle of the month.
Johnson rejected the proposal for the elections, which in any case were clearly impossible to hold within the time proposed.
Meetings proposed towards the end of September between representatives of the three warring parties — the forces of Taylor, Johnson and Nimley — came to nothing.
Changes in ECOMOG command — Sawyer's lobby for support
On Sept. 21, Lt.-Gen.
Quainoo was replaced as head of the ECOMOG force by Maj.-Gen.
Joshua Dogonyaro of Nigeria.
The decision was apparently taken unilaterally by the Nigerian authorities, and appeared to reflect on Quainoo's handling of the command, particularly the incident which led to the killing of Doe.
In order to head off conflict with Ghana over the replacement, assurances were later given that Quainoo would remain as overall commander, with Dogonyaro in charge of field operations.
The move was seen as preparation for ECOMOG to take on an offensive rather than merely a peacekeeping role.
A delegation led by Sawyer representing the interim government-in-exile meanwhile toured Nigeria, Ghana, Sierra Leone and Guinea to lobby for official recognition.
President Babangida of Nigeria was reported to have responded favourably to the delegation.
AFRICA
NIGERIA
Armed forces restructuring
Several senior government appointees were retired from the armed forces on Sept. 5, in the context of a major restructuring of the military which had been anticipated since the April coup attempt, and in line with the policy of transition from military to civilian rule.
According to head of state Maj.-Gen Ibrahim Babangida, the overhaul would ultimately involve a "drastic" reduction in the size of the armed forces.
Vice-Adml.
Augustus Aikhomu, who had been Chief of General Staff until the abolition of the post and his appointment as Vice-President on Aug. 30 [see p. 37644], was among those retiring from the forces, but he remained a member of the governing Armed Forces Ruling Council (AFRC).
The only non-civilian member of the Council of Ministers was now Minister of Defence and Chief of Defence Staff Lt.-Gen.
Sanni Abacha.
Some 100 officers were retired or redeployed.
The changes included the replacement of generals by colonels as head of Army divisions, and the retirement from the Air Force of 10 air vice-marshals and 12 air commodores.
The three service chiefs were among the few officers unaffected.
At the same time a further 10 state military governors were replaced and civilian deputy governors appointed to each state pending gubernatorial elections scheduled for 1991.
Seven members of the AFRC were replaced as a result of the changes.
Continuing executions
On Sept. 13 a further 27 executions took place of soldiers convicted, after a retrial by a special military court, for their involvement in the April 22 coup attempt.
This brought the total executed to 69 [see pp. 37367; 37602].
In response the United Kingdom Minister for Overseas Development, Lynda Chalker, cancelled a visit to Nigeria scheduled for October, when she had been expected to announce a £60,000,000 aid package.
This action was also reportedly a protest against what the UK government interpreted as Nigeria's perceived pro-Iraqi position regarding the invasion of Kuwait.
The human rights organization Amnesty International expressed anxiety over the trial and retrial procedures and the resultant executions.
Tam David-West, Petroleum Resources Minister in 1984-86 and subsequently Mines, Power and Steel Minister until 1988, was granted bail on Sept. 17 after being charged with "corruptly enriching" in 1986 a United States-based oil company.
AFRICA
COTE D'IVOIRE
President's meeting with opposition leaders
President Félix Houphouët-Boigny met opposition leaders on Sept. 28, when he announced the dates of the forthcoming presidential elections.
A request by opposition parties to allow a transitional period during which the newly formed parties could prepare for elections was refused on the grounds that the election dates were specified in the Constitution.
Houphouët-Boigny was expected to announce his own candidacy for a seventh term of office at the ruling Parti démocratique de la Côte d'Ivoire (PDCI) congress in early October.
Meanwhile the Front populaire ivoirien (FPI), now emerging as the strongest of the 26 parties which had been allowed to register since May, elected its general secretary, Laurent Gbagbo, to stand against Houphouët-Boigny in the presidential elections; he was the first opposition presidential candidate since independence in 1960.
On Aug. 31 and Sept. 6 the authorities, reportedly anxious about the imminent visit of the Pope [see below], used force to break up rallies called jointly by four opposition parties, whose purpose was to press demands for a national conference to decide rules for multiparty elections.
Exposure of papal death plot
During the Sept. 28 meeting Houphouët-Boigny revealed details of what he said had been a plot to assassinate Pope John Paul II during his visit to consecrate the basilica of Our Lady of Yammoussoukro on Sept. 9 [see p. 37732].
He accused unnamed opposition parties of planning the assassination with the help of a hired Beninese killer who, he said, had made a full confession to the authorities.
AFRICA
CONGO
Abolition of one-party system
After an extraordinary session of the central committee of the ruling Parti congolais du travail (PCT) it was announced in a communiqué on Sept. 30 that political parties could register forthwith, with legal status being conferred as of Jan. 1, 1991.
Under the terms of the Constitution the PCT was the sole legal political organization; appropriate amendments and draft legislation on the creation of political parties were to be prepared by a presidential commission.
The committee recommended the convening of a national conference of delegates from various social, political and religious groupings and of individuals in the first half of 1991.
Such a conference would, among other things, debate the proposed legislation, and draw up a timetable for elections.
According to the communiqué, a transitional government was scheduled to be appointed in January 1991.
The decision was clearly a response to events at the Sept. 7-18 congress of the Congolese Trade Union Confederation, a specialized organ of the PCT, when delegates challenged the government to speed up the democratization process (already agreed in principle by the PCT in July — see p. 37602).
Among trade unionists' demands were (i) the immediate adoption of a multiparty system;(ii) full autonomy for the unions, requiring the removal of all party central committee members from leadership positions within the 13-union confederation; and (ii) the withdrawal of legislation suppressing public-sector salaries (to be implemented as part of an IMF-approved austerity programme agreed in March — p. 37482; see also below).
A confrontation followed when the government announced the annulment of congress decisions and replacement of the elected leadership; a general strike was called for Sept. 14, causing serious disruption for three days.
In return for the confederation's agreement to work within the system, however, its demands were largely met in a national address by President Denis Sassou-Nguesso on Sept. 16, and the congress formally concluded on Sept. 18.
IMF loan
The IMF announced on Aug. 28 its approval of a standby arrangement equivalent to 27,975,000 special drawing rights (approximately US$39,000,000) over the next 21 months in support of the government's 1990-91 economic programme [for principal objectives of which see p. 37482].
Current expenditure was to be curtailed — involving, among other things a scaling down of the civil service.
Measures aimed at increasing non-oil revenue were to include "selective" tax increases.
Development expenditure was, however, to increase under the plan, in order to diversify and strengthen the productive base of the economy.
AFRICA
GABON
Multiparty legislative elections — Suspension of polling
Ballot results in 32 out of 120 constituencies were annulled after the first round of voting in legislative elections on Sept. 16; the second round, scheduled for Sept. 23, was suspended after the government acknowledged that there had been irregularities at a number of voting centres.
Opposition groups claimed, however, that the government had halted voting in areas where the Parti démocratique gabonais (PDG)(until recently the ruling and sole legal party — see p. 37445) appeared close to defeat.
Fresh elections were set for Oct. 21 and 28.
The largest polling station, in the city hall in Libreville, was forced to close when angry voters ransacked the building, reportedly having discovered the ballot boxes already stuffed as voting began at 6 a.m.
There were also disturbances in Port Gentil, where in May the government was shaken by violent protests [see pp. 37444-45].
The elections, the first on a multiparty basis since 1964, had been made possible by the success of opposition delegates at the earlier national conference [see pp. 37307; 37445]in winning concessions on political reform.
Only the 13 legalized opposition groups which had participated at the conference were allowed to put up candidates.
Of these, the Mouvement de redressement national — Bûcherons (Morena-Bûcherons), led by Fr Paul Mba Abessolo, appeared to offer the most serious challenge to the government.
This was a splinter group of the larger Morena grouping formed after Abessolo's earlier decision to participate in national politics [see p. 37480].
A total of 553 candidates stood for the 120 seats in the Assembly.
After the first ballot, Prime Minister Casimir Oye Mba announced that 58 deputies had been declared duly elected, of whom 36 represented the PDG.
AFRICA
CAMEROON
Government reshuffle
President Paul Biya carried out an extensive government reshuffle on Sept. 8.
The most significant appointments were as follows (with previously held posts in parentheses): Edouard Akame Mfoumou — Defence (Secretary-General at the Presidency); Gilbert Andze Tsoungui — Territorial Administration (Delegate-General for National Security); René Owona — Industrial and Commercial Development and Trade (director-general of Dschang Agricultural Centre, west Cameroon); Simon Bassilekin — Finance (a National Administrator of the Bank of Central African States), and Marcel Niat Nkifenji — Planning and Territorial Development (general manager of the National Electricity Corporation).
The appointment of Augustin Kontchou Kuomegni, an academic lawyer, as Minister of Information and Culture, appeared to confirm Biya's recent promise to relax media controls as part of a broader policy of social liberalization [p. 37523].
Long-serving Finance Minister Sadou Hayatou, a Moslem northerner, became Secretary-General at the Presidency, in charge of co-ordinating the affairs of all the ministries.
Roger Tchoungui, hitherto Secretary of State for Finance, headed the new ministry of Stabilization.
Ibrahim Mbombo Njoya was moved from Territorial Administration, back to his previous portfolio of Youth and Sports.
Haman Adji Garga, a banker, replaced Joseph Owona at Public Service and State Control, the latter moving to Higher Education.
Henri Ayissi Eyebe went to Housing and Town Planning.
AFRICA
ZAMBIA
Reversal on pluralism
As popular demands for political reform intensified, President Kenneth Kaunda on Sept. 24, at a session of the ruling UNIP national council, recommended the reintroduction of a multiparty system and the holding of free elections by October 1991.
The referendum planned for August 1991 on whether to end the one-party system would not therefore be held; a commission would forthwith examine necessary amendments to the constitution.
Kaunda claimed that he feared bloodshed and disorder if the demands for reform were not met.
He had made known his personal opposition to multiparty politics, claiming that the current campaign was little more than a mass protest against the stringencies of the economic recovery plan [see p. 37523].
The policy change, which the 600-member council endorsed, was nonetheless a victory for the Movement for Multiparty Democracy (MMD), a broad alliance which had campaigned for urgent constitutional changes on the grounds that the referendum was unnecessary.
Zambians had enthusiastically attended MMD rallies; on Sept. 8 a crowd in Lusaka, the capital, conservatively estimated at 70,000 (some reports claiming 300,000) was urged to return UNIP membership cards in protest at UNIP's monopoly on power, while in Kitwe on Sept. 15 the response at another rally indicated that the campaign had substantial support in the copper belt.
AFRICA
ZIMBABWE
Central committee debate on one-party system
In a debate on Sept. 22, the 160-member ZANU central committee effectively rejected President Robert Mugabe's proposal for the formal institution of a one-party system.
No vote was taken, but the majority of delegates reportedly expressed a preference for the retention of the present de facto one-party system.
The principal source of support for Mugabe's proposal was reportedly the ZANU Women's League, whose leader was Mugabe's wife Sally Mugabe.
An August politburo meeting had reached a similar conclusion [see p. 37643].
Afterwards, Nathan Shamuyarira, the Foreign Minister and ZANU's information and publicity secretary, and one of Mugabe's strongest supporters, said that ZANU would continue to press for a formal one-party system, but by means of "intensive political mobilization" of the population rather than by legislation.
He added that there would be no referendum on the issue.
AFRICA
ANGOLA
Peace talks with UNITA — Soviet and US role
Delegations representing the ruling Marxist MPLA government and the US-backed rebel UNITA movement met near Lisbon (the Portuguese capital) on Sept. 24-28 for their fourth session of direct negotiations on a peace agreement [for inconclusive meeting in August see p. 37643].
The major obstacle to peace continued to be the status of UNITA.
Rebel leader Jonas Savimbi sought recognition of UNITA as a legal opposition movement as a precondition for signing a cease-fire agreement.
The MPLA, however, rejected the notion of recognizing UNITA as a legitimate military force, stating only that UNITA could become a political party in the context of the establishment of a multiparty system (agreed in principle by the MPLA central committee in early July and to be debated at the party congress in December).
Progress was made, however, on the logistics of a ceasefire, including agreement on monitoring procedures.
Two joint sub-commissions were formed, one to examine further "political principles" and the other to examine military issues and aspects of the ceasefire.
Soviet and US experts, whose presence was thought to give momentum to the talks, were on hand to offer "technical" advice on the practicalities of a ceasefire [for March agreement by the protagonists' principal backers to work for a settlement to the civil war see p. 37365].
Meanwhile United States congressional committees dealing with intelligence matters were considering a request by the US administration to maintain technical and military assistance for UNITA until a definitive peace agreement had been reached [see also p. 37523].
Economic reforms — Famine relief agreement
The government on Sept. 21 launched an economic recovery plan, anticipating a full-scale structural adjustment programme expected to be introduced in 1991.
Measures included a progressive devaluation of the kwanza and the replacement of the old currency with the new kwanza (NK).
The official exchange rate was fixed at US$1.00=NK60 as of Oct. 1 (hitherto approximately 30 to the dollar); on the unofficial parallel market, however, the currency was traded at 2,000 to the dollar.
The government agreed on Sept. 24 to the creation of five transport corridors, by which means UN agencies and other groups could reach an estimated 250,000 people in danger of starvation in drought- and war-affected zones in the south, some of them in areas controlled by UNITA.
Two routes entered the area via northern Namibia by agreement with the Namibian government and the other three were from government-controlled ports.
AFRICA
MAURITIUS
Reshuffle after coalition split
Prime Minister Aneerood Jugnauth on Sept. 24 announced a new Cabinet, replacing the dissident Mauritius Labour Party (MLP) ministers with members of the former opposition, the Mouvement militant mauricien (MMM).
Jugnauth's July electoral pact between his own Mouvement socialiste mauricien (MSM) and the left-wing MMM, aimed at facilitating a move to republican status, had prompted the split between the MSM and MLP, hitherto its coalition partner [see p. 37645].
The MMM leader, Prem Nababsingh, replaced the dismissed Sir Satcam Boolell as Deputy Prime Minister and also became Minister of Health; the other MMM appointees were: Jean-Claude de l'Estrac — Foreign Affairs (briefly held by Agriculture Minister Madun Dulloo — ibid.);
Cassam Uteem — Industry and New Technology; Jayen Cuttaree — Housing and Justice; Swaley Kasenally — Environment and Tourism; and Kailash Ruhee — Civil Service and Employment.
In other changes, Beergoonath Ghurburrun (MSM, Minister of Planning and Economic Development) was also named as Deputy Prime Minister, while Jugnauth himself assumed the Finance portfolio.
Jagdish Gorburdhun (MSM), hitherto Minister of Health, took over Co-operatives from Viswanath Sajadah (the sole remaining MLP member of the Cabinet, who became Minister of Social Security.
AFRICA
ETHIOPIA
Eritrean military successes
The Eritrean People's Liberation Front (EPLF) claimed on Sept. 16 to have crushed a government military offensive launched between Sept. 9 and 13 on the northern Ginda and Dekemhare fronts, east and south-east respectively of the beseiged government-held provincial capital, Asmara.
The EPLF claimed to have killed more than 1,000 government troops, wounded a further 1,900 troops, and to have captured three tanks and a large quantity of weapons.
Guerrilla casualties were not given.
The EPLF also announced that on Sept. 12 it had agreed to merge its forces with those of the Ethiopian People's Revolutionary Democratic Movement (EPRDM).
Addressing a crowd of 25,000 in the capital Addis Ababa on Sept. 12, the 16th anniversary of the 1974 overthrow of Emperor Haile Selassie [see pp. 26733-36], President Mengistu Haile Mariam appealed to Ethiopians to defend their country before it reached a point of "collapse and no return" .
Mengistu said that it was "imperative" that the current civil war be brought to a "definite end with the minimum of delay" , and he accused the EPLF and the Tigrean People's Liberation Front (TPLF) of receiving "unlimited" foreign assistance to destroy Ethiopia.
He made no mention of the political and economic reforms proposed on March 5 [see p. 37310].
Voice of Ethiopia radio, broadcasting from Addis Abada on Sept. 25, stated that on that day the government had granted an amnesty to 120 political prisoners in Asmara; it had recently ordered the release of 500 prisoners in Eritrea.
AFRICA
SOMALIA
New Cabinet — Massacres
On Sept. 3 President Mohammed Siyad Barre dismissed his government, Prime Minister Mohammed Ali Samater being replaced by Mohamed Hawadie Madar.
It was the second time in eight months that Barre had changed the government, and no official reasons were given for the changes, but Barre called on the new Cabinet, sworn in on Sept. 5, to solve the current civil war and economic crisis.
This Cabinet was itself subject to a reshuffle on Sept. 17.
Mohamed Hawadie Madar Prime Minister Abdurahman Jama Barreh First Deputy Prime Minister, Treasury, Finance Abd al Qasim Salad Hasan Second Deputy Prime Minister, Interior Abdullahi Ossobleh Siyad Justice, Religious Affairs Ahmad Mohammad Adan Qaybeh Foreign Husayn Abd al-Rahman Matan Defence Abdisalam Shaykh Husayn Agriculture Abdurahman Abdullah Uthman Shuke Juba Valley Development, Planning Abdullahi Mahmud Hirad Air, Land, Sea Transport Abdullah Mohammad Mireh Education, National Guidance Ahmad Habib Ahmad Culture, Higher Education *Umar Mohammad Dereh Abd al-Rahman Information, National Guidance *Khalif Abdullahi Shuko Deputy Minister of Information Abd al Rahman Jama Mohammad Livestock Development, Forestry, Grassland *Farah Dahir Afey Tourism *Hasan Mohammad Uthman Jumbo Deputy Minister of Tourism Mohammad Shaykh Uthman Jawari Sports, Labour, Social Affairs Mohammad Sa'id Mohammad Fisheries, Maritime Resources Abukar Hasan Weheliych Posts, Communications Mohammad Sa'id Hirsi Morgan Works, Housing Bashir Farah Kahiyeh Commerce Yusuf Ali Nur Industry Abd al-Razzaq Ali Ilmi Mineral, Water Resources Mohammad Shaykh Ali Munassar Health Mohammad Ali Hamud Minister of State for Foreign Affairs Mireh Awareh Jama Minister at the Presidency Abdullahi Ahmad Addu Minister at the Presidency Ahmad Jama Abdullah Jangali Minister at the Presidency *Mohammad Jibril Musa Minister of State *Appointed Sept. 17.
New Somali Cabinet
In a statement released on Sept. 12, Somali National Movement (SNM) guerrillas pledged to intensify the armed struggle against the new government, which was described as "bogus" , lacking support, and unable to rescue the country from its current crisis.
In a battle near the town of Hargeisa on Sept. 13 the SNM claimed to have killed at least 150 government soldiers with a loss to themselves of five dead and 20 wounded.
The SNM had announced on Aug. 6 that it had agreed to join forces with two other guerrilla movements, the United Somali Congress and the Somali Patriotic Movement, in order to overthrow Barre.
According to dissident and human rights groups, the Army had executed 17 men from the Issaq ethnic group on a beach near Berbera on Sept. 3.
Other reports stated that 41 Hawiye civilians had been shot dead following the Army takeover of the town of Adado from United Somali Congress guerrillas.
AFRICA
SUDAN
Coup attempt
According to reports reaching opposition groups in Cairo, an attempted military coup staged by a group of non-commissioned officers to overthrow the miliary regime of Gen. Omar Hassan Ahmad al Bashir was crushed on Sept. 12.
The Sudanese People's Liberation Army (SPLA), waging a rebel war in the predominantly Christian southern part of the country, stated in a broadcast on its radio that 15 NCOs, all members of the Nuba tribe, had been executed by the ruling Revolutionary Command Council on Sept. 15 for allegedly plotting and collaborating with the SPLA.
Former senior Army officers issued a statement from London on Sept. 28 calling for Bashir's overthrow, an end to the war in the south and the restoration of democracy.
They accused Islamic fundamentalists of being behind the military regime with the aim of promoting fundamentalism in the region.
Integration with Libya
The government announced on Sept. 18 that a delegation would leave for Libya in October to prepare a joint charter for the linking of the Sudanese Darfur region and the Libyan province of Tahadi.
Joint trade and immigration projects would also be discussed.
The announcement followed the signing of an integration agreement in the Libyan capital Tripoli on Aug. 31.
AFRICA
MALI-NIGER-LIBYA
Summit meeting — Fighting involving Tuaregs
As concern in Western countries began to focus on the treatment of Tuareg nomads in northern Mali and Niger, the governments of both countries denied reports of massacres or summary executions of "rebels" .
The leaders of Mali, Niger, Libya and Algeria, at a summit hosted by the Algerians in the town of Djanet on Sept. 8-9, agreed that a joint ministerial committee would address "the resettlement of the concerned peoples and their integration" , and went some way to defusing the tension over Malian accusations that Libya was arming and training the Tuaregs.
Libyan military recruitment among Tuareg nomads, notably prior to 1987-88 for service in the so-called "Islamic Legion" , had created the conditions in which those returning to northern Mali and Niger could be targeted as foreign-armed troublemakers.
When killings were reported in late May in the region of Tchin-Tabaradene in Niger, the government recorded the incident as a Tuareg attack on a gendarmerie, in which 63 people died and 77 were arrested.
(Foreign Minister Sani Bako said on Sept. 3 in a letter to the human rights organization Amnesty International that there had been no summary executions, that seven of those arrested had just been released, and that the organization could send a mission to Niger to observe the situation.)
Meanwhile in Mali Tuaregs had been blamed for an attack on June 28-29 at Ménaka, in which some 20 people died.
Amid continuing disturbances the government imposed a state of emergency in the region on July 20.
In August Amnesty complained that 29 Tuaregs had been executed in Mali apparently without trial.
Some reports suggested a death toll as high as 150-200 in Mali and perhaps twice that number in Niger, in what was increasingly described as a separatist rebellion, although other reports suggested that in Mali at least the objective of anti-government elements was not independence for the north-east but the overthrow of the government in Bamako.
AMERICAS
UNITED STATES
Confirmation of David Souter
The Senate judiciary committee voted on Sept. 27 by 13 to one to confirm the nomination of Judge David Souter to the Supreme Court.
Seven Democrats (including Joseph Biden, the committee's chairman) voted for Souter, as did the committee's six Republicans.
The single dissenting vote was that of Massachusetts Democrat Edward Kennedy who rejected the nomination because of Souter's reticence in stating his views on key issues concerning individual rights and freedoms.
With the court finely balanced between liberals and conservatives (the latter possessing a slight but unreliable majority) the appointment was considered to be of crucial importance as it offered an opportunity to shift the balance decisively to the right.
Of particular concern to liberals such as Kennedy was Souter's attitude to abortion and affirmative action for minorities, areas where past liberal victories had been recently eroded by the court.
Souter had been nominated by President George Bush to replace the veteran liberal, William Brennan, who retired in July [see p. 37604].
Souter's judicial philosophy was believed to be conservative in that he was an advocate of "strict construction" — the belief that judges should interpret legislation — including the Constitution itself — narrowly and in accordance with the original intentions of its creators, and "judicial restraint" — the notion that the judiciary should intrude as little as possible into the political domain.
Many commentators believed that he had been nominated because of his self-effacing personality and the fact that he had left no "paper trail" in the form of recorded legal opinions on divisive contemporary issues.
While wanting to appoint a justice who reflected his own — predominantly conservative — views upon such issues, Bush was keen to avoid the repetition of the Senate's 1987 rejection of Judge Robert Bork, an outspoken conservative ideologue, whom President Ronald Reagan had unsuccessfully attempted to appoint to the court [see p. 35701].
The Senate committee reached its decision after hearing three days of testimony from Souter, beginning on Sept. 13, followed by two days of testimony from various interested parties, including supporters and opponents of abortion.
During his three days of testimony Souter behaved with courtesy and tact, studiously avoiding giving the Democratic majority any reason to reject him.
He proved particulary adept at evading all attempts to elicit his views on the constitutionality of abortion.
He declined to comment on the 1973 Roe v. Wade judgment — the landmark case which had established the right of women to have abortions — on the grounds that, if his nomination was confirmed, he would be required to consider the matter and did not wish to prejudge it.
He also emphasized his belief that Supreme Court Justices should be chosen for their overall competence rather than because of their stance on "litmus test" issues.
He also assured the committee that he was a judge of moderate instincts whom they could trust to approach all issues with an open mind, and who was able to understand and sympathise with the tribulations of his fellow US citizens.
The committee's decision was endorsed on Oct. 2 when the full Senate voted by 90 to nine to confirm Souter's appointment.
Congressional rejection of budget
The protracted budgetary negotiations involving the administration and a group of Republican and Democrat legislators on Sept. 30 produced a draft agreement for fiscal 1991 which aimed at reducing the budget deficit by $500,000 million over a five-year period.
The agreement came only 10 hours before the deadline for the beginning of the new fiscal year, after which automatic spending cuts triggered by the Gramm-Rudman-Hollings deficit reduction law would have become operational.
The impasse was broken when Bush conceded on one of his key demands, a reduction in the capital gains tax.
It was the second major concession by the President, the first having been to abandon his election campaign pledge of no new taxes.
Accordingly the agreement involved tax increases — totalling $134,000 million in the first year alone — and included new taxes on petrol, alcohol and luxury items.
These aspects of the agreement provoked widespread criticism from right-wing Republicans who argued that they represented a fundamental betrayal of Bush's election promises.
The agreement was also denounced by many liberal Democrats on the grounds that the spending cuts contained within it were orientated towards welfare programmes and, therefore, were targeted at those least able to absorb them.
When the agreement was debated within the House of Representatives on Oct. 5, it was defeated by 362 votes to 179.
[For full analysis of US budget crisis see October news digest.]
Announcement of military reductions
The Defence Department announced on Sept. 18 that it proposed to end or reduce operations at 151 military sites in 10 European and Asian countries.
This phased reduction in US overseas forces was in response to the reduced Soviet threat abroad and to budgetary constraints at home.
The Pentagon declined to state the number of weapons or troops affected by the plan, or to indicate the savings involved.
Of those sites where operations would close 95 were in West Germany, 11 in Spain, nine in South Korea, three each in Italy, Greece, Australia and the United Kingdom, and one in Japan.
A reduction in the current level of operation was set for 14 other sites in West Germany, three in South Korea, two in Spain, and one each in Bermuda, Canada, Italy and Japan.
Many of the affected sites included training areas, barracks, recreational facilities and supply depots, but some involved airfields and support areas for sophisticated weaponry such as Pershing II missiles which were to be destroyed under the recent arms agreements with the Soviet Union.
The Pentagon portrayed these cuts as the largest overseas withdrawal since the conclusion of the Second World War.
The plan was regarded in many quarters as inadequate, however.
Patricia Shroeder, Democrat chair of the House armed services military installations and facilities subcommittee, described the list as "disappointing" , and suggested that it would have a minimal impact on the level of US forces in Europe — currently around 300,000.
Announcement of withdrawals from western Europe
It was announced on Sept. 26 that the USA was to withdraw 40,000 troops from western Europe over the next 12 months.
The reductions, which involved 30,000 Army and 10,000 Air Force personnel, were announced in anticipation of an East-West agreement on reducing conventional forces in Europe under the auspices of the current Vienna negotiations on conventional forces in Europe (CFE).
Many of the units to be withdrawn were expected to be sent to join US forces in the Gulf region.
Final primary elections of 1990
Lawton Chiles, a populist former federal senator who resigned in 1988 after three terms, won the Democrat gubernatorial nomination in Florida on Sept. 4.
Chiles's victory was particularly impressive in that it was based upon a campaign which included the explicit rejection of negative campaigning tactics — despite personal attacks upon him by his opponents — and the renunciation of "money politics" in the form of a refusal to accept campaign contributions greater that $100.
In the corresponding Republican primary the incumbent governor, Bob Martinez, defeated four opponents to secure his party's nomination for the second time.
In contrast to the homespun approach of Chiles, Martinez was believed to have amassed some $7,000,000 to spend on his November campaign, and was expected to use negative tactics.
The year's largest group of primaries was held on Sept. 11, with elections in 10 states, and also in the District of Columbia, where disgraced mayor Marion Barry was not seeking re-election after his conviction on a drug charge [see p. 37647].
In New Hampshire Republican governor Judd Gregg won renomination, as did Edward DiPrete in Rhode Island and Tommy Thompson in Wisconsin.
Democrat William Donald Schaefer, governor of Maryland, also easily secured renomination.
In Vermont, Richard Snelling, a two-term governor who retired in 1984, won the Republican party nomination and was due to face Democrat Peter Welch in the November election.
In Arizona former governor Evan Mecham, who was impeached in 1988 [see p. 36018], failed in his effort to stage a political comeback when he lost the contest for the Republican nomination to J. Fife Symington, a Phoenix property developer.
The Democrat nomination was won by Terry Goddard, former mayor of Phoenix and the son of a former governor.
The day's most surprising result occurred in Washington DC, where Sharon Pratt Dixon, an outsider with little political experience, came from behind to score a surprise victory against four other contenders for the Democrat mayoral nomination.
Dixon, who campaigned upon the promise to "clean City Hall out not with a broom, but a shovel" , had been the first of the candidates to call for Barry's resignation.
She was almost certain to defeat her Republican opponent Maurice Turner, a former police chief, in the November election.
The charismatic Democrat politician, the Rev. Jesse Jackson, was chosen as one of the two Democrat candidates for the post of "shadow senator" , created in order to lobby for full statehood for the District of Columbia.
The 1990 primary season concluded on Sept. 18 with results in both Massachusetts and Oklahoma, both of which provided evidence of voter disillusionment with incumbents.
In Massachusetts the contest to select the Democrat candidate to contest the governorship was resolved when John Silber, the caustic president of Boston University and a political maverick, came from behind in the polls to defeat Francis X. Bellotti, a former state attorney general and a mainstay of the Democrat establishment.
The result was interpreted by most commentators as an expression of anger against the Democrat administration of Michael Dukakis — who had decided not to seek a fourth term — for having caused the state's current fiscal problems.
Silber's Republican opponent in the November election was also selected on Sept. 18, when William Weld defeated the state House minority leader Steven Pierce, the favourite for the Republican nomination.
The prevailing sense of disillusionment with the Democrats within Massachusetts meant that the Republicans had a realistic chance of winning the governorship for the first time since 1970.
In Oklahoma both main parties held run-off elections to complete the process, begun with the primaries of Aug. 28, of selecting a gubernatorial candidate to succeed Harry Bellmon (Rep.), who was retiring.
The two successful candidates, Democrat David Walters and Republican Bill Price, were both political newcomers.
Voters also overwhelmingly approved a constitutional amendment which would limit state legislators to no more than 12 years in office.
It was the first such measure passed in any state, although similar measures were on the ballot papers for November in Colorado and California.
The advantages possessed by incumbents within the US political system, particularly the disparities in the levels of campaign funds available, meant that most governors and federal legislators — current estimates suggested over 95 per cent— could expect to win re-election.
Of the 405 members of Congress seeking re-election in November 1990, only one, Donald "Buz" Lukens (Rep., Ohio), was defeated during the primary process, and his campaign was impaired by his conviction for having had sexual intercourse with a minor.
Sentencing in jogger rape trial
Yusef Salaam, 16, Raymond Santana, 15, and Antron McCray, 16, the three youths convicted in August of participating in the rape and assault of a jogger in Central Park, New York City, were given maximum sentences of five to 10 years' imprisonment on Sept. 11.
Although the seriousness of the crime meant that the youths had been tried as adults, the fact that all were under 16 years of age at the time of the attack (April 1989) meant that they had to be sentenced as juveniles.
In sentencing the three, Manhattan Superior Court Justice Thomas B. Galligan stated that they had turned the park into a "torture chamber" on the night in question, and that "the intensity of the violence that occurred…is something no rational mind can explain" .
New lawyers acting for two the three defendants accused Galligan of racism and incompetence and suggested that they would appeal against the sentences.
AMERICAS
CANADA
Provincial elections — Constitutional controversy
NDP victory in Ontario
The New Democratic Party (NDP) won its most spectacular victory to date when it swept to power in elections in Ontario, Canada's richest province, on Sept. 6.
The NDP defeated the incumbent Liberal administration, increasing its share of the 130 seats in the provincial legislature from 19 to 74.
The Liberals fell back from 93 to 36 seats, whilst the Progressive Conservative Party (PCP), which held power at federal level, won 20 seats.
Liberal Premier David Peterson had called the election two years before the current parliament's term — constitutionally five years, although in practice normally four years — expired.
(He had first formed a minority government in 1985, ending over 40 years of PCP rule in the province, and had then won a large majority at elections in 1987 — see p. 35452.)
During the course of the campaign the Liberal leader failed to deflect charges that the early election was prompted by political opportunism, and that it had been called while the Liberals still enjoyed a lead in the opinion polls, but with an economic downturn in prospect.
The complacent Liberal campaign was adroitly exploited by Bob Rae, the NDP's provincial leader.
Peterson, who lost his own seat, accepted responsibility for the defeat and immediately resigned as provincial Liberal leader.
Since its foundation in 1961, the NDP had established itself as the most successful social democratic party in north America, and as Canada's third main party at federal level.
Although it had held power in several of Canada's western provinces, however, the Ontario result marked the first occasion upon which the party had won a provincial election east of Manitoba.
The platform upon which the victory was achieved included a commitment to raise the minimum wage by 50 per cent, to index-link pensions, to provide better severance pay and retraining opportunities for workers made redundant, to increase rent controls, to give greater incentives to small businesses and to impose stricter anti-pollution measures.
Rae identified the main device for raising the increased revenue necessary to fund the NDP's ambitious social programme as a minimum corporation tax.
Business leaders warned that the new government's policies, if fully implemented, would damage investor confidence in the province which, as it provided 40 per cent of Canadian GDP, would have nationwide implications.
Elections in Manitoba
The NDP achieved a further success in the Manitoba elections on Sept. 11, where the party forced the Liberals into third place and almost doubled its number of seats.
The minority PCP government of Premier Gary Filmon, which had been in office since the April 1988 elections [see pp. 35958-59], was returned to power with 42 per cent of the vote and 30 of the 57 provincial seats.
The NDP won 29 per cent and 20 seats, whilst the Liberals, who took 28 per cent of the vote, won only seven seats.
Although opinion polls had suggested that the Liberals would achieve a comfortable second place, they were once again eclipsed by a late NDP surge.
Constitutional controversy involving Senate
Canada's longest-serving provincial Premier, John Buchanan of Nova Scotia, resigned on Sept. 12 (after almost 12 years in office) amid allegations of corruption within his PCP administration.
His post was filled on a temporary basis by Roger Bacon, his deputy, until such time as the PCP elected a replacement.
Immediately upon stepping down Buchanan was appointed to the federal Senate by Prime Minister Brian Mulroney.
The appointment, which was controversial in its own right, was part of a wider constitutional controversy which saw Mulroney appoint 24 new senators within a month.
Not only were existing vacancies within the 104-seat chamber filled, but new seats were created so that by the end of September the unelected chamber's membership had been expanded to 112.
The Canadian Senate, which was widely perceived as being in need of reform, had possessed a solid Liberal majority as a legacy of 21 years of almost uninterrupted Liberal government which had ended in 1984.
Despite a growing number of vacancies, Mulroney had suspended Senate appointments during the protracted Meech Lake constitutional debate because the proposed constitutional changes included Senate reform.
Although it was unable to veto legislation, the Liberal majority in the Senate — led by former Deputy Prime Minister Allan MacEachan — blocked a key piece of government legislation: a bill to implement the highly unpopular goods and services tax (GST), a new 7 per cent value added tax due to take effect on Jan. 1, 1991.
The effect of this Senate action, together with the collapse of the Meech Lake Accord in June 1990, led Mulroney to seek to overturn the Liberal majority within the second chamber.
This could not be achieved merely by filling all existing vacancies, however, since the Liberal bloc consisted of 52 out of the 104 seats, and the Liberals could also generally count on the support of at least one independent.
On Sept. 27 Mulroney appealed to Queen Elizabeth II, Canada's head of state, for permission to use an arcane clause of the 1867 British North America Act to create an extra eight Senate seats, in order to avoid Article 42 of the 1982 Patriation of the Constitution Act [see p. 31312].
The last occasion upon which a Canadian Prime Minister had attempted to use the British monarch to alter the composition of the Senate had been in 1874, when Queen Victoria had rejected a request from Alexander Mackenzie.
Mulroney's request was, however, granted by the crown and he promptly named the additional senators.
The new appointments brought the number of PCP seats to 54 which, together with the support of three conservative independents, was sufficient to ensure a slim majority in the upper chamber.
MacEachan denounced the Prime Minister's action and led a five-day Liberal boycott of the Senate.
On their return on Oct. 2 the Liberals began a filibuster, whilst also challenging the constitutional legitimacy of Mulroney's actions in the courts.
Mohawk siege
An 11-week armed siege by Mohawk Indians in Quebec, in defence of local land rights, was the latest manifestation of national and increasingly militant struggles by indigenous people in Canada to control their own affairs [see pp. 37448; 37519].
The siege ended in fist fights on Sept. 26, when 50 Indians, surrounded by Quebec police and Army units, attempted to escape.
Mohawk leaders claimed that their action had focused world attention on land compensation claims of Canadian Indians and on the poor living conditions on reservations.
The federal government, in a four-point plan to improve such conditions, promised an accelerated process for settling land claims.
The Quebec authorities proposed the creation of a special human rights tribunal to try Mohawks charged with offences during the siege, while Indian leaders demanded that Indian police agencies be established because of the widespread distrust of white law enforcement.
The trouble had started in March when Mohawks on the Kahnesatake reservation in Oka, Quebec, 33 km south-west of the city of Montreal, erected a barricade on a highway to prevent the town council from extending a golf course on to sacred burial land.
On July 11 a police corporal was shot dead during an unsuccessful attempt by 100 provincial police to storm the barricade; some reports claimed that he had been killed in cross-fire.
Mohawks on the nearby Kahnawake reservation, joined by members of the militant Warriors Society [see p. 37448], in solidarity with the Oka action erected barricades on approaches to the main Mercier road bridge spanning the St Lawrence river, forcing commuters to make lengthy detours into Montreal.
A protest march of 400 Indians took place in the federal capital, Ottawa, on July 17, and on July 19 an unprecedented emergency meeting of 200 chiefs, comprising the Assembly of First Nations, demanded UN intervention and an international economic boycott of the Canadian federal government if the UN refused to intervene.
On federal government orders, the Quebec government on July 27 abandoned its unofficial policy of starving the Mohawks into submission, and the Department of Indian Affairs purchased 29 acres of the disputed Oka land from its French owner in an attempt break the deadlock.
In the face of the Mohawks' continued uncompromising stance, the Ottawa government on Aug. 8 agreed to the Quebec government's request that troops be mobilized, but also appointed Alan Gold, chief justice of the Quebec Superior Court, as a mediator in future negotiations.
On Aug. 12 a formal agreement paving the way for negotiations was signed by the federal and Quebec governments and by Mohawk leaders.
This failed to meet the demand for the forcible removal of the barricades, as advanced by the 7,000 white residents of the Chateauguay suburb adjacent to the Mercier bridge (some of whom had regularly assembled during the siege to burn Mohawk effigies, and had participated in attacks on Indians fleeing the adjoining Kahnawake reservation).
Violent clashes between these white residents and the police reportedly resulted in injuries to nearly 100 people, including 16 police.
The Quebec government ordered the Army to dismantle the barricades on Aug. 27, having refused to accede to the Mohawks' additional demands that they be treated as a sovereign nation during negotiations and be granted immunity from prosecution.
However, a show of force by 4,000 troops, backed by tank-bulldozers, led to an agreement between Army commanders and the Mohawks to begin the peaceful removal of the Mercier bridge barricades on Aug. 31.
The barricades at Oka were abandoned with little resistance on Sept. 2, following reported clashes between moderate Mohawk community leaders and militant Warriors.
Some 200-300 Warriors reportedly escaped, heavily armed, while 30 others, accompanied by 30 women and children, retreated to an alcohol treatment centre and refused to surrender because they feared police reprisals.
An Army sweep through the Kahnawake reservation in search of weapons on Sept. 18 left 100 Indians hospitalized from injuries and the effects of tear gas, and seven soldiers were also injured.
In a parallel dispute over land claims, freight and passenger rail traffic was seriously disrupted by Ojibwa Indians who blockaded two trans-continental railroads near Thunder Bay in north-western Ontario for five days.
Court injunctions obtained by Canadian National Railways succeeded in having both removed by Aug. 21.
AMERICAS
PANAMA
Economic plan
In late September a joint World Bank and Inter-American Development Bank (IDB) mission discussed the government's "National Strategy of Development and Economic Modernization" , introduced in late August, which aimed to privatize Air Panama, the Atlantic Banana Company, the state-run railway and electricity supply industries, along with other large companies.
It was hoped that under the plan more than 60,000 private- and public-sector jobs would be created over three years.
The government, which had reportedly paid US$120,000,000 in debt interest arrears to the two multilateral agencies in the previous six months, had still to repay a further $540,000,000 in further interest payments before it became eligible for new loans.
As reported on Aug. 23 a $244,000,000 economic aid agreement had been signed with the USA to support the economic recovery programme, $130,000,000 of which would used towards payment of debt arrears.
However, the recovery plan's future, and that of the ruling coalition government, was placed in serious doubt when it was opposed by the Christian Democratic Party (PDC), the holder of the majority of seats in the Legislative Assembly.
The government accused the PDC of electoral manoeuvring to ensure that its candidate became president of the Assembly.
Claim for invasion damages against USA
It was reported on Sept. 19 that the National Council of Private Enterprise, representing business interests in Panama, had requested that the US government pay more than US$400,000,000 in reparations following the US invasion in December 1989 [see pp. 37112-13].
The Council stated that invading troops had done nothing to halt an "avalanche" of looting and malicious destruction.
A mid-September report by the US General Accounting Office had estimated the level of damages at approximately $163,600,000.
Up till then, the government had received $67,000,000 in US aid since the invasion.
Escape of former security chief
Capt. Eliecer Gaitán, the security chief under Gen. Manuel Antonio Noriega, was reported to have escaped on Sept. 16 from the apostolic nunciature in Panamá City, where he had been in refuge since Dec. 23 following the US invasion.
Gaitán was wanted by the authorities for his alleged involvement in the assassination of nine Army officers who had attempted a coup on Oct. 3 1989 [see p. 36971].
There was no clear indication of which group had assisted in his escape, with reports attributing a motive variously to the US Drug Enforcement Agency (DEA), the left-wing December 20 (M-20) guerrillas, or the Panamanian Defence Forces (FDP), of which Gaitán had been a commander, and which was believed to have been behind a number of bombings since the US invasion.
AMERICAS
MEXICO
PRI reforms — Electoral reforms
The 14th national assembly of the ruling Institutional Revolutionary Party (PRI), in power in Mexico since 1929, ended on Sept. 3 with the adoption of modifications to its statutes.
Nearly 10,000 delegates voted for (i) the introduction of direct and secret ballots for all internal party elections except that for the national executive committee;(ii) the reduction of national executive seats from 37 to nine;(iii) increased consultation at grassroots level on party policy and an end to PRI headquarters interference in the party affairs of the state; and (iv) the nomination of the presidential candidate by a PRI national convention of democratically elected delegates and not by the outgoing President as before.
The reforms were interpreted as an attempt to transform the PRI from an authoritarian party into one with increased domestic and international credibility, one objective being a legitimate electoral victory over the conservative National Action Party (PAN) and the Party of the Democratic Revolution (PRD) which now posed a serious electoral threat.
The PRD had been the most forceful voice in its condemnation of the electoral reforms finally passed by the Congress on July 15 [see p. 37274], stating that these would preserve PRI majorities in the Chambers of Deputies and the Senate.
Under the reforms, the President would chose the head of the new electoral commission, and any party receiving 35 per cent of the national vote would be guaranteed a majority (50 per cent plus one seat) in the Chamber of Deputies.
A further provision would have the effect of banning electoral alliances and coalitions.
These had been used to good effect by the PRD in the presidential elections of July 1988, when the PRD candidate Cuauhtémoc Cárdenas Solórzano had accused the PRI of indulging in blatant electoral fraud to deny him victory [see pp. 36367-69].
To make such fraud more difficult a new electoral roll was to be compiled, new voter identification safeguards were to be produced, there was to be access to the electoral commission's computers at the time of counting, and disputes were to be settled by an electoral court.
A leading PRI dissident, Rodolfo González Gaviria, head of the Critical Current faction, resigned on Sept. 13, claiming that the 14th congress had been "the worst sham in the PRI's long history" .
He announced the probable creation, with other dissidents, of a new political party.
AMERICAS
GUATEMALA
Peace talks
In the third round of peace talks since March [see pp. 37372; 37527]the Guatemala National Revolutionary Unity (URNG) left-wing guerrillas held discussions with the umbrella grouping (CACIF), representing prominent agricultural, commercial, industrial and financial associations, in Ottawa, Canada, on Aug. 31-Sept. 1.
In concluding separate statements both sides merely endorsed the principle that the peace process should continue, with no progress announced on the URNG's central demands for fundamental economic reforms and the restructuring of the military.
CACIF claimed that the latter lay outside its jurisdiction.
Human rights
Following persistent pressure on the government from the United States embassy, President Vinicio Cerezo Arévalo admitted in early September that there was a "possibility" that elements of the security forces had been involved in the murder of US citizen Michael Devine on June 8.
On Sept. 26 four lower-ranking members of the Army were arrested along with four civilians.
The government's action was thought to have persuaded the US government to agree to a further US$50,000,000 aid package [see p. 37311 for March 1990 withdrawal of US ambassador].
On Sept. 11 Mirna Mack, an internationally recognized anthropologist, was stabbed to death in the capital, Guatemala City.
Government official blamed her murder on "common delinquents" but human rights groups said that she was one more victim of right-wing death squads who had killed several prominent trade union and peasant leaders since July.
Cabinet changes
It was reported on Sept. 28 that Marciano García had been appointed as new Finance Minister and José Blanco Gomez as new Economy Minister.
Pineda Robles was named as the new president of the Bank of Guatemala to replace Lizardo Sosa López.
The changes followed promises by the ruling Christian Democratic Party (PDCG), in its campaign for the November presidential elections, to enact policies that would "benefit the people" .
Robles announced an economic stabilization programme designed to increase international reserves, to strengthen the quetzal against the US dollar and to restrict the money supply.
This included projected financial assistance from the government of Taiwan to assist with the balance of payments, and US$50,000,000 in US aid [see above]for social and economic development.
AMERICAS
EL SALVADOR
Failure of peace talks
Five leading guerrilla commanders of the left-wing Farabundo Martí National Liberation Front (FMLN) issued a declaration on Sept. 25 calling for a "democratic revolution" to end a decade of civil war and the "hegemonic political and economic power of the military and the big oligarchic families, to re-establish the nation's sovereignty and to create a lasting peace" .
They advocated the demobilization of both government and rebel forces, the creation of a civilian-controlled security force, a new constitution, judicial, electoral, political and agrarian reforms and specific economic measures to help the poor.
They also welcomed the end of the cold war "as it makes clear that our struggle is a North-South one and not an East-West one" .
The declaration coincided with the visit of President Alfredo Cristiani to the United States and came ahead of a vote in the US Congress on a proposal to cut military aid to El Salvador by half.
The FMLN's central demand, that the US-backed Army be gradually disbanded, its leadership replaced and those officers guilty of gross human rights abuses brought to trial, had led to the deadlock in the latest round of UN-mediated peace talks held in the Costa Rican capital San José on Sept. 13-18.
Government negotiators had again refused to consider the proposal, as in previous peace talks held in San José on July 21-26 and Aug. 17-22.
Instead they had offered unspecified cuts in troop levels, the disbanding of rural civil defence forces and the demilitarization of two of the three police units — to be placed under civilian ministries, if the guerrillas agreed to a ceasefire.
The FMLN had rejected these as insufficient, and the deadlock meant the end of hopes for a general ceasefire commencing on Sept. 15.
The only tangible accomplishments to emerge from the peace process so far were as follows.
(1) The July agreement signed by both sides which established that a UN verification commission would monitor human rights abuses "after" a ceasefire.
This provision was subsequently rejected by the FMLN negotiators, however.
Having come under criticism from within their own ranks, and from unions and student organizations, on the grounds that the formula as agreed offered insufficient guarantees, the FMLN insisted that the commission be established immediately.
(2) Agreements announced in Mexico City on Sept. 10 following talks between the FMLN and an inter-party commission, co-ordinated by the Christian Democratic Party (PDC).
These agreements provided for the prompt dispatch of a UN commission to verify FMLN and government adherence to human rights agreements and to facilitate progress on other items on the negotiating agenda, including the creation of an international commission of election observers.
A confidential meeting in Mexico City between the FMLN and Salvadorean business leaders in early July was said by rebel sources to have been "direct and productive" .
The next peace talks were scheduled for Mexico City in early November.
IMF loan
The International Monetary Fund (IMF) had on Aug. 28 approved a standby arrangement authorizing purchases up to the equivalent of SDR35,000,000 (US$50,000,000), the first since July 1982, in support of the government's economic and financial programme aimed at reducing inflation, strengthening the balance of payments and contributing to projects for economic growth.
AMERICAS
HAITI
Postponement of general election
The Provisional Electoral Council (CEP) on Sept. 1 postponed to an unspecified date the general election scheduled for Nov. 4. 1990.
Jean-Robert Sabalat, president of the nine-member CEP, later suggested that the revised date could be Dec. 9, but emphasized that this was not, as yet, official.
The CEP also postponed until Oct. 5 the opening of voter registration (due to begin on Sept. 3), but promised that, when elected, the new president would take office as planned on Feb. 7, 1991, the fifth anniversary of the fall of dictator Jean-Claude Duvalier.
Sabalat said that the delay had been caused by the CEP's shortage of funds and by logistical difficulties, including delays in the receipt of ballot papers donated by the Canadian government.
The decision also followed appeals for a postponement from many within the 12-party Unity Assembly, Haiti's opposition coalition, who were concerned that neither the safety of voters nor the fairness of the poll could be guaranteed because of the prevailing climate of violence and lawlessness within the country.
(An attempt to hold elections in November 1987 was called off when voters were massacred by Duvalierist gangs; the subsequent poll, held in January 1988, was dominated by Duvalierist candidates and involved considerable fraud and intimidation and only a fraction of the electorate participated — see p. 35697-98; 25698-99.)
The postponement also reflected the intensifying conflict between President Ertha Pascal-Trouillot and the Council of State, a 19-member advisory body established in March 1990 when the interim government was formed, and followed the installation by her of a new 13-member Cabinet, on Aug. 27, without seeking either the advice or consent of the Council of State.
Joseph Maxi Interior Jean Thomas National Defence Pierre Labissiere Justice *Alex Toussaint Foreign Affairs Leslie Goutier Economy and Finance *Chavanne Douyon National Education *Alfred Mentor Information and Co-ordination Serge Fils-Aime Public Health and Population *Andre Jean-Louis Agriculture, Natural Resources and Rural Development **Carlo Desinor Social Affairs Jean-Pierre Moise Pierre-Louis Public Works, Transport and Communications Ludovic Pierre Planning, External Co-operation and Civil Service *Jean Mainville Commerce and Industry *New appointment.
**Altered portfolio.
New Haitian Cabinet
AMERICAS
DOMINICAN REPUBLIC
General strike
A three-day general strike which began on Sept. 26 was reported to have left three people dead and 400 detained.
The protest was organized by the Assembly of Popular Organizations together with trade unions in continued opposition to government-imposed price rises which in August had provoked a 48-hour general strike violently suppressed by the Army [see p. 37649].
Three people were reported killed and three injured in bomb explosions in the capital Santo Domingo on Sept. 23.
The authorities claimed that the bombs were the work of a "terrorist" student group, but the National Union of Students claimed that police paramilitaries had planted them at Santo Domingo University.
Cabinet change
President Joaquín Balaguer announced a Cabinet change in late August.
Ramón Martínez Moya, a member of the Independent Revolutionary Party (PRI), was named as the new Industry and Trade Minister.
In other appointments Juan Estebaero Feli was appointed state advocate of the capital district; Gen. Sancito Coco Brito became Commander-in-Chief of the Army; Gen. Constantino Matos González became Commander of the Presidential Guard and Gen. Bernardo Florencio became head of the secret service.
AMERICAS
BOLIVIA
Indian land decrees
In what was seen as some of the most important legislation in the country's history, President Jaime Paz Zamora signed four decrees on Sept. 23 which endorsed an agreement reached between the government and Indian leaders the previous day.
The agreement (i) conferred land rights on ethnic Indians living in the eastern Amazonian department of Beni, covering the Isiboro Sécure el Iviato National Park and 170,000 hectares of the central forest of Chimanes;(ii) established that a multiparty commission would be set up, composed of government and indigenous Indian representatives and others from "respectable institutions" , to draft a new Law for Indigenous Indians of the East and Amazonia;(iii) established that timber merchants in the central Chimanes forest had to end their operations by Oct. 31, 1990, when contracts to cut timber would not be renewed; and (iv) made provision for a further multiparty commission to be set up to police the agreement.
The Confederation of Private Businessmen, representing timber merchants and cattle ranchers in the region, described the government's action as "irresponsible and demagogic" .
The legislation followed a 32-day march of 700 indigenous Indians from the town of Trinidad in the Beni department, who walked 600 km to the capital, La Paz.
AMERICAS
PERU
Rejection of US military aid
The US government's five-year US$2,000 million Andean anti-drug aid programme [see pp. 36889; 37243-44; 37451]suffered a setback on Sept. 27 when President Alberto Keinya Fujimori announced that he would not accept US military aid worth US$35,900,000 to combat drug trafficking.
Fujimori stated that the aid package did not address the all-round economic development needs of coca-growing areas, and that it victimized poor peasants who had no alternative but to grow coca crops.
He called for increased economic aid and insisted that developed countries, as consumers of cocaine, should share the responsibility for fighting drug trafficking.
Increased violence
Attacks in September involving Shining Path (Sendero Luminoso) guerrillas marked a shift of Sendero operations from the Andes to the eastern Amazon departments.
On Sept. 18 security forces claimed to have killed 70 guerrillas as they staged an abortive attack on a police garrison to free prisoners held in the El Sepa prison colony situated in Loreto department in the north-east Amazonian region.
One policemen was reported to have been killed and three others injured.
A further 40 Sendero guerrillas were said to have been killed for the loss of three policemen dead and 20 wounded on Sept. 27 during an attack on a police post in Nuevo Progreso, San Martin department in the Upper Huallaga valley, the country's major cocaine producing area, a Sendero stronghold.
It was considered that Sendero had been profiting from the rivalry between the Army and police in the region as to who should spearhead the US-backed campaign against drug trafficking.
Assassination of former minister
Orestes Rodríguez Campos a Labour and Social Relations Minister in the government of former President Alan García Pérez, was assassinated in the capital, Lima, on Sept. 23.
Suspected Sendero guerrillas threw dynamite into his car and sprayed it with machine-gun fire.
His son and grandson were also killed.
The following day gunmen kidnapped Giraldo Lopez Quiroz, vice-president of the lower house of Congress and a member of Fujimori's ruling Change 90 (Cambio 90) party.
The kidnappers, suspected members of the Tupac Amaru Revolutionary Movement (MRTA), made no immediate demands.
Miners' strike
A six-week strike by 3,000 miners of the state-controlled Mineroperú ended on Sept. 26-26.
The Federation of Miners, Metalworkers and Steelworkers abandoned a 229 per cent basic wage claim and settled for Mineroperu's offer of a 45 per cent increase with minor benefits.
A national miners' strike, involving also miners from the privately owned Southern Peru Copper Corporation, nevertheless remained in prospect for mid-October.
AMERICAS
CHILE
Reburial of Allende
The remains of President Salvador Allende were reburied in the central cemetery of the capital, Santiago, on Sept. 4, the 20th anniversary of his election to power in 1970.
Allende's remains had been brought from the coastal town of Viña del Mar, 80 km from Santiago, where they had lain in an anonymous grave for 17 years.
Thousands of people lined the route to pay their respects.
Four bombs, set off earlier in the day in Santiago by suspected members of the ultra-right September 11 Commando caused minor structural damage.
The ceremony was boycotted by the Army Commander in Chief and former President, Gen. Augusto Pinochet Ugarte, who had led the September 1973 coup in which Allende was killed, and no troops were present.
Those attending the burial, which followed a solemn mass in Santiago cathedral, included Allende's widow Hortensia Bussi, President Patricio Aylwin and his Cabinet, the French Prime Minister Michel Rocard, and other foreign dignitaries.
Aylwin, who had supported Pinochet's 1973 coup, was jeered by crowds outside the cemetery.
In a graveside address he said that he had been a political opponent of Allende, but that he was present to give his "testimony to the truth" .
Paying homage to Allende, he said, restored not only the latter's dignity, but that of hundreds of other victims of military repression whose bodies still awaited discovery in anonymous graves.
The government took legal action against a retired general, Alejandro Medina Lois, who had publicly accused Aylwin of "hypocrisy" .
The left-wing news magazine Análisis, in a special report a week after the reburial, claimed that the examination of Allende's body after it was exhumed on Aug. 14 had substantiated eyewitness claims that he had committed suicide, and had not been shot by soldiers.
A total of 13 people were reportedly injured and 90 others arrested following violent confrontations with riot police during ceremonies and demonstrations on Sept. 11, marking the 17th anniversary of Allende's death.
It was reported that mourners visiting Allende's grave were attacked with batons and tear gas, while supporters of Pinochet celebrated the anniversary in theatres and in wealthy Santiago suburbs.
Letelier murder trial
On Sept. 11 Jóse Dionisio Suárez y Esquivel, 51, a Cuban exile living in the United States, admitted before a court in Washington DC that he had participated in the assassination of the former ambassador to the USA under the Allende regime, Orlando Letelier, on Sept. 21, 1976 [see pp. 28273-74].
Suárez had been arrested in Florida in April [see p. 37490]but Virgilio Paz, wanted in connection with the murder, was still at large.
Two senior Chilean intelligence officers of the Pinochet regime, Gen. Juan Manuel Contreras of the DINA secret police and Lt. Col. Pedro Espinosa, had also been indicted in the case but remained at large in Chile [see also pp. 36346; 36931].
Lending and debt agreement
It was reported on Sept. 25 that a committee of 13 creditor banks meeting in Washington approved proposals to make available to the Chilean government in 1991 and 1992 funds worth a total of US$320,000,000.
The government would issue bonds with five-year maturity and a level of interest of 1.5 per cent over the London interbank offered rate (Libor), after a two-year grace period.
Ten banks would form a "club" in order to buy $200 million of these bonds and would invite other institutions to participate.
The banks also agreed to postpone amortization payments due between 1991 and 1994, a measure calculated to save Chile approximately $1,800 million annually over the following four years.
Biannual interest payments on the overall debt of $16,800 million would be maintained.
AMERICAS
BRAZIL
Amnesty International report
On Sept. 6 President Fernando Collor de Mello ordered Justice Minister Bernardo Cabral to investigate charges by the human rights organization Amnesty International that death squads, some of them secretly operated by the police, were murdering street children.
The Amnesty report, issued on Sept. 6, claimed that "hundreds of children in Brazil's cities have been gunned down by death squads and many more have been beaten and tortured by on-duty police" .
It quoted the Brazilian Institute for Social and Economic Analysis (IBASE) as saying that 457 children, most with no criminal record, had been killed by death squads in 1989 in three cities and that such killings were continuing, at an average of one per day.
Amnesty denounced what it said was the general failure by the Brazilian authorities to take action.
Discovery of mass grave
A mass grave containing an estimated 1,700 bodies was discovered on Sept. 4 in a graveyard at Perus, 70 km east of Sao Paulo.
The graveyard's administrator, Antonio Eustaquio, stated that the bodies, six of which were later identified as those of political prisoners, had been buried in the early 1970s, when the country was under military rule.
The body of Luis Eurico Teixeira Lisboa, a left-wing intellectual, had been discovered in the same graveyard under a false name in 1979.
Marco Barbosa of the Sao Paulo Commission of Justice and Peace called the graveyard a "crime against human rights" .
The government was being pressed to hold a full enquiry.
Delaying of IMF agreement
A letter of intent for a US$2,000 million standby credit was signed with the International Monetary Fund (IMF) on Sept. 13.
The agreement was due to be formalized in October, but was placed in doubt when private creditor banks objected to the government's announcement that it would not resume interest payments to them until a comprehensive set of new debt rescheduling agreements had been reached.
Interest would meanwhile be paid into an escrow account.
The government subsequently wrote to the IMF undertaking to resume interest payments to Western government creditors.
Total interest owed to all foreign creditors, which had not been paid since July 1989, was estimated at nearly $10,000 million.
The commercial banks, along with some members on the IMF executive board, warned that if the IMF agreement were ratified under these circumstances, it would send a clear signal to other debtor countries that they could reach agreements without having to meet their interest liabilities.
Liquidity squeeze
A Central Bank plan to complete a 950,000 million cruzados (approximately US$14,000 million) liquidity squeeze by Sept. 17 began in early September.
Designed to decrease prices and reduce inflation from a current 12 per cent per month to 4 per cent by the end of the year, the scarcity of local currency precipitated a dramatic rise in its value against the US dollar.
This forced the Central Bank, in a 10-day period up to Sept. 13, to buy $800,000,000 in US dollars, to prevent Brazilian exports being priced out of the market.
The freeze caused interest rates to rise steeply, the overnight rate reaching 38 per cent on Sept. 17 before settling back to 30 per cent.
Start of privatization programme
It was reported on Sept. 6 that Sao Paulo State had sold 60 per cent of its share in VASP, the country's second-largest airline, for an estimated US$43,500,000.
The purchasers — Voe Canhedo, a private transport and mining consortium — and 3,500 of the airline's employees, were the only participants in a public auction.
This was the first such sale in the government's privatization programme.
Shares in 13 state companies, principally concerned with steel and petrochemicals, were opened to private bidders by a presidential decree on Sept. 16.
Strikes
An national and indefinite strike of bank workers began on Sept. 12 for pay increases of up to 297 per cent.
Oil workers, demanding a 104 per cent increase, were also planning strike action.
However, 19 regional unions at the state oil company PETROBRAS were reported to have voted to accept a 98 per cent increase.
AMERICAS
ARGENTINA
Austerity programme
Further economic adjustments announced on Sept. 4 complemented an economic austerity package announced by Economy Minister Antonio Ermán González on Aug. 31, the fifth under his administration [for March 1990 measures see p. 37500].
Under the combined programme (i) fuel prices were raised by 35 per cent and public utility rates by between 12 and 25 per cent;(ii) US$8,000 million in government debts to private suppliers were converted into 10-year bonds;(iii) public-sector wages were to be further cut and a 30-day timetable for staff reductions imposed on government agencies; and (iv) a new threshold on welfare benefits was established.
González also promised that a "strict schedule" for the privatization of state companies would be announced within 60 days.
In late August González had been granted extraordinary powers which gave him total control over central government, federal agency and state company finances and the administration of enterprises operating under the Public Works and Defence ministries.
Fraud inquiry
It was reported on Sept. 12 that the government had ordered federal prosecutors to investigate the loss of US$67,500 million by the Central Bank over the past decade.
Roque Fernández, a Central Bank director, alleged that the money, the equivalent to one year's national income and greater than the current foreign debt, had been used to finance government, to rescue failed banks, and to subsidise private companies.
He alleged that the private sector had received 80 per cent of the money and it was here that loans had failed to be repaid.
Losses had also accrued from discounts and subsidies to private and public banks, and from exchange rate speculation.
In covering its spending the Central Bank had fuelled inflation by printing "trillions" of australs.
Forced ending of telecommunications strike
The government ordered the Army to intervene on Sept. 6 to end a strike by 40,000 telecommunication workers which it had declared illegal.
Telephone services had been severely disrupted as the employees of Entel, the state telecommunications corporation, demonstrated against low pay and the threat of job losses due to Entel's imminent privatization.
The strike was reported to have ended, after 10 days, on Sept. 11 when 20,000 workers in the capital, Buenos Aires, returned to work without the reinstatement of 430 dismissed colleagues.
AMERICAS
VENEZUELA
Full GATT membership
The government announced that on Sept. 8 Venezuela had been admitted to full membership of the General Agreement on Tariffs and Trade (GATT).
The decision on membership, for which the government had applied in mid-1989, followed investigations into national commercial practices and negotiations with 12 countries to ensure that the requirements of GATT would be met.
ASIA — PACIFIC
INDIA
Turmoil over implementation of Mandal Commission report
India was in a state of crisis during September as politicians and citizens responded to the government's August decision to reserve 27 per cent of public-sector jobs for members of the lower castes [see p. 37653].
Prime Minister V. P. Singh's decision to implement the reservation scheme generated widespread civil disorder throughout northern India, and his determination to go ahead with the plan despite the unrest was a major political gamble.
Although undoubtedly popular with a large section of the electorate, the scheme also provided his rivals within the ruling Janata Dal Party with the necessary ammunition to launch an attack on Singh's leadership.
The Mandal Commission
A commission headed by B. P. Mandal had been established in late 1978 to investigate the conditions of the socially and educationally backward classes (SEBCs).
Mandal's report was tabled in the Indian parliament in early 1982, and called for 27 per cent reservation in government services and undertakings for some 3,750 castes identified as SEBC.
(Scheduled castes (SC) and scheduled tribes (ST) already enjoyed reservation of 22.5 per cent of all public service posts).
The report observed that SEBCs actually totalled over half of India's population, but the Supreme Court had earlier ruled that total reservation should not exceed a 50 per cent benchmark.
The Mandal report was shelved by successive Congress (I) governments during the 1980s and V. P. Singh's announcement in early August that its recommendations were to be implemented startled all sections of Indian society.
Unrest throughout northern India
The government's announcement on the implementation of the Mandal Commission report sparked immediate and violent opposition, particularly from upper caste students who contended that the measures would seriously reduce their chances of finding a job.
By early September unrest had spread across the entire sweep of the northern "Hindi belt" , from Gujarat in the west to Bihar in the east.
In northern India, Brahmins and other high castes accounted for a relatively large proportion of the population.
In total, the upper castes accounted for less than 20 per cent of the country's total population, but their members constituted a closed political and economic elite.
Interestingly, V. P. Singh's National Front government had been swept to power by northern voters in November 1989 [see p. 37030].
In southern India, where the population was predominantly low caste, there was strong support for Singh's action.
Many northern cities, including New Delhi, were paralysed by rioting students and in many instances curfews were imposed and the Army called in to restore order.
From mid-September the security situation worsened, with a number of students burning themselves to death in protest.
By the end of the month about 70 people had died in the unrest, mainly by police gunfire and self-immolation.
Political opposition to reservation
By the end of September an anti-Singh faction within the Janata Dal appeared to have coalesced around the Prime Minister's arch-rival Chandra Shekhar.
In addition Devi Lal, the former Deputy Prime Minister [see p. 37653 for his dismissal in August], used the opportunity to launch a series of attacks on Singh and on Sept. 30 he resigned his Lok Sabha (lower house of parliament) seat in protest at the "style, timing and manner" of the implementation of the Mandal Commission recommendations.
That same day, however, Singh received a vote of confidence at a meeting of the National Front.
Other political parties tended to attack Singh over his handling of the affair, without actually criticising the Mandal Commission's basic principle of positive discrimination.
Congress (I) appeared to be deeply divided on the issue, with some lower caste Congress MPs openly supporting reservation.
The Bharatiya Janata Party (BJP), on whose parliamentary support the minority National Front government depended, attacked Singh's handling of the issue at a major convention in Bhopal in mid-September.
ASIA — PACIFIC
SRI LANKA
Relief of Jaffna Fort — Amnesty International report
Relief of Jaffna Fort by Sri Lankan forces
The besieged garrison at Jaffna Fort was finally relieved by the Sri Lankan armed forces on Sept. 13.
The Fort had been under siege by guerrillas of the Liberation Tigers of Tamil Eelam (LTTE — the main Tamil separatist group) since the eruption of the recent bout of hostilities in June [see pp. 37529-30; 37611; 37654].
Although the 200 soldiers and police officers in the Fort had been supplied with provisions by the Sri Lankan Air Force throughout the siege, conditions had been harsh and in addition a number of soldiers had fallen victim to LTTE snipers.
The Fort, constructed in a lagoon by the Dutch in the 17th century, had little strategic value, but had been seen as a symbolic representation of the authority of the government in the Tamil heartlands of the Jaffna peninsula.
Government forces reached it by dinghy, as part of an attack which the LTTE said was accompanied by heavy and indiscriminate shelling and bombing over Jaffna.
The LTTE claimed to have shot down a Marchetti combat aircraft with a SAM 7 missile.
According to government sources more than 180 LTTE fighters and 30 soldiers died during the operation.
Fighting continued around the Fort until Sept. 17, when the garrison was finally evacuated.
On Sept. 26 the government announced its intention to abandon the Fort, which the LTTE claimed already to have captured.
Amnesty International report
The international human rights organization Amnesty International released a report on Sept. 19 which accused the Sri Lankan security forces of using "terror tactics" against Tamil rebels and against the Sinhalese guerrilla JVP group.
The report accused the government of intensifying the violence by resorting to widespread repression.
The Indian Peace Keeping Force (IPKF) deployed in the country in 1987-90 was also accused of serious human rights abuses, as were the various guerrilla groups themselves.
In addition the report criticised the United Kingdom government for rejecting since 1985 requests for political asylum from almost 7,000 Sri Lankan nationals.
Many of those refused asylum had faced arrest, detention and torture upon their return to Sri Lanka, according to the report.
ASIA — PACIFIC
NEPAL
Approval of new constitution by King Birendra
On Sept. 10 King Birendra Bir Bikram Shah Deva approved a new draft constitution under which political power would be transferred from the monarchy to an elected government.
The King's approval of the document was a major step in Nepal's path to political reform activated by a campaign of mass pro-democracy agitation during February-April 1990 [see pp. 37246-47; 37362-63].
Having approved the new constitution, which had been drawn up by a nine-member Constitutional Recommendation Committee, the King turned the document over to the Council of Ministers, which had been invested with legislative powers in mid-May [see p. 37453].
ASIA — PACIFIC
BHUTAN
Pro-democracy demonstrations by ethnic Nepalese
The foreign media reported in late September what were described as recent major pro-democracy demonstrations in Bhutan.
According to a report by the Japanese news agency Kyodo on Sept. 27 these had recently been brutally suppressed by government troops who had killed at least 327 demonstrators; this claim was firmly denied by the Bhutanese government, however.
The Far Eastern Economic Review of Oct. 11 reported that only two people had died in the demonstrations, both in southern Bhutan on Sept. 23.
The Economist of Oct. 6 reported that demonstrations had been organized in southern Bhutan between Sept. 19 and 23 by the outlawed Bhutan People's Party (BPP), most of whose supporters were members of the ethnic Nepalese community.
Another source of opposition was the Nepalese-dominated People's Forum for Human Rights, established in 1989.
Enmity between the (Hindu) Nepalese community and the ruling (Buddhist) Drukpa tribe was deep-rooted and had increased since King Jigme Singye Wangchuk imposed a "code of conduct" in mid-1988 aimed at suppressing Nepalese language and customs.
ASIA — PACIFIC
MYANMA
Arrest of NLD leaders — Further unrest in Mandalay
Arrest of Kyi Maung — Reported SLORC offer to release Suu Kyi
On Sept. 6 the military authorities in Myanma arrested two high-ranking members of the opposition National League for Democracy (NLD), acting chair Kyi Maung and Chit Khaing, on charges of "passing state evidence that they should have kept to themselves to an unconcerned person" .
With the NLD leaders Aung San Suu Kyi and Gen. (retd) Tin U respectively under house arrest and in prison, Kyi Maung had been widely regarded as the country's principal unconstrained opposition figure.
In elections held in May 1990 the NLD had won an overwhelming victory, but during the following months the ruling military junta (the State Law and Order Restoration Council — SLORC) had shown little indication that it was planning a transfer of power to civilian rule.
The Thai newspaper Thai Rat reported on Sept. 17 that SLORC officials had recently told Lt.-Gen.
Narudon Detpradiyut, a senior Thai Supreme Command official, that a transfer of power to civilian rule in Myanma would only take place after a new constitution had been drafted and fresh elections held.
Meanwhile, on Sept. 6 the junta apparently offered to release Suu Kyi from house arrest on condition that she went into exile and renounced politics.
The offer was relayed by the Japanese embassy in Yangon (Rangoon) after a member of Japan's governing Liberal Democratic Party had met with Prime Minister and SLORC Chair Gen. Saw Maung on Sept. 6.
Arrest of NLD officials in Mandalay — Continued unrest
The SLORC also announced on Sept. 6 that four NLD officials had been arrested in Mandalay in connection with "disturbances" in the city on Aug. 8 [see p. 37655 for reported killing of demonstrators in Mandalay by the security forces in early August].
Yangon home service reported on Sept. 11 that monks and students in Mandalay had the previous day attacked security forces, injuring 11 security personnel.
In another broadcast the radio station claimed that on Sept. 14 a group of 30 monks had attacked four soldiers travelling to hospital in Mandalay.
On Sept. 17 reports stated that tear gas was used to halt protests at a Mandalay high school.
On the same day large numbers of troops were deployed in Yangon to deter demonstrations marking the second anniversary of the SLORC coup.
ASIA — PACIFIC
THAILAND
Bangkok gas truck disaster — Resignation of Siddhi Savetsila from politics
At least 58 people died and more than 100 others were injured in Bangkok on Sept. 24 when a truck carrying two tanks of liquefied petroleum gas (LPG) crashed and exploded.
Most of the dead and injured were motorists and their passengers who were trapped in traffic jams near the scene of the accident.
The Cabinet immediately adopted a package of measures to control the movement of LPG-laden vehicles through the heavily congested capital.
The Bangkok disaster was the latest in a series of tragedies.
Only one day earlier, 39 students had drowned when their sightseeing boat capsized at the Ubolrat Dam in Khon Kaen district.
Resignation of Siddhi Savetsila
Veteran politician Air Chief Marshal Siddhi Savetsila resigned from the House of Representatives and the Social Action Party (SAP) on Sept. 14.
Siddhi, who had been removed as Foreign Minister and SAP leader in August [see pp. 37655-56], said that he had resigned because he was tired of politics.
ASIA — PACIFIC
CAMBODIA
Progress of UN peace plan — New Foreign Minister
A breakthrough was made in September in the search for a peaceful settlement of the Cambodian conflict when the warring parties agreed to implement a UN peace plan.
However, shortly afterwards the first meeting of a newly formed all-party Supreme National Council broke up in disarray after the members had failed to reach agreement on any issue.
International pressure on the Cambodian factions to agree to a settlement had increased markedly in late August and early September.
After a series of meetings the five permanent members of the UN Security Council (China, France, the Soviet Union, the United Kingdom and the United States) had finally agreed on Aug. 28 on a "framework document" for a solution to the conflict [see p. 37654].
This so-called "P-5" document called for a ceasefire, elections and the formation of an interim administration, all under UN auspices.
On Sept. 1 Qian Qichen and Eduard Shevardnadze, the Foreign Ministers of China and the Soviet Union respectively, met in Harbin [see pp. 37713-14]and apparently reached an agreement on the mutual cessation of arms supplies to their respective, and opposing, clients in Cambodia.
A few days later a secret summit meeting of top Chinese and Vietnamese leaders took place in China, at which Cambodia was reportedly discussed in great detail [see pp. 37712-13].
Approval of "P-5" document at fourth Jakarta informal meeting — Formation of Supreme National Council
An informal meeting of the four Cambodian parties was held in Jakarta, the Indonesian capital, on Sept. 9-10 [see p. 37249 for third Jakarta informal meeting in February].
The meeting was co-chaired by Indonesia and France.
Its participants were Hun Sen, Premier of the State of Cambodia (SOC), and representatives of the three elements of the National Government of Cambodia (NGC), namely Prince Norodom Ranaridh (son of NGC President Prince Norodom Sihanouk and military leader of the Sihanoukist forces), Son Sann (NGC Prime Minister and leader of the Khmer People's National Liberation Front — KPNLF), and Khieu Samphan (NGC Vice-President and Khmer Rouge representative).
The meeting had been jeopardized in early September by Prince Sihanouk's refusal to travel to Jakarta.
Hun Sen initially refused to attend unless Sihanouk did, and only relented at the last moment.
The four Cambodian parties accepted the "P-5" UN Security Council "framework document" in its entirety.
They committed themselves to placing the framework within a comprehensive political settlement at a future meeting of the Paris International Conference on Cambodia [see pp. 36848-49 for meeting of Paris Conference in August 1989].
The parties also agreed on the formation of a 12-member Supreme National Council (SNC), to embody Cambodian "independence, sovereignty and unity" and to occupy the Cambodian UN seat during the transitional period before UN-supervised elections [see table for membership of SNC].
The SNC was to be composed of equal numbers from both the SOC and the NGC, as already agreed by all parties except the Khmers Rouges in the Tokyo communiqué of June 5, 1990 [see pp. 37532-33].
However, the agreement also included a paragraph based on a proposal by Sihanouk which stipulated that the SNC had the authority to elect a "13th member" as its chair.
In a press conference held after the final meeting on Sept. 10 Hun Sen called for an immediate ceasefire in Cambodia.
However, the Khmers Rouges rejected the call, and vowed to continue fighting until the final Vietnamese had left Cambodia.
Hun Sen (SOC) Gen. Tea Banh (SOC) Gen. Sin Song (SOC) Kong Samol (SOC) Hor Nam Hong (SOC) Chem Snguon (SOC) Khieu Samphan (Khmers Rouges) Son Sen (Khmers Rouges) Son Sann (KPNLF) Ieng Muli (KPNLF) Norodom Ranaridh (Sihanoukist) Chau Sen Kosal (Sihanoukist)
Supreme National Council
Breakdown of first SNC meeting over issue of chair
The first meeting of the SNC opened in the disused Cambodian embassy in Bangkok on Sept. 17, but after two days the talks had ground to a halt, the main stumbling block being the appointment of a SNC chair.
During the meeting the NGC members pressed for the appointment of Prince Sihanouk as SNC chair and "13th member" , an option which was unacceptable to the SOC delegates who claimed that this would provide the NGC with a "seven to six" advantage.
For their part the NGC members disagreed with a SOC proposal that Hun Sen should be appointed as SNC Vice-Chair and head of a Cambodian delegation to the UN General Assembly.
Prince Sihanouk himself proposed a compromise on Sept. 21, whereby he would be appointed Chair and the SOC would be entitled to a seventh delegate.
This was apparently rejected by the Phnom Penh government on Sept. 25, on the grounds that it did not provide for Hun Sen's appointment as Vice-Chair.
Appointment of new Ministers of Foreign Affairs and Trade in Phnom Penh
On Sept. 17 the politburo of the ruling Kampuchean People's Revolutionary Party (KPRP) appointed Hor Nam Hong, hitherto Minister Assistant in charge of monitoring Foreign and Judicial Affairs, as Foreign Minister of the SOC in place of Premier Hun Sen [see p. 37655 for August government and party appointments].
The politburo also appointed Lt.-Gen.
Nhim Venda as Trade Minister in place of Taing Sarim.
Nim retained his post as Vice-Minister of National Defence.
ASIA — PACIFIC
VIETNAM
Relations with China and United States
Secret Sino-Vietnamese summit — Visit to Beijing by Gen. Giap
Sino-Vietnamese relations improved dramatically during September.
A secret summit meeting of top government and party leaders was held in China early in the month and this was followed by a visit to Beijing by one of Vietnam's most senior leaders.
Both Vietnamese and Chinese diplomats confirmed in mid-September that a secret summit meeting had taken place on Sept. 3-4.
According to a report in the Bangkok Post of Sept. 19 the two sides signed a memorandum of understanding aimed at ending the Cambodian conflict and normalizing relations.
The Far Eastern Economic Review of Oct. 4 reported that the meeting took place in the city of Chengdu, although other reports cited Nanning as the location.
The Vietnamese delegation included Nguyen Van Linh, the secretary-general of the Communist Party of Vietnam (CPV), Do Muoi, the country's Premier, and Pham Van Dong, former Premier and CPV central committee "adviser" .
The Chinese side included Jiang Zemin, general secretary of the Chinese Communist Party (CCP) and Li Peng, the Chinese Premier.
On Sept. 16 the Chinese government opened the southern border with Vietnam at the "Friendship Pass" in order to allow Vietnamese athletes to travel to the Asian Games in Beijing.
The "Pass" had been closed since the deterioration in Sino-Vietnamese relations in the late 1970s, except for the infrequent exchange of prisoners of war.
Senior Gen. Vo Nguyen Giap, a Vice-Premier and Vietnam's most famous living war hero, also crossed through the "Friendship Pass" on Sept. 18 on his way to Beijing to attend the Asian Games.
Giap arrived in Beijing the next day, the first high-ranking Vietnamese official to visit China openly since CPV general secretary Le Duan visited in late 1977 [see p. 28913].
Meeting between Baker and Nguyen Co Thach — Extension of economic embargo
Nguyen Co Thach, Vietnam's Foreign Minister, and James Baker, the United States Secretary of State, met in New York on Sept. 29.
The meeting followed a major shift in US policy towards Indo-China announced in July 1990 [see p. 37598]and constituted the highest level of contact between Vietnam and the USA since the end of the Vietnam war in 1975.
The two sides discussed the Cambodian problem and the issue of US personnel regarded as missing in action (MIA) in the Vietnam war.
A US State Department official described the meeting as "a step in the direction of normalization of relations" .
Despite the improvement in US-Vietnamese relations, on Sept. 14 the USA extended for a year an economic embargo against Vietnam (and also Cambodia, Cuba and North Korea).
Vietnam was keen to see the embargo lifted in order to pave the way for a resumption of IMF lending.
ASIA — PACIFIC
MONGOLIA
Election of leading officials
Election of President — Election of leading Hural posts
The 12th People's Great Hural, members of which had been elected in the country's first multiparty elections held in July [see p. 37656], met for its first session on Sept. 3-11.
On the first day of the session 372 of the 426 deputies present voted to elect Punsalmaagiyn Ochirbat, hitherto Chair of the Presidium of the People's Great Hural and a member of the Mongolian People's Revolutionary Party (MPRP), as Mongolia's first President.
President Ochirbat's former post was abolished.
Also at the first session MPRP member Jambyn Gombojav was elected as Hural Chair.
Four Deputy Chairs were also elected, only one of whom, Hylyshyyn Huzkey, was an MPRP member.
The other three Deputy Chairs were: Tsohiogyyn Adyasuren of the Social Democratic Party (SDP), Luvsandambyn Dashnyam of the National Progress Party (NPP) and the independent deputy Oydovyn Dolgorsuren.
President Ochirbat, 48, had held the post of Presidium Chair only since March [see p. 37317].
Before that he had served as Minister of External Economic Relations and Supply and had been a member of the MPRP central committee since 1976.
In his inauguration speech delivered on Sept. 3 he urged the Mongolian people to construct a market-orientated economy.
He promised to work towards achieving Mongolian membership of the major international monetary and trade organizations, whilst at the same time stressing the importance of maintaining good relations with the Soviet Union and China.
On Sept. 7 the Hural deputies elected Radnaasumbereliyn Gonchigdorj, Chair of the SDP's executive committee, as Vice-President after what Ulan Bator radio described as a "three-day heated debate" .
In the final vote Gonchigdorj defeated Sanjaasurengiyn Dzorig, chief co-ordinator of the Mongolian Democratic Party (MDP), the largest of the opposition parties.
In an earlier round of voting the NPP leader, Davaadorjiyn Ganbold, had been eliminated [see p. 37454, where Ganbold's first name is incorrectly given as Dagvasurengiyn].
The (MPRP) Chair of the Council of Ministers, Sharavyn Gungaadorj, had withdrawn from the contest before the voting commenced.
Election of Little Hural
The Hural deputies elected members of the newly-created Little Hural, or standing parliament, on Sept. 9.
Four political parties had already been allocated an exact number of seats in the Little Hural from party preferences returned during the July elections [see table below].
Vice-President Gonchigdorj was the ex officio Chair of the Little Hural and Kinayatn Dzardyhan and Byaraagiyn Chimid, both of the MPRP, were elected Deputy Chair and Secretary, respectively.
The Little Hural held its first session on Sept. 13.
MPRP 33* MDP 13 SDP 4** NPP 3 *Including Deputy Chair and Secretary.
**Including Chair.
Composition of Little Hural
Election of Prime Minister — New government structure
On Sept. 11, the final day of the People's Great Hural session, deputies elected MPRP central committee member Dashiyn Byambasuren as Prime Minister.
Byambasuren, a 48-year-old Soviet-trained economist, had served as Deputy Chair of the Council of Ministers since late 1989.
At a press conference on Sept. 11 Byambasuren promised to introduce a market economy in 1991.
He said that in 10 years he hoped to have boosted the Mongolian economy to South Korea's present level, with the help of the developed countries and of international economic organizations.
On Sept. 27 the Little Hural passed its first piece of legislation, a Law on Government Structure.
The law abolished the Council of Ministers and replaced it with a 16-member Cabinet, headed by Byambasuren.
ASIA — PACIFIC
CHINA
Replacement of Li Peng in Economic Commission — Visit by Soviet Foreign Minister
Resignation of Li Peng from leading economic post
Li Peng, Premier of the State Council, resigned from his concurrent post of Minister in charge of the State Commission for Restructuring the Economy on Sept. 7.
He was replaced by Chen Jinhua, head of the China National Petrochemical Corporation and a former vice-mayor and deputy Chinese Communist Party secretary for Shanghai.
According to the official news agency Xinhua the decision, taken at a session of the National People's Congress Standing Committee, was "in accordance with Premier Li Peng's nomination" .
The Far Eastern Economic Review of Sept. 20 commented that reports suggesting that Li Peng's decision to step down reflected "political vulnerability" or presaged his removal as Premier "appear to be groundless" .
Since its creation in 1982 the Commission had played an important role in the country's economic reform programme.
Li Peng had been appointed to head it in April 1988, on the same day that he was confirmed as Premier [see p. 36102].
However, after the reformists were ousted from power during the mid-1989 "turmoil" , the Commission lost much of its authority.
Visit to China by Soviet Foreign Minister
Eduard Shevardnadze, the Soviet Foreign Minister, visited Harbin, the capital of China's Heilongjiang province, on Aug. 31-Sept. 1 for talks with his Chinese counterpart, Qian Qichen [see pp. 37373-74 for visit to Soviet Union by Li Peng in April].
After leaving Harbin Shevardnadze went on to visit North Korea and Japan.
During their Harbin meeting the two ministers discussed the Gulf crisis, and Qian Qichen told reporters that the stands of China and the Soviet Union on the issue were "close or identical" .
Shevardnadze told reporters that the two sides had discussed the Cambodia issue in depth and that he and Qian believed that a "decisive phase had been reached" in the settlement of the problem [see also p. 37712].
An agreement was reached on the establishment of a Chinese consulate in Khabarovsk (in the Soviet Far East) and of a Soviet consulate in the Chinese city of Shenyang.
ASIA — PACIFIC
MACAO
Resignation of Governor
Carlos Melancia resigned as Governor of Macao on Sept. 28 following allegations of corruption [see p. 35510 for Melancia's appointment in July 1987].
The Portuguese President Mario Soares appointed Melancia's deputy, Francisco Murteira Nabo, as interim governor.
A report by the Public Prosecutor's office in Lisbon, the Portuguese capital, had earlier claimed to have found sufficient grounds to accuse Melancia of involvement in corruption in connection with the building of the new airport in Macao.
However, Melancia maintained that he was the innocent victim of a politically motivated smear campaign.
ASIA — PACIFIC
HONG KONG
Agreement on repatriation of boat people
Officials from the governments of Vietnam, the United Kingdom and Hong Kong and from the Office of the UN High Commissioner for Refugees (UNHCR) met in Hanoi (Vietnam) on Sept. 19-21 and approved a fresh plan to deal with the Vietnamese "boat people" in Hong Kong.
The ambiguously worded agreement effectively permitted the involuntary repatriation of Vietnamese "boat people" who had been screened out as "economic migrants" , by providing for the repatriation of those who "while not volunteering to return, are nevertheless not opposed to going back" and according to some officials thereby created a fresh category of "acquiescent non-volunteers" .
The UNHCR agreed to initiate a scheme of intensive counselling of "economic migrants" aimed at persuading them that they had no option but to return home.
The Vietnamese government had been wary of accepting non-volunteers, fearing international (and principally United States) condemnation.
The first, and to date only, involuntary repatriation operation in December 1989 [see pp. 37121-22]had been highly controversial, and in February 1990 the UK had failed in its attempt to persuade Vietnam to accept a policy of involuntary repatriation [see pp. 37248-49].
The Vietnamese government had, however, agreed to increase the rate of voluntary repatriation, but between February and September fewer than 4,500 "boat people" had volunteered to return, a figure far below the target of 1,000 per month.
Total number of boat people 53,681 Awaiting screening 31,875 Screened out as "economic migrants" 12,858 Screened out as "political refugees" 8,948 *Figures taken from Economist of Sept. 29, 1990.
Numbers and categories of boat people in Hong Kong
as of Sept. 21, 1990*
ASIA — PACIFIC
SOUTH KOREA
Cabinet reshuffle — Opposition boycott of legislature — Relations with Soviet Union
South Korean President Roh Tae Woo dismissed two members of his Cabinet and the governor of North Chungchong province on Sept. 19, after holding them responsible for the massive damage which resulted from severe flooding earlier in the month in Seoul and the central region of the country.
The move was seen as an immediate attempt by Roh to mollify vociferous criticism of the government's anti-flood measures by those in the affected areas.
The effect of the torrential rain on Sept. 10-12 — the heaviest since 1907 — was exacerbated on Sept. 12 when the swollen Han River demolished a 100-metre embankment in western Seoul and inundated vast areas of residential and agricultural land.
In total the floods left at least 137 people dead or missing and some 160,000 homeless.
Kang Bo Seong was replaced as Minister of Agriculture, Forestry and Fisheries by Cho Kyung Shik, formerly the Director of the Environment Agency.
Cho's old portfolio was given to Huh Nam Hoon, a former Vice-Minister for Trade and Industry.
Kwon Yong Gack was replaced as Minister of Construction by Lee Sang Hee who, as president of the Korean Land Development Corporation, was a technocrat and an irrigation expert.
Continued opposition boycott of legislature
The National Assembly returned from its mid-year recess on Sept. 10.
It was immediately adjourned by the ruling Democratic Liberal Party when it became clear that the opposition parties were continuing their boycott of the legislature.
Legislators from the Party for Peace and Democracy and the smaller Democratic Party had resigned en masse in July, but the Speaker had refused to accept their action.
On Sept. 10 the opposition confirmed that it would not return to the Assembly until its demands — including an early general election — had been met.
Establishment of full diplomatic relations with Soviet Union
The recent process of rapprochement between South Korea and the Soviet Union culminated on Sept. 30 with the establishment of full diplomatic relations between the two countries.
The agreement, signed during a meeting at the UN between Soviet Foreign Minister Eduard Shevardnadze and his South Korean counterpart Choi Ho Joong, followed a meeting in June between President Roh and Soviet President Mikhail Gorbachev.
ASIA — PACIFIC
NORTH KOREA
Signing with Japan of joint communiqué
Shin Kanemaru, a former Japanese Deputy Prime Minister, arrived in North Korea on Sept. 24 at the head of a joint delegation from the ruling Liberal Democratic Party (LDP) and the opposition Japan Socialist Party (JSP).
It was the first contact between the LDP and the North Korean government, and marked a significant shift in policy by the latter communist regime, which had hitherto rejected overtures from the Japanese government on the grounds that it had diplomatic relations with South Korea.
As such it provided further evidence of a more flexible North Korean foreign policy arising in response to the momentous changes in Eastern Europe, and to South Korea's recent successes in establishing relations with socialist countries.
The unexpectedly cordial atmosphere in which the talks took place was heightened by the attitude of Kim Il Sung, the North Korean leader, who met the delegation on Sept. 26.
Kim was given a personal letter from Toshiki Kaifu, the Japanese Prime Minister and leader of the LDP, and from Takako Doi, the leader of the JSP, apologizing for Japan's past treatment of the Korean people.
Kim responded by expressing his desire to improve relations with Japan and by suggesting that a "lenient decision" would be made in the case of two Japanese fishermen detained in North Korea since 1983 for having helped a North Korean defect to Japan.
The visit ended on Sept. 28 with the signing of a communiqué which called for negotiations aimed at the restoration of diplomatic relations between the two countries.
The document contained a formal apology for the "unhappy past which Japan inflicted on Korea" and a promise to begin negotiating reparations for Japan's colonial rule.
It also contained a North Korean promise to release the fishermen within a month, and a commitment to consider allowing the Japanese wives of North Korean citizens to make visits to their homeland.
The two countries also agreed to allow direct air flights from Pyongyang to Tokyo.
ASIA — PACIFIC
JAPAN
Cabinet changes — Controversial statement by new Justice Minister
Seiroku Kajiyama, Minister of International Trade and Industry in 1989 in Sosuke Uno's Cabinet and a member of the Takeshita faction, the largest grouping within the ruling Liberal Democratic Party (LDP), was appointed to the Cabinet as Minister of Justice following the resignation of Shin Hasegawa on Sept. 12 [for his appointment in February 1990 see p. 37328].
Hasegawa had collapsed at the Imperial Palace on Sept. 3 with a suspected cerebral stroke.
When appointing Kajiyama, Prime Minister Toshiki Kaifu also chose Yoshiaki Kibe, a member of the Watanabe faction and former Construction Minister, to replace his faction colleague, Shigetami Sunada, as Director General of the Hokkaido and Okinawa Development Agencies.
One of the first duties undertaken by Kajiyama was to observe a police operation in one of Tokyo's most notorious areas of prostitution, on Sept. 20, which resulted in the arrest of 45 foreign women who were accused of working as prostitutes.
He caused international controversy at a press conference on the following day by suggesting that the effect of foreign prostitutes, who "ruin the atmosphere" of a neighbourhood, was comparable with the effect of blacks moving into white areas in the United States.
The Justice Ministry issued a statement denying that the Minister's remarks were racist, but on Sept. 25, after a US State Department statement describing his remarks as "offensive to the American people" , Kayijama apologized and retracted his statement, saying that it had been "completely inappropriate" .
Many commentators suggested that the incident was indicative of widespread Japanese assumptions of racial superiority.
Kayijama's remarks were compared with the September 1986 assertion by the then Prime Minister Yasuhiro Nakasone that the average level of intelligence was lower in the USA "because of the number of blacks, Mexicans and Puerto Ricans in the population" [see p. 35334].
ASIA — PACIFIC
JAPAN-SOVIET UNION
Shevardnadze visit — Prospect for progress in Northern Territories dispute
An official visit to Japan on Sept. 4-7 by Soviet Foreign Minister Eduard Shevardnadze produced signs of a much-needed improvement in Japanese-Soviet relations.
Notably, it produced the clearest suggestion yet from the Soviet side that it was willing to compromise in the 45-year-old territorial dispute between the two countries.
For Japan, settlement of the dispute was a key precondition to Japanese financial and technological support for the Soviet economy.
Shevardnadze was in Tokyo to prepare the ground for Soviet President Mikhail Gorbachev's first visit to Japan, planned for April 1991 [for Shevardnadze's last visit to Japan, in December 1988, see p. 36620].
On the eve of Shevardnadze's arrival, Japanese Prime Minister Toshiki Kaifu had addressed a protest rally by supporters of his Liberal Democratic Party (LDP) demanding the return of the Northern Territories, a group of islands off the north-east coast of the Japanese island of Hokkaido which the Soviet Union had seized from Japan at the end of the Second World War (annually since 1982 the LDP had observed Sept. 3 as a day of protest against the Soviet occupation of the islands).
Kaifu declared: "If the [Soviet]new thinking which put an end to East-West confrontation and overcame Cold War-era thinking is also to prevail in Asia and the Pacific region, the first thing to do is to establish relations of true friendship between Japan and the Soviet Union." 
He stated that the Soviet Union had to negotiate the return of the islands before it could hope for improved co-operation with Japan.
He said that he could not share the "optimistic view" of Japanese-Soviet relations stated in past messages from Gorbachev, but he stressed that Japan was ready to play its part to improve them.
During talks with Japanese Foreign Minister Taro Nakayama on Sept. 5 concentrating on Asian security issues, Shevardnadze put forward an eight-point plan for "confidence-building measures" to reduce military tensions between Japan and the Soviet Union, including notification of the holding of military exercises, and exchange visits by military delegations.
It was agreed that these would be discussed by a new joint working group on foreign policy issues.
The Northern Territories dispute dominated further talks on Sept. 6.
At a press conference concluding the visit Shevardnadze told a Japanese journalist that while the Soviet Union regarded its frontiers with Japan as being fixed in international law, there might be scope for "amendment" through "negotiations based on rational dialogue" and within the broader context of concluding a formal peace treaty.
At the same time he expressed frustration at the Japanese linkage between politics and economics.
Shevardnadze met Kaifu on Sept. 6.
At an audience at the Imperial Palace on Sept. 7 Shevardnadze extended to Emperor Akihito an invitation to visit the Soviet Union.
Japanese access to Etorofu island
During the last week of August the Soviet Union for the first time allowed parties of Japanese to visit family graves on the island of Etorofu, the largest and militarily the most sensitive of the Northern Territories (the Soviet Union was believed to have a division of ground troops and a squadron of MiG-23 fighter aircraft based there).
Visits to the other islands had been allowed by the Soviet Union since 1986 [see p. 34560].
ASIA — PACIFIC
INDONESIA
Release of Dharsono
Gen. Hartono Resko Dharsono, Indonesia's most prominent dissident, was released from prison on Sept. 16.
A large crowd greeted him upon his release from Jakarta's Cipinang prison, despite warnings from the military that the occasion should not be politicized.
Gen. Dharsono, a former Secretary-General of the Association of South-East Asian Nations (ASEAN), was an associate, but not a signatory, of the "Petition of 50" movement of dissidents which had risen to prominence in 1984 with the publication of a "Save Democracy" pamphlet [see pp. 33286-87].
He was arrested in November 1984 and sentenced to 10 years' imprisonment in early 1986 on charges of subversion in connection with the Tanjung Priok riots of 1984 [see pp. 33287; 34233].
His sentence was subsequently reduced on appeal to seven years' imprisonment [see p. 35327].
Dharsono was released from jail exactly a month after President Suharto had spoken of the need "to promote human rights" during his National Day speech.
Two days before the speech (i.e. on Aug. 14) a petition signed by a group of 58 human rights activists, academics and retired armed forces officers had called on Suharto not to stand for a sixth term as President in 1993.
The group, Petisi 50, included 10 members of the original "Petition of 50" .
According to a report in the Independent of Sept. 17 Dharsono's release was "a gesture of appeasement" by Suharto to groups within the military which had demanded that he step down at the end of his fifth term.
ASIA — PACIFIC
PHILIPPINES
Talks on US bases issue
Talks on the future of United States military bases in the Philippines resumed on Sept. 18.
During an earlier round of the talks, the Philippines Foreign Minister, Raul Manglapus, had issued on May 15, 1990, a formal notice of termination of the agreement from Sept. 16, 1991 [see p. 37458].
There were some 40,000 US military personnel in the Philippines, including 16,000 troops at Clark Air Base, the largest US air base abroad; the US Seventh Fleet was based at Subic Bay Naval Station; and there were four smaller US installations.
Since the Philippines Constitution stipulated that the current agreement must expire in 1991, any further agreement would require a new treaty, which would need the approval of a two-thirds majority in the Senate.
The Defence Minister Gen. Fidel Ramos wanted to arrange the withdrawal of all US forces by June 12, 1998, the centenary of the country's independence from Spain.
Others in the government were opposed to such a long period of withdrawal, favouring instead two to six years.
Nationalists saw the US military presence as the last vestige of US colonialism, and in the run-up to the talks there were anti-US demonstrations, some violent.
The National Democratic Front (NDF) communist-led alliance promised a ceasefire if the bases were shut down by September 1991.
Stating publicly for the first time that the Philippines government wanted the bases to go, just before negotiations began, President Corazon Aquino spoke of "redefining" US-Philippines relations, and of her hopes that the talks would seek "to craft a new relationship, one more equitable, mutually beneficial and respectful of each other 's sovereignties" .
The US government continued to suggest that it was "ready" to start phasing out its Philippines facilities, regarding them as less strategically important in view of the changing international scene, and with alternative sites available in Singapore, Brunei and possibly northern Australia.
The US side favoured gradual withdrawal, however, with continued access to the Philippines facilities, possibly on a commercial basis, and the deferral of a decision on complete withdrawal for another 10 years.
The September round of talks, which ended on Sept. 21, were described as "healthy" , "congenial" and "candid" .
The question of US compensation to the Philippines following withdrawal was not discussed.
After the talks ended, it was reported that the USA was considering a Philippines proposal for it to leave Clark Air Base and the four smaller installations by September 1991, but to withdraw only gradually from Subic Bay, over a period of 10-12 years.
Manglapus said on Sept. 22 that US forces would only have commercial access to the bases after September 1991.
By mutual agreement the talks were expanded to include other bilateral issues.
The Philippines requested "debt condonation" from the USA, similar to that granted to Egypt, and trade concessions like those enjoyed by China and Caribbean countries.
It was announced that negotiations on the bases would resume in one month.
Breakdown of truce with NPA
Following her Aug. 29 announcement of willingness to negotiate ceasefire agreements with the various groups in conflict with her government [see pp. 37657-58], Aquino announced in early September her acceptance in principle of a limited ceasefire with communist insurgents, and also with rebel soldiers led by the fugitive officer Gregorio Honasan, in northern areas affected in the July earthquake [for which see p. 37613].
The communists had unilaterally declared a ceasefire in the disaster area in — July.
The NDF, which wanted a nationwide truce, said that peace talks with the government would be useless unless Aquino set an agenda to solve the problems of US economic domination, inadequate redistribution of farmland, poverty and government repression.
In early September all leave and non-essential travel by US military and government personnel was cancelled owing to the increased security threat as the negotiations on the bases approached.
On Sept. 12 Aquino ordered an indefinite ceasefire in Manila and the earthquake-hit northern areas — Baguio City and the provinces of Benguet, Mountain and Neuva Vizcaya — with a view to expanding it later.
Army rebels were not included in this truce.
The ceasefire was seen as an attempt to reassure the communists of the government's sincerity in the US bases negotiations, and also as an opportunity for the government to deal with the Army rebels.
On Sept. 24, however, the communist New People's Army (NPA) called off its two-month ceasefire, accusing the government of duplicity in pursuing attacks against the NPA, and of making a secret deal with the USA to keep the bases open.
The NPA declared that it would step up its insurgency and launch attacks "without prejudice to all relief and rehabilitation efforts" .
Right-wing military rebels also vowed to overthrow the government, and continued their bombing campaign.
End of Aquino murder trial
On Sept. 28, after a trial lasting three years, the former chief of the Aviation Security Command, Brig. -Gen.
Luther Custodio, and 15 others including a captain and a lieutenant, were sentenced to life imprisonment for the murder of Benigno Aquino and of his alleged assassin Rolando Galman.
Among 20 others acquitted was the former Minister for Tourism, José Aspiras.
Aquino, husband of Corazon Aquino and the leader of liberal political opposition in the Marcos era, was shot dead in August 1983 at Manila airport on his return home from self-imposed exile in the USA [see pp. 32517-18].
Custodio, who had been in charge of his security, said during the trial that the former armed forces Chief of Staff, Gen. Fabian Ver, who left the Philippines with Marcos in 1986, had instructed him to draw up the security plan for Benigno Aquino's arrival.
(Ver had been charged with the murder in 1984 but acquitted, a verdict which was overturned in 1986 after Corazon Aquino had come to power — see pp. 34297-98; 34489; 34872.)
The court found a soldier, Rogelio Moreno, guilty of firing the fatal shot, although he denied it.
The defence counsel said that appeals would be made against the verdicts.
ASIA — PACIFIC
NEW ZEALAND
New Prime Minister — Wage agreement with trade union movement
Mike Moore became Prime Minister of New Zealand on Sept. 4, after being elected leader of the ruling Labour Party; he became the third person to hold the post in the space of 13 months.
With a general election imminent and Labour trailing the opposition badly in the polls, one of Moore's first acts was to reverse the government's laissez faire economic policy by reaching a pay restraint agreement with the trade union movement.
Resignation of Palmer
The impetus for Moore's election followed the decision of his predecessor, Geoffrey Palmer, to call a general election for Oct. 27, the latest possible date under the country's Constitution.
Opinion poll ratings which had indicated persistently poor support for Labour had most recently shown 63 per cent support for the opposition National Party and only 28 per cent for the government, and widespread dissatisfaction with Palmer's leadership.
His bland and unassertive personal style compared unfavourably with that of David Lange whom he had replaced as party leader and Prime Minister in August 1989 [see pp. 36852-53].
The only encouraging news for the government contained within the opinion polls was that a sizable proportion of the electorate — up to 50 per cent in some key marginal constituencies — remained undecided on how they would vote.
The root of the government's unpopularity lay in its deregulatory economic policy, known as "Rogernomics" after former Finance Minister Roger Douglas.
This anti-inflationary strategy — which included the removal of credit and money supply controls — had attracted praise from international commentators and produced some spectacular levels of economic growth in the mid-1980s, fuelled by credit-powered consumption.
Towards the end of the decade, however, Rogernomics became associated with economic stagnation, growing inflation and, consequently, high interest rates, cuts in the welfare state and growing income disparities arising from tax cuts for the highest paid.
Election of Moore
As the constitutional deadline for the government's term in office approached, Labour MPs increasingly sought to avert electoral disaster by calling on Palmer to step down in favour of Moore, whom he had defeated for the leadership in August 1989.
As late as Sept. 3 Palmer insisted that he would lead the party into the election but, at a caucus of Labour MPs on the following day, he resigned after it became clear that many of those present — including a sizable portion of the Cabinet — had withdrawn their support.
The meeting immediately elected Moore, an instinctive populist and one of the few member of the Cabinet with genuinely working class credentials, to lead the party and to attempt to restore those areas of traditional Labour support eroded by Rogernomics.
Moore, 41, Minister of External Affairs and Trade under Palmer, was largely self-educated.
As a child he suffered a physical disability and, following the death of his father, was institutionalized at the age of eight in a school for the destitute.
He left school at 15, worked as a labourer and then a printer and became active in trade union and Labour Party politics.
In 1972, at the age of 23, he was elected to parliament.
After losing his Auckland seat in 1975 he moved to Christchurch and, after a series of manual jobs, trained as a psychiatric nurse.
He was re-elected to parliament in 1978, and then survived a long struggle against cancer.
Wage restraint agreement with trade unions
After presiding over his first Cabinet meeting Moore promised on Sept. 10 that his government would take immediate steps to avert the $NZ2,500 million budget deficit forecast for 1991-92.
Although he did not specify how this was to be achieved, he promised not to increase the unpopular goods and services consumption tax (GST).
On Sept. 17 he astonished observers by unveiling a new economic package aimed at cutting the deficit by stimulating economic growth through a reduction of interest rates.
The foundation of the package was an accord with the New Zealand Council of Trade Unions (NZCTU) which agreed to limit pay claims to 2 per cent, plus possible rises based on productivity.
The pact was designed to allow the Reserve Bank of New Zealand (central bank), which had anticipated wage rises of around 5 per cent(the current rate of inflation), to relax its tight monetary policy and to reduce interest and mortgage rates accordingly.
Although National Party parliamentary leader Jim Bolger denounced the agreement as "a panic move" , it was widely welcomed in many quarters.
Donald Brash, the governor of the Reserve Bank, suggested that it gave scope for easing monetary controls and predicted that it would result in lower interest rates.
There were some reservations concerning the durability of the pact, however, for although the NZCTU covered some 400,000 workers, it lacked the authority to compel affiliated unions to abide by the wage restraint accord.
ASIA — PACIFIC
AUSTRALIA
Death of Holmes à Court
Robert Holmes à Court, 53, one of Australia's leading businessmen, died at his home in Western Australia on Sept 2 after suffering a heart attack.
Although born in South Africa, Holmes à Court became one of several Australian multi-million dollar entrepreneurs who profited from stock market dealing under the climate of laissez faire capitalism created during the 1980s by the successive governments of the Australian Labor Party.
As head of Bell Group International between 1982 and 1988, he acquired numerous companies and constructed a diverse business empire which included components ranging from heavy industry to light entertainment.
In the process Holmes a Court acquired a reputation as a ruthless and international corporate raider and, at one point, was believed to be the richest man in Australia.
His empire was badly shaken by the October 1987 worldwide stock market crash [see pp. 37540-41, and he eventually lost control of the Bell Group to fellow Australian entrepreneur Alan Bond.
Since 1987 Bond's own fortunes had also declined, however, and on Sept. 26 he resigned as chief executive of the Bond Corporation Holdings in an effort to induce his creditors to accept a reconstruction of the beleaguered Bond group.
EUROPE
EAST-WEST GERMANY
Treaty on the Final Settlement on Germany
A Treaty on the Final Settlement on Germany was signed by the Foreign Ministers of the Federal Republic of Germany (West Germany) and of the German Democratic Republic (East Germany)— "the two" — and those of France, the Soviet Union, United Kingdom and United States — "the four" — in Moscow on Sept. 12.
The treaty, covering the external aspects of German unification, complemented that signed by the two German states on Aug. 31 [see p. 37661]and removed the last major obstacle to unification on Oct. 3, 1990.
Its chief provisions were as follows.
(1) "The final nature of the frontiers of the united Germany" was confirmed.
United Germany and Poland would sign a treaty confirming their bilateral border (the Oder-Neisse line).
The two Germanies confirmed "their renunciation of the production and possession of and power to use nuclear, biological and chemical weapons" .
(2) Soviet forces were to be withdrawn from the former East German territory by the end of 1994 and governed by a separate bilateral treaty [see below].
The only forces stationed on former East German territory would be "German units of territorial defence which are not integrated into the alliance structures" to which united Germany would belong.
While Soviet forces remained in Germany, forces from the other three wartime allies would remain in Berlin "at German request" .
 "The right of the united Germany to belong to alliances with all the rights and duties arising" was confirmed [see p. 37659 for July 1990 effective agreement by Soviet President Gorbachev that Germany could be a member of NATO].
The four allies' "rights and responsibilities in relation to Berlin and Germany" were ended, giving Germany "full sovereignty over its internal and external affairs" .
In addition to the treaty, a letter was signed by Hans-Dietrich Genscher, the West German Foreign Minister, and by Lothar de Maizière, the East German Prime Minister and Foreign Minister, giving assurances to the allied Foreign Ministers on issues which the Soviet Union in particular had sought to have included in the treaty itself.
Memorials to the victims of war and fascism would be protected and maintained.
Parties "intent on impairing or eliminating…freedom and democracy" (i.e. including national socialist parties) would be banned.
The letter also confirmed that "expropriations carried out on the basis of occupation law and occupation sovereignty (1945-49)[could]no longer be reversed" .
Legally, the treaty would come into effect once ratified by the parliaments concerned.
In order that unified Germany could enjoy full sovereignty from Oct. 3 the four allies signed a document in New York on Oct. 1 suspending their "rights and responsibilities with regard to Berlin and Germany as a whole with effect from the time of unification of Germany until the coming into force of the treaty" .
The 1945 Potsdam and London agreements and the 1971 quadripartite accord on Berlin were thus suspended.
The treaty would be submitted to a meeting of states participating in the Conference on Security and Co-operation in Europe (CSCE) in Paris in November 1990.
Although not formally a peace treaty, the treaty was nevertheless described by Eduard Shevardnadze, the Soviet Foreign Minister, as drawing "the final line under the Second World War" .
Signature of the treaty was preceded on Sept. 7 by a final session of the two-plus-four talks [see also pp. 37659; 37535; 37466]at which ministers failed to agree on outstanding issues.
Two telephone conversations between Gorbachev and Helmut Kohl, the West German Federal Chancellor, followed later on Sept. 7 and on Sept. 10.
Only at the latter was agreement reached that West Germany would pay DM12,000 million (approximately US$7,600 million) over four years towards the upkeep of Soviet forces in East Germany, their withdrawal by Dec. 31, 1994, the building of housing for returning Soviet soldiers, and their retraining.
The agreement was described by Genscher as "the price of German unity" .
It later emerged that West Germany was also to provide an interest-free loan of DM3,000 million to the Soviet Union to enable the country to pay for its share of the costs of maintaining Soviet troops in East Germany up to 1994.
The full loan would become repayable after five years.
Ignaz Kiechle, the West German Agriculture Minister, also announced on Sept. 10 that the Soviet Union was to buy surplus East German agricultural produce worth DM1,000 million and including 255,000 tonnes of meat, 60,000 tonnes of butter, 60,000 tonnes of wheat flour and 1,000 million cigarettes [see p. 37663 for Soviet cigarette shortage].
German-Soviet bilateral treaties
The following day, on Sept. 13, Genscher and Shevardnadze initialled a bilateral "Treaty on Good-neighbourliness, Partnership and Co-operation" .
This included a commitment that "if one of the two states should become the target of aggression, then the other side will give the aggressor no military aid or other support" .
It provided for regular ministerial consultations including bi-annual foreign ministers' meetings.
Three further bilateral treaties were also initialled:(i) a 20-year agreement on economic, industrial and technical co-operation;(ii) a treaty regulating the West German contribution to the payment for Soviet troops in Germany and their withdrawal [see above]; and (iii) a treaty regulating the position of the 370,000 Soviet troops while they remained in East Germany and the timing of their withdrawal.
Franco-German summit
The 56th biannual summit between the heads of state and government of France and West Germany was held in Munich on Sept. 17-18.
Kohl and President Mitterrand of France jointly declared that "the accomplishment of Germany unity…gives…a new dimension and broader horizons to our co-operation" .
The two leaders confirmed that "our two countries will continue to be the motor of European construction" and desired that the reforms due to be discussed at the two intergovernmental conferences of the European Communities (EC) in December [see p. 37520]be ratified by the member countries by Dec. 31, 1992, to coincide with the introduction of the single internal market in the EC.
Initially half of the 46,000 French troops stationed in Germany would be withdrawn and the French government gave a commitment to withdraw all its forces (except the 2,800 troops in Berlin and the 3,000-strong Franco-German brigade).
However, Kohl favoured the retention of a token presence in Germany by the three Western allies for the time being.
(On Sept. 27 the Bundesrat, the West German upper house of parliament, approved the legal measures allowing foreign troops to be stationed on sovereign German territory from Oct. 3.)
Membership of EC
The European Community (EC) Council of Ministers on Sept. 12 and the European Parliament on Sept. 13 approved interim arrangements giving the EC Commission emergency powers until Dec. 31, 1990, to integrate East Germany into the EC.
Eighteen East German delegates were to sit in the European Parliament pending direct elections.
[See p. 37659 for EC reactions to unification.]
East German departure from Warsaw Pact
On Sept. 24 a protocol on the immediate withdrawal of East Germany from the Warsaw Pact was signed in East Berlin by Rainer Eppelmann, the East German Defence and Disarmament Minister, and Gen. Pyotr Lushev, the Commander-in-Chief of the Armed Forces of the Warsaw Pact.
German parliamentary approval of unification treaty
The state treaty on unification [see p. 37661]was approved by both the Volkskammer (East German unicameral parliament) and the Bundestag (West German lower house of parliament) on Sept. 20.
The Bundesrat approved the treaty on the following day.
It came into force on Sept. 29 after signature by West German President Richard von Weizsäcker.
On that day thousands marched from West to East Berlin in protest at the terms of unification.
In the Volkskammer approval was by 299 votes to 80 with one abstention.
Those voting against included members of the (formerly communist) Party of Democratic Socialism (PDS) and the Alliance"90/Green faction.
In the Bundestag approval was by 442 votes to 47 with three abstentions.
Those voting against included the Greens and 13 Christian Democratic Union (CDU) and Christian Social Union (CSU) members.
Continuing controversy over Stasi
Despite an agreement reached in late August that files of the East German State Security police ( "Stasi" ) would remain in East Germany after unification [see p. 37661], the question in particular of MPs' and ministers' alleged Stasi involvement remained a major issue.
On Sept. 15-16 a list of 68 names of Volkskammer and government members alleged to have worked for the Stasi was made public.
Among them were Eppelmann, Axel Viehweger, the Free Democrat Minister of Construction, Town Planning and the Housing Sector, and Klaus Reichenbach, the CDU Minister in the Prime Minister's Office.
All three denied the allegations, although Viehweger resigned on Sept. 28, maintaining that this did not imply his guilt but admitting that he had had contact with the Stasi.
On Sept. 28 the Volkskammer elected Joachim Gauck (Alliance"90/Greens) as the special commissioner for handling Stasi files; his appointment had to be approved by the West German government.
The East German commission on the Stasi concluded its work on Sept. 26.
The Stasi headquarters in Berlin were reoccupied on Sept. 4 by New Forum supporters demanding that individuals be given access to their files (which were said to have been held on 4,000,000 East Germans and 2,000,000 West Germans).
Of those occupying the headquarters, 23 went on hunger strike from Sept. 12 until Sept. 28.
Prison protests in favour of amnesty
As unification approached many of the 4,250 prisoners in East German prisons rioted or went on rooftop protests or hunger strike in support of demands for a general amnesty on Oct. 3.
The Volkskammer on Sept. 28 approved a partial amnesty involving the reduction by one-third of sentences passed before July 1, 1990, and not yet fully served (except for serious crimes such as war crimes, murder and serious violent or sexual crimes).
Prisoners were also given the right to request a review of their trial and sentence, by an independent committee.
Merger of Social Democrats
At an extraordinary congress on Sept. 27-28 the East and West German SPD parties merged.
Hans-Jochen Vogel, chair of the West German SPD, was elected chair.
Vice-chair was Wolfgang Thierse, who had been elected chair of the East German SPD on June 9, 1990, in place of Markus Meckel (himself standing in since the March resignation of Ibrahim Böhme — see p. 37302).
The presidium was increased to 13 and Oskar Lafontaine was confirmed as candidate for Chancellor in the elections due on Dec. 2, 1990.
West German third supplementary budget for 1990
On Sept. 28 Theo Waigel, the West German Finance Minister, announced a third supplementary budget for 1990 which integrated the hitherto separate East German partial budget.
The overall budget deficit was revised to DM66,800 million.
Most of the increased expenditure of DM20,100 million under the supplementary budget was to cover social insurance payments and economic restructuring in East Germany (unification costs were also to be covered by the German Unity Fund — see p. 37467).
The remaining DM2,400 million was to cover DM1,000 million pledged on Sept. 16 to support the United States' military operation in the Gulf as well as to assist Iraq's neighbours [see pp. 37640; 37694; 37697 for question of West German involvement in Gulf crisis].
EUROPE
EUROPEAN COMMUNITIES
Meeting of Finance Ministers on EMU
At a meeting in Rome on Sept. 8 in preparation for the December intergovernmental conference on economic and monetary union (EMU), the EC Council of (Finance) Ministers failed to reach a consensus on the pace of integration.
France, Italy, Belgium and Denmark supported the "fast-track" approach"embodied in the plan put forward in April 1989 by Jacques Delors, President of the EC Commission, whereby Stage 2 of EMU would begin on Jan. 1, 1993, and would be as brief as possible.
West Germany, the Netherlands and the United Kingdom were among those in favour of a slower pace of integration.
In what appeared to be a change of approach by Spain, the Economy and Finance Minister, Carlos Solchaga, proposed to the meeting that the commencement of Stage 2 should be delayed until Jan. 1, 1994, and that the transition to Stage 3 should take five to six years.
Solchaga's plan, in which Greece, Ireland and Portugal showed particular interest, also echoed the proposals put forward in June by the UK Chancellor of the Exchequer, John Major, for a European monetary fund which would oversee the introduction of a parallel currency, the "hard ecu" , during Stage 2.
Deepening the divisions in the West German government over EMU, the president of the Bundesbank, Karl Otto Pöhl, on Sept. 19 set out the stringent requirements for economic and monetary integration envisaged by the Bundesbank.
EMU must, he said, be based on economic and financial convergence among member states, particularly as regards anti-inflation policies and contractually enforced budgetary discipline, and he warned that countries with high inflation rates might find it difficult to become full members of EMU.
In the final stage of EMU, reached via "a lengthy transitional process" , he envisaged that the European central bank system into which existing national central banks would be integrated, would enjoy guaranteed independence and could impose sanctions on governments which breached budgetary discipline.
New regulation on mergers and competition
A regulation on the control of mergers and competition entered into force on Sept. 21, giving the Commission authority to vet all large-scale mergers within the EC and to block or reverse them if they presented a threat to competition.
It applied only to mergers between companies whose combined worldwide turnover exceeded 5,000 million ECU (approximately US$6,500 million) and where the aggregate EC turnover of each of at least two of the companies involved exceeded 250 million ECU.
The regulation would not apply if two-thirds of each company's EC turnover was derived from a single member country, in which case the merger would be subject to national authority.
The Commission reserved anti-trust powers under the Treaty of Rome to investigate mergers which had already been approved by an individual member state.
Just before the regulation entered into force the UK on Sept. 20 referred three mergers to its own Monopolies and Mergers Commission, two of which (a bid by Tate and Lyle for British Sugar, and a proposed joint venture between British Aerospace and Thomson-CSF of France) would in theory be liable to scrutiny by the European Commission.
EUROPE
SPAIN
Arrest of ETA leader — ETA and GRAPO attacks
The Basque separatist organization ETA suffered a further serious setback when its second-in-command, José Javier Zabaleta Elosegui, was arrested by French police in Biarritz on Sept. 23.
Zabaleta, 39, known in ETA as Waldo, had been involved with ETA since he was a teenager and had been in charge of its itinerant commandos since 1984.
ETA had recently directed threats against the national railway company Renfe, and small bombs exploded on the line at Puerto de Pajares, north of Leon, on Aug. 14 and 20, and on the Madrid-Oviedo line near Avila on Aug. 17 and 19.
Car bombs exploded near the police headquarters in Burgos on Aug. 17, injuring 48 people slightly; at Bilbao docks on Sept. 2, killing a civil guard and one passer-by and injuring two people; and outside a civil guard barracks in Cartagena, south-eastern Spain, on Sept. 11, injuring eight people including three civil guards.
The extreme left-wing First of October Anti-Fascist Resistance Group (GRAPO) claimed responsibility from Paris for placing three bombs which exploded on Sept. 6 in Madrid, slightly injuring nine people, at the stock exchange, the Ministry of Economy and Finance and the Constitutional Court.
GRAPO also claimed responsibility for placing bombs at the headquarters of the Catalan Socialist Party (PSC-PSOE) in Barcelona on Sept. 10, and at a petrochemical plant near Tarragona on Sept. 9.
The bombings appeared to be an attempt to force the government to negotiate over the hunger strike by some 40 GRAPO prisoners which had been in progress since Nov. 30, 1989 [see p. 37588].
EUROPE
FRANCE
Lamb war
From June onwards French farmers driven to the brink of bankruptcy by falling meat prices took violent action to try to stop imports of foreign lamb and beef, mainly from the United Kingdom but also from Belgium, the Netherlands and West Germany.
Amid protest marches and demonstrations, over a period of weeks some two dozen lorries carrying live animal imports were held up on French roads and in a few cases the animals were slaughtered or burned alive.
In an incident in the Vendée farmers invaded a farm and poisoned nearly 100 sheep recently purchased from the UK.
The UK ambassador in Paris lodged protests with the French government on Sept. 7 and the UK Attorney General, Sir Patrick Mayhew, warned on Sept. 10 that the UK might take France to the European Court of Justice if attacks on lorries continued.
Henri Nallet, then French Agriculture Minister, apologized to his UK counterpart, John Gummer, at a meeting in Brussels on Sept. 24 and assured him that lorry drivers who had been attacked in France would be compensated.
The French government on Aug. 31 announced a F1,200 million (approximately US$230 million) aid programme for farmers affected by drought and falling prices, including F670 million to provide low cost winter fodder.
On Sept. 26 a second programme of emergency aid worth F350 million was announced, as well as a debt relief fund worth F1,400 million financed by the Crédit Agricole, which would become operational by Oct. 15.
Resignation and flight of mayor of Nice
Jacques Médecin, the flamboyant and controversial right-wing mayor of Nice, was forced to resign on Sept. 16 in the face of revelations of city budget irregularities and personal tax evasion.
On July 12 the Chamber of Accounts of the Alpes-Maritimes département had issued an interim verdict holding Médecin responsible for irregular payments of over F13,000,000 (approximately US$2,400,000) in public funds to a Paris finance house during an exercise in 1986 to restructure Nice city council's debts; he had been given until Sept. 17 to explain himself, ahead of a final ruling due in November.
Meanwhile, in August he had been ordered to pay nearly F19,000,000 in tax arrears and associated fines.
Furthermore, he had been summonsed to appear in court in Grenoble on Sept. 26 in connection with an ongoing investigation into corruption charges in his capacity as president of the Alpes-Maritimes Council [see also p. 37684].
Médecin resigned as mayor of Nice and as Alpes-Maritimes Council president in an open letter sent from Osaka in Japan, where he was on an official visit.
He claimed that his Socialist opponents had used corruption allegations to hound him from office, and that fellow right-wing politicians in Paris had abandoned him (many of Médecin's close political friends had been alienated by his decision in 1989 to leave the Gaullist Rally for the Republic and join the far right National Centre of Independents and Peasants).
On Sept. 22 he resurfaced in the Uruguayan resort of Punta del Este, declaring that he would not be returning to France to face charges because he had reason to fear an assassination attempt.
EUROPE
NORTHERN IRELAND
Shooting of former Governor of Gibraltar — Other IRA activity
The former Governor of Gibraltar, Air Chief Marshal Sir Peter Terry, was seriously wounded and his wife, Lady Betty Terry, slightly injured when an Irish Republican Army (IRA) gunman on Sept. 18 fired an automatic rifle into their home in the village of Milford (near Stafford).
Sir Peter, who relinquished the post of Governor on Dec. 1, 1989 [see p. 37592], had been in office in March 1988 when three members of the IRA were shot dead by British security forces [see p. 36236], and a statement issued by the Irish republican party Sinn Féin on Sept. 19 accused him of being "directly responsible" for the death of the three.
A bomb taped under the speaker's lectern at the Royal Overseas League building in London was defused on Sept. 27 just before the opening of an international conference on terrorism which William Waldegrave, Minister of State at the Foreign and Commonwealth Office, had been due to address.
An IRA statement from Dublin confirmed on Sept. 28 that Waldegrave was the target of the bomb and boasted of its ability to breach security and endanger Cabinet ministers "while less than a mile away Margaret Thatcher holds a crisis meeting to find a way to stop IRA attacks" .
In earlier incidents on the UK mainland attributed to the IRA, a bomb exploded without a warning on the roof of an Army and Navy careers office in Derby city centre on Sept. 10, and an Army sergeant was shot and seriously wounded in his car outside an Army recruitment office in Finchley, north London, on Sept. 17.
A bomb had failed to go off in St John's Wood, London, on Aug. 6 and another had been defused in Moulsford, Oxfordshire, on Aug. 13.
In Northern Ireland Constable Louis Robinson, an off-duty member of the Royal Ulster Constabulary who had been on sick leave for three years, was kidnapped from a minibus at an IRA roadblock near the border at Killeen, South Armagh, on Sept. 15.
The IRA announced that they had killed him, and police found his body near Crossmaglen on Sept. 17.
Two off-duty prison officers who were also in the minibus were beaten up and then released, but three others who escaped claimed that they had been unable to get help from a nearby police and Army checkpoint.
This claim was denied by the RUC.
Lack of progress on Brooke initiative
Peter Brooke, the Northern Ireland Secretary, on Sept. 7 intensified efforts to start round table talks with political leaders in Northern Ireland, following setbacks in July after the Irish government demanded early involvement in the talks [see pp. 37583; 37624].
Calling for positive political action from local parties and the Irish government, he said that agreement on a basis for formal negotiation was "close and attainable" but that the constitutional parties involved needed to demonstrate their political will.
A joint statement issued in London on Sept. 28 after talks between Brooke and the Social Democratic and Labour Party (SDLP) warned that if no new formula could be found within a month to bring together the nationalist and Unionist parties on the constitutional future of Northern Ireland, the initiative would have to be abandoned.
EUROPE
UNITED KINGDOM
Changes in Scottish Conservative and SNP leadership
Michael Forsyth was dismissed by Prime Minister Margaret Thatcher on Sept. 7 as chair of the Scottish Conservative Party and at the same time was promoted from Under-Secretary of State to Minister of State at the Scottish Office.
Lord Sanderson of Bowden, hitherto Minister of State at the Scottish Office, took over as party chair in Scotland on a full-time basis on Sept. 27.
Relations between Forsyth and the Secretary of State for Scotland, Malcolm Rifkind, had been strained during the former's 14 months in office, and a number of senior party officials had resigned.
The Scottish Conservatives in general had also attracted criticism for their refusal to discuss devolution, giving rise to fears that a constitutional crisis might overtake the country if the Conservatives were defeated in the next general election.
At the annual conference of the Scottish National Party (SNP) in Perth on Sept. 19-23, Alex Salmond, the MP for Banff and Buchan, was elected party leader in succession to Gordon Wilson, who resigned.
Salmond called on Sept. 27 for a referendum to be held setting out the choices for Scotland as full independence within the European Communities, limited self-government or continuing with the constitutional status quo.
EUROPE
SWITZERLAND
Referendums on nuclear power, energy policy and transport legislation
In a referendum on Sept. 23 a proposal to close the country's five nuclear power stations as soon as possible, and to ban the construction of any others, was rejected by 915,552 votes (52.9 per cent) to 816,302 (47.1 per cent ).
However, a proposal for a 10-year moratorium on building more nuclear power stations was approved by 947,356 votes (54.6 per cent) to 787,247 (45.4 per cent ).
A third proposal, to allocate greater powers to the federal government in determining a safe, thrifty and environmentally friendly energy policy, allowing it to set standards for factories, vehicles and appliances, was approved by 1,212,898 votes (71 per cent) to 495,952 (29 per cent ).
At the same time revisions of transport legislation, to improve road safety and to extend the width limit on lorries to comply with international standards, were approved by 898,718 votes (52.8 per cent) to 803,540 (47.2 per cent ).
The turnout in the four referendums was between 39 and 40 per cent.
The future of the Swiss nuclear industry had been in doubt for a number of years, particularly since the 1986 Chernobyl nuclear disaster in the Soviet Union [see pp.34460-62], and in 1988 the government had halted plans to build a nuclear power station at Kaiseraugst near Basel [see p. 36499].
The successful vote on energy policy reflected the broad national consensus which had developed since the issue was last addressed in a referendum in 1983, when the proposal failed to secure a majority in more than half the cantons as required [see p. 32643].
Sentences in "Lebanon connection case" 
Two Lebanese-born financiers, Jean Magharian and Barkev Magharian, were each sentenced on Sept. 13 by a court in Bellinzona to four years' imprisonment and a fine of SFr50,000 (approximately US$39,000) for laundering SFr1,200 million (US$933 million) for drug operations in Turkey and Lebanon through Swiss banks.
Both men were banned from Switzerland for 10 years but only SFr85,000 of their money was confiscated.
Early revelations about the "Lebanon connection" case had led to the resignation in December 1988 and the subsequent trial of the Justice Minister, Elisabeth Kopp, after she warned her husband, Hans Kopp, of the impending money-laundering investigation into the Shakarchi Trading Company of which he was vice-chairman [see pp. 36473; 37261], and whose director, Mohamed Shakarchi, was a family friend of the Magharians.
EUROPE
AUSTRIA
Charges against former Chancellor Sinowatz
It was announced on Sept. 1 that the former Socialist (SPÖ) Chancellor, Fred Sinowatz, together with the former Foreign Minister, Leopold Gratz, and the former Interior Minister, Karl Blecha, would be charged with abuse of office in connection with the illegal sale of arms to Iran by the Noricum company in 1984-85.
A total of 18 former Noricum employees were already awaiting trial in Linz.
The charges against Sinowatz, Gratz and Blecha were confirmed by the Linz prosecutor on Sept. 17.
Sinowatz was on Sept. 25 fined Sch360,000 (US$33,000) for committing perjury at libel hearings in 1987.
The case arose from a magazine article accusing him of having revealed details of President Kurt Waldheim's alleged Nazi past to an SPÖ conference in October 1985.
Sinowatz had brought libel charges against the journalist concerned (who was cleared), and denied the allegation in court.
This denial was judged to have been false.
EUROPE
GREECE
General strikes and industrial unrest
Protracted work stoppages in September, punctuated by three general strikes on Sept. 13, 19-20 and 26, in protest at austerity and other measures and proposed pension and social security reforms brought many areas of Greek life to a virtual standstill.
The Economy and Tourism Minister, Georgios Souflias, left the government for three months' sick leave on Sept. 15 and the post was assumed on Oct. 1 by the Prime Minister, Konstantinos Mitsotakis, who appointed Efthymios Christodoulou, previously the Deputy Foreign Minister for European Community affairs, as Deputy Economy Minister.
At the end of August, with inflation, exacerbated by the Gulf crisis, running at an annual rate of 22.7 per cent, the government had announced a wage increase of only 7.1 per cent for the final quarter of the year under the automatic wage indexation system, due to be abolished in 1991.
Fare increases (except for air and ferry tickets) were, however, frozen until the end of 1990, and price controls were tightened.
Under the social security reforms, announced on Sept. 6, various separate pension funds including two virtually bankrupt state funds were to be merged into the heavily indebted state welfare organization IKA; the retirement age was to be raised in 1998 to 58 for women and to 60 for men (women being currently eligible for a pension after 15 years' work and men after 25 years).
The measures were approved in parliament on Sept. 28 by a majority of one vote.
Earlier general strikes had paralysed Greece on June 6 and July 4 in protest at austerity measures and an economic development bill which was subsequently adopted by parliament on July 23.
The bill allowed shops to stay open longer, introduced a fourth shift in industry, and allowed workers in 28 ailing state industries to be laid off; it also contained measures to liberalize the commercial banking sector, to deprive the state telephone and telegraph company of its monopoly, and to encourage private enterprise and foreign investment.
EUROPE
TURKEY
Rehabilitation of Menderes
The Prime Minister of Turkey's right-wing regime of the 1950s, Adnan Menderes, and two of his Cabinet ministers, Fatin Zustu Zorlu and Hasan Polatkan, who had been overthrown by a military coup in May 1960 and hanged in 1961 [see pp. 17501-05; 18375-77], were given a state funeral on Sept. 17.
The funeral, attended by President Turgut Özal, was the result of a long campaign for the rehabilitation of Menderes, led by the ruling Motherland Party and the opposition True Path Party.
Left-wing parties, most notably the Social Democrats, did not participate in the funeral.
Menderes was the founder of the Democratic Party which came to power in 1950 following the end of the single-party system.
Although his regime was credited with having introduced a degree of economic prosperity, it was widely criticized for its disregard for human rights.
Shooting of former deputy head of intelligence service
A former head of the secret service, Mustafa Abas, was shot and killed in Istanbul on Sept. 26.
Abas, who had retired from the intelligence services in 1988, was alleged to have been responsible for human rights violations during the period of military rule in 1980-83.
The Dev Sol (Revolutionary Left) claimed responsibility for his killing.
In a separate incident, a journalist, Turan Dursun, was shot and killed on Sept. 4.
Dursun, once a cleric, worked for the left-wing weekly Towards 2000.
Responsibility for his killing was attributed to an extremist Islamic faction.
EUROPE
SOVIET UNION
Hesitation over market economy — Emergency presidential powers
The USSR Supreme Soviet prolonged the wait for the introduction of market economic reforms by voting on Sept. 24 for further efforts towards a compromise between rival reform programmes, thereby putting off a decision until mid-October.
Ahead of the opening of a new Supreme Soviet session on Sept. 10 a working group of ministers and experts set up at the end of August had been attempting to synthesise two sets of proposals [see p. 37663].
The more radical plan was the work of Presidential Council member Stanislav Shatalin and a commission set up by USSR President Mikhail Gorbachev and Russian Federation President Boris Yeltsin [ibid.].
The more cautious programme had been produced by USSR Prime Minister Nikolai Ryzhkov and first submitted in May [see pp. 37537-38].
The search for a synthesis had angered supporters of the Shatalin plan, Yeltsin on Sept. 1 dismissing it as trying to "mate a hedgehog with a snake" , and adding his voice to the growing public clamour for Ryzhkov and his government to resign.
Addressing the Supreme Soviet on Sept. 11, Ryzhkov admitted that the working group had failed to synthesise the rival plans.
There was uproar in the chamber after Ryzhkov proceeded to outline a redraft of his own programme, warning in an emotional address that a rapid switch to a market economy, as envisaged in the Shatalin plan, would produce widespread social unrest and a popular backlash against any future reform efforts.
Subsequently, Gorbachev left Ryzhkov looking even more embattled when he announced to the Supreme Soviet that he personally preferred Shatalin's programme.
With Gorbachev's backing, an attempt at a compromise plan drafted by academician Abel Aganbegyan, which borrowed heavily from the Shatalin programme, was presented to USSR Supreme Soviet committees and to the republican Supreme Soviets on Sept. 12.
Debate in the Supreme Soviet began on Sept. 17, with a view to taking a final vote on Sept. 21, but in the event the vote had to be abandoned for lack of a quorum, a number of deputies having apparently boycotted the session deliberately in order to force a postponement.
On Sept. 24 the Supreme Soviet adopted by 285 votes to 26, with 60 abstentions, a resolution calling for a "unified programme" , combining elements from the Shatalin, Ryzhkov and Aganbegyan proposals, to be worked out under Gorbachev's supervision and in consultation with the republican legislatures, for submission by Oct. 15.
Emergency powers for Gorbachev
Complying with a request by Gorbachev made on Sept. 21, the USSR Supreme Soviet on Sept. 24 granted him emergency presidential powers to "stabilize the country's socio-political life" for a period of 18 months.
By a resolution passed by 305 votes to 36, with 41 abstentions, Gorbachev was effectively given a free hand to dictate the process of economic reform by decree, to manage the state budget, and also to supervise law and order.
The first such decree under these new powers was issued on Sept. 27.
Targeting the crumbling internal trade and distribution networks, Gorbachev ordered enterprises to fulfil contracts under penalty of strict fines, and stipulated a "special work regime" for the railways.
On Sept. 10 Gorbachev had addressed a telegram to all republican, regional and local leaderships calling on them to take action to prevent a collapse of law and order.
He asserted that rising crime, lawlessness in the economic sphere, and a general "legal nihilism in society" were being compounded by the authorities' failure to act decisively.
This state of affairs, he said, jeopardized perestroika, unnerved the population, and threatened to make the country ungovernable.
Adoption of Shatalin programme by Russian Supreme Soviet
Without waiting for a decision by the USSR Supreme Soviet, the Russian Federation Supreme Soviet on Sept. 11 overwhelmingly adopted the Shatalin programme (itself a revision of a programme originated by the Russian Federation government) for the republican economy.
Implementation originally was set to start on Oct. 1, but in the light of developments in the USSR Supreme Soviet it was postponed to Nov. 1.
By unilaterally adopting the programme, with its commitment to wide-ranging economic sovereignty for the individual republics, Russia placed itself potentially on a collision course with the USSR administration should the latter not follow suit.
On Sept. 19 the Russian Federation Supreme Soviet overwhelmingly passed a vote of no confidence in Ryzhkov's government.
On Sept. 22 its Presidium issued a resolution opposing emergency powers for Gorbachev.
The Shatalin "500 days" programme
Days 1-100.
Sale of state property begins.
Farmers given right to leave collective farms with allotment of land and equipment.
Two-tier banking system introduced: a federal reserve comprising republican central banks, and commercial banks formed from sectoral state banks.
Many prices freed (although not basic commodities).
Major budget cuts, including foreign aid by 76 per cent, defence by 10 per cent .
Single exchange rate for the rouble.
Days 100-250.
Wage indexation begins.
By end of this period around half of all small shops and restaurants should be in private ownership, and the number of joint-stock companies formed out of large state enterprises should reach 1,000-1,500.
Days 250-400.
Stabilization of the market.
By now 40 per cent of manufacturing industry, 50 per cent of construction industry and 60 per cent of retail trade and services will have been turned into joint-stock companies, privatized or leased.
Currency market is established with a view to making rouble convertible.
Days 400-500.
Start of economic recovery.
By end of this period 70 per cent of industrial enterprises and up to 90 per cent of construction industry and retail trade should no longer be in state hands.
Ruling by constitutional watchdog against Gorbachev decree
In a striking example of President Gorbachev's "law-governed state" working in practice, the USSR Committee for Supervision of the Constitution (established in December 1989) ruled on Sept. 14, in the first decision of its kind, that a presidential decree issued in April was "unconstitutional" .
The decree had transferred from the jurisdiction of Moscow city soviet (council) to the USSR Council of Ministers the authority to authorize rallies in central Moscow.
The Committee declared that the decree infringed the powers of the Moscow soviet and of the Russian Federation's legislative bodies, and ordered its immediate suspension.
The Committee did not have the power to repeal the decree, but Gorbachev was now required either to rewrite it or repeal it himself.
Significantly, the ruling came only two days before tens of thousands of people took part in a march from Moscow's Gorky Park to Manezh Square outside the Kremlin to call for the resignation of Prime Minister Ryzhkov and his government.
The march had been called by Moscow's mayor, Gavriil Popov, as part of the campaign by radicals against Ryzhkov's approach to economic reform [see above].
Retirement of Biryukova — Resignation of Oil Refining Minister
Aleksandra Biryukova retired as a Deputy Chair of the USSR Council of Ministers (in which she had been the only woman out of 69 members) and as Chair of the Bureau for Social Development on Sept. 17.
Nikolai Lemayev resigned unexpectedly on Sept. 24 as Minister of the Chemical and Oil Refining Industry.
In a subsequent interview with the government newspaper Izvestiya he complained that collapsing central government authority over local administrations and suppliers had made his job impossible.
Decree on loosening Party control of the military and police
President Gorbachev on Sept. 4 issued a decree apparently ordering the relaxation of Communist Party (CPSU) control over the armed forces, the State Security Committee (KGB) and the police.
It called on the Defence and Interior Ministries and the KGB to present within three months draft proposals for reforming political cells in military and state security bodies so that they would "pursue state policy" .
The decree was declared to be in compliance with the March constitutional changes abolishing the guaranteed communist monopoly of power [see p. 37299], and the policy of separating state and party functions [for recent comment on abolition of party cells see pp. 37615; 37617].
Decree on troop safety
In a decree issued on Sept. 6, described by commentators as a move to assuage discontent within the military and the public at large over the state of military discipline and the fate of conscripts, Gorbachev ordered the Defence and Interior Ministries and the KGB to guarantee medical and life assurance for troops killed or injured in accidents and civil disturbances, and to establish legal procedures for appeals by servicemen against misconduct by their superiors.
There was growing public concern at the high toll of deaths and injuries among servicemen in peacetime, and this had become a significant factor in the worsening problem of draft-dodging.
There was much criticism of the use of conscripts in such exercises as the Chernobyl clean-up operation and peacekeeping duties in areas of ethnic unrest.
The Financial Times of Sept. 7 observed that the decree "amounts to a belated admission by the Soviet authorities of the sorry state of discipline in the military, with widespread tales of racial discrimination, bullying, gang warfare, and chronic disregard for safety regulations in soldiers' training" .
By-election win for KGB whistle-blower Kalugin
Oleg Kalugin, a former major-general in the KGB who had come to public prominence recently for alleging continuing KGB abuses of power, was elected to the USSR Congress of People's Deputies in a by-election in the southern Russian city of Krasnodar on Sept. 2.
A KGB operative and counterintelligence officer for 32 years, Kalugin had been forced to retire in March, apparently because he had complained to the CPSU central committee and in letters to Gorbachev about the need for fundamental reforms of the KGB.
He had come to national and international notice in June when, in interviews first with the United States and then with the Soviet press, and at a conference of the CPSU's radical reformist Democratic Platform faction, he had alleged that, in collusion with the CPSU, the KGB was continuing illegal covert operations against Soviet citizens.
He had described as "a fraud" the recent attempts under KGB chairman Gen. Vladimir Kryuchkov to clean up the KGB's public image and stress its role in fighting genuine crime.
Consequently, he was officially denounced and stripped of his rank, pension and medals for "discrediting the honour and dignity of a state security officer" , and threatened with criminal charges.
At the same time, however, he earned massive public support for standing up to the most widely feared and despised Soviet institution.
Election to the Congress meant that Kalugin was now immune from prosecution.
Kalugin's Congress seat was that vacated by conservative hardliner Ivan Polozkov following his June election as first Secretary of the new Russian Federation Communist Party [see p. 37539].
Murder of Fr Aleksandr Men
Archpriest Aleksandr Men, a prominent radical Russian Orthodox priest, was murdered early on Sept. 9 near his home outside Moscow.
He was 55.
Fr Men was not a dissident, but had been harassed by the KGB throughout the 1970s on suspicion of anti-Soviet propaganda in his numerous theological writings (many published pseudonymously and abroad).
With his evangelical approach, he thrived in the conditions of greater religious freedom introduced in 1988, but his radical views on the church's contemporary relevance placed him at odds with a traditionalist wing which sought to revive the Russian Orthodox Church as it had been before the Bolshevik revolution.
He was killed by an axe blow to the base of his skull as he walked through woods to the railway station in the settlement of Semkhoz on his way to conduct the early morning service at his church in the nearby village of Novaya Derevnya.
Although police in subsequent statements inclined towards a simple robbery motive (the killer stole Fr Men's briefcase), they did not rule out a political motive.
This fuelled rumours that the murder was the work of the anti-Semitic Russian nationalist group Pamyat, from which Fr Men (who had been born a Jew) reportedly had received threatening letters.
Russian separatism in Moldavia
Leaders of the majority Russian population in east Moldavia's Dnestr valley, meeting in the city of Tiraspol on Sept. 2, proclaimed secession from Moldavia and the creation of the Dnestr Soviet Republic.
Immediately afterwards the Moldavian Supreme Soviet went into emergency session.
On Sept. 3 it created a post of executive President of Moldavia "because of the deteriorating social and political situation in the republic" caused by the Dnestr Russians' proclamation and a similar move by the Gagauz minority in August.
Mircha Snegur, hitherto de facto president in his capacity as Chair of the Moldavian Supreme Soviet, was elected unopposed to the new post.
He was empowered to introduce direct presidential rule "in regions not obeying the [Moldavian]constitution" .
Pre-election violence in Georgia
Conflict between nationalist parties ahead of the Georgian Supreme Soviet elections due on Oct. 28, centring on plans to pre-empt those elections with an independent poll on Sept. 30 for a rival National Congress, erupted into violence on Sept. 18-19.
According to official Soviet sources, members of a paramilitary group called the Mkhedrioni, allied to the pro-Congress parties, on the evening of Sept. 18 kidnapped and assaulted Vazh Adamiya, a prominent figure in the rival Round Table coalition, and afterwards exchanged gunfire with Round Table supporters on Tbilisi's main Rustaveli Prospekt.
In the early hours of the following day, persons widely suspected to be Round Table supporters shot at and then ransacked and set on fire the offices on Rustaveli Prospekt used by the National Democratic Party and the National Independence Party (both part of the so-called Congress Movement).
Tensions in Tbilisi were already running high after activists from the Society of St Ilya the Righteous (one of the organizations in the Round Table) had ransacked Georgia's KGB headquarters on the night of Sept. 17-18, in protest at the detention of one of their number on suspicion of taking part in a raid on a police station.
Secession declaration by South Ossetia
The Supreme Soviet of the autonomous oblast (region) of South Ossetia on Sept. 20 proclaimed a full union republic independent of Georgia.
This was ruled invalid by the Georgian Supreme Soviet Presidium on the following day, on the grounds that only ethnic Ossete deputies had taken part in the session and that its conduct had been "unconstitutional" .
Kazakhstan chemical accident
An explosion and fire on Sept. 12 at a factory making nuclear fuels at Ulba in East Kazakhstan contaminated a large area, including the city of Ust Kamenogorsk, with highly toxic compounds of beryllium metal.
On the day after the explosion, which injured several people, preliminary tests showed twice the permitted level of beryllium and beryllium compounds in air and water samples, but on Sept. 17 the USSR government newspaper Izvestiya reported that the situation had "normalized" .
However, by the end of September it was clear that the danger to the local population initially had not been appreciated fully because of a lack of sophisticated monitoring equipment.
On Sept. 28 Kazakh President Nursultan Nazarbayev urged the USSR government to declare East Kazakhstan an ecological disaster zone (local authorities had already done so), and called for an international team of experts to investigate the consequences of the contamination.
He also called for urgent medical treatment and compensation for local residents, official estimates on the following day stating that the health of up to 120,000 people could have been endangered, principally by a beryllium oxide gas cloud which had settled over Ust Kamenogorsk for five hours after the accident (beryllium contamination could cause disfunction of the lungs, liver, kidneys and central nervous system).
On Sept. 27 around 60,000 demonstrators in Ust Kamenogorsk called for the closure of the Ulba factory.
EUROPE
BULGARIA
New government
More than three months after it had won a parliamentary majority in a multiparty general election, the Bulgarian Socialist Party (BSP — the renamed Bulgarian Communist Party) finally abandoned in September its efforts to build a grand coalition government including the main opposition Union of Democratic Forces (UDF).
A Council of Ministers, nearly all of whom were BSP members, was formed on Sept. 20.
The all-BSP government formed under Andrei Lukanov in February [see p. 37254]had resigned on Aug. 22.
On Aug. 30 the National Assembly approved a proposal by President Zhelyu Zhelev that Lukanov should be mandated to form a new government.
Earlier, Lukanov had stated that he was not prepared to head another one-party government, since Bulgaria needed a "government of national responsibility" backed by parliamentary consensus.
(Without the support of the UDF, which had 144 of the 400 National Assembly seats, a government would be unable to push through constitutional reforms, requiring approval by a two-thirds majority.)
Zhelev organized on Sept. 1 and 11 meetings between Lukanov and leaders of the UDF and other opposition parties, but the UDF consistently rejected participation in a coalition on the grounds that the BSP alone had to take responsibility for the present state of the country, and that a strong parliamentary opposition was needed to guarantee Bulgaria's democracy.
Lukanov was formally elected Prime Minister on Sept. 19 by 234 votes to 104, with 34 abstentions.
His proposals for the composition of his government were approved overwhelmingly on the following day.
The only non-BSP members were the new Ministers of Culture and of Science and Higher Education, both of whom were non-party academics.
Lukanov had yet to nominate ministers for three portfolios.
Andrei Lukanov Chair *Georgi Pirinski Deputy Chair Belcho Belchev Deputy Chair; Minister of Finance Nora Ananieva Deputy Chair (vacant) Industry and Technology (vacant) Economy and Planning *Atanas Paparizov Foreign Economic Relations *Valeri Tsekov Trade and Services *Dimo Dimov Culture *Iliya Konev Science and Higher Education Ivan Krustev Construction and Territorial Organization *Atanas Popov Transport and Communications Todor Pandov Agriculture and Food Industry Aleksandur Aleksandrov Environmental Protection *Lyuben Gotsev Foreign Affairs *Col. -Gen.
Yordan Mutafchiev National Defence **Pencho Penev Internal Affairs (vacant) Justice *Emiliya Maslarova Employment and Social Welfare Ivan Chernozemski National Health *Matey Mateev National Education *New member.
**Appointed on Sept. 5 (previously Justice Minister).
Bulgarian Council of Ministers
(Sept. 20)
Economic situation
The new government took charge of a country in deep economic crisis.
In the first seven months of 1990 productivity was down nearly 10 per cent compared with the same period of 1989; 37,000 people were unemployed; and retail prices had increased dramatically (according to figures published on Aug. 18 the cost of living index had risen by 108 per cent between May and July alone).
By the end of June Bulgaria had stopped repaying both the capital and interest on its hard-currency foreign debt of over US$10,000 million [see also p. 37744].
Rationing of basic commodities such as sugar, cooking oil and soap had been introduced progressively throughout the country since June, reaching Sofia (the capital) on Sept. 1.
The caretaker government had decreed on Sept. 18 a ban on all food exports until the end of March 1991, in an effort to boost stocks for the coming winter.
Furthermore, Bulgaria had been hit badly by oil delivery shortfalls since July from the Soviet Union [see p. 37630], and since August from Iraq because of the Gulf crisis.
BSP congress
The BSP held its 39th congress on Sept. 22-25.
In his opening speech party chairman Aleksandur Lilov declared that factional splits posed the greatest threat to the party's future.
He also assessed that the BSP could no longer claim to be a party of the working class, but must look to the intelligentsia and young people as its main constituency.
The subsequent, frequently stormy debate centred on how far to reform the party, and many speakers from the radical wing accused Lilov of displaying only lukewarm commitment to reform.
However, Lilov was re-elected chairman (having initially requested not to be nominated) with 66 per cent of the votes, defeating two other candidates, and only one leading figure from the radical wing secured election to the 150-member Supreme Council.
Lilov denied that this demonstrated the ascendancy of party conservatives.
For their part, radicals assessing the outcome of the congress at a meeting on Sept. 29 voted not to split from the BSP.
UDF by-election victory
The first by-election since the June National Assembly elections, held on Sept. 30 in Velingrad, was won by the UDF candidate with nearly 59 per cent of the vote, compared with 39 per cent for the BSP candidate.
EUROPE
CZECHOSLOVAKIA
Apologies by Mitterrand and Thatcher over 1938 Munich agreement
In the course of visits to Prague, the Czechoslavakian capital, and Bratislava by French President François Mitterrand on Sept. 13-14 and by United Kingdom Prime Minister Margaret Thatcher on Sept. 16-18, both leaders expressed their countries' regret at having signed the 1938 Munich agreement, which had allowed Nazi Germany to dismember Czechoslovakia.
In a speech to the Federal Assembly on Sept. 13 following talks with President Vaclav Havel, Mitterrand admitted that France had abandoned Czechoslovakia in its hour of need.
He expressed the hope that future good relations would help lay to rest the mistakes of the past.
Mitterrand praised the revolutions which had toppled communist regimes across Eastern Europe in 1989 as the greatest popular uprising since the French revolution of 1789.
Thatcher addressed the Federal Assembly on Sept. 18.
She drew comparisons between the present crisis concerning Iraq's invasion of Kuwait and the experience of 1938, declaring that "Czechoslovakia of all countries needs no reminding of the need for nations to stand up to bullies and do so at once" .
She continued: "We failed you in 1938 when a disastrous policy of appeasement allowed Hitler to extinguish your independence.
Churchill was quick to repudiate the Munich agreement, but we still remember it with shame."
Rival Mitterrand and Thatcher proposals for future shape of Europe
Mitterrand used his Czechoslovak visit to promote his vision of a confederation of European states linked to, but not fully integrated with, the European Communities (EC), which would represent a core of nations consolidated by political and monetary union.
For her part Thatcher reiterated her support for rapid admission of the new East European democracies to the EC (many observers suggested that she saw enlargement as a way of halting moves towards EC political and monetary union).
Pointedly, in her speech to the Federal Assembly she called on Czechoslovakia to join her in opposing the creation of "new bureaucratic empires" .
On Sept. 17 Thatcher announced that visa requirements for travel between Czechoslovakia and the United Kingdom and Ireland would be abolished on Oct. 1.
EUROPE
HUNGARY
Privatization legislation
Government privatization plans, already set in train in June with the flotation of one-third of the shares in the Ibusz travel agency and the reopening of the Budapest stock exchange [see p. 37620], were framed in legislation approved by the National Assembly on Sept. 18.
Three main means of privatization would be employed by the State Property Agency (SPA): public offering of shares on stock exchanges; competitive bidding; and employee share ownership programmes.
The SPA on Sept. 14 announced the names of the first 20 state-owned companies to be fully privatized.
SPA deputy director Karoly Szabo declared that the privatization programme aimed to reduce the state's present 90 per cent stake in the economy to 40 per cent within five years.
Privatization was central to a three-year outline "programme of national renewal" published by the government on Sept. 25.
Popularly known as the "White Book" , it expanded on the programme announced when the government of Premier Jozsef Antall had taken office in May.
EUROPE
POLAND
Calling of presidential elections
President Wojciech Jaruzelski on Sept. 19 yielded to the demand from the vast majority of Poland's political forces that as an anachronism from the former communist regime he should resign.
He proposed to the Sejm (the lower house of parliament) that it amend the Constitution in order for him to step down early from his six-year term.
In compliance, the Sejm on Sept. 27 adopted by 268 votes to 12, with 55 abstentions, a bill scheduling direct presidential elections for Nov. 25; the package of associated constitutional amendments was approved by 355 votes to four, with 10 abstentions.
Following endorsement by the Senate, the presidential election bill was signed into law on Oct. 1 by Jaruzelski (who was to remain in office until the new President was sworn in, probably during December).
The new law stated that any Pole aged 35 or over and enjoying full electoral rights could run for the presidency; the signatures of at least 100,000 electors would be required to secure nomination as a candidate.
The term of office would be five years, and a President could serve no more than two terms.
Lech Walesa, chairman of the Solidarity trade union, had formally announced his candidacy on Sept. 17.
His presidential ambitions were already well known: notably, he had told the Paris newspaper Le Figaro in an interview published on Aug. 28 that he had a "moral right" to the post [see also p. 37546].
Prime Minister Tadeusz Mazowiecki bowed to pressure from his supporters and formally declared his candidacy on Oct. 4.
Solidarity national leadership vote against Gazeta Wyborcza
In a telling demonstration of the current rift in Solidarity [see pp. 37546; 37620-21], the union's national commission voted on Sept. 5 by a narrow majority to ban the use of the Solidarity logo on the masthead of Gazeta Wyborcza, the Solidarity newspaper created in the run-up to the 1989 parliamentary elections [see p. 36724].
The motion accused the newspaper of publishing "biased articles which aimed at discrediting and ridiculing chairman Walesa" .
The editor-in-chief of Gazeta Wyborcza was Adam Michnik, a founder member of the pro-Mazowiecki ROAD party [see p. 37620].
The conflict between Walesa and Mazowiecki had overshadowed celebrations on Aug. 31 to mark the 10th anniversary of the "Gdansk accords" which had led to Solidarity's foundation.
Sharing the platform at a rally at the former Lenin shipyard in Gdansk, both men had alluded in their speeches to their political differences.
Cabinet reshuffle
The Sejm on Sept. 14 approved proposals by Mazowiecki for three further changes to his Cabinet, completing the reshuffle begun in July [see p. 37621].
Having removed in July all but one of the former communist ministers (the survivor being Marcin Swiecicki of the Socialist Democracy of the Republic of Poland — SDRP), the latest appointments further altered the coalition's balance by giving the vacant Agriculture portfolio, previously held by the Polish Peasants' Party (PSL), to Janusz Bylinski of Rural Solidarity.
Mazowiecki finally won backing from the Sejm to remove Marek Kucharski from the Communications portfolio, replacing him with fellow Democratic Party (SD) member Jan Wiktor Slezak.
A new post of Minister of Ownership Transformations, responsible for overseeing privatization, went to Waldemar Kuczynski of Solidarity, who was hitherto Mazowiecki's chief personal adviser.
Tadeusz Mazowiecki (Solidarity) Chairman Leszek Balcerowicz (Solidarity) Deputy Chairman; Finance Jan Stanislaw Janowski (SD) Deputy Chairman; Minister-Head of the Office for Advancement and Applications of Science and Technology Jacek Ambroziak (Solidarity) Minister-Head of the Office of the Council of Ministers **Krzysztof Kozlowski (Solidarity) Internal Affairs Aleksander Bentkowski (PSL) Justice Izabella Cywinska (Solidarity) Culture and Arts *Janusz Bylinski (Rural Solidarity) Agriculture and Food Industry Bronislaw Kaminski (PSL) Environmental Protection and Natural Resources Andrzej Kosiniak-Kamysz (PSL) Health and Social Welfare Jacek Kuron (Solidarity) Labour and Social Policy Aleksander Mackiewicz (SD) Domestic Market Aleksander Paszynski (Solidarity) Housing and Construction Henryk Samsonowicz (Solidarity) National Education **Vice-Adml.
Piotr Kolodziejczyk National Defence Krzystof Skubiszewski (ind.)
Foreign Affairs Marcin Swiecicki (SDRP) Foreign Economic Co-operation Tadeusz Syryjczyk (Solidarity) Industry **Ewaryst Waligorski (Solidarity) Transport and Shipping *Jan Wiktor Slezak (SD) Communications *Waldemar Kuczynski (Solidarity) Ownership Transformations Jerzy Osiatynski (Solidarity) Minister-Director of the Central Planning Office Artur Balazs (Rural Solidarity) Without portfolio, responsible for health care, culture and education in rural areas Aleksander Hall (Solidarity) Without portfolio, responsible for co-operation with political organizations and associations Witold Trzeciakowski (Solidarity) Without portfolio, in charge of the Government Economic Council *Appointed Sept. 14. **Appointed July 6.
Polish Council of Ministers
EUROPE
ROMANIA
Prison sentence for Nicu Ceausescu
Nicu Ceausescu, the younger son of the late Romanian dictator Nicolae Ceausescu, was sentenced on Sept. 21 by a five-member military tribunal in Sibiu to 20 years in prison for "instigating aggravated murder" .
He had been found guilty of ordering security forces to fire on demonstrators in Sibiu during the December 1989 revolution, resulting in 89 deaths.
Ceausescu, 39, was a former Minister of Youth and, for two years prior to the revolution, Communist Party leader in Sibiu county.
Reviled by Romanians almost as much as his parents for his playboy lifestyle and debauchery, he had been captured on Dec. 22 and paraded before the cameras at the television station in Bucharest (the revolutionary headquarters of the National Salvation Front).
When his trial opened on May 26 he had been charged with complicity in genocide, and the presiding judge had only substituted the lesser charge of instigating murder at the moment of reaching a verdict.
Ceausescu's lawyers immediately lodged an appeal against the verdict.
On Sept. 27 Ceausescu was released from custody for 90 days to undergo medical treatment for chronic cirrhosis of the liver (a condition reportedly complicated by a stab wound he had received from one of the revolutionary mob moments after his Dec. 22 television appearance).
Nicu Ceausescu's elder brother Valentin Ceausescu and his sister Zoia Ceausescu, both of whom had held senior academic posts, had likewise been detained at the height of the revolution, but were released during August.
They remained under judicial investigation in connection with misuse of state funds.
EUROPE
YUGOSLAVIA
Adoption of new Serbian constitution
Serbia's new constitution, approved by referendum in July [see p. 37621], formally entered into force on Sept. 28.
It abolished almost completely the attributes of statehood which the 1978 Yugoslav federal Constitution had granted to the provinces of Kosovo and Vojvodina within the Serbian republic.
Nominally they retained their autonomous status, but their provincial assemblies effectively became mere rubber-stamp bodies, and the powers of their provincial governments and judiciary were drastically curtailed.
The new constitution proclaimed the Republic of Serbia, dropping the adjective "socialist" .
It enshrined a multiparty system, but strengthened the powers of the Serbian President to include the right to propose the republican Prime Minister and to dissolve the republican assembly.
Developments in Kosovo
In Kosovo, which had been under Serbian direct rule since the end of June [ibid.], the majority Albanian population kept up its campaign of open defiance in the face of an intensifying Serbian crackdown.
General strike — Violent suppression of August demonstration
A general strike brought Kosovo virtually to a standstill on Sept. 3, and schools were also boycotted on what should have been the first day of a new school year.
Up to 200,000 people reportedly took part in the strike, called by the recently established Independent Trade Union Organization of Kosovo with the backing of Kosovo's opposition parties.
They were protesting against the dismissal of an estimated 15,000 Albanians, since the imposition of Serbian direct rule, for refusing to work under permanent police supervision or to sign compulsory pledges of loyalty to Serbia.
(In the police and civil service an estimated 80 per cent of Albanian employees had been dismissed or had resigned.)
In retaliation, the Serbian authorities in Kosovo prevented Albanians who had heeded the strike call from returning on Sept. 4 to jobs in state-owned shops, government inspectors having patrolled towns during the strike to padlock the doors of Albanian-run enterprises.
Dismissal proceedings were started against other strikers.
The president of the Independent Trade Union Organization, Hajrullah Gorani, had been sentenced on Aug. 23 by a court in Pristina (Kosovo's capital) to 60 days in prison for publicly advocating the general strike.
The strike came less than a week after Serbia's repression of the Kosovar Albanians had been condemned by the minority leader in the United States Senate, Robert Dole, following his visit to Pristina at the head of a delegation of US Republican congressmen.
He had hinted at the possible withholding of US aid to Yugoslavia.
Hours before the US delegation's arrival in Pristina on Aug. 29 Serbian police units using tear gas, batons and water cannon had clashed with around 5,000 Albanian demonstrators who had gathered outside the hotel where the US delegation was to hold talks with local leaders, in order to protest against the imposition of Serbian direct rule.
Belgrade radio claimed that police used force only after their order for the demonstrators to disperse had been met with stone throwing.
This was contradicted by Zagreb radio, which claimed that the stone throwing was in self-defence after the police had attacked.
On Sept. 4 four officials from the Helsinki Federation international human rights monitoring group were detained by police in the Kosovo town of Prizren, accused of distributing "hostile propaganda" .
On the following day they were ordered to leave Yugoslavia within 48 hours.
Weapons searches
Between Sept. 10 and 20, heavily armed police units surrounded four Albanian villages near Podujevo and conducted house-to-house searches for weapons.
A large number of arrests were made.
In the raid on the village of Palatna on Sept. 13 two young Albanian men were shot dead during an exchange of gunfire with police.
Unilateral declaration of Kosovo republican constitution — Consequent arrests
The Kosovo Provincial Assembly, which had been dissolved by the Serbian authorities in June, was re-formed unilaterally by 111 of its ethnic Albanian, Turkish and Moslem deputies at a secret session on Sept. 7 in the village of Kacanik.
It was announced on Sept. 13 that the Assembly had proclaimed a "Constitution of the Republic of Kosovo" (it had attempted to declare Kosovo a full republic within Yugoslavia at the beginning of July, immediately after its dissolution — ibid.).
Serbia immediately declared the proclamation illegal (it was later supported in this assessment by the federal government and the federal Collective State Presidency), and the Pristina public prosecutor's office announced that criminal charges would be brought against those Assembly deputies involved.
By Sept. 20 six had been arrested, including deputy speaker Ilijaz Ramajli; of the remainder, it was reported on Sept. 24 that one had committed suicide, and that the rest were believed to be in hiding outside Kosovo.
On Sept. 21 the Pristina district court announced that six former Kosovo government ministers, including the last Prime Minister Jusuf Zejnulahu, together with former Pristina television and radio head Agim Malja, were under criminal investigated on charges of setting up a separatist group with the aim of proclaiming Kosovo a republic.
Five of the seven, including Zejnulahu and Malja, managed to evade arrest, however.
Serb-Moslem clashes
In yet another demonstration of Yugoslavia's fragmentation along ethnic lines, hostility between Serbs and Moslems (who were recognized as a distinct nationality in Yugoslavia) led to clashes in Bosnia-Hercegovina's southern town of Foca, and across the nearby border in Serbia's Novi Pazar district (part of the historic Sanjak region).
On Sept. 9 police used tear gas and armoured vehicles to keep at bay thousands of Moslems who attempted to disrupt a rally in the town of Novi Pazar by tens of thousands of supporters of the nationalist Serbian Renewal Movement.
The Moslems, supporters of the Democratic Action Party (based in Bosnia-Hercegovina), were protesting at what they claimed to be repression of the rights of Moslems in the Sanjak and Serbian efforts to drive them out (Sanjak Moslem militants had been agitating for autonomy and closer links with Bosnia-Hercegovina, where Moslems were the largest national group).
Meanwhile, mounting intercommunal tensions in Foca centred on the dismissal at the beginning of the month of some 100 Serb employees from a local bus company.
The Bosnia-Hercegovina government ordered the dissolution of the Foca town council on Sept. 7, and declared a ban on public gatherings in the town.
On the morning of Sept. 11 police using tear gas and batons clashed with around 3,000 Serb demonstrators demanding the dismissal of the bus company's Moslem director.
MIDDLE EAST — ARAB WORLD
ARAB LEAGUE
Dispute over headquarters — Resignation of Secretary-General
A decision taken at an emergency session of the Arab League Council, meeting in the Egyptian capital, Cairo, on Sept. 10, to transfer the bulk of organization's departments and affiliated apparatus from Tunis to Cairo by Oct. 31, provoked a sharp reaction from some members countries not in attendance.
The meeting was boycotted by nine of the 21 members — Algeria, Iraq, Jordan, Libya, Mauritania, Palestine, Sudan, Tunisia and Yemen.
The Arab League Secretary-General, Chedli Klibi (Tunisia), had already resigned on Sept. 3, over alleged accusations from Saudi Arabia's Foreign Minister, Prince Saud al Faisal, that he had failed in his mandate to discover why some Arab countries had expressed reservations or abstained from voting during the August Arab emergency summit on Iraq's invasion of Kuwait [see p. 37635].
Assad al Assad (Lebanon), an Assistant Secretary-General, was named as Acting Secretary-General.
On Sept. 12 Iraq described the decision to transfer the Arab League's headquarters as "highly dangerous" and one not taken for administrative, technical or professional reasons, but "by virtue of Egypt's position towards Israel and the US invasion of Najd and Hejaz" (Iraq's current title for Saudi Arabia).
The Tunisian government confirmed on Sept. 11 that, while it stood by the unanimous March 1990 Arab League decision to transfer the headquarters to Cairo [see p. 37334], the move to speed up the transfer "could hamper this body and prevent it from shouldering its responsibility" .
It added that it rejected the Cairo "fait accompli" and would maintain its right "to safeguard this institution and its employees from loss" .
On Sept. 11 Farouk Qaddumi, head of the political department of the executive committee of the Palestine Liberation Organization (PLO), advised everyone concerned to be "patient and reflective" in dealing with the transfer at a time of crisis in Arab relations, in order to avoid "the expected negative consequences" resulting from the Cairo decision.
MIDDLE EAST — ARAB WORLD
IRAQ
Passing of law impounding international assets
Under the terms of Law 57 of 1990, announced on Sept. 18 and back-dated to Aug. 8, the Revolution Command Council decided to seize all foreign assets and order local courts to ignore international legal rulings against Iraq.
Opening of border between Kuwait and Saudi Arabia
On Sept. 15 the border between Kuwait and Saudi Arabia was opened for the first time since the Iraqi invasion of Kuwait on Aug. 2.
Around 3,000 Kuwaiti families were reported to have crossed over into Saudi Arabia on the first day, and many of them confirmed reports of widespread killing and looting by Iraqi forces.
Meanwhile, it was reported in the Middle East Economic Digest of Sept. 28 that the Local Government Minister, Ali Hasan al-Majid, a cousin of President Saddam Hussein and formerly chief of security with special responsibility for the Kurds (reported on Aug. 20 as in control of Kuwait's security and administration — see p. 37635), was named governor of Kuwait.
The Washington Post of Sept. 28 reported that Iraq had given all citizens of Kuwait until Oct. 1 to apply for Iraqi citizenship.
Death of dissident politician
Col. Salim Fakhri, a political opponent of Saddam Hussein and head of the Democratic Rescue Movement, died suddenly at the age of 69 in London on Sept. 6.
MIDDLE EAST — ARAB WORLD
IRAN-IRAQ
Continued exchange of prisoners following peace agreement
A report from the International Committee of the Red Cross (ICRC) confirmed that by Sept. 14 more than 70,000 prisoners had been exchanged between Iran and Iraq in keeping with the peace agreement concluded between the two countries on Aug. 15 [see pp. 37667-68].
However, an Agence France-Presse (AFP) report on Sept. 18 revealed that the exchange of prisoners had suddenly been interrupted on Sept. 15 reportedly because there were only a few prisoners in Iraq, while almost 20,000 remained in Iran, many of whom were unwilling to return to Iraq.
Growing political and diplomatic rapprochement
There were signs of growing political and diplomatic rapprochement between the two countries despite Iran's official commitment to abide by UN sanctions against Iraq [see p. 37639].
The Foreign Ministers of Iraq and Iran, Tariq Aziz and Ali Akbar Vellayati, agreed during a visit by Aziz to Tehran on Sept. 9-10 to resume normal relations and to re-open their embassies.
On Sept. 18, the Iranian Deputy Foreign Minister, Manuschehr Motaki, held talks with Aziz in Baghdad which were described as "positive and fruitful" .
In a report commenting on the Iranian-Iraqi rapprochement, the Iranian News Agency (IRNA) noted on Sept. 17 that "the solution of differences between Teheran and Baghdad" needed to be assessed in the context of the growing encroachment by "Western imperialism led by the United States" in the Gulf to which Iran could not remain "indifferent and passive" .
MIDDLE EAST — ARAB WORLD
IRAN
Resumption of diplomatic relations with UK
A joint statement issued by Iran and the United Kingdom in New York on Sept. 27 announced that full diplomatic relations between the two countries had been resumed "on the basis of mutual respect" .
The statement which was issued shortly after a meeting between the UK Foreign Secretary, Douglas Hurd and the Iranian Foreign Minister, Ali Akbar Vellayati in New York, came after months of intense negotiations between officials of the two countries.
Diplomatic relations with the UK were severed in February 1989 following the imposition of a fatwa by the late Ayatollah Khomeini which called on Moslems to kill the Indian-born British writer, Salman Rushdie [see pp. 36450-51].
At the time relations between the two countries had only just been normalized [see p. 36631]after almost a decade of tension.
The UK, along with other EC members, had first imposed trade sanctions on Iran and reduced diplomatic representation in protest against the taking of US hostages in November 1979 [see pp. 30150; 30205-12; 30530; 30535-36].
In a statement on Sept. 27 the Iranian News Agency (IRNA) said that the decision to renew diplomatic relations with the UK was based on Iran's acceptance of "remarks by British officials announcing respect for Islam, Moslem values and sanctities" .
The statement was believed to have been a reference to a letter written by Hurd on Aug. 1 to the British Conservative MP, Sir Peter Blaker, underlining the UK government's respect for Islam and adding that "we understand that the novel, The Satanic Verses, was found deeply offensive by people of the Islamic faith" .
It was also understood that the Iranian government's willingness to resume diplomatic relations stemmed from the desire among its "pragmatists" , led by the President, Hojatolislam Hashemi Ali Akbar Rafsanjani, to end Iran's diplomatic and political isolation vis-à-vis Western states.
Although the UK government had insisted that full diplomatic relations would only be resumed after the withdrawal of the death sentence on Rushdie and the release of the British businessman Roger Cooper, imprisoned in Iran without trial since December 1985 [see p. 35544], the latest move was not believed to have involved any formal undertaking on either of these issues by the Iranian government.
MIDDLE EAST — ARAB WORLD
SYRIA
Visit to Iran by Assad
President Hafez al-Assad paid his first visit to Iran on Sept. 22-25 during which he held talks with the Iranian President, Hojatolislam Hashemi Ali Akbar Rafsanjani, and Iran's spirititual leader, Ayatollah Seyed Ali Khamenei.
A communiqué issued at the end of the talks stressed that "the establishment of a regional security system with participation of the region's states is the best and most successful method to provide security and stability to the region's states and people" .
However, it could not conceal the divergence in the positions of the two sides on the Gulf crisis.
While both agreed on condemnation of the Iraqi invasion of Kuwait, they could not agree on any common wording regarding the deployment of Western troops in the Gulf, which Syria supported but which was strongly attacked by Iranian hardliners.
The Syrian President's visit was also followed by the signing of bilateral agreements on economic and cultural co-operation between Iran and Syria.
Visit by Baker to Damascus
The US Secretary of State, James Baker, visited Damascus on Sept. 13-14.
During his stay Baker held talks with Assad, which centred around the situation in the Gulf and which were described as "positive and constructive" by the Syrian Foreign Minister, Farooq ash-Shar".
MIDDLE EAST — ARAB WORLD
JORDAN
Halting of oil supplies by Saudi Arabia — Expulsion of Jordanian diplomats — Recall of Jordanian ambassador
It was announced on Sept. 19 that the Jordanian government had received notification that Saudi Arabi would cut oil supplies immediately due to the non-payment of oil bills amounting to US$46,000,000.
Jordan had turned to Saudi Arabia for its oil supplies when it committed itself to the UN embargo on trade with Iraq and Kuwait [see p. 37639].
The Saudi decision was reported to have stemmed from Saudi Arabia's determination to force Jordan to fall into line with the Western consensus on the Gulf crisis [see p. 37637; see below for Jordanian endorsement of radical Arab meeting in Amman in mid-September].
On Sept. 22, Saudi Arabia confirmed that an undisclosed number (reported to be around 20) of Jordanian diplomats had been expelled for security reasons.
Although a Jordanian government statement issued on Sept. 23 said that there was no intention of expelling Saudi diplomats, a Foreign Ministry spokeman confirmed on Sept. 25 that it had been decided to recall the ambassador in protest against the expulsions.
MIDDLE EAST — ARAB WORLD
PALESTINIAN AFFAIRS
Amman meeting of radical Arabs
A meeting of 120 "anti-imperialist" representatives of Arab political parties and organizations was held in Amman on Sept. 15-17.
The Conference of Popular Arab Movements was organized by the Jordanian Arab National Democratic Alliance (JANDA), a coalition of left-wing groups formed in late 1989 whose objectives included greater democratization, independence from the IMF and support for the Palestinians.
The conference was opened by the Speaker of the Jordanian House of Representatives, Sulayman Arar, who was representing King Hussein.
Among those attending were a delegation from Iraq headed by the Minister of Religious Affairs, Abdullah Fadil Abbas, and leaders of several pro-Iraqi Palestinian groups [see p. 37637], most notably Nayef Hawatmeh, the secretary-general of the Democratic Front for the Liberation of Palestine (DFLP), and George Habash, the secretary-general of the Popular Front for the Liberation of Palestine (PLFP).
Both Hawatmeh and Habash were received separately on Sept. 16 by King Hussein, who personally endorsed the conference [see also p. 37751]
A communiqué issued at the end of the conference condemned the "US-led military campaign against Iraq [as]an act of aggression against the Arab nation" .
The communiqué also supported "the political initiative declared by the Iraqi President Saddam Hussein which linked the Gulf crisis to the Middle East conflict" .
At a news conference on Sept. 18 Habash declared that "in case the United States and its allies commit an aggression against Iraq, our fingers will pull the trigger to open fire on the forces of aggression" .
He added that "the Gulf crisis must be resolved within an Arab framwork" and announced that the PFLP would shortly be opening an office in Baghdad, although there were no plans to do so in Jordan.
King Hussein's endorsement of the conference was believed to have further impaired his fragile relations with Western powers and pro-Western Arab states.
A US State Department spokeswoman said on Sept. 18: "We were surprised and dismayed that this conference took place and we have told the Jordanians so." 
MIDDLE EAST — ARAB WORLD
ISRAEL
Relations with Soviet Union — Der'i affair — Publication of "By Way Of Deception" — Economy
Visit to Soviet Union by Israeli ministers — Soviet immigration to Israel
The first official Israeli ministerial delegation to travel to the Soviet Union since diplomatic relations were severed in 1967 arrived in Moscow on Sept. 13 for a four-day visit.
Itzhak Moda'i, the Finance Minister, and Yuval Ne'eman, Minister of Science and Energy, had been invited to Moscow by the Soviet Chamber of Commerce and Industry, and discussions during their visit centred on economic and scientific co-operation.
In a move which apparently took many leading Soviet politicians by surprise, President Mikhail Gorbachev held talks with Moda'i and Ne'eman on Sept. 14.
On the same day US Secretary of State James Baker was visiting Syria [see p. 37727], a coincidence which served to highlight the shifting alignments in the Middle East in the aftermath of Iraq's recent invasion of Kuwait.
Ariel Sharon, Israel's controversial Minister of Housing and Construction, had arrived in the Moscow on Sept. 6 at the start of a week-long private visit to the Soviet Union.
Sharon delivered a speech in Moscow's central synagogue on Sept. 8, when he promised that Israel would build 500,000 apartment units to accommodate Soviet Jewish immigrants.
During August some 17,500 Soviet Jews had arrived in Israel, bringing the total number of Soviet immigrants for 1990 to 83,000.
Israel's Jewish Telegraphic Agency disclosed on Sept. 17 that the current wave of immigration from the Soviet Union was expected to reach 1,000,000 by the end of 1992.
Levi-Shevardnadze talks in New York — Upgrading of Israeli-Soviet relations
Israel's Foreign Minister David Levi held talks with his Soviet counterpart Eduard Shevardnadze at the UN in New York on Sept. 30.
At the end of their meeting it was announced that an agreement had been reached to restore full consular relations.
Shevardnadze also agreed to allow regular and direct commercial flights to and from Israel.
An agreement on flights had been reached by the Israeli and Soviet national airlines in December 1989 but had not been put into practice because of Moscow's concerns over the settlement of Soviet Jews in the occupied territories [see also p. 37748].
Der'i affair
Soon after the formation of the new Likud-led government in June 1990, police had started investigating allegations that the new Interior Minister, Arie Der'i, a member of the Sephardic Torah Guardians (Shas), had illegally channelled government funds to religious institutions to reward political supporters [see p. 37547].
On Sept. 9 six of Der'i's close associates were arrested by fraud squad agents in connection with the allegations.
Soon afterwards a second police investigation began into allegations that Der'i, or some of his close aides, had ordered the tapping of telephone conversations between Mordechai Gilat, a newspaper reporter who had written articles accusing Der'i of financial impropriety, and the police Inspector General, Ya'acov Terner.
Police questioned Der'i over the affair in late September.
Publication of book by former Mossad employee — Government attempts to halt publication in Canada and United States
A controversial book was published in Canada and the United States in September by Victor Ostrovsky, a former employee of Israel's Mossad secret intelligence agency.
Ostrovsky had written the book entitled By Way Of Deception: The Making And Unmaking Of A Mossad Officer in collaboration with a Canadian journalist, Claire Hoy.
Ostrovsky had left Israel for Canada, his birthplace, in 1986 when he was dismissed from Mossad after working for them for some 17 months.
The Israeli government denounced the book as a "lot of lies" and attempted unsuccessfully to suppress its publication in Canada and the USA.
The publicity generated by the government's efforts to ban the book ensured that it became an instant bestseller.
Among the book's central allegations were claims that Mossad had (i) failed to inform the United States of prior intelligence concerning the October 1983 suicide bombing of the US Marine battalion headquarters in Beirut, the Lebanese capital [see pp. 32646-47];(ii) established a secret spy network ( "A1" ) in the USA;(iii) helped bring about the dismissal of Andrew Young from his post of US representative at the UN in 1979 after secretly recording Young's clandestine meetings with PLO officials [see p. 29956]; and (iv) caused the downfall of Prime Minister Itzhak Rabin in 1977 by exposing his wife's illegal foreign currency bank account [see p. 28533].
New economic package — Devaluation of shekel
On Sept. 13 the government approved a new economic plan presented by Finance Minister Moda'i and aimed at financing the massive influx of Soviet Jewish immigrants to Israel.
The "Moda'i plan" aimed to induce private-sector growth through accelerated liberalization.
The plan envisaged that most of the new Soviet immigrants would find work in the private sector.
On Sept. 9 the median value of the Israeli shekel (IS) had been devalued by 9.1 per cent, setting a new rate at IS2.4077 per unit of a dollar-denominated basket of foreign currencies, down from IS2.1888 per unit.
The value of the shekel was allowed to shift by 5 per cent above or below the new median rate.
The next day the shekel slipped in value by 2.75 per cent against the dollar, to a new rate of US$1.00=IS2.0800, down from US$1.00=IS2.0230.
MIDDLE EAST — ARAB WORLD
LEBANON
Approval of Taif constitutional amendments — Intra-Palestinian fighting near Sidon
Constitutional amendments — Imposition of blockade on Aoun stronghold in East Beirut
On Sept. 21 President Elias Hrawi signed into law constitutional amendments which codified a series of far-reaching political reforms and effectively ushered in Lebanon's Second Republic.
The amendments, first endorsed at the meeting of Lebanese National Assembly deputies in Taif, Saudi Arabia, in October 1989 [see p. 36986 for details of political provisions of Taif Accord], had again been endorsed on Aug. 21 when 51 deputies convened in Beirut.
Features of the new Constitution included the expansion of the National Assembly from 99 to 108 members, to be equally divided between Christians and Moslems (thereby abolishing the existing system based on a 6:5 Christian:Moslem ratio).
Other changes upgraded the post of the Prime Minister (a position currently held by Selim al Hoss) and the Cabinet and reduced the powers of the presidency.
The signature of the amendments by Hrawi was immediately rejected by Gen. Michel Aoun, the former Army Commander and self-declared interim Premier of Lebanon, who described them as "contestable" .
On Sept. 28 Lebanese Army troops loyal to Hrawi moved to tighten the economic blockade on Aoun's stronghold at Baabda in East Beirut.
Soldiers replaced Lebanese Forces militiamen at crossing points into the enclave, home to some 300,000 people.
Albert Mansur, the Defence Minister in the Hoss Cabinet, stated that the objective of the blockade was to use "peaceful and economic methods…to end the rebellion and reunify the military establishment" .
Aoun responded in a typically robust fashion, declaring that "siege and starvation will not make the angry people kneel down" .
Intra-Palestinian feuding — Amal-Hezbollah ceasefire
Fierce fighting erupted on Sept. 7 in the Ain Helwe Palestinian refugee camp, east of the southern city of Sidon.
The fighting was between guerrillas from Abu Nidal's Fatah Revolutionary Council (FRC) and Fatah fighters loyal to the Palestine Liberation Organization (PLO) Chairman Yassir Arafat.
After three days of fighting the Fatah guerrillas had managed to seize all the FRC positions in the camp, pushing FRC units into the surrounding hills.
According to a report on the (West Beirut-based) Radio Lebanon on Sept. 9 a total of 78 people had died in the fighting, and a further 240 had been injured.
Meanwhile, another source of tension in southern Lebanon was eased in early September when the rival Shia militias Amal and Hezbollah signed a ceasefire agreement.
The Syrian military commander in Lebanon, Brig. -Gen.
Ghazi Kan'an, arranged a ceasefire on Sept. 2 and a week later officials from both sides signed an agreement in Damascus.
MIDDLE EAST — ARAB WORLD
ALGERIA
Return of Ben Bella
Former President Ahmed Ben Bella, 73, returned from 10 years of exile in France and Switzerland on Sept. 27.
Landing in the port of the capital, Algiers, he addressed a crowd estimated at between 50,000 and 200,000, urged popular support for Iraq in the current Gulf conflict, and characterized the policies of the ruling National Liberation Front (FLN) government as catastrophic for the country.
A resistance leader in the eight-year colonial war against France, Ben Bella had become President on independence in 1962.
He was overthrown by Col. Houari Boumedienne in a military coup of 1965 [see pp. 20963-68]and kept under house arrest until 1980, when all restrictions on him were lifted by President Chadli Bendjedid.
He then went into voluntary exile.
Although his plans for political and economic reform had yet to be clarified, supporters of Ben Bella believed that he was the only politician capable of ending the social polarization caused by FLN economic policies and the growing appeal of Islamic fundamentalism, as demonstrated in June municipal elections [see pp. 37549-50].
It was felt that his return would bolster the prospects of an alliance of secular opposition parties led by Ben Bella's Movement for Democracy in Algeria (MDA) in the general election scheduled for March 1991.
MIDDLE EAST — ARAB WORLD
MOROCCO
Debt rescheduling agreement
Morocco's Western government creditors, meeting as the Paris Club, agreed on Sept. 11 to extend repayment terms on an estimated US$11,000 million of debt, including some $1,200 million which would be rescheduled over 15-20 years.
[See p. 37220 for October 1988 decision to reschedule $1,005 million over 10 years.]
In addition it was agreed, subject to bilateral talks with individual governments, that part of the debt would be re-channelled into local projects which would include environmental protection, aid and equity investments.
Repayments on this development assistance would be rescheduled over 20 years.
It was reported that Morocco's receipt of commercial debt relief in April 1990, under the international debt reduction initiative of US Treasury Secretary Nicholas Brady [see p. 37393], had influenced the Paris CLub decision, which was unusual in granting such concessional terms to a country ranked in the lower-middle-income bracket.
MIDDLE EAST — ARAB WORLD
TUNISIA
Restoration of diplomatic relations with Iran
The Tunisian government announced on Sept. 24 that diplomatic relations had been restored with Iran following talks held in Bahrain in conformity with "the principles of Islamic solidarity and the provisions of the UN charter" .
Relations between the two had been severed in March 1987 following Tunisian accusations that Iran was supporting Islamic groups opposed to the then President Habib Bourguiba.
INTERNATIONAL
IMF-WORLD BANK
Annual meetings
The 45th annual joint meetings of the World Bank and the International Monetary Fund (IMF) were held in Washington on Sept. 25-27.
It was preceded by meetings of the IMF's Interim Committee and of Finance Ministers from the Group of Seven (G-7) industrialized countries and the Group of 24 (G-24) developing countries.
Three new countries, Bulgaria, Czechoslovakia and Namibia, were admitted as new members of the IMF and the World Bank, bringing the total number of participating nations to 154.
The annual meeting was attended for the first time by a Soviet delegation led by Viktor Gerashchenko in anticipation of full Soviet membership of the Fund and the Bank.
On Sept. 12 the Managing Director of the IMF, Michel Camdessus, refused to comment on suggestions in Paris that a report on the Soviet economy commissioned by G-7 nations during the July Houston summit [see p. 37629]would form the basis of a Western decision to advance loans to the Soviet Union.
In his speech to the inaugural session, dominated by the economic implications of the Gulf crisis [see pp. 37631-41; 37694-97], Camdessus urged the richer countries to assist those unable to "cope with the additional burden" of rising oil prices and the loss of earnings from worker remittances.
He called on the international community "to come together to extend and co-ordinate its assistance" and warned delegates that although the Fund intended to adapt existing lending programmes to help those most affected by the crisis, notably the front-line states, oil-importing countries and the new democracies of eastern Europe, the costs of such finance were likely to be prohibitive.
Turning his attention to the industrialized world, Camdessus regulation and underlined the importance of spending on health and education to develop "human capital" .
He also cautioned east European countries to find a middle way between "half-hearted gradualism" and the excesses of simplistic "shock therapies" .
The President of the World Bank, Barber Conable, urged the international community to make a concerted effort to reduce world poverty by adopting development policies and assistance programmes aimed specifically at helping the poor.
Like Camdessus, Conable urged creditor nations to write off debt to the poorest nations [see also p. 37731 for LDC conference in Paris]and claimed that a 10 per cent cut in military spending by members of NATO would free enough resources to double development assistance.
In his speech on Sept. 25, United States President Bush welcomed the creation of a Gulf Crisis Financial Co-ordination Committee [see below]charged with providing emergency relief to front-line states most affected by the crisis.
He welcomed the presence of the Soviet delegation and drew attention to the urgency of concluding the General Agreement on Tariffs and Trade (GATT) "Uruguay Round" of trade talks by the end of 1990, particularly on the question of agricultural subsidies.
Interim Committee meeting — Founding of Gulf Crisis Financial Co-ordination Committee
In a series of preparatory meetings held on Sept 23-24, the IMF's policy-making Interim Committee agreed to assist developing countries to cope with the economic burdens of the Gulf crisis without, however, committing any new resources or setting a minimum level on the amount of total assistance.
A communiqué on Sept. 24 outlined a three-point programme to make lending more flexible, to increase the amounts paid out, and to reduce interest rates.
Middle-income countries such as India and the Philippines were allowed to draw from a special subsidy account offering loans at nominal interest rates of 0.5 per cent, while hard-hit, low-income countries such as Sri Lanka and Pakistan were offered assistance from the existing compensatory and contingency financing facility (CCFF).
The Interim Committee's programme also envisaged making a levy on oil-producing countries which benefited from the crisis through higher prices, to help other IMF members pay interest on their borrowings from the fund.
The communiqué added that consumers in the industrialized countries should not be protected from rising oil prices through higher wages as this "would only serve to fuel inflationary pressures" .
The IMF's Annual Report published on Sept. 12 revealed that the total debt of developing countries was almost unchanged at $1,235,000 million, or 32 per cent of total gross domestic product.
The Fund's bi-annual World Economic Outlook released on Sept. 19 warned that although the impact of higher oil prices on industrialized countries was likely to be modest, overall world economic growth was expected to slow to 2 per cent in 1990 (from 3 per cent in 1989) as a result of uncertainties stemming from the Gulf crisis.
Meanwhile, it was reported on Sept. 26 that the World Bank had authorized the creation of a special facility to grant concessional credit to help lower-middle income countries to re-settle migrant workers fleeing Iraq and Kuwait, and that it would advance disbursements from the Bank's soft loan affiliate, the International Development Association (IDA), to the poorest countries.
A preliminary meeting of the Gulf Crisis Financial Co-ordination Committee was held on Sept. 25 under the chairmanship of the US Treasury Secretary, Nicholas Brady.
The committee, which included the USA, Canada, Japan, South Korea, Kuwait, Saudi Arabia, the United Arab Emirates (UAE), the Gulf Co-operation Council and European Community (EC) countries, agreed on a two-stage operation to help the front-line states — Egypt, Jordan and Turkey — by offering immediate, unconditional relief and medium-term economic assistance.
However, no agreement was reached on the total amount of assistance, estimated by the USA to be around $14,000 million but by the EC as no more than $9,000 million.
G-7 and G-24 meetings
The Finance Ministers and central bank governors from the G-7 countries met on Sept. 22.
A communiqué issued after the meeting called for "stability-oriented" monetary policies and noted that the Gulf crisis posed "a risk of inflation and a risk of lower economic growth" .
While the statement acknowledged that "solid growth is being experienced in [G-7]economies this year" , many countries were vulnerable to the recent increase in oil prices.
It called upon the IMF and the World Bank to "respond flexibly" to the demands of "seriously affected countries" and to "review the compensatory and contingency financing facility" .
In a statement issued on Sept. 22 the Group of 24 (G-24) developing countries called on the international community to recognize the scale of the problems posed by the Gulf crisis.
They demanded that creditors should grant more debt relief and that the IMF should increase its assistance to poorer countries.
INTERNATIONAL
WORLD BANK
Annual report
In its Annual Report 1990 published on Sept. 17, the World Bank revealed that net transfers from the developing world back to the developed world in 1989 totalled US$42,900 million, an increase of $5,300 million over the 1988 figure.
New lending to the developing world had fallen by nearly $8,800 million to $86,900 million, while capital repayments were $70,300 million, giving an inflow of new loans of $16,600 million, the lowest of the decade and an amount greatly exceeded by the burden of interest payments.
The report noted that sharp increases in arrears on interest payments to commercial banks, from about $10,000 million at the end of 1988 to about $16,400 million a year later, meant that "the prospects for any increases in sources of external financing for the developing countries are not promising" .
Private-sector credits in 1989 amounted to only $44,400 million, a much-diminished share of total lending, while "48 per cent of total developing country long-term debt was held by official creditors, in contrast with 38 per cent at the start of the debt crisis" .
The report, written before the Gulf crisis, urged a cut in military expenditure more consistent with diminishing military tensions in order to maximise spending on health and education.
As regards the Bank's own activities, however, the financial year July 1989 to June 1990 had seen a positive transfer to the developing countries, amounting to $3,370 million including "soft loans" made by the International Development Association (IDA).
In the previous financial year, the outflow of Bank and IDA funding had actually been exceeded, albeit only very narrowly (by some $32,000,000), by repayments and interest payments to the Bank and IDA.
The Bank expected its own new lending commitments in the year 1990-91 to increase to between $16,000 million and $18,000 million, and those of the IDA to reach $5,700 million, including substantial concessional lending to eastern Europe.
The Bank's commitment to fostering environmentally sound development projects was to be underscored by a pilot programme of concessional lending for projects which would yield benefits on matters of key international environmental concern, amounting to between $1,000 million and $1,200 million over the next three years.
INTERNATIONAL
LEAST DEVELOPED COUNTRIES
Second UNCTAD conference
The second conference on least developed countries (LDCs) organized by the UN Conference on Trade and Development (UNCTAD) was held in Paris on Sept. 3-14 [for first conference in Paris in 1981 see pp. 31352-53].
The meeting included representatives from 41 countries (27 of them African) with a combined population of 420,000,000, a total external debt in 1988 of US$69,300 million and a share in 1987 of only 0.7 per cent of world gross domestic product (GDP) and exports.
During a series of preparatory meetings, representatives from the LDCs called for "an immediate and total write-off of all LDC debt" as well as "the elimination of all tariff and non-tariff barriers on products of actual and/or potential export interest to LDCs" .
In his address welcoming delegates, French President Mitterrand supported the call for solidarity which had been underlined in the message to the conference from UN Secretary-General Javier Pérez de Cuéllar.
Mitterrand also announced that France would increase its official development assistance (ODA) to LDCs, from 0.15 per cent of GNP to 0.20 per cent within the next five years.
Reviewing the impact of the Gulf crisis on the world economy, the Managing Director of the International Monetary Fund (IMF), Michel Camdessus, assured the 41 LDCs that the IMF would help meet "the needs growing out of this crisis" .
Camdessus also urged the industrialized countries to increase aid to the LDCs and to write off official loans to the poorest countries.
The conference agreed to adopt a set of compromise proposals which would involve a commitment by each donor country to increase its ODA to LDCs, but it refrained from setting an overall target in excess of the 0.15 per cent agreed upon in 1981.
(Average donor country ODA to LDCs during the 1980s had not exceeded 0.09 per cent, and almost all donor countries also still fell well below the UN target for ODA to all developing countries, set at 0.7 per cent of GNP.)
The United States and Japan, who spent less than 0.04 per cent and 0.07 per cent respectively on ODA to LDCs and were at the bottom of the league table of aid donors, undertook to increase their aid.
Developed countries agreed to assist LDCs in implementing development policies provided that these were linked to political reform and respect for human rights.
INTERNATIONAL
CONFERENCE ON SECURITY AND CO-OPERATION IN EUROPE
Proposed Conference on Security and Co-operation in the Mediterranean
A Conference on Security and Co-operation in the Mediterranean (CSCM) was proposed by Italy and Spain on Sept. 24, during a meeting in Palma, Majorca, held under the auspices of the Conference on Security and Co-operation in Europe (CSCE) to discuss environmental issues.
The CSCM proposal, introduced by the Italian Foreign Minister, Gianni De Michelis, and his Spanish counterpart, Francisco Fernández Ordóñez, called for general rules modelled along the Helsinki Final Act of 1975 [see pp. 27301-09], to settle tensions and disputes between states bordering the Mediterranean, including those of the Middle East and the Gulf.
In a letter sent to Foreign Ministers of the European Communities (EC) shortly before the meeting, Fernández Ordóñez maintained that the need for a new Mediterranean-based security organization stemmed from the "concern…to avoid a possible collision course between Islam and the West" .
He suggested that growing economic and political disparities between the northern and southern Mediterranean, combined with the rise of Islamic fundamentalism in the south and racism in the north, had generated sources of potential conflict.
While the proposal was known to have been received enthusiastically by some EC countries, including Portugal and Greece, others like France opposed a CSCM which would include the Middle East, preferring to limit it to the western Mediterranean.
In his address on Sept. 24 King Juan Carlos urged delegates to the conference, which was also attended by observers from eight Arab countries and Israel, to work together to limit the pollution of the Mediterranean, and lent his support to plans for a CSCM.
In his speech, De Michelis urged EC countries to devote at least 0.25 per cent of their gross national product (GNP) towards investment in the Maghreb countries where demographic pressures were rendering them vulnerable to the forces of Islamic fundamentalism and encouraging mass migration to Europe.
Spain, Italy, France, Portugal and the five Maghreb states (Algeria, Libya, Mauritania, Morocco and Tunisia) were due to meet in Rome on Oct. 10 to formulate a common CSCM proposal.
INTERNATIONAL
UNITED NATIONS
Opening of 45th General Assembly session
The 45th session of the UN General Assembly opened in New York on Sept. 18.
The Maltese Foreign Minister, Guido De Marco, was elected president of the session, which was expected to debate 153 items amongst which the Iraqi invasion of Kuwait assumed priority.
The delegates elected Liechtenstein as the UN's newest member, bringing the total membership to 160.
However, the recognition by the General Assembly of the unification of the Federal and the Democratic Republics of Germany restored the total membership to 159.
The accession of a united Germany was expected to take place on Oct. 3.
The speeches made by the representatives of member governments at the General Assembly were dominated by events in the Gulf [see pp. 37631-41; 37694-97].
In his opening address to delegates, De Marco said that people looked to the UN for moral and political guidance for a resolution of the Gulf crisis.
Among other issues raised by delegates, the newly appointed Vice-President of Nigeria, Augustus Aikhomu, suggested that Africa should have representation on the Security Council through a permanent member, while the President of Uganda, Yoweri Museveni, appealed to all UN members to support debt forgiveness for the Third World.
UN Secretary-General Javier Pérez de Cuéllar said in his speech that despite all the tensions of the world, the UN had undertaken 18 peacekeeping operations since 1948, five in the last decade alone, and had been asked to resolve conflicts in Cambodia, El Salvador and Western Sahara.
He noted, however, that the UN faced a severe financial crisis with debts of over US$1,000 million and "funds for only 24 further days of operation" .
World Summit for Children
The first World Summit for Children, held in New York on Sept. 29-30, was attended by more than 70 heads of government.
The summit, initially proposed in the State of the World's Children report published by the UN Children's Fund (UNICEF) in December 1988 [see p. 36381], was formally backed in February 1990 by Canada, Egypt, Mali, Mexico, Pakistan and Sweden.
A Plan of Action drawn up for the conference was estimated to cost between US$4,000 million and $6,000 million.
The meeting concluded that "the well-being of children requires political action at the highest level" .
Welcoming the delegates, the UN Secretary General Javier Pérez de Cuéllar said that it was necessary "to build a world order that will guard…children" .
In his speech, the Executive Director of UNICEF, James Grant, noted that "millions of children's lives" could be saved by diverting funds away from defence spending.
Organizers of the summit urged all participants to ratify the Convention on the Rights of the Child adopted by the UN General Assembly in November 1989 [see p. 37054].
By the end of the summit the Convention, described as a "bill of rights" for almost 3,000 million children under the age of 16, was ratified by 48 countries.
The United States had not subscribed to the convention, which had been criticized by US conservative groups for not explicitly protecting the rights of the unborn child.
A 10-point programme for children's rights adopted at the summit included (i) the reduction of infant and under-five mortality by one-third to 50 and 70 per 1,000 respectively by the year 2000;(ii) the reduction by half of severe malnutrition in children under five; and (iii) basic and primary education for at least 80 per cent of children.
INTERNATIONAL
AVIATION
Lockerbie crash report
The findings of a 21-month technical investigation by the United Kingdom Air Accident Investigation Branch (AAIB) into the Lockerbie air disaster of December 1988 [see pp. 36409-10]were published on Sept. 11.
The study was the second major investigation into the crash, following that by a United States Presidential Commission on Aviation Security and Terrorism [for whose report in May 1990 see p. 37475].
The report "positively determined" that the crash which killed all 259 people on board Pan Am flight PA103 (and 11 local residents in the Scottish town of Lockerbie), had resulted from an explosion within a luggage container triggered by a device fitted to a radio-cassette player.
Secondary shock waves had punched holes in the fuselage causing further damage and the plane's disintegration.
The investigators found no evidence of a defect or malfunction that could have caused the destruction of the aircraft.
Although the report conceded that "the accident was not survivable" , it urged the adoption of more effective measures by "which the effects of such an explosion might be mitigated" .
Among its recommendations were (i) the creation of vents and energy absorption systems which would dissipate the force of an explosion;(ii) the repositioning of cargo containers to ensure that any explosive energy was either directed outwards or absorbed by other baggage containers; and (iii) improving flight recorders so that they continued working after a power failure.
Commenting on the investigation, the UK Civil Aviation Authority (CAA) noted that while aircraft could be strengthened against smaller explosions, this presented a "formidable task" .
The manufacturers of the aircraft, Boeing, said that they would review the report's recommendations but stressed that the best precaution was "not to allow bombs on aircraft" .
A fatal accident inquiry into the Lockerbie air disaster opened in Dumfries in Scotland on Oct. 1.
Report on M1 crash
It was reported on Sept. 3 that the AAIB had completed its investigation into the crash of a British Midland Boeing 737 near Kegworth in Leicestershire in December 1988 in which 47 people were killed [see p. 36410].
The report, whose conclusions were due to be made public after the expiry of 21 days within which interested parties were required to submit their comments, was expected to confirm that the crash resulted from pilot error involving the inadvertent shutting down of the wrong engine.
It was also expected to recommend "a programme of research" into safety improvements.
Suppression of UTA crash report
The conclusions of an inquiry into the bombing of a DC-10 airliner owned by the French company Union de Transport Aérien (UTA) over the Sahara in September 1989 in which 171 people were killed [see p. 36910], were reported by the French weekly Le Point to have been suppressed.
The Times of Sept. 4 stated that the report, prepared under the auspices of the Service Centrale de la Lutte Anti-Terroriste (SCLAT), had established Libyan and Syrian involvement in the bombing, but had been withheld to "avoid upsetting French diplomatic links with Libya and Syria" .
The report was believed to have concluded that the crash was caused by a bomb carried on board by a Congolese national, Appolinaire Managatany, an opponent of the Congolese government, and, moreover, that Managatany had close links with the Libyan leader, Col. Moamer al Kadhafi, and the head of the Popular Front for the Liberation of Palestine-General Command (PFLP-GC), Ahmed Jabril.
On Sept. 19, however, it was reported that Western diplomats had suggested that the magistrate leading the investigation, Jean-Louis Bruguière, regarded Syria to be the main suspect.
INTERNATIONAL
VATICAN
Papal visit to Africa
Pope John Paul II visited Tanzania, Rwanda, Burundi and Côte d'Ivoire between Sept. 1 and Sept. 10.
During his stay in Tanzania on the first leg of his seventh visit to Africa, the Pope called for more international aid to Africa and urged the international community "to inaugurate a new era of solidarity with Africa, based on justice and respect" .
He also called for a more concerted moral drive to check the spread of AIDS (acquired immune deficiency syndrome) in Africa.
In Burundi, he told a congregation that the solution to Africa's demographic problem lay not in artificial means of birth control but in the more economical use of land.
On Sept. 10 the Pope consecrated the basilica of Our Lady of the Peace in Yamoussoukro, Côte d'Ivoire [see also p. 37700].
The basilica, commissioned by Côte d'Ivoire's President Félix Houphouët-Boigny, was estimated to have cost between US$140,000,000 and $300,000,000.
The regime's opponents criticized this as inappropriate for a country where 70 per cent of the people lived in abject poverty and where less than 15 per cent of the 12,000,000 inhabitants were Catholic.
Signifying that the Vatican had accepted the basilica in return for a government undertaking to spend more on health and education, the Pope on Sept. 10 also blessed the foundation stones of a hospital and a Catholic university.
EUROPE
POLAND
BASIC DATA
Area: 312,683 sq km(including inland water).
Population: 37,873,000 (1988).
Capital: Warsaw.
Languages: Polish.
Religion: Mostly Christian, of whom 95 per cent are Roman Catholic, with numerous other denominations, the largest being Polish Autocephalous Orthodox Church; small Moslem and Jewish minorities.
Av. life expectancy: 72 yrs (1988).
Armed forces: 412,000 (231,000 conscripts).
GNP per capita: US$1,850 (1988).
Currency: zloty (US$1.00=Zl9,681.61, as at Sept. 25, 1990).
The Polish Republic was proclaimed at the end of December 1989, thus restoring the formal name which had been adopted after independence in 1918 but replaced by the name Polish People's Republic in 1947.
Constitutional amendments of April 7, 1989, created a new bicameral National Assembly, comprising as its lower house the 460-seat Sejm (the former unicameral legislature) and as its upper house a new 100-seat Senate.
Direct elections for the two houses, which sit for simultaneous four-year terms, took place in two rounds on June 4 and 18.
In the Sejm elections contests for 65 per cent of the seats were restricted to candidates from the then ruling Polish United Workers' Party (PUWP), and from its traditional coalition partners the United Peasants' Party (ZSL) and the Democratic Party (SD) or from three lay Roman Catholic organizations; the remaining 35 per cent were contested by candidates from opposition or independent groups, and were all won by the Solidarity Citizens' Committee (the electoral platform of the recently relegalized Solidarity trade union).
The Senate seats were all filled by completely free balloting, and all but one were won by Solidarity candidates.
On July 19, 1989, Wojciech Jaruzelski, the outgoing Chairman of the State Council (head of state) was elected by the National Assembly to the new office of executive state President, for a six-year term.
On Aug. 24 the Sejm elected as Prime Minister Tadeusz Mazowiecki of Solidarity, and on Sept. 12 it endorsed his proposals for a new coalition Council of Ministers dominated by Solidarity but including members of the ZSL (since renamed the Polish Peasants' Party — PSL), SD and PUWP.
The PUWP dissolved itself in January 1990, its membership splitting into two new parties, the Socialist Democracy of the Republic of Poland (SDRP) and the Social Democratic Union.
All but one of the ex-PUWP ministers were removed from office in July 1990.
POLITICS
Constitutional change and abolition of censorship
On Dec. 29, 1989, the Sejm adopted a draft law amending Poland's Constitution.
Clearing the required two-thirds majority by 374 votes to one, with 11 abstentions, the law removed references to the leading role of the PUWP, changed the country's formal name from the Polish People's Republic (in use since 1947) to the Polish Republic, and restored (from Feb. 9, 1990) the pre-war national emblem of a crowned white eagle in a red field.
On Jan. 24, 1990, a law was passed in the Sejm allowing the Constitutional Tribunal to grant equal privileges to both the Senate and the Sejm.
On April 6 the Sejm voted, by 268 votes to one with two abstentions, to restore May 3 (the anniversary of the proclamation of the 1791 constitution) as the country's national day; and it approved, by 182 votes to 56, with 39 abstentions, the cancellation of a national holiday on July 22 (the anniversary of the 1944 Lublin Manifesto marking the establishment of Communist rule), despite an appeal by Jaruzelski.
May Day was retained as a national holiday.
On April 11 the Sejm voted, with 266 votes in favour and eight abstentions, to abolish censorship.
On March 23 a law had been passed liquidating the Prasa-Ksiazka-Ruch workers' publishing cooperative (RSW), linked to the PUWP, which had controlled 90 per cent of the circulation of the Polish press.
On Nov. 24, 1989, legislation had been approved for the equal legal protection of public and private property and for the abolition of social adjustment centres.
Reunification of peasant movement and other party developments
On May 24, 1990, a law on political parties was passed, requiring parties to register with the Constitutional Tribunal to gain legal status and empowering that body to decide whether a party's goals or activities were constitutional.
Parties would finance themselves through membership fees, donations and their own economic activities, but would not be allowed to receive monies from abroad.
Access to state-owned radio and television would be guaranteed.
Mazowiecki's government had earlier vowed to end monopolistic practices and state subsidies for parties.
On Aug. 15, 1989, a Warsaw meeting of peasant activists from all over Poland had decided to resume the activities of the Polish Peasant Party (PSL) on the basis of the party's 1946 programme (before its merger with the United Peasants' Party — ZSL — in 1949).
A provisional executive committee had been set up under the chairmanship of Franiszek Kaminski.
The re-emerged PSL criticized efforts by the ZSL (which had taken part in government as a supporter of the PUWP) to transform itself automatically into a new party of the same name, appealing to ZSL members to join the PSL instead.
The ZSL — challenged by the emergence of the PSL and the PSL-S, and faced with the expression of mass support by its membership for the PSL — had brought forward its 11th extraordinary congress to Nov. 26-27, 1989, when it changed its name to the PSL-Rebirth (PSL — Odrodzenie).
Delegates blocked the election of former ZSL Deputy Prime Minister and Agriculture Minister Kazimierz Olesiak, as chairman of the newly named party, feeling he would have hindered the broader moves towards the reunification of the peasant movement, electing instead Jozef Zych.
It was reported on May 5, 1990, that the PSL had held a reunification congress.
Electing Roman Bartoszcze, a deputy who had formerly represented Solidarity, as party chairman, the meeting adopted a resolution on the unification of several strands of the peasant moment, including the PSL, the PSL-Rebirth and representatives of the newly created PSL-Solidarity (PSL-S) from six provinces.
Olesiak joined Kaminski (the interim PSL president) in initially boycotting the May 1990 PSL reunification congress, but both were eventually persuaded by delegates to appear.
Also in May the PSL complained at its exclusion (in favour of candidates from the Citizens' Committees, Solidarity's electoral organization) from state appointments, saying that its continued participation in the Mazowiecki coalition government would depend on a "political equilibrium" being reached.
It added in June that the ruling coalition, having achieved the gradual removal of the Communists from power, was now "window-dressing" and that proper parliamentary elections were required.
On Jan. 21 Jozef Slisz, the Deputy Speaker of the Senate and chair of Rural Solidarity, announced that the PSL-S — intended to supersede Rural Solidarity [for which see p. 36897]— had begun to function.
He had earlier explained that the PSL-S would be a national, centrist party based on Christian values, rather than exclusively peasant in orientation; and that it would seek to combine the historical legacy of the peasant movement with the ethos of Solidarity.
In September 1989 a Rural Solidarity spokesman described the re-emergence of the PSL as a front for the ZSL's efforts to regain identity.
On June 20 Bronislaw Geremek, the chairman of the Citizens' Parliamentary Club (OKP-the grouping of deputies elected on a Solidarity Citizens' Committee ticket), criticized the discussions taking place between the Solidarity trade union leader Lech Walesa and the respective leaderships of the PSL and the SD, claiming that such an "alliance" between a trade union and political parties was "unnatural" [for divisions within Solidarity and the creation of the pro-Walesa Centre Alliance see pp. 37546; 37620-21].
To mark its revival after a 44-year absence from public life, the rightist National Party (Stronnictwo Narodwe — SN) held a national congress in Warsaw on Nov. 18, 1989, electing Bronislaw Ekert party chairman.
It was also reported on Oct. 28 that the Polish Christian-National Union (ZChN) had held a founding congress, with Wieslaw Chrzanowski appointed chairman.
On May 1, 1990, a group of seven ultra-right parties, led by the Union for Realpolitik (Unia Politikya Realnej — UPR) convened a congress in the Warsaw Palace of Culture.
Held to coincide with May Day (celebrated elsewhere in the capital by some 5,000 people), the 2,000-strong congress met the violent opposition of left-wingers who protested at the various anti-Semitic, nationalist, conservative Catholic, and free-market views of the participants.
In November 1989 a Movement for Polish Politics (RPP) was set up by a number of OKP deputies, members of citizens' committees, industrial associations and various political clubs, the aim being to unite the Polish centre-right.
On June 28, an OKP spokesman claimed that the participation of OKP deputies in a Forum of the Democratic Right, created the previous day, was not an official initiative of the OKP.
On June 10, 1990, the right-wing Confederation for an Independent Poland (KPN) ended a two-day annual conference with a warning that Poland was on the verge of a major social explosion as a result of economic reform.
Following its formation in September 1988, the Polish Green Party (PPZ) held its general congress in Krakow on Nov. 26, 1989.
On Dec. 10 the founding session of a "Green parliament" was held in Krakow with the participation of ecological groups from throughout Poland.
In April 1990 a three-day conference of Greens was held at Szklarska Poreba.
A memorandum was drawn up for presentation to the November 1990 Helsinki (Conference on Security and Cooperation in Europe) conference on the environment.
On Nov. 14, 1989, a new left-wing grouping, Justice, Peace, Democracy (Sprawiedliwose-Postep-Demokratcja), was founded, open to all groups supporting the values of democratic socialism.
On Dec. 11, 1989, the Polish Socialist Party-Democratic Revolution (PPS-RD) held its first national congress in Wroclaw, adopting party statutes and a programme of policies based on the goal of a self-governing alternative system.
Jozef Pinior, a member of the party's 10-member council elected at the meeting, said that the PPS-RD opposed the Mazowiecki government's imposition of what he saw as a dependent capitalist system on Poland.
On March 24, 1990, the supreme council of the Polish Socialist Party (PPS) undertook to organize a congress of the non-communist left.
On Oct. 12, 1989, a Polish Socialist Party of Labour (PSPP) was set up on social democratic principles.
On April 7, 1990, 260 people held a founding assembly of the Polish Social Democratic Union (PUSD — given on p. 37195 as SDU), an off-shoot of the now defunct PUWP [for the dissolution of which see p. 37194-95].
The PUSD assembly declared its support for a state-regulated market economy and democratic pluralism.
In April a Sejm-appointed commission investigating the assets of the former PUWP and its allies revealed that some 1,866 of the PUWP's 1900 buildings had been taken over by the government.
PUSD leader, Tadeusz Fiszbach, said that his party would not claim any of such assets.
On Feb 9 six deputies who had left the PUWP before its dissolution set up a new parliamentary group, the Independent Deputies' Caucus (KNP).
It was reported on April 28 that a Byelorussian Democratic Union had been founded, aimed at defending Byelorussian rights, including the introduction of the Byelorussian language in schools.
Wladyslaw Sila-Nowicki was re-elected chairman of the Polish Labour Party [for the emergence of which see p. 36469], it was reported on April 29; and on April 11, the national council of the Christian Labour Party elected Jozef Hermanowicz as its chairman.
On March 24 and 25, the Pax Catholica association decided to become a political party.
Attended by observer from liberal parties from Europe and North America, a second Liberals' Congress was held in Gdansk in November.
Delegates also declared their intention to function as a party — the National Liberals' Congress (KKL).
At a two-day congress the Polish Co-operative Movement agreed to become a political party, it was reported on Dec. 16, 1989.
On Feb. 9, 1990 the Polish Economic Party, aimed at building a strong economy, held its founding congress in Poznan.
Citizens' Committee by-election victory
In a re-run Senate by-election in Lublin on June 11, the Citizens' Committee candidate won almost 51 per cent of the vote against his opponent from Private Farmers' Solidarity who took just over 48 per cent.
Appointments
On June 22, 1989, the Sejm elected the hitherto Deputy Justice Minister, Adam Strezembosz, First President of the Supreme Court.
Mazowiecki in mid-October 1989 appointed Dariusz Fikus as director and editor of the government newspaper Rzeczpospolita in place of Janusz Durmala.
It was reported on May 28, 1990, that Stanislaw Wyganowski, the candidate of the Solidarity Citizens' Committee, had been re-confirmed as mayor of Warsaw, having earlier been relieved of his duties.
Auschwitz controversy and Church-state relations
Polish-Jewish relations continued to suffer major strains in late 1989 as a result of the Auschwitz convent controversy [see.
p. 37011].
Cardinal Jozef Glemp, the primate of Poland, claimed that the 1987 agreement under which the nuns at the Carmelite convent would be re-located to an inter-faith centre nearby, had been negotiated by "incompetent" people and was a violation of the nuns' rights.
The remark fuelled anger in the international Jewish community, with planned visits by Cardinal Glemp to the Netherlands and the United States being cancelled.
Israeli Prime Minister Itzhak Shamir provoked official Polish indignation with the suggestion that Poles were naturally anti-Semitic.
Pope John Paul II stated that hostility towards Jews was at odds with the Christian faith, and the Vatican later offered financial assistance for the building of a new centre outside Auschwitz.
Three Catholic cardinals from France and Belgium, who had participated in the 1987 negotiations, also insisted that the agreement was indeed binding.
The controversy finally ended when Cardinal Glemp assured international Jewish leaders during a visit to the United Kingdom that work would soon begin on a new centre, and construction began in February 1990.
Cardinal Glemp admitted that the Polish Catholic Church had not adequately understood the feelings of the Jewish community on this issue.
On Nov. 24, 1989, the Sejm abolished the Office for Religious Affairs, its tasks to be carried out by an organizational cell headed by a general director within the Council of Ministers' Office.
The move was seen to be due to the normalization of church-state relations following the establishment of the Solidarity-led government.
At the 240th plenary of the Conference of the Episcopate held in Warsaw between April 30 and May 2, 1990, the Roman Catholic Church called for the restoration of religious education (abolished under Communist rule).
A meeting between a church team led by Bishop Tokarczuk of Przemysl and Jacek Abroziak, the head of the Office of the Council of Ministers, on this and other issues, was reported on May 18.
On Nov. 23, 1989, Mgr Jozef Kowalczyk arrived in Warsaw as the first Vatican nuncio to Poland since 1945.
The move followed the Polish government's July restoration of diplomatic relations with the Vatican [see p. 36830].
SECURITY
Creation of state Protection Office
On May 10, 1990, Deputy Minister of the Interior Krzsztof Kozlowski was appointed head of the new State Protection Office, which replaced the security police of the previous regime.
Kozlowski said that the new service would be independent of the Soviet Union, would co-operate with North Atlantic Treaty Organization (NATO) countries over issues such as drug trafficking and terrorism, and would also build up a bank of information on Western economic factors as a source of advice for Polish entrepreneurs.
In June he was appointed chair of the Central Qualification Commission set up to scrutinize former security service personnel recruited to such bodies as the State Protection Office and the police.
At the same time, Col. Leszek Lamparski was appointed Commander-in-Chief of the Police.
On Nov. 23, 1989, the Sejm voted to disband the 600,000-strong Workers' Militias (ORMO), seen as a means of violent enforcement of communist rule.
Coinciding with parliamentary discussions ending the political role of the Ministry of the Interior it was reported on June 19, 1990, that 3,000 former security officers were awaiting a decision on their future.
In September a Sejm commission was set up to investigate allegations by deputy Tadeusz Kowalczyk of Interior Ministry involvement in 93 political killings.
On June 1 Justice Minister Aleksander Bentkowski had announced that further interviews would be held with security agents Adam Pietruszka and Grzegorz Piotrowksi convicted for the murder in 1984 of Father Jerzy Popieluszko [see pp. 33292-93; 33874-75; 34688].
On Nov. 16, 1989, the Sejm adopted an amnesty law for "crimes" committed before Sept. 12 of that year.
According to the law, legal proceedings in cases involving a three-year or two-year prison sentence would be dropped or stayed respectively; valid sentences would be remitted; and sentences for serious crimes would be lowered (including the abolition of capital punishment in favour of a 25-year prison sentence).
As a result of the amnesty, it was reported that Poland's sole remaining political prisoner, Jozef Szaniawksi, was freed on Dec. 19.
Prisoners, mainly those excluded from the amnesty, rioted in Polish jails.
On Oct. 3, 1989, the Justice Ministry made an appeal for the public to provide evidence which would allow prosecutions for "Stalinist crimes" to begin.
Mass graves of Poles murdered by Stalin's NKVD secret police during and after the Second World War were uncovered near Jastkowic in the Tarnobrzeg region (March 5, 1990); in the range of Baran near Kakolewnica, Biala Podlaska province (April 25); at Wolka Turebska (May 6); and near Sokolow Malapowski, Rzeszow province (May 23).
Current-account balance -US$107 m. (1988) Trade balance +US$241 m. (1989) Total external public debt US$33,661 m. (1988) Debt service ratio (as % of export earnings) 10% (1988) Gross domestic product US$76,000 m. (1989) Gross national product US$69,970 m. (1988) Inflation rate 30.5% (average 1980-1988) Principal trading partners Czechoslavakia, East Germany, Soviet Union 
ECONOMY
Economic indicators GDP growth 0.2% (1989)
Effects of economic reforms
According to the Guardian of July 30, the economic reform package approved by the International Monetary Fund (IMF) and introduced on Jan. 1, 1990 [see p. 37130], produced the following results in the first six months: a reduction of inflation from a monthly rate of 80 per cent in January to 3.4 per cent in June; the transformation of a budget deficit equivalent to 8 per cent of GDP into a 6-7 per cent surplus; and the stabilization of the zloty at 9,500 against the dollar.
(According to the Finance Ministry, inflation had risen 640 per cent between 1988-1989, with only a 0.2 per cent growth rate as against 4.1 per cent for 1987-88.)
The Financial Times of April 10 reported that Poland's trade surplus stood at a record $780,000,000 at the end of March, stemming from 6.5 per cent rise in exports and a 21 per cent fall in imports.
(According to official figures, the surplus for 1988 and 1989 (estimated), had been $941,000,000 and $241,000,000 respectively.)
On the negative side press reports indicated that the cost of the programme during the first half of 1990 had been a massive rise in unemployment (from an official 6,000 at the end of 1989 to 568,000); a 30 per cent fall in output; a 25 per cent drop in industrial sales in the first quarter (in comparison with the same period in 1989); and an estimated 30 per cent drop in living standards, as real incomes slumped by around 35 per cent and 90 per cent of prices were freed (following the abolition of subsidies) to find their market level.
According to a report in the Financial Times of June 1, 1990, a government adviser, Stanislaw Gomulka, had estimated that GDP could fall by 15 per cent in 1990, with a steady 7 per cent recovery in growth from 1992.
On April 15, 1990, legislation was presented to the Sejm for the widespread privatization of the economy.
Finance Minister Leszek Balcerowicz said that an agency for privatization would be created and that he would ask the Sejm to create a special commission to speed up legislative approval for the programme.
Whole groups of state-owned enterprises would be sold, with the Council of Ministers being responsible for each enterprise on offer.
Included in the package was the 1980 birthplace of Solidarity, the Lenin shipyard in Gdansk [see also p. 37012].
On Feb. 3, 1990, Inicjatyw Gospodarczych (IG Bank) became the first bank to be offered for privatization; and on April 9, the selling of shares in the leading state-owned foreign trade organization, Universal, began.
Rail strike crisis
On May 27, 1990, a major rail strike was brought to an end following the intervention of Walesa, who urged strikers to negotiate a return to work.
The strike began on May 20 in the northern city of Slupsk after railworkers demanded a 20 per cent wage increase and a purge of the Communist-installed railway management.
Spreading over the whole of the north of Poland, the strike blocked access to Baltic ports and threatened exports of currency-earning coal.
Railworkers in central Poland also joined the stoppage, cutting the link with the industrial south-west, and in addition a hunger strike began in Slupsk.
Refusing to yield, the government said that the workers' demands would shatter its anti-inflation strategy and warned against the strike being exploited politically by the All-Poland Trade Union Accord (OPZZ, formerly linked to the PUWP) which had given the stoppage immediate support.
The government also claimed that the strike was unofficial and therefore illegal.
The Solidarity leadership, while supporting the workers' demands, said that the means used were not appropriate and that it could not deny the legitimacy of the government's position.
A wage increase was granted in June, but below that demanded by the workers.
Debt developments and foreign aid
Balcerowicz announced at a meeting of the Interim Committee of the IMF Bank on May 8, 1990, that Poland would seek a new agreement with its commercial and government creditors to cut Poland's debt-servicing obligations by 80 per cent.
He warned that a failure to reduce the country's debt burden would place political support for the transition to a market economy at risk.
(On Feb. 7, 1990, Deputy Finance Minister Janusz Sawicki had said that Poland's foreign debt was US$40,000 million at the end of 1989 and that it was set to reach $43,000 million by the end of 1990.)
On May 29, 1990, the French government agreed a new aid deal with Poland, rescheduling of $870,000,000 of bilateral debt.
On June 22, West Germany agreed to restructure over a 14-year period a debt of DM3,000 million due for payment by March 1991.
On Jan. 17 an agreement was reached with Italy for $400,000,000 due for 1986-88 to be repaid by the end of 1997, with the first instalment to be paid in mid-1993.
On Oct. 25, 1989, Japan had agreed to reschedule over $396,000,000 with Poland paying principal and interest in five years after a five-year period of grace.
Following a November 1989 visit to the United States by Walesa, Congress further increased an aid package for Poland to $852,000,000.
This included $125,000,000 in emergency food aid, $240,000,000 towards the promotion of private enterprise and a $200,000,000 contribution to a an IMF-backed $1,000 million fund for the stabilization of the zloty agreed by Organization for Economic Cooperation and Development (OECD) countries (and co-ordinated by the European Commission).
Other leading donors to the OECD fund were Japan ($150,000,000); France ($100,000,000); the United Kingdom ($64,000,000); West Germany ($250,000,000); Italy ($100,000,000); Switzerland ($30,000,000); Canada ($25,000,000); Austria ($20,000,000); and Spain ($14,000,000).
During a November visit by Walesa, the UK doubled its so-called "know-how" aid programme for market reform in Poland to $50,000,000.
Japan at the same time offered an extra $50,000,000 in technical and food aid.
FOREIGN
Relations with Soviet Union
Following an official visit by Jaruzelski to Moscow, the Polish Foreign Ministry announced on April 17, 1990, that the 1965 Treaty of Friendship and Mutual Assistance with the Soviet Union would be renegotiated, and by removing communist elements of the document, the review would replace ideological obligation by normal state-to-state relations.
In a joint statement, Jaruzelski and President Gorbachev of the Soviet Union declared the countries' "consistent mutual respect for equality of rights, sovereignty, territorial integrity, non-intervention in internal affairs, freedom of socio-political choice" .
Poland and the Soviet Union would work for the transformation of the existing bloc alliances into a new system of collective European security.
It was reported on April 10, 1990, that Poland had presented a 4,500-million rouble (approximately $7,450 million) demand for reparations for the forced labour of Poles in the Soviet Union during the Second World War.
During an official visit to the Soviet Union on Nov. 23-27, 1989, Mazowiecki had held talks with Gorbachev on economic co-operation, the Polish economy, European security and developments in Germany.
The Soviet Foreign Minister, Eduard Shevardnadze, had visited Poland the previous month to discuss co-operation with the new Solidarity-led government.
The then Polish Defence Minister, Florian Siwicki, visited Moscow on Dec. 4-6.
On May 14, 1990, the defence and foreign affairs committees of the Sejm resolved that the number of Soviet troops in Poland should be reduced from the current 28,000 to 5,000 and demanded an end to their location in the country at low cost [see also p. 37258].
A number of protests had taken place at the Soviet presence in the country, including an attack on Jan. 28 on the Soviet consulate in Krakow.
The Soviet Defence Minister, Marshal Dmitry Yazov, visited Poland on April 24.
It was reported on May 18 that Poland and the Soviet Union would conduct 10-15 per cent of their trade in hard currency in 1990 and make a complete switch from the beginning of 1991, thus ending the barter system and trade in non-convertible roubles [for January 1990 COMECON summit agreeing to review existing trade arrangements see p. 37202].
Polish-German relations
Other foreign relations
Mazowiecki arrived in Italy on Oct. 18, 1989, for a four-day official visit.
He held talks with his Italian counterpart, Giulio Andreotti, and was received on Oct. 20 at the Vatican by Pope John Paul II.
Secretary of State at the Holy See Cardinal Agostino Casaroli arrived in Poland for a six-day visit on June 6, 1990.
Mazowiecki left Warsaw on March 20 for a six-day visit to the USA when a business and economic treaty was signed with President Bush, designed to stimulate US investment, followed by a one-day visit to Canada when Prime Minister Brian Mulroney expressed Canada's interest in extending commercial ties and accepted an invitation to visit Poland in the near future.
Mazowiecki and Jaruzelski arrived in France for a one-day visit at the invitation of President Mitterrand on March 9, 1990.
Talks focused on German unification, Europe and Poland's foreign debt.
Following a further visit to Paris for talks with Mitterrand and French Prime Minister Michel Rocard on May 28-29, Mazowiecki said that he had received support for Polish demands over the Polish-German border issue, as well as its request to participate in the "two-plus-four" talks on German unification [see also above].
He added that a promise had been given by France to support Warsaw within the "Paris Club" of creditor nations.
In a two-day visit to the UK on Feb. 12-14, Mazowiecki held talks with Prime Minister Margaret Thatcher over German unification and the economic problems presented by the magnitude of Polish debt.
UK Foreign, Employment, Agriculture, and Trade and Industry ministers subsequently paid official visits to Poland.
Mazowiecki arrived in Brussels on Jan. 31, 1990, on an official four-day visit to the European Commission.
He was told in meetings with the President of the Commission, Jacques Delors (who had visited Warsaw on Nov. 18, 1989) and the External Relations Commissioner, Frans Andriessen that Poland could not be promised full EC membership in the immediate term.
Mazowiecki suggested the creation of an East-West co-operation council within the framework of the Conference on Security and Co-operation in Europe.
Talks were also held with Belgian Prime Minister Wilfried Martens.
On Jan. 22 Mazowiecki paid an official visit to Prague where he held talks with his Czechoslovak counterpart Marian Calfa [for Havel's visit to Poland on January 25 see p. 37192].
On a visit to Beijing on Jan. 18-23, Deputy Premier Jan Janowski met the Chinese Premier Li Peng.
Jaruzelski paid an official state visit to Spain on June 11-12 at the invitation of King Juan Carlos (who had made an official visit to Poland in October 1989 — see p. 37589).
He also paid an official visit to Switzerland in February.
Coinciding with a three-day visit by the then Israeli Deputy Prime Minister Shimon Peres from Nov. 27, 1989, a government spokesman said that Poland intended to restore diplomatic relations with Israel in early 1990 after a break of 22 years.
EUROPE
CZECHOSLOVAKIA
BASIC DATA
Area: 127,905 sq km.
Population: 15,636,000 (1989).
Capital: Prague.
Language: Czech and Slovak (both official); Hungarian-speaking minority in Slovakia.
Religion: Christianity — around 70% Roman Catholic, 15% Protestant.
Av. life expectancy: 71 years (1987).
Armed forces: 199,700 (1989).
GNP per capita: US$10,140 (1988).
Currency: koruna (crown)(US$1.00=kcs15.61 as at Sept. 15, 1990).
The Czech and Slovak Federative Republic is a parliamentary federal republic consisting of the Czech and Slovak republics, each of which has its own government.
Legislative power is vested in the bicameral Federal Assembly (Federalni Shromazdeni), which consists of a 200-member Chamber of the People (Snemovna Lidu) and a 150-member Chamber of the Nations (Snemovna Narodu), both of which are elected for a five-year term.
The legislature elects the President, who in turn appoints the federal government.
Until November 1989 political power was effectively in the hands of the Communist Party of Czechoslovakia (KSC or CPCz).
Popular protests beginning on Nov. 17 in support of democratic reforms forced the authorities to surrender the communist monopoly of power [see p. 37026], and the necessary constitutional amendments were made by parliament on Nov. 29.
A coalition government with a majority of non-communist members took office on Dec. 10, while the resignation of Gustav Husak as President on Dec. 9 was followed by the election in his place of the country's best-known opposition figure, Vaclav Havel, on Dec. 29 [see pp. 37106-07].
Free multiparty elections held on June 8, 1990 [see p. 37542], brought a clear majority for the twin citizens' movements which had led the protests of late 1989, Civic Forum in the Czech Lands and Public Against Violence in Slovakia.
Together with the Christian Democratic Union/Christian Democratic Movement they formed at the end of June a coalition government (which also contained a number of unaffiliated ministers) headed by the outgoing Prime Minister, Marian Calfa.
Havel was re-elected by the Federal Assembly for a transitional two-year period on July 5.
POLITICS
Post-revolution political changes
The new government which took power on Dec. 10, 1989 [see p. 37106], immediately embarked on a programme of constitutional and political reforms aimed at dismantling the system erected by the CPCz in over 40 years of one-party rule.
Round table talks involving all major political parties in January and February 1990 produced agreement on the modalities of the elections planned for June.
It was also decided to reduce immediately the CPCz representation to reflect more accurately its support in the country.
Thus, on Jan. 30 parliament co-opted 120 new members to replace CPCz members who had resigned or who had been recalled by their constituencies.
As a result the CPCz held only 138 of the 350 seats in the Federal Assembly, about half its previous strength.
Parliament on March 27 and 28 approved a range of new laws concerned with the rights of association, assembly and petition, the press and citizenship.
The new law on association allowed citizens to form associations without prior approval of the Interior Ministry.
The new law on assembly allowed citizens to gather or hold demonstrations without prior approval from the local government.
The new press law formally abolished censorship and allowed individuals to publish newspapers and magazines (previously only institutions had been allowed to do so).
Under the revised law on citizenship, this could only be lost by citizens at their own request.
Accordingly, thousands of Czechoslovaks who had fled the country after the 1968 clampdown and were subsequently stripped of their citizenship would be able to regain it.
Jan Carnugorsky, then a Deputy Prime Minister, declared that with the adoption of this package the legal guarantees of citizens' rights in Czechoslovakia had been brought in line with international agreements and obligations.
Disbanding of National Front — Investigations, trials and suicides of former CPCz leaders
As part of the disestablishment of the CPCz, the matrix of party organizations in the economic, political, social and security spheres was dissolved in the months following the November revolution.
The governing council of the National Front, the umbrella organization of political and social organizations under the communist regime, decided to wind up the body on Feb. 7.
Although the new government had almost immediately initiated investigations of former CPCz officials for crimes committed before the November revolution, it had come under increasing pressure to broaden the scope of the investigations, particularly after a demonstration by over 100,000 people in Prague on May 12.
Among those detained for investigation into suspected criminal acts were Vasil Bilak, former secretary of the CPCz central committee; Milos Jakes, former general secretary of the CPCz; Jozef Lenart, former member of the CPCz presidium and secretary of the CPCz central committee; Rudolf Hegenbart and Michal Stefanak, former heads of CPCz central committee departments; Alojz Lorenc, former Deputy Interior Minister in charge of national security; Peter Colotka, former Slovak Prime Minister; Miroslav Stepan, former member of the CPCz presidium and former secretary of the Prague party section; and Rudolf Barak, former Interior Minister.
All had been expelled from the party in February [see p. 37256].
The main charges being investigated were acts committed in relation to the 1968 invasion by Warsaw Pact troops and to the November 1989 demonstrations as well as more general charges involving abuse of official authority, political interference in legal proceedings, illegal property and currency transactions, and embezzlement.
Legal proceeding were started against Barak, Stepan and Colotka, and it was expected that many others would be charged in due course.
Stepan was sentenced on July 9 to four years' imprisonment for abusing the powers of a public official and inciting others to commit the same offence.
He had been specifically accused of exceeding his authority (i) on Oct. 28, 1988, when he ordered police to use water cannon and tear gas against anti-government protesters [see p. 37093]; and (ii) on Jan. 15, 1989, when he ordered that demonstrators who did not obey an appeal to disperse should be taken out of Prague and abandoned without personal documents 30-50 km from the city [see also p. 36400].
He appealed against the verdict, and on July 16 was released from detention pending his appeal.
Two prominent ousted CPCz officials committed suicide in early 1990 in the wake of the November revolution.
They were Viliam Salgovic, a former president of the Slovak parliament, and Antonin Kapek, a former politburo member and secretary of the Prague party section from 1969 until 1988, who committed suicide on Feb. 5 and May 22 respectively.
Trade-union, media and religious developments
At an extraordinary congress on Mar. 2-3, 1990, the Revolutionary Trade Union Movement (ROH) voted to disband itself and founded a new confederation.
Replacing the old structure which had been closely linked to the CPCz, the new Confederation of Czechoslovak Trade Unions was immediately joined by over 30 unions — both restructured existing unions and new ones set up since the November revolution.
Soon after the change of government the heads of national radio and television and of the CTK news agency, as well as many newspaper editors, were replaced.
Frantisek Pavlicek was appointed head of Czechoslovak radio on Feb. 2, Petr Uhl head of CTK on Feb. 14, and Jiri Kanturek head of Czechoslovak television on March 12.
All three had been prominent opposition figures in the period before November 1989.
The collapse of communist rule also made possible the revival of Czechoslovakia's religious communities.
In January 1990 new laws were approved abolishing state supervision of activities of the churches and allowing religious education in schools.
The promised return of church properties proved complex, however, and parliament was unable to agree on legislation originally planned for May.
The appointment by Pope John Paul II of five new bishops on Feb. 14, 1990, filled all of the country's 13 Roman Catholic bishoprics for the first time since the Second World War [see p. 36235 for appointment in May 1988 of three bishops].
In April diplomatic relations with the Vatican were restored and the Pope visited Czechoslovakia [see p. 37394].
Reappraisal of 1968 events
The government on Feb. 16 set up a commission to establish the full truth of the invasion by Warsaw Pact troops in 1968 which brought the Dubcek reformist regime to an end [see p. 22909].
The commission, headed by the historian Vojtech Mencl, would analyse the reason for the entry of troops and evaluate political developments in the country in the period to 1970, requesting relevant material from the five Warsaw Pact countries involved.
(The CPCz had reversed its position on the invasion in December 1989 — see p. 37106.)
Death of Minister
Slavomir Stracar, Czechoslovakia's Federal Minister of Foreign Trade since the end of June 1990 [see p. 37543], died of a heart attack on Aug. 21 in Brasilia (Brazil) during an official visit.
He was 55.
SECURITY
Report on police actions during demonstrations
A parliamentary commission set up to investigate the extent of the responsibility of the security service (StB) for, and the political background to, the violent police action against student demonstrators on Nov. 17, 1989 [see p. 37026]published its report on May 9.
It concluded that suspicion existed that the action had been planned in advance and was directed by two commands with different instructions.
But the role of StB as well as the involvement of the Soviet secret service, the KGB (the suspected "second" command), remained unclear.
Some 592 people had been injured in the police attack on student demonstrators, which precipitated the November revolution.
Criminal proceedings had already been started in December against individual police officers in connection with the Nov. 17 events, and more officers were charged in April.
In January two senior police officials committed suicide after coming under investigation.
New defence law — Revelation of military budget
Parliament on March 14 approved a new defence law providing for the reduction of compulsory military service from two years to 18 months and the extension of annual leave from 10 to 30 days.
A separate law allowing for conscientious objection and introducing alternative civilian service was also adopted.
The government on June 13 revealed the exact levels of defence spending, which had hitherto been secret.
The defence budget amounted to 35,062 million koruna in 1989 and was expected to amount to 31,180 million koruna in 1990, or 23.6 per cent of overall government expenditure.
The government was committed to further major reductions in defence spending.
Lifting of travel restrictions — Removal of border fortifications
The Adamec government abolished restrictions on foreign travel as from Dec. 4, 1989.
Whereas previously people wanting to travel abroad had had to overcome a range of bureaucratic and political obstacles, the new regulations only required citizens to present their passports.
Exchange regulations were relaxed at the same time to allow people to acquire foreign currency.
Between January and June agreements providing for visa-free travel were signed with Austria, Finland, West Germany and Italy.
Visa requirements for Canadian and US visitors were also abolished in May.
In December 1989 border guards had begun dismantling the fortifications on the Austrian and West German borders, and all barriers were removed by the end of May.
A number of new crossing points had also been opened.
GDP growth 1.7% (1989) Trade balance +3,978 million crowns Budget surplus 2,846 million crowns Total external debt US$7,900,000 (1989) Gross domestic product 606,300 million crowns (1988) Gross national product US$158,168 million (1988) Inflation rate around 3% (1989) Principal trading partners Soviet Union, Poland, West Germany, East Germany 
ECONOMY
Economic indicators
1989 economic performance
Official figures released on Feb. 9 showed that the Czechoslovak economy had grown by 1.7 per cent in 1989, compared with 2.8 per cent the previous year.
There had been no improvement in productivity, retail prices went up by 1.5 per cent(although the real level of inflation was widely thought to be at least double that), and wages remained static in real terms.
Economic reforms
Among its first acts in office, the new government, committed to sweeping economic reforms aimed at the introduction of a market-based economy, announced on Dec. 11, 1989, that Czechoslovakia was applying for membership of the International Monetary Fund (IMF) and the World Bank.
In early January 1990 the crown was devalued by 19 per cent against the US dollar and other convertible currencies, and revalued upwards by 10 per cent against the rouble and other East European currencies.
In April and May parliament approved a series of measures intended to prepare the ground for the new economic structure.
The new legislation included:(i) a law on private enterprise, which allowed individuals to start companies without restrictions on the numbers of employees;(ii) a law on state enterprises, which allowed state-owned companies to offer shares to their workforces;(iii) a law on shareholding, which allowed foreign individuals or companies to own up to 100 per cent of Czechoslovak-based companies;(iv) a law on industrial relations, enshrining employee and trade-union rights; and (v) provisions for the creation of industrial courts to settle commercial disputes.
Commenting on the new economic legislation, the Finance Minister, Vaclav Klaus, said that its main thrust was to revitalize small and medium-size state-owned companies through improved management and new investment; furthermore, the government was aiming to establish a climate favouring private enterprise, but around one-third of the economy would remain under state control for the time being.
In general, observers noted that the economic reforms were not proceeding as quickly as originally envisaged.
This was attributed to a growing realization of the extent of the economic malaise and the need for painful measures.
Despite evident internal disagreements on the pace of economic reform, the government on May 14 announced that it had agreed on a programme of unified reforms to be implemented over the following months.
Environment
The new government pledged itself to deal with a range of serious environmental problems affecting the country, the extent of many of which had only come to light after the collapse of communist rule.
Frantisek Reichel, then a Deputy Prime Minister, told a press conference on Feb. 1 that ecologically responsible development would require an end to inefficient and environmentally damaging production, a change in production programmes, and a review of the current methods of energy production.
All major investment projects under construction or planned would be reconsidered in the light of possible risks to the environment.
Among the specific environmental issues causing widespread concern were (i) the high emissions of sulphur dioxide gas by the country's heavy industries;(ii) the severe contamination of underground water by oil and other substances dumped by the Soviet forces stationed in the country since 1968;(iii) the construction of several nuclear-power plants;(iv) the major dam project on the Danube river on the Slovak-Hungarian border [see p. 37048]; and (v) the planned exploitation of a large gold deposit in a scenic area south of Prague.
FOREIGN
Diplomatic initiatives — New trade agreements
On April 11, 1990, Czechoslovakia formally applied to join the Council of Europe, and it was granted observer status on May 7 [see below for Havel's address on May 10].
In early March the Foreign Minister, Jiri Dienstbier, had also declared that his country would eventually want to join the European Communities.
On April 6, 1990, the government called for the creation of a European security commission under the auspices of the Conference on Security and Co-operation in Europe (CSCE), which could lay the foundation of a new and united security system for Europe [see also p. 37382].
On March 22 Czechoslovakia and South Korea established full diplomatic relations.
Among the various trade and co-operation agreements signed in 1990, the most important were (i) an agreement signed with the United States on April 9 which granted Czechoslovakia most-favoured-nation status, thereby reducing tariff levels for Czechoslovak exports to the United States; and (ii) a 10-year agreement with the EC signed on March 23 which would eliminate quotas for Czechoslovak industrial exports to the EC by 1995 and facilitate the transfer of EC expertise to many sectors of the Czechoslovak economy.
Address by Havel to Council of Europe
Havel addressed the Council of Europe in Strasbourg on May 10.
He called on the North Atlantic Treaty Organization (NATO) and the Warsaw Pact "to move gradually toward the ideal of an entirely new security system" for Europe.
As a first step the two blocs should "function more clearly as instruments of disarmament rather than instruments of armament" because their roles as instruments of defence against attack from the other were becoming attenuated.
Dubcek visit to Moscow
Alexander Dubcek, the reformist leader ousted in 1969 after the Warsaw Pact invasion and rehabilitated and elected President of the Federal Assembly in December 1989 [see p. 37107], paid a visit to Moscow on May 18-21.
He thus returned to the Soviet capital under very different circumstances from his last visit 22 years earlier, when he had been brought to Moscow and forced to give his approval to the invasion.
In the course of his visit he met President Gorbachev and other senior Soviet officials.
(Gorbachev had expressed regret over the "unfounded invasion" in 1968 in February — see p. 37256.)
EUROPE
HUNGARY
BASIC DATA
Area: 93,033 sq km.
Population: 10,375,000 (1990).
Capital: Budapest.
Languages Hungarian.
Religion: Christianity (predominantly Roman Catholic).
Av. life expectancy: 70 yrs (1988).
Armed forces: 91,000 (1989).
GNP per capita: US$2,460 (1988).
Currency: forint (US$1.00=F61.6625 as at Sept. 24, 1990).
Hungary, declared a People's Republic in 1949, was on Oct. 23, 1989, proclaimed the Hungarian Republic.
The proclamation followed approval on Oct. 17-20 by the highest state body, the unicameral National Assembly (Országgyülés), elected for a five-year term, of a new transitional constitution and electoral law which introduced a multiparty democratic system (hitherto the sole legal party had been the Hungarian Socialist Workers' Party, reorganized at the beginning of October as the Hungarian Socialist Party).
Free and direct multiparty elections for 386 seats in a new Országgyülés were held in two rounds on March 25 and April 8, 1990 (a further eight seats were reserved for members of ethnic minority communities).
As a result, on May 23 a coalition government took office led by the centre-right Hungarian Democratic Forum (HDF) and including the Independent Smallholders Party and the Christian Democratic People's Party (CDPP), with Jozsef Antall as Premier.
On May 2 Arpad Göncz was elected Országgyülés Speaker and acting President, pending a decision on whether to hold a direct presidential election or leave the choice to the Országgyülés.
This question was put to a nationwide referendum on July 29, but a low turnout invalidated the ballot, thus empowering the Országgyülés to elect the President.
POLITICS
Efforts to ensure stability in run-up to free elections
In February 1990 a meeting was held between the then Prime Minister Miklós Németh, the then acting President Matyás Szürös and opposition party representatives, to discuss the period up to the March-April multiparty parliamentary elections,[for which see pp. 37325; 37380].
The participants called on enterprises not to increase prices in the run-up to the elections in order to prevent unrest.
They also agreed that there was not time to create a civil service law, but said that civil servants should be reassured that past political affiliation should not affect future job selection processes.
On Nov. 23, 1989, the Országgyüles had passed an amendment to the labour code which stated that no one could be disadvantaged because of religious or political conviction.
Continuing reappraisal of history
In keeping with the reassessment of Hungarian history under way since the beginning of 1989, a resolution was passed on May 15, 1990, restoring citizenship (in some cases posthumously) to people deprived of it during the political repression between the late 1940s and the early 1960s.
Minority rights
National minority rights came into question in January when Romanians, Croats and Slovaks in Hungary began to set up a joint organization which intended to help the government prepare decisions affecting minority rights.
At the Feb. 27 Országgyüles session, one representative called for seats in parliament for minorities, and another proposed that there should also be church representation.
It was decided that from that time on the gypsy, Croat, German, Romanian, Serbian, Slovak, Slovene and Jewish communities would have one representative each in the Országgyüles, but that there would be no church representation.
On May 15 a bill was adopted calling for talks between Hungary and neighbouring countries on the fate and protection of Magyar minorities.
The Justice Party of Hungarian Gypsies demanded in June that a Minister for Gypsies be introduced.
On April 1, 1990, the Hungarian Zionists Association which had been dissolved after the Second World War, was re-established, with the aim of promoting the formation of a minority council within the Jewish community.
The Democratic Federation of Serbs was formed on Jan. 23, 1990, as the legal successor to the Democratic Federation of Southern Slavs in Hungary.
Pre- and post-election party political developments
The Christian Democratic People's Party met in September 1989 for the first time in 40 years and elected a permanent leadership, claiming a membership of 3,000.
In May 1990 it adopted statutes and elected a five-member presidium and executive body consisting of 10 people.
At a congress of the Alliance of Free Democrats (SzDSz) on Oct. 27-29, 1989, a new 30-member council was elected with a 15-member managing board.
One week previously an independent member of the Országgyüles, Eva Balla, had joined the party and thus became the party's first representative in parliament.
In April 1990 Janos Kis was elected SzDSz chair.
A split developed in the Independent Smallholders' Party on Dec. 29, 1989, with the founding session of the National Smallholders and Bourgeois Party, attended by 150 members from Smallholders' Party branches.
The meeting adopted a party statute and created a 15-member provisional organizing committee led by Imre Boros, while Dezsoe Futo was elected honourary party chairman.
The Hungarian Socialist Party (HSP — the former ruling Hungarian Socialist Workers' Party — HSWP) opened its second congress on May 26 and elected former Foreign Minister Gyüla Horn as its chairman, replacing Rezsö Nyers [for whose appointment in June 1989 see p. 36746].
Modifications of the party constitution were adopted, edging it towards mainstream West European social democracy.
The lower age limit on party membership was reduced to 16; this came after the party lost 700,000 members since reconstituting itself and coming a humiliating fourth place in the national elections in March and April [see p. 37380].
The Patriotic People's Front (PPF), the umbrella grouping which had comprised the HSWP and other parties represented in the government before liberalization measures were introduced, decided to dissolve itself at a national conference in May 1990 following the poor election result.
In October 1989 the PPF had elected the then Justice Minister Kalman Kulcsar as its chair.
On June 2, 1990, the Hungarian Democratic Forum (HDF or MDF) held its third national congress when it agreed to expand the forum's presidium to 19 members.
In June the HDF became a member of the Union of European Democratic Parties.
Minor parties
The Social Democratic Party (SDP) split at a congress on Oct. 3-5, 1989.
Formed in January 1989, the party had already experienced divisions between the "historic wing" which wanted to follow the lines of the original SDP which functioned between 1890 and 1948, and the "renewal platform" which wanted to adopt Western ideals of social democracy [see p. 36939].
At the congress the SDP elected a 31-member board and a 102-strong national council, while on Nov. 5 Anna Petrasovits was elected party chair and Andor Boelcsfoeldy honourary chair.
Meanwhile on Oct. 4 SDP left-winger György Ruttner led a walkout from the SDP congress, and on the following day around 60 delegates founded the Independent Social Democratic Party.
The party elected a seven-member operative committee.
The party elected a new leadership in June 1990 at its official selection conference, with veteran SDP activist Andras Revesz confirmed as life chairman.
The SDP was one of the small parties outside parliament which formed an alliance in May 1990.
The Hungarian People's Party, the Generation's Party, the National Alliance, comprising four parties, and the Association of Political Prisoners also took part.
In June, however, the SDP withdrew because "fundamental differences" .
The Democratic People's Party elected Sandor Keresztes its chairman and Emese Ugrin its general secretary in September 1989.
The Green Party held its founding session on Nov. 18, 1989, and at a congress on June 2-3, 1990, it elected Karoly Szita, Ivan Gyulay and Gyoergy Ilosvay as co-chairs.
Gyula Fetke was elected chairman of the Hungarian People's Party on Jan 20, 1990.
On the same day the first congress of the Entrepreneurs Party elected Tibor Szabo as its chairman, but at its second congress in June the leadership resigned because of poor results in the national elections and Jozsef Rigo took over as party leader.
Trade union developments
The Central Council of Hungarian Trade Unions (SZOT) was relaunched as a sovereign organization at a congress on March 2, 1990, with Sandor Nagy being elected president.
Only two trade unions indicated that they did not want to be part of the SZOT confederation.
The congress agreed to establish a closed trade unions' assets management company in which any union could become a member.
A number of new trade unions were formed in the latter part of 1989 to represent a wide range of workers.
Appointments in state-run media and Academy of Sciences
István Nemeskürty replaced as president of Hungarian Television Gyula Bereczky, who resigned in November 1989, saying that the board entrusted with supervising television and radio had turned editorial board meetings into scenes of party battles.
In February 1990 the Council of Ministers relieved Sandor Burjan of his post as director-general of the Hungarian News Agency (MTI), and replaced him with former MTI first deputy to the director general, Tamás Pálos.
Domokos Kosary was elected president of the Academy of Sciences on May 24, 1990.
SECURITY
Coup plot allegations
In March 1990, Miklos Nemeth, then Prime Minister, alleged during a parliamentary debate on the January 1990 Danubegate scandal [see p. 37194]that former leaders of the HSWP with the help of the hard-line Czechoslovak and Romanian regimes had been plotting an armed takeover of power in Hungary in the summer of 1989.
Security services had begun investigations whereupon the plotters had stopped.
Opposition politicians, however, dismissed the "coup" revelation as a ruse to cloud the issue of his responsibility in the scandal.
Defence cuts
In 1990 Hungary's defence budget was reduced by 30 per cent in real terms and as a result the Hungarian Army, 106,000 strong in 1988, was to be reduced to 80,000 by 1991.
In December the formation of a Command of the People's Army was announced which would carry out the professional management of the defence forces; Lt-Gen Kalman Loerincz became commander, with the government rank of State Secretary.
The Army also reduced the number of its attaché positions in Cuba, Ethiopia, North Korea, Mozambique and Vietnam.
However, in recognition of the changing military scene in Europe new attachés were sent to Berlin, Helsinki, Moscow, Paris and Prague.
In February the commander of the Border Guard announced that his forces were to be cut from 22,000 to 9,000 over the following five years.
Ferenc Karpathi, then Defence Minister, announced on March 29 that national service would be reduced to 12 months from August and that soldiers would no longer have to carry out other types of service such as agricultural work.
In June the Interior Ministry reorganized and took direct control of over one-third of the main departments.
Border control was handed to the Defence Ministry.
A decree in February banned the sale of weapons to countries involved in armed conflict.
Arms production declined in 1989 and was expected to continue declining.
Police affairs
In January 1990 new rules for police conduct were released, free of politics and ideology; they no longer contained allusions to the leading role of the HSWP, and the police would no longer be required to address people as "comrade" .
Although it was estimated that a further 2,000 more police would be needed to cope with rapidly rising crime (40,000 more crimes were reported in 1989 compared with 1988, and there were 100,000 unsolved cases), an estimated 3,540 had left the force for more lucrative jobs as security guards.
Gyoezoe Szabo became the Chief of the National Police Force in June 1990.
ECONOMY
The Hungarian economy faced a sharp decline in 1989, although some improvement was visible towards mid-1990.
The National Bank report for 1989 revealed a fall in industrial production by 3.1 per cent compared with 1988 (against a maximum targeted fall of 1 per cent), a deterioration in the hard-currency account and a drop in the GDP in real terms of 1.8 per cent compared with the previous two years.
The volume of investments fell 10 per cent short of the target and failed to reach the 1988 level.
Retail sales rose by 16.2 per cent but were 1.5 per cent down in value.
Public-sector consumption also fell dramatically.
Individuals tended to invest more, with an increased demand for certificates of deposit.
The consumer price index rose by 17 per cent in the first 11 months of 1989 compared with 16.7 per cent in the whole of 1988.
Foreign trade
The convertible currency trade surplus reached $540,000,000, which was $40,000,000 short of the target, but exceeded the previous year's figure by $24,000,000.
Hungary's surplus on the rouble trade (i.e. with its COMECON partners) grew by 325,000,000 roubles to 540,000,000 roubles in 1989 against a targeted deficit of 131,000,000 roubles.
This surplus, combined with dramatically increasing Hungarian tourist spending in convertible currencies following the opening of the borders, was seen as the main reason for a convertible current-account deficit of $1,140 million compared with $591,000,000 in 1988.
The 1990 plan called for a convertible currency trade surplus of $700,000,000 through a 7-8 per cent increase in exports.
The rouble trade was to be drastically reduced in 1990 in order to turn the 1989 surplus into the equivalent of a $500,000,000 dollar deficit.
In October the government told the Soviet Union that it wanted to put their mutual trade relationship on a US dollar basis over a two-year period.
In January Tamas Beck, then Minister of Trade, suspended all licences and contracts for exports to COMECON countries, including quotas stipulated in inter-state agreements.
The effects of this move were that in 1990 Hungary's trade with the European Communities (EC) was expected to exceed that with Hungary's COMECON partners for the first time.
Exports to COMECON fell by 31 per cent in five months, while hard currency earnings rose by 19 per cent.
Hungary and the Soviet Union signed a trade protocol on April 18 providing that the Soviet Union would remain Hungary's main trading partner; however, Soviet exports to Hungary would decrease by 8.5 per cent and imports by 12 per cent.
HSWP/HSP government's economic reforms
The HSWP government published in September 1989 an amended economic reform programme which put forward the reduction of state ownership, easing restrictions on private businesses, and creation of a market economy, with the use of foreign capital.
In addition Hungary was to switch over to hard-currency trading with all East European partners by 1991, and between 1992 and 1994 the forint was to be made partially convertible.
In November strict limits on hard currency exchange were announced in order to curb the run on cash reserves.
Following these measures in the first two months of 1990 the hard-currency current-account deficit totalled $23,000 million, an improvement on the same period in 1989, and external debt fell by $136,000,000.
At the end of March the rouble current account had a deficit of 184,000,000 roubles compared with a surplus of 414,000,000 roubles 12 months previously.
In June 1990 Ferenc Bartha, the National Bank president, reported that Hungary did not wish to reschedule the country's $20,700 million foreign debt.
The Országgyüles on Nov. 23, 1989, discussed reducing income tax as an incentive for increased productivity.
The position was opposed by the then Finance Minister Lazslo Bekesi, who said that debt and restrictions of the socialist market meant that a dynamic short-term development of the economy was not possible.
A bill was passed reducing the tax profit level from 50 to 40 per cent and 35 per cent in agriculture.
In addition the bill proposed extending 25 per cent VAT to goods, especially cars imported privately from the West.
Spending of convertible currencies on imported cars had reached $200,000,000 in the first 11 months of 1989 and had caused a considerable drain on currency reserves.
Foreign credit
In 1989 the broad money supply increased by 74,300 million forints or 12 per cent, which was 7 per cent lower than the growth rate of the nominal GDP, indicating the extreme monetary rigour of the Central Bank.
The number of companies which could not meet payment orders for lack of sufficient funds rose by 60 per cent.
Hungary lost much foreign creditor confidence as a consequence of the general deterioration in its economic performance just as it approached a period when it needed substantial foreign loans to service its debts, finance its convertible currency account deficit and replenish hard currency reserves.
The National Bank said that for 1990 it had to adhere to a strict monetary policy aimed at keeping the hard currency account deficit under $550,000,000, that of the state budget under 10,000 million forints and inflation under 19 per cent— conditions imposed by the International Monetary Fund (IMF) when it approved an agreement to pave the way for additional foreign loans to maintain the country's creditworthiness.
In 1989 Hungary needed about $2,600 million to service its debts and finance its current-account deficit.
Interest payments amounted to $1,400 million, 5 per cent of GDP.
It was estimated that for 1990 new credits of about $3,000 million would have to be sought, primarily from Western sources.
On Dec. 6 the European commission granted a loan of $1,138 million for a five-year term, and in June Western central banks issued a further $280,000,000 short-term loan.
In March 1990 the Group of 10 (G-10 — most industrialized countries) together with Austria granted a bridging loan of $300,000,000.
The World Bank granted Hungary a loan of $66,000,000 in June to streamline its financial system (the money was made available to the four largest banks).
In September regulations on hard-currency accounts were changed to allow Hungarians to deposit hard currencies in their private accounts without having to declare the source of the money.
FOREIGN
On Sept. 8, 1989, the HSWP announced that it was to establish a 50-km zone of security- and confidence-building along the frontiers with Austria and Yugoslavia.
That same month the Hungarian parliamentary Speaker Matyas Szueroes stated that Hungary's long-term aim was the achievement of a Finnish or Austrian type neutrality, not directed against the Soviet Union but founded on confidence within Europe.
The new Foreign Minister, Geza Jeszenszky, declared on May 30, 1990, that Hungary wished to hold negotiations with all parties concerned about leaving the Warsaw Treaty Organisation, having taken the Soviet Union's security interests into account.
On June 29 Jeszenszky visited NATO headquarters in Brussels.
Hungary's need for loans and its trade surplus problems with the Soviet Union led it to look for other trading partners within Europe.
In June 1989 a co-operation agreement between EFTA and Hungary was signed allowing for customs concessions to Hungary.
The Norwegian Foreign Minister and the Finnish Premier visited Hungary separately, also in June.
The new President of the Council of the Europe Communities, French Foreign Minister Roland Dumas, and President of the Council of the EC Commission Jacques Delors arrived in Budapest on Nov. 16, 1989.
On May 22, 1990, the new Premier Antall read the government programme which included joining the EC within the decade as well as becoming a member of the new European security order.
In June 1990 Antall told Austrian Chancellor Franz Vranitsky that Hungary wanted to join the EC at the same time as Austria.
Increasing ties with Western Europe
The UK Secretary of State for Foreign and Commonwealth Affairs, Douglas Hurd, made an official visit in February 1990.
At the end of his visit Hurd announced that Britain intended to set up a £25,000,000 fund to promote Hungary's economy.
President Mitterrand of France arrived in Budapest on Jan. 18.
During the visit the head of the Credit Lyonnais Bank signed a $100,000 agreement with the Hungarian National Bank and agreed to open a office in Budapest.
Horn visited Italyin June 1990, when Hungary was given a further government credit of $150,000,000.
Belgium and Hungary in early November 1989 signed an accord to allow limited military co-operation, the first such agreement between a Warsaw Pact state and NATO member; King Baudouin visited Hungary in June 1990.
Hungary established diplomatic relations with Chile in January 1990, and Oman in June.
A Taiwan commercial office was opened in Budapest in March 1990, a similar South African office opening on April 20.
Disclosure of HSWP regime's involvement with international terrorists
Details of the former government's involvement with terrorist organizations came to light in June 1990.
During a parliamentary session Interior Minister Balazs Horvath said that he had started criminal proceedings against former ministers for harbouring the international terrorist "Carlos" (Illich Ramirez Sánchez).
One of those under investigation, former Interior Minister Andras Benkei described the allegations as "rubbish" , but the Hungarian daily Magyar Nemzet alleged that Carlos and members of his group had stayed in Hungary several times in the late 1970s and early 1980s and that leading communist officials had been aware of their presence.
The newspaper Nepszabadsag also claimed that Ulrike Meinhof, one of the leaders of the West German Red Army Faction group, had stayed in Budapest for a while prior to her arrest in 1972 and death in 1978.
REFERENCES Reference article pp. 36939-41; subsequent developments pp. 36960-61; 37048; 37130; 37258; 37194; 37325-26; 37380; 37465; 37610; 37620; 37667; 37724.
EUROPE
ROMANIA
Basic Data
Area 229,077 sq km.
Population:23,200,000 (1989).
Capital: Bucharest.
Languages: Romanian (official); Hungarian, German and other languages spoken by minorities.
Religion: Christianity (85% belong to Romanian Orthodox Church).
Av. life expectancy: 70yrs (1988).
Armed Forces: 171,000 (1989).
Currency: Leu (plural lei)(US$1.00=20.3415 lei as at Sept. 18, 1990).
The overthrow of the Ceausescu regime on Dec. 22, 1989 [see pp. 37104-05], brought communist rule in Romania to an end.
The communists had taken power in December 1947, when the monarchy was abolished and Romania was proclaimed a People's Republic.
In 1965 it was designated the Socialist Republic of Romania, which title was changed to the Republic of Romania on Dec. 29, 1989.
All communist insignia were dropped from the national flag and state emblems.
Initially the National Salvation Front (NSF) through its Council, represented by an Executive Bureau presided over by Ion Iliescu, assumed legislative authority, with executive responsibility being given to a new provisional Council of Ministers headed by Petre Roman.
On Feb. 9, 1990, the NSF Council was replaced by an all-party provisional Council of National Unity, which served as an interim parliament until the general and presidential elections on May 20.
Thereafter, political authority resided in the bicameral legislature consisting of a 396-seat National Assembly (including nine distributed among nominated members of the national minorities) and a 119-seats Senate.
It contained representatives of more than 20 political parties who had contested the first free multiparty elections in Romania since 1937 [see p. 37441].
The NSF, which reorganized itself as a political party in January, won the elections by a landslide, while Iliescu was elected President by an overwhelming majority.
Iliescu resigned his party posts following his assumption of the presidency and asked Roman to form a government.
The new parliament convened for the first time on June 9.
Among the presidential powers was the appointment of the Prime Minister, the president and members of the Supreme Court, the prosecutor general, the Speaker of the National Assemby and the president of the Senate, who would take over the functions of President in the event of the post suddenly being vacated.
POLITICS/SECURITY
Legacy of Ceausescu era
From the outset of the December revolution questions were raised about the background of the personalities who assumed power.
It was even alleged that the NSF was already in place before the overthrow of Ceausescu and that, in the eyes of its opponents, it "stole the revolution" from those who made it.
Ion Iliescu in particular became the focal point of demonstrators who claimed that his communist past disqualified him from office and that nothing short of a total purge of communists from all positions of responsibility would cleanse society of the effects of 40 years of dictatorship.
Distrust of government and of the pronouncements of politicians was endemic and the circulation of rumours fed an atmosphere of crisis and fear, reinforced by the manner in which Iliescu ended the demonstration in University Square in Bucharest on June 15-16 by calling in miners to restore order [see pp. 37544-45].
The issue of the Securitate, which had maintained Ceausescu in power and had been responsible for the bloodshed in the week following the revolution, was another factor which fuelled mistrust.
While trials of Securitate leaders were taking place in Timisoara, opposition activists alleged that a high proportion of secret policemen were simply absorbed into the government agencies, armed forces and revamped services.
They were said to be behind the acts of violence against the opposition parties, against the minorities, and against peaceful demonstrators.
The Securitate was disbanded after the revolution and a new secret service, the Romanian Intelligence Service (RIS) was inaugurated on April 25, 1990, headed by Virgil Magureanu.
While the objective of the new service was the collection of data on anti-state espionage services, terrorist organizations and extremists, it would have no powers of arrest, detention, confiscation, search or criminal investigation.
It was accountable to parliament and to a parliamentary commission which would ensure that constitutional provisions, fundamental human rights and freedoms were observed.
However, no figures were revealed as to the size of the RIS, and the key question of whether it would employ former Securitate officers was declared "confidential" .
Asylum request by former minister
Mihai Lupoi, who had been dismissed in February 1990 as Minister of Tourism in the provisional NSF government [see p. 37251], applied for political asylum in Switzerland on July 5.
He had fled Romania after having been accused of helping anti-government demonstrators in Bucharest and after having survived what he claimed were three assassination attempts.
Refugee situation
Political uncertainty and economic hardships led to a continued outflow of refugees, particularly from the minorities.
Romania's ethnic Germans once estimated at between 200,000 and 220,000, were reported to be flooding out of the country, taking advantage of the policy of West Germany which granted citizenship to anyone who could prove German descent.
By June 1990 a total of 95,000 Germans had their applications for citizenship approved by the West German embassy in Bucharest, while the mayor of Sibiu, Mircea Tomas, was reported by Tanjug as saying during a visit to Belgrade that the German community in Romania had fallen to only 80,000.
According to Magyar Hirlap Hungarians from Romania crossed the frontier into Hungary at the rate of 200 refugees per day in April 1990, when ethnic tension between the Hungarian minority in Transylvania and Romanian nationalists was at its height.
Since mid-1987 over 30,000 Romanians had sought asylum in Hungary, around 80 per cent of whom were ethnic Hungarians from Transylvania.
Among the most celebrated had been Nadia Comaneci, the former Olympic gymnast, who had fled Romania in November.
The refugee issue prompted the Hungarian government in February to abrogate the 1979 treaty with Romania which prevented dual citizenship, which meant that refugees could maintain dual Hungarian-Romanian citizenship [see also below for relations with Hungary].
In March the Austrian authorities announced visa restrictions on the entry of Romanians into their country which prompted a rush by an estimated 35,000 refugees to cross the border before the ban came into force [see also p. 37689].
Restrictions on travel to East Germany were also announced by the East German embassy in Bucharest on June 5.
However, not all those leaving Romania could be regarded as permanent refugees; the news agency Rompres reported in February that some refugees were beginning to return home.
An upsurge in foreign travel by Romanians was predicted in the light of the government decree granting Romanian citizens the right to a passport.
In the first month of that decree more than 180,000 passports were issued, twice as many as the average for an entire year under the previous regime.
Religious affairs
As the government moved towards honouring its promise to restore religious freedom, the newly created Ministry of Religious Affairs called upon the churches "to contribute to the moral redemption of the nation" .
Consultation with the religious denominations was promised before new laws were adopted along the lines of the legislation of 1928.
New seminaries would be opened and old ones expanded and there would be more oportunities for the publication of religious books.
The ministry would also co-operate with the Ministry of Culture in sponsoring the reconstruction of churches destroyed by the Ceausescu regime and in the building of new places of worship.
The churches themselves began reorganizing their affairs, often removing those officials who had close contact with the previous regime.
The Orthodox Patriarch, Teoctist Arapas, had retired from his post in January 1990, to return in April [see pp. 37192; 37383).
In March Daniel Ciobotea was named Bishop of Timisoara and Caransebes, only to be promoted by the Holy Synod three months later to the post of Archbishop of Iasi and Metropolitan of Moldavia and Bucovina.
Within a few weeks of his appointment the new Metropolitan was urging, in an interview with Romania Libera, that religion be taught in schools and announcing that a Synod-appointed commission would select the basic religious concepts to be taught in primary, junior and senior schools.
Laszlo Tokes, the pastor of the Protestant Reformed Church in Timisoara, whose forced removal from his parish began the revolt against Ceausescu, was elected Bishop of Oradea on March 29, 1990, in place of the disgraced ex-Bishop Laszlo Papp, who fled Romania after the revolution.
Tokes's opposition to the NSF and support for Hungarian minority rights earned him a number of death threats.
On May 15, 1990, the Vatican announced that it was re-establishing diplomatic relations with Romania, broken in 1950.
It was also made known that Pope John Paul II wished to pay a visit to Romania in 1992 or 1993.
This followed the Romanian government's suspension in January of the 1948 decrees which eliminated five of the seven Roman Catholic dioceses in the country and forcibly incorporated the Eastern Rite Catholics (Uniates) into the Romanian Orthodox Church.
On March 14 the Pope named seven new Roman Catholic bishops and five Eastern Rite bishops to reconstitute the Roman Catholic hierarchy in Romania, and also elevated two to the rank of Archbishop.
The Vatican estimated that there were about 2,800,000 Latin and Eastern Rites Catholics in Romania.
Others put the current figure for the Roman Catholics alone at about 1,500,000, the majority of whom came from the Hungarian and German minorities.
On April 24, 1990, the government legalized the Eastern Rite Catholic Church, although the return of church buildings taken over by the Orthodox Church remained difficult to resolve because of uncertainties over the current number of Uniates.
However, in a gesture of reconciliation, the Orthodox Metropolitan of the Banat, Nicolae Corneanu, returned to the Uniates Lugoj Cathedral, which had been their principal church before 1948.
The Uniates, who were found mainly in Transylvania, had some 1,700,000 adherents and 1,500 churches before their suppression in 1948, after which time they operated underground with 500 clandestine priests, their 12 bishops having been put in prison, where all but two of them died.
Although the Jewish community in Romania was small — down to an estimated 15,000, largely concentrated in Bucharest — anti-Semitism had become more evident since the revolution, with verbal attacks on the Jewish background of certain politicians.
On Feb. 15-16, 1990 the synagogue in Oradea was broken into and desecrated and during May Jewish graves were vandalized in Bucharest, Galati and Tirgu Mures, prompting the Chief Rabbi, Mozes Rosen, to warn of the dangers of an outbreak of personal violence against Jews.
ECONOMICS
Economic indicators
Real GNP growth -9.9% (1989) Current account balance — convertible currencies +US$2,670 m. (1989) Trade balance convertible currencies: +US$2,520 m.; non-convertible currencies: +US$50,000 m. (1989) Budget public-sector deficit 11,100 m. lei (1986) Budget surplus as % of GDP 1.2% (1986) Gross national product 813,000 million lei (1989) Debts to commercial banks and private creditors US$450 m. (1989) Inflation rate 0.5% (1989) Principal trading partners Exports: Soviet Union, EC, USA.
Imports: Soviet Union, Egypt, EC
In presenting his new government, comprised largely of young technocrats without previous government experience, Petre Roman called for a rapid transformation to a market economy.
The publication in July 1990 of the half-yearly figures for industrial production indicated a lack of improvement in the overall state of the economy — one of the most highly centralized in Eastern Europe under Ceausescu.
During the first six months of 1990 industrial production fell by more than 18 per cent and output was worth 532,000,000 million lei as against 656,000,000 million lei in the same period in 1989.
Imports, mostly of crude oil and food, rose by 46 per cent while exports fell by 43 per cent in the first six months of 1990, drastically affecting the country's balance of payments.
While the price of materials had risen, labour productivity had declined appreciably due to work stoppages and a failure of management, according to the government, which sought means of relating more closely wages to output.
Price increases and inflationary pressures
On July 10, 1990, the government announced that as a result of its decision to withdraw subsidies "for commodities in ever-growing demand that cannot be met by home production" it would (i) almost double the price of fuel;(ii) increase the price of luxury goods, newspapers and books; and (iii) double the price of mineral water.
It blamed the rise in fuel prices on the threefold increase in fuel consumption in the first half of the year.
However, an assurance was given that, in order not to affect the living standards of those on low incomes, a list of 100 key products and services would be drawn up whose prices would be kept unchanged.
Earlier, in June, the Finance Minister, Theodor Stolojan had said that it was not possible suddenly to remove controls on prices without creating an inflationary spiral in the ensuing price-wage explosion, although he agreed that the current pricing mechanism distorted prices and adversely affected supply and demand.
The danger of inflation was underlined by figures which showed that there were 15,400 million lei more in circulation on May 21, 1990, than at the same time in 1989.
Although there had been an appreciable rise in incomes, supplies in the state shops continued to be poor, encouraging a growing black market [for clampdown in August against black marketeers see p. 37665].
Farmers' incomes had also increased as a result of rises in the state purchasing price for produce, but retail prices had not risen.
Steps towards establishing market economy
The Prime Minister's undertaking to move swiftly to the market economy was given tangible form on July 20, 1990, in the presentation to parliament of bills to create the legal framework for such an economy and to turn the great majority of state-owned businesses into autonomous enterprises and companies with share capital.
In the first instance the government was aiming to foster a private sector in small and medium-sized enterprises.
At the same time the administrative structures overseeing some of the country's bigger concerns would be dismantled.
Economic decision-making and private ownership would then be transferred to production units.
In an interview in the newspaper Adevarul on July 11, Adrian Severin, a Deputy Prime Minister and the Minister for Reform and Relations with Parliament, singled out a shortage of competent people, the bureaucratic resistance to change and the tendency to "over-rate the social cost of reform" as being among the major obstacles to the implementation of the transitional economic programme.
The fear of future unemployment, he believed, was exaggerated and existed at the moment "as a heavy legacy of dictatorship" .
He supported the measures recently announced to protect those who would be affected by the transition, which included unemployment benefit and retraining opportunities.
In the aftermath of the violent suppression of anti-communist demonstrators in June 1990, the European Communities (EC) suspended plans for an economic co-operation agreement which would have given Romania trade benefits and access to EC markets.
However, on July 3 an EC team of foreign ministry officials met government and opposition leaders in Bucharest to reassess the situation.
The team also spoke with representatives of the Students' League and the Group for Social Dialogue, whose members included many leading intellectuals.
Although Ceausescu had paid most of the country's $11,000,000 million foreign debt during the 1980s, depriving the Romanians of food for the sake of export revenues, it was expected that Romania would need to raise foreign loans before the end of the year.
Banking sources said in June that credit needs were expected to expand dramatically even though Romania was owed some $3,000,000 million from abroad and had hard currency reserves of $900,000,000 million.
FOREIGN
Transylvania and Romanian-Hungarian relations
While the question of refugees highlighted the dilemma facing the government as it established freedom of movement [see above], it also provoked problems in Romania's foreign relations, especially with Hungary.
The Hungarian Foreign Ministry in announcing its unilateral decision on the question of joint citizenship said that it was prompted to act by the Romanian government's "negative" attitude and the unsettled status of thousands of refugees from Romania in Hungary.
On the other hand, the action only served to increase suspicions on the part of the growing Romanian nationalist movement that Hungary was trying to exert too much influence over the estimated 2,000,000 ethnic Hungarians in Transylvania and was encouraging the concept of "dual" national status.
The ethnic tensions in Transylvania arising out of heightened Hungarian expectations and increasing demands for the restitution of their minority rights reached a crisis in February-March 1990, culminating in serious disturbances in several towns.
The most serious rioting took place in Tirgu Mures on March 19-20, following celebrations by Hungarians on March 15 of the anniversary of their revolution of 1848 [see p. 37327].
In expressing his regret at the violence Roman reinforced the Romanian government's commitment to minority rights, at the same time pleading for an understanding of the views of Transylvanian Romanians, who had suffered greatly between 1940 and 1944 when northern Transylvania had been under Hungarian rule.
An attempt by the Romanian authorities to place controls on imports of Hungarian books provoked a strong protest from Budapest.
The action reflected the fears in Bucharest of Hungarian interpretations of Transylvanian history and geography which would contradict those of Romania.
Although the authorities declared that the customs ban only applied to large consignments of books, which had to be sent via the Ministry of Culture in Bucharest, Hungary was still complaining in June that the Romanian post office was failing to deliver Hungarian-language publications to subscribers, who were forced to form their own distribution networks.
The dispute also coincided with demands by ethnic Hungarians in Transylvania for the immediate reopening of their own schools and the re-establishment of the Hungarian-teaching Babes-Bolyai University, which had been closed by Ceausescu in his campaign to assimilate the Hungarian community.
Despite an attempt by the Romanian government to defuse the language problem in Transylvanian schools by the appointment of an ethnic Hungarian, Attila Palfalvi, to the post of Deputy Education Minister, local communities "seized" their own schools.
Within a fortnight Palfalvi had been replaced by Laszlo Demeny (also an ethnic Hungarian).
The 70th anniversary on June 1, 1990, of the Treaty of Trianon under which Hungary ceded Transylvania to Romania, was marked by nationalist speeches in both countries.
Speaking at a rally in Budapest, the Hungarian Prime Minister, Jozsef Antall said that he condemned the treaty "historically speaking" , but noted that Hungary had signed the 1975 Helsinki Final Act renouncing the violent changing of frontiers.
However, he concluded by insisting on the upholding of rights for Hungarian national minorities.
In Transylvania such sentiments were attacked by the right-wing Romanian nationalist organization, Vatra Romaneasca ( "Romanian Hearth" ), which set itself in opposition to the rising tide of expectation on the part of Hungary, the unspoken Hungarian aim, in Vatra's opinion, being the incorporation of Transylvania into Hungary.
An attempt by the Hungarian emigré organization, Transylvanian Magyar World Federation, to organize a cross-border demonstration was widely condemned in both countries and did not materialize.
Despite the seriousness of such incidents, agreements were reached in 1990 between the two governments on cultural co-operation (in February) and on the opening of a passport office (in June) in the former Hungarian consulate building in the Transylvanian capital of Cluj.
The former Hungarian consul in Cluj, Domokos Vekas, was continuing negotiations for the re-opening of the consulate, which had been closed in 1989.
Relations with other states
The crushing of anti-communist demonstrators by government-backed miners in June caused an outcry among the EC countries and the United States in particular.
In August France began moves towards healing the breach, indicating the traditional importance of that country in Romania's dealings with the West.
Roman, a fluent French-speaker, had trained in France and established cordial links with French ministers during his visit to Paris on Feb. 17-20.
The Romanian government maintained cordial relations with the Soviet Union, taking a cautious approach to the situation in the neighbouring Moldavian SSR, most of the territory known having formed the Romanian region Bessarabia before its annexation by the Soviet Union in 1940 [see p. 37257].
With the Soviet Union accounting for 33 per cent of Romania's foreign trade, the visit to Moscow in May 1990 of Alexandru Margaritescu, then Minister of Foreign Trade, was seen to be of special significance.
An expansion of cultural contacts between Soviet Moldavia and Romania was the object of the visit to Moldavia on May 25-27 of Razvan Teodorescu, director of Free Romanian Radio and Television.
EUROPE
BULGARIA
BASIC DATA
Area: 110,994 sq km.
Population: 8,933,000 (Jan. 1, 1990).
Capital: Sofia.
Languages: Bulgarian (official); Turkish spoken by around 10 per cent of population.
Religion: Christianity (Bulgarian Orthodox Church); Islam practised by large Turkish and smaller Pomak minorities.
Av. life expectancy: 71 yrs (1990).
Armed forces: 117,500 (1989).
GNP per capita: US$5,676 (1987 est.).
Currency: lev (plural leva)(US$1.00=2.9406 leva as at Sept. 25, 1990).
The People's Republic of Bulgaria was proclaimed in 1946.
Political authority is exercised by the unicameral 400-member National Assembly, elected every five years by universal adult suffrage.
It in turn elects the President (an office created in April 1990, replacing the Collective State Council), and the Council of Ministers (government).
Todor Zhivkov, Bulgaria's leader since 1954, was replaced by Petur Mladenov as leader of the Bulgarian Communist Party (BCP) on Nov. 10, 1989, and as President of the State Council on Nov. 17.
On Dec. 13 the BCP leadership renounced the party's constitutionally guaranteed monopoly on political power, the necessary constitutional amendments being made by the National Assembly on Jan. 15, 1990.
Mladenov relinquished the BCP leadership on Feb. 2 to Aleksandur Lilov, and on April 3 was elected to the new post of President.
However, a political scandal forced his resignation on July 6.
On Aug. 1 Zhelyu Zhelev, leader of the Union of Democratic Forces (UDF — the main opposition coalition) was elected by the National Assembly to replace Mladenov as President.
The BCP was renamed the Bulgarian Socialist Party (BSP) on April 3, 1990.
In a general election on June 10 and 17 (the country's first free multiparty election since 1946), the BSP won an outright majority in the National Assembly.
After the opposition refused to participate in a grand coalition government a Cabinet of BSP and independent ministers was formed under Prime Minister Andrei Lukanov on Sept. 20.
POLITICS
Territorial reorganization
The National Assembly on Jan. 25 repealed the August 1987 State Council decree which had reorganized Bulgaria's 28 administrative districts into nine regions [see p. 35519].
SECURITY
Discovery of mass graves — Rehabilitations
During April 1990 three mass graves containing in total at least 60 bodies were uncovered by UDF activists at sites in south-western and northern Bulgaria.
Citing the testimony of local residents, the UDF claimed that they contained the remains of people summarily executed in September-October 1944 (i.e. immediately following the Soviet invasion and communist seizure of power).
Further to the March-April prison camp revelations, the Interior Ministry on June 7 denied allegations made recently by the UDF in the Washington Post that 20,000 people had been killed at the Lovech and other camps.
Nevertheless, it released new figures stating that 23,531 people had passed through the camps between 1944 and 1962, including 14,647 political internees, and that around 300 had died there "from natural causes or as a result of force" .
On June 1 the Interior Ministry announced that the government would pay compensation to victims of political repressions carried out since 1946.
On Oct. 13, 1989 (i.e. before the ousting of Zhivkov), the BCP newspaper Rabotnichesko Delo published the transcripts of letters sent to the Soviet leadership in the 1940s by Bulgaria's first communist leader, Georgi Dimitrov, in which he had protested at the wrongful incarceration in the Soviet Union of Bulgarian communists during the Stalinist terror.
It was noted that these letters "bear witness to Dmitrov's incorruptible communist conscience" .
Call for inquiry into Georgy Markov assassination
In January the British-born widow of Georgy Markov, a celebrated Bulgarian emigré writer, called for an inquiry into whether her husband's murder in 1978 in London by a poison pellet fired into his leg from an umbrella [see p. 32997]was the work of an assassin sponsored by the Zhivkov regime.
At a meeting with Aleksandur Lilov in Sofia on Jan. 10 Annabel Markov secured his support for an official investigation.
However, in mid-February an Interior Ministry spokesman insisted that the idea that Markov had been assassinated by the Bulgarian security service was a fiction put about by the British press, and he accused the Sunday Times of having invented the umbrella scenario after British agents had planted the poisoned pellet on Markov's body.
On March 1 a vigil was held in Sofia by several hundred people holding open umbrellas to protest at the failure of the authorities to fulfil Lilov's promise to Annabel Markov.
Markov was posthumously rehabilitated to the Bulgarian Writers' Union early in January 1990, when a Bulgarian publishing house was reported to be preparing to republish his writings.
Net material product (NMP) growth 1.5% (1989) -6% to -10% (1990 projection) Current-account balance (hard currency trade) -US$1,326 m. (1989); -US$600 m. to -US$700 m. (1990 projection) Budget deficit 957 m. leva (1990 projection) Total external debt US$10,300 m. (convertible currency, June 1990) Debt service ratio (as % of export earnings) 40% (Dec. 1989 estimate) Gross National Product US$52,000 m. (1987 est.)
Inflation rate 15-20% (1990 projection) Unemployment 18,822 (May 15, 1990) Principal trading partners Soviet Union, East Germany, Czechoslovakia 
ECONOMICS
Economic indicators
Economic reforms — 1989 performance — 1990 budget
Lukanov presented to the National Assembly on March 29, 1990, a package of crisis management measures and first steps towards a market economy, to last until a new government formed after the forthcoming multiparty elections could produce a long term economic strategy.
He declared that Bulgaria was paying a heavy price for "blunders and misconceptions" by the ousted leadership, especially its "distorted notions of the country's industrialization" and its "arbitrary decisions disregarding the requirements of economic laws and the country's actual capacities" .
The top priorities of his programme, which was endorsed on the same day, were stabilization of the domestic market, cuts in exports to COMECON (Council of Mutual Economic Assistance, or CMEA) partners, curbing the increase in hard-currency foreign debt, an active social policy, and measures to solve the worst environmental problems.
Figures published on Jan. 29, 1990, showed that in 1989 national income fell by 0.4 per cent compared with 1988; industrial production grew by 1.1 per cent; and agricultural production declined by 0.4 per cent .
The value of foreign trade fell by 8 per cent.
The 1990 budget, as adopted by the National Assembly on March 6, envisaged a 4.4 per cent drop in GNP and a 3.7 per cent drop in national income.
It featured the removal of state subsidies for public organizations and cuts in public spending, but increased farm subsidies (combined with the introduction of market prices for farm products).
Defence spending would amount to 1,656.6 million leva (6.4 per cent of the total budget, the same as in 1989).
Private farming was relegalized by government decree on Feb. 19.
Further government decrees on March 23 and April 10 removed all restrictions on the private hiring of labour, and created conditions for free enterprise in retailing, services and tourism.
A phased lifting of price controls began on April 1.
Foreign debt
Bulgaria unilaterally suspended repayment of debt principal to commercial bank creditors on March 29, 1990, and early in April requested negotiations on a repayments moratorium and new lines of credit while reforms were enacted.
On June 30 interest payments were also suspended.
An application for membership of the International Monetary Fund (IMF) and World Bank was filed on Feb. 23, and Bulgaria became a member of the IMF on Sept. 25.
Environment
The government on June 8, 1990, announced an environmental protection programme for the 12 worst polluted areas of Bulgaria, to include cuts in harmful atmospheric emissions, measures to clean rivers, and pollution control for the river Danube and the Black Sea.
It ordered the closure by the end of 1991 of the notorious Dimitur Blagoev metalworks in Plovdiv, the object of protests since February.
In May 1990 the government renewed protests to Romania about pollution in Ruse by chlorine gas from the neighbouring Romanian town of Giurgiu.
On June 8 thousands of Bulgarians and Romanians staged a protest on the Ruse-Giurgiu Danube bridge against the continuing pollution.
In official talks begun on June 10, however, the then Romanian Environment Minister Simion Hincu told his Bulgarian counterpart, Aleksandur Aleksandrov, that the offending factory had been closed in 1988, and that atmospheric emissions had since been within permissible limits.
Construction of a nuclear power station on Belene Island in the Danube was finally suspended on Feb. 15 following a general strike in the nearby town of Svishtov.
This had been one of the demands put forward by the Eco-glasnost group at public protests in Sofia in October 1989.
FOREIGN
Relations with Turkey — Return of ethnic Turks
Talks begun in Kuwait in late October 1989 between Bulgaria and Turkey centring on the issue of the exodus of Bulgaria's Turkish minority were given fresh impetus by the fall of the Zhivkov regime and the consequent repudiation of its ethnic policies.
While no concrete agreements emerged from further rounds held in January-March 1990, the participants on both sides talked of finding a new beginning in their relations and expressed the wish for improved co-operation and greater mutual trust.
By February 1990 almost one-third of the 344,263 ethnic Turks who had fled in 1989 had returned to Bulgaria because of the unemployment and other economic hardship they had encountered in Turkey, and latterly because of the repudiation in Bulgaria of Zhivkov's assimilation policies.
The government adopted a decree on April 5 for the provision of homes and jobs to returning Turks, many of whom had sold their houses or found that the local authorities had bulldozed them in their absence.
Spy trial
The official Bulgarian news agency BTA reported on Feb. 20 that the Shumen district court had sentenced Yusuf Mutlu from Istanbul and Belchin Perunov from Shumen to prison terms of 12 and 10 years respectively for passing state secrets to Turkey.
Relations with Yugoslavia — Macedonian question
Bulgaria's democratization and the restoration of ethnic minority rights at the beginning of 1990 revived controversy inside the country and in relations with neighbouring Yugoslavia over Bulgaria's Macedonian minority.
On Feb. 16 the Yugoslav ambassador in Sofia passed a note to the National Assembly declaring Yugoslavia's expectation that Bulgaria's "new democratic authorities" would allow ethnic Macedonians to "manifest their national and cultural identity" .
The then Foreign Minister Boyko Dimitrov immediately restated the long-held Bulgarian position that there were no historical or legal grounds to talk of a Macedonian minority inside Bulgaria.
Bulgarian leaders raised further objections after up to 100,000 people had held a rally on Feb. 20 in Skopje, capital of Yugoslavia's Macedonian republic, to show solidarity with Bulgaria's Macedonians.
An organization called Ilinden had been formed in Sofia on Nov. 14, 1989, to campaign for the rights of the Macedonian minority in Bulgaria.
It had been accepted under the UDF umbrella, but after the ethnic strife at the beginning of 1990 concerning the Turkish minority it had been rejected on the grounds that it had been constituted on ethnic lines.
Zhelev, then UDF leader, at a rally in Blagoevgrad (near the Yugoslav border) on Jan. 21, 1990, had denied the existence of a Macedonian minority, and appeared to suggest that he also regarded Yugoslavia's Macedonians as ethnically Bulgarian (a commonly held position in Bulgaria).
The State Prosecutor's Office and the National Assembly both threatened during May to ban Ilinden, and on July 31 local authorities in Blagoevgrad district outlawed the holding of an Ilinden constituent congress in the village of Oshtava.
The Macedonian question reportedly came up in discussions between Lukanov and his Yugoslav counterpart Ante Markovic in the Yugoslav city of Nis on May 30, although it was not mentioned in the subsequent communiqué.
Work began on April 6 to dismantle fences along the Bulgaria-Yugoslavia border.
Completion was scheduled for late September.
Relations with Soviet Union
In one of the most startling revelations to emerge early in 1990 about the Zhivkov era, the newspaper Narodna Kultura on Feb. 23 published documentary evidence (in the form of a BCP central committee resolution from July 1973) that Zhivkov had secretly agreed in November 1972 with the then Soviet leader Leonid Brezhnev to create conditions for Bulgaria's annexation by the Soviet Union.
The report suggested that the Bulgarian leadership did not give up the idea until Mikhail Gorbachev came to power in the Soviet Union in 1985.
Zhivkov made his last visit to the Soviet Union on June 23, 1989, for a working meeting with Gorbachev.
The communiqué declared that in their discussion they noted the "total independence" of each fraternal party and state, and also the "danger of borrowing someone else's experience without taking into account national peculiarities" .
It gave no indication whether Gorbachev had complied with requests by Turkey to raise with Zhivkov the matter of the Turkish exodus from Bulgaria, then at its height [see p. 36747].
Unconfirmed reports claimed that in October 1989 Mladenov visited the Soviet leadership in Moscow and secured advance backing for his palace coup against Zhivkov [see p. 37027].
Lukanov met Gorbachev and Soviet Prime Minister Nikolai Ryzhkov in Moscow on March 19, 1990, and Lilov met Gorbachev in Moscow on May 23.
Other foreign contacts
Notable foreign visitors to Bulgaria early in 1990 included United States Secretary of State James Baker (Feb. 10-11); Italian Foreign Minister Gianni De Michelis (March 1-2); and Spanish Foreign Minister Francisco Fernández Ordoñez (March 5-7).
Lukanov met French Prime Minister Michel Rocard in Paris on Feb. 28-March 1, two weeks after a visit to France by Dimitrov.
On May 18-19 Dimitrov visited Italy for talks with De Michelis, concentrating on Bulgarian-EC relations.
The Foreign Ministry announced on May 16, 1990, that 20 Bulgarian embassies (mostly in Africa and Latin America) and six trade missions were to be closed as a cost-cutting exercise, although diplomatic relations would be unaffected.
Bulgaria's diplomatic relations with Chile, severed in 1973 after the coup against President Allende, were re-established on April 6.
EUROPE
ALBANIA
BASIC DATA
Area: 27,398 sq km.
Population: 3,197,000 (1989).
Capital: Tirana.
Language: Albanian; principal dialects Gheg and Tosk.
Religion: officially atheism; large but undetermined number of adherents of Islam.
Life expectancy: 72 years (1988).
Armed forces: 40,700 (1989).
GNP per capita: US$930 (1986).
Currency: lek (official rate: US$1.00=5.4186 lek as at Sept. 24, 1990).
The Socialist People's Republic of Albania was established in 1946, Albania first having become independent, following more than 400 years of Turkish rule, in 1912.
Nominal political authority is held by the unicameral People's Assembly whose 250 members are elected every four years from a single list of candidates, and which in turn elects the Presidium and the Council of Ministers.
The President of the Presidium, currently Ramiz Alia, is the head of state.
Effective political control is exercised by the (communist) Party of Labour of Albania (PLA), the only legal political party.
The Democratic Front of Albania, the political umbrella organization dominated by the PDS, nominates all candidates in elections.
Although strongly opposed to the changes in other East European countries, the government in 1989 embarked on a programme of limited reforms under the slogan "democratization" .
Adil Carcani Chairman (Prime Minister) Pali Miska Deputy Chairman; Minister of Agriculture Hekuran Isai Deputy Chairman; Minister of Internal Affairs Reis Malile Foreign Affairs Kico Mustaqi People's Defence Bujar Kolaneci Chairman of the State Planning Commission Simon Stefani Chairman of the State Control Commission Andrea Nako Finance Besnik Bekteshi Industry and Mining; Energy (acting) Bashkim Sykaj Light Industry Ylli Bufi Foodstuff Industry Ismail Ahmeti Construction Hajredin Celiku Transport Pajtim Ajazi Domestic Trade Shane Korbeci Foreign Trade (vacant) Public Services Skenda Gjinushi Education Ahmet Kamberi Health Service Enver Halile Justice Farudin Hoxha Minister to the Presidium of the Council of Ministers Niko Gjyzari Minister, General Secretary of the Council of Ministers 
Albanian Council of Ministers
POLITICS
Local elections
Elections for district, city, village and neighbourhood councils as well as for assistant judges were held on May 7, 1989.
Official returns showed that "over 99.99 per cent of registered voters participated in the voting" and "over 99.99 per cent of voters" voted for candidates of the Democratic Front.
The election commissions declared 619 ballots invalid (0.03 per cent of the total cast).
SECURITY
Travel relaxations — Fate of asylum seekers
As part of the government's programme of limited reforms, the Presidium of the People's Assembly on June 12, 1990, approved a decree relaxing the regulations for granting passports and entry visas for foreign nationals.
The decree, which entered into force later in June, entitled Albanian citizens in principle to a passport for travelling abroad and re-entering the country, and made it possible for visitors to obtain entry visas at crossing points on the Albanian border.
Prior to this decision the authorities had in a number of cases resorted to violence to prevent people from seeking refuge in the embassies of various Western countries.
In two such incidents, security forces entered the Greek embassy on April 29 and the French embassy on June 10 and in each case arrested and removed unidentified Albanians.
On both occasions European embassies in Tirana issued joint protests.
On the other hand, two other cases involving individuals seeking asylum in foreign embassies were resolved by the authorities allowing them to leave the country.
Similarly, the two brothers and four sisters of the Popaj family who had taken refuge in the Italian embassy in 1985 (claiming persecution because of their father's alleged wartime activities — see also p. 34249) were issued with passports and allowed to leave for Italy on May 16.
Throughout 1990 small groups of Albanians illegally crossed the borders into Greece and Yugoslavia to seek political asylum.
In some cases it was reported that Albanian frontier guards had opened fire on the refugees and that some had been killed.
A number of the refugees fleeing to Greece were members of the small ethnic Greek minority in southern Albania.
Unprecedented publication of information
The Albanian authorities on Feb. 22, 1990, published for the first time information on the size of the country's prison population.
The then Deputy Chairman of the Council of Ministers and Internal Affairs Minister, Simon Stefani, quoted in the newspaper Zëri i Popullit, denied reports by "foreign agencies" of an "enormous" prison population.
There were, he said, currently only 3,850 people serving sentences in prisons and re-education centres for all types of offences (roughly 1.2 per 1,000 population); of these 83 had been convicted for attempting the violent overthrow of the state, the most serious political offence.
At the time of a prisoner amnesty in Albania in November 1989 [see p. 37048]Western observers had estimated that political prisoners alone numbered up to 5,000.
In further indications of increasing openness, Tirana radio on Nov. 23, 1989, reported the crash of two helicopters the previous day which had killed 23 people; incidents of this kind had hitherto not been reported in the Albanian media.
In early December the authorities allowed the publication of a book by a former Interior Ministry official, Neshat Tozaj, denouncing the power and methods of the secret police; moreover, the book was warmly praised in the official media.
ECONOMY
Economic indicators
GDP growth 6% (1989)
Budget surplus 50,000,000 lek (1988)
Gross national product US$2,800 m. (1986)
Principal trading partners Exports: Czechoslovakia, Yugoslavia, Romania, Bulgaria; Imports: Italy, Yugoslavia, West Germany (1986)
1989 results
According to official figures on economic performance published on Jan. 4, 1990, the economy overall grew by 6 per cent in 1989 compared with 1988, agricultural production rose by 9 per cent and industrial production rose by 5.6 per cent; income per head "rose perceptibly" .
FOREIGN
Extension of bilateral and multilateral relations
In what was widely seen as an attempt to give its efforts to improve relations with other countries greater domestic and international credibility, the Albanian government hosted a visit to Tirana by the Secretary-General of the United Nations, Javier Pérez de Cuéllar, on May 11-13, when held talks with Alia and other senior officials and also visited other parts of the country.
Albanian sources reported that during the talks Alia had stressed the government's intention to develop its relations with the UN.
He had also declared that it was not possible to judge Albania by the example of other countries and that "centralized government and tight disciple" [i.e. one-party rule]had been essential to Albania's development.
Pérez de Cuéllar was quoted as saying that he welcomed the decision of the government to undertake reforms.
His criticism of the one-party system and concern over Albania's human rights record went unreported in the local media.
While relations with Albania's immediate neighbours, Yugoslavia and Greece, remained strained, senior government officials paid visits to other countries including Bulgaria, Turkey and Egypt, the most important of these being that of the Prime Minster, Adil Carcani, to Turkey on June 25-27, 1990.
Co-operation agreements were signed with all these three countries, as well as with France and West Germany.
Senior Albanian diplomats had contacts with United States officials at the UN in May, the first official contact between the two countries since the breaking off of relations at the end of the Second World War [see also p. 37385].
It was also reported in May that United Kingdom and Albanian diplomats had begun meeting informally to resolve outstanding disputes between the two countries, relations having been severed in 1946.
On June 6 the government announced that it wanted to join the Conference on Security and Co-operation in Europe (CSCE) and that it would sign the 1975 Helsinki Final Act.
The only European country not to join the CSCE process in the mid-1970s, Albania had sent an observer delegation to a CSCE human rights conference held in Copenhagen on June 5-29 [see pp. 37550-51].
Among other multilateral contacts, Albanian delegations took part for the first time in a range of regional meetings, including a conference of Mediterranean chambers of commerce in April and one on Mediterranean water sources in May.
On June 6-9 Albania hosted, for the first time, a meeting of the Balkan countries' national commissions for UNESCO.
MIDDLE EAST
ISRAEL
BASIC DATA
Area: 21,501 sq km.
Population: 4,444,000 (1988).
Capital: Jerusalem (not recognised as such by the United Nations — most embassies are in Tel Aviv).
Languages Hebrew (official), Arabic (about 15%), European languages.
Religion: Judaism (about 82%), Islam (about 14%).
Av. life expectancy: 76 yrs (1988).
Armed forces: 141,000 (1989).
GNP per capita: US$8,650 (1988).
Currency: shekel (US$1.00=IS2.0323 as at Sept. 25 1990).
The State of Israel declared its independence in 1948 after the termination by the United Kingdom of its mandate.
The President (currently Chaim Herzog) is elected every five years, and appoints a Prime Minister (currently Itzhak Shamir) on the basis of the distribution of power between parties in the Knesset (parliament), which is itself elected for a maximum of four years.
The Cabinet, which is appointed by the Prime Minister, is responsible to the Knesset.
Elections to the Knesset held on Nov. 1, 1988, resulted in deadlock between the two main parties, Likud and the Labour Party, which had hitherto been partners along with a number of minor parties in a coalition government formed following the last, similarly inconclusive elections in 1984.
After seven weeks of negotiations, involving the smaller right-wing and religious parties, the two main parties signed another coalition agreement on Dec. 22, 1988, and on the same day the new Cabinet, headed by the outgoing Prime Minister Itzhak Shamir, won a vote of confidence in the Knesset.
Divisions over the direction of the Middle East peace process led to the collapse of the coalition government in March 1990.
Shamir announced on June 8 the formation of a new government following the signing of a fresh coalition agreement between Likud and a number of religious and nationalist parties.
The new government won a vote of confidence in the Knesset on June 11 [see pp. 37546-7].
POLITICS
Histadrut elections
Elections were held on a party political basis to the Convention of the Histadrut trade union federation on Nov. 14, 1989.
The Labour Party won 55 per cent of the 1,400,000 votes, Likud 27 per cent, Mapam 9 per cent , with the reminder of the vote being divided among four smaller parties.
Likud had portrayed the elections as a test of political strength and was disappointed with the result although it improved slightly on its performance in the last elections in 1985 [see p. 34008].
Labour leader, Shimon Peres, on the other hand, commented that "the Israeli people have given us a vote of confidence and the crisis that has shaken our party is over" .
SECURITY
Border incidents — Guerilla raids into Israel
Two soldiers of the Israeli Defence Force (IDF) were injured on Sept. 16, 1989, when "an unidentified person, apparently a Jordanian soldier" fired on their patrol.
Amman radio reported that the incident occurred when a Jordanian Army patrol detected "unusual movement" on the edge of the River Jordan and fired in its direction.
This was the third border incident in the Jordan valley in September.
The IDF killed a man on Nov. 6, 1989 as he attempted to cross the border into Jordan.
On Dec. 5, 1989, Israeli troops killed five Palestinian gunmen who had crossed into the western Negev desert from the Sinai Peninsula in Egypt.
The attack was believed to have been linked to the second anniversary on Dec. 9 of the Palestinian intifada in the occupied territories.
Israel protested to the Egyptian government over the incident.
An IDF patrol killed a Jordanian soldier on Jan. 7, 1990, after he had crossed the border near Hamat Gader.
The incident followed several days of intermittent sniper attacks on Israeli forces in the area, claimed by Fatah Uprising, a Syrian-based Palestinian group.
The Jordanian government denied that there were any attacks and accused the Israelis of opening fire on Jordan to divert attention from the intifada.
Israel claimed that a further attack took place on Jan. 25 near the town of Hazeva.
Contacts with PLO
Two Labour members of the Knesset, Abd al-Wahab Darawshah and Muhammad Mi-ari, were reported to have met Yassir Arafat, Chairman of the Palestine Liberation Organization (PLO), in Tunis in mid-December 1989.
The two MPs refused to comment on the meeting but said that they were working to "close the gaps between the PLO and Israel" .
A peace activist and owner of the Voice of Peace offshore radio station, Abie Nathan, was sentenced on Oct. 3, 1989, to 18 months' imprisonment, with one year suspended, for meeting PLO leaders (including Arafat)— a violation of a 1986 law which prohibited contacts between Israeli MPs and representatives of terrorist groups.
He was released from prison on Feb. 9, 1990, and held a seventh meeting with Arafat on March 9.
Eight Israelis went on trial in Ramla on March 27 on charges of having met PLO officials in Budapest in July 1987.
The Attorney General, Yosef Harish, ordered the police at the end of January 1990 to investigate alleged contacts by the Science and Technology Minister, Ezer Weizmann, with the PLO.
Weizmann had been forced to resign from the 12-member "inner cabinet" over the allegations on Jan. 2 [see p. 37199-200].
As a Knesset member Weizmann could not be prosecuted unless the House Committee and the plenum voted to lift his immunity.
The investigation was dropped on Feb. 15.
Rejection of Vanunu appeal
A three-judge panel of the Supreme Court rejected an appeal by Mordechai Vanunu, a former technician who revealed secrets about Israel's nuclear weapons programme to the British Sunday Times in 1986, upholding his 1988 conviction for treason and espionage and 18-year prison sentence [see pp. 34773-74; 35922].
Desecration of Jewish graves
More than 300 Jewish graves were desecrated in two cemeteries in Haifa on May 13, 1990.
The incident followed the desecration, discovered on May 10, of 34 Jewish graves in the French town of Carpentras [see p. 37468].
On May 28 David Goldner, a member of a Jewish messianic group, was jailed for three years after confessing to defacing the graves in an effort to unite Israelis against Arabs.
Arms purchases
A number of countries lifted long-standing embargoes on arms sales to Israel in 1989-90.
West Germany approved the sale of two diesel-powered submarines in November 1989, despite a ban on selling weapons to areas of conflict.
France, which froze arms sales to Israel during the 1967 Arab-Israeli war, announced the sale on Nov. 20, 1989 of five jet engines for the Kfir, Israel's first home-built combat aircraft.
Current-account balance -US$4,097 m. (1988) Trade balance -US$2,400 m. (1989) Budget deficit -US$2,000 m. (1989) Total external public debt US$23,700 m. (1989) Gross domestic product US$44,960 m. (1988) Gross national product US$38,440 m. (1988) Inflation rate 20.7% (1989) Principal trading partners USA, UK, West Germany 
ECONOMY
Economic indicators GDP growth 3.2% (1980-88)
1989-90 and 1990-91 budgets
On Nov. 20, 1989, the Finance Ministry presented a supplementary budget of IS4,300 million for the 1989-90 financial year, based on estimates that the deficit on government spending had more than doubled for the year, to IS4,100 million.
The Ministry blamed a shortfall in tax revenues caused by the economic slowdown in 1989, and extra expenditure to stimulate growth, to alleviate unemployment of around 9 per cent and to settle Soviet Jewish immigrants.
The 1990-91 budget of IS64,000 million was passed by the Knesset on March 29, 1990.
As in previous years the largest single items of expenditure were debt service, accounting for more than one-third of the budget, and defence spending, accounting for 20 per cent.
The most controversial item was the IS222,000,000 allocated to religious institutions linked to the four religious parties, which held the balance of power in the ongoing negotiations to form a new government [see pp. 37303-04].
Peres, then Finance Minister, announced that the IS500,000,000 budgeted for the settlement of Soviet Jews might not be adequate as it was based on an estimate of 40,000 new arrivals, whereas the Ministry of Immigration had estimated that up to 100,000 immigrants might arrive in 1990.
He stated that there would be no new taxes or loans to fund the shortfall and that the cost would be met through the sale of state corporations and of the government's shareholdings in the major commercial banks.
On May 15 the government approved a revised budget plan allocating an extra ISl2,500 million to the 1990 budget specifically for absorption of the immigrants and including plans for 70,000 new houses to be built in 1990.
Shamir won parliamentary approval on May 21 for an additional US$17,000,000 to build roads and Jewish settlements in the occupied territories.
Financial aid for Koor and kibbutzim
The heavily indebted Koor conglomerate, the country's largest industrial corporation and part of the Histadrut's business empire [see p. 36950], reported new unforseen losses on Nov. 17, 1989, and asked Israeli and foreign creditor banks to write off US$125,000,000 in debt.
At the end of December the foreign creditors refused and called on the government to bear more responsibility for Koor's financial problems.
Peres refused to commit the government and on Feb. 2, 1990, the foreign and domestic creditor banks reached a compromise agreement to write off nearly US$257,000,000 of Koor's debts, in return for which foreign creditors were paid US$87,000,000.
The government and leading banks reached agreement on Dec. 12, 1989, with the agro-industrial collectives (kibbutzim) to write off or reschedule most of their IS6,700 million debts in an attempt to save the collectives from collapse.
The plan had originally been proposed in February [see p. 36950].
Peres stated that the agreement was based on "a value judgement" rather than commercial considerations.
 "Israel without the kibbutzim would be a different Israel." 
Privatization of the banks
A key stage in the government's plan to privatize the five leading banks (Union, Mizrahi, Discount, Hapoalim and Leumi) was reached on Nov. 26, 1989, when the ministerial economics committee approved a plan to equalize the voting rights of the banks' shares.
The government owned 95 per cent of the shares, which it bought after the October 1983 collapse of the Tel Aviv stock exchange.
As part of the rescue operation it left control of the banks with the minority shareholders.
The new measures gave all shares equal rights, thus transferring control of the banks to the government.
Devaluation of the shekel
The shekel was devalued by 6 per cent against a basket of currencies on March 1, 1990, in an attempt to boost the economy and curb inflation.
[See p. 36408 for previous devaluations, in December 1988 and January 1989.]
However, currency speculators flooded Israel's capital market with foreign currency worth US$200,000,000, driving the US dollar down against the shekel and causing what was called the "devaluation that never was" .
FOREIGN
The Defence Ministry on Oct. 3, 1989, issued instructions requiring all those exporting military "intelligence" from Israel, including instruction and training, to provide proof that their operations had the approval of the government.
The directive followed a report in the British Observer on Oct. 1, 1989, which linked Itzhak Rabin, then Defence Minister, to the Israeli security company, Hod Hahanit (Spearhead), whose president, Lt.-Col. (reserve) Yair Klein, had been accused by the Colombian government of training members of drug gangs.
The report claimed that Rabin had given Hod Hahanit permission to export military expertise and defence equipment in 1986.
Klein, who denied the reports linking him to Colombian drug dealers, was committed for trial on June 1, 1990, charged with illegally exporting Israeli military expertise.
Relations with Soviet Union — Immigration of Soviet Jews
Increased Soviet Jewish immigration to Israel that began at the end of 1989 placed a major obstacle in the way of improved relations between Israel and the Soviet Union.
Prior to the controversy over the settlement of the immigrants in the occupied territories the then Minister of Agriculture, Avraham Katz-Oz, paid a semi-official visit to Moscow on Nov. 27, 1989, the first by an Israeli minister since diplomatic relations were severed by the Soviet Union during the 1967 Arab-Israeli war.
This was followed on Dec. 7, 1989, by an agreement to open direct flights between the two countries.
However, the agreement was suspended by the Soviet Union in early February 1990 in protest at the Israeli government's settlement policy and an official Soviet protest was made on March 13, 1990.
On June 3 Soviet President Gorbachev, in the United States for a summit meeting with President Bush, warned Israel that he would consider suspending the issuing of exit permits for Soviet Jews if they continued to be settled in the occupied territories.
He said that he "was being bombarded by criticism" from Arab countries, for his relaxation of emigration controls.
Bush reiterated his opposition to further settlement in the occupied territories, but stressed his unconditional support for Jewish emigration from the Soviet Union.
Shamir responded the next day by saying that Israel was a democracy and was not prepared to accept restrictions on the movement of its citizens.
On June 5 the Soviet Foreign Minister, Eduard Shevardnadze, guaranteed to the USA that Jewish emigration would not be halted.
On June 25 Shamir sent a message to Gorbachev affirming that Israel would not settle Soviet immigrants in the occupied territories; the Soviet Union responded that it would be seeking further assurances from Israel.
Earlier Ariel Sharon, Minister of Housing, announced that immigrant housing would not be built in the occupied territories but in developing areas such as the Negev desert and the Galilee region.
[For Supreme Court ruling in July against emergency housing plan see p. 37626.]
Israel's relations with East European countries improved dramatically following the collapse of communist party rule at the end of 1989.
The new governments all moved swiftly to restore relations with Israel which they had all, with the exception of Romania, broken off during the 1967 Arab-Israeli war [see p. 22105].
Hungary was the first country to restore diplomatic relations in September 1989 [see p. 36906], following two years of steadily improving contacts between the two countries [see p. 36950].
The then Hungarian Foreign Minister, Gyüla Horn, visited Israel on Jan. 7, 1990, ending a 23-year ban on high-level visits to Israel from East European countries.
Czechoslovakia restored relations on Feb. 9, 1990, following the visit of Peres to Prague and the restoration of direct airline flights in January.
These were briefly suspended at the end of March 1990, following threats from an extremist Moslem group opposed to the transportation of Soviet Jews from Moscow to Israel.
Czechoslovakian President Havel became the first East European head of state to visit Israel, in April 1990.
Poland restored relations on Feb. 27, calling the rift a mistake, apologising for an anti-Semitic purge in March 1968 and offering to restore citizenship to about 30,000 Jews forced to emigrate at that time.
Diplomatic links were restored with Bulgaria on May 3, 1990.
Diplomats from Israel and East Germany on Jan. 29, 1990, held the first of a series of meetings in Denmark, aimed at restoring relations.
Following the talks the then East German Prime Minister, Hans Modrow, acknowledged that his country bore a share of responsibility for the Nazi war crimes and expressed a willingness to pay reparations to victims.
Further moves towards improving relations were overtaken by plans for German unification.
Moshe Arens, then Foreign Minister, visited West Germany on Feb. 15 and announced his "limitless confidence in a united Germany" .
A liaison office for the Israeli Academy of Sciences was opened in Beijing, the capital of China, on Feb. 15, 1990.
This was the first official Israeli representation in China and was viewed as the first step towards the establishment of diplomatic relations.
Relations with USA
Relations between the United States and Israel in late 1989 and the first half of 1990 were marked by growing differences over the strategy towards the Middle East peace process [see pp. 37304; 37547]and over the settlement of Jewish Immigrants [see p. 37304].
Before relations deteriorated the USA announced in September 1989 that it was seeking an agreement with Israel not to oppose the sale of 315 US battle tanks to Saudi Arabia.
In return US Defence Secretary, Dick Cheney, agreed to provide Israel with equipment, materials and technology to research and develop new weapons.
There was also agreement to store in Israel US$100,000,000 worth of US weaponry which would be compatible with Israel's systems and available for its use in emergencies.
Israel also requested US$400,000,000 in US guaranteed loans to house the influx of Jewish immigrants from the Soviet Union.
As the US government grew increasingly irritated with Israel's intransigent position on the Palestinian issue, a number of apparently officially inspired reports appeared in the media in late 1989, evidently designed to embarrass the Israeli government.
On Oct. 25, 1989, NBC News, quoting US intelligence sources, reported that Israel was helping South Africa to build a long-range nuclear missile, in exchange for enriched uranium for its own warheads.
The US Congress was empowered to stop military aid to countries which flout international sanctions against arms sales to South Africa.
On Nov. 8 US officials announced that an Israeli request to buy six US-built supercomputers had been stalled because of suspicions that Israel might have transferred sensitive nuclear technology to South Africa.
Prime Minister Shamir said the report was an "utter lie" and confirmed that Israel was adhering to an inner Cabinet decision taken in 1987 to refuse any further defence contracts with South Africa.
On Dec. 19 the US State Department confirmed a further NBC report that Israel had bought 2,000,000 barrels of oil from Iran in mid-November 1989.
The report said that the purchase was an attempt to improve relations with Iran to counter a growing military threat from Iraq and to win freedom for Israeli prisoners of war and possibly Western hostages held in Lebanon.
Iran was reportedly interested in purchasing military spare parts from Israel for equipment bought in the West, although a US law prohibited the transfer of equipment of US origin without US approval.
Israel initially refused to comment on the report but it was finally confirmed on Dec. 28 by Arens who denied that there had been any direct contact with Iran.
Iran denied the report.
Criticism of Israel also grew in the US Congress.
In January 1990 Senator Robert Dole, the Republican minority leader in the Senate, called for a reduction in US aid to Israel [see p. 37199]and in April criticized the automatic support of Congress for resolutions favouring Jerusalem as Israel's capital [see p. 37392].
On May 1 he questioned the need for Israel's request for US$400,000,000 loan guarantee to provide housing for Soviet Jewish immigrants.
European Communities
In October 1989 Israel opened a mission to the European Communities (EC) in Brussels, with the aim of improving commercial relations.
The European Parliament voted by a large majority in January 1990 to freeze scientific co-operation between EC countries and Israel until universities on the West Bank, which had been closed since the beginning of the uprising, were reopened.
Israel condemned the vote as "one-sided" .
The sanctions were lifted in advance of a visit by Arens to the European Council of Ministers on April 2, 1990.
On June 26 the EC condemned Israel's "lamentable" human rights record in the occupied territories and urged that Soviet Jews not be settled there.
The EC also pledged to double aid to the Palestinians and to open a permanent office in the territories.
Sri Lanka
Sri Lanka broke off diplomatic relations with Israel on April 20, 1990, announcing that it would restore them when Israel recognised the PLO, withdrew from the occupied territories and agreed to participate in an international peace conference.
References: Reference article pp. 36947-50; subsequent developments pp. 37052; 37058; 37199-200; 37265; 37304; 37391-92; 37304; 37304; 37443; 37546-47; 37626; 37728-29.
MIDDLE EAST
PALESTINIAN AFFAIRS
Failure of dialogue efforts
The decision by the United States in December 1988 to open a dialogue with the Palestine Liberation Organization (PLO)[see p. 36438]led to efforts by Israel in 1989 to persuade the administration of President Bush that the PLO Chairman, Yassir Arafat, was not sincere in his renunciation of terrorism, announced in Geneva on Dec. 14, 1988 [ibid.].
However, after a second round of US-PLO talks in Tunis on March 22, 1989, the PLO leadership expressed fears that the USA lacked a specific programme for resolving the Palestinian issue, and was playing for time to secure a halt to the intifada ( "uprising" ).
Meetings were also held during the first half of 1989 between senior PLO officials and officials from France, Spain and the United Kingdom, culminating in Arafat's talks with President Mitterrand of France in May 1989, after which the PLO leader said that the PLO's National Charter was "obsolete" and "null and void" [see p. 36669].
On May 14, 1989, the Israeli Cabinet ratified Prime Minister Itzhak Shamir's four-point peace plan [see pp. 36599; 36670]which, as well as providing for elections among Palestinians in the occupied territories, called for international efforts to resettle over 1,000,000 Palestinians who were still classified as refugees.
Large sections of the Palestinian community perceived the elections offer as a device to end the intifada, and the latter provision as a bid to divert attention from calls for an international conference on the Middle East.
During 1989 calls for an international conference were repeated at the European Communities (EC) summit in Madrid, the Paris summit of the seven major industrial countries and the Arab League summit in Casablanca, as well as by the Soviet Union.
The third round of US-PLO dialogue, in June 1989, focused on the idea of, and preconditions for, holding elections in the West Bank and Gaza Strip, with the PLO coming under pressure to allow Palestinians in the occupied territories to negotiate the terms of the suggested elections with the Israelis.
The PLO delegation, in rejecting this, insisted that the elections should be part of procedural steps in the peace process, and not an objective in themselves.
By the time the Palestine Central Council (PCC — the PLO's advisory body) met in Baghdad on Oct. 15-16, 1989, President Mubarak of Egypt had put forward a 10-point peace plan, which was followed by a five-point initiative by US Secretary of State James Baker.
The PCC considered that the dialogue with the USA had reached deadlock and that the PLO should seek other ways of dealing with Washington from a stronger negotiating position.
Prospects for the dialogue became even bleaker in November with the USA insisting that the PLO should accept Egypt's naming of the Palestinian delegation to a suggested dialogue with Israel.
The Baker-Mubarak plan for Israeli-Palestinian talks in Cairo came to nothing.
The formation of the new Israeli Cabinet in June 1990 and its promises to retain the occupied territories and crush the intifada [see pp. 37546-47]forced Palestinians to reassess their strategy on negotiations.
With the suspension of the 18-month US-PLO dialogue in June 1990 [p. 37547], which followed the May 30 seaborne attack against Israel by guerrillas of the Palestine Liberation Front [see pp. 37443-44]and Arafat's failure to denounce the attack to Washington's satisfaction, some leading figures in the PLO suggested that Europe should play a larger role in the peace process.
Others within the PLO advocated the need to rely primarily on Arab support, looking particularly in this regard to Iraq.
Contacts with EC
In January 1989 Arafat held talks in Tunis with a UK Minister of State at the Foreign and Commonwealth Office, William Waldegrave, a meeting which the latter described as a major development in British foreign policy.
During 1989 there were frequent EC denunciations of Israel's handling of the intifada, and a communiqué issued by EC leaders in Strasbourg in December 1989 condemned the economic restrictions and bureaucratic harassment imposed by Israel on Palestinian farmers and fruit growers in the occupied territories.
In January 1990 members of the European Parliament called for an immediate suspension of all scientific co-operation projects between Israel and the EC, amidst plans for a doubling of direct EC aid to the occupied territories to US$12,000,000 a year by 1992 [see also p. 37627].
On April 2, 1990, at a meeting in Luxembourg with members of the Arab League's intifada committee, EC Foreign Ministers promised to use their influence to try to stop the settlement of Soviet Jews in the occupied territories, including East Jerusalem.
The intifada
The nature of the uprising changed during 1989 with more killings by Palestinians of suspected collaborators and an increase in attacks on Jewish civilians, which in turn provoked further arrests of suspected activists and their detention without trial under new detention procedures.
Sixty alleged Palestinian informers or collaborators had been killed by August 1989, as the Israeli Defence Force (IDF) and Shin Bet(the Israeli secret police) increased their use of informers to set up paramilitary groups working alongside Palestinian collaborators.
The authorities also resorted to economic sanctions including tax raids and the seizure of the property of those defaulting on taxes, and the issuing of special identity cards to adults in the Gaza Strip seeking to work in Israel.
The middle of 1989 witnessed a backlash by Israeli settlers in the West Bank, instigated mostly by radical settlers reacting against the continuing US-Palestinian dialogue.
According to some reports the settlers were trying to force Palestinians to increase their use of firearms, thereby provoking the IDF into using its full military might.
Between April and August 1989 eight Palestinian activists in the West Bank and Gaza were allegedly killed by so-called "death squads" ; while the IDF admitted that it was running special undercover units, it insisted that their primary purpose was gathering intelligence.
The cost of the intifada to the Israeli economy up to March 1989, according to the Labour Party, was put at US$750,000,000, effectively wiping out Israel's economic growth in 1988 of 2.3 per cent.
In June 1989 the Bank of Israel (central bank) reported that the intifada had resulted in the loss of US$650,000,000 in potential export earnings in the previous year.
The then Labour Party Defence Minister Itzhak Rabin, speaking in March 1989, had insisted that additional costs arising out of the IDF's operations in the occupied territories did not exceed US$140,000,000 per annum.
Support for Iraq's invasion of Kuwait
Arafat committed the PLO to supporting the Iraqi invasion of Aug. 2, 1990, despite objections from Egypt that this would undermine the PLO's long-standing opposition to the acquisition of territories by force, and would also rule out any immediate prospect of resuming the US-PLO dialogue [see also p. 37637].
A joint statement issued in Baghdad by Arafat and President Saddam Hussein of Iraq said that Palestinians and Iraqis were united in a joint struggle against the Israeli occupation and the US intervention in the Gulf.
In September Saudi Arabia and other Gulf states, primarily Qatar, expelled Palestinians in retaliation for the PLO's support for Iraq.
In Kuwait, there were reports of Palestinians — both existing residents and new arrivals via Iraq — taking homes and businesses vacated by fleeing Kuwaitis as part of an alleged deal between Arafat and the Iraqi leader to establish a de facto Palestinian homeland in a bid to harness the support of the Arab world behind the Palestinian cause and Iraq.
The leaders of two Palestinian factions banished from Jordan after the September 1970 civil war for opposing King Hussein's rule, George Habash of the Popular Front for the Liberation of Palestine and Nayef Hawatmeh of the Democratic Front for the Liberation of Palestine, returned to Amman on Sept. 15, 1990, to attend the Conference of Arab Popular Forces, a gathering of pro-Iraqi radical Arab factions.
Although the King did not attend the conference, he held separate meetings with the two Palestinian leaders [see below for earlier meetings between Palestinian and Hussein].
REFERENCES Reference article pp. 36436-38; subsequent developments in 1989 pp. 36475, 36536-37, 36599-600, 36669-70, 36834, 36860-61, 36904-05, 36986-87, 37051-52, 37136-37; January 1990 events in occupied territories p. 37199; May 1990 intensification of intifada pp. 37443-44; June 1990 suspension of US-PLO dialogue and July aftermath pp. 37547-48; 37626-27.
Jan. 1.
Israel deports 13 Palestinians to Lebanon.
Jan. 2.
The EC launches a Middle East peace initiative; the EC diplomatic "troika" is created.
Jan. 13.
William Waldegrave, a UK Minister of State at the Foreign and Colonial Office, meets with Yassir Arafat in Tunis.
Jan. 17.
Israeli Defence Minister Itzhak Rabin announces details of tough new security measures to counter the intifada.
Feb. 7.
The US State Department attacks Israeli policies in the occupied territories.
Feb. 23.
Soviet Foreign Minister Eduard Shevardnadze delivers a major speech on the Middle East in Cairo during a tour of the region.
March 8.
Israel's Jaffee Centre gives its qualified support for an independent Palestinian state in the occupied territories.
March 22.
The second round of PLO-US talks are held in Tunis.
April 1.
The Palestine Central Council confirms Arafat as Palestinian head of state.
April 6.
During a visit to the USA Itzhak Shamir, the Israeli Prime Minister, outlines details of a "peace plan" involving elections in the occupied territories.
April 13.
Israeli paramilitary forces shoot dead four Palestinians in the West Bank village of Nahalin, generating a marked escalation of the intifada.
May 3.
During a visit to Paris Arafat declares the PLO's National Charter "caduc" .
May 13.
The World Health Organization postpones consideration of Palestinian membership.
May 14.
The Israeli Cabinet approves Shamir's "peace plan" ; three days later the plan is approved by the Knesset, but the PLO rejects it in its present form.
July 6.
A Palestinian attacks an Israeli bus, killing 16 people.
July 23.
The Israeli Cabinet again endorses Shamir's "peace plan" , thereby resolving a government crisis provoked by hardline opponents.
July 25.
Details are released of a recent meeting between a PLO-approved Palestinian lawyer and Shamir.
Aug. 3.
Al-Fatah's fifth congress opens in Tunis.
Aug. 14.
PLO-US talks are held in Tunis.
Aug. 18.
Israel introduces a new system of computerized identity cards for Palestinians.
Aug. 25.
The Palestine National Fund headquarters are re-opened in Amman.
Sept. 5.
The Israeli Defence Forces announce that helicopters are to be used to suppress the intifada.
Sept. 11.
Leading intifada activist Mohammed al-Akra is killed by Israeli soldiers in Gaza.
Sept. 13.
An Israeli spokesman claims that over 80 Palestinian "collaborators" have been killed since January.
Sept. 15.
President Mubarak of Egypt presents a 10-point peace initiative, effectively an extension of the Shamir plan.
Oct. 4.
After visiting the USA Mubarak produces a list of Palestinians to enter into preliminary "pre-election" negotiations with Israeli officials.
Oct. 6.
Israeli "inner Cabinet" rejects a Labour proposal to accept Mubarak's invitation to attend preliminary talks.
Oct. 10.
Details are released of a series of unofficial US proposals (the "five point framework" of Secretary of State James Baker) to facilitate an Israeli-Palestinian dialogue.
Oct. 16.
Arafat rejects the Baker plan.
Oct. 23.
Israeli Foreign Minister Moshe Arens calls for modifications to be made to the Baker plan.
Nov. 5.
The Israeli Cabinet conditionally accepts the Baker plan, calling for certain US "assurances" .
The PLO Executive Committee ends a two-day meeting in Cairo, its first in Egypt for 15 years.
Nov. 11.
The EC"troika meets with Arafat in Tunis.
Nov. 13.
Two Israeli reservists are shot dead in Gaza City.
Nov. 16.
Shamir receives a frosty reception from US President Bush during a Washington meeting.
Dec. 1.
Israeli forces ambush and kill four members of the Palestinian "Black Panther" group in Nablus.
Dec. 6.
Egypt formally accepts the Baker plan, prompting false reports of a diplomatic breakthrough.
Dec. 10.
The intifada enters its third year; prolonged curfews are imposed throughout the occupied territories.
Dec. 22.
Desmond Tutu, the Anglican Archbishop of Cape Town, embarks on a controversial tour of Israel and the territories.
Dec. 30.
Israeli forces violently suppress a peace rally in Jerusalem.
Jan. 2.
Ezer Weizmann, the leading Israeli "dove" , is forced to resign from the "inner Cabinet" over the issue of his contacts with the PLO.
Jan. 3.
Amnesty International accuses the Israeli government of condoning, and even encouraging, extrajudicial executions of Palestinians.
The trial opens in Gaza of Hamas leader Sheikh Ahmed Yaseen.
Jan. 14.
Shamir delivers his highly controversial "big Israel" speech in which he states that the occupied territories are to be used to settle Soviet Jewish immigrants.
Jan. 17.
The influential US Senate minority leader Bob Dole calls for a cut in foreign aid to Israel.
Feb. 4.
An Israeli tour bus is attacked in Egypt leaving 11 dead; Arafat denies PLO involvement.
Feb. 12.
Ariel Sharon, the leading Israeli "hawk" , resigns from the Cabinet in protest over the government's Palestinian policy.
Feb. 28.
Israel's Labour Party issues an ultimatum to Shamir, calling for a total acceptance of the US-backed peace plan.
March 2.
Israel imposes military censorship on domestic and foreign media reports on Soviet Jewish immigration.
March 3.
Bush publicly and deliberately links the occupied West Bank with Jerusalem in a statement on Soviet Jewish immigration.
March 15.
Israel's "national unity" coalition government collapses, reflecting differences between the two main partners, Labour and Likud, over the peace process.
April 8.
Bob Dole starts a week-long tour of the Middle East, during which he is highly critical of Israeli policies.
May 20.
Seven Gaza labourers are shot dead by a deranged Israeli gunman at Rishon Le Zion; the killings prompt some of the most intense rioting of the intifada.
May 25.
Arafat addresses the UN Security Council in Geneva and puts forward a five-point plan.
May 28.
In his speech to the Arab summit in Baghdad Arafat calls upon other Arab states to impose economic sanctions on countries or companies involved in the transfer of Jews to Arab lands.
May 30.
Palestine Liberation Front (PLF) guerrillas launch an unsuccessful attack on Israeli beaches; Arafat refuses to condemn the attack.
June 8.
Shamir announces the formation of a new government following the signing of a fresh coalition agreement with a number of religious and nationalist parties; the new government wins a vote of confidence in the Knesset three days later.
June 20.
Bush suspends the US-PLO dialogue over Arafat's refusal to condemn the PLF beach attack.
July 15-16.
The Arab League meets to discuss the suspension of US-PLO talks.
July 23.
The EC "troika" urges Israel's Foreign Minister David Levi to resume peace negotiations.
Aug. 2.
Iraq invades Kuwait; Palestinians and the PLO rally behind the Iraqi leader Saddam Hussein.
Palestinian affairs and the intifada
Chronology, January 1989-August 1990
1989
1990
MIDDLE EAST — ARAB WORLD
JORDAN
BASIC DATA
Area: 97,740 sq km.
Population: 3,937,000 (1988).
Capital: Amman.
Language: Arabic.
Religion: Sunni Moslem (more than 90%), Christians and Shia Moslem.
Av. life expectancy: 66 (1988).
Armed forces: 85,250.
GNP per capita: US$1,500 (1988).
Currency: Jordanian dinar (US$1.00=JD0.6391 as at Sept. 25, 1990)
The Hashemite Kingdom of Jordan attained independence in 1946.
It is a constitutional monarchy in which the King (currently King Hussein Ibn Talal) appoints a Prime Minister (currently Mudar Badran who in turn selects a Council of Ministers; this last is responsible to the bicameral National Assembly, consisting of the House of Notables (Senate) and the House of Representatives.
Political parties have been banned since 1957, but the Moslem Brotherhood has charitable status and is therefore exempt from the ban.
In July 1988 King Hussein dissolved the (elected) House of Representatives and announced plans to cut legal and administrative ties with the Israeli-occupied West Bank.
The first parliamentary elections in Jordan since 1967 were held on Nov. 8, 1989 [see pp. 37052-53], when the Moslem Brotherhood won 20 of the 80 House of Representative seats, and independent fundamentalists won as many as 14 other seats.
The new parliament convened on Nov. 27; King Hussein appointed Mudar Badran as Prime Minister on Dec. 4 and two days later a new Cabinet was selected.
Mudar Badran Prime Minister; Minister of Defence Salim Masa-idah Deputy Prime Minister; Minister of Interior Marwan al-Qasem Deputy Prime Minister; Minister of Foreign Affairs Abd al-Majid al-Shuraydah Social Development Muhammad Addub al-Zabin Health Abd al-Ra'uf al-Rawabidah Public Works and Housing Ibrahim Ayyub Supply Khalid Amin Abdullah Planning Ibrahim Izziedin Information Basil Jardana Finance Ziyad Fariz Industry and Trade Muhammad Hamdan Education and Higher Education Dawud Khalaf Irrigation and Water Resources Nabil Abu al-Huda Transport and Communications Yusuf al-Mubayyidin Justice Thabit al-Thair Energy and Mineral Resources Sulayman Arabiyat Agriculture Khalid al-Karaki Culture Ali al-Faqir Waqfs (Religious Endowments), Islamic Affairs and Holy Places Qasim Ubaydat Labour Ibrahim al-Ghababishah Youth Affairs Abd al-Karim al-Kabariti Tourism and Antiquities Abd al-Karim al-Dughmi Municipal and Rural Affairs; Environment Sharif Zaid Ibn Shaker Chief of the Royal Court Shaykh Abd al-Baqi Jammu Minister of State for Parliamentary Affairs Hikmat al-Sakit Minister of State for Cabinet Affairs 
Cabinet
POLITICS
Meetings with Palestinian groupings
A series of meetings was held in March, April and May 1990 with radical Palestinian groupings in what many observers saw as preparatory steps towards their unbanning.
In mid-March Badran met two politburo members of the Popular Front for the Liberation of Palestine (PFLP).
King Hussein, for the first time since 1970, in early May met leaders of the Jordan People's Democratic Party, the newly-formed Jordanian section of the Democratic Front for the Liberation of Palestine.
This followed a meeting with representatives of the Communist Party of Jordan [see also p. 37751].
SECURITY
Palestinian guerrilla activities and arrests — Palestinian demonstration — Release of political prisoners
The government confirmed on Oct. 6, 1989, that 12 PFLP members had been detained in connection with rocket attacks on Israel from Jordanian territory.
The guerrillas had allegedly smuggled explosives and weapons, including Soviet Katyusha missiles, into Jordan and used them in the attacks.
However, in April 1990 a government statement revealed that an intensified campaign against the guerrillas had led to 10 rocket attacks being foiled and five members of the Islamic Jihad organization being arrested in the first three months of the year.
On May 13, 1990, some 1,000 Palestinians, who were escorting the body of a guerrilla who had died in police custody, ransacked a police post near Jordan's northern border with Syria and attacked members of the Jordanian secret police, the Mukhabarat.
The guerrilla who had died in police custody belonged to Abu Musa's Palestine National Liberation Movement — Fatah.
Under a royal amnesty in late July 1989, 45 prisoners, including 19 who had been "sentenced for politically motivated offences" , were unconditionally released.
A further 60 prisoners who had also been detained in the April 1989 riots [see p. 36602]were also released.
In December a number of PFLP detainees were released [see p. 37136], and on Jan. 20, 1990, Badran issued a circular to all government departments allowing for the re-employment of any civil servant who had been discharged since the April 1989 riots on the strength of the country's martial law regulations.
ECONOMY
Economic indicators
GDP growth 4.2% (1980-88)
Current-account balance -US$281,000,000 (1988)
Budget deficit (projected 1990) -US$300,000,000
Budget deficit (as % of GDP)(projected 1990) 16.5%
Total external public debt US$8,300 million (1989)
Debt service ratio (as % of export earnings) 31.9% (1988)
Gross domestic product US$3,900 (1988)
Inflation rate 14% (1989)
Principal trading partners Imports: EC, US, Saudi Arabia; Exports: Iraq, Saudi Arabia, India 
Announcement of medium-term programme — budget
In a speech to bankers in London on July 5, 1989, Finance Minister Basil Jardana revealed the key objectives, agreed with the International Monetary Fund (IMF)[see also below], of the government's medium-term economic programme for 1989-93.
They were (i) the reduction of the budget deficit from 24 per cent of GDP in 1988 to 10 per cent in 1990;(ii) cutting inflation to around 7 per cent in 1993 from about 14 per cent in 1989; and (iii) achieving a current-account balance in 1993 from a deficit equivalent to 6 per cent of GDP in 1988.
Jardana presented his 1990 budget to the House of Representatives on Jan. 6, 1990.
In the statement he estimated total fiscal revenues for fiscal year 1990 at JD906,700,000 and expected expenditures to total JD1,106 million, amounting to a deficit of 16.5 per cent of 1990 GDP.
Jardana said that the figure for total expenditure represented a 20 per cent cut in real terms from 1989.
He estimated that inflation had risen by 25 per cent over the first eleven months of 1989 and that the dinar had lost 50 per cent of its value since October 1989.
The House of Representatives approved the budget on Feb. 3, 1990, with 52 votes in favour, 16 against and 12 abstentions.
Debt-rescheduling arrangements
The IMF's satisfaction with Jordan's continued implementation of economic restructuring programmes led it to approve on July 14, 1989, a financial package of 76,600,000 special drawing rights (approximately US$96,000,000).
SDR16,600,000 were to be disbursed immediately to cover shortfalls in revenue, with the balance to be disbursed over the next 18 months in a standby credit.
Talks with 10 creditor countries within the "Paris Club" framework resulted in a July 19, 1989, agreement to reschedule around US$700,000,000 of Jordan's US$8,300 million debt.
The arrangement provided for the repayment of all the principal owed for 1989 and 1990 and half the interest payable for 1989 over a 10-year period with five years' grace.
An arrangement was announced on Oct. 31, 1989, between Jordan and the USA to reschedule an unspecified sum of unpaid interest over 10 years, accompanied by a US decision to boost its aid to Jordan from US$160,000,000 in 1989 to US$210,000,000 in 1990.
On Feb. 8, 1990, the US raised the latter figure to US$259,000,000.
It was announced on Feb. 6, 1990, that the Soviet Union and Jordan had agreed on the rescheduling of debt payments of US$214,000,000 due in 1989 and 1990.
A rescheduling agreement with France amounting to US$130,000,000 was concluded on Feb. 15, 1990.
In a speech at the end of March 1990, Jardana expressed confidence that US$750,000,000 in funding support would be received from the IMF, World Bank and foreign countries during 1990.
This was thought to include US$360,000,000 from Arab countries, US$150,000,000 each from the World Bank and Japan and a smaller sum from West Germany.
Exchange rate measures — Petra Bank scandal
The falling external value of the dinar had resulted in a black market in foreign currency with approximately 75 exchange houses at its centre.
The Jordanian Central Bank governor, Mohammad Said Nabulsi, announced on June 13, 1989, that they would be placed into liquidation in an attempt to cut heavy currency speculation.
Shortly afterwards, on July 31, the central bank introduced a two-tier dinar/US dollar exchange rate according to which (i) the government would continue to provide dollars at an existing fixed rate for a specified list of imports; and (ii) a separate free market exchange rate would prevail for commercial banks meeting their legitimate foreign currency needs.
A perceived improvement in the foreign exchange climate led on Feb. 27, 1990, to the re-establishment of a unified dinar rate against the dollar.
A ban on the import of luxury goods had also been lifted on Oct. 9, 1989, as a result of an improvement in foreign exchange reserves.
Revelations of large-scale fraud and embezzlement at Jordan's second largest commercial bank, Petra Bank, resulted in the seizure of its assets in August 1989.
The assets of a further 37 companies with outstanding debts to the bank were also seized in October, a move which was followed on Oct. 29, 1989, by the arrest of 22 former employees and business associates of Petra Bank, including the bank's chairman, Ahmad Chalabi.
FOREIGN
Trade protocol with Iraq — Foreign contacts
A US$800,000,000 trade protocol for 1990 between Jordan and Iraq signed on Dec. 28, 1989, represented a reduction from a previously set target figure of US$900,000,000.
The shortfall was accompanied by a general reduction in Arab countries' regular aid disbursements to Jordan, resulting in the latter's appeal for more funds on May 28, 1990 at the Arab League summit in Baghdad, the Iraqi capital [see p. 37473].
The appeal was followed on June 1 by an Iraqi promise of US$50,000,000 in aid for 1990, on June 25 by a Saudi promise of US$100,000,000 in one-off aid, and during May and June promises of aid amounting to nearly US$200,000,000 from Kuwait and the United Arab Emirates.
During a tour of West European countries including France and the United Kingdom King Hussein discussed the "dangers" arising from the flow of Jewish emigrants from the Soviet Union to Israel.
The issue was at the centre of the talks between the UK Foreign Secretary, Douglas Hurd, and Badran during Hurd's visit to Jordan on May 30-31, 1990.
Jordan signed an economic co-operation agreement with France on Dec. 14, 1989.
A joint economic commission to monitor links was established and it was hoped that it would meet on a regular basis.
MIDDLE EAST
SYRIA
BASIC DATA
Area: 184,050 sq km.
Population: 11,667,000 (1988).
Capital: Damascus.
Language: Arabic (official), Kurdish minority.
Religion: More than 80% Moslem (mostly Sunni), plus Christian minorities of various sects.
Av. life expectancy: 65 years (1988).
Armed forces: 404,000 (1989).
GNP per capita: US$1,670 (1988).
Currency: Syrian pound (US$1.00=£Syr20.9219 (export incentive rate) as at Sept.25, 1990).
Formerly part of the Ottoman Empire, Syria was administered by France under a League of Nations mandate after 1920; the Syrian Arab Republic achieved full independence in 1946.
Executive power is vested in the President (currently Lt.-Gen.
Hafez al-Assad), who is elected every seven years by universal adult suffrage and who appoints the Vice-Presidents and the Council of Ministers.
Legislative authority rests with the People's Assembly; in elections on May 22-23, 1990, candidates of the ruling Arab Socialist Renaissance (Baath) Party took 134 seats while the four other legal parties allied with the Baath Party as the National Progressive Front won 32 seats.
In addition 84 seats in the expanded 250-member Assembly were reserved for independent candidates.
Mahmoud Zubi Prime Minister Gen. Mustafa Tlass Deputy Prime Minister; Defence Salim Yassin Deputy Prime Minister for Economic Affairs Mahmud Qaddur Deputy Prime Minister for Public Affairs Ghassan Halabi Education Kamal Sharaf Higher Education Mohammad Harbah Interior Yusuf al-Ahmed Transport Mohammad Salman Information Ahmed Diab Local Administration Hassan Saqqa Supply and Internal Trade Mohammad al-Imadi Economy and Foreign Trade Najah al-Attar Culture Farooq ash-Shar"Foreign Affairs Adnan Quli Tourism Iyad al-Shatti Health Abdel-Majid Tarabulsi Waqfs (Religious Endowments) Abd ar-Rahman Madani Irrigation Kamil al-Baba Electricity Antonios Habib Oil and Mineral Resources Marwan Farra Construction Mohammad Nur Antabi Housing and Utilities Mohammad Ghabbash Agriculture and Agrarian Reform Khaled al-Mahayni Finance Antoine Jubran Industry Murad Quwatli Communications Khalid Ansari Justice Wahib Fadil Presidential Affairs Haydar Buzu Labour and Social Affairs Yasin Rajjuh Minister of State for Cabinet Affairs Nasir Qaddur Minister of State for Foreign Affairs Sabah Baqjaji Minister of State for Planning Affairs Muhammed Jumaa Minister of State Abdel-Hamid Munajjid Minister of State Ghazi Mustafa Minister of State Ali Khalil Minister of State
Council of Ministers
Arab Socialist Renaissance (Baath) Party Secretary-general.
Lt.-Gen.
Hafez al-Assad.
Assistant secretary-general.
Abdullah al-Ahmar.
Assistant regional secretary-general.
Zuheir Masharqa.
POLITICS
In early 1990 there were reports that the government was planning a series of initiatives to liberalize the economic and political systems, in the light of the changes in Eastern Europe and the growing popular discontent with the state of the economy.
On Feb. 16, 1990, it was reported that the Council of Ministers had earlier in the month made moves to abolish martial law regulations enacted originally during the 1958-61 period of Syrian-Egyptian unity [see pp. 16005; 18437-40].
President Hafez al-Assad on March 8, in a speech to a youth rally marking the 27th anniversary of the accession to power of the Baath Party, appeared to confirm these reports.
He praised the achievements of the revolution but said that shortcomings did exist, as in the application of the emergency regulations, and that although Syria was still in a state of war with Israel, the government should consider restricting the use of the law to matters of state security and public order.
He also angrily denounced the changes sweeping Eastern Europe, saying that Israel would be the "main beneficiary" and called for the Arabs to unite in a holy war "as long as time" against Israel.
He also condemned the recent wave of Soviet Jewish emigration to Israel [see pp. 37728; 37748]as an "aggression" , claiming that the migrating Jews would force Palestinians from their homeland.
However he did not hold the Soviet Union, a long-time Syrian ally, responsible for the exodus, saying that the relationship between Syria and the Soviet Union was "as firm as ever" , but blaming the United States "for playing a major role in the realization of Israeli desires" .
SECURITY
Anti-corruption drives
On March 4, 1990, Assad issued a law setting up special courts to investigate criminal cases involving government employees.
The move was seen as an attempt to strengthen the government's anti-corruption campaign.
The announcement followed the dismissal on Feb. 18, 1990, of 30 civil servants for dishonesty and misconduct.
Founding of opposition front
The formation of an "all-Syrian" opposition movement, the Patriotic Front for National Salvation, was announced in Paris on Feb. 21, 1990, following reports in 1989 of agreement between Syrian opposition groups (see pp. 37099-100).
The Front comprised political and religious organizations and parties based in Iraq and Jordan, including the Moslem Brotherhood, which agreed for the first time to co-operate without preconditions with nationalist and non-religious groups.
Gen. Amin al-Hafiz, President of Syria during the early and mid-1960s, was also a member.
The Front called for the overthrow of President Assad, "by armed struggle if the people wish" and for the establishment of a multiparty parliamentary system.
The Front was to be financed by Iraq and based in the Iraqi capital, Baghdad.
Current-account balance -US$165,000,000 (1988) Trade balance -US$886,000,000 (1988), +US$908,000,000 (1989)(both official figures) Total external public debt US$4,890 million (1988) Debt service ratio (as % of export earnings) 24% (1988) Gross domestic product US$14,950 (1988) Gross national product US$19,540 (1988) Inflation rate average 12.9% (1980-88) Principal trading partners Exports: Italy, Romania, USSR; imports: Iran, East Germany, USSR 
ECONOMY
Economic indicators GDP growth 0.5% (1980-88)
1990 budget
The 1990 budget, presented by the government and approved by the National Assembly on Feb. 21, 1990, set spending at £Syr61,875 million, 8.5 per cent up on the 1989 budget [for which see p. 37100].
The budget aimed to boost spending on agriculture and industry.
The government also announced a trade surplus of £Syr10,430 million for 1989, the first for 30 years, fuelled largely by increased oil exports.
The announcement was greeted sceptically in the National Assembly and by the press, which claimed that the surplus was illusory as the government trade figures were distorted by smuggling, variable exchange rates, barter deals and restrictions on imports.
New oil discoveries
Oil revenues were boosted by a number of significant oil discoveries in central and eastern Syria in late 1989 and early 1990.
The finds helped offset a fall in production in 1989 due to damage to one of the established oilfields as a result of overproduction.
FOREIGN
For role in April 1990 release of hostages from Lebanon see p. 37391; for response in August to Gulf crisis see p. 37636-37; for relations with Turkey see p. 37201; with Morocco see p.37220; with Yemen see p. 37427; with Egypt see p. 37471.
Syrian relations with its Arab neighbours and the West altered dramatically in the aftermath of Iraq's annexation of Kuwait in early August [see pp. 37631-41].
Following the Iraqi invasion, Syria, along with Egypt and Saudi Arabia, lent its full support to US efforts to force Iraq to withdraw from Kuwait, and Syrian ground troops were dispatched to Saudi Arabia as part of a pan-Arab force.
The Syrian decision to support the USA undoubtedly reflected the fierce rivalry between Assad and his Iraqi counterpart, President Saddam Hussein, who each headed a rival wing of the Baath party.
Relations between the two countries had grown tense during the months prior to the Iraqi invasion as Saddam moved to establish himself as the dominant Arab nationalist leader [see pp. 37390; 37472].
The Syrian decision to support the West over Iraq's invasion of Kuwait also reflected the improved relations between Syria and Egypt [see pp. 37137; 37471; 37626].
Although Syria's relations with the USA had improved rapidly after the Iraqi invasion, relations between the countries had already grown closer during 1989 and early 1990 [see pp. 37391; 37392].
Israel
The Independent newspaper on Feb. 15, 1990, reported that envoys of Syria and Israel had held two rounds of informal talks in Austria in October 1989 and January 1990, with a view to starting a bilateral peace process, a position formerly opposed by Assad.
The report also suggested that a back-stage role in the process was being played by senior retired Egyptian and US officials (the latter led by former US President Jimmy Carter's Secretary of State Cyrus Vance, who visited Syria and Israel in January).
The report was denied by both the Syrian and Israeli governments, but diplomatic sources in Israel said that informal "feelers" had been exchanged and that Syria was softening its position towards Israel under pressure from the Soviet Union.
On a five-country tour of the Middle East, Carter visited Damascus on March 14-15, 1990, and held talks with Assad.
On his arrival in Israel on March 18 he announced that Assad was willing to talk bilaterally to Israel about all issues, including the Golan Heights, once an international peace conference had been convened.
The Golan Heights had been captured by Israel from Syria in 1967 and remained one of the main areas of contention between the two countries.
Soviet Union
Assad visited the Soviet Union on April 27-29, 1990, the first time since 1987 [see p. 35416], and held talks with President Gorbachev.
The visit came amid reports that the Soviet Union had downgraded its commitment to its longtime ally in the Middle East and reduced the number of Soviet military instructors in Syria and the availability of essential military and commercial credits.
Both sides denied any strain in relations, condemned US policy in the Middle East and signed an agreement for further Soviet aid to Syria.
However, the Soviet ambassador to Syria, Aleksandr Zotov, said that while "the security needs of Syria are unquestionable" , the Soviet Union would no longer support Syria's goal of "strategic parity" with Israel, but would support a "reasonable self-sufficiency" .
Relations with Turkey
Relations with Turkey had been strained since Oct. 1, 1989 when the Turkish President, Turgut Ozal (at the time Prime Minister), hinted that Turkey might reduce the flow of the Euphrates River if Syria failed to curb the attacks on Turkey by Kurdish separatists from Syrian-occupied eastern Lebanon.
A visit to Turkey by Foreign Affairs Minister, Farooq ash-Shar"in mid-June 1990, failed to settle the disputes over the Euphrates and border security and relations remained strained.
A special commission set up by Syria to investigate the shooting down in October 1989 of a Turkish civilian aircraft 20 km inside Turkish territory [see p. 37595]reported on Jan. 24, 1990, that "pilot error" had caused the accident.
Syria agreed to pay compensation.
REFERENCES: Reference article p. 37099-101; April 1990 role in release of hostages from Lebanon p. 37391; May general election p. 37472; August response to Gulf crisis p. 37636-37; relations with Turkey p. 37201; with Morocco p.37220; with Yemen p. 37427; with Egypt p. 37471.
MIDDLE EAST — ARAB WORLD
LEBANON
BASIC DATA
Area: 10,452 sq km.
Capital: Beirut.
Languages: Arabic (official); French, Kurdish and Armenian.
Religion: Moslem (about 57%)— Sunni, Shia and Druze; Christian (mainly Roman Catholic, but also Armenian, Greek and Syrian sects and Protestants).
Currency: Lebanese pound (US$1.00=L£879.066 (as at Sept. 25 1990).
No worthwhile economic or demographic data is available.
The Republic of Lebanon became fully independent from France in 1944.
According to a "National Covenant" agreed in 1943, institutional power is allocated between religious groups on the basis of their relative numerical strength according to a 1932 census.
Thus, the President (currently Elias Hrawi) is by convention a Maronite Christian, the Prime Minister (currently Selim al Hoss) a Sunni Moslem and the Speaker of the (unicameral) National Assembly a Shia Moslem.
Central authority has been progressively weakened since the outbreak of civil war in 1975, and real political power in Lebanon now effectively rests with the leading figures of the rival militias which are organized along religious lines.
Syrian forces control much of eastern and northern Lebanon, and since early 1987 have taken over responsibility for security in West Beirut.
The Syrian government has since 1983 exercised an increasing influence on the affairs of Lebanon.
President Amin Gemayel ended six years in office on Sept. 22, 1988, without any agreement having been reached on a successor.
His final act as President was the appointment of a transitional military government, headed by the Maronite Christian Army Commander Gen. Michel Aoun to replace the government of Selim al Hoss.
Both Gen. Aoun's military government (based in East Beirut) and the Hoss Cabinet (based in West Beirut) claimed to be the constitutional government of Lebanon [see pp. 36361-63].
In March 1989 Gen. Aoun declared a "war of liberation" against Syria [see p. 36538].
Intervention by the Arab League to halt the ensuing fighting resulted in the drawing up of an "accord for national reconciliation" , which was approved on Oct. 22, 1989, by a majority of Lebanese MPs meeting in Taif, Saudi Arabia [see p. 36986].
The accord was rejected by Gen. Aoun on the grounds that it did not provide for an immediate Syrian troop withdrawal [ibid].
Under the terms of the Taif accord, MPs elected a new president, René Mouawad, on Nov. 5.
President Mouawad was assassinated 17 days later and was succeeded on Nov. 24 by Elias Hrawi, who on the following day formed a new government.
President Hrawi dismissed Gen. Aoun as Army Commander on Nov. 28 and appointed Gen. Emile Lahud in his place [see pp. 37028-30].
Selim al Hoss Prime Minister; Foreign Affairs Michel Sassin Deputy Prime Minister; Labour George Sa'adah Telecommunications and Posts Nazih al Bizri Economy and Trade Ali al Khalil Finance Edmond Rizq Justice and Information Souren Khanamirian Industry and Oil Abdullah al Rassi Health and Tourism Nabbi Berri Hydroelectric Resources; Housing and Co-operatives Walid Jumblatt Public Works Albert Mansur Defence Ilyas al Khazin Interior Umar Karami Education Muhsin Dallul Agriculture
Hoss Cabinet
Members of Aoun government.
Gen. Michel Aoun (Prime Minister; Defence; Information); Col. Islam Abu Jamrah (Deputy Prime Minister; Posts and Communications; Housing and Co-operatives; Economy and Trade); Brig. -Gen.
Adgar Ma'luf (Finance; Health; Social Affairs; Industry and Oil).
Leader of Amal (Shia): Nabi Berri.
Leader of Progressive Socialist Party (Druse): Walid Jumblatt.
Leader of South Lebanon Army: Maj.-Gen.
Antoine Lahad.
Leader of Phalangist Party (Christian): George Sa'adah.
Leader of the Lebanese Forces (Phalangist Militia): Samir Geaga.
Against a background of rising tension between Aoun's forces and those under the command of Gen. Lahud, as well as Samir Geaga's Lebanese Forces (LF) militia, military confrontation broke out in the Christian enclave of East Beirut in late January 1990 [see pp. 37264-65].
Clashes with varying degrees of severity and with only brief respites continued into June, leaving well over 1,000 people dead and as many as 4,000 injured [see pp. 37331-32; 37391].
During June both the Vatican and the French government launched peace initiatives, neither of which came to fruition [see p. 37548]and as of August the opposing sides remained in a stand-off position.
The intra-Christian fighting of the first half of 1990 did not result in any tangible changes in territorial control over the enclave; the LF maintained control of Jounieh and Jubail areas to the north of Beirut as well as the East Beirut quarters of Ashrafieh and Karantina, while Aoun held on to the area around the Baabda Presidential palace, where he himself was based, and around Ras al Metn and the southern entrances to East Beirut.
POLITICS
Hezbollah leadership elections — Re-election of Jumblatt as PSP leader
Hezbollah (Party of God) elections in Tehran (the capital of Iran) in January 1990 produced a new leadership which excluded the party's "pro-Syrian" wing and was almost wholly supportive of Hojatoleslam Ali Akbar Mohtashemi, the hardline former Interior Minister and Hezbollah's principal Iranian patron.
The election results led many observers to question Iranian President Ali Akbar Hashemi Rafsanjani's control over Hezbollah activities in Lebanon [see also below].
The annual congress of the Druze Progressive Socialist Party (PSP) opened on Jan. 13, 1990, with the re-election of Walid Jumblatt, the Lebanese Public Works Minister, as its leader.
The PSP abolished its central committee and replaced it by an assembly of guides, to be led by its secretary-general, Lt.-Col. Sharif Fayyad.
It was announced on June 10 that formal relations had been established between the PSP and the Chinese Communist Party.
SECURITY
Amal-Hezbollah fighting — Israeli and Palestinian attacks in Lebanon
Fighting between the two rival Shia militias, the Syrian-backed Amal and the Iranian-backed Hezbollah, raged throughout West Beirut and the western Bekaa valley during December 1989 and had led to over 100 deaths by early January 1990 [see p. 37137].
On Jan. 2 fighters of the Fatah group (loyal to Palestine Liberation Organization (PLO) chair Yassir Arafat), which had been deployed to protect two Palestinian refugee camps near Sidon, were caught up in the intra-Shia fighting.
On Jan. 16 it was reported that an alliance had been struck between the PLO and Amal at the main flashpoint of the fighting at Iqlim al-Tofah.
A state of relative peace prevailed in West Beirut in the first few months of 1990, partly owing to a Jan. 25 decision by the Lebanese Cabinet to endorse the West Beirut security plan agreed between Hrawi and the Syrian government during the former's visit to Damascus earlier in the month.
The plan provided for the gradual replacement of Syrian troops in West Beirut by Lebanese soldiers and police.
However, the lull in the fighting was broken in March when the Syrian Army was forced to intervene to stop intra-Shia fighting in the southern Beirut suburbs [see p. 37332].
On April 16 a leading Amal military official was assassinated in Beirut; Hezbollah was blamed and the next day Hezbollah-Amal street fighting erupted, leaving two dead and 42 wounded.
Despite a ceasefire declared by the Amal leader (and Minister in the Hoss Cabinet) Nabbi Berri which came into force on April 23, fighting continued into May, with an Amal military commander, Ayyad Ayyad, being killed on May 2.
The fighting continued sporadically into June despite a massive crackdown on the militias by the Syrian Army on May 31.
Hezbollah was again accused of the assassination on June 1 by means of a car bomb attack of an Amal political bureau member, Haj Hassan Malak.
Hopes of a peaceful resolution of the conflict were raised by the opening of a round of direct Amal-Hezbollah talks on June 7.
The Democratic Front for the Liberation of Palestine (DFLP) claimed to have killed six Israeli soldiers in an ambush in Israel's self-declared security zone in southern Lebanon on Jan. 26.
Israel itself conducted attacks on DFLP targets on Feb. 19 and March 16, causing three guerrilla deaths.
It also conducted two air raids on "terrorist" targets on Feb. 22 and 23, the first aimed at a pro-Iranian Islamic grouping and the second at the Popular Front for the Liberation of Palestine (PFLP).
A communiqué issued by the UN Interim Force in Lebanon (UNIFIL), whose mandate was extended by a further six months on Jan. 31, 1990, protested at the alleged killing of two UNIFIL soldiers by the pro-Israeli South Lebanon Army on Feb. 20.
This was followed on Feb. 22 by reports of the killing of two Shia Moslem guerrillas by UNIFIL forces in UN-policed territory near Israel's security zone.
Total external public debt US$229,000,000 (1988) Unemployment 22% (est. 1990) Principal trading partners Imports: Italy, France, US.
Exports: Saudi Arabia, Switzerland.
ECONOMY
Economic indicators Budget deficit -US$600,000
Approval of budget
The Cabinet approved a draft general budget presented by the then Finance Minister, Edmond Rizq, on April 21, 1990, the first budget to be approved for five years.
It provided for an estimated expenditure of L£597,000 million and revenues of L£210,000 million.
In an effort to cut expenditure and improve revenues, the Cabinet decided to link expenditure in the "second" part of the budget with the levels of forthcoming Arab aid and grants.
Despite the passage of the draft budget the Lebanese financial crisis, largely induced by the renewed fighting between pro-government and pro-Aoun forces, meant that the value of the Lebanese pound continued to fall, reaching US$1.00=L£650 in early May.
On May 21 the governor of the (West Beirut-based) Central Bank, Edmond Naim, requested Arab states to intervene to bolster the Lebanese currency by buying up Lebanese pounds and subscribing to the government's regular treasury bills.
FOREIGN
Releases and prospects for Western hostages
The perceived lack of a positive response from the United Kingdom and United States governments in particular to the release of hostages in April 1990 led to a statement by President Rafsanjani of Iran on May in which he said that Iran would halt all efforts to gain hostage releases if the USA failed to respond to its "goodwill gestures" .
Iran and pro-Iranian forces in Lebanon were thought to be particularly angered at the lack of pressure by the USA on Israel to obtain the release of more than 300 Lebanese Moslem hostages in south Lebanon.
The Libyan leader, Col. Moamar al Kadhafi, in a May 22 interview warned of further hostage-taking and violence if Israel failed to release its hostages.
In a May 27 statement, Hussein Musavi, leader of Islamic Amal (a Hezbollah faction), offered the release of some British hostages in exchange for the expulsion from the UK to any country it chose of Salman Rushdie, the author of the controversial novel The Satanic Verses [see pp. 36450-51].
On June 8 Nabbi Berri offered to exchange the 300 Arabs held by Israel for the bodies of two Israeli soldiers killed in Lebanon.