

INTERNATIONAL
CSCE
Paris summit
The heads of state and government of the 34 participants in the Conference on Security and Co-operation in Europe (CSCE) assembled in Paris on Nov. 19-21 for a summit meeting.
The CSCE process, marked in 1975 by the signing of the Helsinki Final Act [see pp. 27301-09], embraced Europe, the United States and Canada — originally 35 countries, reduced to 34 by the unification of Germany in October [see pp. 37761-63].
Albania, which had been the only European non-participant, had expressed its desire to join and was granted observer status at the summit, but on Nov. 20 lodged a formal complaint stating that "the failure of some states to allow a consensus for Albania's full participation…is incomprehensible" [see also pp. 37385; 37746-47].
Delegations from the Baltic republics of Estonia, Latvia and Lithuania, invited as "distinguished guests" of the French government, were expelled, reportedly at the insistence of the Soviet Union.
The Paris summit formally ended four decades of military confrontation between East and West.
It adopted the Charter of Paris for a New Europe and a Treaty on Conventional Armed Forces in Europe (CFE).
Other developments included the agreement and signing of transatlantic declarations institutionalizing relations between the European Communities (EC) and the USA and Canada.
In his opening address welcoming delegates to the summit on Nov. 19, President François Mitterrand of France said that "it is the first time in history that we witness a change in the depth of the European landscape that is not the outcome of a war or bloody revolution" .
Speaking during the opening session of the conference, US President George Bush warned, in an obvious reference to Iraq's invasion of Kuwait, that "our success here can be neither profound nor enduring if the rule of law is shamelessly disregarded elsewhere" .
Soviet President Mikhail Gorbachev said that while his country was moving away from "totalitarianism to freedom and democracy" , the "Balkanization or Lebanization of entire regions" continued to endanger "the European process" .
Gorbachev's call for more substantial arms cuts contrasted with the view of the then UK Prime Minister Margaret Thatcher that "I don't think we should expect further dramatic reductions in forces" .
Evidence of continuing tensions between some participating member states was highlighted by the Spanish Prime Minister, Felipe González, who, in his address on Nov. 20, told delegates that the UK and Spain "must solve the conflict of Gibraltar" which he described as "an anachronistic vestige" of the old order [see also pp. 37591-92].
Signing of Treaty on Conventional Armed Forces in Europe (CFE)
On Nov.19, leaders of the 16 member states of the North Atlantic Treaty Organization (NATO) and the six member states of the Warsaw Pact signed an unprecedented Treaty on Conventional Armed Forces in Europe (CFE) and endorsed a joint declaration renouncing the use of force.
The Treaty imposed equal ceilings on non-nuclear weapons located between the Atlantic Ocean and the Ural Mountains, restricting each side to 20,000 tanks, 20,000 artillery pieces, 30,000 armoured combat vehicles, 6,800 combat aircraft and 2,000 attack helicopters.
Most of the cuts, which were negotiated over 20 months [see pp. 37201; 37267; 37335; 37473-74; 37796-97], would be made by the Soviet Union and the Warsaw Pact countries, which were expected to reduce their total arsenal by as much as 40 per cent.
Reports on Nov. 12 said that US officials had confirmed that the final percentage of Warsaw Pact weapons cuts would have been higher had it not been for the removal of large numbers of Soviet tanks and other heavy arms across the Ural Mountains to areas where they were not covered by the Treaty provisions.
The Treaty also permitted "declared site inspections" (i.e. of sites where treaty-limited weapons were declared to be held), and some "challenge inspections" , especially in the first 120 days, although inspections would continue after that period.
The joint declaration, finalized in Vienna on Nov. 14, affirmed that its signatories "are no longer adversaries" and that "none of their weapons will ever be used except in self-defence" .
It also welcomed "the prospect" of new negotiations on the reduction of short-term nuclear forces in Europe and underlined the importance of an early agreement on the US "Open Skies" project [see pp. 37201; 37267; 37393; 37466].
Announcement of imminent dissolution of Warsaw Pact
Hungarian Prime Minister Jozsef Antall told delegates at the summit that the six members of the Warsaw Pact had agreed to dissolve the alliance by the beginning of 1992.
In his speech on Nov. 20, Antall said that the signing of the CFE Treaty had dealt a "mortal blow" to the Pact's existence.
Supporting Antall, the Czechoslovak President Vaclav Havel described the Warsaw Pact as "a remnant of the past" and "a typical product of Stalinist expansionism" .
Adoption of the Charter of Paris
At their final session on Nov. 21, summit leaders formally inaugurated a "new era of democracy, peace and unity in Europe" by signing the Charter of Paris for a New Europe.
It declared that "the era of confrontation and division of Europe has ended" and that henceforth signatories would conduct their relations with one another on the basis of "respect and co-operation" .
The 20-page Charter of Paris was divided into three sections.
1.
Ten principles based on the Helsinki Final Act of 1975 which sought, among other things, to "build, consolidate and strengthen democracy as the only system of government" ; to recognize "human rights [as]the birthright of all human beings" ; to uphold "free and fair elections" ; to affirm the right of all individuals to "freedom of thought" and to ownership of property; to protect "the ethnic, cultural, linguistic and religious identity of national minorities" and to develop "market economies" .
2.
Guidelines for the future, including a meeting on national minorities scheduled for July 1-19, 1991; negotiations on Confidence- and Security-Building Measures (CSBM) in Europe [see p. 36539]to be concluded no later than a follow-up summit meeting of the CSCE scheduled for 1992; and the earliest possible conclusion of a comprehensive ban on chemical weapons.
3.
New Structures and Institutions, including the creation of a secretariat in Prague to schedule bi-annual meetings of heads of state and government, beginning with a meeting in Helsinki in 1992, and to co-ordinate regular, preferably annual, meetings of a Council of Foreign Ministers (the first to take place in Berlin).
This section also provided for the creation of a Conflict Prevention Centre in Vienna and an Office for Free Elections in Warsaw.
Agreement and signing of transatlantic declarations on EC-Canada relations
On Nov. 23 the Italian Prime Minister, Giulio Andreotti, then president of the European Communities (EC), and the Canadian Prime Minister, Brian Mulroney, signed a declaration in Rome which set relations between the two parties on a quasi-treaty footing providing for regular summit meetings and top-level ministerial consultations.
A similar declaration was to have been signed between the EC and the USa at the Paris summit but foundered on disagreements between the two parties, especially on the issue of including a commitment to resolve the deadlock on the General Agreement on Tariffs and Trade (GATT)[see p. 37796].
On Nov. 12 the French Foreign Minister, Roland Dumas told a meeting of EC Foreign Ministers in Brussels that references to GATT had "no place in a declaration which focuses essentially on the future" .
On Nov. 21 it was reported that a compromise had been reached between the EC and the USA after most of the contentious issues had been removed or papered over.
October Foreign Ministers' meeting
Agreement on the guiding principles of the Charter of Paris and on some of its institutions had been reached earlier at a meeting in New York of CSCE Foreign Ministers on Oct. 1-3.
Among the structures which received attention at that meeting but which failed to be included in the final Charter was the creation of a pan-European Assembly.
EUROPE
UNITED KINGDOM
Replacement of Thatcher by Major as Prime Minister
Disarray within the Conservative Party and the government, particularly over European policy, provoked the resignation on Nov. 1 of Deputy Prime Minister Sir Geoffrey Howe.
A crisis then unfolded involving a challenge to the leadership of Margaret Thatcher.
By the end of November John Major had succeeded her as leader of the Conservative Party, a post she had held for nearly 16 years, and as Prime Minister, an office she had held since 1979.
On Oct. 8 the United Kingdom had entered the exchange rate mechanism (ERM) of the European monetary system of the European Communities (EC), but at the subsequent European Council meeting in Rome Thatcher had been isolated in her opposition to an early move towards the second stage of economic and monetary union (EMU) and in the strength of her determination to hold out against the possible ultimate introduction of a single European currency [see pp. 37782-73].
Resignation of Howe
The crisis was triggered on Nov. 1 by the resignation of Sir Geoffrey Howe, Deputy Prime Minister, Lord President of the Council and Leader of the House of Commons since July 1989 [see p. 36819]and the only remaining member of Thatcher's original 1979 Cabinet apart from the Prime Minister herself.
Among consequential appointments on Nov. 2 was the entry into the Cabinet of William Waldegrave as Secretary of State for Health.
In his resignation letter, Sir Geoffrey noted the growing difference which had emerged between himself and the Prime Minister on the increasingly important issue of Britain's role in Europe, and especially on monetary policy, and stated that he now felt that he could no longer serve with honour as a member of her government.
In a sharply critical personal statement in the House of Commons on Nov. 13 he said that the so-called Madrid conditions for UK entry into the ERM, agreed by the European Council in June 1989 [see pp. 36740-41], had come into existence only after he and the then Chancellor of the Exchequer, Nigel Lawson, had made it clear that they could not continue in office unless a specific commitment to join the ERM was made, and he accused the Prime Minister of increasingly risking leading herself and others astray in matters of substance as well as of style.
Emergence of leadership issue
Conservative Party rules, first drawn up in 1965 but partially modified in 1974-75 [see pp. 26989-91], provided for the possibility of an annual election for the leadership of the party.
The only challenge to Thatcher since she first became leader in February 1975 had been in 1989, when she had received the support of 314 of the then 374 Conservative MPs (who formed the electorate) against 33 for Sir Anthony Meyer, with 24 ballot papers being spoiled and three MPs not participating [see p. 37134].
On Nov. 3 Michael Heseltine, who had resigned as Secretary of State for Defence in January 1986 over the Westland affair and in particular the anticipated consequences for intra-European co-operation [see pp. 34192-96], sent an open letter to his Conservative Association chairman containing a severe attack on Thatcher's policies and style.
On Nov. 6 (when details of and the timetable for the party leadership election were announced) he repeated, however, his oft-repeated formulation that he could foresee no circumstances in which he would stand against Thatcher for the leadership.
In two by-elections held in Bradford North and in Bootle on Nov. 8 the Labour Party increased its share of the vote, with the Conservative candidate in Bradford being forced into third place behind the Liberal Democrat.
However, in her speech at the Lord Mayor's banquet in London on Nov. 12 Thatcher made a spirited defence of her own record and expressed her determination to defeat any opponents.
The leadership contest
Following Howe's personal statement on Nov. 13, Heseltine on the following day abandoned his earlier position that he would not stand against Thatcher, claiming that he was best placed to win back former Conservative voters, that he had the better prospect of leading the Conservative Party to a fourth successive general election victory and so of preventing "the ultimate catastrophe of a Labour victory in a general election" , and that he had already received the committed support of 100 MPs.
He also indicated that a principal item of his policy platform would be a review of the community charge (poll tax) which had been introduced in England and Wales from April 1990 and which was widely unpopular [see p. 37329].
By the closing date for nominations for the leadership contest of Nov. 15 only Thatcher and Heseltine had been nominated.
In the first round on Nov. 20 Thatcher received 204 votes against 152 for Heseltine, with 16 abstentions or spoiled papers from the 372 Conservative MPs now forming the electoral college.
(Since the last leadership contest in December 1989 the Conservatives had lost two by-elections: at Mid-Staffordshire in March 1990 to Labour and at Eastbourne in October to the Liberal Democrats — see pp. 37328-29; 37784.)
However, although she had an absolute majority of the MPs entitled to participate, she failed by four votes to register in addition the required 15 per cent margin (56 votes) over Heseltine, and a second ballot was necessary.
When the results of the first ballot were announced Thatcher was in Paris attending meetings for the signature of the Treaty on Conventional Armed Forces in Europe and of the Charter of Paris for a New Europe [see pp. 37838-39].
She emerged immediately and dramatically to announce that she would be continuing with the contest with the aim of winning on the second ballot.
After returning to London she again on Nov. 21 declared that she would fight on, and (as for the first round) secured nomination and seconding by Douglas Hurd and John Major (Foreign and Commonwealth Secretary and Chancellor of the Exchequer respectively).
On the following day, however, after lengthy discussions with Cabinet and other colleagues, she announced that she was withdrawing and that she would accordingly resign as Prime Minister once the new party leader had been elected.
Both Major and Hurd were then immediately nominated as candidates for the second round, while Heseltine was also renominated.
In the second ballot on Nov. 27, in which all 372 Conservative MPs voted, Major received 185 votes, Heseltine 131 and Hurd 56.
Major was thus two votes short of a straight overall majority of those entitled to vote, which the election rules stipulated as the requirement for the election of a candidate on the second ballot.
As soon as the result was announced, however, Heseltine and then Hurd conceded to Major, and despite some initial confusion as to the correct procedure it was decided not to proceed to a third ballot in which a preference system of voting would have obtained.
Appointment of Major as Prime Minister
On Nov. 28 Thatcher presented her resignation to the Queen, and later that morning Major was formally appointed as Prime Minister.
John Major, 47, after a successful career in banking, and briefly as a local councillor in the London borough of Lambeth, was elected to Parliament for Huntingdon in 1979.
Between 1983 and 1987 he served successively in the government whips' office and at the Department of Health and Social Security, entering the Cabinet in the latter year as Chief Secretary to the Treasury [see pp. 35271-72]; after briefly holding the post of Foreign and Commonwealth Secretary in mid-1989 [see p. 36819], he became Chancellor of the Exchequer in October 1989 following the sudden resignation of Lawson [see pp. 36982-83].
He was the youngest person to be appointed Prime Minister since the Earl of Rosebery in 1894.
During the party leadership contest much emphasis had been placed in the media on the fact that Major had not had the advantage of a privileged home background or education, that his father had once been a trapeze artist, that his family had lived in a flat in Brixton in South London, and that he had left school at 16 and been unemployed for some time.
On Nov. 29 the new Prime Minister carried out a large-scale reorganization of the (now all-male) Cabinet, retaining Hurd as Foreign and Commonwealth Secretary and appointing Norman Lamont as Chancellor of the Exchequer, while Heseltine became Environment Secretary (a post which he had held under Thatcher in 1979-83) and two ministers entered the Cabinet for the first time: Ian Lang and David Mellor.
A number of other changes were also made.
Those leaving the Cabinet, besides Thatcher, were Cecil Parkinson, who indicated that he intended to retire from Parliament at the next general election, and Lord Belstead who was appointed to a non-Cabinet post.
[For Cabinet list as of June 1990 see p. 37582; for July replacement of Nicholas Ridley by Peter Lilley as Trade and Industry Secretary see p. 37623.]
*John Major Prime Minister, First Lord of the Treasury, Minister for the Civil Service Lord Mackay of Clashfern Lord Chancellor Douglas Hurd Secretary of State for Foreign and Commonwealth Affairs *Lord Waddington Lord Privy Seal and Leader of the House of Lords **John MacGregor Lord President of the Council and Leader of the House of Commons *Norman Lamont Chancellor of the Exchequer *Kenneth Baker Home Secretary Tom King Secretary of State for Defence **Kenneth Clarke Secretary of State for Education and Science *Malcolm Rifkind Secretary of State for Transport John Wakeham Secretary of State for Energy Antony Newton Secretary of State for Social Security *Chris Patten Chancellor of the Duchy of Lancaster (and chairman of the Conservative Party) Peter Brooke Secretary of State for Northern Ireland John Gummer Minister of Agriculture, Fisheries and Food Michael Howard Secretary of State for Employment David Hunt Secretary of State for Wales Peter Lilley Secretary of State for Trade and Industry **William Waldegrave Secretary of State for Health *Michael Heseltine Secretary of State for the Environment *Ian Lang Secretary of State for Scotland *David Mellor Chief Secretary to the Treasury *Appointed on Nov. 29. **Appointed on Nov. 2.
United Kingdom Cabinet
Upon the election of Major as Conservative Party leader and his appointment as Prime Minister, the popularity of the Conservative Party as measured in public opinion polls registered a sharp increase.
In parliamentary by-elections on Nov. 29 in the two Paisley constituencies in Scotland, Labour held both seats with sharply reduced majorities; the Conservative share of the poll fell only marginally, although the Scottish National Party candidates moved from fourth to second place in each case (and the Liberal Democrats fell to fourth place).
EUROPE
POLAND
First round of presidential elections
Results of Polish presidential elections, first round
Votes Percentage
Lech Walesa 6,569,889 39.96
Stanislaw Tyminski 3,797,605 23.10
Tadeusz Mazowiecki 2,973,264 18.08
Wlodzimierz Cimoszewicz 1,514,025 9.21
Roman Bartoszcze 1,176,175 7.15
Leszek Moczulski 411,516 2.50
As widely expected, Lech Walesa, the leader of the Solidarity trade union and the country's most prominent opposition figure in the 1980s, gained a majority of the vote in the first direct presidential elections held in Poland, on Nov. 25.
The unexpected element in the result, however, was that second place went not to Prime Minister Tadeusz Mazowiecki but to Stanislaw Tyminski, an emigré businessman who had no previous political experience and was virtually unknown until the last weeks of the campaign.
Official results released on Nov. 27 showed that Walesa had gained 39.96 per cent of the vote, Tyminski 23.10 per cent and Mazowiecki 18.08 per cent; three other candidates gained 18.86 per cent between them (see table).
Since none of the candidates obtained an overall majority, Walesa (who had fallen well short of his objective of outright victory in the first round) and Tyminski would contest a run-off for the presidency on Dec. 9.
The elections had been called in early October [see p. 37724]after President Wojciech Jaruzelski, the last remaining communist head of state in eastern Europe except for that of Albania, had agreed to resign just over a year into his six-year term and to transfer power to a freely elected head of state.
There was a relatively low turnout of just over 60 per cent.
Analysts interpreted the outcome as indicative of widespread disenchantment with the economic reform programme of the Mazowiecki government, launched in January and the most far-reaching in Eastern Europe to date [see p. 37194], which had precipitated a sharp rise in unemployment and a fall in living standards.
Another factor was thought to be disillusionment with the country's political leaders, with the internal rivalry between the two wings of Solidarity, as represented by Walesa and Mazowiecki, and with the acrimonious tone of a campaign which became increasingly personalized.
Candidates and programmes
The six candidates who contested the presidential elections were (i) Roman Bartoszcze, aged 44, chair of the Polish Peasants Party (PSL);(ii) Wlodzimierz Cimoszewicz, aged 40, the chair of the left-wing caucus in parliament and former member of the communist Polish United Workers' Party (PUWP);(iii) Tadeusz Mazowiecki, aged 63, Prime Minister since August 1989, endorsed by the centre-left Citizens' Movement for Democratic Action (ROAD);(iv) Leszek Moczulski, aged 40, chair of the right-wing Confederation for an Independent Poland (KPN);(v) Stanislaw Tyminski, aged 42, an independent backed by the small right-wing Libertarian Party of Canada, of which he was leader; and (vi) Lech Walesa, aged 47, the chairman of the Solidarity trade union.
While Walesa endorsed the government's reform programme in principle, he argued that it should be accelerated to avert social unrest.
He argued that he, as President, would be best placed to "complete the task" of establishing a market economy and a democratic political system in Poland.
He accused the government of not removing former communists from positions of power in industry and government.
In turn Mazowiecki argued that the reforms should be continued at a cautious pace which would minimize damage to the social and economic fabric.
Reflecting the deep split within Solidarity, the Mazowiecki camp also accused Walesa of autocratic tendencies, contradictory demagogy and a lack of clear policies.
[For biographical information on Mazowiecki see p. 36839.]
Emerging as the main beneficiary of the division within Solidarity, Tyminski had at first been considered a rank outsider and was thus largely ignored by the media and other candidates, but began to attract support with claims that he was untarnished by past politics and that as a self-made millionaire he had the economic acumen to transform the Polish economy.
He spoke of building a "democracy of money" and of achieving improvements "within a month" .
He harshly criticized the government, accusing it of "treasonous" mismanagement of the economy by selling off national property to foreigners at cut-rate prices in its bid to privatize state-owned companies.
(State prosecutors initiated an investigation as to whether this charge constituted slander.)
As Tyminski's showing in opinion polls improved dramatically, doubts were raised regarding his credentials and background, his qualifications, his multiple citizenships, his business dealings, his leadership of the fringe Libertarian Party of Canada, and even his mental stability.
It appeared that Tyminski had left Poland penniless in 1969, travelling first to Sweden and then to Canada, where he built up a business empire centred on a computer automation firm.
He also had business interests in Peru, including a cable television station based in the Amazon region, and held Peruvian and Canadian as well as Polish citizenship.
He returned to Poland in August 1990 to finance his own campaign, but many questions about his background and his backers remained unanswered.
Exit-poll findings and election returns showed that Tyminski had been most successful in the countryside and small towns, where the benefits of the economic reforms had so far been negligible, and among young people waiting for housing and workers concerned about their jobs.
The leading newspaper Gazeta Wyborcza commented that these groups constituted a "second Poland" which had found "no place for themselves" in the Poland run by Solidarity.
Reactions to poll outcome — Resignation of government
After calling an extraordinary Cabinet meeting as the extent of his defeat became clear, Mazowiecki announced the resignation of his government.
He declared on television that "Poland's painful but necessary programme of getting out of economic catastrophe can only be realized with the understanding of the majority of the nation" and that "the country had made its choice" .
On Nov. 29 parliament decided that it would not debate the resignation, thus formally keeping the government in power, effectively in a caretaker capacity until the election of the new President.
While not naming the other candidates, Mazowiecki in his resignation speech criticized the "many promises made without backing" and the "many strong, often demagogical accusations" made against the government.
The Mazowiecki election committee blamed Walesa for precipitating "a war at the top" , which had disrupted Poland's smooth passage to democracy, but commented that the election of Tyminski would be a "tragedy" .
Walesa described Tyminski's success as "an accident of Polish democracy" and claimed that he did not know enough about Poland to govern the country.
Tyminski in turn declared: "I will win these elections…
I am not afraid of Walesa, I am not afraid of anyone."
Resignation of ministers — Replacement of OKP parliamentary leader — Strikes
In developments related to the presidential election, two ministers resigned from the government in the weeks leading up to the vote; the leader of the Solidarity parliamentary group, the Citizens' Parliamentary Faction (OKP), Bronislaw Geremek, was replaced by Mieczyslaw Gil; and, reflecting workers' disenchantment with economic conditions, transport workers and miners staged several strikes.
Aleksander Hall, Minister without Portfolio, responsible for co-operation with political organizations and political parties, resigned on Oct. 11 to join the Mazowiecki campaign team; his successor was Jerzy Ciemniewski.
A Minister of State, Piotr Nowina-Konopka, submitted his resignation on Nov. 21, also expressing support for Mazowiecki.
Gemerek's resignation as OKP leader and the election of Gil on Nov. 9 reflected the internal divisions within the group between supporters of Mazowiecki (including Geremek) and those of Walesa, who was backed by Gil, although he promised to remain impartial during the election campaign.
Miners staged a two-hour strike on Nov. 5 to lend weight to their demands for pay increases and in protest against the effects of the economic reforms.
The strike, called by Solidarity, affected all but four of the country's 74 mines.
A second warning strike was called on Nov. 20.
A strike of transport workers in Krakow spread to other cities on Nov. 16.
The disputes were settled on Nov. 19 and 20.
AFRICA
GABON
Final election results — New government
Gabon's legislative elections were completed with voting in three constituencies in the south of the country on Nov. 4 and 11.
The PDG (formerly the sole ruling party) finished with 63 seats, while the largest opposition party, Morena — Bûcherons, had 20.
The November results gave the locally based Union pour la démocratie et le développement à Mayumba its first seat, bringing the number of parties represented in the new parliament to eight.
The Bûcherons candidate stood in defiance of an instruction by the party leader to boycott the elections.
Prime Minister Casimir Oye Mba tendered the resignation of his transitional government on Nov. 19; he was reappointed by President Omar Bongo two days later, and the composition of a government of national union was announced on Nov. 26, in which the PDG held about one-third of the portfolios and the five largest opposition parties were represented.
However, the key portfolios of Foreign Affairs, Territorial Administration, Defence and Finance remained unchanged.
AFRICA
NIGER
Announcement of political reforms
President Ali Saibou, under pressure from a campaign led by the trades union confederation to introduce democratic reforms, told members of the National Assembly (parliament) on Nov. 15 that a multiparty system would be introduced and a national consultative conference held once political parties had been formed.
At the same time he announced that economic austerity measures, including a freeze on public sector promotions, were to be "reconsidered" ; this had also been one of the demands of the workers' organizations.
A five-day national strike had been launched on Nov. 5, with clashes reported between police and strikers in Maradi, the country's economic capital.
AFRICA
COTE D'IVOIRE
Legislative elections
The opposition failed to make an impact on Nov. 25 in the first multiparty elections since independence in 1960, the ruling Parti démocratique de la Côte d'Ivoire (PDCI) retaining 163 of the 175 seats.
The biggest opposition party, Laurent Gbagbo 's Front populaire ivoirien (FPI), won nine seats; the Parti ivoirien travailliste (PIT) won one seat (its leader Francis Wodie being elected in Cocody, an affluent suburb of Abidjan); and two former members of the PDCI won seats standing as independents.
Of the 26 legal parties, 17 (including the PDCI) fielded candidates, but the opposition parties for the most part lacked the finance and organization to launch national campaigns, so that in more than 40 constituencies there was no opposition challenger to the PDCI.
Turnout was in the region of 30 to 35 per cent of the 4,700,000 electorate, less than had voted in October's presidential elections in which President Félix Houphouët-Boigny, Africa's longest-serving head of state, was returned for a seventh five-year term [see p. 37767].
Polling was reportedly peaceful, but opposition parties alleged voter intimidation and electoral irregularities on the part of the PDCI.
Appointment of Prime Minister
Alassane Ouattara, the author of the country's current economic recovery plan, was on Nov. 7 appointed to the newly created post of Prime Minister [see p. 37767].
He had been considered a de facto prime minister since his appointment in May 1990 as chair of an interministerial committee overseeing the economy [see p. 37445].
Under a constitutional amendment approved on Nov. 6, Article 11 (regarding the succession on the death or incapacitation of the President) was amended to provide that the Speaker of the National Assembly would succeed to the presidency until the end of the current presidential mandate.
Hitherto the provision had been for the Speaker to become interim president, with the obligation to organize elections within a period of 45-60 days.
AFRICA
GUINEA-BISSAU
Foreign asylum for politicians — Arrest of Vice-President
Vítor Saúde María, who had been Prime Minister from May 1982 until his arrest in March 1984 on conspiracy charges [see p. 32899], and who was currently mayor of the capital, Bissau, was granted political asylum in Portugal on Nov. 2 while on an official mission.
A former Armed Forces Minister, Maj. Umaru Djalo, who had served under President Luis de Almeida Cabral, who had been overthrown in 1980 by the coup bringing President Joao Bernardo Vieira to power, sought asylum at the same time.
President Vieira on Nov. 6 returned abruptly after a long period abroad, during which time he had received medical treatment and visited the United States and Taiwan.
In mid-November it was reported that the country's First Deputy Chairman of the Council of State (Vice-President) and Minister for the Armed Forces, Col. Iafai Camara, had been placed under house arrest, accused of supplying arms to Senegalese separatists.
AFRICA
ANGOLA
Progress in peace talks — Timetable for reforms
Government-UNITA talks in Portugal
Five days of negotiations at Estoril, Portugal, ended on Nov. 20 with the Angolan government and United States-backed UNITA guerrillas having agreed on 80 per cent of a ceasefire document drawn up by a Portuguese mediating team, according to the Portuguese Secretary of State for Foreign Affairs and Co-operation, José Manuel Durao Barroso.
Both sides, he said, had promised "not to backtrack" ; the Angolan government had accepted in principle UNITA's demand for political recognition, but the details of how and when this would come about remained unresolved.
Reports now suggested that a ceasefire agreement would be signed at the next round of talks, expected to take place before the end of 1990 [for fourth session, in September 1990, see p. 37702].
The government's proposed transition to multiparty politics [see below]was also discussed at Estoril, but the issue of the integration of the rival armed forces was not broached.
Lopo Fortunato Ferreira Do Nascimento, hitherto Provincial Commissioner for Huíla and a former Prime Minister, was appointed head of the Angolan government's negotiating team in mid-November.
Reforms envisaging multiparty system
Meeting in special session on Oct. 25-26, the central committee of Angola's ruling MPLA-PT endorsed a reform programme for presentation to a party congress scheduled for December 1990.
The programme's main points concerned (i) the required "readjustment" of the Marxist MPLA-PT's theoretical foundations;(ii) the "urgent" introduction of enabling measures for a multiparty system;(iii) the depoliticization of the army;(iv) revision of the Constitution; and (v) the drawing up of electoral rolls prior to the holding of a general election.
Legislation allowing political parties could be introduced in the first quarter of 1991.
This was sooner than had been expected, President José Eduardo dos Santos declaring that it was not necessary to wait for the end of the war to initiate the reforms.
A new constitution would follow one year later; elections would be held after a peace agreement had been reached with the UNITA rebels "within a timetable to be defined by experts" .
A period of three years was thought to be necessary for census-taking and drawing up electoral rolls.
Limitations to CIA aid for UNITA
The US House of Representatives, after a rare public debate on Central Intelligence Agency (CIA) funds, in mid-October rejected a proposal to cease "covert" CIA support for UNITA and to require the administration to detail the request for aid before Congress.
The funding amounted to some US$60,000,000 annually, of which about half was intended for weapons acquisition.
Representatives did approve an amendment under which the aid would be suspended once the MPLA-PT government had agreed to a cease-fire and to hold elections within two years, provided that the Soviet Union also ceased providing military aid to the MPLA-PT.
Dos Santos on Oct. 10 cancelled a visit to the USA, where he was to attend the UN General Assembly, having failed to obtain high-level meetings with US politicians, and in protest at "hostile US policy" towards his government (which remained unrecognized by the USA).
The UNITA leader Jonas Savimbi had met US President Bush on Oct. 2 in the course of a visit to the USA to lobby for the continuation of CIA aid.
Famine relief
UN relief convoys began to move humanitarian supplies to famine areas on Nov. 1 [see p. 37702 for famine relief agreement].
The UN relief plan envisaged distribution of 100,000 tonnes of food aid to some 2,000,000 people in central and southern areas.
The International Committee of the Red Cross (ICRC) had in early October launched convoys from northern Namibia destined for remote areas in the south-east and south west.
AFRICA
SOUTH AFRICA
Talks to continue
A joint ANC-government statement issued after a meeting between President F. W. de Klerk and ANC deputy president Nelson Mandela on Nov. 27 indicated that both sides were committed to peaceful negotiation, and confirmed that their dialogue was to continue.
No specific details were given, however, on how problems were to be tackled.
The inconclusive meeting had been held to discuss issues which appeared to threaten the dialogue.
These included, for the ANC, police brutality in dealing with unrest; the government for its part sought a suspension of the ANC's mass mobilization campaigns, which it regarded as a violation of the ANC's commitment to suspend the "armed struggle" .
By-election win for NP
The National Party (NP) won the seat of Randburg, near Johannesburg, in a whites-only by-election on Nov. 7.
The NP candidate obtained 10,882 votes to 1,969 for the right-wing Conservative Party (CP), whose candidate lost her deposit.
The vacancy arose because of the retirement from politics of Wynand Malan, who had won the seat in the 1989 elections for the Democratic Party; the DP did not contest the by-election.
Ecumenical conference
A change of attitude by leaders of the pro-government Dutch Reformed Church (DRC), which until 1986 was based on a theological defence for the policy of apartheid, was revealed at a national conference held on Nov. 5-9 in Rustenburg, 50 km west of Pretoria, of over 80 Christian churches and religious organizations.
On Nov. 7 the newly elected Moderator of the Dutch Reformed Church, Pieter Potgieter, confessed his church's guilt at the role it had played in establishing apartheid and said that it now considered that policy to be wrong.
A DRC theologian had caused a sensation the previous day by openly confessing to a sense of sin and guilt over the church's support for apartheid.
The DRC, still closely associated with the National Party, nevertheless dissociated itself from parts of the final declaration of the conference, which called for "unequivocal rejection" of apartheid, and for a "democratic elective process based on one person, one vote" .
Harms report
A Supreme Court judge, Justice Louis Harms, on Nov. 13 published his report into the activities of Army and police counterinsurgency units.
His one-man commission had been appointed in January 1990 [see p. 37234].
The Commission investigated allegations of the activities of "death squads" but found that there was no evidence to support allegations that the police operated such squads, and no concrete evidence to implicate the Army's now-disbanded Civil Co-operation Bureau (CCB) in the assassination of a number of anti-apartheid campaigners in mysterious circumstances.
The report was, however, critical of the CCB, stating that there were strong suspicions that its operatives had been involved in "more crimes of violence than the evidence shows" .
The evidence of Dirk Coetzee, Almond Nofomela and David Tshikalanga, former police officers who had testified to the existence of police hit squads [see also p. 37033], was dismissed as being unreliable.
No further light was shed in particular on the deaths of activists David Webster and Anton Lubowski in May and September 1989 [see pp. 36647; 36885].
De Klerk's response to the Harms report was effectively to exonerate Defence Minister Gen. Magnus Malan (held by the Harms report to be "politically responsible" for the existence of the CCB) from all responsibility for the activities of the discredited CCB, declaring that the report's findings belonged to a past era, and there was "no reason to condemn the politicians in charge for the way in which they carried out their duties" .
Release in Zimbabwe of South African spy
Odile Harrington, a South African convicted and imprisoned as a spy in Zimbabwe in 1987 [p. 35629], was released and returned to South Africa on Nov. 2, apparently at the request of the ANC, and was greeted by de Klerk on her arrival.
The release appeared to confirm speculation that South African agents imprisoned in neighbouring countries, including Zimbabwe and Botswana, were to be involved in the amnesty and repatriation process currently being negotiated by the ANC and the South African government.
On Nov. 1 the report of the ANC/government working group on indemnity for exiles and the release of political prisoners was published.
Justice Minister Kobie Coetsee announced that the government was ready to move ahead with the implementation of the agreement [see p. 37765]; the rate at which this would happen was, however, dependent on the ANC's promise to suspend its armed struggle "and related activities" .
While he estimated that up to 600 prisoners might apply for release, the ANC maintained that the number was over 3,000.
AFRICA
LESOTHO
Swearing-in of new King
The forced abdication of King Moshoeshoe II by the ruling Military Council was effectively completed with the swearing-in on Nov. 12 of his 27-year-old eldest son, Prince Mohato Bereng Seeisa, as King Letsie III.
The Prince had earlier been declared King by an assembly of 22 traditional chiefs.
Maj.-Gen.
Justin Lekhanya, chairman of the six-member Military Council, announced on Nov. 6 that the exiled King had been dethroned, on the grounds that while abroad he had sought to undermine the government, and had attached "unacceptable conditions" to his return home.
These included the dissolution of the present government and constituent assembly.
Lekhanya had come to power in 1986 after a South African-backed coup, and initially restored nominal legislative and executive powers to the King [see pp. 34786-89].
The two men clashed, however, notably over constitutional matters and over Moshoeshoe's wish to enter into dialogue with South African liberation movements on issues affecting Lesotho.
AFRICA
SOUTH AFRICA-HOMELANDS
Coup attempt in Transkei
Maj.-Gen Bantu Holomisa, the leader of the ruling Military Council in the nominally independent Transkei homeland (whose independence was not internationally recognized), accused South Africa of being behind an attempt to remove him from power on Nov. 22.
Eleven dissident soldiers and seven Transkei government troops were killed in an attack on the main Army base and later in fighting for control of government offices in the homeland capital, Umtata.
Among the dead was the leader of the coup attempt, Holomisa's former second-in-command Col. Craig Duli; he had helped Holomisa seize power in a coup in 1987 [pp 35232-33]and was a former military intelligence chief.
He had resigned from the Military Council in April 1989 and had subsequently been arrested and charged with illegal possession of arms and ammunition.
At the time of the coup attempt he was free on bail.
Relations between South Africa and the homeland government were strained.
Holomisa was opposed to the homelands system and in February 1990 had promised to hold a referendum on Transkei's possible reintegration into South Africa [see p. 37306]; he strongly supported the ANC, and had legalized the organization in Transkei in February.
Holomisa had a few days earlier claimed to have knowledge of a planned coup attempt against him, stating that members of the neo-Nazi Afrikaner Weerstandsbeweging (AWB) were involved in guerrilla training on South African territory near the Transkei border.
Afterwards he said that the South African government had been aware of Duli's intentions but had failed to warn him.
A series of heated exchanges between the two governments followed, with South African Foreign Minister R. F. "Pik" Botha accusing Holomisa of lying and the latter demanding Botha's resignation.
South Africa threatened to withdraw financial support and diplomatic recognition.
Meanwhile the ANC dismissed as "absurd" the accusation that it was plotting to kill Chief Lucas Mangope of Bophuthatswana and to overthrow his government.
Over 40 ANC activists were detained on Nov. 12 in the wake of the alleged plot's discovery, but were later released.
The action followed a one-day strike in support of, among other things, the reintegration of the homeland into South Africa, which Mangope opposed.
AFRICA
MOZAMBIQUE
New multiparty Constitution
Fifteen years of one-party rule ended formally on Nov. 30 when a new Constitution came into effect which provided for multiparty democracy and a free-market economy.
The principles of Marxist-Leninism had been state ideology until a policy change by the ruling Frelimo movement in 1989 [see p. 36804].
The process of revision had begun in 1986.
In March 1990 the proposed changes had been the subject of popular discussion, as a result of which the principle of political pluralism had been incorporated.
The National Assembly debated the draft during October, unanimously adopting the 206-article document on Nov. 2.
All references to Frelimo (hitherto the sole legal political organization) as the "leading force of the state and society" were deleted.
Basic principles (Articles 1-65).
The country's name was changed from the People's Republic to the Republic of Mozambique, described as "sovereign, unitary and democratic state of social justice" .
Sovereignty (previously vested in "the workers and peasants united and led by Frelimo" ) now resided in "the people" .
The new economic order would now be based "on appreciation of the importance of labour, on market forces, the initiative of economic agents, on the participation of all property regimes [including private property]and on the action of the state to regulate and promote economic and social growth and development" .
The state promised to "promote and support the active participation of the national business sector" .
Fundamental rights, duties and freedoms (Articles 66-106).
The Constitution considerably widened individual rights.
Among these were the freedom of association, of forming and participating in political parties, and of expression and movement.
The right to private property was established, as was the right of inheritance.
The death penalty was abolished.
The right to form trade unions and professional bodies, and the right to strike were established.
Freedom of the press encompassed "journalists' freedom of expression and of creation, access to sources of information, protection of independence and professional confidentiality, and the right to establish newspapers and other publications" .
These principles, and that of the independence of the media, were to be guaranteed by a new body, the Supreme Mass Communication Council.
Protection of citizens under the law included the right to defence counsel and legal aid, and to the principle of habeas corpus in the case of illegal imprisonment or detention.
Organs of State (Articles 117-192).
The President of the Republic was head of state and head of government; the term of office was five years, with a maximum of two consecutive terms.
The President and the Assembly of the Republic (formerly the National Assembly) were henceforth to be elected directly by universal suffrage and secret ballot.
Presidential and legislative elections were expected to take place in 1991 once legal political parties had been legally formed.
MNR response — Continuing talks
The reforms appeared to address the principal demands of the rebel Mozambique National Resistance (MNR or Renamo)— including an end to the one-party system, free elections and a market economy.
President Joaquim Chissano declared on Nov. 3 that "there is no longer any pretext for anyone to continue the violence" .
Nonetheless the rebels immediately announced their rejection of the new Constitution on the grounds that it had been adopted by a National Assembly which the MNR considered invalid.
However, the third round of talks on ending the civil war began in Rome on Nov. 10 between MNR and Frelimo representatives after a three-month lapse, and were still in session at the end of November.
The presence of Zimbabwean troops in Mozambique now appeared to be the principal obstacle to a ceasefire, with the MNR demanding their complete withdrawal as a precondition for any such agreement.
AFRICA
TANZANIA
New government
Following the October general election, John Malecela, a former high commissioner to the United Kingdom, was appointed Prime Minister on Nov. 8, replacing Joseph Warioba, who had hitherto been considered an eventual successor to President Ali Hassan Mwinyi.
A new Council of Ministers was sworn in on Nov. 10, composed largely of members of the previous Cabinet reappointed to new or restructured portfolios.
Ali Hassan Diria was appointed Minister of Foreign Affairs, exchanging portfolios with Benjamin Mkapa, who thus moved to Information and Broadcasting.
Augustine Lyatonga Mrema, a newcomer to the Cabinet, was appointed Minister of the Interior.
Warioba took charge of Regional Administration and Local Government.
AFRICA
ZAMBIA
Cabinet reshuffle
Gen. Benjamin Mibenge was named on Nov. 1 as Minister of Foreign Affairs, replacing Luke Mwananshiku who was seconded to the International Monetary Fund (IMF) in Washington.
At the same time Mavis Muyunda was moved from Health to the Ministry of Water, Lands and Natural Resources and was replaced by her deputy, Jeremiah Chijikwa.
The Minister of State for Decentralization, Michael Sata, was dismissed for criticizing government policy.
He was believed to be a supporter of the Movement for Multiparty Democracy (MMD) which campaigned for political reform.
AFRICA
ZAIRE
US aid cut-off — Multiparty legislation
The United States Congress in early November voted to end military aid worth US$4,000,000 to the regime of President Mobutu Sese Seko, a long-standing US ally, and ruled that $40,000,000 in economic aid must be channelled through humanitarian agencies which had no connection with the Zaïrean government.
The action, taken against the wishes of the Bush administration, followed reports of violation of human rights in Zaïre and the questioning of how Mobutu's personal fortune had been accumulated.
Legislation providing for the organization and functioning of parties was adopted on Nov. 23, after Mobutu's October announcement that he would allow a full multiparty system to operate.
In April he had stated that only two parties other than the ruling MPR would be legalized [see p. 37445].
AFRICA
DJIBOUTI
Cabinet reshuffle
A Cabinet reshuffle announced on Nov. 25 involved 10 of the existing ministers and the appointment of one new minister.
Five ministers retained their posts.
Ougure Hassan Ibrahim Justice and Religious Affairs Ismail Ali Youssouf National Defence Moussa Bouraleh Robleh Finance and National Economy Ahmed Aden Youssouf Ports and Shipping Ahmed Ibrahim Abdi Trade, Transport and Tourism Omar Chirdon Abass Education Mohammed Djama Elabe Health Elaf Orbis Ali Labour Souleiman Farah Lodon Civil Service and Administrative Reform Hussein Barkad Siraj Youth, Sports and Culture *Ibrahim Idris Mohamed Public Works, Construction and Housing *New appointment
Reshuffled ministries
AFRICA
SOMALIA
Cabinet changes — New Army commander
President Mohammed Siyad Barre named his son-in-law, Brig. -Gen.
Mohammed Siyad Hersi Morgan, as the new Defence Minister on Nov. 15, moving Husayn Abd al-Rahman Matan to the Justice and Religious Affairs portfolios while Abdullahi Ossobleh Siyad took over Works and Public Housing.
This was the third Cabinet change since September [see pp. 37702-03]and was thought to reflect growing tensions within the government as it tried to cope with military setbacks in the current civil war, an economic crisis and mounting social unrest, especially in the capital Mogadishu [see pp. 37767-68].
Barre was also reported to have named Morgan as the new C.-in-C. of the Somali National Army on Nov. 20 in place of his son, Brig. -Gen.
Maslah Mohammed Barre.
Killing of Red Cross workers
Abdullahi Mahmoud Mohamed, the secretary of the Somali Red Crescent Society, was reported to have been murdered on Nov. 16.
His killers were unknown.
His death followed that of Peter Altweg, a Swiss national and an official of the International Committee of the Red Cross (ICRC) killed in a Somali National Movement (SNM) guerrilla ambush near the north-western town of Hargeisa on Oct. 7.
Altweg's Swiss colleague Antonella Notari, taken captive with Sahra Ahmed Jama and Hassan Arab of the Somali Red Crescent Society, had been released on Oct. 11.
The SNM stated that the relief workers had been riding on a government military lorry; such lorries were subject to routine attack and they appealed to relief agencies to be "independent" in performing their duties.
AFRICA
SUDAN
Unrest — Disputed coup reports — Human rights
The regime of Lt.-Gen.
Omar Hassan Ahmad al-Bashir took steps in mid-November to crush internal opposition based around the labour movement.
Some reports suggested that it had survived what was described as the fourth attempted coup since Bashir took power from the government of Sadiq el-Mahdi in June 1989 [see p. 36728].
The regime, however, sought to play down the unrest and on Nov. 26 the Sudanese ambassador to Egypt denied that there had been a coup attempt, asserting that the situation was stable.
(By contrast, in April 1990 some journalists had questioned the regime's claim of an alleged attempted coup, dismissing it as a pretext for action against suspected opponents — see p. 37367.)
The November unrest, against a background of continuing civil war and the growing threat of famine, involved strike action, notably by railway workers, and protests at Khartoum university.
Among those detained in a wave of arrests, according to reports on Nov. 13, were three former ministers in the Mahdi government [see p. 36418], Salah Abd al-Salam al-Khalifa, Omar Nour el-Daim and Bakri Ahmed Adil, all of them members of the Umma party whose fundamentalist wing was still represented in the Bashir regime.
Sudan had suffered increased isolation internationally owing to its pro-Iraq stance over the Gulf crisis.
This policy was associated with the radical Arab nationalism of the middle-ranking military officers who had carried out the June 1989 coup.
The Middle East Economic Digest of Nov. 23, however, referred to a clear division between this group and the civilian and fundamentalist National Islamic Front (NIF).
The NIF, generally seen as the effective power behind Bashir's internal policies, was the inspiration for the continuing Islamization drive, which stood in the way of any prospect of a solution in the long-running civil war.
The activities of the NIF-dominated "parallel" security apparatus were a particular source of concern to human rights monitoring groups, two of which, Amnesty International and Africa Watch, drew attention in November to the "permanent crisis" of human rights in Sudan and the prevalence of torture and detention without trial.
Reports of instability in Khartoum (where grain rationing had been introduced in September) were fuelled by rumours in early November that Western diplomats were advising their nationals to leave the country.
Foreign aid workers were increasingly concerned over the government's apparent insistence on downplaying the scale of the threatening famine [see this page].
Meanwhile reports emerged of the destruction in late October of a refugee camp by government forces at Hilat Shouk on the outskirts of Khartoum.
Makeshift dwellings were bulldozed and some 30,000 occupants were taken away by lorry and left at a site at Jebel Awliya some 60 km further south.
The government had since early 1990 been discussing with non-governmental relief organizations the relocation of 23 camps around Khartoum, blaming their occupants (mainly refugees from the war-torn south) for the capital's rising crime rate.
The sudden move against Hilat Shouk, however, was widely ascribed to fear of spreading food riots.
NORTH AFRICA
ETHIOPIA
Departure of Ethiopian Jews to Israel
About 600 Ethiopian Jews (known as "Falashas" — a name they themselves rejected) were allowed to leave the country for Israel in November.
Ethiopian Jews had been airlifted to Israel in late 1984 and early 1985 [see p. 33385].
When the Ethiopian government stopped the operation, many family members were thereby left separated from one another.
Some who had gone to Israel had been involved in protests from July 1985 onwards against the ruling of the Chief Rabbinate that they should undertake a "formal" conversion to Judaism [see p. 34008].
AFRICA
HORN OF AFRICA
Threat of famine
The Ethiopian government and the Eritrean People's Liberation Front (EPLF) guerrillas, responding to an Oct. 4 request from 30 international aid agencies, reportedly reached an agreement on Nov. 23 to open up the Red Sea port of Massawa to UN relief vessels.
The port, captured by the EPLF in February 1990 and subjected since then to air attack by government forces, had been closed to relief efforts since July.
The opening of Massawa was designed to allow in urgent food aid supplies, with more than 4,000,000 people threatened by starvation in the country's worst famine-affected areas in Tigray and Wollo provinces.
In addition it was expected to increase the supply of emergency food aid passing across the Ethiopian border into Sudan, to regions facing a severe threat of mass starvation, and to refugees camps around the Sudanese capital, Khartoum, where refugee numbers were swollen by the influx from drought-ridden and war-torn rural areas.
International relief organizations had warned in early October that large areas of Sudan, Ethiopia and northern Somalia faced severe food shortages.
They predicted that, without urgent action by Western governments and aid agencies, there would be a repetition of the famine of 1982-5 which claimed up to 1,000,000 victims [see pp. 32239-40; 33017; 33382-84; 34471-72].
The United Kingdom-based Save the Children Fund estimated that 10,000,000 people faced starvation and that Sudan and Ethiopia each required 1,000,000 to 1,500,000 tonnes of food immediately to avert a catastrophe.
Hundreds of thousands of people were reported to be on the move throughout October and November in search of food.
Satellite photographs of both Sudan and Ethiopia confirmed that November's harvest prospects were minimal following the failure of rains for the second year running.
Ongoing civil wars in both countries were expected to hamper the distribution of food.
Aid donors had recently taken a tough stance in particular with the Sudanese government for preventing relief aircraft from reaching areas in the largely Christian south, where the civil war against the Sudanese People's Liberation Army (SPLA) was at its height; the Sudanese had claimed that such relief was being used to aid the rebels.
The United States government stated on Oct. 5 that it was halting a commercial wheat shipment to Sudan until the distribution system was improved.
Despite official US State Department denials that food aid would be used as a political weapon, it was felt that Sudan's pro-Iraqi stance in the current Gulf crisis (unlike Ethiopia which supported the US-led blockade of the Gulf) had made Western governments more reluctant to offer unconditional aid to Sudan.
The Sudanese government, after weeks of insisting that reports of imminent famine were "baseless" , had asked potential donor countries on Oct. 25 for 75,000 tonnes of grain as a standby until an evaluation of the harvest gave it a clearer idea of the extent of the food shortage.
The UN World Food Programme, approached by the Sudanese a week earlier, had reportedly already delivered 19,000 tonnes.
In early November the Sudanese government forcibly closed the Christian Heilat Shouk refugee camp and moved its occupants to an area 30 km outside Khartoum.
AMERICAS
UNITED STATES
Mid-term elections
In the mid-term elections on Nov. 6, the Democrats improved their majorities in both houses of Congress, making a net gain of one seat in the Senate and of eight seats in the House of Representatives.
In the 36 gubernatorial contests the Democrats won 19, the Republicans 14 and independents two.
A run-off election was scheduled to decide the gubernatorial contest in Arizona as no single candidate received more than 50 per cent of the vote.
The party strengths in the 102nd Congress, due to convene on Jan. 3, 1991, are given below, as is the distribution of governorships.
Democrats Republicans Other Undecided Senate 56 (55) 44 (45)— House 267 (258) 167 (175) 1 (-)— * Governors 28 (29) 19 (21) 2 (-) 1 *Two seats were vacant prior to election.
Figures in parentheses give seat distribution in old congress.
1990 election results
The outcome of the elections was something of a personal reverse for President George Bush, whose popularity rating had plummeted following what was perceived as his indecisiveness in the recent budget crisis and the abandonment of his pledge not to raise taxes.
Of the 22 Republican candidates on whose behalf the President made personal campaign appearances, only seven were elected.
Although more women than ever ran for office, there was no net change in the level of female representation.
In 1991 women would hold three governorships, two Senate seats and 29 seats in the House.
Voter turnout was around 35 per cent, compared with 38 per cent in the mid-term elections in 1986.
Poll studies showed that electoral apathy was particularly prevalent amongst the very young, with less than 15 per cent of the 18-21 age group voting compared with 22 per cent in 1988.
Senate
Of the 35 Senate seats contested, 18 were won by the Democrats and 17 by the Republicans.
The only incumbent to lose his seat was Senator Rudy Boschwitz of Minnesota who was narrowly defeated by the left-of-centre Democrat Paul Wellstone, a co-chairman of Jesse Jackson 's 1988 presidential campaign.
In one of the country's most negative and vicious campaigns Jesse Helms, the conservative Republican senator from North Carolina, defeated a challenge from the former mayor of Charlotte, Harvey Gantt, by 53 per cent of the vote to 47 per cent.
Gantt had appeared a strong contender according to opinion poll returns, but the result strengthened the belief that such polls could overstate actual support among white voters for a black candidate.
Senator Bill Bradley, of New Jersey, a possible Democratic candidate for the 1992 presidential elections, only narrowly secured re-election against Christine Todd, his little-known and underfinanced Republican challenger.
House of Representatives
In the House of Representatives all 435 seats were open to contest.
Democrats Republicans Independent Alabama 5 (5) 2 (2)— Alaska —(-) 1 (1)— Arizona 1 (1) 4 (4)— Arkansas 3(2) 1(2) — California 26(27) 19(18) — Colorado 3(3) 3(3) — Connecticut 3 (3) 3 (3)— Delaware 1 (1)—(-)— Florida 9 (8) 10 (11)— Georgia 9 (9) 1 (1)— Hawaii 2 (1)—(1)— Idaho 2 (1)—(1)— Illinois 15 (14) 7 (8)— Indiana 8 (7) 2 (3)— Iowa 2 (2) 4 (4)— Kansas 2 (2) 3 (3)— Kentucky 4 (4) 3 (3)— Louisiana 4 (4) 4 (4)— Maine 1 (1) 1 (1)— Maryland 5 (6) 3 (2)— Massachusetts 10 (10) 1 (1)— Michigan 11 (11) 7 (7)— Minnesota 6 (5) 2 (3)— Mississippi 5 (5)—(-)— Missouri 6 (5) 3(4) — Montana 1 (1) 1 (1)— Nebraska 1 (1) 2 (2)— Nevada 1 (1) 1(1) — New Hampshire 1 (-) 1 (2)— New Jersey 8 (7) 6 (6)— New Mexico 1 (1) 2 (2)— New York 21 (21) 13 (12)— North Carolina 7 (8) 4 (3)— North Dakota 1 (1)—(-)— Ohio 11 (11) 10 (10)— Oklahoma 4 (4) 2 (2)— Oregon 4 (3) 1 (2)— Pennsylvania 11 (12) 12 (11)— Rhode Island 1 (-) 1 (2)— South Carolina 4 (4) 2 (2)— South Dakota 1 (1)—(-)— Tennessee 6 (6) 3 (3)— Texas 19 (19) 8 (8)— Utah 2 (1) 1 (2)— Vermont —(-)—(1) 1 Virginia 6 (5) 4 (5)— Washington 5 (5) 3 (3)— West Virginia 4 (4)—(-)— Wisconsin 4 (5) 5 (4)— Wyoming —(-) 1 (1)— Totals 267 (258) 167 (175) 1 Figures in parentheses refer to seat distribution in old Congress in which two seats were vacant at time of dissolution.
Composition of new House
In Georgia the abrasive Republican Newt Gingrich, the minority whip, only narrowly survived a surprisingly strong Democratic challenge.
In Connecticut Gary Franks became the first black Republican to serve in the House since the Second World War.
In Wisconsin the Democratic incumbent Bob Kastenmeier, a sub-committee chairman who had served in Congress for 32 years, was defeated by Republican Scott Klug, a 37-year old newscaster.
In Vermont, the state's single seat in the House of Representatives was won by Bernie Saunders, an independent socialist.
Saunders, a former mayor of Burlington, Vermont's largest city, and the runner-up in the 1988 elections for the House, defeated the Republican incumbent by a 17-percentage-point margin.
Gubernatorial results
In Massachusetts, William Weld became the first Republican governor in the state for 20 years when he defeated John Silber, the Democrat who was aspiring to succeed Michael Dukakis.
The other Republican success in the north-east was in Vermont where Richard Snelling defeated Democrat Peter Welch.
In Rhode Island, the Democrat candidate, Bruce Sundlun, achieved a crushing victory against the Republican incumbent, Edward DiPrete, governor since 1984.
In Connecticut, where the outgoing Democratic governor declined to run, a former liberal Republican senator, Lowell Weicker, won the contest as an independent.
In the mid-west the Republicans made gains in Ohio, in Minnesota, and in Michigan, where the Democratic incumbent since 1982, James Blanchard, unexpectedly lost to John Engler, a right-wing Republican.
In the South the Democrats gained the prized states of Florida and Texas.
With the two states due to gain a total of seven congressional seats in 1992, the gubernatorial contests were of crucial importance as the party which controlled the governorships would be in a position to influence this re-districting process.
In Florida the Republican incumbent since 1986, Bob Martinez, was defeated by Lawton Chiles, a self-styled champion of financial probity and ethical campaigning [for Martinez's nomination as William Bennett's successor as Director of the Office of National Drug Control Policy see below].
In Texas, an expensive, negative campaign by Republican rancher-businessman Clayton Williams, was overcome by Ann Richards, the state Treasurer.
The two results were a personal setback for President Bush who had campaigned hard in both states.
In the West the Democrats gained the governorships of Kansas, Oklahoma, New Mexico and Nebraska.
However, the region's greatest prize, California, which was due to gain up to seven congressional seats through re-districting, eluded the Democrats.
Republican Pete Wilson, a supporter of capital punishment, abortion, and moderate environmental reforms, managed to triumph over the strong Democratic challenge of Dianne Feinstein, former mayor of San Francisco.
In Arizona a fresh election was scheduled as no candidate received more than 50 per cent of the vote.
In Alaska the election was won by Walter Hickel, an independent.
Hickel had been elected governor of the state in 1966, as a Republican, but had left office in 1969 to become President Nixon's first Interior Secretary.
Mayoral election in Washington DC
As expected, the Democrat candidate, Sharon Pratt Dixon, was elected mayor of Washington DC, thereby making the federal capital the largest US city to elect a female mayor.
Former mayor Marion Barry, who had recently been convicted of cocaine possession [see pp. 37647; 37769], failed in his attempt to secure election to the city council, winning only 17 per cent of the vote.
Results of state propositions — "Big Green" 
As was usual in US elections, a number of referendum questions, known as propositions, appeared on the ballot papers of many states.
Propositions supported by environmentalists were defeated in California, Washington, Oregon and Missouri.
In California the electorate rejected by the unexpectedly wide margin of 64 to 36 per cent the controversial Proposition 128, otherwise known as "Big Green" , which had envisaged a range of stringent environmental regulations.
The "Big Green" campaign, initiated by veteran campaigner Tom Hayden, was supported by a high-profile coalition of environmentalists and film stars and other celebrities.
Its main proposals were (i) a 20 per cent reduction in emissions of carbon dioxide by the year 2000, with a 40 per cent cut by 2010;(ii) a ban on offshore oil drilling in state waters;(iii) a halt to logging in the ancient redwood forests;(iv) a requirement that a new tree be planted for every 500 square feet of development; and (v) a ban on all pesticides with the potential to cause cancer or to damage a developing foetus.
This, the most far-reaching of the bill's proposals, would have resulted in the prohibition of over 300 pesticides.
The agrochemical lobby, notably the Shell, BP and ICI corporations, funded an extensive advertising campaign warning of high financial costs for consumers if the proposition were implemented.
Propositions limiting the length of time which politicians could serve in office were adopted in California, Colorado and Kansas.
The California provision, Proposition 140, restricted state assemblymen to three two-year terms and senators to two four-year terms.
Propositions to cut taxes or limit government spending were defeated in Massachusetts, Colorado, Nebraska and Utah.
In Florida voters amended the state constitution to impose a three-day waiting period on the purchase of handguns, whilst in Alaska the private use of marijuana was recriminalized.
Resignation of Bennett
It was announced on Nov. 7 that William Bennett had resigned as Director of the Office of National Drug Control Policy.
His resignation, the second by a senior member of the administration within a month, followed that of Elizabeth Dole, the Secretary of Labour, and fuelled speculation of an imminent Cabinet reshuffle by President George Bush.
Bennett, 47, described as an "abrasive" conservative, had served as Education Secretary within the Reagan administration before being chosen by Bush to become the country's first "drugs tsar" , a post which did not carry full Cabinet rank.
He was responsible for drawing up the first comprehensive anti-drugs strategy, unveiled in September 1989, which involved increased spending, heavier penalties for casual users and incentives to drug-producing countries to clamp down on narcotics production.
Bob Martinez, former Governor of Florida, who had been defeated in the November gubernatorial elections [see above], was nominated by Bush on Nov. 30 as Bennett's successor.
On Nov. 18 it was revealed that Bennett was Bush's choice to succeed Lee Atwater as Republican Party chairman in January 1991.
Although the final decision on the choice of chairman was to be made by the Republican National Committee in January, most observers believed that, with Bush's endorsement, the selection of Bennett was a formality.
His brief would be to revitalize the party in advance of the 1992 presidential election.
Its poor showing in the November 1990 mid-term elections reflected its recent crisis of identity, following the departure of Reagan, the collapse of Eastern European communism, the revival of the abortion rights movement, and the budget debacle — including the abandonment of Bush's commitment not to raise taxes.
Atwater, who was thought likely to be given a ceremonial party post, was widely considered to be one of the key architects of Bush's 1988 presidential election victory, but was suffering from an inoperable brain tumour.
Bob Martinez, a former Governor of Florida who had been defeated in the gubernatorial elections [see above], was on Nov. 30 nominated by Bush as Bennett's successor.
Clean Air Act amendments
Amendments to the Clean Air Act were signed into law by President Bush on Nov. 15.
Criticized by environmentalists for delayed implementation deadlines, the amendments were nevertheless described by President Bush as "the most significant air pollution legislation in our nation's history" .
Industrialists warned that they would result in higher consumer prices for cars, fuel and electricity.
Key provisions included (i) the requirement that the necessary plant be installed to reduce emissions of 41 listed industrial pollutants by 70 per cent by 1995 — a deadline extended to 2003 for a further 148 pollutants;(ii) a phased reduction in annual emissions of sulphur dioxide, to 10,000,000 tonnes; and (iii) a requirement that from 1992 only high-oxygen petrol could be sold in the 44 US cities suffering the highest levels of carbon monoxide pollution.
New Immigration Act
President George Bush on Nov. 29 signed into law an immigration bill designed to raise the limit for legal immigration into the USA from the current 490,000 to 645,000 in each fiscal year until 1994, and to 675,000 annually thereafter.
The quotas did not include refugees who were eligible for admittance if they could show a "well-founded fear of persecution" in their homelands.
The new law constituted the first major revision of the quotas of legal immigration in 25 years and ranked in importance with the Quota Act of 1921, which established the first numerical restrictions, and the Immigration and Nationality Act of 1952.
Many of the ideological restrictions imposed by the 1952 legislation were eased, although the Secretary of State still possessed the authority to bar individuals for political reasons.
It also removed a ban on homosexual immigrants and gave the Health Secretary the authority to remove AIDS and other diseases from the medical list for which a person might be denied entry.
The legislation had been passed by the Senate on Oct. 26 by 89 votes to eight, and by the House of Representatives on Oct. 27 by 264 votes to 118, as the culmination of a three-year congressional effort.
AMERICAS
UNITED STATES
Veto of toxic weapons legislation
The US administration announced on Nov. 18 that President George Bush had vetoed legislation imposing mandatory trade sanctions on countries which used chemical weapons, or companies which assisted in the development of such weapons.
In a written statement Bush claimed that the legislation, which was aimed partly at the sale of chemical weapons technology to Iraq, had been vetoed because it "would severely constrain presidential authority in carrying out foreign policy" .
The legislation was flawed not by the requirement of sanctions, claimed Bush, but by the rigid manner in which they were to be imposed, which would "harm US economic interests and provoke friendly countries who are essential to our efforts to resist Iraqi aggression" .
 "Pocket veto" of drugs bill
Bush declined to sign legislation put before him on Nov. 9 amending the 1983 "Orphan Drug Act" , a controversial law which granted market monopolies to companies producing drugs to treat rare diseases — defined as diseases which afflicted fewer than one in 200,000 of the population.
The amendment was designed to close loopholes in the Act which enabled companies to reap huge profits from drugs which turned out to have wider than anticipated applications.
By withholding his signature (required by midnight on Nov. 10) whilst Congress was not in session, the President exercised the so-called "pocket veto" — the elimination of a piece of legislation without recourse to the use of a formal executive veto.
Opening of ethics hearings on "Keating five" 
The ethics committee of the Senate opened hearings on Nov. 15 into links between five senators and Charles Keating, the owner of the failed Lincoln savings and loan company.
The senators, Republican John McCain and Democrats Alan Cranston, John Glenn, Dennis De Concini and Donald Riegle, had accepted a total of $1,300,000 in campaign contributions from Keating and his associates in the mid-1980s.
They later intervened on his behalf when he was investigated for criminal fraud, thereby opening themselves to allegations of having accepted bribes.
Before the hearings began, Cranston announced on Nov. 8 that he was suffering from prostate cancer.
He stated that he would not stand for re-election as majority whip in the Senate, nor would he seek re-election to the Senate when his current term expired in 1992.
On Nov. 14 Senate Democrats unanimously chose Wendell H. Ford to succeed Cranston as majority whip.
Sentencing of Milken
Michael Milken, the former head of the "junk bond" department at Drexel Burnham Lambert Inc, was sentenced to 10 years in prison on Nov. 21, after pleading guilty to violating federal securities and tax laws.
He received consecutive two-year sentences for five charges which included manipulating stock prices, paying bribes and insider trading.
He also received a three-year period of probation — during which he would be required to perform 1,800 hours of community service per year — on a more general conspiracy charge.
As part of a plea bargain arrangement with the federal authorities in April 1990, Milken had already agreed to be debarred from the securities industry and to pay $200,000,000 in fines and $400,000,000 in restitution.
Milken had dominated the US junk bond market in the late 1980s and was largely responsible for the elevation of Drexel from a second-ranking investment bank to one of Wall Street's most powerful finance houses.
His success, and the huge personal wealth which it brought him — in 1987 he earned $500,000,000 — meant that Milken became the personification of the financial excess and predatory ethics of the 1980s.
Federal Judge Kimba Wood disregarded an appeal by Milken's lawyer for a sentence composed entirely of community service.
She told the defendant that "serious crimes warrant serious penalties" , and that a significant prison sentence was required for "purposes of general deterrence" .
Although Milken could have received up to 28 years in prison, most observers were surprised by the severity of his sentence.
Ivan Boesky, the US arbitrageur whose co-operation with the authorities contributed to the downfall of Milken and Drexel, had received a three-year prison sentence; he was released in April 1990 having served just over two years.
Wood left open the possibility that the sentence would be reduced if Milken agreed to co-operate with the government in other financial investigations.
Sentencing of Mulheren
John Mulheren, one of Wall Street's most successful arbitrageurs in the 1980s, was sentenced on Nov. 14 to one year in prison and a fine of $1,680,000.
Mulheren had been convicted in July 1990 of securities fraud and conspiracy in association with Boesky.
Dismissal of Felix Bloch
Felix Bloch, 55, a career diplomat who was suspected of spying but never charged, was dismissed from the State Department on Nov. 5, for allegedly making "deliberate false statements or misrepresentations to the FBI [Federal Bureau of Investigation]" .
Bloch, who had spent 30 years in the foreign service, gained international notoriety in 1989 when he became the subject of an intensive FBI investigation into allegations that he has passed classified information to the Soviet Union whilst serving as deputy chief of the US embassy in Vienna in 1983-87.
He strenuously denied having committed any offence, however, and the government eventually decided that there was insufficient evidence to indict him on espionage charges.
Controversy over Noriega tapes
A dispute over the conflicting constitutional rights of press freedom (enshrined within the First Amendment) and the right of a defendant to a fair trial (the Sixth Amendment) arose from an attempt by Cable News Network (CNN) to broadcast tapes which it had obtained of telephone calls made by the deposed Panamanian leader Manuel Noriega, who had been imprisoned in the USA since January 1990 awaiting trial on drug trafficking charges.
In addition to its constitutional implications, the dispute also raised the possibility that charges against Noriega would have to be dismissed because the taping of his calls went beyond the routine monitoring applied to other federal inmates and, therefore, represented a violation of his rights.
When CNN reported on Nov. 8 that it had obtained tapes of his telephone calls, Noriega's chief lawyer, Frank Rubino, successfully petitioned District Judge William Hoeveler (the judge presiding over the case) for an injunction prohibiting the network from broadcasting any material which violated the confidentiality of the attorney-client relationship.
CNN appealed to the 11th US Circuit Court of Appeals in Atlanta, on Nov. 9, but the court upheld Hoeveler's injunction on the following day.
It was only at this point that CNN complied with the restraining order and ceased broadcasting excerpts from the tapes pending an appeal to the Supreme Court.
On Nov. 18, the Supreme Court voted by seven to two not to overturn the restraining order, and CNN then turned over the tapes so that they could be examined by Hoeveler.
On Nov. 28 Hoeveler lifted the injunction against CNN.
His decision followed an examination of the material and a withdrawal of Rubino's objections to its broadcast on the grounds that the only excerpts which related to client-attorney confidentiality had already been aired by CNN on Nov. 9.
Advocates of press freedom asserted that the Noriega tapes case had set a disturbing precedent in that it undermined the First Amendment by giving legal endorsement to the concept of "prior restraint" in the form of a pre-publication review of a pending news story.
AMERICAS
DOMINICAN REPUBLIC
General strike
Major trade unions staged a 24-hour general strike on Nov. 19, demanding the resignation of the government of President Joaquín Balaguer.
Four people were reportedly killed during violent clashes with the Army in the capital, Santo Domingo.
Trade unionists were demonstrating against sharp falls in living standards, which they blamed on the government's current austerity programme, economic mismanagement and widespread government corruption.
AMERICAS
ANTIGUA AND BARBUDA
Report on arms scandal
A government-appointed commission of inquiry, headed by a British barrister, Louis Blom-Cooper, submitted a 230-page report to the Antiguan Governor General, Sir Wilfred Jacobs, on Nov. 2, on the country's involvement in the 1989 trans-shipment of Israeli arms to Colombian drug barons.
Although not officially made public, details from the report were released by the Caribbean News Agency which obtained a copy of the document.
The report described Antigua as having been "engulfed in corruption" , and as having fallen victim to people who used "political power as a passport to private profit" .
It was particularly critical of the role played in the scandal by Col. Clyde Walker, head of the self-defence force, whom it recommended should be dismissed, and that of former Minister of Communications and Public Works Vere Bird Jr, son of the Prime Minister, who it recommended be barred from resuming public office.
On Nov. 15 the government announced that it would implement the report's recommendations.
The exclusion of Vere Bird Jr from the Cabinet — it appeared that he would be allowed to retain his parliamentary seat — meant that his younger brother, Deputy Prime Minister Lester Bird, became the most likely candidate to succeed the ailing 81-year old Prime Minister, Vere Bird.
AMERICAS
MEXICO
Free trade talks with USA
President Carlos Salinas de Gortari met US President Bush on Nov. 26-27 for two days of talks in Monterrey, capital of the north-eastern Mexican state of Nuevo León.
In a concluding press conference Bush stated that both countries formed "a family" and had agreed to proceed with negotiations to achieve a US-Mexico free trade treaty which would benefit both economies and increase their competitiveness on a world level.
He claimed that such a treaty would "change the history of North America" and would be an "example to all nations" .
As a gesture of good faith, Bush guaranteed a credit of US$1,500 million for improvements to Mexican oil installations which would be necessary to provide additional supplies of Mexican crude oil to the USA in the event of war in the Middle East.
Salinas dismissed fears that a new relationship with the USA would isolate Mexico from the rest of Latin America.
He stated that a free trade treaty would serve as a "strong commercial bridge" , integrating both northern and southern hemispheres, and would complement the June 1990 US "Enterprise for the Americas Initiative" [see p. 37526].
Bush had asked the US Congress in September to approve "fast track" talks in order that the proposed treaty, also expected to involve Canada, could be signed by 1992.
However there were indications that Congress would delay proceedings until it received assurances of improvements in Mexico's human rights record and evidence of fair elections [see below].
Problems of drug control and illegal immigration into the USA were among the issues raised in Monterrey.
State elections
Official results were released in late November for the state and local elections held on Nov. 11 in México state, the country's most populous region.
According to these results the overwhelming majority of seats went to the ruling Institutional Revolutionary Party (PRI), whose officials vehemently denied opposition charges of election fraud, claiming that their "crushing success" was due to "good organization and hard work" .
The voter abstention rate was put at between 65 and 67 per cent.
[For July 1988 presidential elections and strong showing in Mexico state by Cuauhtémoc Cárdenas Solórzano, the current leader of the opposition centre-left Party of the Democratic Revolution (PRD), see pp. 36367-69.]
The PRI won all 33 constituency seats in the México state legislature.
Under the system of distribution of further seats by proportional representation the opposition centre-right National Action Party (PAN) was allocated nine seats, the PRD eight, and the right-wing Mexican Democratic Party (PDM) and the centre-left Cardenista National Reconstruction Party (PCRN) one seat each.
In the local elections the PRI won 116 municipalities out of a total of 121 contested, the PAN and the PRD won two municipalities each, and one went to an independent.
The results of the simultaneous state and local elections in the neighbouring state of Hidalgo were not due for official release until Dec. 2, but preliminary results indicated that the PRI had won 81 out of the 84 municipalities.
The PRD and PAN claimed that the elections had been a "scandalous fraud" , that the PRI had organized widespread ballot rigging, and that it had used violence to guarantee victory.
Both parties called for mass protests to have the result annulled, the PAN stating that it would ask the Organization of American States (OAS) Inter-American Commission on Human Rights to hold a full scale investigation.
The government had reportedly rejected the presence of international observers invited by the PAN to monitor voting.
Anti-inflation pact — Economic package
The Pact for Economic Stability and Growth (PECE) between the government, trade unions and business [see pp. 37078; 37274]was renewed in November for a further year.
At the same time the government announced a package of new measures under which (i) the minimum wage was increased by 18 per cent from Nov. 18;(ii) a 40 per cent cut in income tax for those earning up to four times the minimum wage was to take effect in 1991;(iii) petrol prices were increased by 20 per cent and diesel oil, liquid gas and electricity prices by 30 per cent;(iv) the peso's rate of progressive devaluation against the US dollar was halved from 80 centavos to an "average" of 40 centavos a day, a depreciation rate of 5 per cent per year, as part of a anti-inflationary move aimed at fixing a future parity for the two currencies and stemming the flight of capital abroad.
AMERICAS
NICARAGUA
Contra unrest
The government of President Violeta Barrios de Chamorro arrested former contra leader Aristides Sanchez on Nov. 18 and seized weapons which were allegedly intended for use in a "dangerous plan" by former contras to destabilize the country.
The government's action coincided with the breakdown of its talks with former leading contras.
The ex-contras were supported by a group of 15 mayors belonging to right-wing parties in the ruling National Opposition Union (UNO) coalition, and by supporters of the Vice-President Virgilio Godoy.
Calling on the government to honour pledges of land and credit made to the contras before their demobilization in June [see p. 37450], they had also demanded the dismissal of former Sandinista leader Gen. Humberto Ortega Saavedra as C.-in-C. of the Armed Forces, and the resignation of Antonio Lacayo Oyanguren, Minister of the Presidency, and Carlos Hurtado Cabrera, Minister of the Interior, whom they held responsible for the October economic pact between the government and the opposition Sandinista-controlled unions [see p. 37771].
In the two weeks before the arrest of Sanchez, former contras had organized the occupation of police stations and churches and barricaded part of the road leading from the capital Managua to Rama, near the town of Bluefields on the Atlantic coast.
Five policemen and three former contras were reported to have been killed and dozens of civilians wounded during armed clashes, although unconfirmed reports put the total number of those killed at 24 or over.
According to official figures only 3,000 former contras out of 20,000 involved in the demobilization had received land.
The government claimed that of the promised funding of US$30,000,000 from the United States to assist in their relocation only $16,500,000 had been received.
The establishment of a new political party, independent of the old contra military leadership and claiming to represent more than 3,000 former contras, was reported in El País of Nov. 27.
Army reductions
Ortega announced on Nov. 8 that a total of 5,000 officers would be retired in order to bring the full complement of the People's Sandinista Army (EPS) down to 28,000 "immediately or in a very short time" .
The EPS had stood at 90,000 in January 1990 but, in line with Chamorro's April inaugural pledge [see p. 37370], it had been reduced in size to 33,000 by October.
The reduction in numbers would reduce the charge on the defence budget by 10 per cent.
1991 budget
Releasing on Nov. 15 its budget figures for 1991, the government stated that it planned to increase spending by 22 per cent to the equivalent of US$499,000,000 and would face a fiscal deficit of $150,000,000, only $91,000,000 of which could be expected to be covered by future loans.
It was forecast that with no domestic savings to draw on, the government would be forced to abandon a plan to maintain the new "gold cordoba" currency at a fixed parity to the US dollar during 1991.
On Nov. 5 the cordoba was devalued for the 43rd time since Chamorro took office in April, the rate moving from US$1.00=1,540,000 cordobas to $1.00=1,610,000 cordobas.
AMERICAS
EL SALVADOR
Guerrilla offensive
In their largest offensive of the year, dubbed "Punishment for the Undemocratic Armed Forces" , guerrillas of the Farabundo Martí National Liberation Front (FMLN) staged a co-ordinated offensive in seven of the country's 14 departments on Nov. 19-20.
They claimed to have killed up to 200 government soldiers, especially in the provinces of Chalatenango, Morazan and Usulutan where fighting had been fiercest, and to have "neutralized" the main Ilopango air base near the capital, San Salvador.
They also destroyed roads, power lines, and sugar and cotton mills over a wide area.
The government claimed that 10 guerrillas had been killed for the loss of 12 soldiers, with 66 others wounded, and that three civilians had also been killed and an estimated 50 more wounded.
Other sources put the total number of dead at 85 with 300 wounded.
Fighting in San Salvador continued longer than elsewhere, prompting speculation that dissident groups within the FMLN were ignoring the leadership.
Suggestions of a split were denied, however, by the FMLN leadership, who claimed that the complete halting of the offensive was dependent upon the acceptance of a mediation role by the UN Secretary-General, Javier Pérez de Cuéllar, who had appealed to the guerrillas to show restraint.
Rocket attack
In the first attack of its type in the 11-year civil war, the FMLN were said to have shot down an A-37 jet aircraft on Nov. 23 with a Sam-7 or Sam-14 ground-to-air missile.
Defence Minister Col. Rene Emilio Ponce described this as representing a "major escalation" in the war.
Cdr.
Humberto Ortega Saavedra, the Chief of the Armed Forces in neighbouring Nicaragua, denied on Nov. 25 a suggestion by the El Salvador government that the guerrillas had obtained the missiles from Nicaragua.
An FMLN communiqué issued by the FMLN leadership on Nov. 26 claimed that the Nov. 19-20 offensive had been the first action of its newly proclaimed professional "National Army for Democracy" , a merger of its five previous organizations into a conventional rank structure.
Many analysts agreed that the primary purpose of this was to place the FMLN on the same footing as the Army and that the primary purpose of the offensive was not to secure military objectives but to place pressure on the government and the Army to negotiate seriously in future peace talks.
AMERICAS
GUATEMALA
Presidential elections
Presidential elections held on Nov. 11 were contested by 12 candidates ranged politically from the centre to the far right, with no left-wing parties represented.
All the leading candidates were regarded as acceptable to the Army and to the business elite which had effectively run the country since the military coup of 1954 [see pp. 13677-81].
None emerged with the necessary overall majority, however, and in the absence of agreement on a national unity government a second round run-off between the two leading candidates on Jan. 6 would be necessary, with the new President due to take office on Jan. 14, 1991.
Jorge Carpio Nicolle, the leader of the National Centrist Union (UCN), won 25.72 per cent of the vote, narrowly ahead of Jorge Serrano Elias of the Solidarity Action Movement (MAS) who polled 24.21.
Alfonso Cabrera Hidalgo of the ruling Christian Democratic Party (PDCG) finished third with 17.5 per cent, while Alvaro Arzú Irigoyen of the Plan for National Advancement (PAN) obtained 17.2 per cent of the vote.
(Cabrera withdrew early from the campaign itself, on Oct. 29, ostensibly because he was suffering from acute pancreatitis, although there were rumours that he had been shot.
His poor showing was attributed to public disillusionment with the government, rather than simply to his withdrawal.)
The Supreme Electoral Tribunal (TSE) announced on Nov. 13 that the parties of the eight remaining candidates, all of whom failed to secure a required minimum of 4 per cent of the votes, would lose their legal status.
Voting was reported to have passed off peacefully, although the election campaign had been marked by death threats, attacks and the assassination of a journalist.
Up to a dozen candidates in the concurrent municipal elections [see below]were reportedly assassinated.
The abstention rate among the 3,200,000 registered voters in the presidential elections was put as high as 43.7 per cent.
The turnout was particularly low in rural departments, where left-wing guerrillas of the Guatemalan National Revolutionary Unity (URNG) were most active.
The URNG on Nov. 8 had called for an election boycott, stating that none of the candidates represented the interests of the majority of the population.
Former President Efraín Ríos Montt, heading the No-Venta ( "No Sell-Out" ) coalition of three small right-wing parties and promising a clampdown on law and order to stem escalating violence, had for some time been thought likely to emerge as winner of the presidential elections.
However, he was prevented from standing on Oct. 19, when the Constitutional Court upheld the Supreme Court's Oct. 12 ruling that anyone who had been the author or beneficiary of a military coup was debarred from participation in elections under Article 186 of the 1986 Constitution.
It was widely believed that this provision had been specifically inserted to prevent a return to office by Ríos Montt, an evangelical Protestant who had come to power in the wake of a military coup and ruled as dictator from March 1982 to August 1983 [see pp. 31605-07; 32494-96].
Despite being barred Ríos Montt instructed his supporters to spoil their ballot papers and to vote for No-Venta candidates in the congressional and municipal elections.
It became apparent that his supporters in the presidential elections had switched their allegiance to Serrano, another evangelical Protestant, who was also expected to pick up second-round votes from the supporters of Arzu and of the now defunct small right-wing parties.
As head of the National Reconciliation Commission in peace talks with the URNG [see pp. 37372; 37527; 37707], Serrano had promised to finalize a peace agreement with the guerrillas if he became President, and had also promised economic reforms.
Congressional and municipal results
Preliminary results in the elections held concurrently on Nov. 11 for the 100-seat Congress showed that the UCN had emerged as the strongest party with 41 seats, the PDCG second with 29 and the MAS third with 19 seats.
No-Venta was thought to have won between six and nine seats.
In the simultaneous elections for 300 municipalities the UCN and PDCG were reported to have won the majority of mayorships.
AMERICAS
GUYANA
Resignation of Foreign Minister
The resignation of Rashleigh Jackson, Senior Minister of Foreign Affairs, was announced on Nov. 27 following the arrest of his son on drugs charges.
President Desmond Hoyte was reported to have accepted the resignation "reluctantly" , and to have taken temporary charge of the Foreign Affairs portfolio.
AMERICAS
COLOMBIA
Drug cartel surrender offer
A communiqué passed to the government on Nov. 22 by a group of prominent citizens known as "the notables" , believed to mediating between the government and the Medellín drug cartel, contained an offer from the cartel that between 200 and 300 of their members would surrender to stand trial if they received official assurances that they would not be extradited to another country.
The traffickers also demanded that they be placed in a special prison and not be forced to testify against themselves or their collaborators, although they dropped an earlier requirement that they be treated as a political organization similar to left-wing guerrillas who had negotiated with the government.
On Nov. 8, the government had extradited Jairo Correa Alzate to the United States to stand trial in Jacksonville, Florida, on drug charges.
In what was considered to be a goodwill gesture to back their peace proposal, the cartel released Juan Vitta, an editor of the magazine Hoy por Hoy and one of seven journalists the cartel was holding hostage [see also p. 37772 issue], on Nov. 26 in the city of Medellín.
Guerrilla offensive
Nine soldiers and 15 guerrillas of the Colombian Revolutionary Armed Forces (FARC) and National Liberation Army (ELN)(both factions of the National Guerrilla Co-ordinating Board (CNG)— see p. 34803) were reported to have been killed on Nov. 10 in two separate attacks staged by an estimated 400 guerrillas against the towns of Tazara and Cacares in Antioquia province.
In response, the government was reported to have broken off peace talks with the FARC and ELN, describing the raid as a "criminal action" .
A government communiqué was also reported to have ruled out the possibility of FARC and ELN delegates being allowed to sit in the new Constituent Assembly to be elected in December.
Murder of politician
The ELN claimed responsibility for the murder on Nov. 24 of Juan Barragán Ruiz, a Conservative Party (PCC) congressional deputy who was shot dead in the north-western city of Bucaramanga.
Resignation of Attorney General
The Attorney General, Alfonso Gómez, resigned on Nov. 22 in the face of criticism of his attempt to dismiss Gen. Jesus Armando Arias.
In November 1985, when the Palace of Justice was occupied by guerrillas of the April 19 Movement (M-19), Arias had led the assault by government forces in which more than 100 people had been killed [see pp. 34804-05].
Gómez claimed that the public criticism of officials for disciplining officers posed a danger to democracy.
No immediate replacement was named.
AMERICAS
PERU
Economic reforms
President Alberto Keinya Fujimori outlined a package of economic reforms in a speech delivered on Nov. 4 to mark his 100th day in office.
He promised (i) to drop immediately the 10 per cent tax on imports;(ii) to eliminate Central Bank financing of the National Treasury, except for guaranteed financing provisions, and to streamline fiscal accounts to avoid deficits;(iii) to combat speculation;(iv) to end private and public monopolies;(v) to introduce tax reforms at the beginning of the new year aimed at simplifying the tax system and making it more progressive to "make everyone participate in the national effort" ; and (vi) to carry out an administrative reform in the state sector with some state companies to be privatized.
He stated that the impact of the measures on the poorest sectors of society would be mitigated by the implementation of a social emergency programme with the co-operation of private and religious organizations.
The reforms were designed to strengthen the government's position before it presented its economic programme to the International Monetary Fund later in the month.
Dismissal of Army Chief of Staff
The Army Chief of Staff, Gen. Juan Fernandez Davila was dismissed on Nov. 8.
It was reported that he would be tried by a military court on corruption charges and for plotting an alleged coup.
AMERICAS
BOLIVIA
Political crisis
The Commander in Chief of the Armed Forces, Gen. Jorge Moreira Rojas, appealed to government and opposition politicians on Nov. 17 to remain calm "for the good of the image of Bolivian democracy" .
He called for sensible and non-sectarian dialogue to solve a conflict between the government and judiciary, ostensibly over the constitutionality of a beer tax increase, which had plunged the country into its most serious constitutional crisis since it returned to democracy in 1982.
The 12-member Supreme Court had ruled in April that a 15 per cent increase in the beer tax was unconstitutional.
On Nov. 7 the Court further ruled that the La Taquina brewery was not obliged to pay the increased tax.
The Patriotic Accord coalition government of President Jaime Paz Zamora denounced the ruling as contravening a recent financial law passed by the Congress, and as establishing a precedent which would result in a total loss to the treasury of the equivalent of US$58,000,000.
Four Patriotic Accord deputies began immediate moves to impeach eight Supreme Court judges on the grounds of incompetence.
The eight were subsequently suspended from their duties and forbidden to leave the southern city of Sucre, the legal capital.
One judge began a hunger strike in protest.
In response the National Revolutionary Movement (MNR), the main opposition party to which many of the Supreme Court judges were linked, began impeachment proceedings against Paz Zamora, claiming that he had flouted the Constitution and the jurisdiction of the Supreme Court by agreeing to the extradition of the drug trafficker and former interior minister Luis Arcé Gomez to the United States in December 1989 [see pp. 37487-88].
In an act of "self defence" , the Supreme Court also threatened to consider an MNR request made 18 months previously to the National Electoral Court that the May 1989 presidential elections be declared null and void because of alleged gross irregularities in the departments of Beni, Oruro and Potosi [see p. 36652].
The head of the Supreme Court, Edgar Obilitas Fernández, requested on Nov. 15 that Gen. Moreira should intervene "in order to protect the judicial power from the threats it has received" , an appeal which Moreira rejected on the grounds that he took orders only from the President.
On Nov. 21 the Supreme Court declared that the congressional proceedings were "unconstitutional" and "lacking in juridical value" .
Paz Zamora responded by announcing that he was willing to face MNR impeachment proceedings against him in order to find a political solution to the crisis.
Any impeachment would need the approval of a two-thirds majority of those actually present in the Congress.
Additional international lending
The consultative group for Bolivia of the Group of Eight (Western) countries, in association with the major multilateral agencies, met in Paris on Nov. 8 and agreed to a total of US$926,000,000 in economic and development loans, reportedly on "very advantageous terms" , to cover the period 1991-93.
A total of US$395,000,000 would come from the World Bank ($65,000,000), Inter-American Development Bank (IADB)($200,000,000), United Nations ($65,000,000) and the Andean Promotion Corporation (CAF)($65,000,000).
The remaining $531,000,000 would come from the United States ($150,000,000), Japan ($115,000,000), Germany ($90,000,000), Spain ($60,000,000), Holland ($35,000,000), Switzerland ($30,000,000), Italy ($25,000,000), Canada ($10,000,000), France ($7,000,000), Sweden ($5,000,000) and the United Kingdom ($4,000,000).
AMERICAS
BRAZIL
Run-off state elections
The National Reconstruction Party (PRN) government of President Fernando Collor de Mello suffered a serious political setback in re-run elections for 16 state governorships held on Nov. 25.
Candidates closely identified with the President were defeated in the important states of Rio Grande do Sul and Parana, and in particular in the key state of Sao Paulo, responsible for 50 per cent of the gross national product.
This was in marked contrast to the result of the Oct. 3 first round where Collor's supporters took nine out of the 10 state governorships which had been finalized [see also p. 37773-74; see below for subsequent annulling of Alagoas result].
The result was seen as a vote of no confidence in the government's economic anti-inflation stabilization programme, a mood reflected in opinion polls which indicated that only 26 per cent of Brazilians viewed the government positively.
The run-off results were as follows: Acre was won by Edumundo Pinto (Social Democratic Party — PDS), Amapá by Annibal Barcellos (Liberal Front Party — PFL), Maranhao by Edison Lobao (PFL), Mato Grosso do sul by Jaime Campos (PFL), Minas Gerais by Helio Garcia (Social Reform Party — PRS), Paraíba by Ronaldo Cunha Linha (Party of the Brazilian Democratic Movement — PMDB), Parana by Roberto Requiao (PMDB), Pernambuco by Joaquim Francisco Cavalcanti (PFL), Piauí by Feitas Neto (PFL), Rio Grande do Norte by Agripino Maia (PFL), Rio Grande do Sul by Alceu Colarres (Democratic Labour Party — PDT), Rondônia by Osvaldo Pianna (from one branch of the Workers' Party (PT) identified as the PTR), Roraima by Otomar Pinto (Brazilian Labour Party — PTB), Sao Paulo by Luis Antonio Fleury (PMDB), and Tocantins by Moises Avelino (PMDB).
The preliminary result for the state of Para was indecisive but the election there was thought to have been won by either Jader Barbalho of PMDB or Sahid Xerfan of the PTB.
The electoral tribunal annulled the first round result and ordered a fresh election in Collor's home state of Alagoas, after investigating allegations made by the PRN candidate, Renan Calheiros, that associates of Collor had tampered with 71,000 votes to guarantee the victory of his opponent, Geraldo Bulhoes, who also enjoyed the financial backing of another Collor adviser, a well-known businessman Paulo César Faria.
Calheiros subsequently resigned his post as PRN congressional leader on Nov. 16, after accusing Collor of having assumed an air of "infallibility and inflexibility" , of showing contempt for the congress, and of allowing "escalating immorality" .
Post-election analysis predicted that while 14 governors could be expected to back the government, eight others were doubtful and four governors would support the opposition parties.
All would take office in March 1991.
Congressional elections
The result of the Oct. 3 elections to an expanded 503-member Chamber of Deputies raised doubts about the government's initial confidence (based on exit polls) that it would commanded a majority in the congress [see p. 37774].
Any such majority was now thought likely to depend on formal or informal alliances which might emerge from the current intense negotiations.
The generally pro-government parties of the centre and right (including Collor's PRN and the PFL, PDS, PTB, PL and PDC) claimed the support of 257 deputies.
The former ruling centrist PMDB, still the largest single party, together with the centre-left PSDB, had a combined total of 146 deputies, not all of whom could be guaranteed to support Collor's reform programmes.
Open opposition to the government had been declared by the left, with a total of 100 deputies belonging to the PSB, the PCB, the PCdoB, the PDT and the PT, the PDT and the PT having shown an unexpected electoral recovery.
The new deputies were to take office on Feb. 1, 1991.
Final results for 498 seats in the Chamber of Deputies were as follows: PMDB 109 (pre-election 130); PFL 92 (90); PDT 41 (31); PRN 41 (31); PDS 40 (32); Social Democratic Party of Brazil (PSDB) 37 (60); PT 34 (17); PTB 33 (28); Partido Democrata Cristao (PDC) 21 (15); Liberal Party (PL) 15 (13); Brazilian Socialist Party (PSB) 12 (8); Communist Party of Brazil (PC do B) five (six); Social Reform Party (PRS) 4 (7); Brazilian Communist Party (PCB) 3 (3); others 11 (identified by acronyms as PSC 5, PTR 2, PST 2, PMN 1, PDS 1).
Preliminary results for the Senate elections indicated that Collor was expected to command more than 55 per cent of the upper house.
New head of PETROBRAS — Alleged financial scandal
Collor reportedly ordered Eduardo Texeira, appointed as the new head of the state-owned company Brazilian Petroleum Corporation (PETROBRAS), to investigate allegations by his predecessor Luis Otávio da Motta Veiga that his dismissal had been corrupt.
According to da Motta Veiga, he had been dismissed on Oct. 19 [see p. 37773]for resisting pressure from Faria [see also above]to lend US$20,000,000 and to supply $40,000,000 worth of oil to the Voe Canhedo business group, which owned a 48 per cent stake in the newly privatized VASP airline formerly controlled by the state of Sao Paulo [see p. 37710].
Devaluation of currency — Price increases
Central bank intervention on Nov. 20 to devalue the cruzeiro saw its value falling by 7 per cent against the US dollar in a single day.
This came on top of a 45 per cent and 35 per cent fall in its value on the black market and official markets respectively since September; overall this trend represented a reversal in the bank's previous policy of intervention to support the currency.
The devaluation was intended to assist a revival of exports and came after the announcement of October's trade figures, the worst since January 1987.
The trade surplus was now expected to be less than US$10,000 million for the year compared to $16,000 million for 1989 (US$1.00=129.826 cruzeiros as at Nov. 29, 1990).
The government announced increases in fuel and transport prices on Nov. 7.
Petrol and fuel alcohol would rise by 27.6 per cent, diesel oil, cooking gas and kerosene by 28.6 per cent , naphtha by 35 per cent , electricity rates by 23 per cent , domestic rail fares by 36 per cent and interstate bus fares by 27 per cent .
AMERICAS
CHILE
Army loan scandal
The president of the House of Deputies of the Congress, Carlos Dupre, on Nov. 28 ordered an official investigation to verify the authenticity of a letter attributed to "various military chiefs" which called on former President Augusto Pinochet Ugarte, the C.-in-C. of the Armed Forces, to resign.
The letter accused Pinochet of joint responsibility in numerous cases of disappeared persons during the years of military dictatorship, and of complicity in a current military financial scandal popularly known as La Cutufa.
Public revelations in the La Cutufa affair had led to the forced retirement of six generals, including Gen. Hugo Salas Wenzel, third in the Army high command, and 16 other officers.
A further 200 officers were reported to have been disciplined.
Pinochet had ordered his own investigations into the affair, as had the government, which denied on Nov. 12 that it was waging a campaign against the Army.
La Cutufa, a fraudulent loan and investment scheme, was allegedly set up by Pinochet's National Information Centre (CNI) secret police in the mid-1980s.
In more than five years of operation it allegedly invested more than US$50,000,000 in cocaine trafficking, arms smuggling and the illegal export of Indian mummies from the northern Atacama desert region.
It also offered tax-free loans at high rates of interest to Army officers as well as tax-free and high-interest investments to businessmen and members of Santiago society connected with the Army and the CNI.
News of its existence leaked out following the murder in July 1989 of Aurelio Sichel, a wealthy restaurateur with close links to the CNI.
His wife claimed that her husband had been had been shot by the Army when he threatened to expose the whole affair if his $1,000,000 investment in La Cutufa was not returned.
A former Army captain and CNI officer, Gastón Ramos, alleged by Sichel's wife of heading La Cutufa, was arrested in early October and his accused accomplice, retired Army captain Patricio Castro Munoz, was extradited from Paraguay and charged with Sichel's murder.
A civilian judge investigating the case died on Nov. 19 when her car blew up in the capital, Santiago.
She was said to have been suffering from depression and her death was ascribed to suicide.
On Nov. 6 a former CNI major, Antonio Flores Gallano, was shot dead in Santiago.
Documents found in his car linked him to La Cutufa.
A controversial 1991 military budget law, passed in its entirety by the Congress on Nov. 27 despite the opposition of left-wing members, included US$5,000,000 for the continuing payment of salaries to some 1,100 former employees of the CNI, now incorporated into the army's intelligence unit.
The CNI itself had nominally been disbanded in March 1990, but the Defence Minister was quoted as saying that it was preferable to keep former CNI agents "in the establishment than in the street" .
New Army appointments
President Patricio Aylwin Azócar stated on Nov. 6 that Army appointments he had made on Oct. 31 could "not be contested constitutionally" and that Pinochet was "finding it hard to play the role he chose, that of Army C.-in-C., subordinate to the President" .
Maj. Gen. Rodrigo Sanchez Casillas became the new Army Chief of Staff and Brig. -Gen.
Garin Aguirre became the new Army Inspector General both replacing those who had "voluntarily resigned" over the La Cutufa affair.
On Nov. 1 Aylwin had rejected two Pinochet nominees for promotion, Gen. Carlos Parera, the current head of the Santiago military region and former head of the DINA secret police under the military junta, and Gen. Ramon Castro, the military attaché to the Chilean embassy in Washington and Pinochet's former private secretary.
AMERICAS
ARGENTINA
Civil service reforms
The government announced on Nov. 26 that over a period of three years it intended to cut 122,000 government jobs — approximately one fifth of state employees — at an estimated saving to the state of the equivalent of US$1,500 million.
The restructuring would be supported by loans totalling between $500,000,000 and $600,000,000 from the World Bank and the Inter-American Development Bank (IADB) to provide those dismissed with compensation, training and advice to enable them to find jobs in the private sector.
There was no immediate reaction from the General Confederation of Workers (CGT) whose call for a general strike on Nov. 15 against the government's austerity policies had been poorly supported, with only an estimated 25,000 to 30,000 public-sector workers attending a rally in the capital, Buenos Aires.
More successful CGT sponsored strikes held in late October and early November had forced the pro-government governors of the northern province of Jujuy and the southern province of Chubut to resign following demonstrations by public-sector workers protesting against unpaid wages and high inflation.
Reform of the civil service was an integral part of the government's sweeping deregulation and privatization programme approved by the International Monetary Fund [see pp. 37500; 37710].
In response to the initiative, the IMF was expected to unblock $240,000,000 in further credits [see also pp. 37040; 37244; 37451]of which Argentina would receive $180,000,000, with the remainder being deposited into a special account already containing $60,000,000 from a previous IMF loan.
This account could only be drawn on when it had reached an estimated $1,000 million and would be for the purpose of purchasing the external debt bonds of Argentina's creditor banks.
On Nov. 8 the privatization of the state telephone company Entel was formally completed, as was that of the state airline Aerolineas Argentinas on Nov. 21 [see p. 37773].
Military unrest
A tape recorded announcement of a military uprising against the government was received by the Noticias Argentinas news agency on Nov. 7 and commented on in the daily newspaper El Diario Popular on Nov. 8.
A proclamation, allegedly from elements within the military, claimed "the right of rebellion" , demanded the resignation of President Carlos Saúl Menem and stated that the rebellion would continue until the installation of a military junta commanded by Col. (retd.)
Mohamed Alí Seineldin.
Seineldin, leader of an unsuccessful military coup against the previous government of President Raúl Alfonsín in December 1988 [see p. 36394], had been dismissed from the Army in October 1989 [see p. 36972).
On Oct. 22, 1990, he had been ordered to be detained for 60 days in a military camp for sending a letter to Menem warning him that unrest in the army could provoke a "military rebellion" .
Earlier, Gen. Hugo Sabino Fernández, Commander of the 2nd Army Corps, had confirmed on Oct. 11 that three non-commissioned officers with links to the secret "Painted Face" group had voluntarily retired.
They had admitted to attending secret meetings in a military garrison in Parana where they had viewed and discussed video cassettes dealing with Seineldin and "his actions and ideals on national and institutional affairs" .
AMERICAS
FALKLAND ISLANDS
Talks over fisheries
Three days of "technical" discussions in the Spanish capital Madrid on Nov. 14-16 between the United Kingdom and
Argentina failed to produce an accord to avert over-fishing in waters around the Falkland (Malvinas) Islands.
Previous talks on the subject between the two sides, in the Brazilian capital Rio de Janeiro in September and in the Argentinean capital Buenos Aires in October, had also failed to produce an agreement.
The central issue was how to protect the ilex squid, the region's most valuable species, essential for the livelihoods of the Falkland Islanders.
The islands' governing Legislative Council on Oct. 26 repeated its protest to the UK government at its exclusion from the ongoing talks, and voted not to co-operate with any plan reached with Argentina until the islanders were assured of a protected 200-mile limit for their own use.
The Council also voted unanimously to request the UK government to declare a continental shelf around the Islands, and announced that it hoped to pass legislation "before Christmas" enabling it to sell exploration licences for oil and other minerals.
A fishing agreement was considered necessary by February 1991, when the squid fishing season began, because the squid fishing grounds straddled both countries' fishing zones.
ASIA — PACIFIC
INDIA
Ayodhya — Fall of Singh government — Appointment of Chandra Shekhar as new Prime Minister — President's rule in Assam
The government headed by the Janata Dal leader V. P. Singh collapsed in early November.
Singh was replaced by his old adversary, Chandra Shekhar, who managed to secure Congress (I) support for the formation of a government by his small band of dissident Janata Dal members.
Singh had served as Prime Minister since early December 1989.
His premiership had been turbulent, particularly during its final months when the government came under massive pressure over its job reservations policy [see pp. 37653; 37710; 37774-75]and its response to the "temple-mosque" dispute at Ayodhya.
Hindu march to Ayodhya — Storming of Babri Masjid mosque
The final weeks of Singh's premiership were overshadowed by the communal and political tensions arising from the attempts of Hindu militants, led by the Vishwa Hindu Parishad (VHP), to begin the construction of a temple on the site of the disused Babri Masjid mosque at Ayodhya in Uttar Pradesh.
L. K. Advani, leader of the Hindu-revivalist Bharatiya Janata Party (BJP), had embarked on a procession to the site in September; his arrest in Bihar on Oct. 23 had provoked the BJP to withdraw its support for Singh's government [see p. 37774].
The arrest of Advani and of hundreds of thousands of others in Bihar and Uttar Pradesh did little to halt the movement of Hindus to Ayodhya and on Oct. 30 thousands of militants gathered at the disputed site.
Militant kar sevaks, or Hindu holy workers, ignored police warnings and rushed through security cordons at the mosque.
According to the VHP some kar sevaks managed to scale the dome of the mosque and initiate its destruction, a claim firmly denied by the government and the security forces.
Battles around the mosque between Hindus and the security forces left five people dead and 80 wounded.
Serious unrest was reported in other areas of northern India on Oct. 30.
Advani was released from the custody of the Bihar state government on Nov. 4.
That day The Hindu newspaper reported that the VHP and the Uttar Pradesh state government "appeared to have agreed to a ceasefire" .
Division of Janata Dal into pro-Singh and pro-Shekhar factions
The Ayodhya dispute and the withdrawal of BJP support for the government served to intensify the already serious divisions within Janata Dal, the main constituent of the ruling National Front government.
On Nov. 5, two days before the government was scheduled to face a vote of confidence in the Lok Sabha (lower house of parliament), the Janata Dal split into two factions.
The division occurred on the day of a vital meeting of the 140 members of the Janata Dal parliamentary party.
Instead of attending the meeting a dissident group of members led by Chandra Shekhar convened at the home of former Deputy Prime Minister Devi Lal.
The dissidents, claiming the support of 68 members, effectively established a new party which came to be known as Janata Dal (Socialist) Party or Janata Dal (S).
Devi Lal was elected as President and Devi Lal's son, Om Prakash Chauthala, was one of three general secretaries.
The dissidents voted to "expel" V. P. Singh from the party.
Meanwhile, the rival meeting of Singh loyalists claimed the support of 83 members and voted to expel some 25 members, including Chandra Shekhar and Devi Lal.
The effect of the Janata Dal split, and the earlier withdrawal of support by the BJP, had a major impact on a number of state governments, although no Chief Ministers actually fell during November as a result of the events at the centre.
In Uttar Pradesh the Janata Dal government of Mulayem Singh Yadav remained loyal to Singh, whereas in Gujarat and Haryana the respective Chief Ministers, Chimanbhai Patel and Hukam Singh, sided with Shekhar and the Janata Dal (S).
In Rajasthan the BJP government of Bhairon Singh Shekhawat managed to survive a vote of confidence with the support of members of both Janata Dal factions.
Loss of Lok Sabha vote of confidence by Singh — Appointment of Chandra Shekhar as new Prime Minister
After an emotional and heated 11-hour debate V. P. Singh's National Front government lost the vote of confidence in the Lok Sabha on Nov. 7 by 346 votes to 142, with eight abstentions.
Chandra Shekhar mustered the support of fewer than 60 Janata Dal members.
Singh's government was the first to be defeated on the floor of the Lok Sabha and shortly afterwards the Prime Minister tendered his resignation to President Ramaswamy Venkataraman.
In one of the many meetings on Nov. 8-9, Rajiv Gandhi, leader of Congress (I)(which with 193 of the 525 Lok Sabha seats had led the opposition to Singh's government and had constituted the largest single party block), apparently turned down an invitation from President Venkataraman to form a Congress (I) government.
Gandhi indicated, however, his willingness to lend "outside" support to Chandra Shekhar.
Gandhi's pledge of "outside" support permitted President Venkataraman on Nov. 10 to appoint Chandra Shekhar and Devi Lal as Prime Minister and Deputy Prime Minister respectively.
Chandra Shekhar
Chandra Shekhar was born into the powerful Thakur caste of Uttar Pradesh landowners in July 1927.
His early political life was spent as an active member of the Praja Socialist Party (PSP).
He entered the Rajya Sabha (upper house of parliament) as a PSP member in the early 1960s, but defected to Congress (I) in 1964 and soon became known as one of the party's leading "young Turks" .
At first a supporter of Indira Gandhi's premiership, by 1975 he was among her opponents and, with many others, was placed in detention under emergency regulations.
On his release in 1977 Shekhar was appointed president of the newly created Janata Party.
It was the merger of this party with other opposition parties in 1988 which formed the Janata Dal, led by another Congress (I) rebel V. P. Singh.
After the November 1989 general election Shekhar was considered by some to be a candidate for the premiership, despite having had no experience of ministerial office.
When the leadership of the Janata Dal parliamentary party and the post of Prime Minister went instead to V. P. Singh, he did little to hide his resentment, called the election "a conspiracy" , and spent the next 11 months assiduously courting anti-Singh members of the Janata Dal.
Vote of confidence in Shekhar government — Formation of new Council of Ministers
On Nov. 16 Shekhar's government won a vote of confidence in the Lok Sabha with 280 votes for, 214 against, 11 abstentions and 17 absentees.
According to unofficial indications the Janata Dal (S) had 61 votes of its own and had the support of Congress (I) and 27 members of parties allied to Congress (I).
The BJP and the Left Front parties voted against Shekhar, as did the Singh loyalists in the Janata Dal.
A new Union Council of Ministers was sworn in on Nov. 21 [see p. 37345 for composition of previous Council of Ministers].
It comprised Shekhar, Devi Lal, 13 ministers, three ministers of state with independent charge, 13 other ministers of state and four deputy ministers.
Chandra Shekhar Prime Minister; Minister of Defence; Home Affairs; Information and Broadcasting Devi Lal Deputy Prime Minister; Minister of Agriculture; Tourism V. C. Shukla External Affairs Subramanian Swamy Commerce, Law and Justice Yaswant Sinha Finance Satya Prakash Malaviya Petroleum and Chemicals; Parliamentary Affairs Shakul-Ur-Rehman Health and Family Welfare Janeshwar Mishra Railways Rajmanfal Pande Human Resources Development Hukum Dev Narain Singh Textiles; Food Processing Industries Kalyan Singh Kalvi Energy Manubhai Koyadia Water Resources Daulat Ram Saran Urban Development Asoke Kumar Sen Steel and Mines Rao Birendra Singh Food and Civil Supplies Ministers of state with independent charge Maneka Gandhi Environment and Forests Sanjay Singh Communications Harmohan Dhawan Civil Aviation
New Indian Council of Ministers
Maneka Gandhi had resigned from the Singh government on Oct. 26.
Five other junior ministers, including Janeshwar Mishra, who had resigned from Singh's government during late October and early November, were appointed to Shekhar's Cabinet.
Imposition of President's rule in Assam
In its first major policy decision the Shekhar government imposed President's rule in the north-eastern state of Assam on Nov. 27.
The entire state was also declared a "disturbed area" .
The decision was taken after the government had considered a report on the deteriorating state of law and order, a result of the activities of the separatist United Liberation Front of Assam (ULFA).
Assam, in common with other north-eastern states, had long been troubled by secessionist groups.
During 1989 the main source of rebellion in the state had been Bodo tribesmen [see pp. 36694; 37348].
The ULFA, a Maoist group which had risen to prominence in 1990, controlled large tracts of upper Assam and had carried out a series of assassinations, kidnappings and bomb attacks.
The group reportedly carried out joint operations with members of the National Socialist Council of Nagaland (NSCN) and with guerrilla groups from Myanma (Burma).
ASIA — PACIFIC
AFGHANISTAN
Peace negotiations in Geneva
On Nov. 21 President Najibullah confirmed during a press conference at the UN's Geneva offices that he had held talks with "prominent personalities of the opposition side" on a "political solution" to end 12 years of civil war.
Najibullah said that these talks had taken place in Geneva and were "a cornerstone…for advancing the peace process" .
Emphasising that "the key to a peaceful solution lies in the hands of Afghans themselves" , he said nevertheless that the talks had been made possible by the "new, positive and changing" United States attitude, a comment widely regarded as a reference to recent US congressional moves to cut aid to the mujahedeen by 10 per cent.
The talks represented the first significant move towards peace since the announcement in February 1988 of the withdrawal of Soviet troops which was completed in February 1989 [see pp. 35785; 35970-71; 36448-49].
Reports suggested that discussions had centred on the creation of a coalition government which would exclude some of the more militant fundamentalist groups.
Najibullah made no mention of resigning, as demanded by resistance groups, but said that he supported the creation of a joint commission embracing opposition groups, including monarchists, to administer the country while preparing for UN-supervised elections.
Najibullah refused to identify the opposition leaders he had met, but it was believed that they included the leading National Islamic Front (NIF) moderate Pir Sayed Ahmed Gailani and Seghbatullah Mujjaddedi, the president of the Pakistan-based Afghan Interim Government (AIG — see p. 36449), as well as two men linked with ex-king Mohammad Zahir Shah, namely his close confidant and former Prime Minister Mohammad Yusuf and the ex-king's son-in-law, Gen. Abdul Wali Khan.
On Nov 20 a spokesman for Gailani had denied reports that he intended to meet Najibullah, and on Nov. 21 Mujjaddedi also denied meeting him, adding that "neither we nor our representatives are ready to hold talks with the puppet Najib or his representative" .
ASIA — PACIFIC
PAKISTAN
Swearing-in of new government — Lifting of state of emergency
On Nov. 6 Mian Mohammad Nawaz Sharif was sworn in by President Ghulam Ishaq Khan as Prime Minister.
Shortly before his appointment, Sharif had won the support of 153 members of the National Assembly, against 39 for Mohammad Afzal Khan of the Awami National Party (ANP).
Sharif, 41, was backed by the coalition Islamic Democratic Alliance (IDA), which had won a landslide victory over the Pakistan People's Party (PPP) in the general election held in October [see pp. 37763-64].
He was Pakistan's first Punjabi Prime Minister and the first industrialist to hold the office, breaking with the tradition of filling the post with a member of the powerful (and generally Sindhi) landowning classes.
In his first act as Prime Minister on Nov. 7, Sharif lifted the state of emergency imposed after the dismissal of the Bhutto government in August [see pp. 37652-53].
*Mian Mohammad Nawaz Sharif Prime Minister; Defence Sahibzada Yakub Khan Foreign Affairs Sartaj Aziz Finance and Economic Affairs **Malik Mohammad Naeem Khan Commerce *Ghulam Murtaza Khan Jatoi Communications **Mir Hazar Khan Bajrani Railways **Islam Nabi Production *Syed Tariq Mahmood Housing and Construction *Rana Chander Singh Narcotics Control *Syed Ali Gohar Shah Youth Affairs *Sardar Yakub Khan Nasir Environment and Urban Affairs Choudhry Shujat Hussain Industries and Interior *Maulana Abdus Sattar Khan Niazi Local Government; Rural Development; Special Education and Social Welfare *Syed Fakhar Imam Education; Law; Justice and Parliamentary Affairs *Choudhry Nisar Ali Khan Petroleum and Natural Resources *Choudhry Hamid Nasir Chatha Planning; Development; Science and Technology *Syed Tasnim Nawaz Gardezi Health **Lt. -Gen. (retd) Abdul Majid Malik Food and Agriculture *Mohammad Ejazul Haq Labour; Manpower and Overseas Pakistani Affairs *Sardar Mehtab Ahmad Khan Kashmir Affairs and Northern Areas **Roedad Khan Adviser to Prime Minister **Ijlal Zaidi Adviser to Prime Minister on Defence *New Appointment.
**Altered portfolio.
New Pakistan Cabinet
Strike by transport workers
Owners of transport companies called off a nation-wide strike on Nov. 13 after six days of widespread disruption affecting bus, train and taxi services.
The strike followed a Sharia decree endorsed by the Supreme Court which ruled that Islamic codes entitled families of those killed in road accidents to claim Rs170,000 (approximately US$8,000) in "blood money" from the drivers or owners of the vehicles involved.
Proprietors and employees of transport companies protested that such payments would ruin most lorry and bus drivers, whose monthly earnings averaged the equivalent of $50-$100.
Negotiations between transport owners and members of the newly appointed government led to an agreement to await a final decision by the Council of Islamic Ideology.
Meeting with Indian Prime Minister
The new Prime Minister met his Indian counterpart, Chandra Shekhar, near Male, capital of the Maldives, on Nov. 22.
The two leaders, attending the fifth summit of the South Asian Association for Regional Co-operation (SAARC)[see pp. 37856-57], agreed that a third round of talks at thelevel of foreign secretaries would be held in Islamabad on Dec. 18.
ASIA — PACIFIC
NEPAL
New Constitution
King Birendra Bir Bikram Shah Deva formally proclaimed a new Constitution for Nepal on Nov. 9.
This marked the culmination of a pro-democracy campaign launched by opposition groups in February 1990.
The King had approved the draft constitution in September [see p. 37711].
However, on Oct. 21 he had submitted a number of amendments to the document, provoking demonstrations in Kathmandu and other towns on Oct. 24 and throughout the succeeding week.
Replacing the 1962 constitution, which had enshrined the multi-tiered system of panchayat representation, the new Constitution began with a preamble recognizing fundamental human rights, parliamentary government, a multiparty system, a constitutional monarchy and an independent judiciary.
Executive power was vested jointly in the King and the Council of Ministers.
Legislative power was vested in a bicameral parliament consisting of a 205-member elected House of Representatives and a 60-member National Council, to include 10 members appointed by the King.
Freedom of expression and of the press, and freedom of peaceful assembly, of association and of movement were all guaranteed.
The Nepalese path to democracy
Feb. 18.
After weeks of simmering tension Nepal's proscribed opposition parties launch a pro-democracy "stir" .
March 29.
Foreign Minister Shailendra Kumar Upadhyaya resigns in protest at police brutality during pro-democracy demonstrations.
April 6.
King Birendra appoints Lokendra Bahadur Chand as the new Prime Minister and sets up a commission to investigate allegations of police violence; later the same day the police shoot dead as many as 150 demonstrators outside the Royal Palace in Kathmandu.
April 8.
The King lifts the ban on political parties and the opposition calls off its "stir" .
April 9.
The King meets with opposition leaders for the first time.
April 16.
Prime Minister Chand resigns and the King dissolves parliament.
April 19.
A new government is sworn in headed by opposition leader Krishna Prasad Bhattarai.
May 17.
The King announces a general amnesty for the country's political prisoners.
May 21.
The King formally delegates parliament's powers to the Bhattarai Cabinet.
May 30.
A committee is established to prepare a new Constitution.
Sept. 10.
The King approves the committee's draft constitution.
Oct. 24.
Demonstrators take to the streets of Kathmandu following attempts by the King to submit a counter-draft to the proposed constitution.
Nov. 9.
King Birendra promulgates the new Constitution and ends the absolute rule of the Shah dynasty.
ASIA — PACIFIC
SRI LANKA
Recapture of Mannar by Army — LTTE success at Mankulam
The Minister of State for Defence, Ranjan Wijeratne, said on Nov. 1 that two Army battalions had started operations to "liberate" the north-western island of Mannar amidst reports that more than 45,000 Moslems had been forced to flee the area under threat from the Liberation Tigers of Tamil Eelam (LTTE), the main Tamil separatist group.
Reports from the Muslim Refugees' Relief Organization on Oct. 29 suggested that Moslems in Mannar were being subjected to widespread harassment by Tamil rebels, allegedly for co-operating with the security forces.
On Nov. 15 the political wing of the LTTE denied these allegations.
[For accusations of LTTE massacre of Moslems in August see p. 37654.]
On Nov. 15 Wijeratne announced that Mannar had been "cleared of terrorists" and that 500 Moslem homeguards were being trained by the security forces to protect Moslem villages.
LTTE success at Mankulam
Reports quoting LTTE sources said on Nov. 25 that an important Army camp at Mankulam in the north-east had fallen to LTTE rebels, with hundreds of casualties on both sides.
About 1,500 rebels were thought to have taken part in the assault which was carried out in the face of sustained bombing from the Air Force.
Defence Ministry officials on Nov. 26 confirmed the storming of Mankulam camp, giving casualty figures of 200 rebels and at least 100 soldiers killed.
European Parliament report
A European Parliament report released on Nov. 6 claimed that more than 60,000 people had been killed or had disappeared in fighting since 1987.
The report stressed the lack of information from the north and east of the country where thousands of civilians were reported killed since the escalation of fighting in June 1990.
ASIA — PACIFIC
BANGLADESH
Declaration of state of emergency
President Hussain Mohammad Ershad declared a state of emergency on Nov. 27 following weeks of anti-government demonstrations [see pp. 37775-76].
It was the third such emergency imposed by Ershad since his bloodless coup in 1982 [see pp. 31501-02].
In an address on radio and television, Ershad said that his action suspending all civil rights and imposing press censorship was necessary to "save the country from the octopus of destructive politics" .
Hours earlier, riots had erupted following reports of the arrest of opposition leaders, including Sheikh Hasina Wajed, leader of the Awami League.
The leader of the Bangladesh Nationalist Party (BNP), Begum Khaleda Zia, was reported to have escaped and gone into hiding.
Internal unrest had grown after the imposition on Oct. 31 of an indefinite curfew on Dhaka and Chittagong following the outbreak of communal violence between Hindus and Moslems.
It was estimated that seven people were killed in rioting between Oct. 10 and Nov. 10.
On Nov. 15, police shot and killed four people during a demonstration by industrial workers.
The Financial Times of Nov. 22 reported that 17 people had been killed since the outbreak of disturbances in late October.
On Nov. 17, Ershad accused "a neighbouring country" (assumed to be India) of fomenting the unrest.
On Nov. 20 opposition groups issued a joint statement calling for the immediate resignation of Ershad and fair and free elections within three months and announcing a general strike on Nov. 26.
Following the imposition of the state of emergency, opposition parties defied government bans and staged massive protest demonstrations on Nov. 28 and 30.
Troops opened fire on crowds armed with iron staves and knives.
The Guardian of Dec. 1 reported that 21 people had been killed since the declaration of emergency; opposition sources put the death toll at 50, while government officials said that the number was closer to five.
ASIA — PACIFIC
SAARC
Fifth SAARC summit
The fifth summit meeting was held in the Maldives on Nov. 21-23 of the seven-nation South Asian Association for Regional Co-operation (SAARC)[see p. 36485 for fourth summit held in Pakistan in December 1988].
The fifth summit had originally been scheduled to take place in Sri Lanka during 1989, but the Sri Lankan government had refused to host the meeting whilst Indian troops remained on its soil [see p. 37357].
Indian forces eventually completed their withdrawal from Sri Lanka in March 1990 [see p. 37316].
Those attending the summit were President Gayoom of the Maldives (the organization's new Chair), President Ershad of Bangladesh, King Jigme Singye Wangchuk of Bhutan, the Indian Prime Minister, Chandra Shekhar, the Nepalese Prime Minister, Krishna Prasad Bhattarai, the Prime Minister of Pakistan, Nawaz Sharif, and the Sri Lankan Prime Minister Dingiri Banda Wijetunge.
The summit was held at a time when the internal and external relations of a number of the SAARC members were in a state of turmoil.
Therefore an important element of the summit was a wide range of bilateral meetings, especially those between Chandra Shekhar and Nawaz Sharif.
Relations between India and Pakistan had been severely strained during 1990 as a result of the revolt in disputed Kashmir.
A final declaration adopted on Nov. 23 called on the SAARC to extend its activities in the core areas of economic co-operation, biotechnology, environmental issues and tourism.
The leaders decided to observe the 1990s as the "decade of the girl child" and to incorporate the recommendations of the September 1990 World Summit for Children [see p. 37732].
The leaders also approved the creation of a human resources development centre in Pakistan, a regional tuberculosis centre in Nepal and a regional documentation centre in India.
ASIA — PACIFIC
MYANMA
Suppression of opposition and of religious protest
In a crackdown against opposition activities in late October and early November, all opposition parties were invited to pledge allegiance to the decree 1/90 issued on July 27 by the State Law and Order Restoration Council (SLORC).
This decree vested all powers in the SLORC, and required that a new constitution be drawn up (by the SLORC) and submitted to a referendum before the transfer to a civilian government — a process likely to take at least two years.
A week-long series of arrests of leaders of the opposition National League for Democracy (NLD) in late October had left only four of the 16 NLD central executive committee members at liberty as of Nov. 1.
In addition to NLD leaders already in detention (including Aung San Suu Kyi, Gen. (retd) Tin U, Kyi Maung and Chit Khaing — see p. 37711), a further 50 senior party figures had been arrested, including at least 10 MPs and four members of the central executive committee — Khin Maung Swe, Kyaw Min, Chan Aye and Soe Thein.
NLD offices all over the country were raided.
Only the main student party, the Democracy Party for a New Society, refused to sign decree 1/90; eight of its leaders were subsequently arrested.
The remaining NLD leaders signed the endorsement on Nov. 12, thus abandoning their demand for an immediate transfer of power and in effect nullifying their May election victory.
Earlier ending of boycott by monks — Ban on Buddhist sects
A religious boycott involving an estimated 50,000 of Burma's 300,000 monks ended on Oct. 20, following an apology from the central military commander and the head of the religious affairs department over the shooting of two monks at a demonstration on Aug. 8 in Mandalay, Burma's second city [see p. 37655].
The chairman of the SLORC, Saw Maung, had on Oct. 18 given the monks a three-day ultimatum to end their protest or face "serious consequences" .
The boycott had begun on Sept. 6, with monks in Yangon, Monyma and elsewhere joining those in Mandalay in refusing to accept alms from soldiers, or to perform religious services for them or their families.
At Insein in Yangon, troops were brought in when 400 monks extended the boycott beyond the Oct. 20 deadline.
An Oct. 20 order to "purify" religion, outlawing all but nine Buddhist sects and introducing prison terms of up to three years for those found posing as monks, became law on Oct. 31.
On Oct. 21, regional military commanders were ordered to round up all members of "unlawful" religious associations.
According to Yangon radio, troops raided 20 Mandalay monasteries, seizing illegal publications, flags, weapons and other items revealing links with the NLD and the defunct Communist Party of Burma, and arresting some 350 monks.
Student hijack attempt
In an attempt to focus world attention on military repression in Burma, a Thai airliner was hijacked on Nov. 10 by two Yangon University students demanding the release of Suu Kyi and of two student activists, an end to martial law and military tribunals, and the release of all political prisoners.
After their statement had been released to the press, the unarmed hijackers surrendered to Indian authorities in Calcutta where they were detained for trial.
ASIA
THAILAND
Government-military tension — Minor government reshuffle
A dispute over the Army's seizure of a mobile radio unit increased tension between the government and the military during November, leading to a minor government reshuffle.
The mobile radio truck, belonging to the Mass Communications Organization of Thailand, had apparently been interfering with military radio frequencies, and the armed forces sought the removal from the Cabinet of Police Capt. Chalerm Yubamrung, a Minister attached to the Prime Minister's Office, when Chalerm publicly criticized the military over the affair.
Army C.-in-C.
Suchinda Krapayoon warned the Prime Minister, Maj.-Gen.
Chatichai Choonhavan that if he was not prepared to "solve the problem correctly" he would "risk losing his popularity among the military" .
Sustained pressure in the Army media was followed by a decision by Suchinda on Nov. 12 to ban "unusual" gatherings of more than 10 people outside Government House, thereby preventing the holding of a pro-Chalerm rally; the ban was lifted on Nov. 16.
Chatichai finally announced on Nov. 22 his promised Cabinet reshuffle, in which Chalerm was demoted to become Deputy Education Minister, exchanging places with Sora-ath Klinprathum.
[For last government reshuffle in August 1990 see p. 37655-56.].
Chatichai had not actually dismissed Chalerm, he said, "as that would make the people think that the government had acted under pressure from the military" .
Other changes in the reshuffle were the promotion of Prachuab Chaiyasarn from Deputy Minister of Science, Technology and Energy to Minister of Public Health; the promotion of Charoen Khantawong from Deputy Minister for Agriculture and Co-operatives to Minister of Science, Technology and Energy; the transfer of Suthas Ngernmuen from Deputy Public Health Minister to Deputy Agriculture and Co-operatives Minister; and the appointment of Anek Tabsuwan as Deputy Public Health Minister.
ASIA — PACIFIC
LAOS
Visits by Thai Premier and Foreign Minister
The Thai Premier, Gen. Chatichai Choonhaven, met his Lao counterpart, Chairman of the Council of Ministers Kaysone Phomvihane, in Vientiane, the Lao capital, on Nov. 2, when they discussed implementation of the 1988 joint communiqué on exchanges, economic co-operation and ways to avoid border conflicts [see p. 37090].
On Nov. 18-19 the Thai Foreign Minister, Subin Pinkhayan, held "frank and useful" talks in Vientiane with his Lao counterpart, Gen. Phoune Sipaseuth, who expressed satisfaction with the "new atmosphere" of relations, involving regular government-level and military talks and co-operation in developing the Mekong River basin.
It was agreed to extend air services.
Laos and Thailand had earlier signed an investment protection agreement, and had established a friendship association.
Arrest of former deputy ministers over coup plot
Two former deputy ministers, Thongsouk Saisangkhi and Latsami Khamphoui, and a former Justice Ministry official were arrested in October for "activities aimed at overthrowing the regime" , as reported by the Lao news agency.
According to the Bangkok Post of Nov. 2, more than 40 top-level officials, including Thongsouk Saisangkhi, had formed a Social Democrat Group to work for the introduction of a multi-party democracy.
ASIA
VIETNAM
Visit by Indonesian President — Other external contacts
President Suharto of Indonesia, accompanied by his Foreign Minister Ali Alatas, Economy and Finance Minister Radius Prawiro and State Secretary Moerdiono, made an official visit to Vietnam on Nov. 19-21.
Suharto held talks with Nguyen Van Linh, secretary-general of the Communist Party of Vietnam, with Vo Chi Cong, President of the State Council and effectively head of state, and with Do Muoi, Chairman of the Council of Ministers, which focused on prospects for co-operation between the two countries, and on Cambodia, which was also discussed in a meeting between Alatas and his Vietnamese counterpart Nguyen Co Thach.
In talks with Tran Duc Luong, a Vice-Chairman of the Council of Ministers, Prawiro said that Indonesia would support Vietnam's application for aid from international financial institutions.
An agreement was signed on economic, scientific and technological co-operation, and a financial joint venture, Indovina, was established — Vietnam's first such joint venture with a foreign country.
It was also agreed to develop co-operation in oil and gas exploration, transport, tourism, forestry and agriculture.
Vatican delegation visit
A Vatican delegation, led by Cardinal Roger Etchegaray, visited Vietnam on Nov. 7-13 for negotiations on the appointment of five new Vietnamese bishops, whose nomination without consultation had angered the Vietnamese government.
The visit was the first official contact between the Vatican and the Vietnamese government.
Etchegaray held talks with Do Muoi, Nguyen Co Thach, Maj.-Gen.
Mai Chi Tho, Minister of the Interior, and Nguyen Chinh, acting head of the State Commission for Religious Affairs.
A Vietnamese Foreign Ministry spokeswoman described the visit as "an important step" in improving relations between Vietnam and the Vatican.
Start of Soviet withdrawal from Cam Ranh Bay
The new Soviet ambassador to Vietnam, Rashit Khamidulin, announced on Oct. 31 that the Soviet Union had started withdrawing its troops from its base at Vietnam's Cam Ranh Bay [see also p. 37288].
 "Biggest case of fraud" — Currency revaluation
The trial of 22 managers of the Thanh Huong perfume factory, charged in connection with the "biggest case of fraud known to date" , involving 153,000 million dong, concluded on Oct. 27.
The defendants were sentenced to prison terms ranging from one year (suspended) to life.
On Oct. 1 the Vietnam State Bank announced a new official exchange rate of US$1.00=5,800 dong.
A new exchange mechanism had been introduced on Sept. 29 to enable the dong to respond to gold and foreign exchange rate fluctuations on the open market.
ASIA
CAMBODIA
 "Significant progress" at Jakarta meeting
An international meeting on Cambodia was held in Jakarta, Indonesia, on Nov. 9-11 in preparation for the reconvening of the Paris International Conference on Cambodia (PICC).
 "Significant progress" was reportedly made, resulting in a "broadening of the consensus" earlier arrived at by the UN Security Council.
The meeting accepted the idea of an overall agreement with five annexes concerning the role of the proposed UN Transitional Authority in Cambodia (UNTAC), a ceasefire, elections, the repatriation of refugees, and a new constitution for Cambodia.
Attending were a representative of the UN Secretary-General, representatives of the five permanent members of the UN Security Council (China, France, the Soviet Union, the United Kingdom and the United States), the Foreign Minister of Indonesia (which together with France chaired the PICC), and representatives of the countries co-chairing three committees under the PICC (India, Canada, Malaysia, Laos, Australia and Japan).
The warring Cambodian factions did not participate.
Finalization of peace plan at Paris meeting
On Nov. 23-25 representatives of France and Indonesia, as co-chairs of the PICC, met with the other four permanent members of the UN Security Council in Paris and agreed on the final draft of the Cambodian peace settlement.
Cambodian resistance leaders Prince Norodom Sihanouk and Son Sann were in Paris at the same time.
Sihanouk called for a "fraternal" meeting of the four Cambodian factions.
This invitation was accepted by the other resistance factions but refused by the State of Cambodia (SOC).
Sihanouk was also reported as saying that if he were made chair of the Cambodia Supreme National Council (SNC) he would allow Hun Sen, the SOC Prime Minister, to become vice-chair.
This concession was ignored by the other resistance parties, and Hun Sen said in a speech at the end of the month that he would not accept Sihanouk as SNC chair and did not want to be an SNC vice-chair.
SOC reactions to Jakarta meeting
While the Jakarta meeting was taking place the SOC Foreign Minister, Hor Nam Hong, sent a memorandum to the co-chairs of the PICC insisting that the powers of the UNTAC should be "very clearly defined" and that the two rival Cambodian governments should not be dissolved in the transitional period before elections.
The memorandum also said that the UNTAC should not be a peacekeeping force, but rather that the Cambodian parties should exercise self-restraint.
This apparently more hardline stance of the SOC was reinforced by Hun Sen, when in a speech on Nov. 24 he indicated that his government rejected the Security Council's peace plan and "will not agree to what is decided in Paris" .
Hun Sen said that dismantling his government and disarming the SOC armed forces would be unacceptable, and that the UN role should be limited to overseeing elections, with UN troops being only lightly armed for self-defence.
Chinese announcement of end to arms supply to Khmers Rouges
On Nov. 22 China announced that it had not "provided any military assistance to the resistance forces in Cambodia" since the UN agreed its peace plan in October.
This was the first time that China had indicated its willingness unilaterally to halt the supply of arms to Cambodia.
However, there were reports of fresh supplies of Chinese arms being made to the Khmers Rouges — possibly under old agreements — and Hun Sen said that his government did not believe China's statement.
ASIA — PACIFIC
CHINA
Dissidents — Easing of international sanctions — Devaluation of currency
Laying of charges against two leading dissidents — Release of dissident writer
Relatives of two leading dissidents, Wang Juntao and Chen Zeming, were informed on Nov. 25 that they had been formally charged with sedition and spreading counter-revolutionary propaganda.
Wang and Chen, formerly editor and publisher respectively of the banned journal Economic Studies Weekly, had been arrested in October 1989, and the government-controlled media had accused them of playing a major role in organizing the pro-democracy movement of April-June 1989 [see pp. 36587; 36640-41; 36720-22].
Wang Ruowang, a prominent writer and dissident, was unexpectedly released on Oct. 29 after being held in detention in Shanghai for over a year.
Wang, aged 72, had been placed in detention on Sept. 8, 1989, as part of the nationwide security crackdown in the aftermath of the June 1989 Tiananmen Square massacre.
Resumption of Japanese loan programme — Other signs of easing of international sanctions
Japan announced on Nov. 2 that it would reactivate a development loan programme for China which had been frozen after the Tiananmen Square massacre in June 1989.
The Japanese decision was the latest sign that sanctions imposed by many countries were gradually being eased.
In October the European Communities had ended its ban on high-level diplomatic contacts [see p. 37783]and on Oct. 30 the German Bundestag voted to reinstate development aid.
In mid-November a United States congressional delegation visited China for the first time since the massacre.
Devaluation of currency
In an attempt to "deepen the country's economic and monetary reform and accelerate economic development" the government devalued the renminbi yuan on Nov. 17.
The 9.57 per cent devaluation lowered the value of the yuan from US$1.00=4.72 to US$1.00=5.23 yuan.
ASIA — PACIFIC
TAIWAN
Relations with China and Soviet Union
Draft statute on relations with China
On Nov. 1 Taiwan's Executive Yuan or Cabinet approved a draft statute on relations with the Chinese mainland, which allowed for the legalization of civilian contacts between the two sides.
The privately funded Foundation for Exchange Across the Taiwan Strait was set up on Nov. 21 as the "only important" channel entrusted by the Mainland Affairs Council with the handling of civilian affairs.
The 16-member Mainland Affairs Council had itself come formally into being only the previous month, when the Executive Yuan on Oct. 18 approved its constitution.
Replacing the ad hoc Cabinet Mainland Affairs Task Force, the council was composed of the government departmental heads, with Vice-Premier Shih Chi-yang as chairman and up to three vice-chairmen.
Taiwan's policy since late 1987 had involved the gradual easing of restrictions on contacts with the mainland.
A review of this policy, however, had urged "a more cautious attitude" towards the mainland, which had so far failed to respond to Taiwan's initiatives on government-to-government contacts [see p. 37455].
Contacts with Soviet Union
The Soviet Minister of Culture, Nikolai Gubenko, became the most senior Soviet official to visit Taiwan for 40 years when he arrived on Nov. 11 for "private discussions" on possible cultural contacts.
In a "private" visit to Taipei on Oct. 27-29, the mayor of Moscow, Gavriil Popov, had met a Taiwan Foreign Ministry official, Frederick Chien, and discussed the development of closer economic and cultural ties.
The visit concluded with an agreement to send a Taiwan trade delegation to Moscow in early 1991 to discuss the exchange of trade offices.
The visit, albeit unofficial, had provoked expressions of concern from the Chinese ambassador in Moscow.
Other foreign relations
Nicaragua become the 28th state recognising Taiwan when it re-established relations on Nov. 6, having switched recognition to China in 1985.
Meanwhile, Taiwan opened trade offices with consular facilities in Peru and Bolivia, both of which officially recognised China.
De facto dual recognition was also boosted by agreements with Australia and Canada to upgrade their offices in Taiwan, while Saudi Arabia, which had recently established relations with China, allowed Taiwan to retain the use of its former embassy.
During a visit to Taiwan on Oct. 27-29, Prime Minister Lee Kuan Yew of Singapore also made it clear that "substantive relations" with Taiwan were to remain unchanged despite the resumption of ties with China [see also p. 37780].
ASIA — PACIFIC
JAPAN
Enthronement of Akihito
Emperor Akihito, 56, formally proclaimed himself the 125th emperor of Japan on Nov. 12, in a lavish 30-minute ceremony held 20 months after the death of his father, Hirohito (in death known as Showa).
A total of 500 heads of state and foreign dignitaries from 158 countries witnessed the Emperor's formal accession to the Chrysanthemum Throne, as did 2,500 Japanese guests.
Akihito was the first monarch to be enthroned under Japan's 1947 Constitution, a United States-inspired document which imposed a clear separation between church and state in order to undermine the practice of emperor-worship implicit within the traditional Shinto religion.
Although a series of Shinto ceremonies was held at the palace, much of the religious content was stripped from the state-funded Sokui-no-rei, or Enthronement Ceremony.
This point was underlined in the Imperial address, in which Akihito vowed to observe the Constitution and to serve as the "symbol of the state and the unity of the people" as stipulated by the Constitution.
Nevertheless, many on the political left were critical of the occasion and members of the Japanese Communist Party refused to attend.
Following the Emperor's address, Prime Minister Toshiki Kaifu read a congratulatory statement on behalf of the Japanese people in which he appealed for the construction of a country which was energetic, culturally rich and dedicated to the promotion of international peace and co-operation.
Akihito's endorsement of the Constitution, said Kaifu, meant that the Japanese people's "love and respect for your majesty is yet deeper" .
The Prime Minister then led the guests in three shouts of "banzai!" , a traditional call for the longevity of the Emperor which had also been the battle-cry of the Imperial Army during the Pacific War 1941-45.
Almost 120,000 people lined the streets to watch the motorcade which carried Akihito and his wife, the Empress Michiko, from the Imperial Palace to their residence at the Akasaka Palace, 5 km away.
Despite the presence of some 37,000 police in the capital, left-wing radicals attempted to disrupt the coronation.
In the days preceding the ceremony Shinto and military targets had been bombed or attacked with homemade rockets, resulting in the death of a policeman on Nov. 2.
There were 35 attacks on Nov. 12 itself, including the use of smoke bombs and fires to disrupt rail and subway travel, and the firing of at least 10 rockets at the Imperial Palace.
All of the missiles missed their target and the attacks resulted in no casualties and little damage to property.
The final and most controversial aspect of Akihito's accession process, the Daijosai, or Great Food Offering Ritual, was held in the grounds of the Imperial Palace on the night of Nov. 22.
This mysterious Shinto rite, during which the new Emperor communed with Amaterasu Omikami, the Sun Goddess, by tradition marked the Emperor's final attainment of divine status.
Critics claimed that the government's endorsement of the Daijosai represented a clear breach of the constitutional separation of church and state, and also violated the Constitution in that it reinvested the monarch with divine status.
However, the government insisted that the ritual was only an extension of the Niinamesai ceremony (a 2,000-year-old annual tradition in which the Emperor offered a token of the new rice harvest to the Sun Goddess), and as such it was an integral element of Japanese culture.
Controversy over Gulf forces legislation
The ruling Liberal Democratic Party (LDP) on Nov. 4 narrowly won a by-election for a seat in the upper chamber of the Diet for the conservative Aichi prefecture, the home region of Prime Minister Toshiki Kaifu.
The vote was widely seen as a referendum on the LDP's controversial UN Peace Co-operation Bill, which was withdrawn three days later.
This bill had proposed sending members of the Japanese military to assist the international force currently ranged against Iraq in the Gulf.
It would have involved the country's first overseas military deployment since 1945, and was opposed by the domestic opposition and by several of Japan's Asian neighbours.
As a large consumer of Middle Eastern oil, Japan had been criticized for not making a fuller contribution to the international effort against Iraq.
Hence, following his recent tour of the region [see p. 37758], Kaifu promised additional aid and loans to countries adversely affected by the crisis, and also proposed sending a token force of up to 2,000 non-combatants drawn from Japan's Self-Defence Forces, police and fire brigade.
A special 30-day session of the Diet was convened on Oct. 12 in order to debate the bill which would have allowed the corps to be dispatched to the Gulf.
Although the LDP's overall majority in the House of Representatives ensured that the proposal would have been approved by the lower chamber, the party's minority position in the House of Counsellors (where it controlled 113 of the 252 seats) made approval in the upper house unlikely.
As the debate progressed it became clear not merely that the country's four opposition parties were prepared to co-operate to defeat the proposal, but that several senior figures within the ruling party — including Shin Kanemaru, leader of the largest LDP faction — had withdrawn their support from the bill.
These factors, together with the narrowness of the LDP's victory in Aichi (the combined vote of the Japan Socialist Party and the Japan Communist Party — both of which campaigned against the bill — comfortably exceeded that of the winning candidate) persuaded Kaifu to withdraw the bill on Nov. 7.
ASIA — PACIFIC
NORTH KOREA
Holding of exploratory talks with Japan
Official delegations from Japan and North Korea on Nov. 4 ended two days of exploratory talks in Beijing aimed at the establishment of diplomatic relations.
The negotiators agreed to meet again before the end of November, and although no date was arranged for the holding of full normalization talks, it was suggested that these might begin before the end of 1990.
The two main obstacles to the normalization of relations were identified as Japan's demand that North Korea allow international inspection of its nuclear facilities, and North Korea's insistence on compensation for alleged Japanese hostility over the previous 70 years.
The Japanese government had indicated a willingness to provide "economic co-operation" to compensate for its colonization of Korea from 1910 to 1945, but refused to accept any liability for the post-1945 period.
A second round of exploratory talks was held in the Chinese capital on Nov. 17, when it was agreed that Japanese restrictions on travel to North Korea would be lifted by April 1991.
Further preliminary talks were arranged for December.
ASIA — PACIFIC
SOUTH KOREA
Postponement of DLP plan for constitutional reforms
It was decided on Nov. 2 to postpone the implementation of a controversial plan to amend the Constitution in order to replace the existing presidential form of government with a Cabinet system until after the 1991 presidential elections.
The postponement avoided the threatened break-up of the ruling coalition Democratic Liberal Party (DLP).
The party's executive chairman, the former opposition figure Kim Young Sam, had distanced himself from the plan, although his signature, that of his DLP co-chairman Kim Jong Pil, and that of President Roh Tae Woo, had been on a secret memorandum leaked to the press in October.
Kim Young Sam had boycotted party activities from late October, threatening to leave the party along with 50 parliamentarians belonging to his faction unless he was officially confirmed as DLP second-in-command.
He also sought to nominate 50 per cent of DLP candidates in the 1992 parliamentary elections, and the power to censure party members, some of whom had sought to undermine his power.
At a dinner with Kim on Nov. 6, Roh promised to reinforce Kim's powers by curbing his detractors within the party, and agreed to press ahead with internal party democratization measures.
Ending of opposition PPD boycott of legislature
The opposition Party of Peace and Democracy (PPD) ended its four-month boycott of the National Assembly parliament on Nov. 19, while the smaller opposition Democratic Party, with eight parliamentarians, had still to decide its position.
In July all 78 opposition legislators had walked out en masse in protest over the DLP's attempt to force bills through parliament, demanding an early general election [see pp. 37609; 37714].
The PPD and the DLP agreed that local assembly elections should be held by June 1991, with elections for governors and mayors in early 1992.
Resignation of minister over nuclear research centre incident
Chong Kun Mo, Minister of Science and Technology, was reported on Nov. 9 to have resigned over a "violent" incident concerning plans to build a nuclear power research complex on Anmyon Island.
He was replaced by Kim Chin Hyon, editor-in-chief and managing director of the South Korean daily Tong-a Ilbo.
ASIA — PACIFIC
SINGAPORE
Formal retirement as Prime Minister by Lee Kuan Yew
After 31 years in office, Prime Minister Lee Kuan Yew submitted his resignation to President Wee Kim Wee on Nov. 26.
His previously designated successor, Goh Chok Tong, hitherto First Deputy Prime Minister and Defence Minister (which he remained), was sworn in on Nov. 28.
[For Lee's announcement in October 1989 of his retirement and his designation in January 1990 of Goh as his successor see pp. 36976; 37085.]
Lee remained secretary-general of the ruling People's Action Party (PAP), which he had founded, and also took on the post of Senior Minister in the new Cabinet.
Lee Kuan Yew, 67, had ruled Singapore since its expulsion from the Malaysian federation in 1965, guiding its development into a thriving and effectively one-party city-state.
His elitist paternalism underlay laws which instituted strict political and social controls for what he saw as the country's politically immature population.
Announcing his forthcoming retirement in 1988, he had made it clear that he would remain on hand to step in if necessary.
Goh Chok Tong, 49, had been a shipping executive before entering politics.
By contrast with his predecessor, he had declared his intention to introduce more "participation, accommodation and consensus" in a "kinder, gentler society" .
In the new government, announced on Oct. 15, Lee's son, Lee Hsien Loong, was promoted to Deputy Prime Minister and took over the Trade and Industry portfolio.
Other changes were as follows: Deputy Prime Minister: Ong Teng Cheong; Foreign Affairs: Mong Kan Seng; Health: Yeo Cheow Tong; Information and the Arts (new ministry): George Yeo (acting).
Military accord with USA
An agreement on increased United States use of Singapore's military facilities was signed in Tokyo on Nov. 13 by Lee Kuan Yew, and US Vice-President Dan Quayle.
US naval units would use Sembawang dockyard for repairs, while Paya Lebar airport would be used for training missions "several times a year" , implying the virtually permanent presence of US aircraft.
A US official statement said that the agreement was "concrete evidence" of US intentions to retain a military presence in south-east Asia "for the forseeable future" .
Lee had offered the use of Singapore's facilities in August 1989 in the light of possible US withdrawals from bases in the Philippines [see p. 37861 for current negotiations there].
Concern over the agreement had been expressed by Malaysia and Indonesia.
The Malaysian Foreign Minister, Abu Hassan Omar, said that US military visits to Singapore would be closely monitored, adding that any move towards setting up a permanent US base would be unacceptable and run counter to the ASEAN goal of establishing a zone of peace, freedom and neutrality.
ASIA
MALAYSIA
Investigation of opposition leader for corruption — Cabinet
Prime Minister Datuk Seri Mahathir Mohamed said on Nov. 5 that the government would investigate the opposition leader Tengku Razaleigh Hamzah for corruption.
This followed claims by Lorraine Osman, former chairman of the London subsidiary of Bank Bumiputra, that money from a collapsed Hong Kong company, Carrian, might have financed the opposition campaign in the general election in October.
Datuk Seri Mahathir Mohamed Prime Minister; Home Affairs Ghafar Baba Deputy Prime Minister; Rural Development *Datuk Abang Abu Bakar Datuk; *Bandar Abang Mustafa Ministers in the Prime Minister's Office *Syed Hamid Albar Minister in the Prime Minister's office; Justice Datuk Seri Ling Liong Sik Transport Datuk Seri S. Samy Vellu Energy, Telecommunications and Post Datuk Seri Lim Keng Yaik Primary Industries Datuk Leo Moggie anak Irok Public Works Datuk Seri Rafidah Aziz International Trade and Industry **Datuk Sulaiman Daud International Trade and Consumer Affairs Datuk Seri Sanusi Junid Agriculture Datuk Seri Anwar Ibrahim Education Datuk Abu Hassan Omar Foreign Affairs Datuk Paduka Daim Zainuddin Finance **Lee Kim Sai Health **Datuk Seri Mohamed Najib Tun Razak Defence Datuk Mohamed Rahmat Information Datuk Sabaruddin Chik Culture, Arts and Tourism **Datuk Napisah Omar National Unity and Social Development **Datuk Mohamad Yusof Nor Public Enterprises **Datuk Lim Ah Lek Human Resources *Low Hian Ding Science, Technology and Environment *Ting Chew Peh Housing and Local Government *Tan Sri Sakaran Dandai Lands and Co-operatives Development *Annuar Musa Youth and Sports *New Appointments.
**Altered responsibilities.
New Malaysian Cabinet
ASIA
INDONESIA
Presidential visit to China
President Suharto of Indonesia, accompanied by his Foreign Minister Ali Alatas, Economy and Finance Minister Radius Prawiro and Minister of State and State Secretary Moerdiono, made a state visit to China on Nov. 14-19, the first by an Indonesian leader since relations were suspended in 1967 [see p. 22482].
Meeting Chinese President Yang Shangkun on Nov. 14, Suharto said that China and Indonesia could step up economic and cultural co-operation in spite of their different social systems.
Yang spoke of the two countries entering "a new phase" in their relations.
Both leaders stressed the 10 principles of the 1955 Bandung Conference on non-alignment [see pp. 14181-84], and the five principles of peaceful coexistence.
Suharto met Chinese Premier Li Peng on Nov. 15 and discussed bilateral relations and international issues.
He also met Chinese Communist Party general secretary Jiang Zemin.
In addition talks were held between Alatas and his Chinese counterpart Qian Qichen, and between Prawiro and Zheng Tuobin, Chinese Minister of Foreign Economic Relations and Trade.
As well as visiting Beijing the Indonesian delegation visited Xian, Canton and Shenzhen.
On the flight back to Indonesia Suharto said that Indonesian communists living in China could return home, although they would have to account for their actions in court.
Before going to China the Indonesian delegation went to Japan for Emperor Akihito 's enthronement on Nov. 12 [see p. 37859].
In a meeting with Japanese Prime Minister Toshiki Kaifu, Suharto asked for Japanese economic aid to Indonesia to continue, while assuring Kaifu that there would be a stable supply of oil to Japan.
Rejection of Fretilin talks offer
The Front for an Independent East Timor (Fretilin) on Nov. 3 offered the Indonesian government unconditional peace talks.
Rejecting this offer outright, Alatas said that the government would not even respond, as "the overwhelming majority of East Timor people have decided to be integrated with Indonesia" .
It was reported, however, that armed forces and police had recently suppressed student-led demonstrations in East Timor against an influx of non-Timorese.
Continuing disturbances in Aceh
In Aceh Province (northern Sumatra) hundreds of people were reported killed and hundreds more missing as a result of fighting between the armed forces and separatist rebels.
The regional military commander blamed most of the deaths on the rebels.
ASIA — PACIFIC
PHILIPPINES
Talks on US bases — Typhoon damage — Arrest of NPA leader
Senior Philippine and United States negotiators held a second round of negotiations in Manila on Nov. 7-9 on the future of the six US military bases in the Philippines.
[For background information and reports on exploratory talks in May see p. 37458; for first round proper in September see p. 37716.]
The negotiating teams were again led by the Philippine Secretary of Foreign Affairs, Raul Manglapus, and the US special negotiator, Richard Armitage, a former Assistant Secretary of Defence.
Both sides agreed that "progress" had been made in the talks, which were aimed at an agreement replacing the 1947 security treaty giving the USA full control over the Clark air base and Subic naval base and four smaller installations.
Neither side gave any details, apart from the fact that it had been decided to disregard the existing agreement and formulate a new one.
The Philippine side described this development as a "breakthrough" , since the current agreement contained "contentious issues" .
The US spokesman declared that "we are starting from zero to fashion a new kind of relationship" .
During the talks the Philippine side continued to insist on taking over the bases when the current agreement expired in September 1991.
In a news conference on Nov. 9, however, the Philippine spokesman Rafael M. Alunan appeared to indicate a softening of the government's stance by differentiating for the first time between "sovereign control" and "operational control" , noting that Philippine personnel would not be fully ready to take over the bases by 1991 and that US personnel would be needed to operate them under Philippine sovereignty for a transitional period.
On the eve of the talks the US government announced that all US fighter aircraft permanently based in the Philippines would be removed "at some point in 1991" and that as a result 1,800 military personnel would also leave the country.
An official statement declared that the decision was separate from the talks on the bases, but that it had been "influenced" by the Philippine government's demand for the fighters to be removed by September 1991.
Typhoon damage
A typhoon designated as typhoon "Mike" destroyed wide areas of the central Visayan islands and the north coast of Mindanao island in mid-November.
According to government reports, the storm left 335 people dead, 205 missing and nearly 500 injured.
It destroyed or damaged around 410,000 houses, leaving an estimated 1,200,000 people homeless.
At least 77 ships were reported sunk, and damage to crops, livestock and property was estimated at US$29,000,000.
Most of the deaths were caused by drowning, but a number of victims were buried by landslides or when their houses collapsed.
Arrest of NPA leader
The army announced on Nov. 5 that it had arrested Reynaldo Bernardo, the alleged deputy commander and head of intelligence of the Manila-based brigade of the communist New People's Army (NPA).
The unit had claimed responsibility for the assassination of over 300 troops, policemen and government officials since 1984.
ASIA — PACIFIC
SOLOMON ISLANDS
Formation of national unity government
The Speaker of Parliament on Nov. 17 refused to allow a motion of no confidence in the Prime Minister, Solomon Mamaloni, to be put to a vote.
The Speaker, Waeta Ben, accepted the government's claim that, because a motion of no confidence had been moved earlier in 1990, Parliament could not discuss the issue again until its second meeting the following year.
The opposition immediately announced that it would challenge the Speaker's ruling in the High Court.
The dispute marked the latest stage in the political turmoil which had begun on Oct. 9 with Mamaloni's resignation on as leader of the People's Alliance Party (PAP), shortly before he was due to face a challenge to his leadership at the ruling party's annual convention.
Despite his resignation Mamaloni stated his intention to remain as Prime Minister and to form a government of "national unity, based on proportionate representation of the nation's scattered provinces — including the capital, Honiara — in terms of population and resources" , and "guided by the principles of political reconciliation, national reconstruction and policy redirection" .
Accordingly, he dismissed five members of his Cabinet, including his deputy, Danny Philips, and replaced them with four members of the opposition (George Luialamo, Sam Alasia, Alfred Maetia and Sir Peter Kenilorea, a former Prime Minister) and Job Tausinga, a PAP backbencher.
Mamaloni dismissed calls for his resignation from Philip and from opposition leader Andrew Nori of the Nationalist Front for Progress.
He insisted that his new administration could command a majority in the country's 38-member legislature.
He also promised to continue his programme of political and economic restructuring, which included the streamlining of the public service and the sale of government assets and of a selected number of state-owned companies.
The central significance of Mamaloni's move arose from its effect on the role of political parties within the Solomon Islands.
The formation of a coalition government, and the splitting of both the ruling party and the opposition, suggested a return to the country's traditional political style, where political structures revolved around personalities while party affiliations remained weak and without clear ideological foundations.
The election of Mamaloni as Prime Minister in March 1989, following emergence from the February 1989 general election as the largest single party [see pp. 36465; 36526]had been widely perceived as the beginning of a new era in that it had provided the first instance of single-party government since independence in 1978.
Solomon Mamaloni Prime Minister *Sir Peter Kenilorea Foreign Affairs and Trade Christopher Abe Finance and Planning *George Luialamo Agriculture and Land *Sam Alasia Education and Human Resources Development
New Cabinet
**Albert Laore Police and Justice **Michael Naena Commerce and Primary Industry *Job Tausinga Natural Resources **Sir Baddeley Devesi Home Affairs **Allen Kemakeza Housing and Government Services *Alfred Maetia Transport; Work and Utilities Nathaniel Supa Health and Medical Services **Allen Qurusu Provincial Government Ben Gale Post and Communications Victor Ngele Tourism and Aviation *New appointment.
**Altered portfolio.
ASIA — PACIFIC
NEW ZEALAND
Aramoana massacre by gunman
The government of New Zealand announced an immediate review of the country's gun laws after 13 of the inhabitants of the tiny village of Aramoana, near Dunedin, South Island, were shot dead within the space of 24 hours by a man with an AK-47 semi-automatic rifle.
The importation of semi-automatic weapons had been banned in June 1990, but no move had been made to restrict their sale or ownership within New Zealand.
The Aramoana incident was the country's worst case of mass murder.
David Gray, 33, a local man believed to be suffering from depression, began shooting on the evening of Nov. 13, and continued until he was shot dead by police 24 hours later.
EUROPE
SOVIET UNION
Emergency state of nation debate
Anxious about the collapse of central political authority and the threat of famine in the coming winter, the USSR Supreme Soviet abandoned its legislative agenda and compelled President Mikhail Gorbachev to address an emergency debate on the state of the nation on Nov. 16.
In voting overwhelmingly on Nov. 14 for the debate, the Supreme Soviet had come out in open revolt against its legislation being either ignored or countermanded because of administrative chaos and the so-called "war of laws" with the republics.
Gorbachev's 80-minute speech on Nov. 16 was widely assessed by commentators as one of his poorest performances.
He began by admitting that there was a crisis of power, but he denied that his administration was without a programme to overcome it.
Much of the speech was given over to the already familiar complaints about "destructive and separatist tendencies" and about "ferocious" attempts to discredit the central government, and to exhortations to political forces to unite behind perestroika.
Gorbachev declared that the country's most pressing task was the signing of the new Union Treaty, which would redefine the respective powers of the centre and republics [the long-awaited draft of the treaty, published on Nov. 23, will be covered in future issues].
In the meantime, he appealed to the republics to declare a moratorium "on decisions which give rise to arguments over the issue of competence" , complaining that the alternative was incurable paralysis.
The speech was badly received by deputies and republican leaders, who complained that it contained nothing new or concrete, and was out of touch with the mood of the Supreme Soviet and of the country.
However, Gorbachev on Nov. 17 salvaged his prestige with a short address in which he unexpectedly produced proposals for constitutional reforms to strengthen the central leadership and raise the level of the republics' involvement in it.
The Nov. 17 proposals involved investing the Council of the Federation (comprising the republican presidents) with new powers to co-ordinate actions by the centre and the republics; abolishing the Presidential Council; creating a presidential "security council" ; and overhauling the government.
The President would head all central executive bodies.
Gorbachev also announced that emergency measures to combat organized crime, including a "special service" under the President's control, and to tackle food shortages and rail transport problems, would be put into effect.
The Supreme Soviet approved the proposals in principle on Nov. 17.
Following a debate on Nov. 23 it passed a resolution giving Gorbachev two weeks to produce detailed plans.
It also instructed him to conclude within one month interim agreements with each of the republics to ensure "stabilization of the socio-economic situation" , and instructed Supreme Soviet Chairman Anatoly Lukyanov to draft temporary agreements with the republican legislatures on overcoming the "war of laws" , pending signature of the new Union Treaty.
Furthermore, with immediate effect the resolution gave the President additional powers permitting him to take unspecified "emergency measures" anywhere in the Soviet Union where "life, health or property" were threatened.
In a brief speech after the vote on the resolution Gorbachev acknowledged fears of a dictatorship, but stressed that strong central executive power was the only way to overcome the present crises.
Gorbachev-Yeltsin discussions — Russia's economic reforms
Reorganizing the central administration had been the one of the ideas discussed at a meeting between Gorbachev and Russian Federation President Boris Yeltsin on Nov. 11.
Yeltsin had called for a "coalition government of national unity" comprising ministers nominated from each of the republics.
The meeting had been called in an effort to heal the renewed rift between the two Presidents resulting from the October retreat by the central administration from radical economic reform.
As a result of what was reportedly a wide-ranging discussion, it was agreed to establish as a prelude to discussion of the Union Treaty two bilateral commissions to negotiate on the most contentious issues in USSR-Russian Federation relations, namely the delineation of state powers, ownership of state property, and the rights to dispose of natural resources.
Yeltsin on Nov. 13 declared that Russia's implementation of the radical "Shatalin plan" for a 500-day economic reform was in abeyance.
Although technically the reform had taken effect on Nov. 1, Yeltsin told the Russian Federation Supreme Soviet that it was simply impossible to proceed with the Shatalin plan without co-ordinating it with the central government.
Because of the likelihood that Russia's reform could not proceed Grigory Yavlinsky, co-author of the Shatalin plan, had tendered his resignation as Russian Deputy Premier on Oct. 17, and was relieved formally of his office on Nov. 22.
Decrees on hard currency and non-essential goods
A presidential decree of Nov. 2 ordered the compulsory sale by enterprises in 1991 of 40 per cent of their hard-currency earnings to the Bank for Foreign Economic Relations, to help repay the Soviet Union's foreign debt.
Having thereafter retained a portion of their hard-currency profits according to prescribed norms, enterprises would be required to sell 90 per cent of what remained to a new Union and Republican Foreign Currency Fund, and the other 10 per cent to republican funds.
Reimbursement for all these sales would be at the commercial rouble exchange rate set in October.
A Currency Committee would also be set up, comprising the central and republican heads of government, to "develop and co-ordinate a currency and import policy" , monitor national debt repayment, and allocate hard-currency resources.
The decree also reiterated all-union responsibility for issuing licences and setting quotas for imports and exports of a list of the most important commodities, including oil, gas, gold, diamonds and high technology goods.
The central government on Nov. 12 resolved that from Nov. 15 the retail prices of a list of non-essential goods (ranging from car spare parts to caviar) would be freed.
In another example of the struggle for legislative supremacy the resolution was immediately overruled by the Russian Federation government, which, pending its own resolution, ordered sale of all goods on the list suspended, thus creating widespread confusion.
The central government resolution was declared suspended by the governments of Kazakhstan, Moldavia and Azerbaijan.
Shooting at Red Square parade
During the Nov. 7 parade through Moscow's Red Square to mark the 1917 October Revolution anniversary, a man fired two shots from a hunting rifle in what police claimed was an attempt to assassinate Gorbachev.
Early reports played down the seriousness of the incident, in which no-one was injured.
A police statement on Nov. 14, however, claimed that the shots had gone astray (one into the air, the other into the ground) only because a policeman had pounced on the gunman, Aleksandr Shmonov, as he had been taking aim at the leadership's reviewing stand atop the Lenin Mausoleum, only 46 metres away.
Shmonov was charged on Nov. 8 with "attempting a terrorist act" .
Nationwide Revolution Day celebrations
Official Revolution Day parades took place in over 150 cities, but the celebrations were subdued compared to previous years.
Parades were cancelled in Yerevan, Baku, Tbilisi and Kishinev.
In the Baltic republics the Army marched in the three capitals in defiance of the nationalist-dominated parliaments, which had abolished the Revolution Day holiday.
In Kiev the parade went ahead after students blockading the route had been ejected in a dawn police raid.
After the official Red Square parade there were two unofficial marches in Moscow, sanctioned by the city soviet.
One included Red Square on its route, and was joined by Russian President Boris Yeltsin.
Unofficial marches took place in 30 cities.
Developments in republics
Moldavia: Russian separatism
Just as southern Moldavia was experiencing an easing of the tensions provoked in late October by the separatist aspirations of the Gagauz minority, an almost identical crisis flared in the Russian-populated east of the republic.
The 700,000-strong majority Russian population in the Dnestr valley planned to reinforce its September unilateral secession declaration by holding elections on Nov. 25 to a "Transdnestr Republic" Supreme Soviet, but tensions came to a head on Nov. 2 following rumours that polling was being brought forward to Nov. 4.
Anticipating intervention by Moldavian armed units, the authorities in the towns of Tiraspol, Bendery, Dubossary and Rybnitsa declared a state of emergency, and residents set up blockades and organized militia detachments.
Special police units were indeed despatched on Nov. 2 to retake control of Dubossary.
There followed a pitched battle at a bridge across the Dnestr river leading into the town.
Four people were killed (including one policeman, who died in hospital on Nov. 4), and at least 16 were injured.
Gorbachev on Nov. 3 organized in Moscow a meeting between Moldavian President Mircha Snegur and Gagauz and Dnestr Russian community leaders.
Gorbachev threatened to declare a state of emergency throughout Moldavia.
It was agreed that law and order should be restored immediately, that the conflicts could only be resolved in accordance with the USSR and Moldavian Constitutions, and that moratoriums should be declared on the resolutions by all sides which had produced the crises (not only the Gagauz and Russian secession declarations, but also Moldavia's August 1989 language law — see p. 36855).
The Moldavian Supreme Soviet on Snegur's recommendation passed on Nov. 4 a resolution ordering the disbanding of all voluntary militias, confiscation of their firearms, and lifting of blockades.
It also set up a "conciliation commission" .
The Dnestr Russians remained defiant, however, refraining from disbanding militia units or lifting blockades.
Amid continuing stalemate the planned elections went ahead on Nov. 25, with an 81 per cent turnout.
On Nov. 29 it was announced that Gorbachev would visit Moldavia on the following day to address the republic's Supreme Soviet, but the visit was cancelled at the last minute, reportedly because Dnestr Russian and Gagauz deputies had announced that they would boycott the session.
Georgia: Nationalist election victory
The second round of elections to the Georgian Supreme Soviet on Nov. 11 saw the Round Table/Free Georgia bloc of nationalist parties translate its first-round lead into a decisive victory.
The Round Table increased its share of the vote from 54 per cent in the first round on Oct. 28 to 62 per cent, and won a further 41 seats to bring its total to 155.
This fell short, however, of the two-thirds majority in the 250-seat Supreme Soviet which would have given the Round Table a free hand to effect constitutional changes.
The Georgian Communist Party, which had adopted a nationalist manifesto for the elections and had joined the other 120-odd political parties in campaigning for restoration of Georgia's independence, failed to build on its strong first-round showing, and increased its seat total only to 64.
The remainder went to the Georgian Popular Front, other party blocs, and independents.
The new Supreme Soviet at its constituent session on Nov. 14 elected Round Table leader and veteran dissident Zviad Gamsakhurdia as executive President of Georgia by 232 votes to five.
Gamsakhurdia, 51, had promised to start immediately to implement transitional measures towards independence, which he predicted would take around five years to realise.
On Nov. 15 Tengiz Sigua of the Round Table was named as Premier.
The constituent session proclaimed the Republic of Georgia (i.e. dropping the adjectives "Soviet" and "Socialist" ).
On Nov. 14 the white, black and plum-coloured flag of independent Georgia flew officially in Tbilisi (the capital) for the first time since a short-lived independent republic had been overthrown by the Bolshevik Red Army in 1921.
Ukraine: New Prime Minister
On Nov. 14 the Ukrainian Supreme Soviet voted overwhelmingly to confirm Vitold Fokin as Chairman of the Ukrainian Council of Ministers.
He had filled the post in an acting capacity since the resignation of Vitaly Masol in October.
From the liberal wing of the Ukrainian Communist Party, Fokin was regarded as a compromise candidate and was elected unopposed in the third ballot (he had re-entered the contest after withdrawing from the second ballot), after the communist hardliners' candidate, Aleksandr Bulyanda, had been persuaded to stand down.
Fokin promised to restructure the government to expedite market economic reforms.
Tadjikistan: Inauguration of presidential system
Kakhar Makhkamov was elected by the Tadjik Supreme Soviet on Nov. 30 to the new post of executive President of Tadjikistan.
Hitherto de facto president in his capacity as Supreme Soviet Chair, he defeated one other candidate.
There had been heated argument in the Supreme Soviet about the method of electing a President, and for over a week members of the opposition Democratic Party of Tadjikistan had been on hunger strike in support of popular elections.
Uzbekistan: Abolition of Council of Ministers
The Uzbekistan Supreme Soviet adopted a resolution on Nov. 1 abolishing the republican Council of Ministers.
Government functions were to be carried out instead by a Cabinet attached to executive President Islam Karimov [whose title is given wrongly on p. 37323 as President of the Supreme Soviet].
The outgoing Chairman of the Council of Ministers, Shakurulla Mirsaidov, was given the newly created post of Vice-President.
Armenia: Return of nationalist exile — New Communist Party leader
Paruir Airikyan, an Armenian nationalist who had been exiled from the Soviet Union and stripped of Soviet citizenship in July 1988 for leading protests over the status of Nagorny Karabakh (as a member of the Karabakh Committee), returned to Armenia in early November, according to the unofficial Moscow-based Interfax news agency.
On Oct. 4 Interfax had reported the restoration of Airikyan's citizenship.
In his absence Airikyan, who had been expelled to Ethiopia but had settled in Los Angeles [see p. 36489], had been elected in May to the Armenian Supreme Soviet.
His former Karabakh Committee colleagues Levon Ter-Petrosyan and Vazguen Manukyan were now President and Prime Minister respectively of Armenia [see p. 37664].
The Armenian Communist Party elected Stepan Pogosyan as its first secretary, replacing Vladimir Movsisyan, on Nov. 30.
Central administration personnel changes
The official Tass news agency announced on Nov. 13 that Gennady Gerasimov, the urbane and witty USSR Foreign Ministry spokesman, had left that post in order to become ambassador to an as yet unspecified European country.
His replacement was Vitaly Churkin.
The Kirghiz writer Chingiz Aytmatov was relieved of membership of the Presidential Council on Nov. 2 in connection with his appointment as ambassador to Luxembourg.
He was replaced on the Council by USSR Culture Minister Nikolai Gubenko.
A presidential decree of Nov. 14 appointed Leonid Kravchenko, hitherto director-general of Tass, as Chair of the USSR State Committee for Television and Radio Broadcasting.
He replaced Mikhail Nenashev, who returned to the post of Chair of the USSR State Committee for the Press, which he had held in 1986-89, and which had been vacant since the removal of Nikolai Yefimov at the end of July.
The decree gave Kravchenko and Nenashev two weeks to produce proposals for reorganizing their sectors.
Formation of new Russian party by CPSU defectors
Members of the Democratic Platform faction who had left the Communist Party (CPSU) following its 28th congress in July, held the constituent congress of the Republican Party of Russia (RPR) in Moscow on Nov. 17-18.
More than 230 delegates attended, including deputies to the USSR and Russian Federation Supreme Soviets and local councillors; the party claimed support in virtually all parts of the Russian Federation.
Prominent founder member Vladimir Lysenko described the RPR as centre-left in orientation, with a programme supporting a market economy, social protection and inter-ethnic accord.
He declared that the RPR stood in opposition to the CPSU in the Russian Federation.
EUROPE
ALBANIA
Calls for constitutional reform and religious tolerance
During the 12th plenum of the Albanian Worker's Party (AWP) central committee on Nov. 6-7, President Ramiz Alia called for changes to the country's 1976 Constitution, including a redefinition of the leading role of the party and freedom for religious beliefs.
A new draft electoral law was approved by the People's Assembly on Nov. 14, in preparation for parliamentary elections to be held by February 1991.
It promised a secret ballot and the possibility of independent candidates standing against nominees of the AWP, provided that they gained the signatures of 300 or more sponsors.
A special constitutional commission was set up, presided over by Ramiz Alia, to draw up the necessary amendments to be placed before the next session of parliament.
The People's Assembly also adopted decrees to protect foreign investment.
Acknowledging the dismal state of the economy, the government had begun to open the door to some foreign investors, mostly those of Albanian origin, to help in the construction of hotels and to sell key consumer items with permission to export profits through barter.
Although foreign loans had been banned, reports indicated that Albania had about US$30,000,000 in short-term debt and $25,000,000 in long-term debt which would fall due over the next 13 years.
Following Alia's call for greater religious toleration, Vatican and Yugoslav sources reported that 5,000 people attended a Catholic mass in Shkoder on Nov. 16 conducted by Archbishop Simun Yubani, who had been in prison from 1967 until 1989 for violating the ban imposed on all forms of religious manifestations.
This was the first religious service to be held publicly in Albania since the 1967 declaration that the country had become the world's first atheist state.
EUROPE
BULGARIA
Resignation of government
The socialist government of Andrei Lukanov, in office for only two months, resigned on Nov. 29 in the face of a general strike, demonstrations, and an opposition boycott of parliament.
These were in protest against the government's programme of market economic reforms and its associations with the former communist regime.
Already in deep economic crisis, Bulgaria had become paralysed politically and economically.
Presentation of reform programme and budget — Vote of confidence
Lukanov's economic reform programme envisaged widespread privatization, land reform, an overhaul of the monetary and credit system, liberalization of foreign investment regulations and a new pricing policy.
Its approval by parliament was a precondition to assistance from the IMF, which Bulgaria had joined in September [see p. 37730].
When presenting the draft to the Grand National Assembly (GNA) on Oct. 10 Lukanov had warned that initially the reforms would raise inflation and unemployment and would further lower living standards.
Lukanov insisted that the government would only proceed with the reform if there was a parliamentary consensus supporting it.
When debate opened in the GNA on Oct. 25 the main opposition Union of Democratic Forces (UDF) categorically declined to back the programme.
On Nov. 1 Lukanov threatened to resign unless there was all-party support for the reforms; subsequently describing the political mood in Bulgaria as "masochistic" , he appealed to the UDF to rise above party politics, and on Nov. 9 he reportedly offered to suspend his membership of the Bulgarian Socialist Party (BSP) in exchange for the UDF's joining a coalition government.
The UDF continued to insist that the only solution to Bulgaria's present crisis was a UDF-led coalition, and to argue that because of its communist past the BSP lacked the moral credibility to govern.
On Nov. 22 the UDF tabled a no confidence motion during the GNA's second reading of a bill on the 1991 budget, which would underpin the government's economic reform programme.
Scuffles broke out between deputies, delaying what proved to be an angry budget debate.
In the early hours of Nov. 23 the budget was passed by 186 votes to 10, with seven abstentions, all opposition deputies having declined to take part.
Later on Nov. 23 the no confidence motion was defeated by 201 votes to 159, with six abstentions.
Immediately afterwards the UDF deputies announced that they were withdrawing from the GNA indefinitely.
General strike — President's coalition negotiations
A general strike called by the UDF-affiliated Podkrepa trade union began on Nov. 26 and spread quickly as a result of sympathetic media coverage (a strike and sit-ins by students protesting against the government had been under way since Nov. 5).
Within three days an estimated 870,000 workers had joined the strike, shutting down gas pipelines, mines and the main Burgas oil refinery, paralysing the Black Sea ports, and grounding the national airline.
On Nov. 29 the much larger rival Confederation of Independent Bulgarian Trade Unions (CITUB — formerly the trade union structure of the communist regime — see p. 37328) also called its members out on strike.
A campaign of anti-government demonstrations in Sofia was stepped up on Nov. 28 when demonstrators erected barricades across main road intersections.
There were clashes when police attempted to remove one such barricade.
The government's resignation was accepted by the GNA on Nov. 30, after agreement was reached that an interim coalition government should take over pending the holding of fresh elections, probably in March 1991.
This agreement was the outcome of negotiations initiated on Nov. 7 by President Zhelyu Zhelev between the government, the BSP and the UDF.
The interim coalition was to be led by a Prime Minister drawn from outside the main parties, and Lukanov's government was to stay in office until the new government was formed.
News of the resignation was greeted with jubilation by the protesters, many of whom hailed it as the true start of Bulgaria's revolution against communist rule.
Podkrepa immediately called off its strike, and the Sofia demonstrators removed the barricades.
However, the CITUB announced that it would continue its strike until it saw guarantees of the character of the new government.
The students also decided to continue their strike to press their demands for prosecution of former communist leaders responsible for Bulgaria's economic crisis, and for nationalization of BSP assets.
New formal name
Breaking off briefly from their arguments, the GNA deputies voted overwhelmingly on Nov. 15 in favour of a UDF motion to change the country's formal title from the People's Republic of Bulgaria (in use since abolition of the monarchy in 1946) to the Republic of Bulgaria.
EUROPE
CZECHOSLOVAKIA
Local elections
Local elections were held in the Czech Lands on Nov. 24 and in Slovakia on Nov. 23-25.
They replaced district national committees (controlled by the central administration) with new district bureaus enjoying powers to levy local taxes, and responsible for maintaining schools, health services, roads and utilities.
In the Czech Lands the turnout was approximately 75 per cent.
Civic Forum remained the most popular organization, although its share of the vote fell to 36 per cent, compared with 49.5 per cent in the June Czech National Council election.
The drop in support was attributed to Civic Forum's problems in creating an effective rural organization, and to public concern about the government's handling of economic reform.
To the undisguised disquiet of Civic Forum officials the Communist Party improved on its strong showing in the June elections, again coming second, with 17.2 per cent of the vote.
The Czechoslovak People's Party was third with 11.5 per cent.
In Slovakia, where there were also direct elections for mayorships, the turnout was 63.75 per cent.
The Christian Democratic Movement took 27 per cent of the vote to overtake Public Against Violence, Civic Forum's sister organization, which took 20 per cent.
The Communist Party came third with 14 per cent of the vote, but won the largest number (24 per cent) of mayorships.
The Slovak National Party (SNS) saw its share of the vote collapse from nearly 14 per cent in the June Slovak National Council election to barely 3 per cent.
This appeared to represent a backlash against its recent campaign of nationalist protests, which had included a rowdy pro-independence demonstration disrupting celebrations in Bratislava (Slovakia's capital) of the Nov. 17 anniversary of the start of the 1989 revolution.
Meanwhile, a hunger strike by SNS supporters against the Slovak language law passed in October had been resumed on Nov. 8, but called off on Nov. 19.
The SNS chairman Vitazoslav Moric, who on Oct. 25 had called for a civil disobedience campaign against the language law, was in consequence recalled from the Federal Assembly Presidium by the deputies on Nov. 26.
Confiscation of Communist Party assets — Earlier party developments
The Federal Assembly on Nov. 16 adopted legislation confiscating Communist Party (CPCz) assets.
In proposing the bill, the federal government assessed that the assets had been acquired illegally, and gave the CPCz an "undemocratic" advantage over other parties.
Communist deputies walked out before the vote, which they condemned as "anti-constitutional" .
At least 20,000 people had taken part in an anti-communist demonstration in Prague on Oct. 11, following controversial remarks made by CPCz chairman Vasil Mohorita (formerly first secretary, but chairman since Ladislav Adamec 's retirement in August).
Mohorita had told the central committee of the Communist Party of Bohemia and Moravia (the CPCz subsidiary organization in the Czech Lands) on Oct. 7 that "national accord is over, and a hard and uncompromising struggle begins" .
For many people this was reminiscent of calls by Klement Gottwald leading to the 1948 communist takeover.
On Oct. 22 Mohorita was recalled by deputies from the Federal Assembly Presidium, although the reason cited was that he had breached protocol by chewing gum during a speech to the Assembly on Sept. 13 by France's President Mitterrand.
At its 18th congress on Nov. 3-4 the CPCz chose not to follow other east European former ruling parties in adopting a change of name.
The congress approved a new leadership structure, with Pavol Kanis being elected chair of a federal council.
Visit by President Bush
United States President Bush paid a one-day visit to Prague on Nov. 17, coinciding with the first anniversary of the start of the "Velvet Revolution" which had overthrown communist rule.
He joined President Vaclav Havel in addressing an anniversary rally in Wenceslas Square attended by at least 70,000 people.
It was widely noted that Bush's euphoric statements proclaiming the transformation of Europe contrasted sharply with Havel's sombre assessment of Czechoslovakia's progress in the past year.
Bush held talks with Havel, Federal Premier Marian Calfa, and leaders of the Czech and Slovak governments.
He also addressed the Federal Assembly, promising that he would urge the US Congress to authorize a US$60,000,000 Czechoslovak-USA enterprise fund, and that the United States would support Czechoslovakia in negotiations with the IMF and World Bank.
Bush on Nov. 9 had signed a congressional resolution granting Czechoslovakia most-favoured-nation trading status.
This entered into force following endorsement by the Czechoslovak Federal Assembly on Nov. 16.
EUROPE
POLAND
Confiscation of former ruling party's assets
The Sejm on Nov. 9 adopted a bill to implement the findings of its Justice and Legislative Affairs commissions concerning the assets of the former ruling Polish United Workers' Party (PUWP).
Most of these assets, the comittees found, had been acquired illegally and should be transferred to the state.
The assets had been ceded by the PUWP to its successor party, the Social Democracy of the Republic of Poland (SDRP), in January 1990.
The SDRP denounced their confiscation as "political revenge" .
EUROPE
ROMANIA
Economic reforms — Devaluation of leu — Protests over price rises
As the National Salvation Front (NSF) government implemented its radical economic programme, sharply reducing subsidies and allowing some prices to find their market level, protest demonstrations took place throughout November in response to the consequent steep price rises.
The Nov. 15 protests were the largest since the crushing of demonstrations in Bucharest by miners in June [see pp. 37544-45].
Economic measures
In view of Romania's rapidly worsening economic situation, Prime Minister Petre Roman argued that the government could no longer continue to pay subsidies to keep prices artificially low.
According to Eugen Dijmarescu, Minister of State for Economic Orientation, the state was paying out some 30,000 million lei per month in subsidies, while the population's total monthly income only amounted to 26,000 million lei.
The government was running a monthly deficit amounting to US$1,000 million every three months.
Imports had risen dramatically, by more than 28 per cent over 1989 levels, and imported goods now accounted for 56 per cent of all goods on sale.
The Gulf crisis had worsened Romania's fuel problem, with Iraq refusing to honour its trade debt and the Soviet Union stopping sales of subsidised oil and demanding payment in hard currency.
Industrial output in 1990 was expected to be down by 60 per cent compared with 1989 [see pp. 37742-43].
Against this background the government decided to bring forward its economic programme as a matter of urgency, adjusting prices as the first concrete step in the development of a free market economy.
Goods and services were classified in three groups: prices for electricity, gas, home heating fuels and rents would be raised on Jan. 1, 1991, and remain fixed for one year; prices of 99 basic products, including bread, milk, meat and children's clothes, would be adjusted every three months, with equivalent wage adjustments; and prices of all other goods would be freed from all controls.
On Nov. 1 the leu was devalued by a further 60 per cent and fixed at US$1.00=35 lei, a move designed to pave the way for a partial convertibility of the Romanian currency which the government planned to introduce in January 1991.
The devaluation and the cuts in subsidies resulted in price rises of between 100 and 120 per cent.
To cushion the blow, wages and pensions were increased.
The government set the new minimum wage at 2,300 lei (US$65) per month, but factory managers were given the power to determine wage policy for their own enterprises and could set pay levels above the minimum.
Meanwhile, parliament voted on Nov. 12 to grant the government special powers over the next six months to implement the economic reform programme, including the authority to change prices and taxes and to negotiate foreign credits.
Protest demonstrations
The so-called "price liberalisation" precipitated protests across the country which continued intermittently throughout November.
The largest anti-government demonstrations were staged on Nov. 15 to coincide with the anniversary of the 1987 Brasov demonstrations against the Ceausescu regime [see pp. 35552].
More than 100,000 protestors marched through Bucharest in a demonstration co-ordinated by the recently formed Civic Alliance, comprising dissident intellectuals and workers, and were addressed by student leader Marian Munteanu.
Union leaders criticized the government for introducing the price rises before implementing privatization measures and before passing laws on unemployment benefit and other social protection measures.
A rally of 20,000 NSF supporters gathered on Nov. 20 to hear Roman defend his government's record, but the NSF postponed its national conference from December to mid-January amid reports of a growing split.
Rebirth of Romanian Communist Party
Romania's Communist Party resurfaced under a new name, the Socialist Labour Party, at the end of November with Constantin Pirvulescu as its honorary president and former Prime Minister Ilie Verdet as its executive president.
Announcing the new party Nicolai Balasoiu said that it would re-examine communist values and uphold the positive ones, specifically "the discipline and serious work ethic which existed under Communist rule" .
The announcement was met with widespread protests from other parties and organizations.
EUROPE
YUGOSLAVIA
Markovic state of nation address
Federal Premier Ante Markovic, in a combative address to the Federal Assembly on Nov. 15, accused the political leaderships in Slovenia, Serbia and Croatia of deliberately obstructing and undermining his government's economic and political reforms, in efforts to preserve their own power.
Painting a bleak picture of a country strained to the point of disintegration because of the flagrant disregard by these republics for federal legislation, and facing an alarming rise in separatism and inter-ethnic violence, Markovic vowed that the federal government would use all democratic and legal means at its disposal to forge ahead with reforms, and appealed to all six Yugoslav republics to unite behind it.
He went on to detail federal government economic policy proposals for 1991, including an overhaul of the fiscal system and more extensive privatization.
He warned, however, that the perception abroad that Yugoslavia was on the brink of disintegration and civil war was inhibiting foreign investment in the country.
Serbian trade barriers
Markovic specifically took issue with Serbia's decision to impose special duties on imports into the republic from Slovenia and Croatia, and from abroad, with effect from Nov. 1.
These protectionist measures, seriously disrupting Yugoslavia's internal common market, had been adopted by the Serbian Assembly on Oct. 23, in response to what Serbian Premier Stanko Radmilovic called the "destructive policies" of Markovic's government.
Radmilovic claimed that in opening up Yugoslavia to foreign imports, by lowering tariffs in order to force domestic manufacturers to lower prices and become more competitive, the government had encouraged dumping, and was ruining domestic producers.
Pointedly, both the Serbian and Croatian television services failed to broadcast a live relay of Markovic's address.
Resurrection of LCY
The League of Communists of Yugoslavia, the former federal ruling party which had collapsed early in 1990, was resurrected in the form of a new League of Communists — Movement for Yugoslavia (LC-MY) founded in Belgrade on Nov. 19.
Many senior figures from the armed forces were on the organizing committee, although accusations that the LC-MY would be a tool of the military were denied.
The party declared its main goal to be preventing the country's disintegration.
EUROPE
GERMANY
Rail strike in eastern Germany
A major rail strike halted most goods and passenger traffic in what was formerly East Germany, as well as services to the west of Germany and to other parts of eastern Europe, on Nov. 26.
The 260,000 employees of the overmanned and loss-making East German Deutsche Reichsbahn were demanding increases to bring their wages closer in line with the earnings of employees of the West German Bundesbahn, but were also expressing concern at proposed massive redundancies in the rail workforce when the Reichsbahn and the Bundesbahn merged early in 1991.
Long-distance passenger train services resumed on Nov. 27 and the strike ended the following day after it was agreed to cut the working week from 44 to 40 hours as in western Germany.
A pay rise was promised for 1991 to bring Reichsbahn salaries up to half those earned by the Bundesbahn, and talks were to take place on redundancies and compensation.
The agreement was formally endorsed by Reichsbahn workers on Dec. 2.
Border treaty with Poland
The Foreign Ministers of Germany and Poland, Hans-Dietrich Genscher and Krzystof Skubiszewski, signed a treaty in Warsaw on Nov. 14 confirming the Oder-Neisse rivers as the definitive border between the two countries.
Germany thereby formally abandoned all claim to some 102,000 sq km(the swathe of territory east of the Oder-Neisse, from eastern Pomerania southwards via eastern Brandenburg to Lower Silesia, plus the southern part of East Prussia).
This territory had been annexed to Poland after its occupation by the Red Army at the end of the Second World War, a situation accepted de facto by the Western powers at the Potsdam conference of July-August 1945 (the northern part of East Prussia being at the same time incorporated into the Soviet Union).
The areas in question made up about one-third of Poland's present territory.
Genscher recalled that the decision embodied in the treaty was a difficult one for all Germans, particularly the millions who had been expelled from their homes in the area annexed to Poland, but that the treaty surrendered nothing that had not been lost long ago.
Taking note of the great suffering caused by the Second World War, "particularly the loss of their homes suffered by numerous Germans and Poles due to expulsion or resettlement" , the treaty confirmed that the Polish-German border, as determined by the July 1950 agreement between Poland and East Germany, by later implementing agreements (of January 1951 and May 1989) and by the December 1970 Warsaw Treaty, was inviolable.
The two sides undertook to respect each other 's sovereignty and territorial integrity and not to assert any territorial claims against each other in the future.
The parliaments of both countries were due to ratify the treaty by the end of February 1991.
Agreement on the treaty had been reached in the first round of negotiations on bilateral relations in Warsaw on Oct. 30-31.
On Nov. 6 it was announced that broad agreement had been reached on protection for the German minority in Poland "in accordance with international standards" .
A meeting then took place at the border on Nov. 8 between German Chancellor Helmut Kohl and the then Polish Prime Minister Tadeusz Mazowiecki, first on the German side at Frankfurt an der Oder and then across the river at Slubice (part of pre-1945 Frankfurt).
At the meeting Kohl yielded to Polish pressure in agreeing that the treaty should be signed some months earlier than he had anticipated.
Visit by Gorbachev — Signature of bilateral treaties
President Gorbachev of the Soviet Union visited Germany on Nov. 9-10.
On the first day of his visit he and Chancellor Kohl signed a 20-year Treaty on Good-neighbourliness, Partnership and Co-operation, which had been initialled in Moscow on Sept. 13 [see p. 37718; for text see p. 37835]and which, Kohl said, "rules off the painful chapters of our past and clears the way for a new beginning" .
A treaty on economic, industrial, scientific and technological co-operation and a labour co-operation agreement were also signed.
UK ratification of two-plus-four treaty
The UK government formally notified the German government on Nov. 9 that it had ratified the "two-plus-four" Treaty on the Final Settlement with respect to Germany, which had been signed on Sept. 12 by the two Germanies, France, the Soviet Union, the United Kingdom and the United States [see pp. 37717-18; for text see p. 37834].
Germany and the USA had ratified the treaty in October [see p. 37762]; as of the end of November France and the Soviet Union had yet to do so.
EUROPE
AUSTRIA
Changes to State Treaty
Several articles of the 1955 State Treaty governing Austria's neutral status were formally declared obsolete and no longer applicable by the Austrian government on Nov. 7 by means of the delivery of a diplomatic note to the treaty's signatories.
All the signatories (France, the Soviet Union, the United Kingdom and the United States) were informed in advance and none raised objections.
The articles were deemed obsolete because of the altered political and legal situation following the changes in eastern Europe and German unification.
They were Article 12, prohibiting former members of Nazi organizations from serving in the Austrian armed forces; Article 13, prohibiting Austria from possessing special weapons; Article 14, on the disposal of war materiel of German or Allied origin; Article 15, on co-operation in preventing German rearmament; Article 16 banning the acquisition of civil aircraft of German or Japanese design; and paragraph 13 of Article 22, banning the return to German or foreign ownership of former German assets.
Austria would continue to abide by the State Treaty and to ban nuclear, chemical and biological weapons.
EUROPE
SWITZERLAND
Court ruling on women's suffrage
On Nov. 27 the Federal Court ruled that the half-canton of Appenzell-Innerrhoden should grant women the vote at cantonal and communal level with immediate effect, a decision breaching the last bastion of all-male suffrage in Europe.
EUROPE
NORWAY
New government
Gro Harlem Brundtland, the leader of the Norwegian Labour Party (DNA), returned to office on Nov. 3, heading a minority government for the third time.
The centre-right coalition led by Jan P. Syse, in power for just over a year [see pp. 36984-85], had collapsed on Oct. 29 because of a deadlock over Norway's policy towards European integration and the question of eventual membership of the European Communities (EC).
There were nine women in the 19-member cabinet appointed by Brundtland, who had previously been Prime Minister in 1981 and in 1986-89 [see pp. 30748; 31246-47; 34502-03; 36984-85].
Seven of its members had also been part of the previous Labour administration — Thorvald Stoltenberg, Johan Joergen Holst and Gunhold Oeyangen in identical posts, and Kjell Borgen, Finn Kristensen, Oddrun Petersen and Tove Strand Gerhardsen with different portfolios.
The New Minister of finance, Sigbjoern Johnsen, had been deputy leader of the parliamentary finance committee since 1986.
Stoltenberg, in accepting appointment to the cabinet, gave up his post as UN High Commissioner for Refugees, which he had held since January 1990 [see p. 36989].
Gro Harlem Brundtland (f) Prime Minister Thorvald Stoltenberg Foreign Affairs Kjell Borgen Local Government Tove Veieroed (f) Health and Social Affairs Sigbjoern Johnsen Finance Ole Knapp Industry Finn Kristensen Petroleum and Energy Aase Kleveland (f) Cultural Affairs Johan Joergen Holst Defence Gunhild Oeyangen (f) Agriculture Grete Faremo (f) Development Co-operation Kjell Opseth Transport and Communications Matz Sandman Children's and Family Affairs Gudmund Hernes Education and Research Kari Gjesteby (f) Justice Thorbjoern Berntsen Environment Oddrun Pettersen (f) Fisheries Eldrid Nordboe (f) Trade and Shipping Tove Strand Gerhardsen (f) Labour and Government Administration Women are indicated by (f).
Norwegian Cabinet
The specific issue which had brought down Syse's coalition was the insistence by the Centre Party (SP), representing in the main the heavily protected and subsidized agricultural sector and with a long-standing tradition of opposition to the European Communities (EC), that Norway retain its so-called concessionary laws which impeded foreign ownership of property, financial institutions and industrial enterprises.
Syse's own Conservative party (Hoeyre) and the other party in his coalition, the Christian People's Party (KFP), were strongly in favour of closer co-operation with the EC and broadly supported full membership in due course.
Since the Norwegian constitution did not allow the early dissolution of parliament, attempts to form a new government had quickly been reduced to two options, a Conservative or a Labour minority administration.
The KFP had previously ruled out a two-party minority coalition with Hoeyre.
Programme of new Brundland government
Addressing parliament on Nov. 6, Brundtland committed her administration to creating jobs, improving childcare provisions and implementing a major environmental programme.
On Europe, she said that her government would push for closer ties with the EC, but did not provide details of the government's plans regarding eventual Norwegian membership of the Community.
EUROPE
DENMARK
Calling of early general election
Prime Minister Poul Schlüter on Nov. 22 called an early general election for Dec. 12, after his minority centre-right coalition failed to reach agreement with the opposition Social Democratic Party (SD) over the 1991 budget and an economic programme including tax reforms.
The decision was also provoked by a split in the Progress Party, a sporadic supporter of the government, which on Nov. 13 expelled its founder, Mogens Glistrup, from the parliamentary group for refusing to commit himself to voting discipline.
Elections in Faroes
Early elections took place in the Faroe Islands on Nov. 17 following the collapse of its centre-right coalition government in October, also over economic policy.
The SD, hitherto in opposition, emerged as the largest single party with 27.4 per cent of the vote and 10 of the 32 seats in the local parliament (Loegting or Lagting), an increase of three.
The People's Party, which led the outgoing coalition, won seven seats (a loss of one seat).
Results for the other parties were: Union Party six (previously seven), Republicans four (six), Home Rule Party three (two) and Christian Democrats two (two).
Some 86 per cent of the electorate of 35,000 went to the polls.
EUROPE
IRELAND
Election of Mary Robinson
In a presidential election on Nov. 7 Mary Robinson, the candidate supported by the Labour Party and the Workers' Party, became the first woman to be elected to the (largely ceremonial) post.
On Nov. 9 she was declared the winner with 51.9 per cent support (after the redistribution of second preference votes).
The candidate of the ruling Fianna Fáil party, Brian Lenihan, who had been the clear favourite until the controversy which led to his dismissal as Deputy Prime Minister in late October [see below], finished with 46.4 per cent of the vote.
Robinson, 46, a lawyer associated with human rights and civil liberties work, had resigned from the Labour Party in 1985 in protest at the Anglo-Irish agreement.
After the results had been confirmed she attributed her victory to votes from the women of Ireland, who "instead of rocking the cradle rocked the system" .
Her inauguration took place on Dec. 3.
Under the presidential voting system, Robinson won 38.9 per cent in the "first count" on Nov. 7.
Lenihan won 44.1 per cent and Austin Currie (Fine Gael) won 17 per cent.
In a "second count" Currie's votes were transferred to the two leading candidates according to the preference indicated by the elector on the voting paper, enabling Robinson to win by a margin of 86,000 votes.
The total turnout casting valid votes was 64.1 per cent.
Earlier dismissal of Lenihan — New Fine Gael leader
Prime Minister Charles Haughey dismissed Lenihan as Defence Minister and Deputy Prime Minister on Oct. 31 under pressure from Fianna Fáil's junior coalition partner, the Progressive Democrats, which was threatening to withdraw from the government and provoke another general election.
Shortly afterwards the government survived a vote of confidence in the Dáil by 83 votes to 80.
Haughey on Nov. 13 appointed John Wilson, currently Minister for the Marine, additionally as Deputy Prime Minister, while Haughey himself temporarily retained the Defence portfolio.
The crisis leading to Lenihan's dismissal arose in connection with reports that in January 1982 the Fianna Fáil leadership had attempted to persuade President Patrick Hillery by telephone to allow them to try to form a government without calling a general election.
(The then Fine Gael-Labour government had collapsed, and in the event an election was called which Fianna Fáil won.)
Lenihan was accused of dishonesty as to whether he had made any such calls himself.
The Irish Times on Oct. 26 published a taped interview, dating back to May 1990, in which Lenihan admitted he had made such a call.
He subsequently withdrew this admission, and on Oct. 29 he denied the persisting reports of his involvement.
Fine Gael leader Alan Dukes resigned on Nov. 13 and was replaced on Nov. 20 by John Bruton, the party's right-wing deputy leader.
New Primate of All Ireland
It was announced on Nov. 6 that the Rt.
Rev. Cahal Daly, 73, would be the new Archbishop of Armagh and Primate of All Ireland, succeeding Cardinal Tomás O Fiaich, who died in May [see p. 37468].
Daly, hitherto Bishop of Down and Connor (including Belfast), was theologically a conservative and an outspoken critic of the Irish Republican Army (IRA).
EUROPE
NORTHERN IRELAND
Brooke-Haughey meeting on Brooke initiative
In a renewed attempt to revive the so-called "Brooke initiative" to reopen talks on the political future of Northern Ireland, the UK Northern Ireland Secretary Peter Brooke met Irish Prime Minister Charles Haughey on Nov. 26.
Discussion centred on the issue of the point at which the Irish government should enter the envisaged inter-party talks.
After the meeting Haughey declared that "there are still hurdles to be overcome, but I believe we are moving towards a satisfactory outcome" .
In the past the Irish government had insisted that it should be involved in talks between the parties from the start [see p. 37784 for Oct. 25 meeting between Brooke and Gerard Collins, the Irish Foreign Minister].
At the Nov. 26 meeting, however, the Irish government appeared to have relaxed this stipulation, according to Guardian of Nov. 27.
Similarly, at the annual conference of the nationalist (largely Catholic) Social Democratic and Labour Party in Londonderry on Nov. 18, John Hume, the party leader, suggested that the timing of the Irish government's participation in any talks should be decided by the two governments rather than by the parties in the North.
Increased Army presence
It was announced on Nov. 30 that the British Army presence in Northern Ireland would be increased by 500-600 troops, in view of "firm intelligence" indicating a likely increase in bombings and shootings by both republican and loyalist paramilitaries before Christmas.
This was the first increase in troop numbers for four years, and brought the Army presence to nearly 11,000 (the peak level, in 1973, having been some 17,000).
The total strength of the security forces including the Royal Ulster Constabulary and the Ulster Defence Regiment in Northern Ireland would rise to over 29,000.
The Nov. 30 decision followed a rocket attack earlier in the day on the home of a High Court judge in north Belfast, in which two policemen were injured.
Mr Justice Higgins 's home had already been attacked in February 1987, and in mid-1988 three civilians were killed in a landmine attack on a car thought to belong to him [see p. 36238].
The IRA claimed responsibility for an attempted "human bomb" attack on Nov. 23 in County Tyrone, involving 3,700 lb of explosives (the largest device ever used by the IRA).
A man whose parents were being held captive had been forced to drive into a border checkpoint in a van containing the bomb, which had failed to explode.
EUROPE
FRANCE
No-confidence vote over social security tax
The Socialist government led by Prime Minister Michel Rocard survived a parliamentary vote of no confidence on Nov. 19 when only 284 deputies (including the Communists) voted against the government, five short of the majority needed to defeat it.
The motion was tabled by the opposition and the Communists in protest at government proposals to finance the social security system with a new income tax, the generalized social contribution (CSG).
Although the Socialist Party controlled only 272 seats in the 577-seat National Assembly, the Communists had supported the Rocard government in the eight previous confidence motions.
The CSG bill was adopted by the Assembly on Nov. 16 by "engaging the government's responsibility" (a procedure whereby a bill could be enacted without a vote unless a motion of no confidence was tabled and passed).
The CSG, designed to bring in revenue of F37,500 million per year, took the form of a 1.1 per cent general tax and replaced the current 0.4 per cent levy from income tax.
Although most unemployed people and many pensioners would be exempt, and an estimated 80 per cent of wage-earners would in fact be better off, the CSG was deeply unpopular simply because it was a new tax.
The General Confederation of Labour (CGT) called strikes and demonstrations for the rest of October.
At the same time the trade unions expressed strong opposition to the draft budget for 1991, which contained plans to cut public spending, ostensibly to offset the effects of the Gulf crisis, to increase defence spending and to cut corporate taxes; there was to be a small increase in wealth tax.
(The budget was adopted on Nov. 20, again by engaging the government's responsibility.)
Student unrest
Action by secondary school students in Paris and other cities, originally staged for better conditions, more teachers and improved security in schools, gathered force during October and was joined by university students as the new term began, continuing into November.
It was sparked off by the rape of a schoolgirl at a school in northern Paris on Sept. 27, and by other attacks in schools in the Paris area.
Some 120,000 pupils held demonstrations throughout France on Nov. 5-6.
Clashes with police in front of the National Assembly building in Paris, where the education section of the budget was being debated, resulted in injuries and arrests.
On the eve of the demonstration President Mitterrand urged that young people should be listened to, and Interior Minister Pierre Joxe urged the police to show moderation.
During a subsequent march of some 200,000 pupils backed by the teachers' union FEN in Paris on Nov. 12, police held back while cars were burned and shops looted in the seventh arrondissement, but finally intervened with tear gas and water cannon to prevent marchers approaching the presidential palace; 234 police and a number of journalists were injured and 83 people were arrested.
The action in October persuaded the government to make provision for a further 1,100 administrative posts and 3,000 jobs for student teachers in the education budget (in addition to the 15,000 new education posts including 4,500 teaching jobs already included).
After the Nov. 12 march talks took place between student leaders, Mitterrand and Education Minister Lionel Jospin, and the government on Nov. 14 announced plans to allocate a further F4,500 million francs to improve conditions in schools, and also to employ more teachers and to improve security.
It was pointed out that the education budget had grown each year since 1988 and that for 1991 it again exceeded the defence budget.
Riots in Lyon
Five nights of street violence and looting took place in Vaulx-en-Velin, a dormitory suburb of Lyon with a large immigrant population, following the death of a young motorcycle passenger, Thomas Claudio, in a collision with a police car on Oct. 6.
The shopping centre was burned down, riot police were brought in and about 30 people were injured in clashes.
Longstanding racial tensions and complaints of persistent police harassment of young people underlay the incidents.
EUROPE
SPAIN
PSOE congress
The Spanish Socialist Workers' Party (PSOE) held its 32nd congress in Madrid on Nov. 9-11.
Prime Minister and PSOE secretary-general Felipe González emphasized in his opening address the party's commitment to social democracy and a free-market economy.
The executive, the most senior PSOE body, was enlarged from 23 to 31 members, but did not include the "neo-liberal" Economy and Finance Minister Carlos Solchaga, who had led opposition within the party to what was described as the ideological rule of the Deputy Prime Minister, Alfonso Guerra.
The Marxist Socialist Left faction lost all its seats on the federal committee.
The congress agreed that PSOE members need no longer be affiliated to the socialist General Workers' Union (UGT), a decision reflecting recent disagreements between the PSOE and the UGT, and formally ending the once close relationship between the two organizations.
Confirmation of Basque Premier
Following the Basque elections on Oct. 28 [see p. 37785]José Antonio Ardanza was confirmed in office as the lendakari (Premier) of the Basque government.
EUROPE
ITALY
Visit by Gorbachev
During a one-day visit to Italy on Nov. 18, Soviet President Gorbachev signed with Italian Prime Minister Giulio Andreotti a 20-year treaty of friendship and co-operation.
It provided for broader and more regular consultations, expanded economic, scientific and technological co-operation, and active co-operation in the conversion of the defence industry.
An economic agreement worth 7,200,000 million lire in the form of a government-guaranteed loan and export credits over the next five years, as announced by Italy on Oct. 18, was also signed.
Later in the day Gorbachev had an audience with Pope John Paul II, whom he had previously met in December 1989 [see p. 37129].
EUROPE
COUNCIL OF EUROPE
Accession of Hungary — Convention on money laundering
On Nov. 6 Hungary became the first east European country to join the Council of Europe.
Poland [see p. 37212], Yugoslavia and Czechoslovakia had also applied for membership.
A Convention on the Laundering, Search, Seizure and Confiscation of the Proceeds of a Crime was signed on Nov. 8 by 12 of the 24 Council of Europe member countries.
The Convention was drawn up under the aegis of the Pompidou Group [see pp. 37394; 35127]and would enter into force once ratified by three signatories.
It provided for court confiscation of convicted drug dealers' assets, and the granting of authority for telephone tapping and surveillance of and access to computer systems of suspected drug criminals.
It would simplify the exchange of evidence and information, and make the laundering of drug money a crime.
EUROPE
EUROPEAN COMMUNITIES
Italian signature of Schengen Agreement
On Nov. 27 Italy became the sixth European Community member country to sign the Schengen Agreement.
In parallel with the introduction of the single internal market by Dec. 31, 1992, signatories were to remove controls on common borders, strengthen external frontiers and operate a harmonized visa policy.
Spain and Portugal joined the system as observers also on Nov. 27.
MIDDLE EAST — ARAB WORLD
GULF CRISIS
Approval of UN Resolution 678 authorizing use of force
The UN Security Council on Nov. 29 approved Resolution 678 authorizing member governments to use "all necessary means" to ensure Iraq's complete withdrawal from Kuwait, if by a deadline of Jan. 15, 1991, the Iraqis had not already done so and thereby complied with the UN's previous resolutions.
It was the first resolution since that of June 27, 1950, on Korea [see pp. 10806-07]to authorize the use of force.
This represented a triumph for intensive diplomatic efforts by United States President George Bush and Secretary of State James Baker.
After leaving Paris where he had attended the CSCE conference on Nov. 19-21 [see pp. 37838-39], Bush had himself visited the Middle East from Nov. 21, spending the following day (the US Thanksgiving Day) with US troops in Saudi Arabia, meeting King Fahd there and Egypt's President Mubarak in Cairo, and returning via Geneva where he had a meeting on Nov. 23 with President Assad of Syria.
The passage of Resolution 678 was achieved before the deadline of Nov. 30 which the USA had set itself, and after which the chairmanship of the Security Council would pass by alphabetical rotation from the USA to Yemen for the month of December.
In pursuit of diplomatic support, Baker met Chinese Foreign Minister Qian Qichen at the UN in New York on Nov. 28 and invited him to Washington, effectively ending the diplomatic isolation of China by the USA in force since the June 1989 Tiananmen Square massacre.
(China, while not using its veto, nevertheless abstained, thus breaching for the first time the unanimity of the five permanent members of the Security Council in supporting resolutions on the Gulf crisis.
Qian had visited Iraq and Saudi Arabia on Nov. 11-12 to seek a negotiated settlement.)
Baker also met Cuban Foreign Minister Isidoro Malmierca on Nov. 28, the first such meeting since the Castro regime came to power in Cuba.
Baker won Cuban as well as Yemeni agreement not to insist that the Council vote first on the Palestinian issue, reportedly tacitly undertaking in return not to veto a resolution planned for December.
Resolution 678 was proposed by the USA, the Soviet Union, the UK and Canada.
It incorporated the deadline of Jan. 15 rather than Jan. 1, which the USA had originally advanced as more desirable.
The debate was described by Baker as the Security Council's most important meeting ever, with 13 of the 15 participating countries (all except Côte d'Ivoire and Yemen) represented by their Foreign Ministers.
UN Security Council Resolutions
Resolution 677.
Nov. 29.
Passed unanimously.
Condemned Iraqi attempts to modify the demography of Kuwait.
Resolution 678.
Nov. 29.
Passed 12-2 with Cuba and Yemen voting against and China abstaining.
"Recalling and reaffirming its Resolutions 660, 661, 662, 664, 665, 666, 667, 669, 670, 674 and 677 [set out on pp. 37639; 37695; 37759; and above; Resolution 669 of Sept. 24, omitted on page 37695, was passed unanimously, asking the sanctions committee to examine requests for assistance from countries experiencing economic difficulties because of observance of the embargo];
"Noting that…
Iraq refuses to comply…;
"Acting under Chapter VII of the UN Charter;
"1.
Demands that Iraq comply fully…and decides, while maintaining all its decisions, to allow Iraq one final opportunity, as a pause of goodwill, to do so;
"2.
Authorises member states co-operating with the government of Kuwait, unless Iraq on or before Jan. 15, 1990, fully implements, as set forth in paragraph 1 above, the foregoing resolutions, to use all necessary means to uphold and implement Security Council Resolution 660 and all subsequent relevant resolutions and to restore international peace and security in the area;
"3.
Requests all states to provide appropriate support for the actions undertaken in pursuance of paragraph 2 of this resolution;
"4.
Requests the states concerned to keep the Council regularly informed on the progress of actions undertaken pursuant to paragraphs 2 and 3 of this resolution;
"5.
Decides to remain seized of the matter."
Baker said in the debate that it was for Iraqi President Saddam Hussein to chose the option of peace by withdrawing Iraqi forces.
The crisis, he said, was the ultimate test of the success of the UN.
"We now have the chance to build the world envisioned by the founders of the UN.
We have the chance to make this council and this United Nations true instruments for peace and justice across the globe."
UK Foreign Secretary Douglas Hurd echoed the argument that there was an "option for peace" and that "the Iraqis hold it in their hands" .
(Hurd said afterwards that the Jan. 15 deadline would not automatically trigger an immediate offensive, but also that Iraq had no immunity against military action before that date if, for example, foreign nationals held hostage there were mistreated.)
French External Affairs Minister Roland Dumas said that, however committed France was to seeking a peaceful solution, it was ultimately a matter of international law.
Soviet Foreign Minister Eduard Shevardnadze said that for Saddam Hussein it was no longer a matter of saving face but that he must save his country and the world by avoiding war; if Iraq were to harm a single Soviet national, his government reserved the right to take appropriate action.
(The Soviet stance vis-à-vis Iraq had hardened noticeably during November with disillusionment over the expectation that 1,000 Soviet nationals would be allowed out within a few weeks following the Oct. 28-9 visit of Yevgeny Primakov [see p. 37758].
After talks in Moscow on Nov. 27 between President Gorbachev and Iraqi Foreign Minister Tariq Aziz, described by Gorbachev as "difficult, I would even say harsh" , the Soviet Foreign Affairs Ministry estimated that only 350 Soviet nationals had thus far been allowed to leave Iraq.)
China was abstaining, Qian Qichen said, because of its belief that all peaceful means should first be exhausted.
Yemen's representative, M. A. S. al-Ashtal, said that those who had once urged patience, for economic sanctions to take effect, in Rhodesia or South Africa, should give peace a chance.
For Cuba, Malmierca characterized the resolution as setting a date for war and said that it violated the UN Charter.
Cuba, Yemen and Malaysia raised the issue of the Israeli-occupied territories during the debate.
On Nov. 30 Iraq's ruling Revolution Command Council and the Arab Baath Socialist Party leadership issued a communiqué rejecting "the ultimatum and the threats" .
Iraq, it said, would not yield before arrogance and terrorism, and called upon the Security Council to use the same criterion for dealing with all the problems of the region.
Shortly before the vote Saddam Hussein had made a speech broadcast by Baghdad radio, asserting that if war came Iraq would fight with a heroism which would fill every Arab and Moslem with pride, and, more specifically, that Iraq had the means to detect US stealth bombers and shoot them down like any other enemy aircraft.
Bush's offer of talks — Earlier military build-up
Bush said on Nov. 30 that he was prepared to go "the extra mile for peace" , proposing that Iraq's Foreign Minister Tariq Aziz should visit Washington for talks with him in mid-December and that this be followed by Baker visiting Baghdad.
Earlier, on Nov. 9, Bush had announced a major increase in US troops in the Gulf, to ensure "an adequate offensive military option" .
No precise numbers were given, but this was expected to bring the US presence to some 400,000 when deployment was completed in January 1991.
This would include 34 per cent of the US Army's total effective strength, a larger proportion (albeit a smaller absolute number) than had ever been deployed in Vietnam.
This announcement represented the first explicit US endorsement of an offensive military option.
The existing US force of 230,000 as part of "Operation Desert Shield" had been assessed by the US commander, Gen. Norman Schwartzkopf, as ensuring "the capacity to defend successfully" , Bush said.
Referring to the effect of the new deployment on Saddam Hussein's policy, Bush commented that he hoped for sanctions to work within a two-month period, but that "if this movement of forces is what convinces him [of the need to comply with UN resolutions], so much the better" .
Additional forces reportedly comprised three tank divisions redeployed from western Europe, a doubling of the US Marines contingent to 90,000, three more aircraft carrier groups and a second battleship, the Missouri.
The Army began calling up reserves for combat training for the first time in the crisis to date (the Marines having done so a week previously).
The US Senate foreign relations committee chairman, Claiborne Pell, had warned on Nov. 8 that the President "would be badly advised to go to war without a clear prior expression of congressional support" and should not "establish an offensive capacity in advance of a UN resolution authorizing offensive action" .
Growing domestic concern about the prospect of a military offensive was evident by the end of November, despite the failure of a bid to have Congress specially recalled for a full debate; the Senate armed services committee opened hearings on the administration's management of the Gulf crisis on Nov. 27.
Le Monde of Dec. 1 estimated the forces ranged against Iraq, besides the large US contingent, as 30,000 UK (including 14,000, mainly from the 4th Armoured Brigade based in Germany, whose deployment in the Gulf had been announced on Nov.????); 11,700 French; 1,700 Canadian; nearly 20,000 Egyptian; some 20,000 Syrian (plus 800 in the UAE); 6,200 Moroccan; 5,000 Pakistani; and Saudi forces totalling 67,500.
Against them were ranged an estimated 450,000 Iraqi soldiers massed in Kuwait and southern Iraq, plus a further 250,000 whose despatch was announced on Nov. 19.
Baker had talks in Jeddah on Nov. 5 with King Fahd of Saudi Arabia as part of a Middle East tour on Nov. 3-7, followed by a visit to Moscow on Nov. 8 and a series of meetings in European capitals.
An agreement announced on Nov. 5 confirmed that the Saudis would have ultimate command of fighting to defend the Kingdom, but that US forces based there could proceed independently in action outside Saudi territory.
Abortive Moroccan proposal for Arab peace initiative
King Hassan of Morocco, in a broadcast on Nov. 11, called for an emergency Arab summit as a last opportunity for a peaceful Gulf settlement, with the Palestinian issue also on the agenda.
The PLO leader Yassir Arafat discussed this proposal with King Hussein of Jordan in Amman on Nov. 13, but the initiative foundered quickly over Iraq's insistence that the Arab League cancel the resolutions of its Cairo meeting in August [see p. 37635], requiring immediate withdrawal of Iraqi troops from Kuwait.
Saudi Arabia conversely insisted that this be fulfilled before any further meeting.
On Nov. 15 the Kuwaiti government-in-exile endorsed the Saudi view that an Arab summit at this time would be pointless.
Hostage releases from Iraq
A series of prominent former government leaders and various other Western political figures visited Iraq during November to seek from Saddam Hussein the release of those held hostage there.
Most obtained some concessions.
On Nov. 18 the Revolutionary Command Council announced that the release of all foreigners, estimated to number some 2,000, would begin on Dec. 25 and be completed three months later unless "something happens to disrupt the climate of peace" .
On that day a plane left Baghdad for London with 133 people on board, mainly women and children.
Saddam's talks with former West German Chancellor Willy Brandt on Nov. 7-8 had resulted in the announcement that 170 people would be released, including over 100 Germans.
Former Japanese Prime Minister Yasuhiro Nakasone, who met Saddam on Nov. 6, left Iraq on Nov. 7 on a flight to Japan with 77 Japanese men released from Iraq.
Impact of sanctions in Iraq — Opposition activities — Regime personnel changes
On Nov. 20 the Iraqi National Assembly passed a bill introducing the death penalty for people convicted of hoarding cereals.
With reports from Western sources suggesting that UN sanctions against Iraq were working [see also pp. 37639; 37695], the Belgian Foreign Minister Mark Eyskens claimed on Nov. 18 that the effects were "visible in the factories" , where there was a "growing lack of spare parts" , although "the shops in Baghdad are full of things brought from Kuwait" .
Reports from Iraqi Army deserters crossing into Turkey indicated that sanctions had not yet affected military weapons and equipment, but that food supplies were often inadequate.
Reports of opposition activities
Egyptian news agencies on Nov. 24 reported the arrest of "a number of young people…following disturbances at some Baghdad schools" .
On Nov. 25 and 27 a Beirut-based dissident Shia Moslem group, the Supreme Council of the Islamic Revolution of Iraq, claimed that 4,500 opposition Moslem fundamentalists, mostly students, had been arrested for distributing leaflets and painting slogans criticizing the regime of Saddam Hussein.
The reports added that the arrests had followed "bloody clashes with knives and daggers on Nov. 7 and 15 in Baghdad" .
Earlier reports on Sept. 7 and 10 had claimed that opposition groups had called for a popular revolt against Saddam Hussein, and had agreed on a plan for joint action, with plans for a government-in-exile composed of "various wings of the Iraqi opposition" .
The leader of the Tehran-based Iraqi Patriotic Union of Kurdistan (PUK), Jalal Talabani, was reportedly undertaking a tour of Arab and international capitals to co-ordinate opposition to Saddam Hussein.
However, the Guardian of Nov. 27 quoted Talabani as saying that Iraqi Kurds "will not join foreign forces fighting Iraq" .
Dismissal and reported execution of Iraqi Army Chief-of-Staff
— Reported assassination of Iraqi governor of Kuwait
Gen. Abdel-Karim al-Khazraji was replaced by Gen. Hussain Rashid as Iraqi Army Chief-of-Staff on Nov. 8.
No reason was announced for Khazraji's dismissal.
On Nov. 22 a spokesman for the exiled Iraqi New Ummah Party claimed that he had been executed along with seven other officers for having attempted to depose Saddam Hussein.
It was announced on Nov. 14 that Aziz Saleh al-Nouman, a former Minister of State and a senior official of the Arab Baath Socialist Party, had temporarily replaced Ali Hasan al-Majid as governor of occupied Kuwait [see p. 37727 for Majid's appointment in September].
On Nov. 26 The Washington Post quoted Abdel Razzaq Saqer, a spokesman for the Kuwaiti government-in-exile, as saying that Majid had been shot and killed by members of the Kuwaiti resistance.
Reported intensification of resistance within Kuwait — Lifting of night-time curfew
On Nov. 24 the Iraqi News Agency (INA) denied as "fabricated" a claim broadcast by the Voice of America (VOA) earlier that day, that eight Iraqi schoolchildren had been killed by members of the Kuwaiti resistance to avenge the deaths of Kuwaiti children.
INA reported merely that "a number of adolescents" had been arrested for having "caused panic in several primary schools" .
This latest incident, effectively coinciding with the claim that Iraq's governor in Kuwait had been assassinated [see above], followed reports of an escalation in resistance activity.
On Sept. 7 an unidentified Kuwaiti resistance leader had said that "the resistance has cost the Iraqi regime between one and two thousand soldiers" .
On Sept. 15, Egyptian radio had reported that members of the Kuwaiti resistance had assassinated an Iraqi Baa'th party official, Najib Khalaf, in Baghdad, the first such attack inside Iraqi territory.
The Washington Post of Nov. 16 reported that US special forces were training small units of the Kuwaiti Army to resist Iraqi attacks.
Lifting of night-time curfew
Iraqi authorities lifted the night-time curfew on Nov. 23 for the first time since the Aug. 2 invasion [see pp. 37632-35].
According to INA, the decision was taken "to confirm the return of normal life to the governorate" .
Resignation of Information Minister
Shaikh Jabir Mubarak al-Ahmad as-Sabah resigned as Information Minister in the exiled Kuwaiti government on Nov. 25.
No reason was given.
He was replaced by Badr Jasim al-Yaqub, the Minister of State for National Assembly Affairs.
MIDDLE EAST — ARAB WORLD
ISRAEL
Assassination of Kahane — Border incidents — Internal political affairs
Assassination of Meir Kahane
Rabbi Meir Kahane, a controversial ultra-militant Zionist leader, was shot dead in New York late on Nov. 5.
Kahane was killed while addressing members of a fledgling Zionist group, the Zionist Emergency Evacuation Rescue Organization.
His assassin was identified by police as El Sayed Noseir, a 37-year-old boiler repairman who was believed to be an Egyptian immigrant.
Noseir was shot and seriously injured by a US Postal Service police officer whilst attempting to escape the scene.
Kahane, born in New York in 1932, had founded the Jewish Defence League (JDL) there in 1968, organizing defence patrols, clashing frequently with Black Nationalists, and campaigning for Jews to be allowed to emigrate from the Soviet Union.
After a number of bomb explosions at Soviet targets, Kahane was given a suspended five-year prison sentence in mid-1971 for conspiracy to manufacture explosives.
He emigrated to Israel later in 1971, founding a political party, Kach ( "Thus" ) and advocating "transfer" (the physical removal of its Arab citizens from Israel, and of Palestinians from the occupied territories, to establish a purely Jewish state).
In the early 1980s Kach members were involved in "Jewish underground" attacks on Palestinian and Islamic targets.
In 1984 Kahane was elected to the Knesset as his party's sole representative, but in October 1988 the Israeli Supreme Court upheld a decision taken by the central elections committee to ban Kach from competing in the forthcoming elections because of its "Nazi-like, un-democratic and racist" stance [see p. 36947].
Two elderly Palestinians were shot dead on Nov. 6 near the West Bank town of Nablus in an apparent act of revenge for Kahane's assassination.
As many as 15,000 Israelis, including three government ministers, attended Kahane's funeral on Nov. 7 in Jerusalem, where there were outbreaks of rioting and battles between police and mourners.
Border incidents
According to Israeli media reports a group of Jordanian security police crossed into Israel near the West Bank town of Jericho on Nov. 8 in an attempt to "perpetrate an attack" .
One Israeli soldier and one "infiltrator" died in the ensuing clash.
On Nov. 13 a 16-year-old Palestinian was captured after crossing into Israel from Jordan and shooting dead an Israeli soldier.
A uniformed gunman crossed into Israel from Egypt on Nov. 25 and opened fire on several Israeli military and civilian vehicles.
Four Israelis were killed and 26 injured.
The attack occurred in the vicinity of Ein Uzzia, some 10 km from Eilat.
Responsibility was claimed by the Islamic Jihad Movement — Bayt al-Maqdis (Jerusalem), which had also claimed responsibility for an attack on an Israeli tour bus in Egypt in February 1990 [see pp. 37265-66], and which in late October had been declared illegal in Israel and the occupied territories.
On the previous day, Nov. 24, five Arab gunmen attempted a seaborne attack from Lebanon, but were all shot dead when their vessel was intercepted by an Israeli naval patrol vessel.
A few hours later (early on Nov. 25) a 19-year-old Arab woman approached an Israeli Army patrol in Israel's self-declared "security zone" in southern Lebanon and ignited explosives concealed on her body; the woman died and two soldiers were injured.
Responsibility for this attack was claimed by the Syrian Socialist Nationalist Party.
Defeat of no-confidence motion — Addition to ruling coalition
The Likud-led coalition easily survived a vote of no confidence in the Knesset on Nov. 5, defeating the Labour Party and other left-wing parties by 57 votes to 50.
The opposition had tabled the no confidence motion on the government's handling of the mass immigration of Soviet Jews and the expected housing crisis.
On Nov. 16 Agudat Yisrael, a small four-member ultra-orthodox religious party, joined the ruling coalition, which now held 64 seats in the 120-member Knesset.
Since its formation in June 1990 the government had ruled with 60 seats, plus tacit support from the two-member rightist Moledet party.
Before joining the coalition Agudat Yisrael secured a promise of government support for four pieces of legislation, reducing the sale of pork and cutting public transportation on the Jewish sabbath, tightening restrictions on abortion, and prohibiting "lewd advertising" .
Under the agreement, Agudat Yisrael also gained three deputy ministerships and the chair of the powerful Knesset finance committee.
MIDDLE EAST — ARAB WORLD
PALESTINIAN AFFAIRS
Aftermath of Temple Mount killings — Events in the occupied territories — Extradition to Israel of Palestinian
 "terrorist" 
The Nov. 5 assassination in New York of the extremist Jewish leader Meir Kahane [see p. 37872]intensified tension and fuelled the spiralling violence in Israel and the occupied territories in November, sparked off by the Oct. 8 shooting of at least 17 Arabs at the Temple Mount in Jerusalem.
UN secretary general's report on Temple Mount killings — Israel's conditional acceptance of UN envoy
The report of UN Secretary-General Javier Pérez de Cuéllar to the UN Security Council on the Temple Mount killings was released on Oct. 31.
Although the Security Council had voted unanimously to send a mission to investigate the killings, this had been frustrated by the Israeli government's refusal to co-operate.
Pérez de Cuéllar's report proposed a conference of all the 164 state signatories to the Fourth Geneva Convention of 1949 — including Israel — to discuss measures to protect Palestinians in the occupied territories.
The Convention had been established in the aftermath of the Second World War to protect civilians living under the control of occupying forces.
The UN had long maintained that the Convention applied to all the territories occupied by Israel during the 1967 war, including Jerusalem.
The Israeli Cabinet responded to the proposal on Nov. 4 by stating that Israel did not acknowledge the applicability of the Convention to the territories.
The Cabinet also attacked Pérez de Cuéllar for "abusing" the Convention and singling out Israel "without making a comparable plea to the Palestinians to cease their violence" .
On Nov. 12 Israel agreed to accept a visit to Jerusalem by Jean-Claude Aimé as the envoy of the UN Secretary-General, on condition that Aimé would not use the opportunity of his visit for an investigation specifically directed to the Temple Mount killings.
The move was seen as an attempt by Israel to defuse the worsening crisis in its relations with the United States, which had in October voted for the sending of a UN mission to Jerusalem.
Israel's Foreign Minister David Levy said that in return for Israel's acceptance of a UN emissary, the USA had agreed to "take steps to remove the subject of the Temple Mount from the Security Council agenda" .
Shamir's "river to sea" speech
Israel's Prime Minister Itzhak Shamir delivered a speech on Nov. 18 which revived the controversy surrounding his "big Israel" speech of January 1990 [see p. 37199].
In his speech Shamir said that Israel should always maintain control over the occupied territories in order that future immigrants could be settled.
 "The past leaders of our movement left us a clear message to keep the land of Israel from the [Mediterranean]sea to the river Jordan for the generation to come" , Shamir stated.
Shamir's speech was harshly condemned by Palestinian leaders.
The Middle East International of Nov. 23 reported that during an address to the Knesset foreign affairs and defence committee on Nov. 19, Shamir had specifically linked the territories with the need for space to absorb immigrants from the Soviet Union.
Serious unrest in Gaza Strip — Arrest of prominent Palestinians
Rioting erupted in the Gaza Strip on Nov. 3 as news spread that a Palestinian detainee had been killed the previous day by soldiers.
The Israeli authorities claimed that the detainee, Attiyah Abdel Atti Zanin, had hanged himself in his cell.
During the rioting one Palestinian man was shot dead by Israeli soldiers and over 100 others were injured, many as a result of being shot.
Palestinians on Nov. 15 disregarded curfews imposed by the Israeli authorities and openly celebrated the second anniversary of the Palestinian declaration of independence.
The Israeli authorities placed three prominent Palestinians under "administrative detention" for periods of up to one year on Nov. 13.
The three were Radwan Abu Ayyash, head of the Arab Journalists' Association, Ziyad Abu Zayyad, a lawyer, and Ahmed Yazji, a physician.
The three had frequently been accused by Israel of being leaders of the intifada.
Extradition of alleged Palestinian terrorist from USA to Israel
On Oct. 30 Mahmoud Atta, a Palestinian and a US citizen, was extradited from New York to Israel, where he faced trial on charges of taking part in an attack on an Israeli bus in the West Bank in 1986.
Atta had been arrested in the USA in 1987, and in August 1990 the US Supreme Court had rejected his final appeal against extradition.
According to the US State Department Atta was a member of the Abu Nidal Organization.
MIDDLE EAST
SYRIA
Diplomatic relations with UK
The United Kingdom government announced on Nov. 28 that it was restoring diplomatic relations with Syria with immediate effect.
The UK had severed relations with Syria in October 1986, declaring that it had "conclusive evidence" of Syrian involvement in the attempted destruction of an Israeli airliner flying from the UK to Israel [see p. 34722].
Other incidents, notably including kidnappings in Lebanon and the Lockerbie disaster in which a Pan Am airliner was destroyed in December 1988, had also been attributed in a number of cases to groups based in or operating under the protection of Syria.
In a House of Commons debate on Nov. 28, 1990, however, the UK Foreign Secretary Douglas Hurd declared that Syria had made "energetic efforts" to facilitate the release of Western hostages in Lebanon and had given formal assurances of its "rejection of international terrorism" .
Syria's anti-Iraqi stance in the Gulf crisis [see pp. 37694; 37636-37]was widely seen as a major factor influencing the UK decision to resume relations.
[For resumption of relations between UK and Iran in September see p. 37727.]
MIDDLE EAST — ARAB WORLD
IRAN-IRAQ
Visit by Vellayati to Iraq
The Iranian Foreign Minister, Ali Akbar Vellayati, visited Iran on Nov. 14-15 for talks with Iraqi President Saddam Hussein and Foreign Minister Tariq Aziz.
It was the first time that a senior Iranian official had visited Iraq since the Iranian revolution of 1979.
Describing the contacts between the two countries as a "positive development" , Vellayati also said that the exchange of prisoners of war between the two countries, abruptly suspended by Iraq in September [see p. 37727], would resume shortly.
After the last exchange of prisoners in mid-September, Iran had refused to release an estimated 17,000 Iraqi prisoners, claiming that Iraq still held 20,000 Iranians not registered with the International Committee of the Red Cross (ICRC).
Iraq, however, maintained that there were no more Iranians to free.
A spokesman for the Iraqi Foreign Ministry said on Nov. 19 that following the agreement reached during Vellayati's visit Iraq's Revolutionary Command Council had "decided to pardon all convicted Iranian prisoners and those whose cases were referred to the judiciary, a total of 239" .
MIDDLE EAST — ARAB WORLD
OMAN
Creation of Consultative Council
In a speech marking the 20th anniversary of his reign on Nov. 18, Sultan Qaboos bin Said announced plans for the creation of a Consultative Council "to provide more opportunities for the Omani citizen's wider participation in the responsibilities of…the fatherland" .
Sultan Qaboos, who deposed his father in a coup in 1970 [see p. 24102], said that the new Council would consist of representatives from the country's 42 provinces.
He added that, unlike the existing 55-member State Consultative Assembly "there will be no government membership of this majlisRO>" .
MIDDLE EAST — ARAB WORLD
UNITED ARAB EMIRATES
Cabinet reshuffle
In the most comprehensive reshuffle for a decade, prompted in part by the death in October of the UAE Prime Minister and ruler of Dubai, Shaikh Rashid bin Said al-Maktoum [see p. 37794], the UAE President Shaikh Zaid bin Sultan al-Nahayan named a new Cabinet on Nov. 20.
Shaikh Maktoum bin Rashid al-Maktoum was appointed Prime Minister, with Sultan bin Zaid al-Nahayan as Deputy Prime Minister.
Sayed Manah Said al-Oteiba, Oil Minister for 20 years, was replaced by Yusuf bin Umayr bin Yusuf.
Rashid bin Abdullah Ali al-Nuaymi was named to the newly created post of Foreign Minister, while his previous post as Minister of State for Foreign Affairs was assumed by Hamdan bin Zaid al-Nahayan.
The Interior Minister, Shaikh Mubarak bin Mohammad al-Nahayan, was replaced by Maj.Gen.
Hammudah bin Ali al-Dhuhiri.
MIDDLE EAST — ARAB WORLD
ALGERIA
Formation of Algerian Movement for Justice and Democracy
It was announced on Nov. 6 that former Prime Minister Col. Kasdi Merbah, who had resigned in October from the central committee of the ruling National Liberation Front (FLN)[see p. 37795], had formed the Algerian Movement for Justice and Development.
In a press statement, Merbah said that his new party "draws its framework from Islam" , the "consecration of the Algerian personality" and "the need to build a democratic state" .
Demonstrations by Islamic Salvation Front
Mass anti-government rallies were organized in Constantine and Algiers by the Islamic Salvation Front (FIS) on Nov. 2 and 9, during which FIS leaders warned the government against postponing the country's first multiparty national parliamentary elections scheduled for early 1991.
In his address on Nov. 2 the FIS leader Abbasi Madani called for a jihad ( "holy war" ) if "there [was]any procrastination in holding these elections" .
On Nov. 9, FIS leaders threatened "to reject dialogue" with the government, accusing it of hindering the work of councils where the FIS had won a majority of seats in the June municipal elections [see pp. 37549-50].
The latest anti-government protests came amidst a growing political crisis within the FLN [see p. 37795]and nationwide strikes over rising prices and unemployment [see pp. 37795-96].
MIDDLE EAST
MOROCCO
Crisis in relations with France
The French Foreign Minister Roland Dumas paid a visit to King Hassan of Morocco on Nov. 9 in an effort to repair bilateral relations, which had deteriorated seriously in recent weeks.
He said afterwards that he thought the explanations he had given regarding the crisis had satisfied the King.
The crisis grew out of the attention paid by the media of both countries to the bestselling book Notre Ami le Roi, written by French author Gilles Perrault, which detailed notorious scandals under Hassan's reign and concentrated in particular on human rights abuses.
Senior Moroccan government officials alleged that the Perrault book was being used as part of a French "anti-Moroccan campaign" .
The Moroccan Prime Minister, Azzedine Laraki, applied to a Paris court for injunctions against Radio French Internationale and Antenne-2, which had broadcast interviews with Perrault.
Due to the charged atmosphere between the two countries, the French President's wife Danielle Mitterrand, the head of the human rights group France Libertés, was persuaded on Nov. 5 to cancel her plan to pay a visit on Nov. 7-9 to southern Algerian refugee camps, which housed Polisario guerrillas fighting to liberate the Moroccan-occupied Western Sahara.
The Moroccan government had also reportedly taken exception to the October appointment of Georges Kiejman as the new French Justice Minister.
Kiejman, a distinguished lawyer, listed among his clients some of Morocco's best-known political prisoners, including members of the family of the late Gen. Mohammed Oufkir who were mentioned in Perrault's book.
On Nov. 8 a UN human rights panel asked for an official explanation why the Oufkir family and the left-wing leader Abraham Serfaty were still imprisoned.
An Amnesty International report published on Nov. 21 called for a public commission to penetrate an official wall of silence and secrecy surrounding the disappearance of 100 people in the south of Morocco and the Western Sahara over the previous 15 years.
The report claimed that there was evidence of the "generalized use of torture and unjust sentences" .
INTERNATIONAL
ENVIRONMENT
Second world climate conference
At the conclusion of the second world climate conference, held in Geneva on Nov. 5-7, the 137 participating governments signed an agreement which recognized that global warming was a reality and undertook to take steps to limit it.
This would be achieved by formulating a convention on climate change, to include legally binding protocols on cutting emissions of gases which contributed to global warming, and provisions for industrialized countries to provide financial and technical assistance to Third-World countries to help them achieve this without forgoing the benefits of industrial development.
Negotiations on the convention were scheduled to begin in February 1991, with a view to reaching agreement in time for the 1992 environment and development conference in Brazil.
Agreement had been delayed by a reluctance on the part of major oil-producing states, led by Saudi Arabia, the Soviet Union and the United States to agree to set firm targets for limiting greenhouse gas emissions.
Such targets had been advocated by the majority of Western countries, including Australia, Japan and the European Communities (EC), which proposed a commitment to freeze emissions of carbon dioxide (the single largest contributor to the greenhouse effect) at present levels by the year 2000.
A joint statement of intent had been issued on Nov. 5 by the 18 countries in the EC and the European Free Trade Area (EFTA), while the German government, going a stage further, promised a net cut in C02 emissions of 20-25 per cent by the year 2005.
The failure to agree on definite targets brought strong criticism from environmentalists.
The largest US environmental group, the Sierra Club, blamed the US government for the "failure of the conference" .
A spokesperson commented that "more than 700 scientists have sent out a clarion call for action, and the USA was the only wealthy country not to make tangible promises" .
The head of the US delegation, John Knauss, described emissions targets as "idealistic" .
Asked to comment on the German government's targets, Knauss said that they were no doubt based on a "very thorough" study, adding that "we have not done that level of study" .
London Dumping Convention meeting
A meeting attended by representatives of 43 of the 64 signatory countries of the 1972 London Dumping Convention (LDC — a UN instrument to control the dumping of waste at sea — see pp. 25637-38) was held at the headquarters of the International Maritime Organization in London on Oct. 29-Nov. 2.
It was agreed to halt all depositing of industrial waste in international waters by 1995, including sub-seabed disposal of nuclear waste.
The existing blacklist of substances not to be dumped at sea would be superseded by the blanket ban.
A survey was to be carried out by the North Sea Conference to gain a clear picture of where dumping occurred, and it would be the responsibility of signatory countries to prosecute those of their own ships which transgressed the convention.
The ban was initially opposed by the France, the Soviet Union, the UK and the USA, which wanted to keep open their option of dumping nuclear waste at sea.
It was also argued that the ban was premature and that developing nations would have their industrial development impaired as a result.
Such arguments were strongly opposed by environmental groups such as Greenpeace, which described the final result as "a strong signal from the international community that dumping nuclear waste at sea is unacceptable" .
In another development the LDC also proposed extending its remit to control the disposal of waste into the sea directly from land — the source of 80 per cent of marine waste.
The Convention's remit to date only included dumping from ships.
A report and proposals would be submitted to preliminary meetings of the 1992 Brazil conference on environment and development.
INTERNATIONAL
NATO
Revelations concerning clandestine anti-communist units and alleged European network
In several European countries there were disclosures during November concerning clandestine anti-communist units, apparently set up at the height of the Cold War in the 1950s and intended to lie dormant for activation in the event of a communist takeover.
The extent to which such units comprised a network supported by the North Atlantic Treaty Organization (NATO) was a matter of widespread speculation.
The reports were stimulated by Italian government admissions about the existence of a secret force, code-named "Gladio" , and allegations about the involvement of Gladio in right-wing extremist action.
Details of Gladio in Italy first emerged in July when a magistrate in Venice, Felice Casson, who was leading an inquiry into a terrorist attack on three policemen in 1972, accidentally stumbled on Gladio's records amongst the archives of the Italian secret service, SISMI.
Prime Minister Giulio Andreotti first admitted publicly on Oct. 17 that a NATO-backed clandestine para-military force of between 600 and 1,000 men and women had existed in Italy since 1951, to counter a possible invasion by Warsaw Pact countries.
On Nov. 8 Andreotti told the Italian Parliament that Gladio was "a legitimate child of NATO born during the years of the Cold War" .
On Nov. 16 he testified before a parliamentary committee that orders had been given a month previously to freeze "Operation Gladio" .
Subsequent allegations by the Italian Communist Party (PCI) suggested links between Gladio and a wave of extreme right-wing attacks which killed 143 people between 1969 and 1984, including the Bologna railway station bombing in 1980 [see p. 30522].
Andreotti denied these allegations, but on Nov. 15 Adml.
Fulvio Martini, head of Italy's domestic security and counterespionage agencies, told a parliamentary sub-committee that Gladio's anti-communist brief had also included dealing with "internal subversion" .
In Belgium on Nov.10 Defence Minister Guy Coëme said that a Belgian general, reportedly General Major Raymond Van Calster, head of the Belgian Army's intelligence and counterespionage services, was in charge of a secret Western intelligence network operating in several NATO countries.
On Nov. 11 Gen. Calster denied the reports.
In France it was reported on Nov. 14 that former Defence Minister Jean-Pierre Chevènement had said that a hitherto "dormant" French branch of an anti-communist NATO network had recently been dissolved by presidential order.
In the Netherlands on Nov. 14 reports quoted Prime Minister Ruud Lubbers as having admitted to the existence of a secret organization in the Netherlands but denying that it was supervised by NATO.
In Greece Defence Minister Yannis Varvitsiotis confirmed that a network codenamed "Sheepskin" , sponsored by the United States Central Intelligence Agency (CIA), had functioned since 1955 but was dismantled in 1988.
On Nov. 16 Germany announced that it was disbanding its branch of a clandestine anti-communist network.
Reports of clandestine anti-communist organizations in Denmark, Norway, Portugal, Turkey and the United Kingdom were not officially confirmed.
The Independent of Nov. 16 reported that NATO's Secretary-General, Manfred Wörner, had refused to comment on the existence of secret networks, saying that they were a security matter.
On Nov. 22 the European Parliament called for an investigation into the activities of secret anti-communist organizations, especially Gladio, which, it said, had "escaped all democratic control" .
INTERNATIONAL
TRADE UNIONS
WFTU congress — Imminent closure of Prague headquarters
The World Federation of Trade Unions (WFTU) adopted a radical programme of budget and staff cuts and internal reorganization at its 12th quadrennial congress, held in Moscow on Nov. 13-20.
As the international trade union organization which since the Second World War had maintained close ties with the communist countries, the WFTU had been severely shaken by the withdrawal of five east European federations in the wake of the collapse of communist rule in late 1989 and by the reorganization of the Soviet trade union movement as an independent body, renamed the General Confederation of USSR Trade Unions, in October [see p. 37787].
Under the new organizational arrangements the French General Confederation of Labour (CGT) took control of the WFTU's bureaucracy, which would be cut by three-quarters and reorganized into five regional offices.
In October the Czechoslovak government had formally requested the WFTU to close its headquarters in Prague by the end of June 1991 at the latest.
The Ministry of the Interior gave as the main reason for the request the fact there was no Czechoslovak member of the federation since the dissolution of the Revolutionary Trade Union Movement (ROH), which had been closely linked to the CPCz, in March [see p. 37737].
INTERNATIONAL
SPACE RESEARCH
US shuttle flight
The US space shuttle Atlantis, launched on Nov. 16 on a secret military mission, was believed to have deployed a spy satellite for the purpose of observing troop movements in the Gulf.
This was the seventh and final secret military mission planned for the shuttle fleet; in future Titan-4 rockets would be used for such missions.
ASIA — PACIFIC
AUSTRALIA
BASIC DATA
Area: 7,682,300 sq km.
Population: 16,804,000 (1989).
Capital: Canberra.
Language: English.
Religion: Christianity 76% (26% Anglican, 26% Roman Catholic, other Protestant 21%, Orthodox 3%); most of the rest do not profess a religion.
Av. life expectancy: 76 yrs (1988).
Armed forces: 69,600 (1989).
GNP per capita: US$12,390 (1988).
Currency: dollar (US$1.00=A$1.2866 as at Nov. 12, 1990).
The Commonwealth of Australia is an independent federal parliamentary monarchy within the Commonwealth.
The head of state is the British sovereign, represented by a Governor General (currently Bill Hayden).
Under the federal Constitution adopted in 1901, legislative power is vested in the bicameral Parliament, comprising a 148-member House of Representatives elected for a three-year term and a 76-member Senate (12 seats for each of the six constituent states and two each for the Northern Territory and the Capital Territory).
Executive power rests effectively with the Prime Minister and the Cabinet, who are responsible to the legislature and are appointed by the Governor General acting on its advice.
Each state has its own constitution, and a legislature and government with wide-ranging powers.
At the general election on March 24, 1990 [see pp. 37320-21], the Australian Labor Party (ALP), led by Bob Hawke, gained a fourth consecutive term of office, defeating a coalition of the Liberal and National parties.
Bob Hawke Prime Minister Paul Keating Deputy Prime Minister; Treasurer John Button Industry, Technology and Commerce Gareth Evans Foreign Affairs and Trade Neal Blewett Health and Community Services Ralph Willis Finance Michael Duffy Attorney General John Dawkins Training; Employment; Education Kim Beazley Transport and Communications John Kerin Primary Industry and Energy Brian Howe Community Services and Health Graham Richardson Social Security Robert Ray Defence Gerry Hand Immigration, Local Government and Ethnic Affairs Ros Kelly Arts, Sport, Environment, Tourism and Territories Peter Cook Industrial Relations Nick Bolkus Administrative Services 
Australian Cabinet
POLITICS
Senate election results
The final results of partial elections to the Senate on March 24, 1990 [see also p. 37321], gave the ALP a total of 32 seats, the Liberal Party 27, the Australian Democrats seven, the National Party six, the Country Liberal Party one, and independents three.
Plans for constitutional reform
Sir Ninian Stephen, Governor General in 1982-89, was on July 19, 1990, appointed to head a steering committee whose brief was to organize a constitutional convention.
The latter was expected to convene in March 1991, when one of its main tasks would be to recommend the reallocation of powers among the various levels of government.
In recent years there had been growing calls for a reform of the federal system of government, which it was argued led to costly duplication between federal, state and territorial authorities.
New immigration legislation
Wide changes in immigration policy were formally approved by the House of Representatives on June 1, 1989, with the support of all main parties.
The new Migration Regulations, amending the 1958 Migration Act, were the government's response to the 1988 Fitzgerald report on immigration [see pp. 36296; 36761]and incorporated most of its recommendations as well as nine amendments proposed by opposition parties.
The new rules laid greater emphasis on economic factors such as professional qualifications and work skills.
They also made it more difficult for temporary residents or visitors to become permanent residents.
Aboriginal affairs
On Oct. 26, 1989, the government launched a new national educational policy for Aboriginals.
The new policy, developed in consultation with Aboriginal people, sought to raise Aboriginal participation and success in education to the same levels as the rest of the community.
The initial financial commitment amounted to A$226,000,000 over a three-year period.
A report prepared by the Australian Institute of Criminology published on Oct. 23, 1989, showed that an Aboriginal was 28 times more likely to be sent to prison than a white person.
The report blamed appalling living conditions and prejudice within the police and legal systems for the discrepancy, which had widened over the years.
The last similar study, published in 1982, had indicated that Aboriginals were 14 times more likely to be imprisoned than non-Aboriginals.
Informal ALP-Green coalition in Tasmania
In Tasmanian the Liberal government of Robin Gray was on June 28, 1989, defeated by 18 votes (13 Labor and five Green) to 17 in a motion of no confidence tabled in the newly assembled legislature by the Greens, who held the balance of power following the May state elections [see p. 36658].
The following day Labor formed a minority government under Michael Field.
The Greens, who had demanded a number of concessions on environmental policies in particular, pledged external support to the new administration in an alliance which was the first of its kind in Australia.
A prominent Tasmanian media owner, Edmund Rouse, who had been arrested on the eve of the no confidence vote, was convicted on May 7, 1990, of trying to bribe a Labor politician to cross the floor and thus to prevent the ALP from forming a government.
He admitted the charge and was imprisoned for three years.
SECURITY
Convictions for 1978 Sydney hotel bombing
Evan Pederick and Tim Anderson, two former members of the Anand Marg religious sect, were on Sept. 14, 1989, and Oct. 25, 1990, respectively, convicted of the bombing of a Sydney hotel in 1978 in an attempt to assassinate the then Indian Prime Minister, Morarji Desai, during a Commonwealth regional summit conference [see p. 28931].
Both were sentenced to life imprisonment.
The bombing, which killed a policeman and two rubbish collectors, was the first major terrorist attack in Australia and was one of the country's most highly publicized crimes.
The prosecution claimed that the bombing had been committed as part of a nationwide campaign of terror to secure the release from an Indian prison of the Anand Marg's founder, Prabhat Sarkar, known as Baba.
The Anderson trial caused great controversy in Australia because Anderson, the sect's public relations spokesman at the time of the bombing, always denied the charge and claimed that he was being framed by the police and the intelligence services.
(He had previously served a seven-year sentence for conspiracy.)
Crucial to the conviction was evidence from Pederick, who had, at his own trial, admitted planting the bomb and further claimed at Anderson's trial that he had done so on the latter's instructions.
ECONOMY
Economic indicators
GDP growth 4.8% (1989)
Current-account balance -US$15,677 m. (1989)
Trade balance -US$3,647 m. (1989)
Budget deficit A$5,468 m. (1988/89)
Gross domestic product A$357,540 m. (1989)
Gross national product A$343,420 m. (1989)
Inflation rate 7.8% (1989)
Unemployment 6.2% (1989)
Principal trading partners Exports: Japan 26%; United States 11%; New Zealand 5%; Hong Kong 5%; Imports: United States 21%; Japan 19%; United Kingdom 7%; United Kingdom 7%; West Germany 7% 
Government economic policies
Throughout 1989 the Labor government continued to pursue the tight fiscal and firm monetary policy initiated in early 1988 [see p. 36762]in order to bring domestic demand, inflation and a growing current-account deficit under control.
The current-account deficit reached a record A$17,400 million in 1988-89, and inflation and the external debt continued to rise throughout 1989, reaching 7.8 per cent and A$137,000 million respectively by the end of the year.
On Jan. 13, 1990, the Treasurer, Paul Keating, announced a first relaxation of the restrictive monetary policy, which had pushed up interest rates to 18 per cent for mortgages and at least 20 per cent for other borrowing.
On Feb. 21 — six days after the calling of the general election [see pp. 37250; 37320-21]— he announced a package of wage increases agreed with the trade-union movement and tax cuts.
At the same time he declared that the government's economic polices had had a sufficient impact particularly on consumer spending and imports, to allow "a sustainable fall in interest rates" .
Interest rates were further cut on April 4 and Aug. 2.
1990/91 budget
The 1990-91 budget, presented on Aug. 21, 1990, provided for expenditure of A$92,956 million and revenue of A$101,063 million, amounts virtually unchanged in real terms from the previous year.
The budget surplus of A$8,107 million was the fourth consecutive surplus, and would be used to reduce overseas debt.
The budget included cuts in expenditure, mainly in health and social-security spending, of just over A$1,000 million as well as tax cuts of around A$1,200 million.
Moreover, in July 1991 unemployment benefit was to be abolished and replaced by a short-term "job search" allowance and a "new-start" allowance for those unemployed for longer than a year.
Other important measures included (i) tax relief for a range of environmental measures (such as those to combat land degradation);(ii) increased tax relief for small businesses and oil exploration;(iii) allocation of additional funds for industrial restructuring; and (iv) increased funds for the Australian Securities Commission, a new body set up to regulate the corporate sector.
The government predicted that the current-account deficit would fall from A$20,700 million in 1989-90 to A$18,000 million in 1990-91 and that inflation would fall from an annual rate of 7.7 per cent to 6 per cent.
Unemployment was expected rise from 6.2 per cent to 7.3 per cent, but more jobs would also be created.
Overall, growth in GDP would be 2 per cent, compared with 3.3 per cent in the previous year.
Keating described the budget as a consolidation of the government's policy which was succeeding in "slowing the economy without impairing longer-term growth prospects or jeopardizing the economic and social advances of recent years" .
The budget surplus would continue to provide Australia with "a period of sustained budgetary discipline unprecedented in its history" .
The opposition, however, said that the budget showed how a weak and divided government had opted for further cuts in living standards without an effective strategy to boost productivity and exports.
 "It therefore promises to impose sustained and substantial hardship on millions of Australians," declared John Hewson, the Liberal Party leader.
Business and banking failures
Business confidence was undermined in 1990 by a spate of major corporate failures caused primarily by high interest rates (both in Australia itself and worldwide) putting great strain on companies' abilities to meet interest payments on their debts.
The most spectacular crisis affected the Bond Corporation, a business conglomerate comprising property, brewing and media interests worldwide built up by Alan Bond in the 1970s and 1980s.
The corporation reported an annual loss of A$979,000,000 for the 1988-89 financial year, and subsequently had to sell most of its assets to reduce its debts.
Bond resigned as chairman and director of Bond Corporation on Sept. 26, 1990, a move which was expected to pave the way for agreements on key refinancing arrangements.
Australia's second-largest building society group, Farrow, was wound up on July 1, 1990, after a run on its funds.
Some 200,000 members were expected to lose most of their savings in what was described as the worst collapse of a deposit-taking institution in Australia since 1990.
The liquidation of Farrow became unavoidable after the government of the state of Victoria, in which the group was based, refused to intervene to save it.
Growing nervousness among small investors also led to a run on some banks.
On July 16 the country's central bank, the Reserve Bank, intervened to attempt to halt a flood of withdrawals from the Bank of Melbourne, which had been worst affected by the crisis of confidence.
After the collapse of Farrow as well as of two major banks in Victoria, the state's Labor government arranged a line of credit to support other building societies with short-term liquidity problems and announced that it would reform the state's banking laws to improve protection for depositors.
Hitherto Victoria had had far more liberal banking laws than the other five states.
Pilots' strike
One of the most serious industrial disputes in Australian history, involving the country's two domestic airlines, caused in the second half of 1989 and early 1990 massive losses to the Australian economy estimated at well over A$1,000 million, in particular in the tourist industry.
The dispute began in June 1989 when pilots working for Australian Airlines and Ansett made a claim for a 29 percent pay increase.
When the airlines refused to negotiate on the claim, the pilots refused to work outside business hours from Aug. 18.
The airlines then sued the Australian Federation of Air Pilots (AFAP) and individual pilots, after which the 1,647 pilots employed by the two companies resigned en masse on Aug. 23.
The government, claiming that granting the pilots' wage demand would set off a wage explosion and damage the economy, expressed its support for the airlines and took unprecedented steps to break the strike.
It chartered military planes to transport passengers, allowed the airlines to charter foreign aircraft and crews and recruit foreign pilots, allowed some international carriers to carry passengers on domestic routes, and provided financial support to the airlines to keep other employees in work.
The Prime Minister, Bob Hawke, describe the dispute as a "situation of national emergency" .
The pilots on Oct. 4 withdrew their pay claim and agreed to accept the 6 per cent national guideline agreed by the government and the trade unions, but the airlines refused to respond while the matter was before the arbitration commission.
By this stage the airlines had been able to restore a basic service by recruiting new pilots, persuading pilots out of retirement and persuading some to return to work on individual contracts.
On Feb. 14, 1990, the Victoria Supreme Court ordered the AFAP to pay A$6,600,000 in damages to the two airlines.
Environmental protection plan
The government on July 20, 1989, launched a major initiative to protect the country's environment.
Costed at more than A$400,000,000 over the next 10 years, its main element was a revegetation programme to combat soil degradation, desertification and salinification, which would involve planting 1,000 million new trees in Australia by the year 2000.
The plan also provided for measures to protect endangered species, protect the ozone layer and increase energy conservation.
In unveiling the plan Hawke declared: "We have taken too much from the earth and given back too little.
It is time to say enough is enough.
I give my commitment to [the children of Australia]that my generation will hand on…a better country".
Hawke also appointed Sir Ninian Stephen as Australia's first international "ambassador for the environment" .
His task would be to promote the government's international environmental policies abroad.
Worst floods since 1990 — First fatal earthquake
An area the size of western Europe was flooded in sparsely populated regions of southern Queensland and northern New South Wales after a week of rains in April 1990.
As a result of the floods, the worst since 1900, six people died and thousands were made homeless.
Losses in livestock, crops and property were estimated to total A$300,000,000.
At least 12 people were killed and 120 injured on Dec. 28, 1989, in the first fatal earthquake to have been recorded in Australia.
The deaths occurred in the city of Newcastle, New South Wales, three miles west of the epicentre of the earthquake, which registered 5.5 on the Richter scale.
FOREIGN
Five-country tour by Hawke
Between June 16 and July 3, 1989, the Prime Minister, Bob Hawke, paid official visits to five countries; France, the United Kingdom, the United States, West Germany and Hungary.
Talks with government leaders in each of the countries were concerned mainly with trade issues, the future of Antarctica, relations with China in the wake of the suppression of the pro-democracy movement, arms control, the crisis in the Middle East, environmental issues and a range of bilateral issues.
During his visit to France on June 16-19, which included meetings with President Mitterrand and the Prime Minister, Michel Rocard, Hawke welcomed the French government's announcement that it would reduce its nuclear-testing programme in the Pacific as part of cuts in defence spending.
The two sides also issued a joint statement expressing their support for making Antarctica an international nature reserve, as first proposed by the French explorer Jacques-Yves Cousteau.
Hawke's visit to the United Kingdom on June 20-23 was aimed at reinvigorating relations between the UK and Australia, both leading members of the Commonwealth with strong historical ties.
The then UK Prime Minister, Margaret Thatcher, described the visit as a "great success" and called the two countries "vital allies" ; Hawke said he was "fully satisfied" with his talks.
ASIA — PACIFIC
NEW ZEALAND
BASIC DATA
Area: 267,844 km.
Population: 3,371,000 (1989).
Capital: Wellington.
Language: English (official); Maori.
Religion: Christianity 75%; most of the rest do not profess a religion.
Av. life expectancy: 75 yrs (1988).
Armed forces: 12,400 (1988).
GNP per capita: US$9,620 (1988).
Currency: dollar (US$1.00=NZ$1.6339 as at Nov. 26, 1990).
New Zealand is an independent member of the Commonwealth.
The head of state is the British sovereign, represented by a Governor General (currently Dame Cath Tizard, who succeeded Sir Paul Reeves on Nov. 20, 1990).
Legislative power is vested in the unicameral House of Representatives, whose 97 members are elected for a three-year term.
Executive power rests effectively with the Prime Minister (currently Jim Bolger) and the Cabinet, who are responsible to the legislature and are appointed by the Governor General acting on its advice.
At the general election on Oct. 27, 1990, the National Party, led by Jim Bolger, defeated the ruling Labour Party, led by Mike Moore, and returned to power after six years in opposition [see p. 37781].
POLITICS
Financial interests guidelines
Guidelines were introduced by the then Prime Minister, Geoffrey Palmer, with effect from June 1, 1990, under which Cabinet ministers, ministers outside the Cabinet and parliamentary under-secretaries were required to disclose their financial interests within four weeks of taking office and annually thereafter.
They would have to disclose commercial property holdings, share holdings, gifts received above a value of NZ$500, and outside income.
On April 30 a television programme had claimed that the Labour Party had hosted secret fund-raising dinners for prominent business executives, that certain companies had made significant secret contributions to the party's campaign fund, and that these had subsequently profited from sales of state assets.
The allegations were denied by the people mentioned by name, and a number of leading politicians and business executives, including the then Prime Minister, Geoffrey Palmer, filed writs against the Television New Zealand broadcasting company.
GDP growth 0.8% (1989) Current-account balance -US$2,025 m. (1989) Trade balance -US$300 m. (1989) Budget surplus NZ$3,218 m. (1989/90) Gross domestic product NZ$63,805 m. (1988) Gross national product NZ$61,075 m. (1988) Inflation rate 5.7% (1989) Unemployment 7.2% (1989) Principal trading partners Exports: Australia 17%, Japan 17%, United States 15%, United Kingdom 9%; Imports: Australia 21%, Japan 18%, United States 16%, United Kingdom 10% 
SECURITY
ECONOMY
Economic indicators
1990/91 budget
The 1990/91 budget proposed by the Labour government on July 24, 1990, stressed social spending and provided for a new benefit targeted on low-income families, for a new universal benefit to include unemployment, and for higher spending on education and health.
Measures to help the business sector included the abolition of excise duties on cars, a cut in the price of unleaded petrol, and a number of simplifications in the taxation system.
Helped by the proceeds of the sale of major assets, in particular of the national telephone service and state-owned forests [see below], the budget showed a cash surplus of some NZ$5,000 million.
Around NZ$4,200 million of this was allocated to repaying domestic and foreign debt.
Overall the budget showed a financial surplus — the first since 1978 — of NZ$89 million.
Privatization programme
Despite continued widespread opposition the Labour government in 1990 continued with its policy of selling off state assets as a means of reducing domestic and foreign debt.
On March 28, 1990, the government published a document listing the companies which it intended to privatize over the following years, including Telecom (the national telephone service); the national railways, ferry network and bus company; port companies and the country's three national airports; the state forests; the state insurance office; and hotels and travel offices.
Other sales which were planned but would be delayed for various reasons were those of Coalcorp, the former state coal mining operation; Landcorp, which administered government buildings and land; and Electricorp, which operated the power stations and the national grid.
As with earlier privatizations [see pp. 36294; 37153], the government's plans were strongly opposed by the left wing of the Labour Party and by the public service unions.
In the largest and most controversial privatization to date, the government announced on June 14 that it had sold Telecom to two United States companies, Bell Atlantic and American Information Technologies (Ameritech), for NZ$4,250 million.
According to Richard Prebble, then Minister for State-owned Enterprises, the two companies would reduce their holding in Telecom to 24.95 per cent each over the next three years so as to keep in line with the government's planned 49.9 per cent limit on foreign ownership of the company.
Two New Zealand firms, Fay Richwhite and Freightways, an investment bank and a transport and security company respectively, would each take a 5 per cent stake in Telecom, while the remaining 40.1 per cent of the company would be offered to the public and international investors through a series of share offerings.
In July and August the process of selling the 99 separate state-owned forests was put in motion.
The government would retain ownership of the land but would sell logging rights and existing infrastructure.
The total revenue expected from the sale of the forests, comprising some 550,000 hectares (just under half the country's total forested area) of mostly pine trees, was expected to be between NZ$2,500 million and NZ$4,500 million.
Originally managed by a government department, the state-owned forests had been transferred to a public corporation in 1987 as an initial stage of the privatization programme.
The New Zealand Forest Corporation had been highly successful in its three years of operation.
FOREIGN
Completion of CER agreement on free trade with Australia
As agreed in August 1988 [see pp. 36294-95]New Zealand and Australia on July 1, 1990, abolished all remaining barriers to trade and thus completed the closer economic relations (CER) agreement which provided for completely free trade in goods, services and other commercial dealings between the two countries.
[For initial CER negotiations concluded in December 1982 see p. 33279.]
On July 22, 1990, the two countries opened talks aimed at harmonizing such matters as legal and accounting practices, tax administration, and access to communications services.
These were expected to be resolved by 1992, when a review of the CER was due.
The CER had been very successful for New Zealand, which since 1983 had been able to increase by 170 per cent its exports of mainly agricultural products to the relatively large Australian market, as well as to correct a large bilateral trade deficit.
ASIA — PACIFIC
PAPUA NEW GUINEA
BASIC DATA
Area: 462,840 sq km.
Population: 3,804,000 (1988).
Capital: Port Moresby.
Language: Pidgin, English, Motu (all official).
Religion: Pantheism, Christianity.
Av. life expectancy: 54 yrs (1988).
Armed forces: 3,200 (1989).
GNP per capita: US$770 (1988).
Currency: kina (US$1.00=K0.9489 as at Nov. 26, 1990).
The head of state of Papua New Guinea (PNG), an independent member of the Commonwealth since September 1975, is the British sovereign, represented by a Governor General (currently Sir Kingsford Dibela).
Legislative power is vested in a unicameral National Parliament, the 109 members of which are elected for up to five years by universal adult suffrage.
Executive power is exercised by a Prime Minister (currently Rabbie Namaliu) and a National Executive Council (Cabinet) who are responsible to Parliament and are appointed to office by the Governor General acting upon its advice.
The June 1987 general election resulted in the return of Paias Wingti 's coalition government which had first come to office in November 1985 following a vote of no confidence in the government of Michael Somare.
Wingti's government was in turn defeated in a parliamentary vote of no confidence on July 4, 1988, and was replaced by a new coalition led by Rabbie Namaliu.
Sir Rabbie Namaliu Prime Minister Ted Diro Deputy Prime Minister and Minister for Public Service Bernard Vogae Civil Aviation Arnold Marsipal Defence John Momis Provincial Affairs Tenda Lau Agriculture and Livestock Paul Wanjik Works Michael Somare Foreign Affairs Bernard Narakobi Justice Paul Kamod Administrative Services Karl Stack Forests Toni Ila Labour and Employment Mathew Bendumb Home Affairs John Giheno Minister of State Assisting the Prime Minister Jim Waim Environment and Conservation Tom Pais Corrective Institutions Paul Pora Finance and Planning Brown Sinamoi Communications Mathias Ijape Police Anthony Temo Transport Utula Samana Education Akoka Doi Fisheries and Marine Resources Galeva Kwarara Trade and Industry G. Beona Culture and Tourism Kala Swokin Lands Robert Suckling Health Michael Singham Housing Patterson Lowa Minerals and Energy Jack Genia Minister of State Assisting the Prime Minister 
Papua New Guinea National Executive Council
POLITICS/SECURITY
The secession crisis on Bougainville Island dominated virtually all areas of PNG's public life during 1989 and into 1990.
The separatist Bougainville Revolutionary Army (BRA), led by Francis Ona and Sam Kauona, was successful in forcing the closure in 1989 of the giant Panguna copper mine by its Australian management.
In early 1990 the guerrilla war intensified, with rising casualties among both the local population and the security forces.
The government of Rabbie Namaliu, its patience with the rebels evidently exhausted, opted for an unrestrained military solution.
By the end of February all basic services had broken down or had been withdrawn and a mass evacuation of non-Bougainvilleans (both foreigners and Papua New Guineans from other provinces) was under way.
In mid-March the security forces were suddenly withdrawn and the island effectively left in the hands of the rebels.
The military solution had proved elusive, largely as a result of the difficulty of the terrain, the extent of passive local support for the rebel cause, and the poor training and discipline of the security forces.
The government's precipitate withdrawal led to an alcohol-inspired and wholly unsuccessful attempt by the Police Commissioner and Controller of the Bougainville State of Emergency, Paul Tohian, to mobilize the police and Army against the government [see p. 37320].
The "barbecoup" , as it came to be known from the social event which preceded it, resulted in a charge of treason against Tohian two months later.
The government maintained pressure on the rebels by declaring an exclusion zone around Bougainville and blockading all supplies to the island.
There was also a highly visible build-up of forces on neighbouring Nissan Island.
For its part, the BRA declared an independent "Republic of Bougainville" on May 17.
To the surprise of many the former Provincial Premier, Joseph Kabui emerged as a senior figure in the rebel "government" .
Denied any recognition or support from the outside, beleaguered by the blockade, and reportedly unable to exert control over an internal situation rapidly degenerating into anarchy, the BRA leadership remained open to the prospects of a settlement with the PNG government.
A number of venues for peace talks were proposed in May and June including the mine site itself at Panguna (unacceptable to Namaliu), and the capital of neighbouring Solomon Islands, Honiara (unacceptable to the BRA on security grounds).
The deadlock was broken by the New Zealand government which offered the use of two of its naval vessels.
Preliminary talks were held in July between a separatist delegation led by Kabui and representatives of the government including Foreign Minister (and first post-independence Prime Minister) Michael Somare and Justice Minister Bernard Narakobi.
The negotiations were inconclusive on the main issue of secession but a relaxation of the blockade was agreed and a commitment made for future talks aimed at a final settlement.
The death toll from the conflict up to the withdrawal of the security forces in March remained unclear, but was certainly in excess of 100.
Reports of atrocities by both sides were widespread and a report by the human rights group Amnesty International published in July 1990 (which was angrily rejected by Narakobi) was highly critical of the behaviour of the security forces.
The Bougainville crisis exacerbated the normally volatile political process in PNG.
At the beginning of November 1989 Namaliu survived what was becoming the regular six-monthly vote of no confidence.
On this occasion, as on previous ones, the result remained in doubt until the last moment.
Clear signs of public impatience with such political manoeuvres were emerging, however, as the canvassing of support by government and opposition had the effect of weakening party allegiance and increasing the level of corruption endemic within the country's political system.
The maintenance of his fragile coalition caused Namaliu further difficulties in 1990 and compromised his own considerable reputation for integrity and probity.
In April Ted Diro of the Papuan-based People's Action Party (PAP) was appointed Deputy Prime Minister.
This appeared to represent Diro's ultimate rehabilitation — and effective immunity — following the exposure his highly dubious and probably illegal business activities in the late 1980s.
Diro's elevation was, it appeared, the price Namaliu had to pay for continued PAP support for his Pangu Pati-led coalition.
In July Namaliu outmanoeuvred opposition leader Paias Wingti yet again in a vote of no confidence.
On this occasion, however, the details of some of the behind-the-scenes fixing were publicized by the opposition and an unprecedented public protest took place as a result.
It emerged that large cash payments had been made to four government ministers in return for relinquishing their portfolios.
The posts thus freed were then available as inducements to other potential government supporters.
On July 26 a demonstration by about 10,000 people led by students from the University of Papua New Guinea was held in Port Moresby.
The protesters demanded the dissolution of parliament and a general election.
Namaliu rode out the protest and was successful in seeing through an initial parliamentary vote on a constitutional reform which would restrict the number of votes of no confidence.
The reform, which required a two-thirds majority in parliament, would allow a new government a period of 18 months to establish its programme and policies before it could be subject to a confidence motion.
Economy
Economic indicators
GDP growth 4.1% (1987/88)
Current-account balance -US$380 m. (1988)
Trade balance -US$9.6 m. (1987)
Total external public debt US$1,269 m. (1988)
Debt service ratio (as % of export earnings) 16.5% (1988)
Gross domestic product US$3,520 m. (1988)
Gross national product US$2,555 m. (1987)
Inflation rate 5% (1988)
Principal trading partners Exports: Japan, Germany, Australia; Imports: Australia, Singapore, USA
The November 1989 budget presented to parliament by Finance Minister Paul Pora was unexpectedly expansionist given the closure of the Panguna copper mine or Bougainville which had previously provided about 17 per cent of national revenue and 40 per cent of foreign exchange earnings.
Calculations had been based, unreasonably in the view of many, on an imminent re-opening of the mine and a rapid return to full production.
One of the more controversial aspects of the budget, and one which contributed to the growing public concern about the integrity of the political system, was an increase in the so-called "MPs' slush fund" (more correctly the National Development Fund) to K100,000 annually for each member.
The fund was originally intended to fund small-scale enterprises and services in each constituency but MPs were virtually unaccountable for its distribution and use.
Pora's economic optimism was short-lived.
At the beginning of January 1990 he announced a 10 per cent devaluation of the kina with an exhortation for the nation to stop living beyond its means.
The devaluation came in the wake of a package of measures by the Bank of Papua New Guinea (central bank) designed to apply strict fiscal discipline to the economy.
In May Australia acceded to urgent representations from the PNG government and announced an increase of A$20,000,000 (approximately US$15,270,000) in aid.
The World Bank and the other major donors including the European Communities indicated significant increases at the same time.
Despite the Bougainville crisis a general optimism prevailed over the long-term prospects for the mineral sector.
The Iagifu-Hedina oilfield in the Southern Highlands Province which was being developed by a consortium dominated by Chevron and BP was on target to begin production by 1993.
Mineral revenue for the first four months of 1990 was calculated at US$1,075,600.
FOREIGN
Australia was drawn into the conflict over Bougainville as PNG's major military supplier.
Its accelerated transfer of four Iroquois helicopters to the PNG Defence Force in mid-1989 represented a major contribution to the government's campaign against the BRA, as did a subsequent major shipment of small arms and ammunition.
At the end of January 1990 the Australian government announced an expanded military assistance programme worth A$15,000,000 which would involve both the training and the expansion of the PNG Defence Force.
The Australian government was, however, concerned at the conduct of the PNG forces and the danger of guilt by association with human rights abuses.
Despite a new border agreement with Indonesia in April 1990, incursions by Indonesian forces in pursuit of Melanesian separatists from Irian Jaya led to a number of civilian deaths in July and August and provoked a series of protests from Papua New Guinea.
Somare, however, maintained his strong anti-separatist position on Irian Jaya by threatening to hand over any guerrillas found in PNG to the Indonesian authorities [see also p. 37577].
In May 1990 Namaliu visited the Unites States where he met President Bush and other senior members of the administration; a new aid package was agreed.
The following month a much delayed fishing agreement was signed with the Soviet Union which gave Soviet vessels access to PNG's 200-mile economic zone in return for a range of benefits including joint ventures in fish processing and the training of Papua New Guineans in the Soviet Union.
ASIA — PACIFIC
FIJI
BASIC DATA
Area: 18,376 sq km.
Population: 720,000 (1989 estimate).
Capital: Suva.
Languages: Fijian, Hindi, English.
Religion: Christianity (53%), Hinduism (38%), Islam (8%).
Av. life expectancy: 68 yrs (1989).
Armed forces: 3,500 (1989).
GNP per capita: US$1,540 (1988).
Currency: Fiji dollar (US$1.00=F$1.4351 as at Nov. 12, 1990).
On May 14, 1987, a coup led by Lt.-Col. (subsequently Maj.-Gen.)
Sitiveni Rabuka and supported by the (predominantly Melanesian) armed forces ousted the new coalition government and established a military regime.
A second coup by Rabuka on Sept. 25 led to the revocation of the Constitution and the establishment of the Republic of Fiji on Oct. 6.
Queen Elizabeth II was replaced as head of state by the former Governor General, Ratu Sir Penaia Ganilau, who was sworn in as President on Dec. 5.
Several Army officers including Rabuka were retained in the interim government headed by the former Prime Minister, Ratu Sir Kamisese Mara.
On Jan. 5, 1990, full civilian rule was restored when Rabuka gave up his post as Minister of Home Affairs and returned to barracks as head of the armed forces [see p. 37189].
The new post-coup Constitution, promulgated on July 25 after nearly two years of consultations, established Fiji as a sovereign, democratic republic with a bicameral legislature.
Fiji's executive President was to be appointed for a five-year term by the Great Council of Chiefs, which would also nominate 24 Melanesians to the 34-member Senate.
One Rotuman would be nominated to the Senate by the Rotuma Island Council, and nine other members would be appointed by the President from other racial groups.
The Senate would have the power to veto legislation affecting Melanesians, but would have restricted powers over financial legislation.
The 70-member House of Representatives was to be elected every five years by universal suffrage under the communal system (with elections expected to be held early in 1991).
Melanesians would have 32 provincial seats in 14 constituencies and five seats in urban constituencies.
There would be 27 constituencies for Indians, one for Rotumans and five for other races.
The Constitution provided for an independent judiciary with special provisions for Melanesian affairs and Melanesian courts.
Commissions for judicial and legal services and public service would ensure that 50 per cent of all appointments consisted of Melanesians (including Rotumans).
The Constitution also granted immunity from prosecution to members of the armed forces, police and prison services for their actions during the 1987 coups and during the period of military government up to the end of 1987.
POLITICS
Government decrees
A government immigration decree was issued in 1990 which sought to restrict foreign investors from entering the retail trade and other sectors of the economy.
The decree also stipulated that foreigners should not participate in political activities, "work studies" or research.
The Sunday observance law was relaxed in May 1989 to allow some public transport and agricultural work, marriages, funerals and family picnics to take place on Sundays.
The ban on public entertainment, sport and most commercial activities remained in place.
Death of Ratu Sir George Cakobau
The paramount chief or Vunivalu of Fiji, Ratu Sir George Cakobau, died on Nov. 25, 1989, at the age of 77 after a long illness.
Governor General of Fiji from 1973 to 1983, Ratu Cakobau was the great-grandson of Ratu Seru Cakobau who had ceded Fiji to Britain in 1874.
He was the first member of a chiefly family to be sent abroad to study, in Australia and New Zealand.
He served with the Fiji Military Forces in the Pacific during the Second World War, and held various ministerial posts before independence in 1970.
In 1983, he retired to his home on the island of Bau, where, in declining health, he remained largely silent following the two coups of 1987.
The term of the interim government headed by Ratu Mara was extended by a month to Jan. 5, 1990, because of preparations for Ratu Cakobau's funeral.
SECURITY
Acquittals in arms trial
In March 1989, a British court ruled against the extradition of Mohammed Rafiq Kahan to Fiji to face charges of organising the shipment of 12 tonnes of arms from North Yemen to the Fijian port of Lautoka.
The Fiji police believed that the arms, seized by Australian customs officials in Sydney, were intended for disaffected Fijian Indians [see also p. 36700].
In January 1990, 20 Fijian Indians went on trial in Lautoka in connection with the Australian arms haul.
After changing their pleas to guilty 19 of the defendants were given suspended sentences; the remaining defendant was acquitted.
Stone-throwing attacks were subsequently reported on the houses of the Indian-born magistrate and defence lawyer.
Travel restrictions for Rotumans
In July 1989 it was reported that Rotumans wanting to leave the island, 400 km north of Suva, would have to seek permission from the island's authorities.
The Rotuma Council of Chiefs said that it wanted to monitor the islanders' movements "for social and cultural purposes" .
In February 1988 the Fiji government had sent a contingent of troops to Rotuma after an attempt by the islanders to secede [see also p. 36700].
Press restrictions
On Jan. 24, 1990, the Minister for Information proposed to introduce the annual registration of newspapers.
The Attorney-General subsequently announced that libel was to be treated as a criminal offence, provoking protests against censorship from the local and foreign press.
On May 2 the office of the Pacific Islands news service, Pacnews, was ordered to close and two West Germans working for an associated training programme were expelled from Fiji [see also p. 36700].
<RLS 
ECONOMY
Economic indicators
GDP growth 12.1% (1989)
Budget deficit F$28,000,000 (estimated 1990)
Foreign reserves US$202 m.
(March 1990)
Inflation rate 8.7% (1989)
Principal trading partners Exports: UK, Australia, USA; Imports: USA, New Zealand, Australia, Japan 
Economic performance — 1990 budget
Economic performance in 1989 showed a great improvement as a result of recoveries in the sugar and tourism industries, the backbone of the economy.
Record earnings of F$55,000,000 were reported for fish exports.
However, the Fiji Reserve Bank (central bank) warned that favourable world prices were unlikely to be sustained, and in the medium term the expansion of the sugar industry would be limited in terms of yield and planted area.
The prospects for tourism were constrained by limited airline capacity and the lack of skilled personnel.
There was rapid development in the export-oriented manufacturing sector, although industrial investment elsewhere in the economy was limited, reflecting lack of business confidence.
In December 1989 the Minister of Finance Josevate Kamikamica presented a 1990 budget of F$538,000,000 with revenue projected at F$476,700,000,.
The net deficit, after allowing for tax concessions and loan repayments, would be F$28,000,000.
Kamikamica announced a 20 per cent cut in income tax and the reduction of duties on a wide range of goods in recognition of the satisfactory performance of the economy.
Capital expenditure in 1990 was set at F$122,600,000, of which 40 per cent would be spent on developing the infrastructure.
According to the Fiji Reserve Bank, GDP growth was expected to be 5 per cent.
Kamikamica laid stress on attracting foreign investment: F$500,000 was to be spent on developing free trade zones at Levuka, Lautoka, Kalabu (just outside Suva), and Suva itself.
The opposition coalition criticized the tax-free zones as exploiting women textile workers and as creating dependence on foreign countries.
In June 1990 Fiji sought aid worth US$178,000,000 from the United Nations Development Programme for 41 projects.
Labour unrest
Labour unrest linked to political discontent led to strike calls in 1989 and 1990.
In mid-1989, the Fiji Trade Union Council, derecognised by the government in 1986 because of its links with the Labour Party [see p. 35251], called for a general strike to force the government to lift the freeze on wages and revive the defunct wage guideline forum comprising the Fiji Trades Union Congress, the government and the employers' association.
Rabuka warned that the army would step in, but at an economic summit meeting on June 29-30, the government agreed to set up national wage guidelines.
In mid-1990, despite a similar warning of military intervention from Rabuka, cane farmers threatened to strike if a new contract on profit-sharing was not negotiated with the state-owned Fiji Sugar Corporation.
In 1989 it was reported that landowners were under pressure not to renew leases to the largely Indian cane farmers.
Population and emigration
According to government figures in December 1989, for the first time since 1946 Melanesians outnumbered Fijian Indians.
The number of Indians had dropped from 51 per cent to 46.4 per cent of the population, while Melanesians made up 48.4 per cent with other races making up the remainder.
The report said that 8,500 Indians had left in 1989.
The Reserve Bank of Fiji said in April 1990 that there had been a 23,000 net fall in the population since the 1987 coup, and that Fiji was now seeking experts from Thailand, China, Sri Lanka, the Philippines and Britain to make up the shortfall in professionals [see also p. 36700].
FOREIGN
Closure of Indian high commission
Following India's announcement in April 1990 of a campaign protesting at Fiji's discrimination against Indians in the proposed new constitution, the Fiji government on May 24 gave the Indian high commission 24 hours' notice to close its mission because of alleged internal and external "interference" .
The government accused India of "unfriendly and unwarranted acts" in funding the opposition coalition, and in blocking Fiji's readmission to the Commonwealth.
In November the previous year India had withdrawn its ambassador and downgraded its mission in Suva.
On the promulgation of the new Constitution on July 25, India was deeply critical [see above].
Visit of French Prime Minister
During a Pacific tour, the Prime Minister of France, Michel Rocard, on Aug. 23, 1989, paid a one-day visit to Fiji, the first by a French head of government.
Previously critical of French policies in the Pacific, Fiji had improved its relations with France since the 1987 coups, when France had recognized the new republic's military government.
Following Rocard's visit, France set up a trade mission and subsequently agreed to provide military training and offered to build a military maintenance centre.
However, the new warmth in relations did not prevent Fiji from criticizing French nuclear testing in the Pacific at the UN General Assembly in September 1990.
Further military training assistance
A mid-1990 Asian tour by Rabuka led to promises of military training assistance from South Korea, Malaysia, Singapore and China.
Fiji also won the promise of a $2,000,000 loan from Taiwan for arms, while Israel was reported to be offering "guidance" to the Army on controlling civil disturbances.
By 1990 New Zealand, Australia and the USA were still suspending military aid withheld since the coups of 1987, although the United Kingdom had re-started its military training programme.
Resumption of direct contact with New Zealand
In July 1990, the then New Zealand Minister for Tourism and Disarmament and Arms Control, Fran Wilde, visited Fiji in the first direct contact between the two countries since the coups of 1987.
Earlier, in October 1989, New Zealand had agreed to extend aid worth NZ$5,000,000 for 21 projects.
ASIA — PACIFIC
SOLOMON ISLANDS
BASIC DATA
Area: 27,556 sq km.
Population: 304,000 (1988).
Capital: Honiara (island of Guadalcanal).
Languages: English (official); pidgin more widely used; more than 80 local languages.
Religion: Christianity (95%); traditional beliefs.
Av. life expectancy: 67 yrs (1988).
GNP per capita: US$430 (1988).
Currency: Solomon Islands dollar (US$1.00=SI$2.5832 as at Nov. 26, 1990).
The head of state of the Solomon Islands, an independent member of the Commonwealth since July 1978, is the British sovereign represented by a Governor General (currently Sir George Lepping).
Legislative authority is vested in a unicameral National Parliament, the 38 members of which are popularly elected for up to four years.
The Prime Minister (who is elected by MPs from amongst their number) and an appointed Cabinet exercise executive power and are responsible to Parliament.
Solomon Mamaloni became Prime Minister in March 1989 following the election victory of his People's Alliance Party.
He resigned as party leader in October 1990 but remained as Prime Minister, at the head of a coalition government of "national unity" [see p. 37862].
POLITICS/SECURITY
During 1989 and into 1990 Mamaloni was confronted by a series of legal and parliamentary challenges from the highly effective opposition leader Andrew Nori.
Nori, an energetic member of the new generation of Solomon Islands politicians, led an Opposition Alliance composed of some of the most able and experienced national figures, including two former Prime Ministers and a former UN permanent representative.
Nori was successful in having overturned by legal action or the threat of it a number of government proposals in late 1989 and early 1990.
He insisted that his target was Mamaloni himself, whom he saw as unacceptably arbitrary and authoritarian in his leadership, rather than the ruling Alliance Party as such.
In May 1990, however, an opposition vote of no confidence was decisively defeated in parliament (by 23 votes to 13), despite rumours of an Alliance Party conspiracy to replace Mamaloni.
Current-account balance -US$18.9 m. (1985) Trade balance -US$4.5 m. (1987) Total external public debt US$89 m. (1987) Gross national product US$123 m. (1987) Inflation rate 17% (1988) Principal trading partners Exports: Japan, Thailand, UK; Imports: Australia, Japan, New Zealand 
Economic indicators GDP growth 5.1% (1986/87)
FOREIGN
The danger of a "spill-over" from the Bougainville conflict in Papua New Guinea (PNG) was a major concern of the government during this period.
In May 1990 the then Foreign Minister Sir Baddeley Devesi signed a joint border surveillance agreement with his PNG counterpart Michael Somare, which was aimed at preventing infiltration by the Bougainville secessionists.
The government, at the request of the PNG government and with some reluctance, offered Honiara as a venue for proposed peace talks between the two sides in the conflict.
This, however, proved unacceptable to the secessionists [see also p. 37880].
ASIA — PACIFIC
VANUATU
BASIC DATA
Area: 12,190 sq km.
Population: 151,000 (1988).
Capital: Port Vilau.
Languages: English, French, Bislama (all official), and many other Melanesian languages.
Religion: Christianity (80%).
Av. life expectancy: 64 yrs (1988).
GNP per capita: US$820 (1988).
Currency: Vatu (US$1.00=113.203 vatu as at Nov. 26, 1990).
The Republic of Vanuatu became an independent member of the Commonwealth in July 1980.
Legislative authority is vested in a unicameral Parliament, the 46 members of which are elected for four years on the basis of universal adult franchise.
Executive power is exercised by a Prime Minister (who is elected by Parliament from amongst its members) and by a Council of Ministers which consists of MPs appointed by the Prime Minister.
The President (currently Fred Timakata), who is the republic's head of state, is elected for five years by an electoral college which is composed of the Parliament and the presidents of the Regional Councils (local government bodies to which a considerable degree of power is constitutionally devolved).
The Vanuaaka Pati (VP), led by Fr Walter Lini, was elected to government in November 1983 and was returned to power in the general election of November 1987.
Vanuatu Council of Ministers Fr Walter Lini Prime Minister; Public Services; Planning and Information Iolu Abbil Home Affairs Jack Hopa Agriculture and Livestock Sethy Regevanu Education Sela Molisa Finance Donald Kalpokas Foreign Affairs; Judicial Services Jimmy Meto Thilia Health William Mahit Lands; Minerals; Fisheries Harold Qualo Trade; Commerce and Industry; Co-operatives; Energy Edward Natapei Transport; Tourism; Public Works; Communications; Civil Aviation 
POLITICS
On the eve of Vanuatu's 10th independence anniversary celebrations in July 1990, Prime Minister Walter Lini announced the setting up of a constitutional review committee.
The purpose of the review was to identify areas in which adjustments could be made to bring the state into greater harmony with traditional social structures.
The committee was to consist of 35 members and its composition would be heavily weighted in favour of the VP, with 24 of its members from the ruling group, four from the opposition Union of Moderate Parties (UMP) and the other seven from various social and religious organizations in the community.
Various areas of reform were on the agenda; Lini, himself an Anglican priest, was known to be concerned at the proliferation of fundamentalist sects and cults in the country.
It was suggested that "traditional" congregations be afforded formal recognition in the constitution with the implication that smaller groupings might then be declared illegal if the government thought it necessary.
Lini also suggested that the churches should take over the running of a large part of the school system in the interests both of efficiency and economy.
Hilda Lini, the Prime Minister's sister and a VP MP, proposed that a number of police and court functions might, under the terms of the amended constitution, be shifted to the traditional authority structures of the villages.
Following the disruptive leadership wrangle of 1988 [see pp. 35906; 36067; 36381], Barak Sope, Lini's unsuccessful rival and former member of the VP, attempted to build a new personal power base by forming in 1988 his own movement, the Melanesian Progressive Party.
Formerly associated with the more radical anti-French, pro-Libyan wing of the VP, Sope (who was released on appeal following his conviction and imprisonment in March 1989 for incitement to mutiny and seditious conspiracy — see p. 36526) entered into alliance with the conservative UMP, the traditional francophone opposition to Lini's anglophone government since independence in 1980.
Evidently unabashed at the ideological implications of his re-orientation, Sope in July 1990 predicted an opposition victory in the 1991 general election and suggested that he would be Deputy Prime Minister in a government headed by UMP leader Maxim Carlot.
The VP, however, remained the dominant force in Vanuatu politics as it had been since independence, and won all five by-elections in December 1989 caused by the resignations of the Sope faction after the leadership struggle.
The seats included Sope's own and that of President Fred Timikata who was appointed head of state after the imprisonment of his predecessor, a relative of Sope's who was implicated in the events of 1988.
Both the UMP and Sope himself had boycotted the poll.
The victory laid to rest any doubt that may have emerged about the VP's continued authority following a weaker showing in local council elections earlier in August (when the VP held only two of four municipalities, losing one and tying with the opposition in the fourth).
FOREIGN
Relations with France, difficult since independence but particularly bad since 1987, improved markedly at the end of 1989.
The French ambassador had been expelled in October 1987 for alleged involvement with the UMP, after which Paris was represented in Port Vila by a chargé d'affaires.
In November 1989 the Vanuatu Foreign Minister, Donald Kalpokas, made an official visit to Paris and the process of rapprochement got under way, facilitated by the installation in France of the government of Michel Rocard in 1988 and the subsequent signing of the Matignon Accord relating to New Caledonia [see pp. 36348-49].
In July 1990 Louis Le Pensec, the French Overseas Departments and Territories Minister, attended the independence anniversary celebrations in Port Vila.
ASIA — PACIFIC
NAURU
BASIC DATA
Area: 21.3 sq km.
Population: 9,000 (July 1989).
Capital: No official capital.
Languages: Nauruan, English.
Religion: Christianity (Nauruan Protestant Church).
Life expectancy: 66 yrs (1989).
Currency: Australian dollar (US$1.00=A$1.2866 as at Nov. 12, 1990.
The Republic of Nauru, which achieved independence in January 1967, is an associate member of the Commonwealth.
Legislative power is vested in an 18-member unicameral Parliament, elected for up to three years, which elects from amongst its members the President, who governs with the assistance of an appointed Cabinet.
Nauru's first President, Hammer DeRoburt, who dominated the political structure of the island since independence, was forced to resign in August 1989 after a vote of no confidence.
He was replaced by Kenas Aroi, who resigned in December for reasons of ill-health.
Following a general election on Dec. 9, 1989, Bernard Dowiyogo was elected President on Dec. 12 by 10 votes to six.
Bernard Dowiyogo President; Minister of Internal Affairs, External Affairs, Island Development and Industry, Public Service; Civil Aviation Vincent Detenamo Works and Community Services; Minister assisting the President Kinza Clodumar Finance Vinci Clodumar Health and Education Kennan Adeang Justice 
Nauru Cabinet
ECONOMY
1990-91 budget
In a budget report presented in mid-1990, the Minister of Finance, Kinza Clodumar, said that he expected that phosphate royalties would drop by A$10,000,000 from the 1989-90 figure of A$25,000,000.
Australia, Nauru's main customer for phosphate, planned to cut its imports by half to 500,000 tonnes because of falling demand, and phosphate sales to New Zealand and South Korea were not likely to increase.
Consequently, he was budgeting for a deficit of about A$5,600,000.
Expenditure in 1990-91 was expected to be A$71,200,000.
Nauru expected to earn A$34,400,000 from Air Nauru, and about A$6,200,000 from other sources.
Clodumar said that the government planned to invest further in Air Nauru, but that it would not re-open diplomatic missions in Hong Kong, American Samoa, Japan, Hawaii and the Cook Islands, which had been closed under the Aroi administration for reasons of economy.
He also announced the launching of a television service on Nauru.
FOREIGN
Barry Wyborn was appointed as the new Australian high commissioner to Nauru in December 1989.
The previous incumbent had been recalled in January following a dispute between Australia and the government of former President Hammer DeRoburt over the grounding of Air Nauru services and a strike by pilots over operation and safety issues [see p. 37091].
ASIA — PACIFIC
SOUTH PACIFIC FORUM
Basic data
Type of body: Regional co-operation organization.
Membership: Australia, the Cook Islands, Fiji, Kiribati, the Marshall Islands, the Federated States of Micronesia, Nauru, New Zealand, Niue, Papua New Guinea, the Solomon Islands, Tonga, Tuvalu, Vanuatu, Western Samoa.
Main organ: Annual conference.
Executive body: South Pacific Forum Secretariat.
Principal associated organization: South Pacific Forum Fisheries Agency (FFA).
Superpowers' stance
The United States, following a major review of its strategic stance in the region in the second half of 1989, maintained its refusal to sign the protocols to the 1985 Treaty of Rarotonga, which made the Pacific a nuclear-free zone [see p. 33855], despite the improvement in its relations with the Soviet Union.
The Soviet Union continued its diplomatic offensive in the region, finalizing arrangements for the exchange of ambassadors with Papua New Guinea and approaching the South Pacific Forum Fisheries Agency with a view to negotiating a multilateral fisheries agreement.
Previous agreements had been made bilaterally with Kiribati, Vanuatu, New Zealand and, most recently, Papua New Guinea.
ASIA — PACIFIC
TONGA
BASIC DATA
Area: 748 sq km.
Population: 101,000 (1988).
Capital: Nuku'alofa.
Language: Tongan, English (both official).
Religion: Christianity (mainly Wesleyan).
Av. life expectancy: 66 yrs (1988).
GNP per capita: US$800 (1988).
Currency: pa'anga (US$1.00=1.3067 pa'anga as at Nov. 26, 1990).
The Kingdom of Tonga, an independent constitutional monarchy within the Commonwealth, was a British Protected State for 70 years prior to achieving full independence in 1970.
The Tongan sovereign (currently King Taufa'ahau Tupou IV) is head of state and presides over a Privy Council which functions as a Cabinet.
The 29-member unicameral Legislative Assembly consists of the Privy Council, nine hereditary nobles (elected by their peers) and nine popularly elected representatives.
Elected representatives hold office for three years; the most recent elections were held in February 1990.
Prince Fatafehi Tu'ipelehake Prime Minister; Agriculture; Forestry and Fisheries; Marine Affairs Baron Tuita Deputy Prime Minister; Lands, Survey and Natural Resources Hu'akavameiliku Civil Aviation; Education; Works, Disaster Relief Crown Prince Tupouto'a Foreign Affairs; Defence Cecil Cocker Finance Sione Tapa Health Baron Vaea Labour, Commerce and Industries George Akau'ola Police, Fire Services and Prisons Tevita Tupou Justice Fakafanua Governor of Ha'apai Ma'afu Tupou Governor of Vava'u 
Tonga Cabinet
POLITICS AND SECURITY
Members of the Legislative Assembly in July, 1990, rejected a call from the civil servants' association to accept an effective salary reduction by giving up overtime and other allowances, so that the money saved could go towards a delayed pay rise for civil servants.
At the same time two of the nine popularly elected representatives, Akilisi Pohive (leader of the dissident pro-democracy movement) and Viliami Fukofuka, were each reported by the Times of Tonga to have returned about 12,000 pa'anga to the Treasury on the grounds that overtime payment for members of the Assembly was immoral and increased the financial burden on the people.
During and after the February 1990 elections the nine popularly elected representatives had demanded to know the whereabouts of US$20,000,000 reportedly received by the government for Tongan passports sold to Hong Kong Chinese.
King Taufa'ahau Tupou IV finally acknowledged in an interview with New Zealand television in March, in which he claimed that Pohive and other dissidents were Marxists who wished to overthrow the royal style of government, that the money was being held in a United States bank so that the government would not spend it.
Four New Zealanders were deported on April 14, 1990, after claiming that the Police Minister, George Akau'ola, and European mercenaries were planning a coup against the King on April 6.
Akau'ola on April 1 publicly denied the allegations, made at the end of March in an audience with the King and supported by members of the radical Tokai Kalo Christian Fellowship (a Pentecostal sect) who placed the four under guard at church headquarters, apparently to protect them.
ECONOMY
Current-account balance -US$46.4 m. (1988)
Principal trading partners Exports: New Zealand, USA, Australia; Imports: New Zealand, USA, Fiji 
Cyclone "Ofa" 
At the beginning of February 1990 cyclone "Ofa" , one of the most devastating to hit the western Pacific region, caused one death in Tonga and T$4,000,000-worth of damage.
ASIA — PACIFIC
TUVALU
BASIC DATA
Area: 26 sq km.
Population: 8,229 (1985).
Capital: on Funafuti atoll.
Language: Tuvaluan, English.
Religion: Christianity (98% Protestant).
Av. life expectancy: yrs (19).
Armed forces:(19).
GNP per capita: US$ (19).
Currency: Australian dollar (US$1.00=A$1.3067 as at Nov. 26, 1990).
As an independent "special member" of the Commonwealth since October 1978, the head of state of Tuvalu is the British sovereign, represented by a Governor General (currently Toalipi Lati.
Legislative authority is vested in a unicameral 12-member Parliament which is popularly elected for up to four years.
Executive power is exercised by a Prime Minister (who is elected by MPs from amongst their number) and a Cabinet appointed by the Governor General upon the advice of the Prime Minister.
Tomasi Puapua, who became Prime Minister following the general election of September 1981, was returned to office in September 1985.
Following a general election in September 1989 he was defeated by Bikenibou Paeniu.
Bikenibeu Paeniu Prime Minister; Minister of Foreign Affairs; Economic Planning Alesana Seluka Deputy Prime Minister; Minister of Finance and Commerce Ionatana Iontana Works and Communications Toomu Sione Natural Resources; Home Affairs Works and Communications Naama Latasi Commerce and Natural Resources
Tuvalu Cabinet
ASIA — PACIFIC
WESTERN SAMOA
BASIC DATA
Area: 2,831 sq km.
Population: 168,000 (1988).
Capital: Apia.
Languages: Samoan and English Religion: Christianity.
Av. life expectancy: 66 yrs (1988).
GNP per capita: US$580 (1988).
Currency: tala — Western Samoan dollar (US$1.00=WS$2.2601 as at Nov. 26, 1990).
Western Samoa achieved independence from New Zealand in 1962 and became a member of the Commonwealth in 1970.
The head of state, the O le Ao O le Malo,(currently Susuga Malietoa Tanumafili II) acts as a constitutional monarch with the power to dissolve the unicameral 47-member Fono (the legislative assembly) and to appoint a Prime Minister upon its recommendation.
The Fono is elected for up to three years, with two of its members elected by universal suffrage and the remainder chosen by Matai (elected clan leaders).
In the general election of February 1985 the Human Rights Protection Party (HRPP) won 31 seats in the Fono but 12 of its MPs subsequently defected and, in January 1986, entered into a coalition government with the rival Christian Democratic Party.
In the general election of Feb. 26, 1988, the government and the opposition each won 23 seats; the remaining seat was the subject of numerous recounts.
It was awarded eventually to the HRPP and the party's leader, Tofilau Eti Alesana, became Prime Minister in April.
Tofilau Eti Alesana Prime Minister; Foreign Affairs; Labour; Broadcasting; Justice; Police and Prisons; Attorney General Tuilaepa Sailele Malielegaoi Finance Jack Netzler Civil Aviation; Post Office; Transport; Public Works Pule Lameko Agriculture, Forests and Fisheries Tanuvasa Livi Economic Affairs Patu Afaese Education; Youth, Sports and Culture Polataivao Fosi Health Sifuiva Sione Lands and Surveys 
Western Samoa Cabinet
POLITICS
Referendum on universal suffrage
In June the Cabinet approved a plan for a referendum on Oct. 29, 1990, on the issues of universal suffrage and the proposed establishment of a second chamber in the Fono.
Under the prevailing laws only some 20,000 traditional chiefs (Matai) were allowed to vote in elections to 45 seats in the Fono, while voters of European blood who were not members of a Matai family elected the remaining two seats.
The proposed changes, supported both by the Prime Minister and the opposition leader, would allow all those aged 21 or over to vote, but would still allow only Matai to become candidates.
In the referendum the population of Western Samoa voted narrowly in favour of the introduction of universal suffrage.
The official turnout was 74 per cent, although there were claims that many voters had not been registered for the ballot.
The proposal to establish an upper legislative chamber composed of the Matai was rejected in the referendum.
ECONOMY
Cyclone "Ofa" 
Cyclone "Ofa" , one of the most devastating to hit the western Pacific region, struck Western Samoa on Feb. 1, 1990, leaving seven people dead, 10,000 homeless and WS$306,000,000-worth of damage.
ASIA — PACIFIC
KIRIBATI
BASIC DATA
Area: 861 sq km.
Population: 68,200 (1988).
Capital: the island of Bairiki, in Tarawa Atoll.
Languages: I-Kiribati, English.
Religion: Christianity.
Av. life expectancy: 52 yrs (1987).
GDP per capita: A$703.317 (1988).
Currency:(US$1.00=A$1.3067 as at Nov. 26, 1990).
The Republic of Kiribati, which is composed of 33 Pacific atolls within an area of 5,000,000 sq km, became an independent republic within the Commonwealth in July 1979.
Legislative power is vested in a unicameral House of Assembly (Maneaba), comprising 39 members popularly elected for up to four years and one appointed representative of the Banaban community.
The head of state is the President who is popularly elected from amongst members of the Assembly; he governs with the assistance of an appointed Cabinet and is empowered to dissolve the Assembly and to call general elections.
Ieremia Tabai has been President since independence and was elected for a fourth term on May 12, 1987, despite a constitutional prohibition on any individual serving more than three terms in the post.
Ieremia Tabai President; Minister of Foreign Affairs Teatao Teannaki Vice-President; Minister of Finance Ieruru Karotu Works and Energy Taomati Iuta Natural Resources and Development Babera Kirata Home Affairs and Decentralization Uera Rabuau Transport and Communications Raion Bataroma Trade, Industry and Labour Ataraoti Bwebwenibure Education Rotaria Ataia Health and Family Planning Michael Takabwebwe Attorney General Tekinaiti Kaiteie Line and Phoenix Group
Kiribati Cabinet
ASIA — PACIFIC
UNITED STATES EXTERNAL TERRITORIES
BASIC DATA
Belau
Status: Sole territory under UN trusteeship as the Trust Territory of the Pacific Islands, administered by the United States.
Area: 497 sq km.
Population: 14,800.
Capital: Koror, on Koror Island.
Languages: Palauan, English.
Religion: Christianity.
Currency: US dollar.
Head of state: President Ngiratkel Etpison.
Guam
Status: Unincorporated US territory.
Area: 549 sq km.
Population: 138,000 (45% Chamorro, 25% Filipino-American, 30% US mainlanders, 10% Micronesians and Asians.
Capital: Agaña.
Languages: English (official); also Japanese and Chamorro.
Religion: Christianity.
Life expectancy: 73 yrs (1988).
Currency: US dollar.
Governor: Joseph F. Ada.
Marshall Islands
Status: Sovereign, self-governing state in free association with the USA.
Area: 180 sq km.
Population: 38,000 (1988).
Capital: Majuro.
Languages: English and local languages.
Religion: Christianity.
Currency: US dollar.
Head of state: President Amata Kabua.
Northern Marianas
Status: US Commonwealth.
Area: 457 sq km.
Population: 30,000 (1988).
Capital: Saipan.
Languages: English (official); also Chamorro, Carolinian and Japanese.
Religion: Christianity.
Currency: US dollar.
Governor: Larry I. Guerrero.
BELAU
Guam accord on aid
On May 26, 1989, the Belau and US governments signed a series of subsidiary agreements in Guam on additional economic and social aid as an incentive for the population of Belau to ratify the compact of free association which had been negotiated in 1982.
The aid package included US$36,000,000 to help pay off debts amounting to $48,000,000 resulting from the ambitious IPSECO power station project.
In 1985 Belau had defaulted on the loans from foreign banks financing the project and was successfully sued in the US courts [see p. 36701].
Also included in the agreement was $9,300,000 to fund an anti-drug programme, a new hospital and a prison, and to pay for a public auditor and a special prosecutor.
These funds were only to be disbursed when the compact agreement had been signed.
The agreements reached at Guam also linked US land claims for defence sites to further aid.
Originally the compact had stipulated that the Belau government would provide land for sites selected by the military and would compensate landowners, while the USA would provide $5,500,000 for all the land it had an option on.
Critics of the compact say that the USA has rights to up to one-third of Belau's territory.
Under the Guam agreement, however, the USA was bound to reach an agreement with Belau on financial assistance if it required land other than that already designated as an airfield and harbour.
Belau was not required to make the land available until such agreement was reached.
The UN Trusteeship Council (comprising the five permanent members of the Security Council) at a meeting on June 1 approved conclusions and recommendations to the Security Council on the Guam accord by four votes to one, with the Soviet Union voting against.
The Soviet delegate said that statements from petitioners in Belau had been disregarded in the report to the Security Council.
China participated in the meeting for the first time.
UN mission report
A UN Trusteeship Council mission to Belau reported in June 1989 on its visit to the islands in March to examine moves towards resolving the territory's political future.
The report noted the high degree of political development in Belau and concluded that free association with the USA remained the preferred option among the "overwhelming majority" of the population.
At a meeting on June 1, the UN Trusteeship Council took note of the report by four votes to one.
The Soviet Union, which voted against, said that the report was attempting to justify the "annexationist activities of the Administering Authority" [see p. 36701].
US draft secretarial order on relations with Belau
While awaiting ratification of the compact of free association, the US Department of the Interior proposed to revise the document governing relations with Belau.
On July 12, 1990, the department issued a draft secretarial order which proposed tighter budgetary controls and an expanded role for the new resident US representative in Belau.
The draft order enforced previous unwritten powers by stipulating that the resident US representative should approve the federal budget submission, all plans for borrowing and requests for grants-in-aid, and all contracts for capital improvement projects.
It also laid down that Belau's laws and any communications or relations with other countries, organizations or US agencies should be subject to approval by the US Department of the Interior.
In response to the document, the Belauan authorities in August appealed to the UN Trusteeship and Security Councils over what they called the US proposal "to eliminate democracy and self-government" in Belau.
They also called for wider consultations, and a meeting between the US Department of the Interior and the Belau Olbil era Kelulau (OEK — National Congress, consisting of the House of Representatives and the Senate) to discuss the document was scheduled for September 1990.
US report on official corruption
A report by the General Accounting Office of the US Congress on official corruption, political violence and the IPSECO power project was released in August 1989.
Calling for closer monitoring of government activities by the US Department of the Interior, the report was highly critical of Belau government involvement in heroin trafficking and terrorism, fiscal irresponsibility and lax laws.
It also revealed official corruption in relation to road building and the construction of a new airport, involving bond issues with US underwriters.
The report mainly referred to the activities of the previous administration under President Lazarus Silii, who had committed suicide in August 1988 [see p. 36226].
The government of his successor, Ngiratkel Etpison, had supported the US investigation.
Drug smuggling ring uncovered
A year-long joint undercover operation by US and Guam police uncovered a Guam-Belau drug ring in mid-1989, leading to the arrest of 40 people who were charged with smuggling millions of dollars' worth of heroin and marijuana to the USA between 1984 and 1989.
Belau nationals Melwert Tmetuchel, Leslie Tewid and Angenhenio Subino were said to have led the smugglers.
All three had been convicted in 1986 of the 1985 murder of the Belau President, Haruo Remeliik but had been freed on appeal [see pp. 33995-96; 35003; 35648].
Also arrested in connection with drug smuggling were former OEK senator Hokkans Baules and former House of Representatives member Francisco Asanuma.
GUAM
Suicide of former Governor
Former Governor Ricardo J. Bordallo (Democrat), committed suicide on Jan. 31, 1990, rather than serve a four-year prison sentence for extortion and interfering with witnesses.
Bordallo, 63, shot himself in the centre of the island's capital Agaña, chained to the statue of a 17th century Chamorro chief and wrapped in the island's flag.
He was scheduled to leave that day for a mainland United States prison, having exhausted all appeal procedures, to serve four years of a 30-year sentence imposed in February 1987 for accepting bribes of $70,000 in alleged government deals with Japanese businessmen in order to finance his election campaign.
He was also convicted of conspiracy to obstruct justice and interfering with witnesses.
The US charges had been laid as he sought re-election as governor for a third term; he was narrowly defeated in the election by Joseph K. Ada (Republican) on Nov. 4, 1986.
A strong Chamorro nationalist, Bordallo served as governor in 1975-79 and in 1983-87 and was the major force behind the Guam Commonwealth Bill which proposed to upgrade Guam's status from an unincorporated US territory and give the island greater autonomy [see also below].
However, he drew criticism for his lavish spending, both personal and public.
His business interests, at one time worth $25,000,000, collapsed and went into bankruptcy in the early 1970s.
Some 10,000 local people turned out for Bordallo's funeral.
Before his death his wife Senator Madeleine Z. Bordallo had announced her intention to stand for Governor in the November 1990 elections.
Discussions with USA on political future
The first public discussions between US and Guamian officials of Guam's proposal for a new political association with the USA took place in Honolulu, Hawaii, on Dec. 11-12, 1989.
Developed between 1983 and 1988 by local commissions after referendums in 1982 and 1987, the proposed Commonwealth Bill combined elements of free association with US citizenship for Guamian citizens.
The US congressional committee was reluctant to accept the bill in its original form, arguing against Guam's proposed power of veto over federal laws and regulations, and questioning the controversial proposal to limit the right of self-determination to the indigenous Chamorros, who make up 45 per cent of the island's population.
The Governor, Joseph Ada, said that the Guamian people had been held in "serfdom" for the past 91 years while its neighbour states had gained independence.
He dismissed US objections as "policy objections masquerading as constitutional issues" .
The second round of meetings between the commission on self-determination, chaired by Ada, and a task force on Guam set up by the administration of US President Bush was held on Feb. 22-23, 1990, to discuss the next steps in drafting the Commonwealth Bill.
However, Ada had made it clear at the first round of talks that the commission had no power to negotiate changes, which had to be approved by referendum.
The USA criticized this stipulation as "a design for failure" .
Along with discussions on the island's political future, the issue of US military bases on Guam remained to be decided.
In January 1990, Ada wrote to the US Defence Secretary, Dick Cheney, reiterating his call for the USA to return the Guam Naval Air Station to civilian use in the light of US announcements of future base closures elsewhere.
Earlier, during a stopover visit to Guam, Cheney had promised to consider closing the base.
The decision to remove a squadron of B-52s from the nearby Anderson Base on Guam by September 1990 had already been announced.
In 1985, there had been local opposition to US moves to find base sites on the islands as an alternative to the Philippines.
Dissatisfaction with the proposed $39,500,000 land settlement was the key element of this opposition.
MARSHALL ISLANDS
US compensation for nuclear victims
It was reported in February 1990 that victims of nuclear testing in the islands, which had ended in the 1950s, would receive $45,000,000 in compensation from the USA.
The decision was made after a panel of judges in the islands concluded that cancer and other illnesses had been caused by the US tests.
Earlier the 14 claims for compensation had been rejected when a US federal judge ruled that US courts had no jurisdiction in the case since the island became self-governing in October 1986 under the Compact of Free Association [see pp. 35002-03].
NORTHERN MARIANAS
Election of Governor
Larry I. Guerrero was elected Governor in the November 1989 elections, succeeding Pedro P. Tenorio and gaining the third successive term for a Republican.
The new Resident Representative in the USA, Juan Babauta, a Republican, took over the post from a Democrat, Froilan C. Tenario, a strong nationalist who had stood as a candidate for the governorship.
The Republicans retained control of the nine-member territorial Senate, but in the 15-member House of Representatives, the Democrats remained in the majority.
ASIA — PACIFIC
FRENCH PACIFIC TERRITORIES
BASIC DATA
France's possessions overseas are regarded as integral part of France and participate in the political system of metropolitan France.
Each (apart from the French Southern and Antarctic Territories) elects its own representatives to the Parliament in Paris (a total of 22 seats in the National Assembly and 13 in the Senate).
French Polynesia and New Caledonia are overseas territories (territoires d'outre-mer).
Each is administered by an appointed High Commissioner or Chief Administrator and each (apart from the Southern and Antarctic Territories which are governed by special statute) has a directly elected Territorial Assembly or Congress.
French Polynesia
Area: 4,200 sq km.
Population: 196,000 (1989).
Capital: Papeete.
Languages: French; Polynesian languages.
Religion: Christianity.
Av. life expectancy: 72 yrs (1988).
Currency: franc of the Comptoirs français du Pacifique (franc CFP or Pacific franc)(US$1.00=91.0709 francs CFP as at Nov. 26, 1990).
New Caledonia
Area: 19,103 sq km.
Population: 164,000 (1989).
Capital: Nouméa.
Languages: French (official); also Polynesian and Melanesian languages.
Religion: Christianity.
Av. life expectancy: 69 yrs (1989).
Currency: Franc of the Comptoirs français du Pacifique (franc CFP or Pacific franc)(US$1.00=91.0709 francs CFP as at Nov. 26, 1990.
FRENCH POLYNESIA
Visit of French President to Tahiti
President Mitterrand of France attended Papeete's celebrations of 100 years as a municipality on May 16, 1990, when he told the local assembly that he would help the colonies "to erase the legacy of an underlying colonial past" .
This was interpreted as indicating a move towards increased autonomy for the territories or less economic aid from France.
In 1989, French Polynesia's trade deficit was US$753,000,000.
Nuclear test
The French Ministry of Defence announced that it had exploded a 35-kiloton nuclear device on Mururoa Atoll on July 5, 1990, the fourth such test since June 1989.
All four tests were formally acknowledged in accordance with President Mitterrand's promise of May 1989 ending the French government's policy of silence on nuclear testing since 1985, and gave rise to a number of regional protests.
NEW CALEDONIA
Election of Congress officials
Simon Loueckhote of the pro-French Rally for Caledonia in the Republic (Rassemblement pour la Calédonie dans la République — RCPR) was in early July 1990 re-elected president of the Territorial Congress.
Five of the eight vice-presidential posts also went to the RCPR, with the FLNKS winning the remaining three.
The 54-member Territorial Congress, an aggregate of the three regional assemblies, had become the islands' autonomous legislative body following the ending of French direct rule on July 14, 1989, under the terms of the 1988 Matignon Accord [see pp. 36348-49; for elections to the regional assemblies in June 1989 see p. 367].
distribution of seats North South Loyalty Islands RCPR 4 21 2 FLNKS 11 4 4 Front national — 3 — Calédonie demain — 2 Union océanienne — 2 Front anti-néocolonialiste —-1
New Caledonia Provincial Assemblies
Assembly presidents: North: Léopold Jorédié (FLNKS).
South: Jacques Lafleur (RPCP) >.
Loyalty Islands: Richard Kaloi (FLNKS).
New FLNKS leader
After a 16-hour closed meeting the pro-independence Kanak Socialist National Liberation Front (Front de Libération Nationale Kanake Socialiste — FLNKS) on March 24, 1990, elected as their new president Paul Néaoutyine, 39, the leader of the Kanak Liberation Party (Parti de liberation kanak — PALIKA), a radical component of the FLNKS.
The presidency and vice-presidency had been vacant since the assassination in May 1989 of the charismatic Jean-Marie Tjibaou and of Yeiwéné Yeiwéné by a member of the extreme left-wing United Front for Kanak Liberation (Front uni de libération kanake — FULK), whose expulsion from the FLNKS was confirmed in January 1990.
The new vice-president was Rock Wamytan, of the Union Calédonie (UC), the more moderate main constituent party of FLNKS, which had been led by Tjibaou until his death.
Admission of FLNKS to SPG
The Melanesian Spearhead Group (SPG — composed of Papua New Guinea, Solomon Islands and Vanuatu), originally formed in 1986 [not 1988 as wrongly given on p. 36702]to press for a strong stance on the New Caledonia issue within the South Pacific Forum, held a summit meeting in the Solomon Islands capital Honiara in March 1990, when the FLNKS was admitted to full membership.
The admission of the FLNKS, which had been resisted by the SPG in the past, was seen as a signal to the French government that the region was still actively committed to a fully independent, Melanesian-controlled New Caledonia.
Nickel production — Strike
In 1989 nickel production reached 46,935 tonnes, of which exports amounted to 46,071 tonnes worth 715,000,000 francs and equivalent to one-fifth of the territory's budget.
A 36-day strike by workers in the mining and metallurgical industry over wages and conditions was ended by an agreement on July 23, 1990, which provided for a substantial wages and conditions package, payment during the strike and a one-off cash payment.
ASIA — PACIFIC
NIUE
BASIC DATA
Area: 259 sq km.
Population: 2,100 (1989).
Capital: Alofi.
Languages: English and Niuean.
Religion: Christianity.
Currency: New Zealand dollar (US$1.00=NZ$1.6339 as at Nov. 26, 1990)
Niue is a self-governing territory in free association with New Zealand, which is responsible for the territory's foreign relations and defence.
The Niue Assembly comprises 20 members (14 village representatives and six elected on a common roll) and has legislative authority, but it can also request New Zealand to legislate for the island.
Executive power is in the control of the Premier and three other ministers.
POLITICS
General election
Six newcomers won seats in the Niue Assembly in the general election held in May 1990, Niue's sixth since the island obtained self-governing status in October 1974 [for previous general election in March 1987 see p. 35206].
The Niue People's Action Party (NPAP), Niue's only formal political association (which was strongly opposed to the leadership of Sir Robert Rex who had dominated politics since Niue became self-governing), made gains with the victory of sympathizers including Tauveve Jacobsen, who retained the seat she won in a 1989 by-election, and Sani Lakitani, the founder of the NPAP.
Young Vivian, the party's leader was returned unopposed, and was confident of the NPAP's having a majority in the new Assembly.
However, by dint of intensive lobbying, Sir Robert, 81, retained control of the assembly by persuading four members sympathetic to the NPAP, already weakened by differences between Vivian and Lakitani, to switch allegiance.
Rex was then re-elected as Premier when the Assembly reconvened.
Leadership challenge — dismissal of ministers
The Premier dismissed the Minister of Finance, Sani Lakatani, and the Minister of Works, Frank Lui, on Sept. 18, 1990, after they refused to resign at his request.
The two ministers were said to have challenged Sir Robert's leadership by collecting signatures from 11 members of the Assembly in a vote of no confidence in the Premier.
Three Assembly members later withdrew their support from the motion.
The ministers were replaced by two opposition members: Young Vivian as Minister of Finance and Fisa Pihigia as Minister of Works.
ECONOMY
1990-91 budget
Lakatani, then Minister of Finance, presented the 1990-91 budget to the Assembly in August 1990.
Lakatani said that the budget, totalling NZ$15,000,000, would provide for "appropriate" development especially in the private sector, with emphasis on tourism.
The government would also assist the private sector in job creation for school leavers, many of whom had been forced to leave the island and seek work in New Zealand.
It was estimated that 10,000 Niueans live and work in New Zealand.
Cyclone "Ofa" 
At the beginning of February 1990 cyclone "Ofa" , one of the most devastating to hit the western Pacific region, caused US$2,500,000-worth of damage on Niue.
INTERNATIONAL
UNITED NATIONS ORGANIZATIONS
BASIC DATA
UNESCO
Full title: United Nations Educational, Scientific and Cultural Organization.
Date of foundation: 1946.
Status: UN specialized agency.
Objective: Promotion of international collaboration in education, science and culture.
Director-General: Federico Mayor Zaragoza (Spain).
UNICEF
Full title: United Nations Children's Fund.
Date of foundation: 1946.
Status: semi-autonomous UN agency, financed entirely by voluntary contributions.
Objective: to improve the situation of children, particularly in developing countries.
Governing body: 41-member Executive Board, elected by UN Economic and Social Council (ECOSOC).
Executive Director: James P. Grant (USA).
UNHCR
Full title: Office of the United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees.
Date of foundation: 1951.
Status: agency of the UN secretariat, but mainly financed from voluntary contributions.
Objective: emergency relief, long-term aid and resettlement of refugees.
Governing body: 43-member executive committee.
High Commissioner: vacant [see p. 37868].
Commission on Human Rights
Date of Foundation: 1946.
Status: Intergovernmental body subsidiary to the UN Economic and Social Council (ECOSOC).
Objective: Promotion and protection of human rights.
Number of members: 43 [but see below].
Chairwoman of 46th session: Purificación Quisumbing (Philippines).
IMO
Full title: International Maritime Organization (initially known as the Intergovernmental Maritime Consultative Organization — IMCO).
Date of foundation: 1959.
Objectives: Maritime safety and the prevention of pollution from ships.
Secretary-General: William O'Neil (Canada).
UNCTAD
Full title: United Nations Conference on Trade and Development.
Date of Foundation: 1964.
Status: Permanent organ of the General Assembly, financed from UN regular budget.
Objective: to promote international trade and economic development in the Third World.
Director-General: Kenneth Dadzie (Ghana).
UNDP
Full title: United Nations Development Programme.
Date of Foundation: 1965 (through the amalgamation of the Expanded Programme of Technical Assistance and the Special Fund for large development projects).
Status: UN Secretariat body, financed by voluntary contributions from governments.
Objective: Co-ordination of UN development activities.
Governing body: 48-member Governing Council.
Administrator: William H. Draper III (USA).
FAO
Full title: United Nations Food and Agriculture Organization.
Date of Foundation: 1945.
Status: UN specialized agency.
Objective: Co-ordination of agricultural development programmes in the Third World.
Director-General: Edward Saouma (Lebanon).
IFAD
Full title: International Fund for Agricultural Development.
Status: UN specialized agency.
Date of foundation: 1976 (started operations 1977).
Objective: Funding of rural development programmes, mainly for the poorest Third-World countries.
Number of member states: 143 divided as follows: 20 Category I industrialized countries belonging to the Organization for Economic Co-operation and Development (OECD); 12 Category II countries belonging to the Organization of Petroleum Exporting Countries (OPEC); and 111 Category III developing countries.
The Executive Board consists of 18 members and 17 alternates, one-third from each of the categories.
President: Idriss Jazairy (Algeria).
WFP
Full title: World Food Programme.
Date of Foundation: 1963.
Status: A body jointly accountable to FAO and the UN Economic and Social Council (ECOSOC).
Objective: Provision of food aid and emergency relief to developing countries.
Number of member states on organizing Committee on Food Aid Policies and Programmes (CFA): 30 (15 appointed by FAO and 15 by ECOSOC).
Executive Director: James Ingram (Australia).
UNESCO
Abandonment of reforms proposed by Director-General
At the May 1990 session of UNESCO's governing body, the Executive Board, Federico Mayor, the Director-General, was again criticized for his proposals to establish new high-level posts and an advisory committee of international scientific and cultural personalities [see p. 37335].
Mayor dropped his plans for the new committee and agreed to keep the Executive Board more fully informed of his actions in future.
However, the Executive Board approved 13 of the new appointments which Mayor had proposed.
A report issued by the United States State Department on April 17, 1990, made it clear that the USA, which had left UNESCO in 1984 [see p. 33500], would not be seeking to rejoin in the foreseeable future.
The report said that UNESCO had not accepted the need for budgetary restraint and was still excessively politicized, adding: "The leverage we retain as a sought-after non-member…is greater than we would wield simply by being one vote among 161 others." 
International Literacy Year
International Literacy Year 1990, whose programme of activities was to be co-ordinated by UNESCO [for its announcement in 1987 see p. 35925], was launched on Dec. 6, 1989.
(The number of illiterates in the world was estimated at 1,000 million, including some 35 per cent of all women.)
The world literacy campaign aimed to provide primary education for 80 per cent of children under 14 by the year 2000.
[For world education conference held in Jomtien, Thailand on March 5-9, 1990, see p. 37335.]
UNICEF
Report highlighting preventable child deaths
UNICEF's 1990 The State of the World's Children report said that some 40,000 children died every day from malnutrition and preventable illnesses (principally immunizable diseases, dehydration due to diarrhoea, and pneumonia).
The report put the cost of immunization and of medicines to cure diarrhoea and pneumonia at US$2,500 million per year: "Two and a half billion dollars is a substantial sum…
It is as much as the Soviet Union has been spending on vodka each month.
It is as much as US companies have been spending each year to advertise cigarettes…
It is as much as the developing world is paying every week to service its debts."
The report concluded that, if current trends continued, more than 100,000,000 children would have died under the age of five by the year 2000.
Proposed cut in US contribution to budget
The United States administration announced in March 1989 plans to cut its contribution to UNICEF's 1989 budget by 45 per cent, to $33,900,000.
However the US Congress approved a budget allocation for fiscal 1990 of $60,400,000, the same amount as the previous year.
(In 1989 the Soviet Union had increased its contribution to UNICEF to US$20,000,000.)
Election of Palme as chairman of Executive Board
Lisbet Palme, widow of the assassinated Swedish Prime Minister, Olof Palme [for whose murder in February 1986 see p. 34363], was elected chairman of the UNICEF Executive Board in June 1990.
UNHCR
Budget crisis
In 1988 the UNHCR recorded its first budget deficit, of US$7,000,000, while in 1989 this deficit rose to $38,000,000.
At the 40th session of the UNHCR Executive Committee in October 1989 the 43 member states adopted a general programme budget of $190,000,000 for the first six months of 1990 only; after extensive debate at an extraordinary session in May 1990 and at the regular session in October, the Executive Committee finally adopted a general programme budget for 1990 amounting to $378,885,900, including the $38,000,000 deficit carried over from the previous year.
The proposed budget for 1991 was set at US$345,500,000.
Accessions to refugee convention
In March 1989 Hungary became the first East European state to accede to the 1951 Convention and 1967 Protocol relating to the Status of Refugees (under which states agreed not to expel refugees or return them to their homeland if they would face persecution there).
On Oct. 4 the Hungarian government signed two agreements with the UNHCR on assistance to refugees and the opening of a UNHCR office in Budapest.
Exoneration of Hocké
Jean-Pierre Hocké, who had resigned as High Commissioner in October 1989 after allegations that he had misused money from a Danish/Swedish educational fund [see p. 36989], was in October 1990 cleared of the charges after a Danish government investigation.
(He had been cleared by an internal UN inquiry in March 1990.)
UN Commission on Human Rights
46th session of Commission
At its 46th session in February and March 1990, the Commission adopted a resolution proposed by the United States condemning human rights abuses in Cuba.
Poland and Czechoslovakia co-sponsored the resolution, whereas the Soviet Union voted against it.
After a long and acrimonious debate, the developing countries joined to block similar resolutions condemning China and Iraq.
An article in Le Monde on March 22, 1990, pointed to the increasing concern among Third-World countries that they would become the target of criticism for their human rights records as the confrontation between East and West declined.
The decision to increase the Commission's membership to 53 and to allot all the new seats to Third-World countries was seen as a further attempt by those countries to protect themselves, while a simultaneous Western proposal for measures to increase the Commission's efficiency was defeated.
Another proposal, which would have limited the powers of the Commission's special envoys (rapporteurs) to visit countries suspected of human rights abuses, was deferred to the 47th session.
The United Kingdom failed to secure re-election to the Commission for a further three-year term, for only the second time in the Commission's history.
IMO
Ferry safety measures
Measures adopted by the IMO to improve the safety of passenger ferries became international law in October 1989 and April 1990.
The United Kingdom had requested the changes to the 1974 Safety of Life at Sea Convention (SOLAS) after the Zeebrugge ferry disaster of March 1987 [see pp. 35040, 35488; 36502].
The first set of amendments, which entered into force on Oct. 22, 1989, covered the provision of leak-detection systems or closed-circuit television to warn the crew if cargo doors had been left open.
Another new regulation stated that emergency lighting had to be provided in all public spaces and alleyways.
The second set of amendments, which entered into force on April 29, 1990, stated that all cargo doors had to be closed and locked before or immediately after the vessel left its berth, and that ships' masters had to check trim and stability before departure.
In March 1990, again on the initiative of the UK, the 13 states party to the 1974 Athens Convention relating to the Carriage of Passengers and their Luggage at Sea adopted a protocol to the convention which increased the compensation payable for death or personal injury to around US$225,000.
The protocol was due to become law automatically after 18 months.
New member state
Sao Tomé and Príncípe acceded to the IMO Convention on July 9, 1990, bringing the number of member states to 134 (133 after the unification in May 1990 of Yemen).
[For December accession of Monaco see p. 37510.]
UNCTAD
Annual report — Impact of Gulf crisis
UNCTAD's annual trade and development report for 1990 pointed to the harmful effects of the current Gulf crisis [see pp. 37631-41; 37694-97; 37758-60; 37870-72]on the economies of the developing world.
A long-term oil price of US$30 per barrel would bring increased costs of some US$26,000 million per year for oil-importing developing countries, with repercussions on their welfare and development programmes as well as their debt repayments.
The report warned that the international debt strategy could become "one of the first economic casualties" of the Gulf crisis.
[For UNCTAD co-operation with the UN Food and Agriculture Organization (FAO) see below.]
UNDP
Human Development Report
In May 1990 the UNDP published its first Human Development Report, which proposed that the traditional macroeconomic yardsticks, favoured by the World Bank and other international financial institutions, should be replaced by a new indicator, the "Human Development Index" (HDI), which would take into account life expectancy, degree of literacy and individual purchasing power, since traditional indicators were often distorted by exchange rate fluctuations.
The report also pointed out that the average life expectancy in the developing world had risen from 46 to 62 in the period 1962-87, while infant mortality had dropped by 50 per cent.
The report criticized a number of developing countries, including China, Angola and Pakistan, for wasting resources on reckless arms spending.
The HDI was widely criticized for its complexity and for a system of weighting data which gave the United States the lowest HDI of any developed country (owing to its high illiteracy rate).
Japan, Sweden and Switzerland had the highest HDI.
Agreement with IMF
The UNDP and the International Monetary Fund (IMF) signed an executing agency agreement in July 1989, under which the IMF would receive UNDP funding to provide technical assistance to developing countries in areas such as fiscal and monetary policy and the improvement of statistical bases.
[For co-operation with FAO see below.]
FAO
Adoption of real-growth budget
The 25th FAO conference in Rome in November 1989 adopted a regular budget of US$569,000,000 for 1990/91, an increase of $77,000,000 over the previous biennium [see p. 36957].
However, on Jan. 11, 1990, the United States announced that it was to cut its 1990 contribution to FAO from $70,000,000 to $18,000,000 and would consider withdrawing from the organization altogether.
The reasons behind the decision were thought to be the USA's continuing doubts about the value and cost-effectiveness of FAO's work and its dissatisfaction with the Director-General, Edward Saouma.
However, it was considered unlikely that the USA would actually withdraw, since the Soviet Union was expected to join soon.
Reports on international trade and food security
A report on trends in the international market for agricultural and tropical products, published jointly by the FAO, the World Food Council and UNCTAD in late 1989, showed that developing countries were continuing to lose their share of world trade in agricultural products to the developed market-economy countries, a trend exacerbated by protectionism, dumping and additional tariff barriers on semi-processed agricultural products.
An FAO report published in November 1989 said that, despite a net increase in world cereal production, world stocks would for the third year running be "at or below the minimum necessary to safeguard global food security" , with wheat reserves in the leading exporting countries at their lowest since the world food crisis of the early 1970s.
The report estimated the world trade in cereals for 1989/90 at 203,000,000 tonnes.
Anti-screwworm campaign
In May 1990 the FAO launched an appeal for $85,000,000 to eradicate the New World screwworm (Cochliomyia homnivorax), a large fly of South American origin which had been detected over an area of 18,000 sq km in Libya.
(The International Fund for Agricultural Development — IFAD — and UNDP had already promised a total of $3,000,000 for a pilot project.)
The screwworm larvae, which burrowed deep into the flesh of their animal or human hosts, had been a major problem in Central and South America until the 1950s, when the technique of releasing sterilized male flies (which would mate with females but produce no offspring) had brought the parasite under control.
Bid to revitalize rainforest action plan
Saouma announced in March 1990 that an independent commission of inquiry under a former Swedish Prime Minister, Ola Ullsten, was to be set up to investigate the slow progress of the action plan for the tropical rainforests, set up in 1985 in collaboration with the UNDP and the World Resources Institute.
IFAD
IFAD Executive Board 37th session
At the 37th session of IFAD's governing body in September 1989, Australia announced a contribution of US$7,600,000 to the third replenishment of IFAD resources [see p. 36957]and a further sum of $380,000 to combat drought and desertification in sub-Saharan Africa.
India announced that it was to increase its contribution to the third replenishment from $6,500,000 to $8,000,000.
The Executive Board approved four new programmes to help the neediest rural inhabitants of Turkey, Zanzibar (Tanzania), Senegal and Djibouti.
WFP
December 1989 food aid meeting
The organizing Committee on Food Aid Policies and Programmes (CFA) heard at its meeting in December 1989 that the WFP was likely to suffer a shortfall of 500,000 tonnes in its food supplies for 1990, owing to increased commodity prices and reductions in the pledges made by donor countries.
The committee nevertheless approved 14 new development projects worth US$225,9000,000 (760,000 tonnes of food) and 10 projects for long-term refugees worth $123,600,000 (346,000 tonnes), provided that the necessary food supplies became available.
The committee also discussed the continued disputes between the WFP and the FAO over the distribution of programmes, resources and responsibility, and endorsed a UN suggestion that an "eminent person" should be appointed to consider the relationship between the two organizations.
INTERNATIONAL
WHO
BASIC DATA
Full name: World Health Organization.
Date of foundation: 1948.
Status: Specialized agency of the United Nations.
Objective: The attainment by all peoples of the highest possible level of health.
Director-general: Hiroshi Nakajima (Japan).
1989 annual report
The 1989 annual report of the WHO, published on Sept. 25, 1989, contained for the first time comprehensive estimates of the overall incidence of disease in the world.
According to the report around 1,000 million people, or one-fifth of the world's population, were diseased, in poor health or malnourished.
Worst affected were the developing countries.
Around 500,000,000 people in South and East Asia (40 per cent of the total population), 160,000,000 in Sub-Saharan Africa (30 per cent) and 90,000,000 in Latin America and the Caribbean (25 per cent ) suffered from malnutrition and diseases such as malaria, diarrhoea, tuberculosis, respiratory illnesses and AIDS.
The WHO Director-General, Hiroshi Nakajima, described this situation as a "preventable tragedy" , because the industrialized countries had the "resources and technology to end common diseases worldwide" but lacked the "will" to help the developing countries.
INTERNATIONAL
AIDS
Global AIDS situation
In its latest report on the spread of AIDS (acquired immune deficiency syndrome), published on July 31, 1990, the World Health Organization (WHO) said that the AIDS epidemic was "accelerating dramatically" and raised its estimate of the number of people infected with the AIDS virus (HIV) to between 8,000,000 and 10,000,000.
This was 2,000,000 above the previous figures but within the wide range the organization had been estimating for some time.
The report said that the disease was spreading more rapidly than expected, in particular in the developing countries.
In sub-Saharan Africa the estimated number of HIV-infected people had doubled to 5,000,000 compared with 2,500,000 in 1987.
The report said that, as a result of the disease's spread in rural areas, one in 40 adult men and women in the area were now believed to be HIV carriers.
In Asia, the virus had spread rapidly among intravenous drug users and female prostitutes.
At least 500,000 Asians were currently believed to be infected in an area where AIDS was virtually unknown two years ago, with increases being particularly dramatic in Thailand, the Philippines and India.
In Latin America and the Caribbean there had been a marked shift from homosexual to heterosexual transmission.
The report warned that the spread of HIV in sub-Saharan Africa, Asia and Latin America could force a "dramatic upward revision" of its prediction that between 15,000,000 and 20,000,000 people would be infected with HIV by the year 2000.
The report said that worldwide over 260,000 cases of AIDS cases had been reported to WHO, but the actual total was thought to be two or three times higher.
It predicted that at least 3,000,000 women and children would die of AIDS in the 1990s, and that AIDS would become the leading cause of death among young women and even among the worldwide population as a whole.
In its annual update on the incidence of HIV and AIDS, published on Jan. 3, 1990, WHO had reported that the total number of reported AIDS cases worldwide had reached 203,599 by the end of 1989, an increase of 36,942 or 22.2 per cent on the previous year [for 1988 figures see pp. 37019-20].
As in previous reports, WHO noted that many cases of AIDS went unreported, particularly in Africa, and that the actual number of sufferers was much higher.
The countries with the highest incidence of reported AIDS at the end of 1989 were the United States (113,211 victims), Brazil (8,064), France (8,025) and Uganda (7,375).
The highest rates of the incidence of the disease were recorded in Bermuda, with 49.1 cases per 100,000 people, and the Bahamas, with 38.0 cases per 100,000 (compared to 12.0 per 100,000 in the United States).
The relative impact of AIDS in these two Caribbean territories was attributed to the important role of international tourism in their respective economies.
In February 1990 WHO reported the first signs of HIV infection in eastern Europe and the Islamic countries of North Africa and the Middle East, regions which until recently were thought to be relatively untouched by the epidemic.
National policies to combat the spread of AIDS
The Australian government in August 1989 announced that it would carry out compulsory blood tests on potential immigrants and would in principle ban all those who were HIV-infected.
The New Zealand government subsequently announced a similar move.
Reflecting the rapid spread of AIDS in the Asia-Pacific region, the Malaysian government in September 1989 announced it would begin random blood testing of Malaysian nationals returning from Thailand (where the number of HIV-infected people was the highest in the region).
In February 1990 the Chinese government admitted for the first time that HIV infection had spread to China in significant numbers, particularly to the south-western province of Yunnan, which because of its proximity to the "golden triangle" of drug production in Thailand and Burma had a relatively high number of intravenous drug users.
The provincial government introduced a number of preventive measures, including extending the scope for blood-serum tests to identify people infected with HIV.
Medical developments
In July 1990 British researchers investigating the origins of AIDS reported that tests on a man who died of an unexplained disease in 1959 showed that he had carried the HIV virus.
Apart from this case, traces of HIV had previously been attested in a blood sample collected from a patient in Zaire in 1959 and in an American man who died in 1969.
These were the earliest known fatalities from AIDS, which was first recognized in 1981.
Throughout 1990 research institutes and drugs companies reported advances in finding treatments for AIDS, but all were still in the research and testing phase.
Azidothymidine or zidovudine (AZT), the only drug yet approved to treat AIDS, was shown to have a number of serious side effects and was linked to an increased incidence of various forms of cancer.
INTERNATIONAL
INTERNATIONAL MONETARY SITUATION
Economic and financial trends in the industrialized world
The rapid growth experienced by the major industrialized countries in 1988 slowed in 1989, and was expected to moderate further as a whole in 1990 following the invasion of Kuwait by Iraq in August, which exerted pressure on oil prices and international financial markets.
Inflation, which fell in the second half of 1989, rose in some countries in the first half of 1990, was anticipated to increase further in 1990 due in part to oil price increases.
The tightening of monetary policy throughout the industrialized world in 1989 and early 1990 manifested itself in the form of higher interest rates, as the major instrument to curb consumer demand and ease inflation.
Pressure on exchange rates in late 1989 resulted in calls for currency stabilization on the part of the leading industrialized countries.
Intervention in currency markets by monetary authorities in the Group of Seven (G-7) countries was necessary in late 1989 as the deutschmark gained considerable strength against major currencies with the prospect of German political and monetary unification.
Erratic currency markets in the first half of 1990 led to intervention by the major central banks to halt the strengthening United States dollar, and help the weakening Japanese yen.
Following disturbances in October 1989, major stock markets around the world remained strong at the end of the year, with some reaching historical peaks in the last week of 1989 and the first week of 1990.
The decline in stock market prices between early January and April 1990 were substantial, particularly in Japan, where the Tokyo stock exchange recorded historical falls.
International financial markets remained volatile following the start of the Gulf crisis.
Growth, inflation and unemployment
In its June 1990 Economic Outlook, the Organization for Economic Co-operation and Development (OECD — grouping 24 industrialized economies) indicated that real growth in gross national product (GNP) in member countries slowed to 3 per cent in the second half of 1989, compared with a rapid rate of 4.1 per cent in 1988.
The overall growth projection for 1990 was 2.9 per cent, and the same for 1991, as reflected in the G-7 economies.
The semi-annual World Economic Outlook of the International Monetary Fund (IMF), published in May 1990, indicated that the rate of expansion of the world economy in 1990, was likely to be the lowest since 1982, but suggested that it would not be as severe as 1982 when world output rose by only 0.5 per cent.
The IMF predicted that real GNP growth in the industrialized countries would moderate to 2.75 per cent in 1990, before rebounding to 3 per cent in 1991.
However, in a special supplement on the impact of the Gulf crisis, published in September 1990, the IMF suggested that if the price of oil stabilized at $25 a barrel, the industrialized countries could expect growth to be cut by a further 0.25 per cent to 2.5 per cent for 1990.
Inflationary pressures continued in the industrialized countries in 1989, despite a slight easing of inflation in the second half of the year, to an average annual rate of 4 per cent in the OECD countries (compared with an overall 1989 average rate of 4.3 per cent).
The OECD Economic Outlook of June 1990 attributed most of the favourable development in inflation at the end of 1989 to a stabilization of oil prices, the further softening of non-oil raw material prices, and the absorption of the effects of indirect tax increases which took place at the beginning of 1989.
Inflation especially in the United States, the United Kingdom, Germany and Italy, accelerated in the first half of 1990 to an average of 4.7 per cent.
Inflation was estimated to increase at an annual rate of 4.5 per cent for 1990, according to the OECD World Economic Outlook.
The IMF predicted that consumer price inflation could be boosted by 0.25 per cent in 1990 and by 0.5-0.75 of a percentage point in 1991, as a result of the Gulf crisis.
Assuming an oil price of about $33 for the fourth quarter of 1990, and an average of about $30 for 1991, inflation was expected to rise above 5 per cent in 1990 and stay at similar levels in 1991.
Unemployment in the OECD countries was expected to remain stable at an average of 6.5 per cent in 1990 despite a slowdown in growth.
In some OECD countries, unemployment rates remained very stable in 1989: 7.5 per cent in Canada, 7 per cent in West Germany, 2.25 per cent in Japan and 5.25 per cent in the USA.
In the UK, unemployment declined throughout 1989, from 7 per cent in January to 5.75 per cent in December.
Trade imbalances
The current-account imbalances in the three largest economies, West Germany, Japan and the USA, shrank more than was expected in the second half of 1989.
The OECD Economic Outlook indicated that the trade deficit in the USA stabilized at an annual rate $5,000 million lower than in the second half of 1988.
The current-account deficit in the USA narrowed to $100,000 million in the second half of 1989, compared with $125,000 million a year earlier.
The Japanese surplus fell to below $50,000 million in the second half of 1989 from over $80,000 million a year earlier, and the West German surplus in the second half of 1989 was also slightly below its record level in the first half of the year.
The trade deficit in the UK widened to over $30,000 million in 1989.
Monetary developments
The sharp increase in interest rates, and exchange rate fluctuations between the major currencies increased economic pessimism in 1990.
Long-term interest rates were between 1 and 1.75 percentage points higher in May 1990 than in September 1989 in Canada, France, West Germany, Japan, the UK and a number of other smaller European economies.
Concern over the rising US dollar in 1988 and late 1989 shifted to the weakness of the yen, and central bank intervention was necessary to halt the yen's slide.
The US dollar, which appreciated through much of 1989 until September, when co-ordinated central bank intervention was agreed among the G-7 countries [see p.37165], depreciated at the end of the year.
The US currency fluctuated during much of 1990, depreciating by 8.5 per cent against the deutschmark by March (compared with its level a year earlier), and appreciating by 17.5 per cent vis-a-vis the yen during the same period, and 5.5 against the pound sterling.
Over this period, the dollar rose by about 2.5 per cent according to the IMF's World Economic Outlook of May 1990.
Following German monetary unification in July 1990, the dollar fell to DM1.62, approaching its lowest level, attained in January 1988, of DM1.56.
The US dollar also weakened considerably following the start of the Gulf crisis.
The strength of the West German mark in the last quarter of 1989 and first quarter of 1990, following the Bundesbank's increase in its discount and Lombard rates [see p.37165], was also attributed to political optimism surrounding the economic and monetary union of East and West Germany.
According to the IMF, the upward pressure on the deutschmark in the first half of 1990 did not adversely affect other currencies participating in the exchange rate mechanism of the European Monetary System (EMS), as increases in West German interest rates were largely matched throughout the European Communities.
The weakening of the yen intensified in the first quarter of 1990, and over the year ending March 1990, had depreciated by 20 per cent in real terms.
The rise in Japanese interest rates, and narrowing of interest rate differentials vis-a-vis other major currencies did not stem the slide of the yen, which depreciated by about 15 per cent against the US dollar and by 22 per cent against the deutschmark over the same period.
Intervention by monetary authorities of the G-7 countries to support the yen following turbulence in Japanese equity markets helped the yen recover slightly, but at the end of May, the Japanese currency still stood at 6 per cent below the level at the time of the Louvre Accord in February 1987 [see p. 35609].
In August 1990, the Japanese raised interest rates by three-quarters of a point to 6 per cent.
In the UK interest rates hit their highest level in eight years, reaching 15 per cent in October 1989, and remained the highest among the major industrialized countries in 1990.
The pound came under intense pressure at the end of 1989, and fell to its lowest level in December reaching DM2.72.
Pressure on sterling continued into the first quarter of 1990 as inflation and interest rates increased, and on March 19 sterling hit a record low against the West German mark at DM2.71.
Overall, the pound depreciated by 6.25 per cent in real terms in the year ended March 1990, but recovered in the wake of the Gulf crisis, hitting a nine-year high against the US dollar on Aug. 23 (£1=$1.9515), and rising against the West German currency to over DM3.
The pound fell again in late September over doubts of Britain entering the exchange rate mechanism (ERM) of the European monetary system, but gained strength just prior to the then Chancellor John Major 's announcement that the UK would join the ERM on Oct. 8, 1990.
Interest rates were lowered by one percentage point to 14 per cent, and the pound strengthened.
Equity markets
The world's equity markets came under renewed pressure at the beginning of 1990 due to in particular to concerns over inflation and higher interest rates.
The Tokyo stock exchange fell more than 650 points in January, representing the largest one-day fall since the October 1987 world stock market crash [see pp. 35740-42], and tumbled further throughout February, plummeting by 4.5 per cent(1,569 points) on Feb. 26, marking the second largest one-day fall.
The sharp decline was blamed on fears over the falling yen and over-valued stock prices on the Tokyo stock exchange.
Other international markets did not follow Tokyo's lead, and declines in London and New York were modest in comparison.
Between January and April 1990, declines in stock market prices were substantial in Japan (25 per cent), in the UK (10.75 per cent ), and in Canada (9 per cent ).
In France, Italy and the USA, the decline was only about 2 per cent.
Stock market prices in West Germany rose by 3.5 per cent in the same period.
The (US) Dow Jones Industrial Average index rose to a record high of 2,821 on May 12, based on hopes of lower US interest rates, but prices on the New York stock exchange fell sharply on July 23, as hopes of interest rate cuts subsided.
The Tokyo and London stock markets followed New York, also recording losses.
Following Iraq's invasion of Kuwait on Aug. 2, the price of oil rose from $16.18 a barrel (July price) to an average of $26.50 in the first 24 days of August, and reached a high of just over $41 in October.
World financial markets became increasingly volatile as the Gulf crisis continued encouraging swings in oil prices, currency and share markets.
Fears of a global recession affected international stock markets in September, and London share prices hit their lowest closing level since January 1989 when £6,400 million were wiped off the value of companies listed in London.
The Tokyo stock exchange fell to its lowest level in 3½ years on Sept. 28 on unfounded rumours that war had broken out in the Gulf.
The Financial Times Actuaries World Index showed an overall decline in international share prices of 19.5 per cent in the year ending Oct. 26, 1990, compared to a decline of 5.2 per cent in the year ending July 27, 1990, just prior to the start of the Gulf Crisis.
Share prices in the five major industrialized countries showed the following percentage losses in share prices in the year ending Oct. 26, 1990: France 14.9 per cent, West Germany 1.6 per cent , Japan 33.7 per cent , UK 5.4 per cent and the USA 10.6 per cent .
All five countries except Japan registered gains in share prices over the year up to the Gulf crisis.
INTERNATIONAL
WORLD DEBT
Commercial banks' disquiet over Brady Plan into difficulty as commercial banks expressed dissatisfaction with its proposals.
Some claimed that the plan was underfunded by the multilateral institutions and that its call for debt-reduction agreements would encourage debtors to default on existing commitments, thus impeding the extension of new loans.
Six months after its March 1989 introduction [see pp. 36541-2], the Brady Plan for Third-World debt began to run
Their reservations were voiced in the run-up to the 44th annual joint meeting of the International Monetary Fund (IMF) and the World Bank on Sept. 26-28, 1989, in Washington [for which see p. 36908].
In a letter to the policy boards of the two institutions on Sept. 18, the Institute of International Finance (IIF — representing 184 banks and financial institutions worldwide) criticized what it saw as IMF "tolerance" of overdue interest payments to the banks, claiming that such arrears discouraged the banks' involvement in the Brady Plan.
The IIF cautiously welcomed the debt-reduction agreements struck with Mexico and the Philippines [see p. 37243; p. 37580 for their respective finalization], but it pointed out that the two countries had continued to service their obligations during negotiation of the deals, in contrast with other middle-income debtor nations seeking relief under the plan.
Shortly before the IMF/World Bank meeting, three of the biggest US banks sharply increased their provisions against possible losses on Third-World loans and declared profit losses.
JP Morgan, Chase Manhattan and Manufacturers Hanover added US$2,000 million, US$1,150 million and US$950 million respectively to their reserves, raising provisions against bad debts to 100, 46 and 36 per cent of their loans to Third-World countries.
The chairmen of Chase Manhattan and Manufacturers Hanover said that the July debt-reduction accord being hammered out with Mexico [see p. 36812]had signalled the need to bolster reserves.
The Washington Post of Sept. 21 reported the move had also been prompted by Brazil's recent announcement that it would not make a US$1,600 million payment due to foreign creditors.
Responding to the banks' hostility, US President Bush summoned 65 leading bankers to a meeting at the White House on Sept. 26.
He urged them to back the Brady plan, pointing to the socio-political unrest that might follow the failure to provide economic support for strategically important developing countries.
According to reports, US Treasury Secretary Nicholas Brady had held a stormy meeting with bankers on Sept. 22.
According to the Observer of Feb. 2, 1990, IMF Managing Director Michel Camdessus suggested, in an IMF meeting on Dec. 18, 1989, a number of ways in which debtors might take a tougher stance in negotiations with the commercial banks.
He criticized the latters' unwillingness to meet the borrowing requirements of those developing countries undertaking economic reforms and making serious efforts to honour their commitments.
On Nov. 9, two United Kingdom clearing banks, Lloyds and National Westminster also announced increases in provisions against bad Third-World debts.
Lloyds, which declared pre-tax losses of £715,000,000 — the highest in Europe — made provisions covering 85 per cent of its medium- and long-term debt, while National Westminster covered 72 per cent of its total debt.
Meanwhile, the Guardian of Sept. 22, 1989, reported that Citicorp, the most exposed of the US banks with loans worth US$9,500 million, continued to insist that its reserve level of 25 per cent of loans was adequate.
By September 1990, five countries — Mexico, the Philippines, Morocco [see p. 37393], Costa Rica [see p. 37450]and Venezuela [see p. 37313]— had secured debt-reduction agreements under the terms of the Brady plan, with Chile and Uruguay [see pp. 37490; 37607 respectively]among countries retiring or buying back considerable portions of foreign debt on the secondary debt market.
UK debt relief proposal
Speaking in Trinidad on Sept. 19, 1990, at the annual meeting of Commonwealth finance ministers, the then UK Chancellor of the Exchequer, John Major, unveiled a proposal to double Western debt relief for the world's poorest countries.
The plan, backed by France and Canada on the eve of the meeting of Group of Seven (G-7) Finance Ministers in Washington on Sept. 22 [see p. 37730], foresaw a US$18,300 million cut in the US$27,500 million official debt of 19 poor countries.
Except for Guyana and Bolivia, the latter were all sub-Saharan African countries qualifying for debt relief under the terms agreed at the 1988 Toronto G-7 economic summit [see pp. 36123-26].
Enhancing the Toronto terms, the plan contained four main elements.
The "Paris Club" of industrialized creditor countries would write down rescheduled debt by two-thirds instead of one-third; they would deal with the total debt of an eligible country in one operation instead of in one-year maturities; interest payments would be capitalized for the first five years of rescheduling, with debt repayments linked to the debtor nation's export capacity; and the repayment period would be extended from 14 to 25 years.
The proposals were welcomed by Camdessus at the 45th annual joint meetings of the IMF and the World Bank in Washington from Sept. 25-27, 1990 [for which see p. 37730].
Paris Club agreement with lower-middle-income countries
It was reported on Sept. 21, 1990, that the Paris Club had launched a strategy offering more favourable terms for lower-middle-income countries (defined as countries with per capita incomes of between US$700and $1,000).
A commitment in principle to aid countries in this category had been made at the Houston G-7 summit in July [for which see p. 37629].
Four countries (El Salvador, Honduras, Morocco and Congo, with total foreign debts of US$30,500 million) took advantage of the move, agreeing to packages spreading repayments over a period of 15 years — instead of the 10 years previously allowed by the Club.
Official development aid loans (worth US$4,100 million between them) would be rescheduled over 20 years with a maximum grace period of eight years (instead of five).
The agreements also allowed, for the first time, debt-equity swaps by creditor governments, up to a maximum of 10 per cent of outstanding debts.
Latin American debt proposals
On June 22, 1990, the 26 member countries of the Latin American Economic System (SELA) adopted a plan for the reduction of their foreign debts, to be presented at the Houston economic summit in July.
According to the plan, current repayments of US$40,000 billion would have to be cut to US$10,000 million if Latin America was to recover the 5-6 per cent annual economic growth rates of the 1970s.
Regarding the commercial banks, it suggested reducing debt through the exchange of principal for long-term bonds, payable over 35 years or more, taking into account their reduced value on the secondary market (27 cents to the dollar at the end of 1989).
Interest rates would be fixed at 5 per cent instead of the current market level of 10.
Multilateral institutions would be asked for debt reductions equivalent to those agreed by the private banks.
In early May the UN Economic Commission for Latin America and the Caribbean (ECLAC) presented a report on the Latin American debt crisis to a conference of ministers from the western hemisphere.
The study welcomed the Brady plan as being "conceptually on the right track" , but suggested that industrialized countries should increase to US$90,000 million the funds pledged to debt reduction, and should in addition eliminate regulatory and tax obstacles to debt write-offs in creditor countries, particularly the United States.
It also noted that the Brady plan had been applied on a slow-moving voluntary basis which depended on the goodwill of creditor governments and banks, and claimed that in the absence of such goodwill debtor governments had had no alternative but to declare moratoriums as a means of attracting attention to their situation.
ECLAC put Latin America's combined foreign debt for 1989 at US$422,000 million, with 60 per cent owed to commercial banks in the USA, Europe and Asia, and the rest to governments and multilateral agencies.
It estimated that a 60 per cent cut in commercial debt would be required if the region's economies were to resume traditional growth levels.
A reduction in interest rates, as well as debt, was also needed.
While recognizing that poor local economic management was partly to blame for the region's debt crisis, the report argued that what it described as the banks' irresponsible lending practices meant they should also share responsibility and assume greater losses.
According to a survey by the Organization for Economic Co-operation and Development (OECD), Financing and External Debt of Developing Countries, published on July 11, Latin American and Caribbean countries transferred US$15,000 million to creditors in 1989, as against US$16,000 million in 1988.
The World Bank's World Debt Tables 1989-90 [see also below]predicted that the net transfer of money from the region would rise from US$26,000 million in 1989 to US$27,600 million in 1990; and that total debt servicing for the region would increase from US$55,600 million in 1988 to US$58,000 million in 1989.
African debt
It was reported in March, 1990, that the US Agency for International Development (USAID) had signed agreements to relieve 10 African countries — Benin, Cameroon, Ghana, Guinea, Kenya, Madagascar, Malawi, Mali, Nigeria and Zaïre — of some US$305,000,000 in debt.
USAID officials said that further, but as yet unconcluded, agreements with three other countries eligible for debt relief — Côte d'Ivoire, Niger and Uganda — would extend the reduction package to US$745,000,000 (out of total sub-Saharan African debts to the US government of US$6,600 million).
To qualify for US debt relief, countries had to be engaged in IMF- or World Bank-approved economic reform programmes.
According to World Debt Tables 1989-90, 12 sub-Saharan African countries had, by the end of 1989, rescheduled their debts with official creditors on the Toronto terms, leading to savings of US$50,000,000 for that year (with total interest payments estimated at US$3,800 million).
It said that total debt servicing for sub-Saharan Africa would grow to US$10,700 million in 1989 from US$10,500 million the previous year.
The World Bank report put sub-Saharan Africa's 1988 foreign debt at US$139,000 million, predicting a rise to US$143,000 million by the end of 1989.
It estimated that the full implementation of debt relief plans would remove up to US$6,000 million from outstanding debt (around 8 per cent), but still leave the region owing the equivalent of 106 per cent of annual gross domestic product (GDP).
In its 1990 Annual Report [see also below]the IMF stated that total African debt remained roughly unchanged at US$209,000 million, or 53 per cent of GDP, adding that by June 30 five countries — Liberia, Sierra Leone, Somalia, Sudan and Zambia — were in arrears to the Fund and ineligible for loans.
Speaking in Brussels on Sept. 18, 1989, former Tanzanian President, Julius Nyerere, described the haemorrhage of resources from the poor South to the wealthy North as "morally wrong" , calling for debt and interest rate cuts.
However, in April 1990 the President of the World Bank, Barber Conable, said that economic development had been held back in sub-Saharan African countries by the weakness of their political systems, nepotism and corruption.
World Bank strategy for Africa in the 1990s
In its report, Sub-Saharan Africa: From Crisis to Sustainable Growth, published on Nov. 22, 1989, the World Bank reaffirmed the need for structural adjustment programmes (SAPs) as a prerequisite for economic recovery, but laid greater emphasis on "human-centred" development.
It proposed a long term strategy to "release the energies of ordinary people by enabling them to take charge of their lives" , noting that agriculture remained the "primary foundation for growth" and emphasizing food security rather than food self-sufficiency.
The report was seen partly as a response to a document published by the UN Economic Commission for Africa (ECA) which had criticized the socially destructive effects of World Bank-supported SAPs [see pp. 36991-92].
In its new report, the World Bank focused on (i) strengthening the skills of African people and institutions;(ii) additional debt relief and increased external aid in support of African countries' efforts (from US$15,000 million in 1990 to US$20,000 million by 2000); and (iii) the need for a "global coalition" of donors and beneficiaries to tackle long-term problems.
The main aims of the strategy were stated as (i) continued economic reforms within the framework of SAPs;(ii) a doubling of agricultural growth to 4 per cent per year;(iii) a reduction of Africa's annual 3.3 per cent population growth rate;(iv) increased regional economic co-operation and integration;(v) encouraging partnership between African entrepreneurs and private foreign capital;(vi) an increased role for non-governmental organizations; and (vii) the involvement of women.
Increased Western bank loans to eastern Europe
In a report published on January 1990, the Bank for International Settlements (BIS) in Basel noted that banks in the major industrialized countries had significantly increased lending to east European countries in the first half of 1989.
Loans rose by US$5,700 million (or six per cent) to reach a total of US$86,500 million.
Of the new funds, US$4,200 million went to the Soviet Union, US$700 million to Bulgaria, US$500 million to the German Democratic Republic and US$300 million to Hungary.
[For the European Bank for Reconstruction and Development, see pp. 37196; 37363-64; 37386; 37465-66; 37474.]
The increase in lending to this region contrasted with a reduction in lending to most developing countries outside Asia.
According to the report, lending to Latin America fell by US$8,100 million (including US$3,200 less to Argentina; US$2,900 million less to Mexico; US$700 million less to Chile; US$600 million less to Peru; and US$500 million less to Colombia).
Among the largest recipients of new loans in Asia were China (US$1,700 million), Thailand (US$1,600 million), India (US$900 million), Malaysia and the Philippines (US$200 million each).
According to an OECD report published on Feb. 28, 1990, the total debt of the east European countries (including the Soviet Union) had risen by the end of 1989 to US$114,000 million (from US$99,000 million in 1988 and US$60,000 million in 1984).
Except for Bulgaria, the report found that the east European countries were now in a better situation than in the early 1980s, in terms of their debt-service ratio (the ratio of annual payments on principal and interest to export earnings), to cope with their obligations.
It warned, however, of impending recession, particularly in Poland and Hungary.
In September 1989 the Bahrain-based Gulf International Bank reported that the combined external debt of Arab countries had reached a record high of US$140,000 million (from US$68,000 million in 1982).
World Bank report on world debt
The World Bank's annual World Debt Tables 1989-90 published on Dec. 18, 1989, gave a preliminary estimate for the total developing country external debt of US$1,290,000 million (or 44 per cent of aggregate GDP).
The figure represented a 0.5 per cent rise on the revised estimate of US$1,284,000 million for 1988, with a projected increase to US$1,319,000 in 1990.
Arrears to all creditors totalled US$52,000 million by the end of 1989, up from US$41,000 million in 1988.
Official creditors accounted for 48 per cent of total long-term debt (up from 38 per cent in 1982).
According to the report, net lending to developing countries rose from US$95,700 million in 1988 to US$99,000 million in 1989, but higher interest payments meant that net financial transfers from developing to developed countries remained close to their 1988 level of $52,000 million, with severely indebted middle-income country transfers rising to a record US$31,700 million.
Dismissing the "extreme pessimism expressed by some observers of the new [debt]strategy" , the World Bank report found the results of the new Brady plan "encouraging" .
It pointed to the progress that had been made in Mexico, the Philippines and Costa Rica.
Analysts, however, noted that total debt relief had fallen from US$22,000 million in 1988 to US$14,000 million in 1989, despite the Brady plan.
The report called for the debt strategy to be broadened to include debt concessions for highly indebted middle-income countries, such as Poland, whose main debt was with official creditors.
It also suggested that two sets of countries — Colombia and Yugoslavia, and India, Indonesia and Pakistan — were receiving inadequate attention.
But it resisted "undue pressures" on the World Bank and the IMF to provide funds for debt-relief.
According to the Financial Times of April 26, 1990, a joint IMF/World Bank report on the Brady plan stated that fewer deals had been concluded than hoped for and that negotiations between banks and debtors had often taken too long.
A simultaneous report by Conable urged greater resources for debt-reduction programmes in countries undergoing economic reform, in order to ensure that the benefits of the Brady plan were spread more widely.
It was reported on July 6, 1990, that World Bank lending to the developing world had fallen slightly compared with 1989 to US$20,602 million.
IMF annual report — Reports by OECD and UN Secretary-General
In its 1990 Annual Report, published on Sept. 18, the IMF welcomed the Brady Plan, while acknowledging that its progress had been too slow.
It put the total debt of developing countries at US$1,235,000 million (or 32 per cent of aggregate GDP).
Expressing cautious optimism about a solution to the debt crisis, the Fund noted that the debt-service ratio of developing countries had fallen to its lowest level since 1981.
Meanwhile, the OECD's Financing and External Debt of Developing Countries report noted "emerging tensions which are likely to influence the agenda for the discussion [on the debt crisis]in the period ahead," citing the lack of new commercial bank lending and high interest rates.
According to the report, Third-World interest payments rose from US$79,000 million in 1987 to US$97,000 million in 1988 and US$107,700 million in 1989.
The UN Secretary-General, Javier Pérez de Cuéllar, in October 1989 presented a report, The External Debt Crisis and Development, to the UN General Assembly.
Welcoming the emergence of greater consensus on a solution for the debt crisis, he urged the international community to "go much farther and faster" in debt reduction, in order to "bring the debt back to a reasonable proportion of export capacity, to permit more domestic investment, and to restore creditworthiness and resumed voluntary lending" .
Bettino Craxi, the UN Secretary-General's personal representative on debt and a former Italian Prime Minister, on July 7, 1990, presented at the Palais des Nations in Geneva a further report on the debt crisis.
INTERNATIONAL
COMMODITIES
International commodity developments, May 1989 to October 1990
The International Monetary Fund (IMF) 's 1989 edition of Primary Commodities: Market Developments and Outlook
predicted that price increases for non-fuel commodities, which rose by 17 per cent in real terms in 1988, were likely to weaken in mid-1989, with prices of beverages and agricultural raw materials more or less stagnant.
The Fund's 1990 edition of Primary Commodities: Market Developments and Outlook confirmed that non-fuel commodity prices had declined in the second half of 1989.
Measured in US dollars, prices had averaged .5 of 1 per cent less than in 1988 owing to "sharp reductions in the price of most metals, especially copper, aluminium, and nickel, as well as in the prices of coffee, cocoa, vegetable oils, and protein meals" .
By May 1990 the trend in commodity prices had begun to show signs of a slow recovery.
The IMF Survey reported in July that the dollar price of commodities had reached their highest levels since October 1989.
The outbreak of the Gulf crisis in August 1990 [see pp. 37631-41]adversely affected the price of some agricultural commodities.
In October the price of sugar dropped to its lowest level in 20 months owing to a fall in demand from Iraq and Kuwait and the readiness of countries like India to sell sugar to raise desperately needed cash to cover rising oil prices.
Non-ferrous metals including tin, aluminium, copper, zinc and nickel
The price of tin rose in April 1989 to its highest level since its collapse in 1985 [see p. 33955]reaching 28.67 Malaysian ringgits per kilogramme (US$10,444 per tonne)— only 48 Malaysian cents away from the "floor price" sought by the International Tin Council at the time of its insolvency [see pp. 34518-20; 37669].
Prices fell throughout the first half of 1990 due largely to the anticipated failure of the Association of Tin Producing Countries (ATPC) to attain by December 1990 its target of cutting by 6,000 tonnes its world stockpile, reported in February to have totalled 43,200 tonnes.
In August tin prices fell to M$15.54 (US$5.77) per kilogramme, their lowest level since late 1986.
At its annual meeting in Cochabamba, Colombia, in October 1990 the ATPC agreed to cut output by 6 per cent in 1991 to reduce world stocks and called for a "supply rationalisation scheme" during 1991 to reduce overhanging stocks by more than 5,000 tonnes.
Brazil's undertaking (despite its decision not to join the ATPC as a full member) to control wildcat mining at its Bom Futuro mine was expected to reduce production by cutting the mine's output from 19,000 tonnes in 1990 to 14,000 tonnes in 1991.
China, also a non-member, undertook to restrict exports to 15,000 tonnes in 1991.
Despite buoyant demand in Europe and the Far East during 1989, aluminium prices plummeted to US$1,400 a tonne at the beginning of 1990, less than half the mid-1988 peak of US$4,200 [see p. 36635].
Although supply outstripped demand during 1989 and much of 1990, especially in Western Europe, high levels of production, estimated at 14,000 million tonnes in 1990, kept prices down.
Hopes that the increased use of aluminium in motor cars to meet new mileage standards required by clean-air legislation in 1990 would encourage greater demand, failed to materialise amidst fears of recession in the car industry following the outbreak in August 1990 of the Gulf crisis.
Unstable copper prices in 1989 were aggravated by disruptions in supply caused by striking mine workers in Peru [see p. 37067], Bolivia [see p. 36484]and Canada.
Prices tumbled to £1,638 per tonne in June after an agreement between management and workers at Noranda's copper refinery in Montreal, but rose sharply to £1,896 in October as the market experienced the effects of the closure in May of the Bougainville mine in Papua New Guinea [see pp. 36657; 36817].
Prices rose in April 1990, but fell again in May to £1,573 after an upsurge in warehouse copper stocks.
Zinc consumption was forecast to reach 5,360,000 tonnes in 1989, a 2 per cent rise over 1988 levels, while production was expected to total 5,310,000 tonnes, up 1 per cent on 1988.
Attempts to rationalize production [see p. 36635]did not, however, hold up prices which were expected to fall to an average of US$1,600 per tonne in the second half of 1989.
Although a 10-day strike at the Centromin mines in Peru caused the biggest weekly fall on record in zinc stocks in January 1990, the price of high grade zinc rose by only US$15 a tonne to $1,292.
The decline in prices in 1989 and early 1990 was attributed to a slow-down in the automotive and construction markets in the USA.
After mild weather depressed demand in 1988-89 for car batteries the principal source of lead consumption, prices rose steadily through 1989 to reach record levels of £745 a tonne in March 1990.
Despite continued pressure from environmental groups to ban the use of lead, its consumption was expected to reach 4,430,000 tonnes in 1990, very slightly ahead of the record levels attained in 1989.
Nickel was affected in 1989 by sharp cuts in orders from stainless steel manufacturers who accounted for almost 60 per cent of its consumption.
Prices which fell to below $10,000 a tonne in October, recovered in July 1990 to reach $10,337 a tonne, owing to restricted supply caused by a strike in June at the Doniambo plant in New Caledonia and renewed buoyancy in the demand for Japanese stainless steel.
Precious metals — gold, silver, platinum, diamonds
The downward trend in the price of gold which began in 1988 continued into the summer of 1989 reaching a 33-month low of $356.50 per troy ounce.
Political uncertainties in the Soviet Union and South Africa, which between them accounted for 55 per cent of the world's gold supplies, helped bring the price of gold in February 1990 to $425 an ounce.
Rumours of a significant sale originating in the Middle East in March caused prices to plummet to below $360 an ounce by July.
The Iraqi invasion of Kuwait in August pushed prices up to $413 an ounce although peace initiatives at the end of August [see p. 37695]caused them to fall again to around $382 an ounce.
Silver prices continued their downward trend in 1989 and fell to $4.54 an ounce in October 1990, their lowest level in 13 years on the London bullion market.
The plunge in platinum prices showed little signs of easing during 1989.
Hopes of a price rise in the spring, when platinum reached $550 an ounce, evaporated owing to lower interest in platinum for investment, especially in Japan, which caused a fall in demand from 630,000 ounces to 165,000 ounces.
Prices stabilized at around $500 an ounce in the first quarter of 1990 due to increased demand from the West European car industry, where platinum formed an essential component in the manufacture of catalytic converters to cut fuel emissions, and from sustained demand from the jewellery sector in Japan.
Fears of recession generated by the Gulf crisis pushed prices down in October to below $400 an ounce, their lowest level since 1986.
The Central Selling Organization (CSO), the marketing arm of De Beers Consolidated Mining Co.
Ltd. of South Africa, reported that diamond sales fell by 2 per cent in 1989 from a record $4,172,000 in 1988 to $4,086,000 during 1989.
 "Beverages" — coffee and cocoa
Coffee prices in 1989 underwent dramatic changes following the collapse of the International Coffee Agreement (ICA) and the suspension of export quotas on July 4 [see p. 36836].
Prices plunged in October to their lowest level for more than 14 years (taking the price of beans in London to £655 a tonne) after the 74-country International Coffee Organization (ICO) failed to agree on a new price stabilization agreement favoured by the USA, the largest consumer, based on a greater allocation of the export market to some coffee producers, notably Colombia, at the expense of Brazil and the African countries.
Attempts to resolve differences met with little success when Latin American regional heads of state gathered in San Jose, Costa Rica, in October and sought to persuade Brazil to agree to a new price-support scheme based on a reduction of its 30 per cent quota allocation in return for a similar agreement by Colombia to cut exports.
The prospect of a further fall in prices led the 25-country Inter-African Coffee Organization (IACO) meeting in Kampala in November, to call for the creation of a coffee cartel which would curb output, drain supplies and push up prices.
It was estimated by the World Bank that the collapse of the ICA in July 1989 would cost coffee producers almost $4,000 million in lost revenues.
According to the Economist Intelligence Unit (EIU) coffee prices in 1990 were likely to average 85.8 cents a pound against 95.6 cents a pound in 1989.
In October 1990 the ICO agreed at the end of its annual meeting to extend the ICA by one year without, however, introducing a price support mechanism [for 1989 extension see p. 36836].
The new agreement, due to expire in September 1992, extended by a further two years the free trade which began with the suspension of ICO quotas [see p. 36836].
Since then prices were estimated to have fallen by about 50 per cent.
Cocoa prices in 1989 also tumbled to a 14-year low owing to the sixth consecutive year of oversupply on the world market (estimated at between 100,000-154,000 tonnes for 1989-90); failure to agree on the minimum price to be defended and continuing problems stemming from unpaid producer levies, estimated in 1989 to be well over $100,000 million.
In May the price of cocoa fell to its lowest level since 1975-76.
The failure of the 41-nation International Cocoa Organization (ICCO) to revive the international cocoa agreement,(frozen since February 1989), in September caused the average daily price to fall to 51.75 cents, some 60 per cent in real terms below 1975-76.
Attempts by Côte d'Ivoire, the world's largest producer, to keep prices up by withholding stock also foundered amidst the country's worsening debt crisis [see p. 36676].
In September the Ivoirien government cut the price it paid cocoa farmers for the second time since July, to CFA200 per kilogramme (£368 a tonne).
The decision by the ICCO in March 1990 to extend the 1986 International Cocoa Agreement for a further two years [see p. 37335]encouraged prices to rise.
Unrest in Côte d'Ivoire in March [see pp. 37307-08]also led to substantial increases, with prices reaching $1,620 a tonne in May — their highest level in two years.
Concern about the continued lack of rain in West Africa kept prices up through August at around £764 a tonne.
Agricultural materials — rubber and jute
Rubber prices fell steadily during 1989 despite falling output in Malaysia.
Overall output grew by only 1.6 per cent, to 5,120,000 tonnes, the fall in Malaysian production being more than off-set by Thai, Indian and Chinese supplies.
Total consumption of natural rubber in 1989 grew by 3.6 per cent, to 5,300,000 tonnes, resulting in a 180,000-tonnes drawdown in stocks.
A fall in prices in October to below the International Natural Rubber Organization's (INRO) "may buy" level of 185.00 Malaysian/Singapore cents a kilogramme fuelled speculation that intervention was imminent.
Fears in January 1990 that prices were approaching "must buy" levels of 174 Malaysian/Singapore cents a kilogramme, dissipated as a strike by Malaysian plantation workers pushed prices up.
At an INRO council meeting in Kuala Lumpur on July 10-11, it was agreed to reduce by 5 per cent the buffer stock reference price (the base on which calculations were made to determine whether intervention was necessary) to approximately 207 Malaysian/Singapore cents a kilo.
The move was seen to be a response to the average daily INRO market price indicator being below the "may buy" levels in the six months leading up to the review.
Renewed buying by the United States for its defence stockpile in the wake of the Gulf crisis boosted prices by 3 per cent in August reaching 183 Malaysian/Singapore cents.
At a meeting in Geneva held under the auspices of the United Nations Conference on Trade and Development (UNCTAD), jute producing and consumer countries agreed on Nov. 6 to approve a new five-year International Jute Agreement (IJA).
Like the earlier pact which was due to due to expire in 1991 [see pp. 36636; 34522-23], the new agreement did not provide for a price support structure common to other commodity arrangements and favoured by the two largest jute producers, Bangladesh and India.
It did, however, incorporate a decision to promote jute as an environment-friendly product because of its biodegradable qualities.
According to the International Jute Organization (IJO), world production of jute, kenaf and allied fibres fell to a 20-year low of 3,010,000 tonnes in 1988-89.
Grains
According to an International Wheat Council report in April 1989, world wheat stocks at the end of the 1988-90 season were expected to be 103,000,000 tonnes — down from 135,000,000 tonnes at the end of the previous year — with the biggest decline being in US stocks [see p. 36280].
In September the Council warned that wheat stocks held by the five biggest exporters — Argentina, Australia, Canada, the European Commodities and the USA, were set to fall by the end of the 1989-90 season to levels not seen since the food crisis of the mid-1970's.
However, the Council's forecast in July 1990 of a rise in world wheat production by 28,000,000 tonnes to 564,000,000 tonnes in 1990-91, with coarse grains expected to rise to 837,000,000 tonnes, was expected to provide limited replacement of stocks.
The rise in wheat consumption slowed markedly since the early 1980s from an increase of 3.5 per cent a year to an average increase of only 2.4 per cent a year.
INTERNATIONAL
COCOM
Basic Data
Full title: Co-ordinating Committee for Multilateral Export Controls.
Date of foundation: 1958.
Objective: Prevention of export of Western technology with strategic applications to communist countries.
member countries: Australia, Belgium, Canada, Denmark, France, West Germany, Greece, Italy, Japan, Luxembourg, Netherlands, Norway, Portugal, Spain, Turkey, United Kingdom and United States.
Agreement to streamline restricted export goods
Senior trade officials from the 17 member states of the Co-ordinating Committee on Multilateral Export Controls (COCOM) met in Paris on Oct. 25-26, 1989, to discuss reducing restrictions on exports to eastern Europe the reform of the countries [for July 1989 Warsaw Pact summit and October Foreign Ministers meeting acknowledging growing divergences and renouncing Brezhnev regime see pp. 36831; 36982].
The meeting agreed to streamline the list of restricted goods while tightening controls against member states violating COCOM rules.
It also agreed to simplify the rules governing the trade of sensitive technology between members of COCOM, a question that was of particular interest to members of the European Communities (EC).
The meeting revealed wide differences, especially between the United States and West Germany, on the issue of the export of machine tools to eastern Europe.
West Germany, whose machine tool exports to eastern Europe were estimated in 1989 to have amounted to 45 per cent of its total machine tool exports, had consistently pressed for restrictions to be lifted.
However, US officials claimed that COCOM rules on the export of machine tools could not be relaxed because COCOM countries did not yet have "common standards" of effective protection.
A resolution of the issue was postponed until the next high-level meeting held in June 1990 [see p. 37552].
European moves towards trade liberalization
On Dec. 7, 1989, MPs belonging to the Western European Union (WEU) unanimously endorsed a report in Paris calling for an end to many of the restrictions on sensitive Western technology exports to former communist countries.
The acceptance of the report increased European pressure on the USA to reduce controls on exports to eastern Europe.
On Dec. 17 the US Commerce Secretary, Robert Mosbacher announced, in the face of continuing opposition from the US Defence Department, that the USA would dismantle export barriers for goods destined for Hungary and Poland.
The decision was prompted by a US agreement with Hungary and Poland which allowed the US to monitor the use of advanced technology.
On Jan. 31, 1990, the Financial Times reported West German officials as saying that the recent trade liberalization moves by the USA did not go far enough.
It reported that West Germany was seeking to end restrictions on the export of digital switching equipment, civilian satellites and mobile radio networks to eastern Europe on grounds that restrictions on the export of these items had not applied to China since 1985.
West Germany was also believed to have cited the case of US support for a ruling in July 1989 [see p. 37021]which lifted controls on the export to eastern Europe of 16-bit microcomputers, a product where the USA was more competitive than the European countries.
On April 7, 1990, it was reported that a quarterly survey of corporate partnerships, undertaken by UK accountants Peat Marwick McLintock showed that COCOM rules were being circumvented by the rise in the number of small joint ventures.
Corporate partnerships in engineering, electronics and computing, especially involving West Germany which accounted for 120 such partnerships, had increased sharply in the first half of 1990.
European pressure on the USA to extend its trade liberalization policy grew after reports on April 11 that some West German companies including the Volkswagen car manufacturing company had complained that COCOM regulations were preventing them from supplying machinery to their newly acquired factories in East Germany.
In a series of meetings in early April West German officials were believed to have told US officials that once Germany was unified, companies in the former East Germany would honour existing contracts with the Soviet Union, even if they violated COCOM restrictions.
Demands for trade liberalization from eastern Europe and SEMI
Demands for an end to export controls came also from within eastern Europe.
It was reported on Nov. 30, 1989, that the then Hungarian Trade Minister, Tamas Beck had revealed that Hungary was pressing the US to relax COCOM controls so that it could upgrade its telecommunications industry.
Earlier, on Nov. 4, Hungary's then State Secretary for Foreign Affairs, Laszlo Kovacs, had announced that Hungary was ready to give assurances to the US that it would not use developed technology for military purposes.
At a meeting in Bonn of the Conference on Economic Co-operation in Europe on April 10, 1990, the Chair of the Soviet State Foreign Economic Commission, Stepan Sitaryan, urged COCOM to relax its rules covering exports to eastern Europe.
He added that the Soviet Union would, if necessary, be prepared to consider "inspection procedures for monitoring its application" .
On Aug 7, 1990, it was reported that the Semiconductor Equipment and Materials International (SEMI), representing US, Asian and European manufacturers of semiconductors, called on COCOM to relax export controls on its products "in the light of political changes" in eastern Europe 
Violation of COCOM regulations
On July 31, 1989, it was reported that South Korean police had arrested two men on charges of selling to East Germany 12 machines designed to produce nuclear weapons and spy satellites.
It was reported on Aug. 22 that a German national, Egbert Partesius and an Afghan, Abdul Aziz Ahmad, were arrested in Phoenix, Arizona (USA), on charges of trying to sell a VAX 8820 computer with military applications to the Soviet Union.
On Oct. 23, 1989, it was confirmed that the Italian government had investigated allegations by the US that the Italian computer company, Olivetti, had breached COCOM rules.
The resulting report was believed to have established that while Olivetti had not directly breached COCOM guidelines, the company's technicians working in the Soviet Union may have "upgraded" equipment which the USA claimed was used in developing the Soviet supersonic fighter, the Yak-41.
On June 10, 1990, the South Korean electronics company, Samsung, acknowledged that its planned sale of TDX digital telecommunications exchanges to the Soviet Union violated COCOM regulations, although it rejected the possibility of cancelling the contract worth US$12,000 million.
South Korea which was not a COCOM member, had agreed to observe COCOM regulations.
INTERNATIONAL
COMECON
Basic data
Full title: Council for Mutual Economic Assistance (COMECON or CMEA).
Date of foundation: Jan. 25, 1949.
Status: Soviet bloc economic co-operation pact.
Member states: 10 — Bulgaria, Cuba, Czechoslovakia, East Germany, Hungary, Mongolia, Poland, Romania, Soviet Union and Vietnam.
ECE report — WIIW report
According to the Economic Bulletin for Europe published on Nov. 23, 1989, by the UN Economic Commission for Europe (ECE), there was a significant fall in output growth in the first half of 1989 in the member countries of the Council for Mutual Economic Assistance (CMEA or COMECON).
Although exact data for material output (NMP) for all the eastern European economies was not available to the Commission, UN statistics predicted an average NMP growth of 2.5 per cent in 1989 as a whole, compared with 4 per cent in 1988.
Average NMP growth forecast for 1990 was in the range of 2.5 per cent and 3 per cent.
The ECE report indicated virtual stagnation in the total volume of exports from the Soviet Union and eastern Europe in the first half of 1989 owing to absolute declines in intra-COMECON trade and COMECON trade with developing countries.
The growth in exports from eastern Europe to the developed market economies slowed from 6 per cent in 1988 to 4 per cent in the first half of 1989.
However, Soviet trade with the West expanded rapidly in the first half of 1989, showing a 9 per cent growth in volume, while imports grew by about 11 per cent.
Eastern Europe's net indebtedness was estimated to decline in 1989 by about US$2,000 million to US$71,000,000.
Details of a report by the Wiener Institut für Internationale Wirtschaftsvergleiche (WIIW — the Vienna Institute for International Comparative Economics), published in the Neue Zürcher Zeitung of April 19, 1990, showed that industrial production in member states of COMECON had risen by only 1.2 per cent in 1989 — the lowest ever recorded.
It added that national income rose by 1.9 per cent in 1989 as against 4.4 per cent in 1988 [see p. 37020].
Agreement on currency convertibility
Finance ministers from the 10 COMECON member states met in Prague on Jan. 17, 1990, and called for the progressive introduction of convertible currencies in intra-bloc trading.
The decision followed the adoption of a Soviet proposal in January recommending hard-currency trading between member countries [see p. 37202].
The Prague meeting was preceded by sharp disagreements between the Soviet Union and some member states, notably Czechoslovakia, Hungary and Poland, whose representatives spoke openly about the dissolution of COMECON and pressed for a speedier implementation of currency convertibility and the right to trade individually with organizations such as the European Communities (EC).
On Jan. 15, Czechoslovak officials claimed that the Soviet Finance MInister, Valentin Pavlov had sought to postpone the Prague meeting in an effort to slow down the pace of reform within COMECON.
The Czechoslovak government announced on April 4 that it had formally notified the CMEA Secretariat that it was withdrawing from three multilateral agreements designed to regulate the currency rate mechanism which were no longer operational [see pp. 37326; 37334].
The Soviet State Bank announced on June 29, 1990, that from Jan. 1, 1991, the Soviet Union would replace transferable roubles with hard currency in all dealings with other COMECON countries.
Hungarian suspension of rouble-backed licences
Hungary on Sept. 1, 1989, revalued the forint against the rouble at R1.00=F27.50.
The measure was explained by the Finance Minister, Laszlo Bekesi, as an attempt to tackle Hungary's current account surplus in roubles which between January and July had grown to R865,100,000 from R233,800.000 in 1988 [see p. 37740].
Hungary on Jan. 18, 1990, suspended all licences for exports denominated in roubles in an effort to cope with the country's growing trade surplus in relation to other member states of COMECON.
The Hungarian Secretary of State in the Ministry of Trade, Imre Dunai, said on Jan. 19 that the decision was partly a response to an IMF-imposed condition which required Hungary to balance its rouble settlements in order to qualify for further credit.
COMECON-EC relations
With the gradual disintegration of the COMECON, the EC sought increasingly to establish bilateral agreements with individual countries within COMECON [see pp. 37129; 37212].
It was reported on Oct. 14, 1989, that the first attempt to bring together COMECON and EC officials in Moscow was effectively boycotted by the EC in an attempt to play down links between the two organizations in favour of developing bilateral relations.
The Deputy Secretary of COMECON, Stefan Zawodzinski, announced on Jan. 11, 1990, that the third round of negotiations between the EC and COMECON had provided "many opportunities for mutually advantageous co-operation between the two economic organizations" .
A fourth round of negotiations between EC and COMECON officials was held in Moscow on June 12-13.
During the meeting both sides agreed to "harmonize statistics on foreign trade and prices for consumer goods" .
On May 7, 1990, Czechoslovakia signed a pact to liberalize trade with the EC.
The 10-year agreement eased restrictions on imports and called for greater co-operation.
After signing the accord, the Czechoslovak Prime Minister, Marian Calfa said it was a milestone on the way to Czechoslovakia becoming a full EC member, for which he would now press.
Bulgaria and East Germany signed similar agreements with the EC on May 8.
INTERNATIONAL
IAEA
BASIC DATA
Full name: International Atomic Energy Agency.
Date of foundation: 1957.
Status: autonomous intergovernmental organization within the UN system.
Objective: Promotion of the peaceful uses of nuclear energy.
Number of member states: 113.
Director-General: Hans Blix (Sweden).
The 34th regular session of the general conference of the IAEA was held in Vienna, Austria, on Sept. 17-21, 1990.
The conferences was attended by more than 300 delegates from most of the agency's 113 member states.
During the opening session, the IAEA Director-General, Hans Blix, told delegates that the current Gulf crisis reminded the world "once again of the need to diversify energy sources" .
In addition to concern about rising oil prices due to the Gulf crisis, Blix said that fears of global warming caused by generating energy from fossil fuels such as coal, oil and gas meant that many countries would continue to rely on nuclear power.
He reported that, partly because of nuclear power, reliance on oil to generate electricity in industrialized nations had fallen from 24 per cent in 1974 to 9 per cent in 1986.
Currently 17 per cent of the world's electricity demand was met by nuclear power.
Many delegates reiterated Blix's observations, but there was also general agreement that in the wake of the Chernobyl accident in 1986 [see p. 34460]efforts to restore the nuclear option worldwide would only be successful if public confidence in the operational safety of nuclear facilities could be restored.
To this end conference (i) approved a report recommending measures to improve safety at Soviet-built reactors in the east European countries; and (ii) adopted a proposal, submitted by the Soviet Union, to set up a nuclear research centre to study the effects of radioactive contamination at the site of the Chernobyl accident.
The conference also adopted a number of measures aimed at promoting international co-operation on safety and improving monitoring of the fulfilment of the 1968 Nuclear Non-Proliferation Treaty and other agreements.
The conference also approved a budget of US$179,000,000 for 1991, which represented zero growth in real terms.
Blix warned that the agency was experiencing serious financial difficulty as a result of the ever-increasing demands being made on it without adequate financial provision and because many members were failing to pay their annual contributions in full.
Unlike at past conferences, the issues of whether Israel and South Africa should be expelled from the IAEA did not figure prominently.
The question of Israel's continuing refusal to let IAEA experts inspect its civilian nuclear industry was overshadowed by the Gulf crisis, and efforts to exclude South Africa because of its continuing apartheid policy and its unwillingness to sign the Nuclear Non-Proliferation Treaty had been pre-empted by the announcement on Sept. 27 that the South African government intended to sign the treaty in due course.
The Gulf crisis, though not formally on the agenda, took up much debating time.
The IAEA had suspended its technical assistance to Iraq in the wake of its invasion of Kuwait in August.
As a gesture of solidarity with Kuwait, delegates elected a Kuwaiti official as one of the eight regional vice-presidents of the conference.
The Iraqi government responded by threatening to refuse future inspections of its nuclear-energy plants as required by IAEA statutes.
INTERNATIONAL
AVIATION
Malta lead in Lockerbie investigation
On Dec. 21, 1989, exactly a year after the Lockerbie bombing [see pp. 26409-10], a Palestinian identified as a suspect in the crime was given a life sentence by a court in Uppsala, Sweden, having been with three others with terrorist offences in Sweden, Denmark and the Netherlands in 1985-86 [see p. 37137].
Scottish police carrying out the criminal investigation on Lockerbie had earlier been authorized to interview the suspect, named as Mohamed Abu Talb, who had worked under various identities for Palestinian groups in Egypt and Lebanon, but his lawyers refused to agree to interrogation procedures.
Talb became a suspect after his ex-wife told Swedish police in May that he had visited Malta in October 1988, apparently buying clothes there.
Traces of Maltese clothing found in the Lockerbie wreckage had been linked by experts to the suitcase containing the bomb.
In August 1989 Scottish police visited Malta to investigate the Talb connection, and in October investigators confirmed that they were examining the possibility that the bomb had been placed aboard an Air Malta flight before being transferred to Pan Am's Frankfurt-London-New York flight PA 103.
On Dec. 1 Talb's Uppsala home was raided, and the clothing seized taken to the UK for forensic tests, following court and Swedish government approval.
A 1988 diary with Dec. 21 circled was also apparently found.
It was established that Talb, while in Malta, had met Hafez Dalkammoni, a leading member of Ahmed Jabril 's Damascus-based Popular Front for the Liberation of Palestine-General Command (PFLP-GC), which was suspected by US intelligence of being responsible for the Lockerbie bombing.
(One widely held theory was that Iran had paid Jabril US$1,000,000 to blow up PA 103 in retaliation for the July 1988 shooting down of an Iranian airbus by the USS Vincennes [see pp. 36169-70]]).
It was also reported that two of the three men on trial with Talb or members of their family had been seen with Dalkammoni.
Dalkammoni was one of 16 PFLP-GC suspects arrested in Frankfurt and Neuss by West German federal criminal investigation office (BKA) on Oct. 26, 1988 (after a tip-off by the Israeli intelligence service Mossad).
He was found with a bomb similar to the Lockerbie Toshiba radio-cassette device.
During pre-trial interrogation Talb told Swedish police that between October and December 1988 he had retrieved a bomb from one of the PFLP-GC's West German safe houses and passed it to an unnamed person, causing speculation that it could have been identical to the Lockerbie device.
US and British officials reportedly criticized the BKA's handling of PFLP-GC arrests, in particular its delay in discovering up to four other devices before and after Lockerbie.
They also complained at the release of another man detained with Dalkammoni, Marwant Khreesat, reportedly a Jordanian or West German intelligence agent who was believed to have produced a total of five or six bombs at the time.
US and British investigators also complained that the West German police had withheld information on the PFLP-GC arrests, preventing them from making the Malta link earlier.
The West Germans reportedly did not subscribe to the view that the PFLP-GC's German cell was involved in Lockerbie.
It was reported on Nov. 9, 1989, that West German forensic evidence suggested that the Lockerbie bomb could have been loaded at Heathrow airport, London.
The claim was based on examination of the timing devices of bombs found in April in the Neuss house of one of Dalkammoni's relatives, and the assumption that the Lockerbie bomb was identical.
The Lord Advocate of Scotland and the head of the Scottish police team investigating the bombing said on Dec. 15, 1989, that they were not near to making arrests and that there were no immediate plans to request Talb's extradition.
Court action on Lockerbie disaster
In an effort to prove prior official knowledge of an imminent terrorist attack around the time of the Lockerbie bombing, Pan Am lawyers issued subpoenas on Sept. 27, 1989, calling on the US Central Intelligence Agency (CIA) and five other US government departments to disclose results of Western, particularly Israeli, surveillance of the Pan Am baggage-handling area at Frankfurt airport.
According to reports, Pan Am filed the suit on the basis of a report commissioned from an Israeli intelligence expert known as "Avner" , based in New York, who had once worked for Mossad.
The report claimed that a CIA group in Frankfurt had made a deal with a Syrian drug dealer with terrorist connections, involving the release of US hostages in Beirut in return for a safe drug-trafficking route.
The deal supposedly went wrong when bombers took advantage of the CIA protection.
The report alleged that warnings of a terrorist bombing went unheeded because they would have exposed the "drugs-for-hostages" deal.
The report, whose findings were presented by a US congressman, James Traficant, was described by many as a Pan Am smokescreen to avoid responsibility for poor security.
A New York federal court ruled on Jan. 3, 1990, that families of the Lockerbie victims could not sue Pan Am for punitive damages under the 1929 Warsaw Convention.
The UK government announced on Dec. 21, 1989, that government security officers would pose as terrorists with mock bombs to test the effectiveness of airport security arrangements.
However Jim Swire, a leading member of the UK Families Flight 103 group, claimed that he had already managed to take a simulated bomb through Heathrow airport on a flight to New York, on May 18, 1990.
Air crashes, reports and inquests
It was reported on Sept. 15, 1990, that 21 families had accepted out-of-court settlements for the loss of relatives in the UK's worst helicopter disaster in 1986.
A gearbox failure caused a Chinook helicopter to crash in the North Sea, killing all 45 oilworkers.
The manufacturers of the helicopter, Boeing Vertol, would not specify the sums involved.
By June 1990 the remaining relatives had still not received compensation (having rejected offers of up to £200,000 each) and were continuing litigation in the United States.
An inquest on May 22, 1990, into the deaths of 45 people when a British Midland Boeing 737 crashed near Kegworth in December 1988 [see p. 36410]returned a verdict of accidental death, discounting negligence on the part of pilot and crew (who, amid the confusion, had turned off the functioning engine instead of the one that had caught fire).
The jury urged the UK's Civil Aviation Authority and Department of Transport to consider a number of safety measures to improve identification of engine and airframe problems.
In July an Indian government report on the February crash of an Indian Airlines Airbus A320 in Bangalore in February 1990 [see p. 37268]found that not enough time had been allowed to enable personal to adapt to changes in aircraft, equipment, maintenance, ground facilities and the training of engineers and pilots.
Two crewmen of the UK Royal Air Force were killed on Aug. 17, 1989, when their Tornado jet crashed into the North Sea near Humberside, just two miles from the spot where three others had been killed in a mid-air collision involving similar aircraft on Aug. 14, bringing to 24 the number of Tornados lost in British airspace since 1983.
An ageing RAF Shackleton aircraft crashed into a hillside on the island of Harris in the Outer Hebrides, Scotland on April 30, 1990, killing 10 people.
The Ministry of Defence denied it had been hit in a missile exercise.
A Boeing 737-400 on Sept. 22, 1989, plunged off the runway of the La Guardia airport in New York and crashed into the East River, killing two passengers and injuring 45, after an inexperienced pilot reportedly applied the wrong controls.
Increase in air traffic
According to figures provided by the International Civil Aviation Organization (ICAO) on Dec. 27, 1989, total air traffic in 1989 (passengers and freight) increased by an average of 6 per cent in comparison with 1988, with a 3 per cent increase in passengers, an 8 per cent increase in freight and a 3 per cent increase in mail carried.
The number of air passengers had risen to 1,100 million (49 per cent higher than in 1980) and was expected to double in the 1990s.
Total airline traffic had risen 72 per cent over the last decade.
Despite the expected growth in demand, the Geneva-based International Air Transport Association warned in a report published on April 10, 1990, that air travel in western Europe would be brought to a standstill if improvements were not made in capacity, the harmonization of air traffic control and the availability of trained air traffic controllers.
With the onset in August 1990 of the Gulf crisis, airlines announced a 5-8 per cent increase in passenger fares and a 7 per cent increase in cargo rates from October 1990, having already blamed a fall in 1989 profits on increased fuel prices.
INTERNATIONAL
WAR CRIMES
Major war crimes trials during 1990
John Demjanjuk, convicted in April 1988 by an Israeli court of participation in the murder of around 870,000 Jews at the Treblinka extermination camp in 1942 and 1943 [see p. 36189], subsequently lodged an appeal with the Supreme Court.
The appeal hearing opened on May 15, 1990, with Demjanjuk's lawyers arguing that he had been the victim of mistaken identity and that evidence presented at the original trial had been forged.
In two war crimes trials which opened in West Germany, an exiled Latvian, Boleslavs Maikovskis, was charged on Jan. 18, 1990 with responsibility for the murder in 1942 of all 171 inhabitants of a village in German-occupied Latvia as well as another of 250 Latvians, Jews and Gypsies.
On Aug. 22, Josef Schwammberger was charged with involvement in the murder of more than 3,400 Jews while commander of two concentration camps in Poland between 1943 and 1944.
Born in Austria, he had been imprisoned after the Second World War but escaped to Argentina, where he was granted Argentinian citizenship.
He was arrested in 1987 and finally extradited to West Germany in May 1990.
In France, Paul Touvier, the intelligence chief of the pro-German militia in Lyon during 1943 and 1944 who had been arrested in May 1989 [see p. 37019]was charged on Nov. 23, 1989, with crimes against humanity.
It was reported on March 25 that a French court had ordered the prosecution of René Bousquel who was wartime head of the Vichy administration's national police.
Bousquet, aged 81, was accused of crimes against humanity and charged with overseeing the deportation of Jews between 1942-44.
The first trial in Canada [see also pp. 36189-90]on the basis of special legislation on war crimes adopted in 1987 began on Dec. 8, 1989, and involved a Hungarian, Imre Finta, who emigrated to Canada in 1951.
He was charged with kidnapping, confining and deporting to labour and death camps 8,617 Jews from Szeged in 1944.
He was acquitted on May 25, 1990, largely because of contradictory statements by witnesses.
In a second case, Michael Pawlowski, a Byelorussian immigrant, was charged on Dec. 19, 1989, with the murder of 490 Jews and Poles in German-occupied Byelorussia in 1942.
Special legislation on war crimes had also been adopted in Australia in 1988.
On Jan. 26, 1990, Ivan Polyukhovich, a Ukrainian who emigrated to Australia in 1950, was charged with the murder of 24 civilians and with complicity in the murder of 852 others in German-occupied villages near the Soviet Union's border with Poland between August 1941 and May 1943.
He entered no plea, but had previously denied any involvement in the killings.
He was taken to hospital on July 29 with bullet wounds to the chest, apparently the result of a suicide attempt.
Failure of UK war crimes bill
The United Kingdom's government's plan to introduce special legislation to allow to prosecution of alleged war criminals [see pp. 36190; 37019]had to be deferred after the House of Lords rejected the bill on June 4, 1990 by 207 votes to 74.
Although it had been overwhelmingly approved by the House of Commons on March 19 by 273 votes to 60, the Lords' vote effectively ended the chances of the bill becoming law in the current session of parliament.
(If the Commons passed the bill for a second time, the action would be unprecedented and, it was widely argued, could cause a constitutional impasse.)
Opponents of the bill had argued that it amounted to "retroactive justice" by declaring illegal acts committed in another country and allowing the prosecution of people for offences committed before they became British citizens or residents.
They also maintained that it would be impossible to hold fair trials so long after the alleged crimes had been committed.
The government subsequently confirmed that it would reintroduce the war crimes bill in the 1990-91 session of parliament.
Opening of wartime files by East Germany and admission of war guilt
After the collapse of the communist regime in late 1989, the new East German government announced that it would allow US, Israeli and other researchers access to state archives dealing with the Second World War and in particular with the extermination of Jews and other war crimes.
On Jan. 27, 1990, the East German government announced its readiness to pay reparations to victims of Nazi war crimes.
On April 12 it formally accepted part of the moral responsibility for atrocities committed by the German people during the Second World War [see p. 37379].
The previous regime had refused to accept any such responsibility on the grounds that the Federal Republic had been the only successor state to the Third Reich.
In a first move of this kind, the government on May 16 formally lodged a request with Syria for the extradition of Alois Brunner, who was alleged to have ordered the deportation of 100,000 Jews from Germany and France.
(France had made a similar request in December 1988 — see p. 36414.)
Austrian payments to wartime victims
The Austrian government on Feb. 14, 1990, concluded various agreements with Jewish organizations for the payment of nearly US$200 million in benefits to Austrian Jews who had suffered from persecution after the country's forcible union with Nazi Germany in 1938 [see also p. 37688].
The reparations agreements did not include an explicit acceptance of Austrian responsibility for crimes committed by the Nazis.
The formal Austrian position remained that the country had been a victim of Nazi aggression and could therefore not be held accountable for such crimes.
UK libel case
Lord Aldington, a UK peer and former Army officer, was on Nov. 30, 1989, awarded £1,500,000 in libel damages over a pamphlet accusing him of deliberately sending 70,000 Yugoslavs and Cossacks to their death in 1945.
The case became a public examination of one of the most controversial episodes at the end of the Second World War when under the Yalta agreement the British were obliged to hand over to their authorities all East European prisoners.
INTERNATIONAL
VATICAN
The sovereign State of the Vatican City includes the area around the Basilica of Saint Peter in Rome, Italy, and twelve buildings in and outside of Rome.
Created in 1929, it provides an independent base for the Holy See, the government of the Roman Catholic Church.
Relations with Italy are governed by a concordat signed in 1929 and revised in 1985.
Sovereignty is exercised by the Pope, who has absolute legislative, executive and judicial power.
The Pope is the head of the Roman Catholic Church, elected for life by a conclave of the College of Cardinals.
He appoints a pontifical commission to conduct the administrative affairs of the state.
Karol Wojtyla, Archbishop of Cracow, Poland, was elected Pope in 1978 and took the name John Paul II.
INTERNAL AFFAIRS
Financial situation
The commission of cardinals overseeing the Vatican's financial affairs announced on Oct. 26, 1989, that the Vatican's budget deficit for 1988 had amounted to US$43,500,000.
This was a reduction from the previous year's record deficit of US$63,800,000.
The revelation of the size of the deficit in 1987 had precipitated a serious financial crisis, the introduction of austerity measures and an appeal to congregations worldwide for donations.
The annual budget covered the church's central administration, including departments of social, religious and diplomatic affairs as well as a daily newspaper and a radio station.
Opening of Banco Ambrosiano trial
The trial of 35 people charged with complicity in fraudulent bankruptcy over the collapse of the Banco Ambrosiano, a private bank which had close links with the Vatican's own bank, opened on May 29, 1990, in Milan, Italy.
In its opening statement the prosecution argued that the Vatican bank (Istituto per le Opere di Religione — IOR) bore heavy responsibility for the collapse of Ambrosiano in 1982 [see pp. 33793-94; 35592].
The trial was expected to last at least a year.
FOREIGN
After the restoration of full diplomatic relations between the Vatican and other Eastern European countries in 1989 and early 1990, links between Romania and the Vatican were re-established in March 1990.
Permanent official contacts were established in the same month with the Soviet Union and a Soviet ambassador to the Vatican was appointed.