

MIDDLE EAST — ARAB WORLD
GULF CONFLICT
Major military conflict in the Gulf began on the night of Jan. 16-17 when forces of the United States-led international coalition in the Gulf launched an air offensive against Iraq.
Hostilities were initiated on the authority of the US President, George Bush, after consultation with major coalition partners.
The UN Secretary-General, Javier Pérez de Cuéllar, was notified that military action had begun under the terms of UN Security Council Resolution 678 of Nov. 29, 1990, which authorized UN member states to use "all necessary means to uphold and implement Security Council Resolution 660 [of Aug. 2, 1990, demanding an immediate and unconditional withdrawal of Iraqi forces which had that day invaded Kuwait]and all subsequent relevant resolutions" .
[For text of 678 and references to 660 and the nine other relevant resolutions see p. 37870.]
Resolution 678 stipulated a deadline for Iraq's withdrawal from Kuwait as "on or before Jan. 15, 1991" .
This was generally, although not incontrovertibly, taken to mean a deadline of midnight on Jan. 15-16 at UN headquarters in New York (Eastern Standard Time, corresponding to 5 a.m. on Jan. 16, Greenwich Mean Time (GMT), or 8 a.m. on Jan. 16, Kuwaiti/Iraq local time).
US and allied governments stressed that the exact moment was unimportant as it was not a "trigger point" , but that military action might begin at any time they chose thereafter, unless Iraq had complied with the UN resolutions.
In the event the allied offensive began less than 19 hours after midnight in New York, shortly before midnight GMT on Jan. 16.
Diplomatic activity prior to Jan. 16
The first half of January was marked by intense diplomatic activity.
The last hopes of avoiding war centred on (i) a French mediation effort in early January;(ii) the Jan. 9 US-Iraqi meeting in Geneva at foreign ministerial level, i.e. between US Secretary of State James Baker and Iraqi Deputy Prime Minister and Foreign Minister Tariq Aziz;(iii) a visit by Pérez de Cuéllar to Baghdad, where he met with the Iraqi President Saddam Hussein on Jan. 13; and (iv) the possibility of a last-minute French initiative, with Soviet support, at the UN.
No major Arab initiative materialized at this time, although the Yugoslav Foreign Minister on behalf of the Non-aligned Movement pursued ideas on lines similar to those explored in December by Algerian President Col. Chadli Bendjedid [see p. 37927].
There were numerous other meetings at every level, between Iraq and friendly countries, between member countries of the US-led coalition, and between political leaders on either side and independent figures who could hope to offer some mediating influence.
All such contacts, however, took place without identifying major common ground between Iraq and the anti-Iraqi coalition.
Saddam Hussein maintained an uncompromising unwillingness to discuss withdrawal from Kuwait, while increasingly presenting the confrontation in terms of anti-imperialism and anti-Zionism with the liberation of Palestine as the main issue.
On the coalition side the USA and the United Kingdom insisted on Iraq's unconditional withdrawal as the essential requirement, leaving only limited scope for any mediator to suggest to Saddam Hussein that this would create a more fruitful atmosphere for addressing regional problems.
French initiative by Vauzelle
Throughout the first half of January the French government maintained close contacts with Algeria, Germany, Morocco, the Soviet Union, Spain and Yugoslavia.
Michel Vauzelle, head of the foreign affairs committee of the National Assembly (French lower house of parliament), travelled to Baghdad on Jan. 2, holding talks with Aziz and (on Jan. 5) with Saddam Hussein.
He returned via Tunis where he was believed to have held discussions with Yassir Arafat, the Chairman of the Palestine Liberation Organization (PLO).
French radio broadcasts on Jan. 6 reported Vauzelle as saying: "He [Saddam Hussein]is ready for concessions if there is a conference on Palestine." 
European diplomatic initiative
In discussions at a meeting on Jan. 4, when European Community (EC) Foreign Ministers at first feared that the Baker-Aziz meeting might not take place, Roland Dumas, the French Foreign Minister, argued for EC talks with Aziz and a proposal for "linkage" between an Iraqi withdrawal and a Middle East peace conference on wider issues.
This position was opposed by both the UK and the Netherlands.
The differences were only patched over when ministers heard during the meeting that Baker and Aziz would meet.
They then agreed on a communiqué reaffirming "their commitment to contribute actively to a settlement of the other problems of the region" and inviting Aziz to Luxembourg.
This invitation was, however, turned down on Jan. 5.
The Iraqi News Agency (INA) cited Iraqi "indignation" at "some European states' subservient policy of subordination to the aggressive and arrogant US policy" .
A further offer made on Jan. 9 for talks in Algiers was also rejected.
These Iraqi rejections undermined EC attempts to present a united position.
The French government was also criticised, in particular by the UK but also by Denmark and by the EC Commission, for pursuing its own "freelance diplomacy" in search of a solution to the crisis.
[For differing views in December see p. 37927.
See also p. 37906 for December 1990 European Council summit statement on Gulf crisis, when a separate declaration on the Middle East was also issued, reaffirming the European Council's "long-standing commitment to a just and lasting solution" to the Arab-Israeli conflict and the Palestinian problem and reiterating its "support for the principle of convening, at an appropriate time, an international peace conference under the auspices of the UN" .]
Baker-Aziz meeting in Geneva
In an attempt to be seen to be making every effort to avert war, Bush had proposed on Jan. 3 that Baker and Aziz should meet in Geneva.
The following day he ruled out, however, the idea of Baker going on to Baghdad as suggested by Iraq, apparently because of his belief that a series of meetings would only serve as a pretext for Iraq to delay any withdrawal from Kuwait.
Prior to the Geneva meeting, moreover, Bush continued to emphasize that there was nothing negotiable about the requirement for an Iraqi withdrawal, nor any "linkage" with the issue of a Palestinian homeland.
The Baker-Aziz meeting was duly held in Geneva on Jan. 9; although it lasted six hours, no progress was made.
Baker, who described his role in the talks as attempting to impress upon the Iraqi government the determination of the 28-country coalition to eject Iraqi forces from Kuwait, said that he had "heard nothing which showed any Iraqi flexibility whatever" .
He also criticized Aziz for refusing to accept a letter reiterating the US position from Bush to Saddam Hussein.
Aziz repeated his government's view that the problems of the Middle East should be treated as a whole, and confirmed that, in the event of war, Iraq would attack Israel.
(A statement on Jan. 10 by Farouq Qaddumi, head of the political department of the PLO executive committee, declared that Palestinians were proud of the Iraqi stance and blamed the USA alone for the failure of the talks, since it had ignored the central issue, i.e. Palestine.)
Baker's unproductive visit to Geneva came in the middle of a week of meetings with leaders in allied countries.
Notwithstanding the general perception that the US diplomatic stance was markedly less flexible than the French position, Baker had affirmed his "complete agreement" with French President François Mitterrand while visiting Paris on Jan. 8.
US congressional debate on war with Iraq
The efficacy with which Bush could authorize the use of force against Iraq without the support of Congress was an area of uncertainty — arising from the disputed constitutionality of the 1973 War Powers Act — which stalked the Bush administration in the run-up to the Jan. 15 deadline.
Furthermore, the attitude of the Democrat majorities in both houses towards a war with Iraq was unclear, their leaders appearing to want to be seen neither to sanction nor to prohibit the use of force.
Eventually the issue was resolved — although the constitutional position remained unclear — when, on Jan. 12, both houses produced majorities in favour of the use of force.
In the House of Representatives the administration's position was accepted by 250 votes to 183, with 86 Democrats voting for the use of force.
In the Senate the vote was 52 to 47 in favour, with 10 Democrats (seven from the South) supporting the administration and two Republicans voting against.
UN Secretary-General's visit to Baghdad
Pérez de Cuéllar announced on Jan. 9 after the failure of the Baker-Aziz meeting that he would visit Baghdad; he arrived on Jan. 12 and saw Saddam Hussein for several hours the following day.
He made it clear that he had "no specific proposals" beyond "the wish of the international community for a peaceful solution" , and conceded on Jan. 14 that the talks had been "polite but unfortunately unsuccessful" .
Pérez de Cuéllar's mission received "full support" from the Soviet Union, as expressed by Soviet President Mikhail Gorbachev in a message on Jan. 10.
En route for Baghdad he met Mitterrand in Paris on Jan. 11, EC foreign ministers and also Yugoslav Foreign Minister Budimir Loncar (who had been seeking to mediate on behalf of the Non-aligned Movement) in Geneva later that day, and King Hussein of Jordan in Amman that evening.
Press reports suggested that he had little room for negotiation in that he could offer Saddam Hussein no relaxation of the requirement for immediate withdrawal and the unconditional acceptance of UN resolutions.
He was believed to be concentrating, however, on (i) guarantees of no military attack on Iraq in the event of its compliance, to be backed up by a UN peacekeeping force and arrangements under which the US and allied forces would withdraw from the region;(ii) suggestions for some form of political expression for Kuwaitis after the withdrawal of the al-Sabah regime; and (iii) the understanding that an international conference would discuss the Palestinian issue at the earliest convenient time.
US White House chief of staff John Sununu reiterated on Jan. 13 the US insistence that there could be no linkage with the Palestinian issue but that "certainly there are opportunities after the Gulf crisis is resolved when such a conference takes place" .
Returning via Paris to New York, Pérez de Cuéllar reported to the UN Security Council on Jan. 14 the lack of success in his discussions with Saddam Hussein.
After the ultimate collapse of the last-minute French initiative [see below], he made a statement at the request of the Security Council on Jan. 15, saying: "As…the world stands poised between peace and war, I most sincerely appeal to President Saddam Hussein to turn the course of events away from catastrophe and toward a new era of justice and harmony…
If this commitment is made, and clear and substantial steps taken to implement [the UN]resolutions, a just peace, with all of its benefits, will follow."
Other diplomatic activity
Yugoslavian Foreign Minister Loncar visited all the principal capitals of the region with proposals on behalf of the Non-aligned Movement, essentially reflecting ideas which Algerian President Chadli had advanced in December [see p. 37927 for Saudi refusal to discuss these ideas with Chadli], envisaging guaranteed Iraqi access to (and perhaps a leasing of) Warba and Bubiyan islands and talks on financial issues with Kuwait after an Iraqi withdrawal.
Former Nicaraguan President Daniel Ortega (on Jan. 8), Zambian President Kenneth Kaunda (on Jan. 10-11), Japan Socialist Party leader Takako Doi (on Jan. 13) and Yemeni and Libyan delegations were among visitors to Baghdad, while King Hussein of Jordan continued a series of meetings, including a visit to London in early January.
Saddam Hussein on Jan. 13 rejected a message from President Hafez al-Assad of Syria, and invited him instead to change sides and "join the ranks of the believers" in the great battle with the infidels.
Assad had urged recognition that "the only beneficiary of the present crisis is Israel" , promising that Syrian forces would fight alongside Iraqis if they were attacked after a withdrawal from Kuwait, and arguing that only such a withdrawal would avoid giving the "enemies of our Arab nation…the golden opportunity which they were dreaming of one day having, and which today is present" .
Assad's message had been endorsed publicly by the Libyan leader Col. Kadhafi as showing "unmistakable pan-Arab commitment" ; Assad as well as President Hosni Mubarak of Egypt and the Sudanese leader Gen. Bashir had met with Kadhafi at Misratah in Libya on Jan. 3.
On Jan. 14 Saddam Hussein also denounced King Fahd of Saudi Arabia, accusing him of having "aborted" earlier opportunities of "serious dialogue" .
The King had said while inspecting Saudi troops on Jan. 6 that if Iraq withdrew from Kuwait it could "escape further punishment" and that Saudi Arabia would favour a negotiated solution to territorial and financial disagreements between Iraq and Kuwait.
Arafat met frequently with Saddam Hussein in Baghdad in the run-up to the expiry of the Jan. 15 deadline, and reaffirmed on Jan. 14 that "Palestine and Iraq are standing in the same trench to regain Arab rights" .
Saddam Hussein, for his part, had again declared on Jan. 14 that "the Palestine issue is the crux of the confrontation" .
On Jan. 6, as part of a televised speech, he had described the liberation of Palestine as the main objective in the struggle, while reaffirming nevertheless that "the return of Kuwait to the motherland is a reality" , that the Iraqi army should prepare for "the mother of battles" , and that the war would reach "every struggler and fighter whose hand can reach out to harm aggressors in the whole world" ; on Jan. 9, when an International Islamic Popular Conference opened in Baghdad, he promised that in the event of war the Americans would "swim in their own blood" .
Eleventh-hour French proposals at UN
On his return from Baghdad on Jan. 14 Pérez de Cuéllar consulted in Paris with Jacques Poos, the Luxembourg Foreign Minister and President of the EC Council of Ministers for the first half of 1991.
Later the same day a meeting in Brussels of EC Foreign Ministers (excluding Dumas who was not present) declared that they "regret to have to conclude that the conditions for a new European initiative do not exist" .
The French government was consequently widely criticized for its presentation late on Jan. 14 of new proposals, of which no inkling was given at the EC ministerial meeting.
The criticism was particularly marked in the UK, whose Prime Minister John Major had lunched with Mitterrand in Paris that day.
The French initiative was put before the UN Security Council, calling for Iraqi withdrawal from Kuwait, after which a conference on the Middle East would be convened "at an appropriate time" .
In detail the proposal called on the Iraqi leadership "to announce without further delay Iraq's intention to withdraw from Kuwait under a specific timetable and to begin an immediate, rapid and massive withdrawal" .
This would be supervised by UN international observers and an Arab peacekeeping force.
After a peaceful settlement was reached "the Security Council members…will bring their active contribution to the settlement of the other problems of the region and, in particular, the Israeli-Arab conflict and the Palestinian problem by the convening at the appropriate time of an international conference…to secure the security, the stability and the development of this part of the world" .
The proposal reportedly won German, Italian and Soviet support.
However it was dropped in the face of the opposition expressed by the United States representative, who insisted that there be no "linkage" between the issues; the UK also opposed the proposal.
French Prime Minister Michel Rocard conceded that the initiative had "not met with the least response from the Iraqi side" .
Expiry of UN deadline
The Jan. 15 deadline for Iraq to meet the terms of the relevant UN resolutions expired with no sign of Iraqi compliance.
On Jan. 14 Saddam Hussein called on Iraqis once again to fight to the death to defend Kuwait, and the National Assembly in Baghdad formally voted unanimously to approve full powers for him to determine both the Iraqi military response to any allied offensive and the handling of any negotiations.
The transition from diplomatic and economic pressure on Iraq to direct offensive military action provided a further confirmation of the US leadership of what US statements described as "the 28-member international coalition" , since "coalition forces" would come under the operational command of the commander of US forces, Gen. H. Norman Schwarzkopf, in consultation with Saudi Defence Minister Prince Sultan ibn Abdul Aziz.
Operational orders to Arab forces within the alliance would be conveyed through Prince Sultan.
Economic sanctions remained in place under the existing UN resolutions.
Opponents of the resort to force, and others who regarded it as premature, maintained that the effectiveness of sanctions required their application over a longer period (this being broadly the position adopted in early January, i.e. before the military conflict began, by the opposition Labour Party in the UK).
Assessments varied as to how much impact sanctions had achieved.
William Webster, director of the US Central Intelligence Agency (CIA), had said in evidence to the House armed services committee on Dec. 5 that sanctions "have dealt a serious blow" , shutting off "more than 90 per cent of imports and 97 per cent of exports" but that there was "no assurance or guarantee" that economic hardship would bring a change in Iraqi policy.
He changed his assessment in a Jan. 10 letter to the committee's chairman Les Aspin, however, with the judgment that "the ability of Iraqi ground forces to defend Kuwait is unlikely to be substantially eroded over the next six to 12 months" and that "economic hardship alone is unlikely to compel Saddam to retreat" within that time.
There was concern in some quarters that the resort to force would reduce the prospect of the peaceful resolution of subsequent international disputes by means of economic sanctions.
Position of diplomats and foreign nationals
On Jan. 14 the US State Department announced that Iraq's ambassador to the USA, Mohammed Sadiq al-Mashat, had been recalled following the expulsion of a number of Iraqi diplomats on Jan. 12.
On Jan. 25 it was reported that Iraq's ambassador in the UK, Azmi Shafiq al-Salahi, had been recalled.
The expulsion of a number of Iraqi diplomats was ordered by the UK on Jan. 15, by Belgium on Jan. 18, by France on Jan. 21, by Germany on Jan. 24 and by Australia on Jan. 26.
Various allied governments took action to deport Iraqis and others whose continued presence was deemed to be against national interests.
In the UK all Iraqis were from Jan. 19 required to have visas to enter the country, and strict registration procedures were laid down for Iraqis who were in the UK on limited leave; as of Jan. 29, out of 101 Iraqis detained since the beginning of the year 42 (together with seven Palestinians) were currently in detention awaiting deportation, 21 had left or had been deported and three had been released; 35 serving members of the Iraqi armed forces were being held in military custody.
Member countries of the alliance reduced non-essential diplomatic staff in the Middle East and in predominantly Moslem countries in Asia, and many of them, in particular the USA, the UK and France, took measures to evacuate their citizens.
The last US diplomats in Iraq itself had left Baghdad on Jan. 12, on a flight with their remaining Austrian, Brazilian, Belgian, Canadian, Finnish, Norwegian, Polish and Portuguese colleagues.
The UK, which had reduced its embassy staff in Baghdad from 24 to six in early January, had also brought out its ambassador (Harold Walker, who left on Jan. 10) and remaining personnel following the failure of the Jan. 9 Baker-Aziz talks; the Germans had left on Jan. 8, and according to Le Monde of Jan. 15 France was the only EC country with diplomatic representation still in place in Baghdad.
Japan had closed its embassy temporarily on Jan. 12 and the Egyptian ambassador had left the following day, although most Arab countries retained some representation.
Le Monde of Jan. 15 also reported that Kuwait's ambassador in Baghdad, held under house arrest since Aug. 2, 1990 and suffering from heart problems, had been released at the request of King Hussein and given permission to leave Iraq.
Progress of war
Initiation of air campaign
The offensive by the US-led allied forces, codenamed "Operation Desert Storm" , began just before midnight GMT on Jan. 16.
Sustained air attacks on Iraqi targets continued throughout January, with the allies using carrier-based and land-based aircraft — including US B-52 bombers — and Tomahawk cruise missiles launched from allied ships.
In the UK special emphasis was laid on the role of the Royal Air Force in the earliest phase of the air war, and the loss of six RAF Tornado aircraft represented a relatively high rate of casualties among the allied forces at this stage.
Although little hard information was released concerning the nature of targets and the level of damage inflicted by the air campaign, it appeared that the initial attacks were directed against Iraqi command structures, airfields, missile sites, chemical and nuclear facilities and elements of civilian infrastructure such as electrical power plants.
Later in the month objectives of the air raids were shifted to attacks on troop concentrations — particularly Iraq's elite Republican Guard divisions being held in reserve behind the front line — and on supply lines in both Iraq and Kuwait.
By the end of January the allies claimed to have flown over 30,000 sorties.
Video footage taken both from the ground and from attacking allied aircraft suggested that the cruise missiles and the laser-guided bombs used by the allies were capable of a very high degree of accuracy.
Nevertheless, more traditional weapons of bombardment were also used — including "carpet bombing" by B-52s — and Iraqi sources claimed that the air attacks had resulted in the widespread destruction of non-military targets and considerable loss of life among the civilian population.
Turkey, the only member country of the North Atlantic Treaty Organization (NATO) with a common border with Iraq, on Jan. 17 authorized the US Air Force to station 96 warplanes at Incirlik, near the southern city of Adana.
Official sources later confirmed that these aircraft had immediately joined the air offensive against Iraq.
Iraqi response to air attacks
Iraq responded to the air war with anti-aircraft fire and ground-to-air missiles.
The Iraqi air force attempted little in the way of a co-ordinated response to the allied air assault, and it appeared that Saddam Hussein was intent on preserving his aircraft either for a later stage of the campaign or for the duration of the entire war.
Despite heavy attacks on Iraqi airfields, many of the country's 700 planes were successful in avoiding destruction by relocating to bases in the north of the country and by taking refuge in reinforced underground shelters.
There were also reports that Iraq had sought sanctuary for many of its most modern aircraft in Iran.
By Jan. 29 the allies claimed that nearly 100 Iraqi planes were in Iran.
The Iranian government gave assurances that the aircraft would be held in Iran until the cessation of hostilities.
Three Iraqi F-1 Mirages, believed to be armed with Exocet missiles, attempted to attack allied vessels in the Gulf on Jan. 24, but were intercepted by a Saudi Arabian F-15.
Two of the attacking aircraft were destroyed in an engagement which underlined the technological superiority of the allied weapons systems.
Launching of Scud missiles
Iraq also retaliated by launching Scud missiles against Saudi Arabia and Israel.
These aged Soviet-made missiles, descended from the German V-2 rocket, carried a one-ton warhead and had a range of 290 km.
By reducing the size of the warheads, however, the Iraqis had been able to increase the range of some of their Scuds.
These modified missiles, the al-Hussein and the al-Abbas, had maximum ranges of around 600 km and 880 km respectively.
Although of limited accuracy by modern standards, the Scuds were reasonably successful at hitting large targets such as urban settlements.
Iraq was thought to possess between 500 and 1,000 Scuds, which could be launched either at fixed sites or from mobile launchers.
Although some of these sites were reported destroyed in the early stages of the air campaign, the mobile facilities in particular proved difficult to detect.
Seven missiles were launched against Israel (and one against Dahran) in an initial attack in the early hours of Jan. 17.
Two hit Tel Aviv, one hit the port of Haifa, three landed in unpopulated areas and one at an undisclosed location.
Initial fears that the Scuds were carrying chemical warheads proved groundless.
The attacks caused localized damage and injuries, and up to three elderly Israeli women suffocated when they failed to remove the filter caps from their gas masks.
Iraqi Scud attacks on Israel gave rise to intensive international diplomatic activity.
It was widely perceived that direct Israeli military involvement could alter dramatically the whole political complexion of the conflict [see section below on the Israeli dimension].
The Scud launched on Jan. 17 against the allied air base at Dhahran, Saudi Arabia, was destroyed in the air by Patriot anti-aircraft missiles.
Scud attacks continued throughout January [see table], with Patriot missile batteries in Saudi Arabia (and later in Israel — see below) proving an effective but not infallible defence measure.
DateTargetFiredHitsMissesDownedKilledInjured Jan. 17Tel Aviv & Haifa734 — 12 Dhahran1 — 1 —— 19Tel Aviv431 — 20 20Dhahran5 — 5 —— Riyadh5-14 —— 21Riyadh2-11 —— Dhahran4-4 —— 22Tel Aviv11 — 396 Riyadh2-2 —— Dhahran3-21 —— 23Tel Aviv1 — 1 —— Dhahran2 — 2 —— Riyadh1 — 1 —— 25Tel Aviv & Haifa72-5166 Riyadh21-1130 Dhahran2 — 2 —— 26Tel Aviv3 — 3 —— Haifa1 — 1 —— Riyadh1 — 1 —— 28Tel Aviv1-1 —— Riyadh1 — 1- — 31Tel Aviv1-1 —— Totals571017305224
Chronology of Scud missile attacks during January*
*Accuracy of figures subject to reporting restrictions in Saudi Arabia and Israel, and to interpretation of intended targets.
Iraqi display of captured allied airmen
Seven captured allied airmen — including two RAF officers — appeared on Iraqi television on Jan. 20.
The men, all of whom had been captured after having been shot down over enemy territory, gave their names, sent greetings to their families and made statements critical of the war.
Several of them showed signs of injury, leading to claims in the US and the UK that they had been coerced into making their statements.
This factor, and Iraqi suggestions that the captured air crews would be positioned near possible allied bombing targets as a "human shield" , were condemned in the West as clear breaches of the Geneva Conventions.
Iraq replied with a denunciation of the allied bombing of civilian targets, and the declaration that, as the allies were not providing information on the true level of their air losses, it was impossible to treat all captured airmen as prisoners-of-war.
After watching film of the captured pilots, Bush condemned their "brutal treatment" but gave assurances that their possible presence in target areas would not affect the prosecution of the bombing campaign.
Asked if Saddam Hussein would be held accountable for the treatment of the men, Bush replied: "You can count on it." 
Major, speaking in the UK House of Commons on Jan. 21, underlined Bush's attitude, promising that Iraqi forces would be held to account for their "illegal and inhuman actions" .
Official summation of progress of air campaign
On Jan. 23 Gen. Colin Powell, Chairman of the US Joint Chiefs of Staff, gave the most comprehensive public account of the progress of the air campaign since the beginning of the war.
He claimed that the allied forces had achieved "general air superiority" over Iraq and Kuwait; that enemy nuclear weapons reactors were "finished" ; that Iraqi aircraft were able to operate from only five of the country's 66 airfields; and that Iraqi air defence radar had been reduced by 95 per cent.
After more 10,000 allied air sorties, however, he was able to confirm that only 41 enemy aircraft had been destroyed and that Saddam Hussein and his generals retained effective command and control over their forces.
He suggested that the air campaign would continue for a considerable period before a ground attack would be considered.
As to the strategy for dealing with the Iraqi army entrenched in Kuwait he said that "first we are going to cut it off, then we are going to kill it" .
Capture of Qaruh island — Formation of giant oil slick
The first piece of Kuwaiti territory was recaptured on Jan. 24, when allied forces landed on the tiny island of Qaruh, 35 km off the coast of Kuwait.
Allied aircraft had come under fire from the island — little more than an uninhabited rock supporting a navigational beacon — whilst they were attacking two Iraqi naval vessels on Jan. 22.
The island was then attacked from the air and, after several Iraqi soldiers had been killed, the 29 remaining members of the garrison surrendered.
The war took a potentially catastrophic environmental turn when it was revealed on Jan. 25 that huge quantities of oil were pouring into the Gulf.
The US government accused Iraq of deliberately pumping the oil from Kuwaiti storage tanks via the Sea Island loading terminal.
The action was alleged to have been initiated around Jan. 22, at about the same time as other Kuwaiti oil wells and storage tanks had been set alight in an apparent attempt to disrupt the allied air campaign.
Iraqi claims that the oil had been released by allied attacks on two Iraqi tankers on Jan. 22 were dismissed by most commentators.
Within a few days the oil slick, first reported on Jan. 24, had grown to measure 55 km long by 15 km wide.
Heading south and with part of it reportedly burning, it threatened to have a devastating effect on the marine environment of the northern Gulf, which was particularly vulnerable as a shallow, largely closed area of water with little natural turbulence or tidal flushing.
The slick also endangered desalination plants on the coasts of Saudi Arabia, Bahrain and Qatar.
By the evening of Jan. 26 between 5,000,000 and 10,000,000 barrels of oil were estimated to have poured into the Gulf, in what was thought to be the worst oil spillage in history [for March 1989 Exxon Valdez spill see pp. 36541; 36606].
US F-111 aircraft using laser-guided "smart" bombs succeeded in stemming much of the flow on Jan. 26-27 by knocking out two manifolds — oil pressure controls — at the Mina al-Ahmadi oil storage facility which fed the Sea Island terminal.
As of the end of January the main slick had yet to come ashore (media reports and pictures of onshore damage were of smaller slicks caused by Iraqi shelling of Saudi facilities at Khafji and Mishab).
Oil-spill experts from a number of countries flew into the area to assist with cleaning-up operations, which were largely limited to defending the intakes of desalination plants with the use of booms and "skimmer" vessels; the slick was seen as too large for practical use of chemical dispersants, which might in any case damage marine life, and the best hope for its dispersal lay in a combination of the natural processes of evaporation and breakdown by marine bacteria.
Variously suggested as Iraqi motives for causing the slick were (i) the desire to impede any allied amphibious assault on the Kuwaiti or south Iraqi shore as part of a ground offensive;(ii) the intention of damaging Saudi coastal installations; and (iii) the hope of provoking the allies into launching a full-scale ground offensive ahead of their preferred schedule.
Bush characterized the action as having no military advantage for the Iraqis and as providing further evidence of Saddam Hussein's ability to "amaze" and "outrage" international opinion.
A US Defence Department spokesman accused Iraq of conducting "environmental terrorism" .
Seabirds were badly affected, with cormorants and black-necked grebes being among the first to die.
Terns, redshanks and sand plovers were also at risk, together with birds accustomed to using the coastal mudflats as resting points on seasonal migrations between Siberia and East Africa.
The livelihoods of local fishermen were threatened by the slick's impact on the oyster-beds of Bahrain, Qatar, Kuwait and the United Arab Emirates, and on colonies of prawn, shrimp and hamour.
The entire Gulf population of the dugong, or sea cow, a relatively rare marine mammal, was also at risk.
Other animals under threat included the bottlenose and humpback dolphin, and the green and hawksbill turtles, which normally laid their eggs on the beaches of tiny offshore islands.
Other marine life expected to suffer included coral reefs, algae and sea grass.
If the slick persisted long enough, it could shut out sunlight to an extent that the phytoplankton, which depend on photosynthesis, would die off, thereby threatening the survival of all fauna higher up the food chain.
The allies
The 29-country coalition as given on Feb. 21 by the US embassy in London was, in addition to the USA, as follows:
Argentina, Australia, Bahrain, Bangladesh, Belgium, Canada, Czechoslovakia, Denmark, Egypt, France, Germany, Greece, Italy, Kuwait, Morocco, Netherlands, New Zealand, Niger, Norway, Oman, Pakistan, Qatar, Saudi Arabia, Senegal, Spain, Syria, United Arab Emirates and the UK.
Honduras had also committed troops.
Estimated total forces in Gulf at end-January
Total allied forces 705,000.
USA 500,000 (Army 285,000; Marines 90,000; Navy 75,000; Air Force 50,000); UK 35,000 (42,000 committed); France 13,500; Other allied forces approx. 155,000
Total Iraqi forces (excluding reserves) 555,000.
Regulars 435,000, Republican Guard 120,000 (Reserves 480,000)
Bombing of Iraq-Jordan road traffic
Oil tankers and trucks on roads from Iraq to Jordan came under air attack on Jan. 29.
Jordanian Foreign Minister Taher al-Masri described these incidents as deliberate bombings which had killed four Jordanian civilians.
Iraqi offensive in Khafji
On Jan. 29 two Iraqi battalion-sized armoured forces invaded Saudi Arabia.
One of the units occupied the coastal town of Khafji, 20 km south of the border with Kuwait.
The town, which been evacuated prior to the beginning of the war, was only lightly defended by allied troops.
On the following day two more Iraqi formations made incursions into Saudi Arabian territory.
In the fighting which followed all the Iraqi units were repulsed by allied ground and air forces.
Khafji was reported to have been retaken on Jan. 30, and allied military briefings emphasised that this should be regarded principally as a victory for Saudi units in the coalition.
Pockets of Iraqi troops continued to resist until Feb. 2, and fighting was reported to be continuing between allied forces and retreating Iraqi units elsewhere in the border region.
Provisional casualty reports suggested that allied losses included 12 US Marines killed and 15 Saudi troops; 30 Iraqi soldiers were reported killed and several tanks destroyed.
Between 400 and 500 Iraqi troops were reported captured during the fighting, while 31 US personnel were described as missing or captured, including a female Marine who was thought to be the first US woman soldier to be captured by an enemy force.
Although the Khafji offensive technically constituted an Iraqi military defeat, it was seen to have brought important political and morale benefits to Iraq.
That such an attack could have been successfully executed — apparently taking the allied forces by surprise — was in itself an impressive achievement given the extent of allied air superiority.
Furthermore, the resilience and tenacity displayed by the attacking forces belied suggestions that the effectiveness of the Iraqi army had been largely destroyed by the intensive allied air campaign.
The Iraqi offensive was also interpreted by many commentators as an attempt by Saddam Hussein to precipitate the long-awaited allied ground assault.
In this respect the operation was a failure; Schwarzkopf made it clear that the air phase of the war would be continued until it had achieved its objectives, and that the timing and location of any land-based offensive would be in accordance with allied war plans and would be made by the US President.
On Jan. 30 Schwarzkopf declared that the allies had achieved complete air supremacy and that the air offensive against enemy ground units was due to be intensified still further.
The flow of supplies to Iraqi troops in Kuwait, he said, had been cut from the 20,000 tons per day needed to support them to only 2,000 tons.
He did concede, however, that the recent enemy attacks indicated that the Iraqi armed forces had "a lot of fight left in them" .
Allied figuresIraqi figures Allied dead Air force — N/A Navy1N/A Army1539 Marines/Others1212 Wounded9N/A Missing/captured3723+ Iraqi dead Armed forces4990 WoundedN/AN/A Missing/captured500+N/A Aircraft lost US18227 UK6 (includes missiles) Kuwaiti1 Italian1 Saudi Arabian1 Iraqi55N/A Flown to Iran98N/A Naval vessels lost Allied — N/A Iraqi40+N/A Tanks lost Allied — N/A Iraqi52N/A Other vehicles Allied2N/A Iraqi178N/A Civilian deaths IraqiN/A320 Israeli4N/A Saudi Arabian1N/A Missiles launched Scud57N/A Cruise254+N/A Patriot (estimate) 120+N/A 
Estimated losses at end of January
Intensification of Iraqi-inspired terrorist attacks
There were reports of widespread incidents of Iraqi-inspired terrorist attacks on US, UK, French and other allied targets.
The International Herald Tribune of Jan. 29 reported that there had been 29 attacks against allied targets in the first 12 days after the outbreak of hostilities.
In Turkey alone, the Guardian of Jan. 28 reported that there had been 10 terrorist attacks in Istanbul, Ankara and Adana on Jan. 21-28, causing substantial damage to US and other allied military and business interests.
Two people died during attacks on a French bank in Baalbeck, Lebanon and a US government library in Manila.
On Jan. 27, bombs exploded in Paris and Marseille, causing substantial damage, and attacks were reported in Athens on Jan. 25 and 28.
Restrictions on media coverage
On the outbreak of war all parties to the conflict introduced restrictions on reporting.
It was acknowledged by political leaders, military commanders, media executives and journalists alike that these restrictions substantially affected the range and type of coverage which would be provided of the fighting.
It was also generally agreed that the restrictions obscured the extent of the bombing campaign and the destruction in Iraq in the first weeks of the war.
The US Department of Defence on Jan. 14 issued guidelines which on the whole reflected the policies of allied governments.
Under these arrangements, about 60 reporters were selected from the several hundred covering the conflict to form "news pools" , which would share dispatches and radio and video tapes from the war zone with all their colleagues.
Reporters would be accompanied by military information officers in combat zones if deemed necessary by local commanders and would be "strongly discouraged" from travelling independently.
Material for publication or transmission would be "reviewed before release" in the field by the military information officer in consultation with the unit commander to determine whether it contained sensitive information.
If agreement could not be reached with a reporter on disputed material, it would be sent to a joint information bureau in Dhahran, and, if still unresolved, to the US Assistant Secretary of Defence responsible for public affairs.
US officials stressed that the procedure did not amount to censorship, since the ultimate decision on publication or transmission would remain with the originating reporter's news organization.
Deleted from the guidelines were certain provisions which had appeared in previous drafts but which had been strongly criticized by media executives as amounting to censorship; these would have prohibited reporters from approaching military officials unannounced, and banned dissemination of pictures showing troops in agony or severe shock.
Most media organizations and journalists accepted the argument that certain restrictions were necessary for security reasons, but some, in particular US journalists, expressed concern that the ground rules would be used to prevent coverage showing the horrors of battle.
Several US journalists decided to sue the US government for infringing their liberties, claiming that the restrictions reflected more the military's belief that free reporting during the Vietnam war had turned US citizens against the war, than concern for security.
Others claimed that the restrictions on the transmission of visual material in particular were excessive.
Other allied countries imposed similar restrictions on reporting.
Confusion over what could or could not be reported arose, however, because of differences of interpretation among French, Saudi, UK and US officials in Saudi Arabia and in their respective capitals.
News organizations also issued their own guidelines to their reporters.
The British Broadcasting Corporation, for instance, stressed in particular the need to observe the advice of military authorities "unless there are very strong reasons for not doing so" , and the need to be "circumspect" in showing pictures of death and injury of soldiers and civilians.
The Iraqi media were already under strict government control before the war, and there was no indication that additional controls were imposed.
Foreign news organizations based in Baghdad had been allowed to report freely in the weeks leading up to the conflict, but after the outbreak of hostilities restrictions were introduced on reporting by foreign journalists.
Most foreign journalists were ordered to leave Baghdad on Jan. 19, on the grounds that "correct living conditions could not be guaranteed" , but the US-based Cable News Network (CNN) was allowed to continue transmissions.
Media organizations, eager to disseminate stories with maximum speed on the basis of initial reports, ran a particular risk not only of news management by those giving their briefings, but also of giving prominence to "news" which later proved incorrect.
A vivid example even before the war began was the Jan. 7 report of six Iraqi helicopters landing in eastern Saudi Arabia in an apparent attempt to defect.
Based on official sources, the whole story was later acknowledged by both Saudi and US military officials to be without foundation.
The Israeli dimension
By launching missiles into Israel [see p. 37936 above]the Iraqis fulfilled their promise that they would attack Israel if fighting began, a promise which Aziz had confirmed unequivocally ( "Yes, absolutely yes" ) on Jan. 9 in Geneva.
Western governments including the USA and the UK had advised their nationals to leave Israel before hostilities began, and a rush of foreigners attempting to do so had provoked airport bottlenecks, compounded by airlines cancelling services because of sharp increases in insurance costs.
The prime motives for the missile attacks were seen as twofold.
They achieved a significant measure of success in promoting radical Arab enthusiasm for Saddam Hussein, fostering his image as a symbol of Arab pride and defiance in the struggle to liberate Palestine.
Their other purpose was apparently to bring Israel into the war (probably entraining Israeli violation of Jordanian territory or at least its airspace), in the expectation that no Arab government could risk fighting on the Israeli side.
If the anti-Iraqi coalition could be thus split up, Iraq would be left fighting only "Zionists and Western imperialists" , and might even attract its erstwhile Arab opponents as allies.
As of end-January, however, there had been no Israeli retaliation, despite the Israeli government's previous public position (as expressed by President Chaim Herzog on Jan. 15) that an Iraqi strike would encounter a "calculated and strong" response.
On Jan. 18, following the first Scud attacks the previous night, Israeli Defence Minister Moshe Arens stated that "we will react, certainly" , but the USA in particular immediately launched intensive diplomatic efforts to sustain what Bush described as Israeli Prime Minister Itzhak Shamir's "great understanding for the interests of the USA and others in this coalition" .
On the same day the Egyptian government made it clear that it would remain within the coalition even if Israel were to retaliate against Iraq, while a somewhat more ambiguous Syrian statement allowed the inference that a limited Israeli response, proportionate to the Iraqi attack, need not have adverse consequences for Syria's participation in the coalition.
By Jan. 21 the US Deputy Secretary of State Lawrence Eagleburger, while clearly recognizing "Israel's right as a sovereign state to retaliate, to defend itself" , was able to confirm that Israel had pledged to work closely with the USA and "will consult us first" before taking any such action.
A major factor in securing this pledge was the supply of advanced anti-missile technology in the form of the Patriot missile battery, with US support crews (an unprecedented deployment of US army personnel on Israeli soil) to enable the Patriots to be brought immediately into service (whereas Israel's own two Patriot batteries purchased from the USA the previous year were not yet operational as crews were still being trained).
Also significant was the high priority now accorded in allied air war strategy to targeting the mobile Scud launchers used in the attacks.
Israeli Foreign Minister David Levi said on Jan. 22 that the USA was also to provide Israel with battle reports, logistical information and instantaneous "real-time" satellite reconnaissance data under a "joint co-ordination apparatus" .
Finance Minister Itzhak Moda'i presented Eagleburger on Jan. 22 with an estimate that Israel would need US$13,000 million in additional US aid, in excess of the annual $3,000 million it already received in US military and economic assistance, to meet Gulf war losses up to mid-February ($3,000 million) and the absorbtion of Jewish immigrants from the Soviet Union ($10,000 million).
He stressed "with certainty and decisiveness that no promise was given" in connection with this or any other aid request that Israel would continue with its restraint in the face of Iraqi missile attacks.
Later on Jan. 22, in the third and most damaging of the Scud attacks to date, a missile penetrated the Patriot defences to land on Tel Aviv.
Pressure on the government for military retaliation increased significantly, and Arens confirmed that "we are going to respond even if there is not a single other casualty" , but he also said that Israel would take account of the US, UK and other appeals not to disrupt the anti-Iraq coalition.
Further missile attacks in succeeding days [see table on p. 37937]did not change the Israeli government stance.
In civil defence terms the Scud attacks, directed as they were at civilian populations, posed a dilemma for the Israeli authorities as it was not known in advance whether the missiles would carry conventional or chemical warheads.
Fearing the latter (although all missiles fired as of the end of January turned out to be conventionally armed), the population was advised to don gas masks, and to take refuge until the all-clear sounded in sealed rooms which they had been instructed to prepare on the top floor of their homes.
It was reported that three elderly women died during the first Scud attack when they suffocated because they had failed to remove filter covers from their masks.
As far as the Palestinian population was concerned, gas masks had not been distributed, as they were to all Israeli citizens, to Jewish settlers in the occupied territories and to all arriving immigrants; moreover, there were reportedly no air raid sirens in the occupied territories except in the Jewish settlements there.
On Jan. 14, in response to a law suit brought by a West Bank resident, an Israeli high court judge found this to be "blatant discrimination" and ordered the military authorities to begin distribution of gas masks to Palestinians.
This reportedly began only on Jan. 20, but only close to the Israeli border in the West Bank, and was limited to those aged over 15.
As of Jan. 28 some 20-30,000 gas masks had been distributed to Palestinians.
The distribution was apparently hampered by strict curfew regulations, imposed in the occupied territories as a security measure since the morning of Jan. 16 in view of the level of popular support for Saddam Hussein and to ward off a fresh upsurge in the Palestinian intifada.
[See pp. 37975-76 for other developments in Palestinian affairs in January.]
International responses
Responses in the Arab world
Egypt's Foreign Minister Ahmed Esmat Abdel Meguid said in Cairo on Jan. 17 that "there is still time to avoid more damage if Iraq begins an immediate and complete withdrawal from Kuwait" .
On Jan. 24 President Hosni Mubarak told the People's Assembly said that it was Saddam Hussein's "occupation of an independent, sovereign Arab country" which had "caused all that is happening now" .
The Middle East Economic Digest of Feb. 1 reported that the fundamentalist Moslem Brotherhood had expressed "disgust at the position of the government, which is completely subservient to the USA and its Western allies" .
Syrian radio said on Jan. 17 that the war was "an inevitable result of the reckless action by the Iraqi ruler" .
The Syrian official daily Tishreen also accused Jordan, on Jan. 21, of "encouraging Saddam Hussein's expansionist dreams" .
Saudi Arabia's Minister of Information Ali ibn Hasan al-Shaer said on Jan. 17 that "the military operations for the liberation of Kuwait…represent the sword of right" .
Saudi Arabia criticised the Jordanian, Algerian and Tunisian media for their "campaign against Saudi Arabia" .
An official source was quoted on Jan. 18 as saying that Saddam Hussein alone bore "the full responsibility for all his actions and what may result from such actions" .
Also on Jan. 18, the highest religious authority in Saudi Arabia, the Council of Ulema (religious leaders), issued a fatwa (decree) authorizing a jihad (holy war) against Saddam Hussein.
On Jan. 22, however, a group of exiled Saudi ulema based in the Iranian city of Qom called on all countries in the region to "rise up" and "uproot the USA" .
The exiled Prime Minister and Crown Prince of Kuwait, Shaikh Saad al Abdullah as Salim as Sabah, in an address on Jan. 17 spoke of the "legitimate struggle to liberate our dear homeland from the evil Iraqi regime's occupation" .
On Jan. 17 the Gulf Co-operation Council (GCC) welcomed "the start of military operations to liberate Kuwait" and on Jan. 26 it reaffirmed the "international legitimacy" of all UN resolutions [see also p. 37927-28].
The position of Morocco was complex in that the government, having committed forces on the allied side, was compelled by the strength of domestic feeling to express its concern over the war.
It thus called for the observance of a "day of solidarity with the brotherly Iraqi people" in support of a nationwide general strike on Jan. 28.
Earlier, on Jan. 15, King Hassan had warned Moroccan political parties against encouraging disturbances in the event of war.
Pro-Iraqi and anti-US protests also featured prominently in Arab countries whose governments opposed the US-led allied military involvement.
The Algerian Foreign Ministry said on Jan. 17 said that the war "imposed" on the "fraternal Iraqi people" had been "forcefully rejected" , and the largest of all the protest demonstrations took place in Algiers, where a march organized by the fundamentalist Front Islamique du Salut (FIS) on Feb. 1 reportedly involved 400,000 people.
Smaller demonstrations had been organized on Jan. 18 and 25 by the FIS and the ruling Front de libération nationale (FLN), while on Jan. 24 the National Assembly condemned "the illegitimacy of UN Security Council Resolution 678" justifying the use of force [see p. 37870].
In Jordan, support for Iraq came from professional organizations and labour unions, as well from religious parties including the Moslem Brotherhood and the Amman-based Islamic Jihad Group which was reported on Feb. 1 to be planning "painful blows to the Western coalition arrayed against Iraq" .
The Jordanian government had on Jan. 17 described the launching of allied air attacks as a "brutal onslaught against an Arab and Moslem nation" .
[See also pp. 37976-97.]
In Yemen an official statement on Jan. 17 said that "the military action aimed basically at destroying fraternal Iraq" was "a flagrant challenge to the declared will of the world" ; the Guardian reported that an estimated 100,000 people carrying pro-Iraqi banners attended an anti-US rally the same day in the capital, Sana'a.
On Jan. 20 anti-war demonstrations in Libya led to a statement by the Saudi ambassador urging Kadhafi to "listen to the voice of conscience" .
President Zine el-Abidine Ben Ali of Tunisia said on Jan. 26 that "the destruction and devastation to which fraternal Iraq is being subjected has reached an intolerable level" .
On Jan. 27 the head of Sudan's Revolutionary Command Council (RCC), Lt.-Gen.
Umar Hassan Ahmad al-Bashir, said that "the arrogant alliance forces have not united for the sake of righteousness…but have come to victimize fraternal Iraq" .
A statement on Jan. 17 by the executive committee of the PLO said that the USA was using "the pretext of international legitimacy to carry out its treacherous aggression" .
The Palestinian "unified national leadership" of the intifada, in a communiqué broadcast on Jan. 30, called upon "the masses of our Arab homeland to support steadfast Iraq in facing the American-Zionist-Atlantic invasion" .
US war aims — Peace demonstrations
The outbreak of hostilities had the immediate effect of silencing most of those within Congress who had spoken out against war, and effectively removed the argument that sanctions should be given a longer period in which to work.
In a speech to a group of reserve military officers on Jan. 23 — the President's first public event since the beginning of the war — Bush claimed that Operation Desert Storm was "right on schedule" .
He also made a personal onslaught upon Saddam Hussein whom he accused of having "sickened the world" with his "tools of terror" , and appeared to suggest an enlargement of allied war aims to include the capture of the Iraqi President.
By stating that "this tyrant" would be "brought to justice" , Bush encouraged the inference that the USA was intent on going beyond its UN mandate to liberate Kuwait and was determined to launch an attack upon Iraq itself, with the aim of deposing its government.
A poll published on Jan. 29 gave Bush an approval rating of 79 per cent— the highest yet achieved by his administration — and also suggested that 75 per cent of those questioned approved of the war.
Anti-war demonstrations were held in the USA both before and after the outbreak of hostilities.
The protest in Washington DC, on Jan. 26, involved some 100,000 people according to official estimates, a turnout larger than any achieved during the first two years of the Vietnam conflict.
Organizers of the demonstration — the National Campaign for Peace in the Middle East — claimed that at least 250,000 people had participated in the protest.
Bush's State of the Union address
On Jan. 29 Bush used the annual State of the Union speech to address the matter of the war.
[For aspects of speech unrelated to Gulf conflict see pp. 37952-53.]
The President appealed to his compatriots to stand with him in support of the war, declaring that its cost in lives "is beyond our power to measure, but the cost of closing our eyes to aggression is beyond mankind's power to imagine" .
Bush stated that the USA had assumed the "burden of leadership" in confronting the aggression of Iraq, because "among the nations of the world, only the United States of America has had both the moral standing and the means to back it up" .
"For two centuries we've done the hard work of freedom.
And tonight we lead the world in facing down a threat to decency and humanity.
"What is at stake is more than one small country; it is a big idea: a new world order — where diverse nations are drawn together in common cause, to achieve the universal aspirations of mankind: peace and security, freedom and the rule of law.
Such is a world worthy of our struggle and worthy of our children's future.
"The community of nations has resolutely gathered to condemn and repel lawless aggression.
Saddam Hussein's unprovoked invasion, his ruthless systematic rape of a peaceful neighbour, violated everything the community of nations holds dear.
The world has said this aggression would not stand, and it will not stand.
"Together we have resisted the trap of appeasement, cynicism and isolation that gives temptation to tyrants.
The world has answered Saddam Hussein's invasion with 12 UN resolutions…backed up by forces from 28 countries of six continents.
With few exceptions the world now stands as one.
"The war in the Gulf is not a war we wanted.
We worked hard to avoid war…
But time and again Saddam Hussein flatly rejected the path of diplomacy and peace…
The world well knows how this conflict began…and I am certain of how it will end…
Tonight I am pleased to report that we are on course.
Iraq's capacity to sustain war is being destroyed.
Our investment, our training, our planning — all are paying off.
Time will not be Saddam's salvation.
"Our purpose in the Persian Gulf remains constant: to drive Iraq out of Kuwait, to restore Kuwait's legitimate government, and to ensure the stability and security of this critical region…
We do not seek the destruction of Iraq, its culture or its people.
Rather, we seek an Iraq which uses its great resources…to build a better life for itself and its neighbours.
"Most Americans know instinctively why we are in the Gulf.
They know we had to stop Saddam now, not later…
They know we must make sure that control of the world's oil resources does not fall into his hands, only to finance further aggression.
They know that we must build a new, enduring peace — based not on arms races and confrontation, but on shared principles and the rule of law.
And we all realize that our responsibility to be the catalyst for peace in the region does not end with the successful conclusion of this war.
"Last year our friends and allies provided the bulk of the economic costs of Desert Shield, and having now received commitments of over $40,000 million for the first three months of 1991, I am confident that they will do no less as we move through Desert Storm.
"This nation has never found glory in war…
This we know: Our cause is just.
Our cause is moral.
Our cause is right.
Let future generations understand the burdens and the blessings of freedom.
Let them say, we stood where duty required us to stand.
Let them know that together, we affirmed America, and the world, as a community of conscience."
Size and scope of UK involvement — Debates
The position of the UK forces in Saudi Arabia and in the Gulf area generally was that together with the armed forces of Kuwait and other coalition partners they were engaged in hostilities against Iraq under the authority of the UN Security Council; Major specifically explained in Parliament on Jan. 28 that the UK was not in a state of war with Iraq.
In early January the Prime Minister and the Foreign and Commonwealth Secretary (Douglas Hurd) had each visited the Gulf and surrounding areas: Major on Jan. 6-9 to meet members of the British armed forces and to hold discussions with the Amir of Kuwait, King Fahd of Saudi Arabia and Mubarak, and Hurd on Jan. 10-14 for talks in Bahrain, Qatar, the United Arab Emirates, Jordan and Turkey.
In addition to the 35,000 UK personnel already in the Gulf area by the outbreak of hostilities — comprising the main 1st Armoured Division and support, naval and air units — extra servicemen and servicewomen and equipment were deployed to the area during the latter half of January (including three battalions to guard Iraqi prisoners of war who might be taken), bringing the total, when all such forces were in place, to about 42,000; there were also another 7,500 in the Mediterranean and in the near east.
A further small number of reservists were called out during January (in some cases compulsorily) to fill certain key posts, but there were no plans to introduce conscription.
The full operating costs of the British presence in the Gulf arising from the response to Iraq's invasion of Kuwait were over £4,000,000 a day by the end of January, with the total such costs by then amounting to over £1,250 million (plus equipment lost and ammunition consumed in operations amounting to nearly £200,000,000).
On the outbreak of hostilities, a small ministerial committee was established to co-ordinate the UK's role in the operation, comprising Major, Hurd, Tom King (the Defence Secretary) and John Wakeham (the Energy Secretary, who also had responsibility for the general co-ordination of government information), together with, as appropriate, other members of the Cabinet and the Attorney General (Sir Patrick Mayhew).
The situation in the Gulf was the subject of debates in both Houses of Parliament on Jan. 15 (i.e. the day on which the UN deadline expired) and on Jan. 21.
In the House of Commons the bulk of the Labour opposition (as well as the Liberal Democrats) voted with the government, but on the first occasion over 50 and on the second over 30 Labour members critical of the bipartisan approach agreed by their party's leadership voted against (resulting in resignations from their posts by three frontbench spokespersons).
Demonstrations against the military build-up had already taken place in the UK, and after Jan. 15 these were stepped up, with vigils and other forms of protest taking place, but opinion polls showed consistently high levels of public support for the government's actions.
EC position on hostilities
On Jan. 17 EC Foreign Ministers gave their formal backing to the allied forces fighting in the Gulf.
On Jan. 30 the EC Commission allocated assistance totalling 500,000,000 European currency units (ECU) to "frontline" Gulf states (ECU1=US$1.37733 as at Jan. 28, 1991).
Of this sum Egypt was to receive ECU170,000,000 and Jordan was to receive ECU150,000,000, both as grants.
Turkey was to receive ECU175,000,000 as an interest-free loan.
EC member states had committed bilateral assistance totalling ECU1,000 million to these three countries, one-third of which had reportedly already been paid out.
The aid was part of a package agreed in principle on Oct. 1, 1990 [see p. 37697].
European Parliament, WEU and Council of Europe positions
The difficulties in reaching a common EC position were underlined in a European Parliament debate when a compromise resolution was passed on Jan. 24 after four days of intermittent, chaotic debate.
Speaking to MEPs on Jan. 21 Poos declared: "There is a structural weakness in existing political co-operation and it will be up to the intergovernmental conference [opened in December 1990 — see p. 37905]to tackle and reverse that" .
He described it as "regrettable" that positions taken in the UN Security Council by the EC's two permanent Security Council members — the UK and France — had not been subject to prior agreement among the 12 EC members.
A meeting of Western European Union (WEU) Foreign Ministers in Paris on Jan. 17 reaffirmed support for the USA in the Gulf war and for military action against Iraq until it withdrew unconditionally from Kuwait.
At the meeting both the Netherlands and Italian governments confirmed their commitment to direct military participation in the war.
The Italian Foreign Minister, Gianni De Michelis, announced that eight Tornado fighters would depart for the Gulf that day.
In addition to agreeing to reinforce its presence in Turkey by sending German, Italian and Belgian aircraft [see below], NATO approved on Jan. 17 the strengthening of its naval presence in the eastern Mediterranean.
The Assembly of the 24-member Council of Europe gave its "full support to the allies' action in the Gulf" in a vote on Jan. 29.
Response in France
The National Assembly (lower house of Parliament) on Jan. 16 voted by 523 votes to 43 with two abstentions to support Mitterrand's policy in the Gulf and therefore also the action of the US-led coalition.
The Senate (upper house) also voted on Jan. 16 to support Mitterrand's policy on the Gulf by 290 votes to 25 with two abstentions.
Parliamentary approval was not constitutionally required for Mitterrand to commit French troops to combat, since only career soldiers rather than conscripts were involved.
During the Assembly debate Michel Rocard, the Prime Minister, announced that French forces in the Gulf would that day be put under US military command "for a strictly defined time and missions" .
On Jan. 17 Defence Minister Jean-Pierre Chevènement announced that French forces would only fight in Kuwait and not in Iraq.
However, Mitterrand denied on Jan. 20 that there was any geographical limitation on French commitment to the allied force and on Jan. 24 French aircraft bombed Iraq for the first time.
Mitterrand accepted the resignation of Chevènement as Defence Minister on Jan. 29 after a period of several months during which his outspoken pro-Arab views and his opposition to war in the Gulf had become an increasing source of tension within the government.
His resignation letter declared that "the course of the war threatens to distance us further each day from the objectives fixed by the UN" .
At least two offers of resignation by Chevènement since the start of the Gulf crisis (in December 1990 and earlier in January) had been rejected by Mitterrand.
He was a founder member of the France-Iraq Friendship Association, and within the Socialist Party (PS) he led the small "socialism and republic" faction which had voted against the government in the parliamentary vote on the Gulf war on Jan. 16 [see above]; the existence of this faction, together with size of France's Arab community and the strength of its pacifist movement, had been seen as domestic factors influencing Mitterrand's eleventh-hour diplomatic initiatives.
Chevènement's visit to Saudi Arabia on Jan. 20 led to accusations that he was undermining the morale of French troops, while on Jan. 23 he provoked a controversy when he called into question the patriotism of former President Valéry Giscard d'Estaing and of former Prime Minister Jacques Chirac, as well as recalling that both had assisted Iraq in developing its nuclear potential by authorizing a number of major contracts in the 1970s.
Le Monde dubbed his politics "bolsho-bonapartism" .
Chevènement was replaced as Defence Minister by Interior Minister Pierre Joxe, who was widely described as tough and austere and a close ally of Mitterrand.
Joxe's position was taken by Philippe Marchand, previously a Minister-Delegate at the Interior Ministry who had been responsible for Territorial Collectivities and Civil Security.
Political opposition to the war was led by the Communist Party (PCF), although other left-wing and ecological groups as well as trade unions played a prominent role.
Numerous demonstrations were held as war approached and after it broke out, the largest protest being on Jan. 12 when 40,000 attended two rallies in Paris.
Italian attitude
The Italian parliament after protracted debate approved on Jan. 16 (by 382 to 201 in the Chamber of Deputies and by 190 to 96 in the Senate) a motion providing for Italian participation in an "international policing operation" to secure Iraqi withdrawal from Kuwait; the wording was significant in that Italy's Constitution forbade recourse to war as a means of settling international disputes.
The motion authorized the sending of four Italian naval vessels and 10 Tornado aircraft to the Gulf.
[For announcement at WEU meeting see above.]
Vice-Adml.
Mario Buracchia, the commander of Italian naval forces in the Gulf, resigned on Jan. 30 after the magazine Famiglia Cristiana quoted him as saying that war could have been avoided "with a little more wisdom" and the continuation of the economic embargo.
He was replaced on Jan. 31 by Rear-Adml.
Enrico Martinotti.
In Italy opposition to the war came from the communists, and from within the Catholic Church and Christian youth groups.
Protest demonstrations included one by 100,000 people in Rome on Jan. 12 and one by 25,000 people in Milan on Jan. 15.
German involvement and peace protests
In newly unified and sovereign Germany the decision on Jan. 2 to send 18 German Alpha fighter aircraft and some 300 German air personnel to help defend Turkey against possible Iraqi aggression [see below]caused major concern.
It represented the first deployment of German armed forces outside German territory since the Second World War.
Germany was constitutionally permitted only to send troops in defence of NATO territory, although following the December 1990 all-German election Chancellor Helmut Kohl had conceded that this rule would have to be changed.
On Jan. 12 demonstrations against the sending of German forces to Turkey were attended by hundreds of thousands of protesters in 75 cities and towns.
German angst over the issue prompted Turkish President Turgut Özal to assert on German television on Jan. 24 that "Germany had become so rich that it has completely lost its fighting spirit" .
In a special debate on the Gulf crisis in the Bundestag (lower house of German parliament) on Jan. 14 all parties unanimously called on Saddam Hussein to withdraw from Kuwait.
On Jan. 17 Kohl declared that "German soldiers will not be sent into action in the Gulf" .
Measures to tighten the illegal transfer of weapons technology to countries such as Iraq were announced on Jan. 29.
Responding to criticism that Germany was not pulling its weight within the alliance the government announced on Jan. 25 that its financial contribution to the Gulf effort totalled DM5,300 million, of which DM3,400 million was for Western allies and DM1,900 million for "frontline" Arab states (US$1.00=DM1.4885 as at Jan. 28, 1991).
On Jan. 29 Kohl promised a further DM8,300 million towards the US military campaign for the first three months of 1991 plus further military assistance to Turkey (air defence missiles and 600-strong crew) and to Israel.
Assistance amounting to DM800,000,000 for the UK military effort for the first quarter of 1991 was announced on Jan. 30.
This reportedly brought Germany's level of contribution up to a level similar to that of Japan.
Reflecting Germany's special relationship with Israel German Foreign Minister Hans-Dietrich Genscher visited the country on Jan. 24-25, bringing with him a promise to provide DM250,000,000 in humanitarian aid.
On Jan. 30 the government also announced that it was sending to Israel eight launchers for Patriot missiles (equipped to deter aircraft rather than Scud missiles), eight "sniffer" vehicles for chemical warfare detection, 50 similar vehicles from the former East German army and a commitment to provide two submarines subject to approval by the relevant parliamentary committees.
Opposition to the war and especially to the role of the USA was particularly strong in Germany.
Protesters included many school and university students.
Among the largest demonstrations were those held on Jan. 12 when almost 200,000 attended marches in 70 cities, on Jan. 13 when 250,000 demonstrated in 120 cities (including 7,000 at the US air base near Frankfurt and 50,000-100,000 in Berlin), and on Jan. 26 when 200,000 protested in Bonn.
Position of other European countries
In the Netherlands parliament voted on Jan. 11 in favour of putting the two Netherlands frigates in the Gulf under US command and of sending two squadrons of ground-to-air Patriot missiles and 150 military personnel to Turkey (a fellow NATO member).
On Jan. 30 the government also decided to send two squadrons of Hawk anti-aircraft missiles to Turkey.
In Spain the government's policy of providing logistical, humanitarian and political support for allied forces in the Gulf while eschewing direct military involvement in the war won overwhelming support in a parliamentary debate on Jan. 18.
Prime Minister Felipe González won support from his own Socialist Party (PSOE) as well as from the opposition Popular Party (PP) and the Democratic and Social Centre (CDS).
Three Spanish naval vessels which had been sent to the Gulf were removed from the combat area on the outbreak of war.
The Torrejón air base was being used by some 45 per cent of all US forces en route for the Gulf.
In Spain opposition to the war was strong especially among the young.
On Jan. 15 up to 20,000 students and pacifists marched through Madrid; on Jan. 19 up to 100,000 demonstrated in Madrid, Barcelona and other cities.
The communist United Left (IU) was the only significant party overtly against the war.
Portugal also provided humanitarian and logistical support for the multinational force.
The Lajes air base in the Azores remained an important US staging post on the route to the Gulf [see also p. 37968].
In Belgium the government decided on Jan. 16 that the Belgian minesweepers in the Gulf of Oman and a frigate in the southern Red Sea would be used as hospital or refugee ships.
Some military aircraft would be placed at UK and French disposal.
The Cabinet further decided on Jan. 25 to supply the USA with and pay for nearly 1,000 automatic weapons at a cost of US$2,750,000.
In Greece, which had sent a frigate to the Gulf, there was concern that the balance of US military aid to Greece and Turkey was being upset as a result of increased US support for Turkey in the Gulf war.
Denmark had sent one corvette to the Gulf as well as gas masks to Turkey and Israel and medical teams to the war zone.
In Ireland, a neutral country, the Foreign Ministry announced on Jan. 14 that if a war broke out US aircraft would be allowed to use Shannon airport en route for the war zone according to the rules of the UN Charter on Landing and Overflying Rights.
Since the start of the Gulf crisis in August, 88 US military planes had refuelled at Shannon, while during August and September more 1,500 military aircraft had flown over Irish airspace.
Among the countries of central and eastern Europe, Czechoslovakia was counted as part of the US-led alliance; its Federal Assembly on Jan. 16 ratified an agreement with Saudi Arabia on the involvement of Czechoslovak military experts including a special chemical weapons decontamination unit.
Hungary had sent military doctors to Saudi Arabia and Poland had sent two hospital ships.
The governments of both Romania and Bulgaria accepted the US-led initiation of military action as legitimate.
An Albanian Foreign Ministry statement on Jan. 17 favoured "avoidance of any escalation of this war, a ceasefire, and the earliest possible withdrawal of Iraqi forces from Kuwait" .
Turkish reaction to commencement of offensive — Authorization of allied use of bases — Anti-war protests
President Özal declared on Jan. 18 that "Turkey will not engage either in a ground war or in an air war unless it is attacked by Iraq" .
The previous day, however, the National Assembly had approved a resolution authorizing the use of military bases by US-led multinational forces for air attacks against Iraq.
All five opposition parties including the Social Democratic Populist Party (SDPP) and the True Path Party (TPP) voted against this resolution, and on Jan. 27 the leader of the SDPP, Erdal Inönu, accused Özal of misleading parliament by falsely professing neutrality.
On Jan. 23 Aziz accused Turkey of committing "unjustified aggression" and warned of unspecified "consequences" .
His remarks followed increasing speculation about Turkish territorial claims on the oil-rich Iraqi provinces of Mosul and Kirkuk in the event of any post-war redrawing of Iraqi borders.
The granting of permission to use Turkish military bases for the allied offensive, criticized in a formal protest by Algeria on Jan. 24 and condemned also in Iran, Libya and Jordan as well as by Iraq, was reportedly in return for a US undertaking to increase economic assistance from $14,000,000 to $50,000,000 in fiscal 1991, and military aid from $500 million to $700 million in fiscal 1992.
On Jan. 14 Prime Minister Yildirim Akbulut had confirmed that the USA would double to 96 the number of combat aircraft stationed at the NATO military base at Incirlik.
Earlier, on Jan. 2, NATO ambassadors meeting in Brussels had agreed, allegedly at the secret request of the government, to send 42 fighter aircraft.
On Jan. 20 Akbulut emphasised that "joint defence installations…definitely cannot be used without the permission, authorization and knowledge of the government" .
On Jan. 13 an anti-war demonstration in Istanbul was attended by 40,000 people.
On Jan 25 one man was killed in the eastern town of Talvan during nationwide anti-war protests.
There were also reports on Jan. 26 and 30 of anti-US demonstrations in the mainly Kurdish towns of Mersin and Batman.
Iranian reiteration of neutrality
The Iranian government maintained its neutrality on the Gulf crisis [see p. 37696], reacting cautiously to news of the allied attack on Iraq on Jan. 16.
In a statement on Jan. 17 characteristic of the government's public stance, the President, Hojatolislam Hashemi Ali Akbar Rafsanjani, condemned both the USA and Iraq by declaring that the "catastrophe" inflicted by "imperialist and arrogant" powers on the Moslem world could have been avoided "if relations between the countries of the region had been normal" .
The arrival of nearly 100 Iraqi aircraft in Iran between Jan. 26-29 [see above]fuelled fears among the US-led allies that Iran's neutrality was under strain.
However, the Supreme Council of National Security (SCNS) on Jan. 26 announced that all aircraft would be "confiscated" and their pilots kept in custody, stressing that "this policy would be applied to all parties which violate Iranian air, land or sea spaces" , and on the same day Baker confirmed that "we have been assured that Iran intends to remain totally neutral" .
[For Iranian peace initiatives see below.]
On Jan. 25 Rafsanjani described as "suicide" the suggestion that Iran should ally with Iraq against the US-led allies.
There was, however, growing pressure from radical groups for Iran to form such an Islamic alliance; former Interior Minister Ali Akbar Mohtashemi said on Jan. 20 that "the Iranian nation has a religious duty to rise for a jihad" [see also p. 37696].
Anti-US demonstrations in Tehran drew crowds of 2,000 on Jan. 18 and 5,000 on Jan. 21; demonstrations also took place in Orumiyeh, Karaj and Qom.
Other international reaction
Countries in south and south-east Asia with large Moslem populations witnessed growing popular hostility to the action against Iraq.
Large-scale pro-Iraqi demonstrations immediately after the outbreak of hostilities were reported in Pakistan and Bangladesh, both members of the anti-Iraq coalition.
In Malaysia officials confirmed on Jan. 21 that the government's support of UN resolutions had been "very unpopular" .
On Jan. 24 Indonesia's ruling Golkar party also criticized the attack on Iraq.
The government of Prime Minister Chandra Shekhar in India maintained the previous low-profile response, with an expression of "deep sadness" on Jan. 17 coupled with calls for Iraq to begin an immediate withdrawal; only the Communist Party (Marxist) took a firm line in denouncing "unjustified" US aggression, while still calling for Iraq to withdraw from Kuwait.
Support for allied action came from South Korea, Taiwan, Thailand, Singapore and the Philippines.
In Africa countries with sizeable Moslem populations, including Nigeria and Mauritania, reported pro-Iraqi demonstrations, while in South Africa the Islamic Institute was reported on Jan. 16 to be "sympathetic" to Iraq.
Prospects for diplomatic initiatives — US-Soviet statement
Amid renewed calls for an immediate ceasefire there were reports of continued diplomatic initiatives.
Yemen called on Jan. 17 for "the international community in general and the five permanent members of the UN Security Council in particular to halt this haemorrhage" .
On the same day Kadhafi, in a message to Pérez de Cuéllar, urged him to ensure that all "raids on Iraq" would cease following the "retrieval of Kuwait" .
On Jan. 23 Algeria, Morocco, Libya, Tunisia and Mauritania called formally for an urgent meeting of the UN Security Council.
On Jan. 25, however, the Security Council deferred a debate on the Gulf crisis, after a majority agreed that Iraq should first comply with all UN resolutions.
Meanwhile on Jan. 21 Pérez de Cuéllar was reported to have received peace proposals from the Soviet Union, India and Algeria.
On Jan. 30 Pérez de Cuéllar rejected accusations by Aziz, who on Jan. 28 had charged him personally and the UN in general with permitting "ugly and deliberate crimes against Iraqi citizens" .
There were also efforts to initiate a solution among Arab countries.
King Hassan of Morocco on Jan. 19 suggested a Maghreb peacekeeping force to police Kuwait, if Iraq would accept a ceasefire.
Reports on Jan. 22 said that Mubarak had sent a personal envoy to hold talks with Kadhafi.
On Jan. 29 an official spokesman for Sudan's Revolutionary Command Council (RCC) announced that preparations were being made to convene an Arab mini-summit with the participation of Sudan, Yemen, Jordan, Algeria, Palestine, Libya and Tunisia.
Syria's Information Minister Mohammad Salman said on Jan. 27, however, that Syria was not in favour of an international peace conference "which would examine all the regional issues because there were no links between these issues" .
Within the wider group of Moslem countries, Iranian and Pakistani leaders were closely associated with the search for a peace formula.
On Jan. 24 the Speaker of the Iranian majlis, Ayatollah Mehdi Karrubi, formulated a peace plan based on an Iraqi pull-out from Kuwait and the withdrawal of all foreign forces from the region.
On Jan. 25 King Hussein discussed peace proposals with Pakistani Prime Minister Mian Nawaz Sharif, in the midst of a series of meetings on Jan. 22-28 between Sharif and government leaders in Iran, Turkey, Syria, Egypt and Saudi Arabia.
On Jan. 27 Jordanian Foreign Minister Taher al-Masri arrived in Tehran to discuss the possibility of convening a ministerial meeting of the Islamic Conference Organization (ICO), as already advocated by Rafsanjani on Jan. 6 and again on Jan. 26.
On Jan. 21 it was confirmed that a peace formula was also being sought within the framework of the Non-aligned Movement.
A joint US-Soviet statement on Jan. 29 suggested that hostilities could end "if Iraq would make an unequivocal commitment" to withdraw from Kuwait, and take "immediate, concrete steps" to comply with the UN resolutions passed since Aug. 2.
The statement, issued by Baker and Soviet Foreign Minister Alexander Bessmertnykh at the end of three days of talks in Washington, was interpreted in some quarters as representing a softening of the US demand for Iraq's unconditional withdrawal from Kuwait.
Vigorously denying this interpretation, however, the US administration insisted that the declaration represented no change from the US position as previously stated, and that its publication had been motivated by the desire to ensure that the Soviet Union remained a supportive member of the international coalition against Iraq.
Decision to release oil reserves — Criticism from OPEC
On Jan. 18 the 21-country International Energy Agency (IEA), consisting of the major industrialized countries, activated its war energy contingency plan and informed its members that they should make available 2,500,000 bpd to the market within 15 days.
(Non-members including Finland, France and Iceland also agreed to comply with the plan.)
An emergency meeting of the IEA in Paris on Jan. 11 had unanimously approved a contingency plan to take this step in the event of a Gulf war.
IEA Chairman Geoffrey Chipperfield said that "we came to this conclusion to calm the market…and in the event of a breakout of hostilities,…[to]assure a security of supply" .
He indicated that about 80 per cent of the additional oil would come from stockpiles and the balance from measures to reduce demand.
The IEA's governing board on Jan. 28 confirmed the plans.
On Jan. 29 the President of the Organization of Petroleum Exporting Countries (OPEC), Sadek Boussena, accused the IEA of depressing oil prices by releasing stocks in the market.
Oil prices had fallen from $29 to below $20 a barrel (the sharpest one-day fall on record) on Jan. 17, in response to the initial assessment that allied air raids on Iraq were being so successful as to promise rapid military victory.
On Jan. 29 oil prices still stood at about $20 a barrel, compared with OPEC's target price of $21 [see p. 37930].
Chronology of Gulf crisis, January 1991
Jan. 2 Special French envoy Vauzelle flies to Baghdad.
NATO decides to send planes from allied mobile force to defend Turkey from possible Iraqi aggression.
Jan. 4 EC Foreign Ministers agree to invite Aziz to talks in Luxembourg, but this and another offer on Jan. 9 for talks in Algiers are rejected.
Jan. 5 Vauzelle holds talks with Saddam Hussein.
Jan. 6 Saddam Hussein promises "the mother of all battles" if war breaks out.
Jan. 9 Baker-Aziz talks in Geneva.
Jan. 10 Pérez de Cuéllar flies to Baghdad.
Jan. 12 US Congress authorizes use of force against Iraq.
Jan. 13 Pérez de Cuéllar meets Saddam Hussein before leaving Baghdad.
Jan. 14 French peace proposals presented to UN Security Council are blocked.
Iraqi National Assembly session unanimously supports Saddam Hussein and calls for jihad.
Saddam Hussein-Arafat talks.
Jan. 15 Pérez de Cuéllar issues final appeal via Security Council in attempt to prevent "a conflict that none of [the world's]peoples want" .
UN deadline for Iraqi withdrawal from Kuwait expires at midnight New York time.
Jan. 16 Operation Desert Storm begins shortly before midnight GMT.
Jan. 17 Bush announces that "the liberation of Kuwait has begun" .
The price of oil falls from US$30 a barrel to $18 before stabilizing at just below $20 by the end of the month.
First Iraqi Scud missiles hit Israel.
Jan. 19 US airlifts Patriot missiles to Israel after second Scud attack.
Jan. 20 Iraq parades seven captured allied pilots on television.
Launch of first Scuds against Riyadh.
Jan. 23 US announcement that allies have achieved air superiority.
Jan. 24 Japan announces increased contribution to allied war effort at G-7 meeting [see p. 37978].
Jan. 25 US accuses Iraq of pumping oil into the Gulf.
Jan. 26 Widespread peace demonstrations including protests by 200,000 in Bonn, 100,000 in Washington and San Francisco and 50,000 in Paris.
Jan. 27 Iran announces that 12 Iraqi aircraft are being held.
Number reaches 100 by end-January.
Jan. 29 Iraqi captures Saudi coastal town of Khafji.
Baker-Bessmertnykh meeting in Washington ends with joint US-Soviet statement saying that bombing will end if Iraq promises unconditional withdrawal.
French Defence Minister Chevènement resigns.
German contribution to allied war effort is increased.
Jan. 29-31 PLO forces launch rocket attacks at Israel from southern Lebanon.
Jan. 31 Allied recapture of Khafji.
EUROPE
SOVIET UNION
Crackdown in Baltic republics
Soviet forces resorted to military intervention in January in the Baltic republics, thereby providing dramatic evidence of a new hard line in Soviet internal politics.
In both the Lithuanian and Latvian capitals, Soviet forces seized key buildings and installations; 19 people were killed, most of them Lithuanian civilians passively resisting Soviet tanks.
The crackdown provoked an international outcry, although this was greatly tempered by Western recognition of the need to maintain Soviet support for the campaign against Iraq in the Gulf war [see pp. 37934-43].
Failure to convene Lithuanian independence negotiations
On Jan. 2 Lithuania's President Vytautas Landsbergis announced that Lithuania's offer to suspend its March 1990 independence declaration was being withdrawn because of the failure after more than six months to convene negotiations on Lithuania's status.
Landsbergis and the then Soviet Premier Nikolai Ryzhkov had led delegations at "talks about talks" in Moscow beginning on Oct. 2, and at a further meeting on Oct. 10 they had concluded that formal negotiations might begin within weeks.
Prospects for these negotiations had vanished, however, when on Dec. 3 Rafik Nishanov, the Chair of the Soviet of Nationalities (one of the two USSR Supreme Soviet chambers), warned that republics would be unable to negotiate on their individual status unless they first signed the new Union Treaty [see p. 37903].
On Dec. 13 Landsbergis had announced that a further round of preliminary consultations had been postponed indefinitely by the Soviet side.
Despatch of Soviet paratroopers
The crackdown started on Jan. 7 when the USSR Defence Ministry ordered divisions of paratroopers into the three Baltic republics, as well as into Armenia, Georgia, Moldavia and parts of the Ukraine, to enforce conscription and round up deserters.
On Jan. 8 the Defence Ministry sought to justify its operation against draft-dodgers by declaring that conscription levels were so low as to threaten national security.
The commander of the Baltic military district, Col.-Gen.
Fedor Kuzmin, telephoned the Prime Ministers of Lithuania, Latvia and Estonia to warn them not to hinder the paratroopers.
Tension between the republican leaderships and the military had risen in recent weeks over conscription and the stationing of Soviet troops in the republics.
Both the Lithuanian and Latvian leaderships had renewed calls during November for a Red Army withdrawal, and on Nov. 14 the Latvian Supreme Council (formerly Supreme Soviet) had authorized cutting off food and power supplies to Soviet military bases.
Together with continuing anti-conscription demonstrations in Lithuania, this had prompted Defence Minister Marshal Dmitry Yazov on Nov. 27 to announce sweeping new powers for troops to fire on people harassing them or attacking bases, and to seize installations if vital supplies were threatened.
A spate of minor bomb explosions at Communist Party buildings and military installations in Riga, the Latvian capital, fuelled tension further in mid-December.
On Dec. 18 the Presidium of the Supreme Council blamed these bombings on anti-independence extremists wishing to destabilize the republic and to provide the pretext for a Soviet-imposed state of emergency.
On Jan. 2 units of the OMON or "Black Berets" , a paramilitary police force formed by the USSR Interior Ministry in 1987, seized Riga's main press building, recently nationalized but previously the property of the pro-Moscow Latvian Communist Party (CP).
The OMON appeared to be acting on party orders.
There were similar events on Jan. 1-2 in Lithuania's capital, Vilnius, where Soviet Interior Ministry troops seized the Historical Institute and the former Communist Party central committee building, which was claimed by both the pro-CPSU party and the independent party (recently renamed the Democratic Labour Party).
Demonstrations outside Lithuanian parliament — Resignation of Prunskiene
On Jan. 8 the pro-Soviet Yedinstvo ( "Unity" ) group, drawing its support mainly from the Russian and Polish minorities, staged a demonstration outside the Lithuanian Supreme Council building, ostensibly to protest against planned price rises of 200-300 per cent.
Members of the around 5,000-strong crowd smashed windows before being forced back by parliamentary guards and police using water-cannon.
An appeal by Landsbergis for Lithuanians to come to the defence of parliament was answered by several thousand people who formed a cordon around the building.
On the following day Lithuanians surrounding the parliament were confronted by a further pro-Soviet demonstration, although clashes were avoided.
Opposition to price rises by the majority of Supreme Council deputies was the reason for the resignation of Prime Minister Kazimiera Prunskiene on Jan. 8.
She had been unpopular with militant nationalists, who suspected her of being too conciliatory towards Moscow, and they voted down her price rise proposals on the grounds that they might prove socially divisive and thus weaken Lithuania's resistance to Soviet pressure.
Albertas Shiminas was chosen to replace Prunskiene on Jan. 10.
On Jan. 24 it was reported that Prunskiene was living in Switzerland, having fled Lithuania because of fears for her safety.
Gorbachev's order to restore Soviet Constitution in Lithuania
President Mikhail Gorbachev on Jan. 10 issued a message to the Lithuanian Supreme Council stating that the deteriorating situation in Lithuania was the result of flagrant violations of the USSR Constitution and deviations from the Constitution of Soviet Lithuania.
The latter had been scrapped by the Supreme Council upon its declaration of independence, but Gorbachev now ordered it to be restored.
He accused the Supreme Council of allowing citizens' political and social rights to be flouted, and of using "slogans of democracy as a cover for a policy aimed at restoring a bourgeois system" .
Seizure of Vilnius television station and other buildings
After staging several provocative manoeuvres in Vilnius, the newly arrived Soviet paratroopers on Jan. 11 occupied the headquarters of the Lithuanian Defence Council, a government department set up as a first step towards establishing an independent Lithuanian army.
They also seized the central newspaper printing works, in the process injuring one Lithuanian protester whom they shot in the face.
Late on Jan. 11 Lithuanians were reported to be flooding into Vilnius in their thousands to reinforce cordons around key buildings.
In the early hours of Jan. 13 troops from the local Red Army garrison stormed the Vilnius television centre.
At least 13 protesters were killed, most of them run over by tanks as they stood in a human cordon trying to defend the building, and 230 were injured; a soldier also died, shot by one of his own men.
The assault came only a few hours after Gorbachev had reassured a Federation Council meeting in Moscow that force would not be used.
On Jan. 14 Gorbachev publicly denied prior knowledge of the attack on the television station.
USSR Interior Minister Boris Pugo explained that it had been at the request of a "national salvation committee" formed by the pro-Moscow Lithuanian CP on Jan. 11, after its members were allegedly beaten up outside parliament as they protested against "anti-Soviet slander" in the media.
The Vilnius garrison commander had ordered troops, tanks and armoured personnel carriers to the television station, clearing this action with a member of the Baltic Military District command.
After the building was taken the "national salvation committee" installed itself there as a rival government.
Fearing a similar assault on parliament, Lithuanians began to erect concrete barricades around the building, while inside supplies of gas masks and weapons were prepared.
Outside, the military authorities began enforcing an undeclared night-time curfew.
Throughout Lithuania Jan. 14 and 15 were declared national days of mourning.
The killings at the television station gave rise to a clamour of international condemnation, including warnings from the United States administration and European Community (EC) Foreign Ministers that economic aid might be suspended if the Soviet authorities continued this use of force.
President Boris Yeltsin of the Russian Federation flew to Estonia on Jan. 13 and issued a joint statement with the three Baltic Presidents calling for an emergency UN conference on the crisis.
Yeltsin also appealed to Russian soldiers in the Baltic states to disobey orders to use force against civilians, prompting a furious attack on him by Gorbachev.
On Jan. 15 Gorbachev went so far as to suggest that the country's new liberal press law might be suspended in the wake of Soviet media criticism of the leadership's handling of the Baltic crisis.
On Jan. 20 up to 100,000 people marched through central Moscow protesting against the killings in Lithuania and calling for Gorbachev's resignation.
Violence in Riga
Attention switched to Latvia on Jan. 20, when an OMON assault on the Latvian Interior Ministry resulted in a gun battle with Latvian police in which two (ethnic-Russian) police officers and a Latvian TV cameraman were killed.
The attack came shortly after a "committee of public salvation" , led by hardline Latvian CP leader Alfred Rubiks, had proclaimed itself a rival government to that of President Anatolijs Gorbunovs.
In earlier incidents, OMON units on Jan. 14 had briefly occupied a police station in Riga, and had tried to remove two of the barricades which had been put up by Latvians on main roads, bridges and around public buildings in response to events in Vilnius.
One Latvian manning a barricade was shot and wounded.
Early on Jan. 15 the OMON attacked Latvia's police academy, badly beating two police officers and confiscating weapons.
A truck driver whose vehicle formed part of a barricade near a Riga military base was shot dead by OMON on Jan. 16.
Gorbachev's rejection of presidential rule
In an apparent attempt to repair the damage to his reputation both at home and abroad caused by the events in the Baltics, Gorbachev called a press conference on Jan. 22 at which he declared himself "deeply upset" by the killings in Vilnius and Riga.
He confirmed that he had no intention of imposing presidential rule (he had earlier given such an assurance in talks with Gorbunovs), but he continued to lay the blame for the crisis on the "unconstitutional acts" of the Baltic republics' parliaments.
Withdrawal of troops — Postponement of Soviet-US summit
Despite Gorbachev's comments the crackdown in Vilnius continued on Jan. 23 with the seizure of the central newsprint depot, while on the following day troops in armoured cars opened fire on road traffic outside Vilnius, injuring one person.
On Jan. 30 a draft-dodger died in hospital from a gunshot wound sustained the previous day when paratroopers tried to detain him in Vilnius.
Soviet policy appeared to shift on Jan. 30 when Pugo announced that all the paratroopers and two-thirds of the OMON units were being withdrawn.
Reportedly this had been promised on Jan. 29 by the new Soviet Foreign Minister Aleksandr Bessmertnykh [for whose appointment see p. 37970]at the end of talks in Washington with the US Secretary of State James Baker.
It appeared to represent a retreat in the face of international criticism.
At the Washington talks it had been agreed to postpone the summit meeting between Gorbachev and President Bush scheduled for Feb. 11-13.
Both sides said that Bush was too busy with the Gulf War, but US unease about events in the Baltic was widely assessed as having also been a factor.
Incidents in Estonia
Estonia escaped the kind of violence experienced by its Baltic neighbours.
Nevertheless, the republican parliament was barricaded after the Vilnius killings, and tensions rose in the capital, Tallinn, after two bombs exploded on Jan. 21 at factories which were considered centres of Russian worker resistance to the nationalist government.
In an incident linked by unofficial Estonian sources to the crackdown in Latvia and Lithuania, two senior Swedish trade union officials were found murdered in Tallinn on Jan. 24.
The badly beaten bodies of Bertil Whinberg, chair of the Building Workers' Union and a member of the executive of Sweden's ruling Social Democratic Labour Party, and Ove Frederiksson, head of the Wood Industry Worker's Union, were found in a gravel pit on the outskirts of the city.
There were suggestions that the KGB or the pro-Soviet Interfront group might have committed the crime in order to discredit the Estonian government as incapable of maintaining law and order.
Icelandic diplomatic recognition of Lithuania
Iceland on Jan. 31 became the first country to resume diplomatic recognition of Lithuania as an independent state.
AFRICA
AFRICA
Famine threat
In early January aid agencies and international organizations warned that large parts of sub-Saharan Africa faced famine and devastation on an even worse scale than in the mid-1980s.
The recurrence of such a food crisis was attributed to the combination of drought, civil war, and structural underdevelopment, compounded by falling commodity prices and the burden of foreign debt.
The UN World Food Programme (WFP) estimated that the lives of up to 20,000,000 people depended on the provision of emergency food aid.
According to preliminary UN estimates, the total food aid requirement for the region came to 3,800,000 tonnes, the highest estimate ever made, surpassing by far the average requirement of 1,400,000 tonnes in each of the three years 1987, 1988 and 1989.
The Horn of Africa, the subject of the third famine warning in four years, was again worst hit and needed just under two-thirds of total emergency aid.
FAO annual report
In its annual report, released on Dec. 28, 1990, the UN Food and Agriculture Organization (FAO) stated that only 2,700,000 tonnes of the 3,900,000 tonnes pledged by donors in 1989-90 had been delivered, adding that substantially more would be required in the coming year.
It urged developed countries not to let domestic economic problems and concern with eastern Europe divert attention from the needs of millions of Africans.
According to the FAO, two consecutive years of drought had led to reduced harvests in all the countries bordering the Sahelian area, while late rains in Southern Africa had delayed cereal planting, thus increasing the likelihood of lower yields.
The report pointed to 10 countries facing "exceptional food emergencies" in 1991: Sudan and Ethiopia in the Horn of Africa; Burkina, Chad, Mali, Mauritania, Senegal and Liberia in west Africa; and Angola and Mozambique in southern Africa.
Emergency relief would also be needed for Liberian refugees in Guinea, Sierra Leone and Côte d'Ivoire and for Mozambican refugees in Malawi.
In Sudan up to 8,000,000 people were facing starvation, according to relief workers, especially in the south and west.
In Ethiopia 7,000,000 people were facing famine after near total crop failure in Eritrea and parts of Tigray.
In Mozambique, where the rice crop was reportedly 50 per cent down, nearly 2,000,000 people were facing food shortages, particularly in the province of Zambezia.
In Angola a programme co-ordinated by the UN to deliver 110,000 tonnes of food to 1,900,000 people affected by war and drought in nine central, southern and eastern provinces was barely under way due to poor donor response — by mid-December it was reported that only Switzerland and the Netherlands had made donations.
Existing UN food supplies were due to run out by the start of 1991.
Other assessments of food shortages
According to the 1990 report of the UN Economic Commission for Africa (ECA), 100 million people, one-quarter of Africa's population, were receiving less than 80 per cent of daily food needs, and per capita incomes had fallen for the 12th successive year.
Nevertheless, the ECA report noted that in 1989 food production in Africa had actually grown faster than population, for only the third time in 20 years (3.4 per cent, against population growth of 3.2 per cent ), and that food imports had fallen by 12 per cent .
A Southern African Development Co-ordination Conference (SADCC) report, released on Dec. 28, 1990, warned of lower harvests in 1991 than in 1990 in Angola, Botswana, Malawi, Mozambique, Namibia, Lesotho, Swaziland, Tanzania, Zambia and Zimbabwe (though the latter three had food surpluses).
The overall food stocks for the SADCC region had fallen to 333,500 tonnes of maize equivalent in November, from 638,000 tonnes in September, and total food import requirements amounted to 2,350,000 tonnes.
Aid agencies pointed to Uganda and Rwanda as two more countries in serious difficulties, while the UN Disaster Relief Organization claimed that the response to an international appeal for aid for civil war-torn Liberia had been practically non-existent.
Impact of civil wars on food production and relief efforts
Governments, international organizations and aid agencies referred to civil war as a major contributor to the food crisis and a major hindrance to relief efforts.
The Ethiopian government reportedly agreed in January 1991 to allow food to arrive at the port of Assab and to be transported into the rebel-held province of Tigray.
This followed the December 1990 agreement [see pp. 37907-08]under which the Eritrean People's Liberation Front (EPLF) would allow the supply of emergency aid through the port of Massawa, both to areas under its control and to areas still held by the Ethiopian government, including Asmara.
The majority of food aid to Ethiopia was channelled through Sudan, but the WFP hoped to bring in 6,000 tonnes per month through Massawa.
In Sudan, the military government of President Bashir refused until December to admit to the seriousness of the famine, claiming that only 75,000 tonnes of food aid were required as against the UN estimate of a requirement of 1,200,000 tonnes.
The Sudanese government also sought to maintain sole responsibility for the transport and distribution of aid.
In Angola and Mozambique, once self-sufficient in food, armed conflicts had hit production capacity and were now seriously hindering food relief operations, although there were improved prospects of a resolution of the civil wars in these two countries [see p. 37951].
In 1990 the Angolan authorities permitted several non-governmental organizations to open offices in the country, and the UN organized "peace corridors" to transport food across the battle lines dividing the government and the UNITA rebels.
On Dec. 20, however, the government claimed that UNITA had destroyed a bridge in Huila province, across which 25 tonnes of relief supplies were to be transported.
The government thereupon declared that it would allow no more food into rebel-held areas, and the UN was forced to suspend operations.
It was also reported that the International Committee of the Red Cross (ICRC) was forced to halt relief operations in mid-December because of disputes with the two sides.
In Mozambique in 1990 250,000 people were driven off the land by clashes between government and rebel forces.
In spite of peace negotiations between the two sides, access to relief for the estimated 500,000 to 700,000 people behind rebel lines remained a critical problem.
Observers noted that a successful outcome to the peace talks would ironically compound the food problem in Mozambique itself, as it would lead to the return of the 1,000,000 Mozambican refugees in Malawi.
In December a conference of donors pledged US$1,000 million in relief aid to Zambezia, the most affected province, and the Red Cross persuaded the government and rebels to allow it to cross battle lines.
 "Crisis in Africa" appeal by UK aid agencies
On Jan. 8, United Kingdom aid agencies grouped in the Disaster Emergency Committee launched a "Crisis in Africa" appeal, raising record donations, despite fears of "donor fatigue" and the effect of the media's focus on events in the Gulf.
They warned, however, that relief operations were being seriously reduced by soaring fuel costs.
As regards UK government assistance, Overseas Development Minister Lynda Chalker announced in December a £7,000,000 emergency aid programme for Ethiopia and Sudan from existing funds, but a senior government source, quoted in the Independent of Jan. 9, warned that further official financial support would not be forthcoming if there was war in the Gulf.
AFRICA
DJIBOUTI
Reported coup attempt
One soldier was reported killed and two others wounded during an attack on the military barracks at the coastal town of Tadjoura on the night of Jan. 8-9, in what the government claimed was the start of an attempted coup.
According to Interior Minister Khayreh Alaleh Hared, 68 people had been arrested in the early hours of Jan. 9, as they were holding an illegal meeting at a local cemetery; the attack on the barracks had taken place 90 minutes later, and the attackers had escaped, but the two incidents formed part of an attempt to destroy "the sovereignty, existence and unity of Djibouti and its economy" .
The arrest of Ali Aref Bourhan, Chief Minister of the territory before independence from France in 1977, was announced the following day.
On Jan. 13, several people were reported to have been wounded by security forces during demonstrations in protest at the arrests.
Those arrested were reported, like Aref, to be members of the Afar community from northern Djibouti.
Official sources were quoted by the Agence France-Presse news agency (AFP) on Jan. 14 as alleging that Aref had been the financial backer of an attempt to assassinate political and military leaders; if the plan had succeeded, they claimed, a "civil war" between the Afar and Issa communities "would have been inevitable" .
On Jan. 17, Khayreh Alaleh confirmed the arrest of seven alleged "ringleaders" , including Aref and members of the police and armed forces, but denied a BBC report that Ahmed Dini Ahmed, Djibouti's first Prime Minister [see pp. 28499-500], was among them.
Nine others had been arrested the previous day, he added, "following a search operation by the army" in which one soldier had been killed and two wounded.
On Jan. 20 the chairman of the National Security Court announced that "about 20" people had been charged with murder, treason and attempting to take over the government by force.
Those arrested at the cemetery had been released, he added.
AFRICA
SOMALIA
Overthrow of Siyad Barre
Ali Mahdi Mohammed was sworn in on Jan. 29 in Mogadishu as President of Somalia, marking the end of the 21-year rule of President Mohammed Siyad Barre, who had fled the capital three days earlier.
The overthrow of Siyad Barre came at the end of a month of intense fighting on the streets of Mogadishu.
Forces opposed to the President had been in control of much of the country for several months [see pp. 37702-03; 37767-68; 37844-45], with the central government's authority largely confined to the area around the capital.
Rivalries among the rebel movements, however, had delayed an assault on Mogadishu until the three main groups agreed in August 1990 to co-operate to overthrow the Siyad Barre regime.
The United Somali Congress (USC), which drew its support from the Hawiye clan of central Somalia, launched an offensive in late December, while the largest rebel group, the northern-based Somali National Movement (SNM), dismissed as "futile" a government announcement on Dec. 26 that political parties had been legalized with immediate effect.
The USC claimed by Jan. 1 to control large areas of the capital, with the President pinned down in a bunker at a military base south of Mogadishu airport; later reports said he was confined to the presidential palace.
As fighting intensified, the capital was said to be without water or electricity supplies, with food supplies running short and bodies lying unburied in the streets; heavy civilian casualties were reported.
Somalia: Events in January
Jan. 3 Siyad Barre appeals for ceasefire and peace talks, saying that he would accept the result of any negotiations; his appeal is rejected by the USC.
Jan. 7 President's family reported to have escaped to Abu Dhabi.
Jan. 8 Suspension of airlifts as fighting worsens, over 460 foreigners having been evacuated by US and Italian aircraft on Jan. 5-6.
Jan. 9 Peace plan proposed by Italian government, but immediately rejected by USC, providing for Siyad Barre to remain head of state while relinquishing most of his powers to a government of national unity in preparation for a peace conference and UN-supervised elections.
Jan. 12 Italy closes its embassy in Mogadishu and evacuates all its personnel; all foreigners reported to have left by Jan. 14 except medical team from French charity Médecins sans frontières.
Jan. 15 In an apparent attempt to find a political solution, Siyad Barre announces appointment of "national reconciliation committee" ; rebels reject subsequent reports that USC has agreed to ceasefire.
Jan. 20 Radio Mogadishu reports that Siyad Barre has accepted resignation of government of Prime Minister Mohammed Hawadie Madar, and asked Umar Arteh Ghalib, a former Foreign Minister who had been released from house arrest to serve on the reconciliation committee, to form a government.
Jan. 21 Further reports on Radio Mogadishu that rebels have agreed to a truce, again denied by USC.
Jan. 23 USC announces in Rome formation of a national salvation committee with four other opposition movements: Somali Patriotic Movement (SPM), Democratic Front for the Salvation of Somalia, Somali Democratic Movement and Democratic Alliance of Somalia.
The USC says it has asked the SNM to join the other groups "in the national interest to contribute to the common effort to seek a political solution" .
Jan. 24 Siyad Barre hands over power to new 25-member government formed by Arteh, and offers to step down in exchange for a ceasefire.
Jan. 26 Siyad Barre reported to have fled the capital in a tank, to an unknown destination.
(Rebel sources reported that he had fled to the southern port of Kismayu, with the aim of entering Kenya, which had promised him safe conduct.
A USC spokesman said on Feb. 4 that he had arrived in Wajir, northern Kenya, but a Kenyan government official denied the claim.)
Jan. 27 USC broadcasts statement on Radio Mogadishu announcing that it had taken over the government.
Jan. 28 Announcement of choice of Mahdi as President.
Despite Mahdi's calls for unity and negotiation, his appointment as President was reported to have been rejected by other rebel groups, notably the SNM, as well as by factions within the USC.
Promising free elections as soon as possible, he called for all Somalis to participate in a conference to decide the country's future.
Mahdi, 52, had been a government minister in the 1960s, but was imprisoned after Siyad Barre's takeover in 1969.
After his release in the mid-1970s he became a successful businessman and hotelier but later went into exile in Rome, where he helped finance the USC, returning to Somalia in late 1990.
SNM military successes in north
According to reports on Feb. 5, the SNM on Jan. 30 captured the northern regional capital, Hargeisa, as well as Burao and the port of Berbera, after troops loyal to Siyad Barre surrendered or fled.
AFRICA
MALI
Peace agreement with Tuaregs — Anti-government demonstrations — Cabinet reshuffle
On Jan. 6 the government signed a peace agreement with Tuareg rebels, whose uprising had begun with an attack on a police station in June 1990 and led to the imposition of a state of emergency in the north of the country [see pp. 37703; 37800].
Under the accord (i) an immediate ceasefire was declared;(ii) the state of emergency in Gao and Timbuktu provinces was lifted and army troops were to be withdrawn from the area;(iii) an amnesty was granted to all Tuareg political prisoners;(iv) internal autonomy was to be granted to the Adrar region (i.e. Gao and Timbuktu); and (v) additional state funds were to be allocated to the development of the region.
Mediated by the Algerian government, the agreement was signed in the southern Algerian town of Tamanrasset by the Malian ambassador in Algeria, Sinally Coulibali, and Iyad Ag Ghali, the leader of the Popular Front for the Liberation of the Azawad, the main group representing Tuareg interests.
Anti-government demonstrations
In what was widely described as the worst civil unrest since independence, rioting erupted in Bamako, the capital, on Jan. 21 after the police banned two anti-government demonstrations demanding political reforms and the introduction of multiparty democracy.
Four people were reported to have died and many were injured during the disturbances, which continued into the next day.
In April 1990 the ruling Mali People's Democratic Union (UDPM) had held a series of conferences on the country's political system, but the party executive had decided in August to defer any further discussion of the issue until its next congress in March 1991.
Subsequently, newly formed opposition groups, the central trade union, professional organizations, students, religious bodies and even individual members within the UDPM sought to increase pressure on the government to introduce political reforms.
Two demonstrations in support of multiparty democracy had been held on Dec. 10 and Dec. 31.
Cabinet reshuffle
In a significant reshuffle of the Council of Ministers on Jan. 8, President Moussa Traoré relinquished his post as Minister of National Defence, which he entrusted to Brig. -Gen.
Mamadou Coulibaly, hitherto Minister-Delegate for National Defence.
Among the other major changes (i) Gen. Sekou Ly was switched from National Education to Interior and Grassroots Development (hitherto called Territorial Administration) and thus became responsible for maintaining order;(ii) Bakary Traoré, hitherto the Minister for Sports, Arts and Culture, became Minister of Education; and (iii) Lt.-Col. Sambou Soumare entered the government as Minister of Justice.
Col. Issa Ongoiba and Mamadou Sissoko (respectively Ly's and Soumare's predecessors) left the government.
AFRICA
SUDAN
Cabinet reshuffle
A Cabinet reshuffle carried out on Jan. 20, 1991, by the head of state and Prime Minister, Lt.-Gen.
Omar Hassan Ahmad al-Bashir, was interpreted as an effort to strengthen the executive and to broaden the government's representation.
Bashir dismissed the Industry Minister, Mohamed Omar Abdullah, and the Minister of Transport and Communications, Ali Ahmad Ibrahim, whose departments had reportedly come under criticism for poor performance.
Their replacements were Taj el-Sir Mustafa (Industry) and Col. Salah Karrar (Transport and Communications).
The Minister for Relief and Displaced Persons' Affairs, Peter Orat Ador, a non-Moslem, was also dropped from the Cabinet, but no replacement was named.
Two new ministries were created, with Ibrahim Ahmad Omar being appointed Minister of Higher Education and Scientific Research, and Hussein Soleiman Abu-Salih, hitherto Minister of Housing and Public Utilities, becoming Minister of Social Security and Development.
Three portfolios were renamed.
Construction and Public Works (formerly Housing and Public Utilities) went to Osman Abd al-Gadir; Health (formerly Health and Social Security) went to Shakir el-Sarrag; States' Affairs Co-ordination (formerly Local Government and the Co-ordination of Regional Affairs) remained the responsibility of Natali Yanku Ambu.
Meanwhile, Abd al-Basit Sabdrat was appointed Minister of Education and Abdullah Muhammed Ahmed, his predecessor, became Minister of Culture and Information.
AFRICA
LIBERIA
Continuing struggle for control
As of January 1991 four groupings continued to vie for control in Liberia: the Interim Government of National Unity, headed by Amos Sawyer and installed with the backing of the ECOWAS (Economic Community of West African States) peacekeeping force ECOMOG in November 1990; the Armed Forces of Liberia, the remnants of erstwhile President Samuel Doe's forces, currently headed by Gen. Hezekiah Bowen; the National Patriotic Front of Liberia (NPFL), led by Charles Taylor and thought to be in control of much of the countryside outside the capital Monrovia; and the Independent National Patriotic Front of Liberia, led by Prince Yormie Johnson.
Taylor and Johnson, who had parted company in February 1990, appeared to reach a rapprochement in mid-January, raising the possibility of a reunited front against ECOMOG.
The ceasefire agreed in Bamako, Mali on Nov. 28 and reaffirmed in Banjul, The Gambia, on Dec. 21, held throughout January.
Moves under the aegis of ECOWAS to consolidate the fragile ceasefire were reported on Jan. 21 to be deadlocked over the issues of disarmament and confinement of troops, with the NPFL refusing to sign an agreement.
Some agreement was reached over controlling the import of arms, the drawing up of buffer zones and the release of prisoners and hostages.
Taylor attempted to improve his international credibility by sending a NPFL delegation to Nigeria for talks; the delegation was received on Jan. 21 by Nigerian Vice President Vice-Adml. (retd) Augustus Aikhomu.
New claim to presidency
On Jan. 20 Harry Moniba, Vice-President under Doe until mid-1990, laid claim to the presidency.
Moniba had fled from Liberia in September 1990, after three months in hiding following attempts by him and others to persuade Doe to step down.
Speaking from Sierra Leone, Moniba claimed that under the Constitution he should have taken over on the death of Doe in September, and he called on Sawyer's interim government to step down.
Meanwhile Sawyer announced the appointment of six Cabinet ministers to his interim administration and said that it did not intend to stay in power for more than a year.
On Jan. 24 it was reported that 28 members of the Interim Legislative Assembly had taken their seats.
Different views of an interim administration
The Banjul agreement in December proposed that a national conference be convened within 60 days to discuss the establishment of an interim administration.
However there were divergent interpretations of the function of such a conference.
Sawyer's interim regime — which had invited the participation of his opponents — was not itself party to the Banjul agreement.
Liberia's Bar Association opposed the proposed formation of a new interim administration on the grounds that none of the parties to the Banjul agreement had the authority to form one.
Six political parties, which with other interest groups had elected the Sawyer interim government, saw the Banjul agreement as continuing the reconstitution of Liberia's government under ECOWAS auspices, and not as endorsement of another interim administration.
Relief efforts
Distribution of food assistance by local relief organizations was reportedly under way in mid-January, although distribution was still facing difficulties at the end of the month.
Liberia's needs had been assessed by a visiting UN Disaster Relief Organization team in December.
On Jan. 25 the World Food Programme launched a US$29,000,000 food assistance programme for Liberian refugees in Sierra Leone, Guinea and Côte d'Ivoire.
Previous UN appeals on Liberia's behalf had yielded little [see p. 37946], but some non-governmental relief organizations were beginning to set up teams in Monrovia towards the end of January.
ECOMOG casualty figures — Murder of journalists
The Nigerian field commander of the ECOMOG force, Gen. Joshua Dogonyaro, giving the first official casualty figures for the force, said at the end of January that there were "not more than" 60 casualties.
Liberian radio reported in late January that two Nigerian journalists, Knees Imodibie and Tayo Awotunsin, missing in Liberia since August 1990, had been killed by the NPFL in October.
AFRICA
CAPE VERDE
Opposition election victory
In the country's first multiparty legislative elections on Jan. 13, the ruling African Party for the Independence of Cape Verde (PAICV), which had held power since independence in 1975, was defeated by the recently formed Movement for Democracy (MPD).
Unofficial results showed that the MPD had gained 68 per cent of the vote and 56 seats in the new 79-seat National People's Assembly.
The PAIGC had gained 32 per cent and 23 seats.
The Prime Minister and PAICV leader, Gen. Pedro Pires, tendered the resignation of his government on Jan. 15 and committed the party to "constructive opposition" .
The MPD leader, Carlos Viega, a former public prosecutor, said that the extent of his party's victory had been "unexpected" .
The vote, he said, proved that a "transition by the democratic way is possible in Africa" .
Among his party's priorities he included removing traces of the one-party state, dissolving the political police, and above all developing the country's economy; there would be no radical changes in foreign policy.
The process of transition to multiparty democracy had been initiated in February 1990 [see pp. 37239; 37802]and formally sealed with the adoption in September 1990 of amendments to the constitution providing for direct elections for the presidency, the abolition of the position of the PAICV as the sole ruling party, the separation of party and state, and the formation of other political parties.
Under the new Constitution, the President would appoint a government on the basis of the results of the parliamentary elections.
President Arístides Pereira asked the outgoing government to stay on in a caretaker capacity until after the presidential elections due on Feb. 17.
AFRICA
GUINEA-BISSAU
Decision on multiparty system
At an extraordinary congress held on Jan. 21-25 the ruling African Party for the Independence of Guinea-Bissau and Cape Verde (PAIGC) formally approved the introduction of "integral multipartyism" .
The decision concluded a debate within the party and more generally on the country's political future which had been launched by President Joao Bernardo Vieira in May 1990 [see p. 37802]in response to demands for change.
Vieira told the 425 delegates that the country needed political reform; in future the PAIGC would no longer be the ruling force of the country, he declared.
He also issued an appeal to all citizens to participate in political liberalization and in the development of the country.
AFRICA
GAMBIA-SENEGAL
Framework agreement on future links
The governments of the neighbouring countries of The Gambia and Senegal signed a treaty of friendship and co-operation on Jan. 8.
Although no details of its terms were made available, officials declared that it would form the basis for future formal bilateral links, which had been put into question after the collapse of the 1982 Confederation of Senegambia in September 1989 [see pp. 37062; 37801].
Officials also disclosed that all bilateral treaties (dealing with defence and security, health, trade, commerce, agriculture and energy) were under review.
New agreements were expected to be ready for signature by July 1991.
AFRICA
SENEGAL
Report on torture and killings in Casamance
The human rights organization Amnesty International claimed in a report published on Jan. 10 that torture and summary executions by the Senegalese security forces were becoming more common in the southern region of Casamance, where a separatist movement had been intensifying its armed struggle since mid-1990 [see pp. 37799-800].
The report stated that "the government appears to have given the security forces carte blanche to kill and torture in Casamance in response to attacks from its opponents" .
In the second half of 1990 at least 300 people had been charged with offences against state security in the region, and 11 people had died from torture while under arrest.
In response the government declared on Jan. 11 that it would investigate the allegations contained in the report and publish the results in a White Paper.
It had rejected outright a previous report by Amnesty published in May 1990 [see p. 37800].
AFRICA
TOGO
Moves towards pluralism
In an address on Jan. 10 to mark the 24th anniversary of his accession to power (on Jan. 13, 1967), President Gnassingbe Eyadema announced a political amnesty and a change in the financing of the ruling Rally of the Togolese People (RPT), the country's sole legal party.
Both moves were seen as tentative steps towards opening up the political system.
In his address Eyadema spoke of "the forthcoming introduction of a multiparty system" .
Although he made no specific commitment on its timing, this statement marked a significant change from the RPT's firm rejection of multiparty politics in May 1990 [see p. 37809].
In an appeal to exiles to return to Togo to "contribute their quota to the construction of their country" , he offered a "general amnesty to all those who were sentenced for political offences or plots against the nation" .
He excluded, however, those convicted of involvement in the coup attempt of September 1986 [see p. 35110-12], saying that such cases would be "examined separately" .
He also announced the cancellation as of Jan. 1 of the collection of RPT membership dues by means of deductions at source from all workers' salaries.
This scheme had been in operation since 1977.
AFRICA
SAO TOMÉ AND PRINCIPE
Defeat of ruling party in first multiparty elections
The Movement for the Liberation of Sao Tomé and Príncipe — Social Democratic Party (MLSTP-PSD), in power as sole legal party since independence in 1975, was unexpectedly defeated in the country's first multiparty legislative elections, held on Jan. 20.
The MLSTP won 30.53 per cent of the vote and 21 of the 55 seats (previously 40) in the National People's Assembly.
The opposition Democratic Convergence Party — Reflection Group (PCD-GR) won 54.37 per cent and 33 seats.
The remaining seat went to the Democratic Opposition Coalition, which won 5.23 per cent of the vote; a fourth party, the Christian Democratic Front, won 1.5 per cent of the vote.
Turnout among the 60,000 registered electors was about 80 per cent.
Commentators suggested that the key factor in the Marxist MLSTP's defeat was the country's economic crisis, marked by labour disputes in recent months and exacerbated by collapsing world prices for the country's economic mainstay, cocoa.
The election result came only days after the electoral defeat of the ruling party in Cape Verde, the other island state of Portugal's five former African colonies [see p. 37948].
The government of Prime Minister Celestino Rocha da Costa resigned on Jan. 25, before the official elections results had been released.
PCD general secretary Daniel Lima dos Santos Daio, a former Defence Minister who had left the MLSTP in 1982 and had formed the PCD as an underground organization in 1987, was named to form an interim government pending presidential elections on March 3.
AFRICA
CONGO
New Prime Minister — Government reshuffle
President Denis Sassou-Nguesso on Jan. 8 appointed Gen. Louis Sylvain Goma as Prime Minister in succession to Alphonse Poati-Souchalaty, who had resigned in December.
In a government reshuffle announced by Goma on Jan. 14 Brig.
Raymond Damas Ngollo became Defence Minister (a portfolio previously held by the President), and was succeeded as Minister of State for Forestry by Paul Ngatse.
A new Interior Ministry headed by Col. Celestin Goma-Foutou incorporated the Ministry of Territorial Administration (previously headed by Goma-Foutou) and the Ministries (previously headed by Ngatse) of Information and of Physical Education and Sport.
The ministerial portfolio of Mines an Energy, held by Aimé Emmanyel Yoka, was upgraded to a Ministry in the Presidency, and Yoka (hitherto also Minister of State Control) additionally took over from Auxence Ickonga as Minister in the Presidency for State Control.
Ban on radio coverage of opposition parties
It was announced on state radio on Jan. 4 that Goma-Foutou, in his capacity as Territorial Administration Minister, had banned state radio journalists from broadcasting news about opposition parties; these had been legalized just over a week earlier.
On Jan. 5 eight journalists were suspended, apparently for opposing the ban.
AFRICA
NIGERIA
1991 budget — IMF standby agreement
The 1991 budget, announced by President Ibrahim Babangida on Jan. 1, marked a significant shift of emphasis, with some relaxation of the austerity programme and a projection of a modest surplus.
The harsher budgets of previous years had been framed in the context of significant deficits, and in line with the requirements of the IMF-backed structural adjustment programme.
Despite the boost to foreign exchange revenue due to recent higher oil prices (total foreign exchange earnings in 1991 were projected at US$11,855 million), the budget was nevertheless adjudged a cautious one, with Babangida stressing strict discipline in its implementation.
Gross domestic product (GDP) was expected to rise by 6 per cent, compared with 5.2 per cent in 1990, and a target was set to reduce inflation to 8 per cent by year-end.
Nigeria's total external debt had risen by 8 per cent to $31,500 million in the year to October 1990, and debt service obligations weighed heavily on federal revenue, some 16,5000 million naira being available for debt servicing within the 1991 revenue and expenditure projections (US$1.00=N8.7506 as at Jan. 14, 1991).
Recurrent federal expenditure was budgeted at N12,883 million and federal capital expenditure at N9,240 million.
The sum of these two figures was 2.5 per cent below the 1990 budget (and more than 20 per cent below actual 1990 federal expenditure), the cuts being apparently largely due to the ending of subsidies to parastatals.
Total revenue for the year was estimated at N68,730 million.
Almost N64,000 million of that sum was allocated to the Federation Account, of which 30 per cent went to finance state governments and 15 per cent to local government.
Significant budget measures included a 26 per cent increase in foreign exchange made available at auction, a measure expected to stabilize the naira; the end of state funding for the two political parties (the Social Democratic Party and the National Republican Convention); and a doubling of the minimum wage (from the level of N125 per month set in 1981) for public-sector employees.
Interest rates were set to fall to around 21 per cent following the Central Bank of Nigeria's announcement of a new base rate of 14 per cent.
IMF standby facility
On Jan. 10 the IMF approved a 15-month standby facility authorizing drawings of 319,000,000 special drawing rights (SDR1=US$1.43 as at Jan. 7, 1991).
AFRICA
ZAIRE
Registration of political parties — Political unrest
In accordance with legislation passed in November 1990 [see p. 37844]a total of 19 new political parties were registered on Jan. 16; the remaining 94 applications were rejected by the authorities as "incomplete" .
By the Jan. 31 deadline a further nine parties had successfully completed the registration process.
On Jan. 19 the government had announced that all legal parties would be submitted to certain restrictions, binding them to give prior notice to the municipal authorities of any meeting, demonstration or public gathering, along with details of the organizers.
The successful parties included the Popular Movement for the Revolution (Mouvement populaire de la révolution — MPR), led by President Mobutu Sese Seko and hitherto the sole legal party; the Union for Democracy and Social Progress (Union pour la démocratie et le progrès social — UDPS) led by Etienne Tshisekedi wa Malumba; a party led by Nguza Karl I Bond (who had been Foreign Affairs Minister until May 1990 — see p. 37446); and an African Socialist Party.
The opposition parties had on Jan. 4 called for a three-day strike on Jan. 7-9, with the aim of securing the "immediate and unconditional" resignation of Mobutu, notwithstanding his promise (in an address to the country on Dec. 31) that 1991 would see the organization of presidential and legislative elections and of a referendum on a new constitution.
On Jan. 6 Mobutu met party leaders at N'Sele (60 km from Kinshasa) to discuss a new constitution and an electoral timetable, and, according to a report in the International Herald Tribune of Jan. 16, he obtained their agreement to participate in an interim government, provided that such a government were "representative, responsible and independent" .
(The parties represented included the UDPS, the Christian Social Democratic Party — PDSC, the Union of Independent Federalists and Republicans — UFERI, the Congolese National Movement — MNC, the Republican Democratic Rally — RDR, and the Federalist Christian Democracy — DCF.)
Alleged coup attempt
The Agence France-Presse (AFP) news agency reported from Kinshasa on Jan. 7 that there had been an abortive coup attempt the previous month, as a result of which a number of high-ranking officers were said to have been imprisoned.
One of those named, Adml.
Lomponda wa Botende, a former Chief of Staff, expressed his astonishment at the report, and the Defence Ministry denied that any coup attempt had been made.
AFRICA
UGANDA
New Prime Minister — Release of former minister
George Cosmas Adyebo was on Jan. 22 named as Prime Minister by President Yoweri Museveni.
Adyebo, a 43-year-old economist, was a member of the ruling National Resistance Council, and formerly principal of the Uganda College of Commerce.
He replaced Samson Kisekka, who had held the post since Museveni took power in January 1986.
Kisekka, who was appointed Vice-President, was in his mid-70s and reported to be in poor health; in February 1988 he had been given three deputies to ease his workload.
Museveni also announced that First Deputy Prime Minister Eriya Kategaya would become National Political Commissar, replacing Kiiza Besigye.
Release of Rurangaranga
A former Cabinet minister, Edward Rurangaranga, and five others were released from prison on Jan. 23 after the state dropped murder charges against them for lack of evidence.
Rurangaranga, Minister of State in the government of President Milton Obote, had been arrested soon after Obote's overthrow in 1985.
The six were charged with the murder of three men in Bushenyi district in the south-west in 1983.
Following their release, a police officer was quoted by a local newspaper as saying that he had been forced to sign a statement implicating them in the murders.
Sentencing of former minister
Former Youth, Culture and Sports Minister Brig.
Moses Ali was sentenced to 30 months' imprisonment for illegal possession of weapons on Jan. 7.
Ali had been arrested in April 1990 amidst allegations that he had been plotting to overthrow the government, but was acquitted of terrorism charges in December.
A minister in Idi Amin's government until 1978, Ali led the Uganda National Resistance Front in opposition to the Obote regime; he joined Museveni's government, initially as Tourism and Wildlife Minister, in 1986.
AFRICA
RWANDA
New rebel incursions
Following their invasion in October 1990 [see pp. 37765-66], Uganda-based rebels of the Rwandan Patriotic Front (FPR) launched smaller-scale incursions in December and particularly in January 1990.
As before, the rebels were repelled by units of the Rwandan army, but repeated claims by the government that order had been restored in the border region were put under question by reports of renewed fighting.
[For background information on the FPR and its demands, see p. 37765.]
According to government sources, the FPR attempted an invasion on Dec. 12, 1990, and around 200 rebels were killed in subsequent clashes with the army in Muvumba province.
In another incursion involving around 800 rebels on Jan. 4, around 150 rebels were reportedly killed and many others wounded.
On Jan. 13 the government claimed that FPR forces were preparing another major invasion.
The Rwandan government repeated the accusation, as made in connection with the invasion of October 1990, that the FPR was being assisted by the Ugandan army.
The Ugandan Foreign Ministry denied the accusation as totally unfounded.
A group of around 400 to 600 FPR fighters, remnants of the larger force which had launched the October invasion, crossed the border on Jan. 23 and briefly occupied the district town of Ruhengeri, in the north-west of Rwanda.
On Jan. 25 the government claimed that the rebels had suffered many casualties and had been driven back over the border into Uganda.
On Jan. 27 Radio Rwanda reported that 120 rebels had been killed in fighting in the Kinigi region.
In diplomatic moves to resolve the crisis, President Juvénal Habyarimana visited Burundi and Kenya on Jan. 15 and Jan. 16 respectively to discuss various initiatives to restore peace in Rwanda and the region, in particular the holding of a regional conference on the plight of thousands of Rwandan refugees in neighbouring countries.
(One of the FPR's main demands was for the return home of all Rwandan refugees.)
Such a conference was due to be convened in Kinshasa, Zaïre, in February.
AFRICA
ANGOLA
Peace plan — Cabinet changes
The Popular Movement for the Liberation of Angola (MPLA) government announced on Jan. 23 that it had accepted "with only slight amendments" a peace plan to end its 15-year civil war with the National Union for Total Independence of Angola (UNITA), the US-backed rebel group led by Jonas Savimbi.
The plan, finalized earlier in the month by Portuguese, Soviet and United States diplomats, had already received a broad measure of acceptance from UNITA.
A sixth round of the ongoing peace negotiations was due to be held soon in Portugal, and both sides predicted that the talks would lead to the agreement of a ceasefire.
Although the details of the peace plan were not made public, diplomats familiar with the negotiations suggested that it included a timetable for multiparty elections and details of designated areas where the two sides would be permitted to station forces during the truce.
The ceasefire would be guaranteed by international observers, and outside military assistance to either side would be prohibited.
Cabinet and military changes
Earlier in the month, on Jan 9, President José Eduardo dos Santos announced changes to the Angolan Council of Ministers (Cabinet).
José Eduardo dos SantosC. -in-C. of the Armed Forces; Chairman of the Council of Ministers; Minister of State for the Economic and Social Sector Kundi PaihamaInspection and Control; State Security Fernando José de França Van-DúnemPlanning Col.-Gen.
Pedro Maria Tonha "Pedalé" Defence Pedro de Castro Van-Dúnem "Loy" External Relations Lazaro Manuel DiasJustice
Angolan Council of Ministers
*António Burity da Silva NetoEducation Flavio Joao FernandesHealth Aguinaldo JaimeFinance
**Ambrosio Antonio de Oliveira SilvestreTrade
*Justino José FernandesIndustry
*Joao Lourenço LamboitePetroleum and Energy Col. António Paulo KassomaTransport and Communications Diogo Jorge de JesusLabour and Social Security
*Isaac Francisco Maria dos AnjosAgriculture Francisco Antonio Magalaes Paiva "Nvunda" Interior Joao Henriques Garcia "Cabelo Branco" Construction Francisco Ramos da CruzFisheries Marcolino José Carlos MocoYouth and Sports Boaventura da Silva CardosoInformation
*New appointment.
**Altered portfolio.
The President also announced changes within the administrative apparatus of the ruling party, and transferred Lt.-Gen.
Antonio dos Santos Franca Ndalu from Chief of General Staff of the Armed Forces to Deputy Defence Minister.
AFRICA
MOZAMBIQUE
Progress of ceasefire
There were reports during January that the Rome accord, the partial ceasefire negotiated on Dec. 1, 1990, to cover the Beira and Limpopo corridors, was breaking down in the face of persistent attacks by the rebel Mozambique National Resistance (MNR or Renamo).
Under the terms of the accord, all Zimbabwean troops in Mozambique were to withdraw to the Beira and Limpopo corridors, the two strategic routes linking landlocked Zimbabwe with the Mozambican ports of Beira and Maputo.
In return, the South African-backed MNR rebels promised to end all attacks within the two areas.
The Zimbabwean army completed its withdrawal by Dec. 28 — well ahead of the Jan. 5 deadline as specified in the ceasefire agreement — and handed over its positions to Mozambican units loyal to the government.
Nevertheless, MNR attacks continued, with raids upon the towns of Chimoio, Motasse and Beira itself, in addition to attempts to destroy rail links and the Beira corridor oil pipeline, the conduit for almost all of Zimbabwe's refined fuel.
The United States Assistant Secretary of State for African affairs, Herman Cohen, said that the US was "disappointed" by the "established fact" that the MNR had violated the Rome accord.
Outside the corridors the 15-year-old civil war between the government and the MNR continued with its accustomed brutality as the rebels mounted attacks in an attempt to take over positions previously controlled by the Zimbabwean army.
Meanwhile the government and the MNR resumed talks in Rome on Jan. 26-27.
Although there was no official statement concerning the content of the agenda, it was widely believed that the two sides would begin detailed discussions for the first time since the negotiations began in July 1990.
Cabinet reshuffle — Promulgation of multiparty law
President Joaquim Alberto Chissano made four changes to the Council of Ministers on Jan. 3.
Aguiar Mazula, hitherto Labour Minister, was appointed Minister of State Administration; Teodato Hunguana, hitherto Information Minister, became Minister of Labour; Rafael Maguni was appointed Minister of Information; and Octavio Mutemba became Minister of Industry and Energy.
Chissano promulgated on Jan. 30 the country's Law on Political Parties, unanimously passed earlier in the month by the Assembly of the Republic, which provided the legal foundation for the establishment of a multiparty state.
AFRICA
SOUTH AFRICA
ANC-Inkatha meeting
In a meeting apparently heralding a breakthrough in relations, high-level delegations from the African National Congress (ANC) and the Zulu-based Inkatha Movement met in Durban on Jan. 29.
Despite a long history of hostility between the two organizations the tone of the seven-hour meeting was described as good-natured, while the joint peace strategy which emerged was seen as a positive development.
There was significant symbolic value attached to the talks as the first meeting in 30 years between Nelson Mandela, the ANC deputy president, and Chief Mangosuthu Gatsha Buthelezi, leader of Inkatha, who had once been fellow students at university, and were now the country's two most influential black leaders.
The hope was that their public encounter would diffuse tension in the townships and workers' hostels, which were the fighting grounds in the power struggle between the rival movements.
According to the Financial Times (London), fighting between the rival supporters had left more than 1,000 dead in the Johannesburg area since August 1990, and 3,000 dead in Natal province since mid-1987.
The violence had placed severe strains on the ANC's relationship with the government over the issue of perceived police partiality towards Inkatha supporters, and had delayed the holding of negotiations on a post-apartheid constitution.
Many in the ANC had come to regard Buthelezi, the Chief Minister of the "self-governing" homeland of KwaZulu, as a "sell-out" by virtue of his collaboration with the Pretoria government in the discredited homeland system.
They also suspected him of fomenting violence to prevent Inkatha being marginalized as a political force.
Reports suggested that senior figures in the ANC had sought to prevent a top-level meeting until it appeared that a cessation of violence could not be brought about by any other means.
Buthelezi for his part had frequently called for such a meeting, insisting on meeting Mandela on an equal footing.
In a joint strategy for peace, the two organizations called upon their members to "cease all attacks against one another with immediate effect and promote the quest for peace" .
Both organizations gave an undertaking to curb violence among their members and committed themselves to political tolerance and freedom of political activity, recognizing the other's right to exist "with its own policies and programmes" .
The two sides called upon the police to act without political bias.
Significantly, it was also agreed that the two leaders would jointly tour the violence-affected areas, and that structures would be set up to convey the strategy to the grass-roots level, and to work towards the rehabilitation of the stricken communities.
ANC all-party conference proposal
The ANC on Jan. 8, in a statement marking the 79th anniversary of its founding, proposed the convening of an all-party congress which would draft the broad principles of a new constitution.
The ANC had previously insisted that the drafting should be left to a Constituent Assembly chosen in a non-racial election.
This position had been rejected by the government, but the holding of an all-party conference had reportedly been discussed at "secret" talks between Mandela, ANC president Oliver Tambo and President F. W. de Klerk in December 1990 [see p. 37910].
The three principal tasks of the proposed congress would be (i) to set out the broad principles within which the detailed constitutional work could be carried out;(ii) to determine the make-up of the body which would draw up the constitution; and (iii) to establish an interim government to oversee the transition process until a new government was in place.
Such a congress would not be a substitute for an elected Constituent Assembly and could not itself write a new constitution.
Mandela said on Jan. 8: "An all-party congress means exactly that…
It would be a mistake for the ANC or the government to think that they are the only parties in the negotiating process."
Gerrit Viljoen, the government's senior negotiator on constitutional matters and Minister for Constitutional Development, welcomed the proposal.
It was, however, rejected by Buthelezi, who claimed that the congress would be designed to enable the ANC to take power, and was also rejected by the radical Pan-Africanist Congress (PAC), which was opposed to dialogue with the government.
The right-wing Conservative Party also made known that it would not attend.
Renewed "death squads" suspicions
The findings of the Harms Commission of Inquiry, which in November 1990 concluded that there was no proof in allegations that the police operated death squads to eliminate prominent government opponents [see p. 37843], were called into question by a court decision on Jan. 18.
Judge Johan Kreigler dismissed a libel action brought against two newspapers, the independent Afrikaans Vrye Weekblad and the Weekly Mail, by the head of the police forensics service, Lt.-Gen.
Lothar Neethling.
The papers had accused Neethling of issuing poison to members of so-called hit squads for administering to anti-apartheid activists.
This case rested, as did the Harms Commission, on the credibility of former police Captain Dirk Coetzee, who claimed to have received the poison from Neethling [for his allegations, first published in November 1989, see p. 37033].
Coetzee had four years earlier fled from South Africa and joined the ANC.
The Harms Commission had concluded that his evidence (heard in London) was unreliable, but Kreigler accepted Coetzee's story, concluding that Neethling had misled his court (and the Harms Commission) in claiming never to have met Coetzee.
Massacre at funeral vigil
At least 35 mourners at a nocturnal vigil for a murdered ANC activist were killed on Jan. 12 when unidentified gunmen attacked a crowd at Sebokeng, south of Johannesburg, using automatic AK-47 rifles and hand grenades.
The motive for the killings was unclear; reports suggested that the gunmen were part of a gang organized by Inkatha.
The township had on previous occasions been the scene of faction fighting between ANC and Inkatha supporters.
The police, accused of inaction in the face of warnings of a possible attack, stated that an offer of police protection for the mourners was refused by the ANC.
Sebokeng was declared an "unrest area" and placed under a curfew on Jan. 13, as police announced the arrest of 10 men in connection with the incident.
In late January Mandela revealed that the ANC had demanded the removal and replacement of certain police officers, whose names had been submitted to de Klerk, and who were regarded by township communities as having orchestrated violence.
White farmers' protest
Some 5,000 right-wing white farmers used farm vehicles to bring Pretoria to a standstill on Jan. 29 in a protest at government agricultural and economic policies, including uncertainty about anticipated amendments to the Land Act which would desegregate land ownership.
Ciskei coup attempt
Brig.
Joshua Oupo Gqozo, who in March 1990 had seized power in the nominally independent Ciskei homeland [see p. 37305], survived a coup attempt against his regime on Jan. 26.
Gqozo said he had been forewarned of a coup plot, and the two conspirators were stopped by a police road block as they attempted to enter the capital, Bisho, from the direction of Transkei.
They were named as Col. Mangwane Khosana, Gqozo's former right-hand man who had recently escaped from custody facing treason charges, and Lt.-Gen.
Charles Sebe, son of former President-for-Life Lennox Sebe whom Gqozo had ousted.
Khosana was shot dead in an ensuing gun battle with Ciskeian troops; Sebe escaped to the bush but was soon afterwards shot dead by soldiers at a remote mission clinic.
AMERICAS
UNITED STATES
State of the Union address
President George Bush gave the second State of the Union address of his presidency on Jan. 29, the first such address to be given during wartime since the end of Vietnam conflict.
Speaking to both houses of Congress only 13 days after ordering United States forces into combat against Iraq, the President devoted much of his oration to the Gulf war, passages which were greeted by thunderous applause and standing ovations [see p. 37940].
The President's address also covered a range of other foreign and domestic issues, on which excerpts are given below.
The Cold War and the Soviet Union.
"The end of the Cold War has been a victory for all humanity…
Germany is united.
Europe has become whole and free — and America's leadership was instrumental in making it possible.
"Our relationship with the Soviet Union is important…
That relationship has helped to shape these and other historic changes.
But like many other nations we have been deeply concerned by the violence in the Baltics, and we have communicated that concern to the Soviet leadership.
[See pp. 37944-45 for January developments in the confrontation between Baltic republics and the central authorities in the Soviet Union.]
"The principle that has guided us is simple: our objective is to help the Baltic peoples achieve their aspirations, not to punish the Soviet Union…
We will watch carefully as the situation develops.
We will maintain our contact with the Soviet leadership to encourage continued commitment to democratization and reform.
If it is possible, I want to continue to build a lasting basis for US-Soviet co-operation, for a more peaceful future for all mankind.
The US economy.
"I know, tonight, in some regions of our country, people are in genuine economic distress.
I hear them…
I understand and I'm not unrealistic about the future.
But there are reasons to be optimistic about our economy…
Yes, the largest peacetime economic expansion in history had been temporarily interrupted.
But our economy is still over twice as large as our closest competitor.
We will get this recession behind us and return to growth — soon.
Budget and legislative agenda.
"We must begin with control of federal spending.
That's why I'm submitting a budget that holds the growth in spending to less than the rate of inflation.
"We have prepared a detailed series of proposals that include:
"A budget that promotes investment in America's future — in children, education, infrastructure, space and high technology.
"Legislation to achieve excellence in education.
"A blueprint for a new national highway system.
"A research and development agenda that includes record levels of federal investment and a permanent tax credit to strengthen private research and development and create jobs.
"A comprehensive national energy strategy that calls for energy conservation and efficiency, increased development, and greater use of alternative fuels.
"A banking plan to bring America's financial system into the 21st century, so that our banks remain safe and secure.
"In addition to these proposals we should recognize that our economic strength depends upon being competitive in world markets.
We must continue to expand America's exports…and move towards a free trade zone throughout this entire hemisphere.
Social policy.
"The budget includes a plan of action…at home to put more power and opportunity in the hands of the individual.
Freedom and power to choose should not be the privilege of wealth.
They are the birthright of every American.
"Civil rights are also crucial to protecting equal opportunity.
Every one of us has a responsibility to speak out against racism, bigotry and hate.
We will continue our vigorous enforcement of existing statutes, and I will once again press the Congress to strengthen the laws against employment discrimination without resorting to the use of unfair preferences.
"We are determined to protect another fundamental civil right — freedom from crime…
The Attorney General will soon convene a crime summit of our nation's law enforcement officials, and to help us support them we need tough crime control legislation, and we need it now.
As we fight crime we will fully implement our National Strategy for Combating Drug Abuse.
Recent data show we are making progress, but much remains to be done.
We will not rest until the day of the dealer is over, forever.
"Good health care is every American's right and every American's responsibility.
So we are proposing an aggressive programme of new prevention initiatives…to promote a healthier America and to help keep costs from spiralling.
Political reform.
"…The American people are increasingly concerned about big-money influence in politics…
The time has come to put the national interest above the special interest and totally eliminate political action committees.
That would truly put more competition in elections, and more power in the hands of individuals.
New focus for Strategic Defence Initiative.
"…With remarkable technological advances like the Patriot missile, we can defend against ballistic missile attacks aimed at innocent civilians…
I have directed that the SDI programme be refocused on providing protection from limited missile strikes — whatever their source."
Banking and airline crises
During January the federal banking authorities faced a renewed spate of failures among the 10,000 small banking institutions which conducted the bulk of America's retail banking activity.
Pressure on the financial markets worsened dramatically after Jan. 4, when President George Bush conceded in public, for the first time, that the country was "in a slowdown economically, if not a recession" .
With manufacturing companies throughout the country reporting falling industrial orders, the US dollar fell steadily during January, towards two dollars to the pound sterling.
The sense of crisis was heightened by dramatic closures in the airline industry.
Bank failures — Overhaul of banking regulations
For some years the growing number of bank collapses had been putting pressure on the Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation (FDIC), the government body which guaranteed the safety of private savers' deposits in most, but not all, of the federally approved banks.
The FDIC was already weak from helping to bail out a large number of savings and loan institutions (the so-called "thrifts" ), some of which had lost large sums through misguided speculation or outright corruption [see p. 36843; 37412].
The FDIC on Jan. 6 decided to close the Bank of New England, the 21st largest bank in the country, and to seize its assets.
The bank, which was secured by the FDIC deposit scheme, had lost over $1,400 million during 1990 — largely because of failed investments in property development.
The FDIC action came after worried investors had rushed to withdraw some $1,000 million of their savings, leaving the bank insolvent.
Meanwhile, a bank emergency had been declared on Jan. 1 in Rhode Island, where the state authorities had closed 45 local banks which did not enjoy FDIC protection.
The banks' own private deposit insurance scheme had collapsed because of what were termed "extremely high delinquency rates" among borrowers.
At least 23 banks, with losses totalling nearly $1,000 million, were ordered to remain closed because they appeared to be insolvent.
Efforts began to secure FDIC backing for banks not actually bankrupted by the collapse.
The prospect of a radical overhaul of US banking legislation was confirmed on Feb. 5 when the US Treasury announced proposals including the abolition of two laws dating from the 1930s which were widely blamed for the fragmented character of US banking.
The Glass-Steagall Act and the McFadden Act prevented banks from operating in more than a few states at a time, and also restricted their scope for involvement in the securities markets and other financial services — areas where their international competitors already had wide powers.
Worsening of airline crisis
Pan American World Airways, formerly the largest airline in the USA, announced on Jan. 8 that it had filed for protection from its creditors under Chapter 11 of the US insolvency code, following a long period of almost continuous losses which industry sources put at $3,000 million.
For some years Pan Am had been selling some of its more profitable routes to rivals, in an effort to head off its mounting financial problems.
There was chronic overcapacity on domestic US passenger air routes, and rising fuel prices now coincided with a period of heavily reduced passenger bookings, connected with the weakness of the dollar and with fears arising from the Gulf crisis.
Eastern Airlines, the sixth-largest airline in the USA, also registered for Chapter 11 protection on Jan. 18, and all its aircraft were grounded pending a possible sale.
The closure followed more than four years of successive crises at Eastern, culminating in a prolonged strike in 1989 [see p. 37412]in which staff had resisted the management's ultimately successful attempt to cut wages and withdraw trade union recognition.
Recently, the company had been accused by its rivals of worsening the general problems of the industry by sharp price-cutting.
Analysts estimated in January 1991 that US airlines had lost about $2,000 million in 1990, of which Eastern had accounted for some $600 million.
United Airlines had reported on Jan. 16 that its final-quarter losses in 1990 had been the worst on record, and that its projections for 1991 were "even more troubling" .
Delta Air Lines, the third-largest carrier in the USA, reported a $270,000,000 loss in the final quarter, and the domestic carrier Southwest Airlines declared a $4,580,000 quarterly loss.
However, Continental Airlines, which had entered Chapter 11 protection during 1990, said in November that it had reduced its operating deficits.
Termination of naval stealth bomber project
Defence Secretary Dick Cheney cancelled the navy's highest priority aircraft programme, the A-12 "stealth" bomber, on Jan. 7.
Cheney stated that he was terminating the $4,780 million project because neither contractors nor navy officials were able to predict the cost of correcting major flaws within the programme.
Officials described the termination as the largest weapons contract ever to be cancelled by the Defence Department.
Cheney's unexpected decision was the culmination of several weeks of controversy surrounding the A-12.
In early December 1990 the Defence Department had released an internal report which cited "errors of judgment and failures of supervision" in the programme which was estimated to be at least $1,300 million over budget and 18 months behind schedule.
Amongst those held responsible, Vice-Adml.
Richard C. Gentz, commander of the Naval Air Systems Command, was ordered to retire from the service by Feb. 1, 1991, and Rear Adml.
John F. Calvert and Capt. Lawrence G. Elberfeld were removed from the programme and formally censured.
It was also reported that the Justice Department was conducting a criminal investigation of contract payments to the General Dynamics Corp. and the McDonnell Douglas Corp., the contractors responsible for building the A-12.
The A-12 had been designed to replace the ageing A-6 bombers currently deployed on aircraft carriers.
Like the air force's B-2 bomber and F-117 fighter it was to use "stealth" materials and design in order to minimize the degree to which it would be subject to radar detection.
The maiden flight of the A-12 had been scheduled for November 1991, with a view to the aircraft becoming operational in the mid-1990s.
General Dynamics suggested that the cancellation would force it to lay off 4,000 of its 100,000 employees, while McDonnell Douglas estimated that it would make some 3,000 redundancies.
Both companies expressed disappointment at Cheney's decision and said that they would contest the cancellation.
The escalation of the A-12's costs was seen as a failure for the fixed budgeting principle much praised by the Defence Department during the 1980s.
Although attractive as a cost-controlling measure, the fixed budget was considered by many experts to be unrealistic in practice, particularly when funding projects which required the development of new technologies.
Cheney's decision to cancel rather than rescue the stricken programme was also widely interpreted as an attempt by the Defence Department to repudiate the long-standing convention that defence contractors could enter into unrealistic contracts confident that the government would make good any losses suffered in cases other than fraud or gross mismanagement.
The fact that Cheney felt able to cancel the A-12 was indicative of the altering priorities of the Defence Department in the post-cold war era.
The range and technological sophistication of the aircraft had been seen as necessary to penetrate advanced Soviet air defences, but were of less value against less advanced military opponents.
Supreme Court decisions
Upholding of machine-gun law
The Supreme Court on Jan. 14 upheld a federal law banning the private ownership of machine guns.
The justices left intact a ruling by the 11th US Circuit Court of Appeals, which had held that the US Congress had acted properly when in 1986 it had prohibited individuals from possessing or transferring machine guns.
Lawyers for the National Rifle Association (NRA), one of the strongest of US pressure groups, had brought the case on behalf of a Georgia gun collector.
They argued that the appeals court had wrongly interpreted the federal legislation and that the prohibition of any type of gun-ownership by law-abiding citizens was an infringement of the constitutional right "to keep and bear arms" as enshrined within the Second Amendment.
Dennis Henigan, of the Legal Action Project at the Centre to Prevent Handgun Violence, called the decision a "big victory" , and said that it showed that the Second Amendment was "no threat to reasonable gun laws" .
Sanctuary Movement convictions — Abortion ruling — Civil rights
In other business the Supreme Court upheld the convictions of eight members of the nationwide Sanctuary Movement, who claimed that their rights had been violated when agents had infiltrated church services to uncover evidence that they were harbouring illegal aliens from Central America.
The eight had claimed that their actions had been justified by their religious beliefs which held that US immigration laws were forcing many people to live under threat of death in El Salvador and other countries in the region.
The Court also refused to remove a 1987 injunction which limited the scale and scope of permissible protests outside an Ohio abortion clinic.
On Jan. 22 the Supreme Court refused to allow the only all-male dining club at Princeton University to maintain its exclusion of women as members.
The decision brought to an end a case which had begun in 1979 when a female student filed a complaint over the exclusion with New Jersey civil rights officials.
Nomination of new head of Republican Party
The protracted search for a new chairman for the Republican National Committee (RNC)— the party's leading position — ended on Jan. 7 when the presidential press secretary, Marlin Fitzwater, announced that Agriculture Secretary Clayton Yeutter had been chosen for the post by President George Bush.
The appointment was formally endorsed unanimously by the RNC when it convened in Washington for its annual winter meeting on Jan. 25.
Yeutter, 60, had served as Special Trade Representative in the Reagan administration and was president of the Chicago Mercantile Exchange from 1978 to 1985.
He had raised cattle in central Nebraska before coming to Washington in the mid-1970s.
Although known as a technocrat rather than an ideologue, Yeutter's conservative credentials were impeccable.
His views on divisive issues such as abortion, crime and affirmative action were not clearly defined, however, and it was generally thought that this factor, together with his general pragmatism, would assist him in seeking to heal the current divisions within the Republican Party.
Yeutter was selected to head the Republican Party after William Bennett had unexpectedly turned down the job [see p. 37911].
Following Bennett's withdrawal a number of other candidates had been unsuccessfully approached until Yeutter was offered the post on Jan. 3.
Lee Atwater, 39, the outgoing RNC chairman, had been diagnosed in March 1990 as having an inoperable brain tumour.
Following the ratification of Yeutter's appointment, he was given the ceremonial title of general chairman of the party.
In a reflective article for the February 1991 issue of Life magazine, Atwater admitted that he had been one of the "most ardent practitioners" of negative campaigning tactics as manager of Bush's 1988 presidential election campaign against Michael Dukakis.
Apologizing for the first time for some of those tactics, he expressed regret over the "naked cruelty" of certain remarks directed at Dukakis.
Edward R. Madigan, a member of the House of Representatives for 18 years, was nominated to replace Yeutter as Agriculture Secretary.
Madigan, the senior Republican on the House agriculture committee, was a representative for the state of Illinois.
Stock market corruption cases
In early January the government achieved a breakthrough in its investigation of trading fraud in the futures markets, when a Chicago jury convicted 10 soyabean brokers and traders of more than 300 charges including racketeering, mail and wire fraud and violations of the Commodities Exchange Act.
Those convicted were among 48 people indicted for fraud in 1989 after a two-year inquiry by the Federal Bureau of Investigation (FBI)[see also p. 37406].
The convictions appeared to give new life to government efforts to combat corruption in the Chicago stock exchange following the failure in mid-1990 to secure convictions against three Swiss franc futures traders on most of the charges against them.
Uncovering of price-rigging ring
The authorities claimed to have smashed a multi-million dollar stock-rigging scheme on Wall Street when, on Jan. 23, the Manhattan District Attorney ordered the arrest of 21 securities brokers on fraud and racketeering charges.
The traders, who were alleged to have defrauded thousands of investors by manipulating share prices, were arrested after a three-year undercover investigation.
The case marked the first use of the Organized Crime Control Act of New York State in connection with fraud on Wall Street's financial markets.
Investigation of Teamsters
It was reported on Jan. 8 that former federal judge Frederick B. Lacy, the court-appointed independent administrator assigned to clean up the notoriously corrupt Teamsters union (International Brotherhood of Teamsters, Chauffeurs, Warehousemen and Helpers of America), had banned one of the union's vice-presidents, T. R. "Teddy" Cozza, for having knowingly associated with figures involved in organized crime.
In November 1990 Lacy had vetoed the appointment of Jack B. Yager to a union vice-presidency on the grounds of his past association with criminals; in December he banned vice-president George Vitale of Michigan from the union for five years for alleged embezzlement.
The president of the Teamsters, William J McCarthy, had himself come under criticism recently after he awarded the union's printing contract, worth $350,000 per month, to his son-in-law.
Delay of Noriega trial
After a year of legal wrangling the trial on drugs-trafficking charges of former Panamanian leader Gen. Manuel Noriega was set to proceed on June 24, 1991.
The decision was announced by federal district judge William Hoeveler at a pre-trial hearing on Jan. 11.
The trial had been due to begin on Jan. 28, but was delayed after Noriega's lawyers claimed that the prosecution had used procedures which threatened to deny the defendant a fair trial.
The defence claim was founded upon the secret recording of Noriega's telephone calls — including those with his lawyers — by the authorities.
The existence of the tapes came to light when they were acquired by Cable Network News, which broadcast portions of them in defiance of a court prohibition.
Whilst admitting that there had been procedural "irregularities" , Hoeveler rejected a defence motion that the charges against Noriega be dismissed.
A further delaying factor was Noriega's difficulty in finding the funds to pay his defence team.
Although he was alleged to have made huge profits from drug trafficking, Noriega's bank accounts had been frozen since the time of his arrest.
AMERICAS
CANADA
Implementation of goods and services tax
A 7 per cent goods and services tax (GST), a comprehensive value added tax, took effect on Jan. 1.
The controversial new tax had been approved by the House of Commons in early 1990 but had been blocked in the Senate where the opposition Liberal Party held a majority.
The Progressive Conservative Party (PCP) federal Prime Minister, Brian Mulroney, eventually overcame this obstacle by using an arcane constitutional device to create a PCP majority in the upper chamber; however, the Liberals used procedural and judicial processes to delay the tax legislation so that it did not receive its royal assent until Dec. 17.
Renewed fighting on Mohawk reservation
The uneasy truce between Quebec police and the Mohawk Indians, established in the aftermath of the 11-week siege in mid-1990 (in which one policeman was killed and many police and Indians injured), was broken on Jan. 8 when 13 officers and at least six Mohawks were injured in renewed fighting.
The latest violence followed an attempt by police to stop a lorry for a minor traffic violation on the Kahnawake reservation, immediately south of Montreal.
In the resulting confrontation several hundred Mohawks armed with clubs and guns fought running battles with police.
At least eight Indians were arrested.
Claude Ryan, Quebec's Security Minister, vowed that his government would not tolerate any repeat of the 1990 disorder, and dispatched 150 police to the reservation to restore order.
Mohawk Grand Chief Joe Norton warned that there would be further violence unless the Quebec authorities agreed to return policing of the reservation to the control of the Indians, who had policed it for 11 years prior to the outbreak of the 1990 trouble.
He also appealed to the federal government to address the grievances of the Indians, which included land compensation claims and poor living conditions.
AMERICAS
HAITI
Failure of coup attempt
The position of the President-elect Fr Jean-Bertrand Aristide was bolstered on Jan. 7 when the Haitian army crushed an attempted coup d'etat led by Roger Lafontant.
Aristide, a left-wing Roman Catholic priest, had won by a landslide in the presidential elections on Dec. 16.
His victory was strongly opposed, however, by forces loyal to Jean-Claude Duvalier, the former dictator overthrown in 1986.
Lafontant, a former Interior Minister and notorious Duvalierist leader, had returned from exile in July 1990, since when the military had repeatedly refused to act on a warrant for his arrest.
Lafontant and several dozen supporters — including a former presidential candidate, Alphonse Lahens — seized control of the presidential palace late on Jan. 6, and forced interim President Ertha Pascal-Trouillot to announce her resignation.
In an attempt to fulfil his promise to prevent Aristide from taking office on Feb. 7, Lafontant declared himself provisional president, and committed himself to create a "true democracy" and to "wipe out the blot and bloody insult" of the Dec. 16 election.
Tens of thousands of Haitians responded to news of the coup attempt by taking to the streets where, armed with machetes and clubs, they paralysed the capital by building and then setting fire to barricades.
In response to the mass protests, Chief of Staff of the 8,000-strong army, Gen. Hérard Abraham, denounced the coup attempt and pledged his support for Aristide.
Loyal troops stormed the presidential palace on Jan. 7, freeing Pascal-Trouillot and arresting Lafontant.
In the aftermath of the coup attempt mobs engaged in widespread violence and looting which resulted in some 100 deaths and damage estimated at several million dollars.
The homes of known Duvalierists were attacked as were several Roman Catholic properties, the Church establishment having long expressed its opposition to Aristide.
Many Duvalierists fled to the countryside to escape popular retribution.
Although the President-elect formally deplored the bloodshed, he suggested that the people had acted in self-defence, and attributed the violence to corrosive effects of those aspects of Haitian society which had been left "unpunished" for too long.
Aristide was criticized by the Haitian business sector and by United States elements for not condemning the actions of his supporters more fully, although the US government also formally welcomed the failure of the coup.
Run-off elections for legislature
Voters went to the polls on Jan. 20 for run-off elections for those National Assembly seats where no candidate had won an overall majority on the first ballot (held in conjunction with the presidential elections on Dec. 16).
Turnout in the second round was reported to be around 20 per cent.
In the first round Aristide's National Front for Change and Democracy (NFCD) had won 25 of the 110 seats in the two legislative chambers, while 13 went to the National Alliance for Democracy and Progress (ANDP) led by Marc Bazin and Serge Gilles.
AMERICAS
BARBADOS
General election
The Democratic Labour Party (DLP) government of Prime Minister Erskine Sandiford was returned for a second five-year term at a general election on Jan. 22.
The DLP won 49 per cent of the vote and retained 18 of its 20 seats in the 28-member House of Assembly.
The Barbados Labour Party (BLP), led by former Foreign Minister Henry Forde, increased its share of the vote from 40 to 44 per cent and boosted its representation from three to 10 seats.
The National Democratic Party (NDP), a DLP splinter group formed in February 1989 by former Finance Minister Richie Haynes, failed to retain any of the four seats which it had held at the dissolution.
The overall turnout was around 60 per cent compared with 76 per cent in 1986, and an average in past elections of just under 80 per cent.
Since the 1986 election (when the DLP won 24 of the then 27 seats) support for Sandiford had declined.
The Prime Minister's personal style, together with his handling of the economy and the issue of law and order, had been the subjects of particular critical attention.
The 1991 result was nevertheless widely interpreted as a vote of confidence in Sandiford's leadership ability (although the DLP's share of the vote fell by 10 per cent), given the extent of the factional infighting and the party splits since the death in 1987 of its charismatic leader Errol Barrow.
Although the country's economy had grown in real terms by 3.5 per cent in 1989, the Central Bank's current prediction was that the figure for 1990 would show a 3 per cent contraction, attributable largely to a drop in tourism and to the continuing weak performance by export manufacturing.
The crushing defeat of the NDP raised questions as to the political future of Haynes — once commonly described as "the second most powerful man in Barbados" — who was beaten into third place in his own constituency.
Despite the defeat Haynes insisted that the NDP would be a "major factor in Barbadian politics in the future" , but most political analysts interpreted the party's manifest failure to establish a mass base as a fatal flaw.
Speaking after the DLP victory, Sandiford stated that he would devote his new term to "maintaining a sound economy" and suggested that he would also strive to accelerate progress towards the economic integration of the Caribbean.
He reiterated his commitment to "economic justice" , a vaguely defined concept which, within the context of Barbadian politics, was generally taken to mean greater participation by blacks within the white-dominated private sector of the country's economy.
AMERICAS
GUATEMALA
Second round of presidential elections
In a second-round run-off on Jan. 6 between the two leading candidates for the presidency, Jorge Serrano Elias of the Solidarity Action Movement (MAS) emerged as the clear winner with 936,338 votes (68 per cent), while Jorge Carpio Nicolle, the candidate of the National Centrist Union (UCN), won 438,990 (32 per cent ).
The turnout, at 42.9 per cent of the registered electorate of 3,204,955, was the lowest ever recorded.
The latest results of the Nov. 11 congressional elections showed that the MAS had won only 27 of the 100 seats in Congress compared with 41 for the UCN.
Serrano, born in 1945, was a conservative businessman and a member of the evangelical Protestant Shadai sect.
He had been president of the Council of State in 1982-83 under Gen. Efraín Ríos Montt and came third in the 1985 presidential elections [see p. 34285].
He was sworn into office on Jan. 14, taking over from Vinicio Cerezo (also a democratically elected civilian, of the Christian Democratic Party — PDCG — whose candidate had come third in the first round), together with his Vice-President and fellow evangelical, Gustavo Adolfo Espina Salguero.
He announced the formation of a multiparty Cabinet of "national unity" .
Alvaro Arzú IrigoyenForeign Affairs Gen. Luis Mendoza GarcíaDefence Col. Ricardo Méndez RuizInterior Alvaro HerediaCommunications, Transport and Public Works Manolo BendfeldtUrban and Rural Development Adolfo BoppelAgriculture Irma Raquel Zelaya RosalesFinance Richard Aitkenhead CastilloEconomy María Luisa Beltranena de PadillaEducation and Culture Mario Solórzano MartínezLabour Miguel Angel MontepequeHealth Carlos Leonel Hurtarte CanoEnergy and Mines Antulio Castillo BarajasSpecific Affairs Federico LinaresCentral Bank President
Guatemalan Cabinet
Alvaro Arzú was the former mayor of Guatemala City and co-founder with Alvaro Heredia (the acting mayor) of the right-wing National Advancement Party (PAN), as whose candidate he came fourth in the first round of the election.
Raquel Zelaya, a neo-liberal economist, was an advisor to the previous government.
Richard Aitkenhead was head of the Guatemalan Managers' Association and was connected with the PAN leadership.
María Luisa Beltranena was a magistrate on the supreme electoral board and a university vice-rector.
Mario Solórzano was secretary-general of the Social Democratic Party (PSD) and had been a presidential candidate in 1985.
Miguel Montepeque and Antulio Castillo were both MAS leaders.
Referring to Serrano's relationship with the military, traditionally dominant in civilian politics, Caribbean Insight of February 1991 commented that the confirmation of Col. Ricardo Méndez as Interior Minister marked "a small victory" for Serrano, while there could be no doubt that the new Defence Minister, Gen. Luis Mendoza was "the choice of the military High Command alone" .
Serrano announced an emergency economic plan to control inflation, and proposed a social pact between labour, government and business to improve real wages, halt speculation and reduce the public-sector deficit.
He promised to guarantee the security of the populace and to continue the peace process.
Relations with Soviet Union
Guatemala and the Soviet Union on Jan. 4 signed an agreement at the UN headquarters in New York re-establishing diplomatic relations which had been broken off in 1947.
AMERICAS
NICARAGUA
New Education Minister and National Assembly President
President Violeta Barrios de Chamorro on Jan. 10 apppointed Humberto Belli Pereira as the new Minister of Education, replacing Sofonías Cisudror Leiva.
At the same time several former contra leaders were appointed to senior government posts and a number of supporters of Vice-President Virgilio Godoy were not reappointed.
Carlos Hurtado Cabrera Interior Violeta Barrios de Chamorro Defence Humberto Belli Pereira Education Enrique Dreyfus Morales Foreign Affairs Emilio A. Pereira Alegría Finance Roberto Rondón Sacasa Agriculture and Livestock Silvio de Franco Montalván Economy and Development Jaime Icabalceta Mayorga Construction and Transport Ernesto Salmerón Bermudéz Health Francisco Rosales Arguello Labour Antonio Lacayo Oyanguren Presidency
Alfredo César, a presidential adviser and a former leader of the contras, on Jan. 9 succeeded Miriam Arguello as president of the National Assembly.
He was elected with the votes of 64 deputies (Sandinista National Liberation Front and pro-Chamorro members of the ruling National Opposition Union — UNO) out of a total of 92.
Sale of army missiles to Salvadorean guerrillas
The armed forces commander, Gen. Humberto Ortega Saavedra, on Jan. 10 swore his allegiance and that of his forces to the President and the Constitution.
Earlier, Chamorro had resisted pressure to dismiss Ortega after the army admitted on Jan. 2 that four of its officers had stolen 28 Soviet-made anti-aircraft missiles from army stockpiles in October and had shipped them to guerrillas in El Salvador.
The four officers were arrested together with 11 civilians.
Spokesmen for the Chamorro government stressed that a small group of officers had acted on their own authority to ship the missiles, which included Sam-7s and Sam-14s and which had been used to shoot down Salvadorean army aircraft on Nov. 23 and Dec. 4.
The Foreign Minister, Enrique Dreyfus, who had discussed the matter with President Cristiani of El Salvador, was among those who held Ortega responsible, pointing out on Jan. 4 that Nicaragua had violated international agreements by allowing the Soviet missiles to be used by third parties without authorization.
Ortega's office on Jan. 4 condemned the officers responsible and the provision of army weapons under any circumstances "to any guerrilla movement, regardless of how just its struggle may be considered to be" .
AMERICAS
EL SALVADOR
Death of US military advisers
The Farabundo Martí National Liberation Front (FMLN) on Jan. 2 shot down a transport helicopter with three United States military advisers on board over Lolotique, eastern El Salvador.
The first FMLN announcement stated that one of the advisers had died instantly and the others within minutes from their injuries; however, a further statement on Jan. 9 noted that two members of the unit which brought down the helicopter had been arrested on charges of murdering wounded prisoners of war, and that they would be dealt with according to "war justice" if found guilty.
This second statement confirmed the US conviction, backed up by evidence from local people and from US pathologists who examined the bodies, that two of the men had been shot after the crash.
The FMLN on Jan. 21 admitted that investigations had shown that its soldiers had shot the two men and it proposed that they should be tried by an FMLN tribunal with independent participants.
A total of 15 US military personnel were reported to have lost their lives in El Salvador over the past decade.
Resumption of peace talks — Earlier proposed release of US military aid
It was reported at the end of January that talks under UN mediation between the government and the FMLN which became deadlocked in September 1990 [see p. 37707], had resumed earlier in the month in Mexico City and in San José, Costa Rica, and were making progress.
President Bush had announced to the US Congress on Jan. 15 his decision to release US$42,500,000 in military aid to El Salvador, on the grounds that guerrillas of the FMLN had failed to comply with certain conditions laid down in October 1990, when the United States decided to withhold the aid [see p. 37770].
If the FMLN demonstrated a "serious and constructive approach" to the UN-supervised peace talks, Bush said, and if a ceasefire and a political settlement could be reached within the next 60 days, the military aid to the government might continue to be withheld.
During this 60-day period progress would also be monitored on the investigation into the murders in November 1989 of six Jesuit priests, their housekeeper and her daughter [see p. 37038].
Bush's announcement specified that he was not satisfied with the co-operation of the Salvadorean armed forces in this investigation, in which nine army officers had been accused.
Two government prosecutors in the case had resigned on Jan. 9, claiming that intimidation of witnesses had made their task impossible.
A Spanish parliamentary commission, which had visited El Salvador in November 1990 to investigate the murder of the Jesuits (five of whom were Spanish), reported in its findings on Jan. 29 that the involvement of the Salvadorean armed forces in the murders was evident, and that others apart from the nine soldiers at present accused also bore responsibility.
The report noted that the commission had encountered lack of co-operation and deliberate obstruction on the part of the armed forces, some sectors of the Salvadorean government and the US administration itself, in its efforts to clarify the events.
Cabinet change
Oscar Santamaría left his post as Justice Minister on Jan. 24 and took over as Minister for the Presidency on Jan. 28.
He was succeeded as Justice Minister by René Hernandez Valiente, hitherto Education Minister.
AMERICAS
PANAMA
Partial legislative elections and local elections
Elections were held on Jan. 27 to nine National Assembly seats which had remained vacant since the May 1989 elections, when the relevant voting papers were spoiled or destroyed, and also to 170 local government posts.
It was the first occasion on which the country had voted since Gen. Manuel Noriega was removed from power by US forces in December 1989 and replaced by President Guillermo Endara Gallimany [see pp. 37112-13].
Turnout for the local elections was exceptionally low, but was much higher in the nine districts where National Assembly seats were at issue.
The left-wing opposition National Liberation Coalition (Colina), which had supported Noriega in 1989, won five of these seats and Endara's Democratic Civic Opposition Alliance (ADOC) the remaining four.
Following the revocation of the annulment of the May elections in December 1989 [see p. 37113], the distribution of the 58 seats confined by the Electoral Commission in February 1990 was: ADOC — 51 seats, Revolutionary Democratic Party — six, Labour Party (PALA)— one.
AMERICAS
CENTRAL AMERICA
Meeting of Central American leaders
The heads of state of Mexico and the other Central American countries of Guatemala, Honduras, El Salvador, Nicaragua and Costa Rica, together with the Foreign Ministers of Venezuela and Colombia, met in Tuxtla Gutiérrez, Mexico, on Jan. 11.
Panama was not represented as Mexico did not recognize the legitimacy of its present government.
The participants agreed to accelerate negotiations for a free trade agreement to be implemented by 1996 at the latest, and concluded an agreement for the continued purchase of Mexican and Venezuelan oil by Central American countries on favourable terms.
AMERICAS
OAS
Accession of Guyana and Belize
On Jan. 8 Guyana and Belize were accepted as respectively the 34th and 35th members of the Organization of American States (OAS) at its general assembly in Washington.
The new President of Guatemala, Jorge Serrano, stated after his election in January [see p. 37956]that Guatemala would continue talks with Belize to settle their territorial dispute [see p. 36999], which had held Belize back from becoming a member of the OAS for many years and which Serrano described as "belonging to the past" .
AMERICAS
COLOMBIA
Surrender of drug traffickers — Death of hostages
Jorge Luis Ochoa, joint leader of the Medellín drug cartel, surrendered to the authorities on Jan. 15 in response to government assurances in September and October including a guarantee that drug traffickers who gave themselves up would not be extradited to the United States [see pp. 37772; 37851].
A total of seven traffickers had surrended to date, including Ochoa's brother [see p. 37914].
The first to surrender, Gonzalo Mejía, was released by decision of a judge on Jan. 11, after only two months in custody.
The government said that it would appeal against the decision which it called a "wilful violation of the law" .
On Jan. 25 Diana Turbay Quintero, a journalist and one of eight people held hostage for several months [see p. 37772]by drug traffickers of the Medellín and Calí cartels, who called themselves the "Extraditables" , was fatally wounded, apparently by her captors, when police tried to rescue them.
She was a magazine editor and the daughter of former President Júlio César Turbay Ayala.
The hostages were being held by Extraditables as bargaining counters to force further concessions from the government, which was anxious to end drug-related violence in Colombia.
Three of the eight had already been released [see pp. 37851; 37914], but after the rescue attempt the Extraditables threatened to kill two of the remaining four, and announced the renewal of all-out war against the police.
On Jan. 29 President César Gaviria Trujillo made a fresh offer, extending an earlier decree to include crimes committed up to the time of surrender, and on Jan. 30 the Extraditables, maintaining that the police had in fact killed Diana Turbay, announced that they were reconsidering their latest declaration of war and would abstain from violent action for the moment.
The body of another hostage, Marina Montoya, was found in Bogotá on Jan. 31.
She had apparently been dead for a week.
The Extraditables subsequently claimed that they had decided to spare her life but had been unable to prevent her murder from being carried out.
Pardon for guerrillas
According to an agreement signed on Jan. 29 by the government and the Maoist Popular Liberation Army (EPL), the EPL would lay down its arms on March 1 and become a legal political party with two seats in the Constituent Assembly.
A decree pardoning EPL guerrillas who wished to be reintegrated into civilian life was approved by the government on Jan. 22; it also covered the Revolutionary Workers' Party (PRT), which was to lay down its arms on Jan. 26, and the militant indigenous Quintín Lamé Commando.
AMERICAS
ECUADOR
Cabinet changes
The Minister of Industry, Commerce and Integration, Jacinto Jouvin, and of Finance and Public Credit, Jorge Gallardo, resigned in early January and were replaced respectively by Pablo Better and Juan Falconi.
The government denied that the changes had been precipitated by disagreements on economic strategy.
AMERICAS
SURINAM
New Cabinet
The army-backed government of provisional President Johan Kraag, installed following the military coup of Dec. 24, 1990 [see pp. 37912-13], named a new Council of Ministers in early January whose purported task was to prepare the country for fresh elections.
The timetable for the holding of these elections was extended from 100 to 150 days.
Jules Wijdenbosch, expected to be a dominant figure in government policy-making, was confirmed as Prime Minister and became Vice-President and acting Finance Minister; he resigned as chairman of the pro-military National Democratic Party (NDP) to take up his new posts.
Wijdenbosch had been Prime Minister of the military-backed government responsible for the 1987 Constitution allowing in that year the first general election since 1977 [see pp. 35758-59].
Maj. Rupert Christopher, a close aide of the instigator of the December coup, Lt.-Col. Désiré "Desi" Bouterse (who had immediately been reinstated as C.-in-C. of the Army), became Minister of Defence.
Among other Cabinet members, most of whom were new to national politics, were Ronnie Ramlakhan at Foreign Affairs, Hans Breeveld in charge of Internal Affairs and Regional Development, Eddy Varseveld at Economic Affairs and Paul Sjak Sjie as Minister of Justice and Police.
AMERICAS
PERU
Cabinet changes
A formal resignation of the entire Council of Ministers in late December allowed President Alberto Keinya Fujimori to make adjustments to his government.
The principal change was the departure of Foreign Minister Luis Marchand Stens, who was replaced on Jan. 8 by Vice-Adml. (retd) Raúl Sánchez (Sotomayor.
Félix Alberto Canal Torres took over from Sotomayor as Fisheries Minister, and Jaime Yoshiyama was appointed as Minister for Transport and Communications, replacing Eduardo Toledo González.
AMERICAS
BOLIVIA
1991 budget
The budget for 1991, presented to Congress at the end of January, envisaged a 5 per cent decrease in expenditure and a reduction in the public-sector deficit to the equivalent of 2.8 per cent of the gross national product.
The education, health and defence sectors would not be subject to spending cuts.
An annualized inflation rate of between 12 and 15 per cent was predicted and provision made for salary increases in line with this rate.
Trial of former minister in US court
A federal jury in Miami, Unites States, on Jan. 9 found a former Interior Minister, Col. Luis Arce Gómez, who had been extradited to the USA in December 1989, guilty on two charges of drug-trafficking, each of which carried a potential maximum sentence of 15 years.
Sentence was due to be pronounced on March 22.
Arce Gómez, who had during his term of office in 1980-81 [see pp. 30585; 31123]allegedly organized a paramilitary death squad in collaboration with the Nazi war criminal Klaus Barbie, also faced charges in Bolivia of murdering a trade union leader and nine leaders of the Movement of the Revolutionary Left (MIR), as well as of conspiracy, theft of state assets and violations of the Constitution.
AMERICAS
CHILE
Military corruption
The Chamber of Deputies received in late January the report of an all-party parliamentary committee investigating payments amounting to the equivalent of US$3,000,000 made by the army in 1989 to Augusto Pinochet Hiriart, the son of former President Augusto Pinochet Ugarte, in the so-called "Pinocheques" case.
Pinochet Hiriart stated in his testimony to the committee in mid-January that the money, apparently used to buy out his share in a small bankrupt arms manufacturing company, was in fact a payment for three loans which he had personally secured in Europe for the company.
The committee made no allusion to the former President in its final conclusions.
The issue of military corruption thrown up by the Pinocheques and La Cutufa cases [see pp. 37852-53]had severely damaged the image of the army, which had projected itself as incorruptible and on this basis had hoped to defend itself successfully against charges of human rights abuses during the military dictatorship.
A report on human rights abuses drawn up by a "national commission for truth and reconciliation" , appointed by President Patricio Aylwin Azócar in April 1990, was due to be published in the near future.
In December it appeared that there were moves within the Army to engineer the resignation of Gen. Pinochet as its Commander-in-Chief.
Negotiations were said to have been set up between the government and Gen. Jorge Ballerino, one of Pinochet's close advisers, to negotiate terms.
However, on Dec. 19 Pinochet called a full army alert, in a show of force; when the alert was called off 18 hours later, Patricio Rojas Saavedra, the Defence Minister, announced on television that no negotiations had taken place over Pinochet's retirement.
One of the chief defendants in the La Cutufa case, Patricio Castro Muñoz, was cleared in December by decision of the Supreme Court of the murder of Silvio Aurelio Sichel.
Law to pardon political prisoners
A law amending the Constitution and enabling President Aylwin to pardon some 250 political prisoners incarcerated under the Pinochet dictatorship was approved by the Chamber of Deputies on Jan. 22.
Although they could only be released following the conclusion of their court cases, the law allowed for them to be provisionally released.
Burial of coup victims
The burial of 16 peasants from Huelquén, just south of Santiago, took place on Jan. 13.
They had been murdered by the army in the early days of the 1973 coup and their remains had lain in sacks at a Santiago mortuary for 17 years.
AMERICAS
ARGENTINA
Cabinet reorganizations
The Cabinet resigned on Jan. 15 at the request of President Carlos Menem, following allegations by the United States ambassador, Terence Todman, that several government ministers and the President's economic adviser and brother-in-law, Emir Yoma, had been involved in bribery and corruption.
Yoma, who was alleged to have demanded payments for import permits from the US Swift-Armour meat-packing company, resigned from his post.
The new Cabinet, sworn in on Jan. 16, contained four new appointees.
Guido di Tella, the new Defence Minister, a liberal Peronist who had briefly been president of the Central Bank in 1982, was hitherto ambassador to the United States.
Raul Granilla Ocampo, hitherto the legal and technical secretary of the presidency and a close confidant of President Menem, was put in charge of a crusade against corruption.
Rodolfo Díaz was hitherto under-secretary of labour; and Avelino Porto had been rector of the Belgrano University.
At the same time the ministries of Justice and Education were separated, Antonio Francisco Salonia retaining the Education portfolio, and the responsibilities of the Public Works and Services Ministry, accused of corrupt dealings, were transferred to the Economy Ministry.
The four ministers who were not reappointed were Alberto Jorge Triaca (Labour), Humberto Romero (Defence), Alberto Kohan (Health and Social Action) and Jose Roberto Dromi (Public Works and Services).
Alvaro Alsogaray, another economic adviser, also resigned.
The government took over administration of the provinces of Tucumán and Tierra del Fuego which were affected by political unrest and economic problems.
In a national broadcast on Jan. 24 Menem said that Argentina was in a state of "moral emergency" due to corruption; he announced that government and military officials and employees of state enterprises would be required to submit a list of their assets, and he promised a purge of his personal advisers.
In a further government upheaval on Jan. 28, Antonio Ermán González resigned as Economy Minister, together with his deputy, Carlos Carvallo, and the president of the Central Bank, Javier González Fraga, as the result of a sharp fall in the austral against the US dollar.
On Jan. 29 Domingo Cavallo, hitherto Foreign Affairs Minister, took over the Economy portfolio and was replaced at Foreign Affairs by di Tella; González became Defence Minister.
The austral fell from 7,020 to the dollar on Jan. 25 to 7,900 on Jan. 28.
Banks were closed on Jan. 29-30, but on Jan. 30 Cavallo ordered the financial markets to be reopened, with the austral to be restricted within a fixed fluctuation band of between 8,000 and 10,000 to the dollar, backed up by Central Bank reserves.
Guido di TellaForeign Affairs Domingo CavalloEconomy Antonio Ermán GonzálezDefence Raul Granillo OcampoJustice Julio Mera FigueroaInterior Antonio Francisco SaloniaEducation Rodolfo DiazLabour Avelino PortoHealth and Social Action Eduardo BauzáSecretary-General of the Presidency 
Argentine Cabinet
(at end-January 1991)
Sentencing of military rebels
The Supreme Council of the armed forces on Jan. 8 sentenced Mohamed Ali Seineldin, Luis Baraldini, Oscar Ricardo Vega and four other officers to indefinite imprisonment and discharged them from the army as the ringleaders of a military rebellion on Dec. 3 [see p. 37913].
Six officers received sentences of between 12 and 20 years, two were acquitted, and charges were later dropped against 100 non-commissioned officers.
Seineldin, who was in military detention on the day of the rebellion, had admitted full responsibility for the events of Dec. 3.
Release of IMF tranche
At the beginning of December 1990 the International Monetary Fund (IMF) released the third tranche, worth $240,000,000, of a $1,400 million standby loan agreed in November 1989, suspended in February 1990 and reactivated in May [see pp. 37040; 37244; 37451].
This had been again held back in September because of Argentina's failure to meet economic performance targets.
In November 1990 the government sent the IMF a new letter of intent, whose proposals included spending cuts and improved tax collection, and increasing currency reserves.
ASIA — PACIFIC
CHINA
Trials of June 4 demonstrators
Some 22 demonstrators and activists were brought to trial at the Beijing municipal intermediate court on Jan. 5 and 26, in connection with the pro-democracy demonstrations which ended in the government crackdown in Tiananmen Square on June 4, 1989 [see pp. 36720-22].
The State Council spokesman, Yuan Mu, said on Jan. 10 that a policy of "leniency" was being adopted in the trials, which were closed to foreign observers.
Prison sentences of two to seven years were handed down in January to 15 students and intellectuals.
Wang Dan, the most wanted student leader, was convicted on Jan. 26 of "counter-revolutionary incitement and propaganda" .
His sentence, of four years in prison with one year's deprivation of political rights, took into consideration his repentance and his assistance in "exposing" others, the court said.
Arraigned on the same charge, Ren Wanding, the veteran human rights activist, who had previously been imprisoned for four years for his activities in the 1978-79 Democracy Movement, was given a more severe seven-year sentence with three years' deprivation of political rights, having refused to show repentance for his "grave" crimes.
Others sentenced included student leaders Wang Youcai, Zhang Ming, Ma Shaofang, Zheng Xueguagn and Guo Haifeng, and the philosopher Bao Zunxin.
The literary critic Liu Xiaobo, previously described as a "black hand" behind the demonstrations, was released.
Altogether 66 people accused of minor crimes were released without trial after showing repentance and performing "meritorious services" , it was officially reported.
Western reports ascribed the relatively light sentences for the better-known dissidents to a desire to maintain good relations with the United States and the European Communities following the relaxation of sanctions in late 1990 [see pp. 37783; 37859].
A Chinese Foreign Ministry spokesman on Jan. 10 denied claims that the trials were timed to take place when world attention was focused on the Gulf crisis.
Some Western reports commented that far less publicity was being given to heavier sentences imposed in the provinces, and to the detention and trial of large numbers of workers involved in the pro-democracy movement.
On Jan. 26, Liu Zihou, a worker, was imprisoned for an undisclosed period for the capital offence of "armed mass rebellion" .
Liu Zihou had organized workers in support of the 1989 demonstrations.
Economic targets for five- and 10-year plans
The proposed targets for the eighth five-year plan (1991-95) and the 10-year strategic development plan (1991-2000), as adopted at the seventh plenum of the 13th Central Committee on Dec. 25-30, 1990 [see p. 37917], were released on Jan. 28.
According to the proposals, GNP was to grow at 6 per cent per annum, with emphasis on the development of agriculture, energy, transportation and telecommunications.
A "new economic structure" would be established, centred on the planned state-owned sector with the market playing a subsidiary role; price reform was to be carried out "in an active and prudent way" ; and "guidance planning" was to increase with the reduction of mandatory planning.
Targets for 2000 (1990 figures in parentheses)
Grain 500 million tonnes (420 million tonnes)
Coal 1,400 million tonnes (1,090 million tonnes)
Electricity 1,100,000 million kWh (615,000 million kWh)
Steel 80 million tonnes (65.8 million tonnes)
Chemical fertilizer 120 million tonnes (90 million tonnes)
Cotton yarn 31,000,000 bales (24,500,000 bales)
Chemical fibres 2,600,000 tonnes (1,550,000 tonnes)
Sugar 6,700,000 tonnes (5,200,000 tonnes)
1995 target: Crude oil 145,000,000 tonnes (138,000,000 tonnes)
ASIA — PACIFIC
MONGOLIA
President's visit to USA — Economic developments
President Punsalmaagiyn Ochirbat began the first visit to the United States by a Mongolian head of state on Jan. 22.
During his visit he met US President Bush and other senior officials and a trade agreement was signed.
He also held talks with senior officials from the World Bank and the IMF.
The visit formed part of Mongolia's stated policy to improve relations with the USA, the Soviet Union and China.
Food rationing
Following panic buying in Ulan Bator, Mongolia introduced rationing for meat, milk, butter, flour, rice, liquor, green tea and vegetable oil in all cities from Jan. 21.
According to the Vice-Prime Minister, Davaadorjiyn Ganbold, the shortages resulted from centralized economic planning and the disruption in ties between enterprises, caused by democratization and economic reforms.
Earlier, a special commission headed by Ganbold had been established to monitor distribution and sales of food and consumer goods.
He said that special bodies had been set up in 20 enterprises and organizations to deal with "irregularities" and "speculation" in the supply of these goods.
Meanwhile, the government had decided to use state reserves to supply food to state retail outlets and food industry enterprises, and had made US$10,000,000 available to purchase food and industrial goods from abroad.
Doubling of wages and benefits
To mark the start of the transition to a market economy, Prime Minister Dashiyn Byambasuren announced on Jan. 15 that wages and all benefits would be doubled with effect from the following day.
Consumer prices would also double, as producers would be able to set their own prices up to a fixed maximum, but Byambasuren said that the prices of some foodstuffs and industrial goods would remain under government control.
In addition, according to a Cabinet decree, private savings up to 10,000 tugriks (US$1.00=Tug3.3431 as at Jan. 14, 1991) would be doubled.
Economic performance in 1990
According to a report in the Mongolian newspaper People's Rights of Jan. 10, Mongolia's grain production in 1990 fell to 718,300 tonnes, a drop of 130,000 tonnes compared with the previous year.
Industrial production fell by 5.5 per cent, ascribed to poor work discipline, shortages of imported raw materials and equipment, and problems in the transition to the new administration.
The same report gave the value of exports in 1990 as 442 million roubles (US$810 million), down by 8.4 per cent compared with 1989, while imports fell by 4.1 per cent to 619 million roubles ($1,135 million).
ASIA — PACIFIC
SOUTH KOREA-JAPAN
Visit by Japanese Prime Minister
The Japanese Prime Minister, Toshiki Kaifu, made a two-day visit to South Korea on Jan. 9-10, during which he held talks with President Roh Tae Woo.
Kaifu promised to make efforts to reduce his country's large trade surplus with South Korea — estimated to have exceeded US$6,000 million in 1990 — but he did not commit himself to any specific measures to achieve this.
Roh and Kaifu agreed to foster the general principles of bilateral co-operation, partnership and exchange.
Roh also appealed to Kaifu to incorporate certain conditions in Japan's recent progress towards normalizing its relations with North Korea, including the demand that the North Korean government allow international inspection of its nuclear facilities.
Kaifu's visit also coincided with a Japanese commitment to end by 1992 the practice of the mandatory fingerprinting of Koreans in Japan.
The promise was contained within a memorandum on the legal and social status of Japanese Koreans, signed on Jan. 10 by the South Korean Foreign Minister, Lee Sang Ock, and his Japanese counterpart, Taro Nakayama.
The memorandum represented a culmination of protracted negotiations over the status of Koreans, many of whom were descended from those who had been transported to Japan during the Pacific War for the purposes of forced labour.
The practice of fingerprinting all aliens within Japan had become symbolic of general racial discrimination against the large Korean population.
The memorandum committed the Japanese government to revise the application of the alien registration law to Koreans in order to replace the fingerprinting requirement with a record of family registration.
The agreement also promised to open low-ranking teaching posts to Koreans, to give automatic permanent residential status to third- and later generation Koreans in Japan, and to make Koreans subject to deportation orders only if convicted of crimes against Japan's national security.
The two Foreign Ministers also agreed to hold the inaugural meeting of the Korea-Japan Committee for co-operation in trade, industry and science and technology in Tokyo early in 1991.
The committee had been conceived during a ministerial meeting between the two countries in Seoul in November 1990.
ASIA — PACIFIC
JAPAN
Court prohibition on official visits to war shrine
Judge Tadao Kasuya of the Sendai High Court ruled on Jan. 10 that official visits by the Prime Minister or the Emperor to the Yasukuni shrine, a Shinto temple in central Tokyo, constituted a violation of the Constitution.
The decision followed a 10-year legal battle which had begun with the filing of a suit claiming that a prefectural assembly resolution urging visits to the shrine by the heads of government and state was unconstitutional.
When the Japanese Constitution was rewritten by the United States after 1945, a strict separation of church and state was imposed, on the grounds that Shintoism had provided a religious and philosophical foundation for the emperor-worship, racism and military expansionism regarded as characteristic of imperial Japan.
The Yasukuni shrine, dedicated to the souls of those Japanese who died during the Pacific War, had become a focus for the ongoing debate concerning the role of militarism within modern Japanese society.
It embodied a further complication because the millions of souls to whom it was dedicated included political and military leaders convicted of war crimes and executed by the Allies.
Although conservatives argued that visiting the shrine — particularly on Aug. 15, the anniversary of the ending of the Pacific War — was a legitimate means of paying respect to the dead, others interpreted it as paying homage to an outdated militarist philosophy and its discredited adherents.
The Yasukuni shrine issue had sparked fierce controversy in 1985 when Yasuhiro Nakasone became the first post-war Prime Minister to make an official visit [see p. 34559], an action which drew fierce criticism from neighbouring countries which had suffered during the Pacific War.
In 1990 Prime Minister Toshiki Kaifu appointed a commission to examine whether official visits to the shrine constituted a violation of the Constitution.
The commission was due to deliver its report in mid-1991.
ASIA — PACIFIC
HONG KONG
Hong Kong governor's visit to China — Conflict over airport scheme
Sir David Wilson, the Governor of Hong Kong, held "wide-ranging and useful" talks with Chinese leaders in Beijing on Jan. 21-24, defusing a potentially damaging conflict over the Hong Kong government's plan to build a new airport and port complex.
This had provoked controversy over who controlled Hong Kong in the period leading up to its 1997 reversion to China.
Prior to the Governor's visit, talks had broken down on Jan. 12 between Hong Kong government officials and the Chinese government on the proposed $16,300 million project.
The Chinese side had ordered that construction be halted until the project received China's approval, saying that China had not been consulted on the matter, and expressing concern that it would place a financial burden on the new government after 1997.
A Chinese Vice-Premier, Wu Xueqian, said on Jan. 15 that in the transition period up to 1997 "only the central people's government can, and is entitled to, speak on behalf of the people of Hong Kong" .
According to the Hong Kong magazine Liaowang, the Chinese position reflected orders from Deng Xiaoping, China's "elder statesman" leader.
Wilson had responded with a statement saying that the administration of Hong Kong was currently the responsibility of the United Kingdom and the Hong Kong government, and declaring that construction of the project would go ahead.
Following his talks with Chinese Premier Li Peng and other officials, characterized by the Chinese side as "beneficial" , Wilson said that the Chinese government had agreed to allow the scheme to proceed but had expressed reservations about the cost.
In return, Wilson had agreed to strengthen consultations with the Chinese government over the project.
ASIA — PACIFIC
PHILIPPINES
Talks on US bases — Arrest of right-wing rebels — IMF draft accord — Moves to recover Marcos assets
Talks on US bases
A further round of talks on the future of the United States bases in the Philippines took place on Jan. 9-11.
The current Military Bases Agreement, first signed in 1947 and governing US control of the Clark Air Base and the Subic Bay Naval Base together with four smaller installations, was set to expire on Sept. 16, 1991.
During the talks, the USA reportedly agreed to cede control over Clark and the four smaller installations, but differences remained over the future of Subic Bay.
The Philippines government was said to have abandoned an earlier insistence on a five-year "terminal phase-out" period.
A further round of talks was expected in February.
Shortly before the talks began, the US navy had used Subic Bay to assemble large elements of its task force bound for the Gulf.
US sailors had spent an estimated $25,000,000 on pre-departure shore leave, which one Manila newspaper described as "a fiesta in hell" .
On the eve of the talks, the two sides had exchanged strongly worded statements on the issue.
Richard Armitage, former Assistant Secretary of Defence and one of the US negotiating team, warned that the Philippines was risking "irreparable harm" to bilateral relations by its alleged intransigence.
He urged the Aquino administration to abandon attitudes which would be "interpreted by the US public as an act of anti-Americanism" .
His remarks followed a comment by a Philippines government spokesman, Rafael Alunan, that it was "not interested" in a pledge by the US administration to use its "best efforts" to persuade Congress to agree to increased aid in return for continuing use of the bases.
Alunan added that "the time has come for actions to match rhetoric" .
Arrest of rightist rebel officers and NPA commanders
Several "rightist" Army officers, implicated in coup attempts, were arrested in late December and January.
[For mid-December prison sentences see p. 37919.]
Those arrested included (i) Lt.-Col. Rodolfo Calzado, alleged to have been involved in the August 1987 coup attempt [see pp. 35709-11], who was arrested on Dec. 31;(ii) Lt.-Col. Billy Bibit, arrested by military intelligence on Jan. 17, in connection with the December 1989 coup attempt [see pp. 37120-21]; and (iii) Lt. Vincente Tomas and Lt. Emil Ong, alleged to have planned a series of "destabilizing" actions to coincide with the Gulf crisis.
An army spokesman announced on Jan. 3 that the military had foiled a further coup plot, supposedly hatched jointly by the rightist Reform the Armed Forces Movement (RAM) and the leftist New People's Army (NPA), which was to have opened with the bombing of the Basa air base in Pampanga.
Two commanders of NPA units which staged an ambush on an Army patrol in Bohol province in 1988 were sentenced to a total of 144 years in prison on Dec. 27, 1990.
The judge said that the severity of the sentences reflected the fact that the soldiers ambushed had been armed only with spades.
IMF draft agreement — Japanese loan
The government reached a draft agreement with representatives of the International Monetary Fund (IMF) on Jan. 17.
Subject to approval by the IMF board in February, the agreement provided for loans totalling 554,000,000 special drawing rights (US$778,700,000), of which SDR114,000,000 would be allocated to earthquake relief.
It would also trigger the release of further credits worth $700,000,000, currently held by various creditors pending agreement on an IMF-endorsed economic stabilization programme.
The programme's main aim was to reduce the budget deficit by $904 million during 1991.
Broad details of the planned programme emerged during January.
It included the introduction of new taxes, the raising of charges for fuel and power, the maintenance of petrol prices at a high level (despite the unrest caused by recent increases — see p. 37919), and the establishment of a 9 per cent duty on imports, which last was expected to raise over $700,000,000 annually.
A presidential spokesman described these moves as "bitter pills" which would need to be swallowed to satisfy IMF conditions.
The import levy was criticized by some government members, including Tomas Alacantra, Under-Secretary of Trade and Industry, who warned that it would discourage foreign investors and lead to increased commodity prices.
The Finance Secretary, Jesus Estanislao, announced on Jan. 15 that the government would seek to open negotiations with the "Paris Club" of Western creditors with a view to rescheduling $500,000,000-worth of loans falling due between July 1991 and December 1992.
The Japanese government announced on Jan. 23 that it would extend aid worth $638,000,000 to the Philippines to support economic reforms.
The sum was divided between $358,000,000 of development aid and $280,000,000 of loans for rapid disbursement.
Swiss ruling on Marcos assets
The Swiss Federal Tribunal (supreme court) issued a ruling on Dec. 27, 1990, which opened the way for the Philippines government to recover assets embezzled by ex-President Ferdinand Marcos which had been secreted in Swiss bank accounts.
The Tribunal rejected appeals by lawyers acting for the Marcos's heirs, including his wife, Imelda Marcos, against earlier decisions by the Swiss cantons of Fribourg and Zürich to give legal assistance to the Philippines government in its efforts to recover the assets, variously estimated as amounting to between $330,000,000 and $500,000,000.
The Tribunal's ruling stipulated, however, that the funds could be returned to the Philippines only after a Philippines court had issued a "legally binding verdict" on whether the assets were to be confiscated or given back to their claimants.
Previously, the Aquino administration had been reluctant to charge Marcos or his wife with a criminal offence, for fear that their presence in the country could provoke an uprising by their supporters.
A spokesman for the Swiss Justice Ministry insisted, however, that "criminal proceedings have to be conducted and the accused will have to be granted all the rights of defence provided for by the (Swiss) federal constitution and the European Human Rights Convention" .
Auction of Marcos assets
An auction of antique silver and paintings amassed by Marcos while in power, was held on behalf of the Philippines government in New York on Jan. 10-11.
It raised $20,200,000, which the government said would be used to support agrarian reform and earthquake relief projects.
ASIA — PACIFIC
INDONESIA
Budget
The draft state budget for the 1991-92 financial year, beginning on April 1, 1991, was presented by President Suharto to the House of Representatives on Jan. 7.
Suharto said that the highest priority was to keep inflation down; the annualized 1990 rate was put at 9.55 per cent and the predicted 1991 rate as 7 per cent.
Increased oil revenue would be used to strengthen foreign exchange reserves, and there would be no increase at present in salaries for civil servants and members of the armed forces.
Objectives were identified as increasing non-oil and non-gas exports as much as possible; continuing the process of deregulation in the import and export sectors; directing the import and export systems towards the production of commodities for export; rationalizing import taxes and other levies; and deregulation in the investment and industrial sectors.
Total budget revenue was set at 50,500,000 million rupiah, an increase of 18 per cent over the 1990-91 budget (US$1.00=RPs1,897.44 as at Jan. 14, 1991).
Projected domestic revenue was Rps40,180,000 million, an increase of 27.2 per cent, with Rps15,000,000 million from oil and gas (a 39 per cent rise) on the basis of projected average oil prices of US$19 per barrel.
Tax receipts were expected to rise by 20 per cent.
Development revenue was expected to be almost Rps10,400,000 million, including programme aid of Rps1,500,000 million and project aid of Rps8,900,000 million — representing a reduction compared with the last budget.
Total routine expenditure was set at Rps30,500,000 million, an increase of 14.7 per cent.
Servicing foreign loans (totalling US$42,000 million) would cost Rps14,300,000 million, an increase of 10 per cent, although Suharto said that new foreign borrowing for 1991-92 was to be cut by some 8 per cent to Rps10,370,000 million.
Development expenditure was expected to total almost Rps20,000,000 million, an increase of 23 per cent, with priority for infrastructure construction, basic services, human resources development, and operational and maintenance expenses.
ASIA — PACIFIC
MALAYSIA
Arrest of Sabah Chief Minister
The Chief Minister of Sabah and president of the Parti Bersatu Sabah (PBS), Datuk Joseph Pairin Kitingan, was arrested on Jan. 5 and charged by the federal Anti-Corruption Agency on three counts on corruption.
He was freed on bail of 1,500,000 ringgits (US$550,000).
It was alleged that in 1985 and 1987 Kitingan awarded to relatives licences for 2,000 hectares of timber and two construction contracts worth 12,000,000 ringgits.
The arrest was widely seen as the response of Prime Minister Datuk Seri Mahathir Mohamed to the PBS's defection from the ruling coalition before the October 1990 elections [see pp. 37780-81]; the PBS had won a comfortable majority in the Sabah Assembly [see p. 37612].
The PBS deputy leader, Bernard Dompok, said that more arrests could be expected as federal leaders were aiming to "create uncertainty" in Sabah.
Kitingan's press adviser and nephew, Maximus Ongkili, deputy executive director of Sabah's Institute for Development Studies which Mahathir had accused of fostering anti-federal feelings, was detained on Jan. 3 under the Internal Security Act, which allowed indefinite detention without trial.
Jeffrey Kitingan, brother of the Chief Minister and a director of the state-run Sabah Foundation, had also been charged under federal emergency powers.
In mid-January the police said that they had arrested under the Internal Security Act a sixth man allegedly involved in a plot to take Sabah out of the Malaysian federation; he was named as Vincent Chung, group manager of a company controlled by the Sabah Foundation.
ASIA — PACIFIC
PAPUA NEW GUINEA
Signature of Bougainville peace accord
Representatives of the government of Papua New Guinea (PNG) and the secessionist Bougainville Revolutionary Army (BRA) met for peace talks in Honiara, the capital of the Solomon Islands, on Jan. 22.
The negotiations, held under the auspices of the Solomon Islands' government and the local Christian Association, followed an agreement by the PNG government to ease its blockade of the island and a commitment by the BRA to use the forum to discuss a ceasefire rather than its demand for independence for Bougainville.
At the end of the meeting, on Jan. 24, the two sides signed a peace accord to end the two-year guerrilla war.
Some 150 people were thought to have died in the Bougainville conflict before the government withdrew its forces from the island in June 1989.
There followed a declaration of independence from the BRA which went unrecognised by other countries, and the imposition of a tight blockade of the island by the PNG government.
Peace talks, convened in mid-1990, foundered upon the issue of independence.
Under the terms of the Honiara accord the rebels were given immunity from prosecution, together with the promises that the government would remove its blockade and would not attempt to re-establish its troops upon the island by force.
In return the BRA undertook to surrender its weapons and prisoners to a multinational peacekeeping force drawn from other Pacific countries.
Discussions concerning the contentious issue of Bougainville's future status were deferred, although many commentators speculated that, if the agreement was to hold, it would have to lead ultimately to the granting of greater autonomy to PNG's North Solomons province which encompassed Bougainville.
The signature of the accord raised hopes for the early reopening of the giant Panguna copper mine on the island, which had employed 2,000 people and provided 40 per cent of PNG's export revenue before its enforced closure in May 1989.
The largest shareholder in the mine, the Australian CRA group, had recently warned, however, that reopening the mothballed mine could cost in excess of US$100 million.
ASIA — PACIFIC
SINGAPORE
Constitutional change increasing presidential powers
Parliament voted on Jan. 3 by 75 to one (Chaim See Tong, the sole opposition MP) to change the Constitution to make the presidency an elected executive office rather than a ceremonial post.
Under the amendment the President would have wide-ranging powers over finance and over senior government and military appointments.
All prospective presidential candidates would have to screened by a pre-selection committee, comprising the government-appointed chairman of the Public Service Commission, a member of the Presidential Council of Minority Rights, and the head of the Society of Accountants.
Candidates could be rejected on grounds including character; they had to be at least 45 years of age and have financial management skills.
People holding political office would not be eligible, but political parties would be allowed to campaign for candidates.
Critics of the change claimed that the new post was earmarked for Lee Kuan Yew, who had retired in November 1990 after 31 years as Prime Minister.
ASIA — PACIFIC
CAMBODIA
Continuing disagreement over peace plan — Renewed fighting
Hopes for an agreed settlement following the Paris International Conference on Cambodia in December 1990 [see p. 37916]faded in January.
The Phnom Penh leadership of the State of Cambodia (SOC) restated fundamental objections to the peace plan agreed by the five permanent members of the Security Council (see p. 37712), and the armed conflict intensified with the onset of the dry season.
In his New Year message the SOC President Heng Samrin rejected the central components of the plan which involved the UN's supervision of key Phnom Penh ministries (including Defence and Foreign Affairs) and the disarming of all four factions.
He insisted that SOC sovereignty must be respected "by maintaining the political and military status quo before general elections" .
He also reiterated the SOC insistence that any agreement must explicitly condemn the genocide by the Khmers Rouges under Pol Pot in the 1975-79 period.
SOC Premier Hun Sen on Jan. 7 told a National Day rally (marking the 12th anniversary of the overthrow of the Pol Pot regime) in Prey Veng Province that, although hopes of a settlement "were founded, the solution remains remote" .
No agreement would be signed which did not "stipulate concrete measures aimed at preventing the repetition of the genocidal regime" , and the "Pol Potist ringleaders" must be put on trial.
The evident SOC retreat from the more moderate stance of December was thought to be due to the influence of a hardline faction which feared that the peace plan would open the way to systematic Khmer Rouge infiltration under unwitting UN protection.
It was also suggested that this faction was backed by elements in Vietnam who feared a type of democratic "domino effect" if open elections were to take place in Cambodia.
In an attempt to revive the UN plan the Indonesian Foreign Minister Ali Alatas and the French Minister-Delegate attached to the Foreign Affairs Ministry, Edwige Avice, planned to visit Hanoi, the Vietnamese capital, at the beginning of February to urge Vietnamese support for an agreement.
Renewed fighting
After a desultory start which had led some observers to hope that the intensity of the armed conflict might be declining, the "fighting season" got fully under way in January.
The SOC, in retreating from the prospect of an agreement with the external factions, appeared now to be pushing for a decisive victory on the ground.
The Khmers Rouges, by far the most active of the three external factions in the military sphere, appeared to be consolidating territorial gains made over the past year, particularly in the south, rather than trying to extend their area of occupation.
Despite official claims to the contrary it was widely believed that China was maintaining its supplies to the Khmers Rouges and considerable stockpiles of arms were thought to have been accumulated.
ASIA — PACIFIC
LAOS
Death of Vice-Premier
Sali Vongkhamsao, a member of both the politburo and the secretariat of the Lao People's Revolutionary Party and a Vice-Chairman of the Council of Ministers and Minister of Economy, Planning and Finance, died on Jan. 23, aged 66, after a long illness.
A period of nationwide mourning was declared for Jan. 23-28.
Among those attending the cremation ceremony in Vientiane on Jan. 28 were President Souphanouvong, making a rare public appearance; Arthit Urairat, the Thai Foreign Minister; and Bo Yibo, Vice-Chairman of the central advisory commission of the Chinese Communist Party's central committee.
ASIA — PACIFIC
MYANMA
Ethnic insurgency
As government forces pursued a dry-season offensive to regain control of trade routes across the border with Thailand, clashes with guerrillas from the Karen, Mon and Kachin ethnic groups were reported by the state radio in January.
The Karen National Union on Jan. 8 and 14 reportedly attacked and set fire to three oil tanker trucks belonging to a Thai logging company working in Karen State, killing one of the drivers.
Western reports cited intelligence sources as saying that Thai lorries had been used to move Myanma troops in the region.
The rebels also reportedly shelled villages in Kawkareik township "without any reason" on Jan. 25, killing one villager, and mined the Namti-Mogaung and Moulmein-Ye railway lines.
Government troops on Jan. 21 claimed to have overrun a base used by ethnic Mon guerrillas near Bokpyin township in the south-east; the death toll was given as 10 rebels and one government soldier.
Western reports said that troops had been massing in the region since December 1990.
The state radio reported that members of the Kachin Independence Army on Jan. 21 mined a Mogaung-Myitkyina goods train in the north of the country, killing two passengers and a government soldier and capturing the driver and mechanic.
Reported surrender of members of parallel government
Brig. -Gen.
Khin Nyunt, secretary of the ruling military council, the State Law and Order Restoration Council (SLORC), told a press conference on Jan. 25 that Than Kywe and Myint Aung, "cabinet ministers" in the opposition parallel government formed in December [see pp. 37915-16], had surrendered to the Myanma embassy in Bangkok in early January, revealing "important news" .
A spokesman for the parallel government said that the two men had been kidnapped.
ASIA — PACIFIC
INDIA
Lok Sabha dispute over disqualifications
Proceedings in the Lok Sabha, the lower house of the Indian parliament, were disrupted on Jan. 2-4 during controversial disqualification proceedings against Janata Dal (Socialist) MPs.
Defections from the former ruling Janata Dal (JD) to form the JD(S) had brought down the government of V. P. Singh in November 1990, and led to the appointment of the JD(S) leader Chandra Shekhar as Prime Minister heading a minority government [see pp. 37854-55].
According to India's anti-defection laws, members who crossed the floor were liable to lose their seats unless at least one-third of their party went with them.
At the time, the defections did amount to this proportion, but JD leaders then expelled 25 of the defectors and claimed that, as the remaining 37 represented less than the legal quota, they should be disqualified from parliament.
Uproar on Jan. 2 followed the revelation that the Minister for Law and Justice, Subramanian Swamy, had threatened the arrest of the Speaker, Rabi Ray, unless he accepted a High Court decision and extended indefinitely the deadline for the response of the JD(S) members to the disqualification proceedings.
On Jan 4 Swamy apologized to the House, while Chandra Shekhar tried to defuse the crisis for his government by assuring MPs that Parliament was supreme and that the Speaker's rights would be protected.
The Speaker's ruling issued on Jan. 11 found in favour of the disqualification with immediate effect of eight MPs, five of whom were ministers, including the Minister for External Affairs, V. C. Shukla, and the Health Minister, Shakul-Ur-Rehman.
(It was announced that the eight planned to appeal.)
The remaining 29 defectors received the "benefit of doubt" .
The faction of 54 members of the original JD would be treated as a new party in the organizational sense.
The five affected ministers were believed to have expressed the desire to step down, but Chandra Shekhar ruled out their resignation, taking the strictly technical line that they could continue as ministers for six months without being members of parliament.
Party leadership changes
Shiv Shakar resigned as the leader of the opposition in the Rajya Sabha on Jan. 2, foregoing the claim of the Congress (I) to be the main opposition party in the upper house.
In the Lok Sabha, the Speaker had already recognized the Bharatiya Janata Party (BJP) as the main opposition party.
On Jan. 14 the Congress (I) general secretary, C. K. Jaffer Sharief, resigned for reasons of poor health.
He had been responsible for looking after party affairs in Uttar Pradesh and in Maharashtra, where the Congress (I) government of Sharad Pawar was facing demands from four senior ministers that he be removed.
Following talks with party president Rajiv Gandhi on Jan. 23-24 in New Delhi, at which Pawar's offer of resignation was rejected, the Maharashtra cabinet was expanded by 11 to 33 in order to make it more broad-based and to end intra-party squabbles.
On Jan. 7, Murli Manohar Joshi, general secretary of the BJP, was declared to have been unanimously elected to succeed L. K. Advani as its president for two years beginning Feb. 1.
The election of Joshi, a professor of physics at Allahabad University, confirmed a wider BJP move to bring younger leaders to the fore.
Generally regarded as more forthright than his predecessor, Joshi rejected a secular model of democracy for India, stressing instead the intrinsic link between Hinduism and India's identity as a nation.
However, while the process of electing a national president went smoothly, state party elections revealed high levels of factionalism within the BJP and led to the intervention of the central leadership in attempts to restore a greater semblance of unity to the party.
A split in the Bihar state unit of the BJP was formalized on Jan. 6 with the formation of the breakaway group into a new party.
The main policy-making body of the Janata Dal party, the political affairs committee, was reconstituted on Jan. 15 with S. R. Bommai, the party president, as chairman.
Ayodhya unrest
Subodh Kant Sahay, Minister of State for Home Affairs, in a statement on Jan. 2 to the Indian parliament announced that 890 people had been killed and nearly 4,000 injured in 15 weeks of Hindu-Moslem riots triggered by Hindu agitation around the disputed sacred site where a mosque currently stood in Ayodhya, Uttar Pradesh.
There had been 332 deaths in the first two weeks of December alone.
A 40-day passive protest in Ayodhya ended on Jan. 14, when over 7,500 Hindu volunteers were arrested including more than 1,300 women.
On Jan. 16, the Chief Minister of Uttar Pradesh, Mulayam Singh Yadev, announced the appointment of a three-member judicial commission of inquiry into the incidents of police firing at Ayodhya on Oct. 30 and Nov. 3, and the subsequent communal riots at various places in the State.
He also announced the formation of a peace security force to deal with communal riots and terrorism in the future.
On Jan. 10, following a third round of discussions to resolve the Ayodhya dispute, Hindu and Moslem leaders belonging respectively to the Vishwa Hindu Parishad (VHP) and the All India Babri Masjid Action Committee (AIBMAC) agreed to the setting up of expert panels to examine documents in support of their claims over the site; the panels would submit a report by Feb. 5.
Indian Airlines 1990 Airbus crash report
Almost two years of acrimonious disputes between the Indian Government and the European aircraft manufacturer Airbus Industrie came to an end on Jan. 11, when a court of inquiry in New Delhi ruled that the crash of an Indian Airlines A-320 Airbus in February 1990, in which 92 people had died, had been due to pilot error, and not to technical failure, as the Indian authorities had maintained [see p. 37268].
The court found that the pilot appeared to have confused the vertical speed instruments with the altitude indicator, and thus to have selected an inadequate altitude shortly before landing.
Following the accident, the government of the then Prime Minister V. P. Singh had grounded India's remaining 18 Airbuses, on the grounds of the alleged safety risk.
There were also allegations, denied by Airbus Industrie, that it had paid bribes during the sale of the aircraft.
All the aircraft had been returned to service in December 1990 following V. P. Singh's resignation in November and his replacement by Chandra Shekhar [see p. 37854].
The grounding was reported to have cost Air India some US$100 million in lost revenues.
State developments
Goa
President's rule, in force in Goa for 43 days, was lifted on Jan. 25, when the leader of a breakaway group of the Maharashtrawadi Gomantak Party (MGP), Ravi S. Naik, was sworn in as Chief Minister.
Naik had met the Governor on Jan. 5 to press his claim to form a government, claiming the support of 23 members of the 39-seat legislative assembly, including Congress (I) members.
Assam
The Minister of State for Internal Affairs, Subodh Kant Sahay, announced on Jan. 19 that the National Socialist Council of Nagaland and the United Liberation Front of Assam (ULFA) had been banned on the grounds that both were "hand in glove in extremist activities" .
The authorities' campaign of arrests of suspected militants continued, although on Jan. 28 the ULFA issued a statement saying that it was ready to respond to any mediatory initiative.
Bihar
Talks began on Jan. 15 on the demand by tribals of Jharkhand region in Bihar for a separate state for 13 districts of the region.
The talks, which encountered difficulties, were attended by the Bihar Tribal Welfare Minister, Karam Chand Bhagat, and representatives of the Jharkhand Mukti Morcha.
Punjab
Chandra Shekhar told Home Ministry officials on Jan. 2 that he had "not given any assurance" during his recent talks with Akali Dal leader Simranjit Singh Mann [see p. 37915].
However, he informed a parliament committee meeting on Jan. 9 that the central government was "working on a comprehensive action plan for revamping the administration in Punjab" , and did not rule out amending the Constitution to provide for more autonomy as long as all other political parties co-operated in the matter.
In an address to a congregation at a Sikh temple on Jan. 10, the Prime Minister pledged strong action against those who took innocent lives whether they were terrorists or security force personnel.
At a meeting in Chandigarh on Jan. 12, senior Akali leaders representing the Mann, Badal and Longowal groups decided to merge as a single Akali Dal to be known as Shiromani Akali Dal (SAD).
Mann, the leader of the new grouping, said that henceforth no Akali Dal would be known after any individual and that "now our aim is one, the right of self-determination for Sikhs" .
On Jan. 20, responding to further deaths caused by separatist action, Chandra Shekhar reiterated during a visit to Chandigarh that central government was prepared to hold talks with any group pledging to restore peace in Punjab, but that his government would make no compromise on violence.
On Jan. 22 two bombs exploded simultaneously in the police headquarters and court buildings in New Delhi, injuring 43 people.
On Jan. 31, the government promised safe passage to Sikh militants taking up the Prime Minister's offer of peace talks.
Karnataka
On Jan. 1 Bhanu Pratap Singh resigned as Governor of Karnataka and was replaced by Khurshid Alam Khan, governor of Goa, who also remained in the latter post.
Tamil Nadu
Chandra Shekhar dismissed the government of Tamil Nadu and imposed direct rule on Jan. 30, bringing to four the number of states being run directly by central government.
Indian government officials said that the dismissal was prompted by increased activity of Sri Lankan Tamil militants in the state, leading to the "breakdown of law and order" .
The decision was widely seen as an attempt to support the Sri Lankan government in its war against Tamil guerrillas, and was announced as Foreign Minister Shukla completed a three-day visit to Sri Lanka.
ASIA — PACIFIC
BANGLADESH
Corruption charges against Ershad — Arrest of former ministers — Jatiya Party decision to participate in
elections — Outbreak of prison riots
Charges carrying sentences ranging from 14 years to life imprisonment were filed against the former President, Lt.-Gen. (retd.)
Hussain Mohammad Ershad, on Jan. 5 and 8.
He was accused of illegal possession of firearms and of embezzlement of public funds.
Police reports alleged that raids on Ershad's residence after his arrest on Dec. 12 [see p. 37907]had revealed assets in excess of those which could have been expected from a presidential income, as well as large quantities of unlicensed firearms.
A government announcement on Jan. 27, detailing corruption charges against Ershad, said that he had been accused of misappropriating funds in 1990 amounting to between £3,000,000 and £4,000,000 (US$5-7,000,000) in the purchase of three advanced turbo prop aircraft from the British company, British Aerospace.
Similar charges would face Lt.-Col. (retd) H. M. A. Gaffar and Ziauddin Ahmed, the former Minister for Civil Aviation and his Minister of State respectively, who were both in hiding.
Arrest of former ministers
On Jan. 25 the government ordered the ex-Prime Minister, Kazi Zafar Ahmed and members of his Cabinet in hiding to surrender themselves to the authorities within seven days or face one year's rigorous imprisonment.
Two former ministers, Ruhul Amin Hawlader and Kazi Firoz Rashid, were arrested in Dhaka on Jan. 26.
In a separate development on Jan. 27, nearly 1,000 students attempted to storm the villa where Ershad was being detained, demanding that he be transferred to prison within 24 hours.
Decision by Jatiya Party to participate in elections
On Jan. 1, a spokesman for Ershad's Jatiya Party (JP) said that the party would contest nationwide elections scheduled for Feb. 27 [see p. 37907] "for the sake of democracy" .
On the party's past role, the spokesman said that the JP "begs forgiveness" from the people, adding that if "we have done anything wrong, we are ready to rectify ourselves" .
On Jan. 18 the Election Commission declared valid all the nomination papers filed by Ershad to contest parliamentary elections from five constituencies in his home district of Rangpur.
This overturned a Jan. 14 decision by the Rangpur returning officer, who had rejected Ershad's applications on grounds of technical "irregularities" , thereby sparking off demonstrations by pro-Ershad demonstrators.
Prison riots — Amnesty
Three people were killed and more than 100 injured, including 22 policemen, when riots broke out among inmates at Dhaka's central prison on Dec. 29.
Six more inmates were killed and 200 injured between Jan. 1 and Jan. 5 as riots spread inside prisons in Chittagong, Jessore and Rajshahi.
A government press note issued on Jan. 11 said that the riots had been sparked off by inmates demanding "the release of all prisoners following the liberation of the country from autocratic rule" .
On Jan. 16 Radio Bangladesh reported that the government had agreed to grant an amnesty which would secure the release immediately of 3,683 prisoners and the phased release over eight years of a further 9,000.
ASIA — PACIFIC
SRI LANKA
Ending of brief ceasefire
The ceasefire announced unexpectedly by the Liberation Tigers of Tamil Eelam (LTTE) at the end of December [see p. 37915]ended on Jan. 11.
The previous day President Ranasinghe Premadasa had refused to extend the seven-day cessation of hostilities which the government announced on Jan. 3 in response to the LTTE's initiative.
The ruling United National Party and the other major political parties (with which Premadasa was anxious to establish a consensus on the issue) viewed the LTTE initiative with considerable scepticism, suspecting that its main purpose was to facilitate re-grouping and consolidation of rebel forces rather than, as claimed, to create conditions for the resumption of peace talks.
The army insisted that a viable peace agreement could only come with the laying down of LTTE arms.
Military commanders were reluctant to lose the momentum of their campaign against the rebels, who they judged to have been weakened by the Indian authorities' clamp-down on their organization in Tamil Nadu state [see also p. 37964].
The government was, however, anxious not to provide the LTTE with a propaganda victory by rejecting its initiative out of hand.
The level of violence (which had resulted in some 5,000 deaths since the breakdown of peace talks in June 1990) fell dramatically during the period of the ceasefire, although each side accused the other of extensive violations.
The government for its part claimed that the Tigers had been guilty of over 30 breaches; reports also indicated that they had used the opportunity to build new fortifications near government military bases in the north Jaffna area and near the Elephant Pass (linking the Jaffna Peninsula with the rest of the country).
Following the resumption of hostilities, the LTTE formally ended its own ceasefire on Jan. 25.
ASIA — PACIFIC
PAKISTAN — INDIA
 "No-attack" nuclear treaty — Third round of high-level talks
A treaty between India and Pakistan undertaking not to attack each other 's nuclear facilities came into effect on Jan. 27.
A Pakistan Foreign Ministry spokesman said that lists of nuclear installations to be protected had yet to be exchanged.
The treaty, first proposed in 1985, had been signed in December 1988 by the then Prime Ministers, Rajiv Gandhi of India and Benazir Bhutto of Pakistan [see p. 36485].
However, ensuing tension between the two countries over Kashmir, leading to threats of war, delayed its ratification.
Third round of high-level talks
Signs of willingness to finalize a no-attack treaty came at the conclusion of a third round of high-level talks on Dec. 18-20 in Islamabad, Pakistan, between the Indian foreign secretary Muchkund Dubey and his Pakistani counterpart, Shahryar Khan.
Both sides also agreed to exchange information on a weekly basis between senior military commanders on troop deployments and movements.
Afterwards, Khan told a press conference that Pakistan had also proposed a regional solution aimed at curbing nuclear proliferation, but that India had preferred a global approach.
Khan also said that while Pakistan had sought self-determination for Kashmiris, India continued to regard the Kashmir issue as an internal problem.
ASIA — PACIFIC
MALDIVES
Visit by Gayoom to India
President Maumoun Abdul Gayoom visited India on Jan. 25-27 for talks with the Indian Prime Minister, Chandra Shekhar.
During their talks Gayoom and Shekhar agreed to review and upgrade the 1981 India-Maldives trade agreement.
ASIA — PACIFIC
NEPAL
Formation of UNCP
On Jan. 7 the two major factions of the Nepal Communist Party agreed to merge to form the United Nepal Communist Party (UNCP).
A UNCP press release said that the leaders of the Marxist-Leninist and Marxist factions, after several days of intense negotiations, had decided to merge "in accordance with the aspirations of the people" and that the new party expected to be able to form a government after a general election due by May 1991.
A total of 47 political parties had applied by Jan. 21 for registration for Nepal's forthcoming general election.
The Chief Election Commissioner, however, warned that some parties might be rejected "on legal grounds" .
EUROPE
GERMANY
Formation of new government
The three parties constituting Chancellor Helmut Kohl's ruling coalition agreed on Jan. 16 on a government programme and on the distribution of portfolios, six weeks after winning the all-German general election on Dec. 2, 1990 [see pp. 37904-05].
Kohl was elected Chancellor for the fourth time on Jan. 17 by 378 of the 644 votes cast in the Bundestag (lower house of parliament).
The Cabinet was sworn in the following day.
The distribution of portfolios reflected the dominant role of Kohl's Christian Democrat Union (CDU), but also the strong election performance of the Free Democratic Party (FDP), which now held five portfolios (including that of the nominally independent Justice Minister) rather than four as previously.
The Bavarian Christian Social Union (CSU), relatively weaker within united Germany, now held four rather than five portfolios.
The FDP proved unable to insist on its proposed low taxation zone for the five eastern Länder (states).
Investors there would nevertheless be permitted to write off against tax 50 per cent of costs entailed in a one-year period, while employees there would have their tax allowances increased, and companies would not have to pay the same local property and capital taxes as in western Germany.
Extra revenue was to come from higher telephone and unemployment insurance charges, but the cost of unification was still expected to increase the public-sector deficit above the DM140,000 million (approximately US$94, 580 million) projected in December 1990 [see p. 37904; for end-January rise in Federal Bank discount rate see p. 37978].
Helmut Kohl (CDU) Federal Chancellor Rudolf Seiters (CDU) Head of Chancery Hans-Dietrich Genscher (FDP) Foreign Ministry Wolfgang Schäuble (CDU) Interior
German Cabinet
*Klaus Kinkel (independent) Justice Theo Waigel (CSU) Finance
**Jürgen Möllemann (FDP) Economy Ignaz Kiechle (CSU) Agriculture Norbert Blüm (CDU) Labour Gerhard Stoltenberg (CDU) Defence
*Gerda Hasselfeldt (CDU)(f) Health
* ***Angela Merkel (CDU)(f) Women and youth
*Hannelore Rönsch (CDU)(f) Family; the Aged
** ***Günther Krause (CDU) Transport Klaus Töpfer (CDU) Environment Christian Schwarz-Schilling (CDU) Posts and Telecommunications
*Irmgard Adam-Schwätzer (FDP)(f) Construction Heinz Riesenhuber (CDU) Research
** ***Rainer Ortleb (FDP) Education
*Carl-Dieter Spranger (CSU) Development Aid
*New appointment
**Altered responsibility.
***East German.
Women are denoted by (f).
[For last Cabinet list see p. 37676; for expansion of Cabinet upon unification see p. 37762.]
Resignation of Späth
Lothar Späth resigned as CDU Minister President of Baden-Württemberg on Jan. 13 following allegations (which he denied) that a number of his and his family's vacations had been financed by local companies which were then favoured when contracts were awarded.
During his 12 years in the post Späth had consolidated Baden-Württemberg's reputation as a prosperous state and he had been widely regarded as a possible successor to Kohl.
Späth was succeeded by Erwin Teufel, CDU leader in the Land parliament.
Land election in Hesse
In Land elections in Hesse on Jan. 20 the CDU-FDP coalition lost its two-seat majority after four years in power [see p. 35208 for April 1987 Land election and p. 36531 for March 1989 Hesse local elections].
The Social Democratic Party (SPD) and Greens, which had formed a coalition government in Hesse for 14 months up to February 1987, benefited from pacifist support immediately after the outbreak of the Gulf war.
The result was particularly welcome for the Greens (led in Hesse by the pragmatist former Bundestag deputy Joschka Fischer), which had failed to win representation in the Bundestag in the December 1990 general election.
A "red-green" coalition led by Hans Eichel, SPD mayor of Kassel, was expected to be sworn in.
Also on Jan. 20 two referendums were approved in Hesse.
One made the protection of the environment a constitutional obligation; the other provided for the direct election of mayors and Landräte.
A court ruling had, however, found that the results of the referendums could not be implemented without further legal investigation.
Hesse Land election (provisional official results)
Percentage of vote
Formation of unified Berlin government — Balance of power in Bundesrat
On Jan. 24 Eberhard Diepgen, 49, was elected mayor of Berlin at the head of a Senate (cabinet) comprising eight CDU and seven SPD members, of whom three came from East Berlin.
At the newly elected Berlin parliament's constituent session on Jan. 11 West Berlin's 1950 constitution was extended to East Berlin, East Berlin's July 1990 constitution was suspended and Tino Schwerzina]resigned as mayor of East Berlin.
As a result of the Berlin and Hesse elections the federal coalition's majority in the Bundesrat (upper house of parliament), which had been regained in October 1990 [see pp. 37762-63], was again threatened.
Diepgen declared on Jan. 24 that the Berlin CDU and SPD would abstain in a Bundesrat vote where their positions were opposed.
Re-election of PDS leader Gysi
At a congress in Berlin on Jan. 27 Gregor Gysi was re-elected chair of the Party of Democratic Socialism (PDS — the successor to the former East German ruling SED).
Student unrest and strikes in eastern Länder
On Jan. 2 institutes and university departments in the eastern Länder deemed to have been too politically corrupted by the former East German communist regime were closed amid student protests.
Staff affected, who generally came from Marxism-Leninism, history, education, law, philosophy or economics faculties, would receive 70 per cent pay for six months.
During December and January several thousand students staged sit-ins and marches.
At Berlin's Humboldt University the rector contested the reforms through the courts.
Postal workers in the eastern Länder, whose salaries were 60 per cent lower than their western counterparts, went on strike on Jan. 24 in support of demands for a one-off payment equivalent to a 13th month's salary to compensate for increased living costs.
The 130,000 postal workers agreed to return to work three days later when the Interior Ministry agreed to make a payment of DM650-900 per employee.
Both sides had agreed before the strike to reduce the working week from 43@1/2 to 40 hours.
[For November 1990 railworkers' strike see p. 37867.]
Trial of former East German trade union leader
Harry Tisch, 63, the former East German trade union (FDGB) leader [see pp. 37826; 37024], became the first former East German leader to face trial when his case opened at a Berlin court on Jan. 29.
He was accused of breach of trust and diverting 10,000,000 marks from FDGB funds in 1984 and of diverting 4,583,000 marks in 1984-89 to build a holiday home on the Baltic coast and a hunting lodge [see p. 37107]and to finance holidays for himself, his family and that of SED politburo member Günter Mittag.
Red Army Faction sentence
Werner Lotze, 38, a Red Army Faction extremist, was sentenced on Jan. 31 by the Bavarian state court to 12 years' imprisonment.
He was convicted of the murder of a policeman, of the attempted murder in 1979 of the then NATO Supreme Commander in Europe, Gen. Alexander Haig [see p. 29913], and of robbery and blackmail.
The case was the first brought against nine extremists arrested in June 1990 in East Germany [see p. 37828]and the first under 1989 legislation allowing milder sentences for those turning state's evidence [see p. 36046 for draft legislation].
Lotze's sentence was, however, above the nine years requested by the prosecution; the court did not consider his to be a true case of state's evidence, since it had neither led to further arrests nor prevented a crime.
EUROPE
NORWAY
Death of King Olav
King Olav V, who had succeeded to the throne on Sept. 21, 1957 [see p. 15769], died on Jan. 17 after a heart attack, at the age of 87.
His state funeral was held in Oslo cathedral on Jan. 30.
Crown Prince Harald, who had assumed the monarch's official duties since his father's stroke in June 1990, was sworn in as King Harald V on Jan. 21.
(Norway's Constitution prohibited a coronation ceremony.)
Olav, born on July 2, 1903, and his father Haakon VII had been symbols of Norwegian resistance to the Nazi occupation, during the Second World War.
Both had escaped to the United Kingdom in June 1940 and worked with the government in exile while regrouping the defeated Norwegian army.
Olav was a keen ski jumper and an Olympic yachtsman.
In 1929 he married Princess Martha of Sweden, who died in 1954.
Harald, their third child and only son, was born on Feb. 21, 1937.
In 1968 he married Sonja Haraldsen, the daughter of a department store owner.
They had two children, Princess Martha Louise, 19, and Crown Prince Haakon Magnus, 17.
The succession law favouring the male heir was changed in May 1990 to give equal succession rights to both sexes.
The new law, however, would only apply to those born after 1990.
EUROPE
SWEDEN
1991/92 budget
The 1991/92 draft budget for the financial year starting July 1, 1991, was presented on Jan. 10.
Described by Finance Minister Allan Larsson as "austere but responsible" , the budget sought to bring the expansion of public-sector expenditure to a halt [for austerity measures already approved in December 1990 see p. 37925].
Spending cuts would especially affect public administration and, within the social welfare budget, the level of payments on sickness benefit.
Government revenue was projected to rise by 3.9 per cent to 454,900 million kronor (of which one-third would come from value added tax revenue) and expenditure to rise by 3.4 per cent to 455,500 million kronor (of which social welfare accounted for 28 per cent and education and interest on public debt each accounted for 13 per cent).
(US$1.00=5.7322 kronor as at Jan. 14, 1991.)
Inflation had reached an annual rate of 11 per cent in December 1990.
Gross domestic product was expected to fall by 0.2-0.5 per cent in 1991 (compared with increases of 2.1 per cent in 1989 and 0.9 per cent in 1990).
A recovery was projected for 1992.
EUROPE
IRELAND
1991 budget
The 1991 budget presented by Finance Minister Albert Reynolds on Jan. 30 provided for a 1 percentage point reduction in both the standard and the higher rate of income tax, and for a 4 per cent increase in welfare payments.
Tobacco and automobile taxes were raised, and the lower rate of value added tax increased from 10 to 12@1/2 per cent, but the higher VAT rate was reduced from 23 to 21 per cent , to bring Irish rates closer to those in other European Community countries.
The budget reflected a 10-year "programme for economic and social progress" agreed earlier in the month with public-service workers, unions and farmers.
This provided for tax cuts, higher social welfare allowances and wider access to free medical care in exchange for keeping annual wage increases below 4 per cent for three years (inflation averaging 3.4 per cent in 1990).
EUROPE
SWITZERLAND
President and Vice-President
Under Switzerland's annually rotating presidential system the Interior Minister, Flavio Cotti (Christian Democratic People's Party — CVP), took office on Jan. 1 as President of the Bundesrat (Federal Council) for 1991.
The post of Vice-President, which Cotti had held for the past year, was taken by René Felber (Social Democratic Party — SPS), Minister for Political (Foreign) Affairs.
Both men had been elected on Dec. 5.
FRANCE
Renewed FLNC activity in Corsica
The activity of the National Liberation Front of Corsica (FLNC) was revived in early January after a truce which had begun in June 1988 [see p. 36227].
The organization's "historic" faction claimed responsibility for six bomb attacks on the night of Jan. 2-3, directed against court buildings flying the French flag in Ajaccio, the island's capital, and Bastia, and against bars and tourist developments.
On Jan. 3 over 40 holiday homes were blown up in Anghone and Porto Vecchio and a number of occupants taken hostage temporarily, to force the French government into "a true process of decolonization" and to stop Corsica from being taken over by property developers and turned into the "sun-tan centre of Europe" .
In response to the bombings President François Mitterrand on Jan. 3 called an emergency meeting of the inner Cabinet, agreed measures to strengthen the rule of law in Corsica, and appointed a new prefect for security on the island.
The murder on Dec. 31 of Paul Mariani, the Socialist mayor of Soveria, was denied by the FLNC, as were the Dec. 19 killing of Lucien Tirroloni, Gaullist president of the regional chamber of agriculture, and the Sept. 26 murder of Charles Grossetti, the right-wing Union for France (UDF) mayor of Grossetto-Pugna.
The moderate section of the FLNC, which announced on Jan. 8 that it was freezing all military action because this was alienating the Corsican people, attributed these murders to Mafia-style property speculators.
Others in the FLNC had attributed them to anti-nationalist elements in Corsica linked to the (Gaullist) Rally for the Republic (RPR) and the Left Radical Movement (MRG).
The renewed bombings increased opposition to a bill currently before the French Senate, granting more autonomy to Corsica and formal recognition to the Corsican people as a distinct group, described as "a component of the French people" .
The autonomy bill, approved by the French National Assembly on its first reading on Nov. 23-24 and due to enter into force in March 1992, would give the island administration greater autonomy in the education, training, transport and tourism sectors but would still leave its regional economic development programme subject to French government approval.
EUROPE
SPAIN
Resignation of Guerra
Deputy Prime Minister Alfonso Guerra González resigned on Jan. 12 after eight years in office; as of the end of January he had not been replaced.
Guerra announced his decision unexpectedly at a regional congress of the ruling Spanish Socialist Workers' Party (PSOE) in Cáceres (Extremadura); he retained the post of PSOE deputy secretary-general.
He had hitherto resisted the pressure for his resignation, and had been supported by Prime Minister Felipe González Marquez, a close friend and political ally since the 1960s.
However, his reputation had been seriously damaged during the past year by a scandal involving his younger brother Juan Guerra González [see p. 37263], whose conduct had been the subject of a judicial investigation, the results of which were due to be made public in the near future.
Formation of Basque government
A nationalist government commanding the support of 37 of the 75 deputies in the Basque parliament (i.e. one less than an absolute majority) was finally formed on Jan. 22.
Following the elections to the Basque parliament on Oct. 28, 1990, the formation of a new regional government had been delayed for three months due to the breakdown of talks between the two parties which had made up the previous governing coalition — the Basque Nationalist Party (PNV), which had emerged as the largest single party, with 22 seats, and the Basque Socialist Party (PSE-PSOE) which had been beaten into second place.
In the new government the PNV was joined by Basque Solidarity (EA), with nine parliamentary seats, itself a splinter group of the PNV, and by Basque Left (EE), with six.
José Antonio Ardanza (PNV) was once again Premier (lendakari); the PNV held eight of the 13 portfolios, EA three (Education, Economy and Planning, and the new Justice ministry), and EE two (Town Planning, Housing and Environment, and Labour and Social Security).
The government programme to which the PSE-PSOE had been unable to agree envisaged the transfer to the region of responsibility for social security and local management of the national employment institute, as well as the creation of a Basque public bank.
It also proposed bilingual education in schools and the creation of a secretariat of external relations and an environmental agency.
ETA attacks
Col. Luis García Lozano, the second in command of the San Sebastián military zone, was shot dead in San Sebastián on Jan. 2 by a commando of the Basque separatist organization ETA.
A car bomb in Bilbao on Jan. 8 injured a woman and her daughter; two other members of the same family, which was apparently involved in drug trafficking, had been killed by an ETA car bomb in 1989.
Another suspected drug handler was fatally injured in a car bomb attack in Bilbao on Jan. 9.
Bombs exploded in San Sebastián on Jan. 25 on a train transporting French cars, destroying 11 of them.
About 7,000 people formed a "human chain for peace" stretching through Pamplona on Jan. 27, recalling the deaths of 31 people killed mainly by ETA over the past 12 months, and demanding an end to all violence by terrorist groups.
EUROPE
PORTUGAL
Re-election of Soares as President
On Jan. 13 Mário Soares, 66, was elected for a second five-year term as President.
The former socialist Prime Minister, he was supported by both the Socialist Party (PS) and the ruling Social Democratic Party (PSD).
Recognizing Soares's popularity, the PSD had decided in April 1990 not to field its own candidate if he stood for re-election.
In a 62 per cent turnout, Soares won 70.43 per cent of the vote, against 14.07 per cent for his closest rival, Basilío Horta of the conservative Democratic Social Centre (CDS).
Carlos Carvalhas, deputy leader of the Portuguese Communist Party (PCP), polled 12.92 per cent, and Carlos Marques, the radical, pacifist and ecologist candidate of the Popular Democratic Union (UDP), won 2.57 per cent .
During the campaign Horta accused Soares of indirect involvement in a corruption scandal involving the governor of Macao (a presidential appointee), but failed to undermine Soares's non-partisan fatherly image.
Negotiations on US access to Azores air base
Talks began on Jan. 29 to renegotiate an agreement with the United States on access to the Lajes air base in the Azores, an important link for US forces currently in the Gulf.
The existing seven-year agreement was to expire on Feb. 4, 1991 [see p. 37591].
EUROPE
GREECE
Resignation of Education Minister
The Minister of Education and Religious Affairs, Vassilis Kondoyannopoulous, resigned on Jan. 9 after disturbances at a school in Patras the previous day, in which a teacher was killed, reportedly by right-wing elements, and three other teachers were injured.
The Education and Religious Affairs portfolios were taken on by Giorgios Souflias, hitherto the Economy and Tourism Minister; the Prime Minister, Konstantinos Mitsotakis, took over the Economy portfolio, while Yannis Kefaloyannis was appointed Tourism Minister.
Over 1,000 secondary schools had been occupied since mid-December by pupils protesting at new measures to improve discipline, at the lack of funds and resources, and at the generally poor state of many schools.
In protest at the teacher's death the teachers' unions ordered an immediate strike in all schools.
In Athens some 60,000 pupils, parents and teachers held a demonstration on Jan. 10.
Violent incidents erupted, barricades were erected and cars burned, over 100 people including 23 police were taken to hospital with injuries or breathing difficulties due to tear gas, and three dead bodies were recovered from a building set on fire by a Molotov cocktail.
Demonstrations continued into Jan. 11 despite an announcement by Souflias that the government was withdrawing all the new education discipline measures and allocating substantially more money for education in the budget.
EC loan
Finance Ministers of the European Communities (EC) agreed in principle on Jan. 28 to a loan of 2,200 million European currency units (ECU1=US$1.37733 as at Jan. 28, 1991) to support Greece's balance of payments, on condition that austerity measures were immediately introduced.
Formal approval of detailed proposals, on which negotiations had been in progress for five months, was expected at the end of February.
Only half of the loan was to be released initially, and the remainder in two instalments by 1993, conditional upon the success in meeting targets, which included a reduction in inflation from the present annualized rate of over 20 per cent to less than 10 per cent by 1993, and a reduction of the public-sector deficit.
The austerity plan was likely to involve the dismissal of thousands of government employees.
EUROPE
TURKEY
General strike — Miners' protest march — Lifting of restrictions on use of Kurdish
Almost 1,500,000 blue- and white-collar workers staged a general strike on Jan. 3 in defiance of a court order declaring it illegal.
The two largest union federations, Turk-Is and Hak-Is, which organized the strike, demanded an increase of 500 per cent in workers' pay and called for an end to restrictive labour laws.
The strike followed weeks of industrial unrest, and was supported by opposition parties including the True Path Party (DYP) and the Social Democratic Populist Party (SHP).
Nearly 50,000 striking mineworkers from the Black Sea town of Zonguldak, who had begun in early January a protest march on foot to Ankara, called off the march on Jan. 9 in response to a call from Semsi Denizer, leader of the largest miners union, Maden-Is.
The mineworkers had been on strike since Nov. 30, demanding pay rises of 300-600 per cent.
On Jan. 4 miners' leaders had called for a temporary halt to the march, after an offer by Prime Minister Yildirim Akbulut to hold talks, but two days later the march was resumed after union leaders had rejected a government offer of a 250 per cent pay rise.
Security forces blocked the miners from advancing towards the main Istanbul-Ankara highway.
Lifting of restrictions on use of Kurdish
On Jan. 26 the Council of Ministers decided to abolish the law introduced in 1983 which restricted the use of languages other than Turkish, thus effectively recognizing the Kurdish language.
Assassination of retired general
Members of the left-wing organization Dev Sol claimed responsibility for the killing in Ankara on Jan. 30 of Gen. (retd) Hulusi Sayin, commander from 1987 to 1989 of security forces fighting Kurdish guerrillas in the south-east.
EUROPE
COUNCIL OF EUROPE
Approval of application for membership by Czechoslovakia
The Council of Europe's Parliamentary Assembly, meeting in Strasbourg, voted unanimously on Jan. 30 to approve Czechoslovakia's membership application.
A meeting of the Committee of Ministers of the current 24 members in Madrid on Feb. 21 was expected to confirm the decision.
On Feb. 1 an Assembly committee accorded Romania "special guest status" despite "continuing doubts about the process of democratization" there.
Poland, the Soviet Union and Yugoslavia had had this status since mid-1989 [see p. 37212], as had Hungary until its accession in November 1990 [see p. 37870].
Conference on east-west migration
A ministerial-level conference was held in Vienna on Jan. 24-25 in an effort to co-ordinate immigration policy in the face of a growing influx of migrants and asylum-seekers into western Europe from the Soviet Union and eastern Europe (particularly Poland and Romania).
The conference was held at Austria's initiative, under the auspices of the Council of Europe, and attended by the 34 participant states of the Conference on Security and Co-operation in Europe (CSCE)[see pp. 37838-39].
A similar conference on south-north migration in Europe was scheduled for March 1991.
There was concern that the number of intending immigrants could grow dramatically in line with rising unemployment (especially youth unemployment) in the east, and political instability, combined with the relaxation of travel restrictions.
(In the Soviet Union a draft law allowing all citizens to obtain a passport quickly had already been given a first reading, and the Soviet delegate estimated that between 1,500,000 and 2,000,000 Soviet citizens could decide to emigrate "in the first two to three years" .)
Catherine Lalumière, Secretary-General of the Council of Europe, acknowledged that "there is a contradiction between freedom of movement and the wish to avoid migratory inflows that are detrimental both to the country of origin and the receiving countries" .
Delegates were generally agreed that the ideal solution was to remove migrants' reasons for wanting to leave.
The final communiqué, however, made little mention of economic assistance to eastern Europe.
It called for (i) the harmonization of national migration and asylum policies in conformity with the Geneva Conventions of the International Red Cross;(ii) the exchange of information on labour markets; and (iii) the introduction of measures to prevent multiple applications for asylum and illegal employment of immigrants.
In Austria, where 23,000 refugees (over half of whom were from Romania) sought political asylum in 1990, the influx had been sharply reduced when visa requirements for Romanians and Poles were reintroduced (in March and September respectively).
Since Sept. 4, 1990, Austria had resumed intensive military patrols along the border with Czechoslovakia and Hungary.
In Germany the numbers seeking asylum increased by 59.1 per cent in 1990 to 193,063, the largest group of 35,345 being from Romania [see also p. 37677].
In addition there were 397,073 immigrants, of whom nearly 148,000 were from the Soviet Union and 111,000 from Romania.
Some 100,000 Germans from the five eastern Länder (states) in Germany were estimated to have moved to the western Länder in the three months following German unification [see pp. 37826; 37829].
Among those seeking asylum in Germany in 1990 were 3,000-5,000 Soviet Jews.
Many had taken advantage of a vote before unification by the Volkskammer (former East German People's Chamber) granting special status to Soviet Jewish immigrants.
A meeting of ministers from the 16 German Länder in Dresden on Dec. 14, 1990, discussed the possible imposition of a quota for Soviet Jewish immigrants, but on Jan. 9, 1991, Wolfgang Schäuble, the German Interior Minster, announced that they would be handled on a "generous case-by-case basis" .
EUROPE
EUROPEAN COMMUNITIES
UK "hard ecu" proposals
On Jan. 8 Norman Lamont, the United Kingdom Chancellor of the Exchequer, announced detailed proposals on how a new currency — the "hard ecu" (separate from the existing European currency unit — ECU)— could be created and managed by a European monetary fund (EMF).
Presented in a similar format to the existing Commission draft treaty, the proposals had been promised by UK Prime Minister John Major at the December 1990 European Council meeting [see pp. 37905-06]and were based on outline proposals which Major had made as Chancellor in June 1990 [see p. 37521].
Whereas the Commission's draft treaty proposed the creation of a single European currency supplanting national currencies, the "hard ecu" as proposed by the UK would float alongside the existing currencies in the exchange rate mechanism (ERM) of the European Monetary System (EMS).
Robin Leigh-Pemberton, the governor of the Bank of England, in a speech in Hamburg on Jan. 22, maintained that "the hard ecu would not be victim to the pitfalls of other parallel currency schemes because it would be defined so that it could never be devalued against other ERM currencies in a realignment" .
One of the main objectives of the proposed EMF (which would be independent of either EC or national bodies) would be to maintain price stability.
It was possible but not inevitable that the EMF, which would have powers to impose monetary discipline on lax national treasuries, would evolve into a fully-fledged European central bank.
The UK proposals were welcomed in part by the French, Spanish and Belgian governments but critically received by the German and Netherlands governments.
Spanish and French proposals
On Jan. 28, at the first ministerial session of the intergovernmental conference on economic and monetary union (EMU — which had opened in December), ministers discussed further proposals by both Spain and France.
After the meeting Henning Christophersen, the EC Commissioner for economic affairs, declared: "We can begin to see some very interesting convergence of views." 
Rather than introducing a new 13th currency both documents proposed "hardening" the existing ECU of a basket of national currencies as a precursor to an eventual single currency.
The Spanish proposal envisaged the monetary institution established under stage two in the transition to EMU as a definite precursor to a full European central bank.
The French proposal emphasized the need for a "fully democratic economic government" centred on the existing Council of Ministers to control a future European central bank.
EUROPE
SOVIET UNION
Appointments to new Cabinet
The first appointments were made in January to a new Cabinet of Ministers, created as part of the restructuring of the senior government leadership approved in December.
On Jan. 14 Valentin Pavlov was nominated by President Mikhail Gorbachev and approved by the USSR Supreme Soviet as Premier.
Vitaly Doguzhiyev and Vladimir Velichko were approved on the same day as First Deputy Premiers, and Yury Maslyukov and Nikolai Laverov as Deputy Premiers.
All five were members of the disbanded Council of Ministers.
Pavlov, 53, had started his career as a district auditor and had risen through the ranks of the Finance Ministry and the State Planning Committee (Gosplan) and State Pricing Committee, being appointed Minister of Finance in 1989.
He was described by the Financial Times of Jan. 15 as a "safe but unimaginative choice for premier, a job which will be overwhelmingly concerned with the reform of the collapsing economy" .
Maslyukov had served as First Deputy Premier and chair of Gosplan, and briefly as acting Prime Minister after Nikolai Ryzhkov was incapacitated by a heart attack in late December.
Doguzhiyev (a member of the small Adygey minority inhabiting the North Caucasus) and Laverov had been Deputy Premiers.
Velichko had been Minister of Heavy Machine Building.
Aleksandr Bessmertnykh was proposed by Gorbachev on Jan. 15 to succeed Eduard Shevardnadze as Foreign Minister, and Boris Pugo was proposed to continue as Interior Minister (a post he had assumed in December).
These proposals were endorsed by the Supreme Soviet on the same day.
Regarded as a liberal, Bessmertnykh, 57, had been hitherto the Soviet ambassador to the United States, and before that a First Deputy Foreign Minister.
A career diplomat, he had served in the Washington embassy in 1970-83 and as head of the Foreign Ministry's United States department in 1983-86, and had participated in nearly all Soviet-US summit and foreign ministerial meetings since 1983.
His appointment was welcomed particularly in the United States, and Bessmertnykh affirmed that he would continue Shevardnadze's foreign policy.
Reports of the Cabinet's first meeting revealed that Mikhail Shkabardnya, hitherto Chief Administrator of the Council of Ministers, was continuing in that capacity in the new Cabinet.
Resignation of presidential economic adviser
It was disclosed on Jan. 19 that Nikolai Petrakov had resigned as Gorbachev's personal economic adviser.
In an interview with the newspaper Komsomolskaya Pravda he complained of disastrous government economic policies which he had been powerless to influence.
Chair of CPSU control commission
Pugo's former post of chair of the CPSU central control commission was filled by Yevgeny Makhov on Jan. 30.
1991 Budget — Other economic developments
The Soviet Union entered 1991 without a budget, and with the USSR and Russian Federation governments locked in a dispute over the latter's budget contributions.
Pavlov, as Finance Minister, had unveiled at the end of November 1990 a new style "union budget" relating only to the centre's spending and revenue, and leaving the republics free to set their own budgets after meeting contributions to the centre.
Several republics had objected to the size of contributions being sought from them and to the division of tax revenues, while the USSR Supreme Soviet had run out of discussion time because of arguments over defence spending.
The task of setting the budget had been passed on Dec. 27 by the USSR Congress of People's Deputies to the Federation Council, after the Russian Federation Supreme Soviet on Dec. 26 had thrown the budget-setting exercise into crisis by voting to cut its contribution to the union budget by almost 85 per cent, to 23,400 million roubles (US$1.00=Rbs0.5556 as at Dec. 31, 1990).
Following a Federation Council meeting on Jan. 3 Gorbachev announced on television that a provisional agreement had been reached to end the budget deadlock.
However, on Jan. 7 Russian Federation President Boris Yeltsin declared that what he called the "budget war" was not over, and that although his republic had agreed effectively to increase its contribution to Rbs78,000 million by funding specific all-union programmes, the central government was still demanding an additional Rbs27,000 million.
That demand was apparently dropped when Yeltsin met Gorbachev on Jan. 8, however, and Russia's formula for its contributions was accepted.
This paved the way for the union budget to be debated and approved by the USSR Supreme Soviet on Jan. 11.
It envisaged income of Rbs250,157 million, and expenditure of Rbs276,820 million, leaving a deficit of Rbs26,663 million.
The biggest single item was defence spending, at Rbs96,563 million, Rbs2,000 million less than originally proposed but still Rbs25,000 million more than the 1990 figure.
This huge increase caused concern among many deputies, but Pavlov had justified it by saying that it took account of forthcoming wholesale price rises and would actually represent a fall in real terms.
Decrees on budget stabilization and sales tax
Gorbachev on Dec. 29, 1990, issued two decrees setting up in 1991 an all-union "extra-budgetary economic stabilization fund" , and introducing a sales tax.
Both measures were intended to curb the 1991 budget deficit after initial projections had put it at Rbs250,000 million.
The stabilization fund was to ensure continued financing for investment and research programmes and support for enterprises "experiencing during the period of transition to market relations difficulties for reasons beyond their control" .
It would be generated by enterprise payments into social security funds, depreciation funds, confiscated profits from excessive price rises, and revenue from sales to work collectives of shares in their enterprises.
The 5 per cent tax on the sale of all production and technical output, consumer goods, completed jobs and paid services was technically to be introduced on Jan. 1, although the authorities were given until Jan. 15 to confirm provisions for its calculation and collection.
Boosting budget revenues in this way would generate funds for income support for pensioners and fixed-income groups in conditions of accelerating inflation as prices were freed, and the tax was also intended to stabilize the money supply.
Republican budgets would get 70 per cent of receipts from the sales tax, and the union budget the remaining 30 per cent.
Economic results in 1990
Figures released by the State Committee for Statistics on Jan. 26 showed that in 1990 gross national product (GNP) had fallen by 2 per cent, produced national income by 4 per cent , and labour productivity by 3 per cent .
The trade deficit had risen from Rbs3,400 million in 1989 to Rbs10,000 million, even though overall trade volume had shrunk by 7 per cent to Rbs131,000 million.
The only bright spot was a cut in the budget deficit to Rbs58,100 million, Rbs1,900 million more than planned, due to lower central government investment and defence spending, and higher tax revenue.
Decree on land use
Gorbachev on Jan. 5 decreed that "in order to activate the implementation of land reform" republican and local authorities should make an inventory of "lands which are not being used in a rational manner by collective and state farms" , and of the land holdings of USSR ministries, with a view to making these available leasehold to private farmers and as allotments for town dwellers.
In the first phase it was intended to release between 3,000,000 and 5,000,000 hectares by spring 1991.
The decree also declared that the union and republican governments should investigate ways of transforming inefficient collective and state farms into private or co-operative farms, although it ruled out compulsory dissolution.
In July 1990 the USSR government had written off debts amounting to Rbs40,300 million from state banks to collective and state farms and other agro-industrial enterprises.
Withdrawal of high-denomination rouble notes
Widespread public consternation resulted from a presidential decree of Jan. 22 declaring that, effective from Jan. 23, existing Rbs50 and Rbs100 banknotes (the highest denominations) would no longer be legal tender.
The decree was intended to wipe out the illegal cash holdings of black-marketeers, and to drain from the economy up to 20 per cent of the money supply, which had become bloated by the printing of new money to cover budget deficits in recent years.
Enterprises were given just three hours from the start of business on Jan. 23 to hand over such notes from their cash floats to banks.
Equivalent sums would be credited to the enterprises' bank accounts, subject to verification that the money had been earned legally.
Individual workers were allowed between Jan. 23 and 25 to exchange notes at their workplaces (there were special provisions for people on sick leave or vacation) for lower denomination notes or for new Rbs50 and Rbs100 notes to the value of their average monthly wage in the past year, up to a maximum of Rbs1,000.
Pensioners were allowed to exchange notes at banks up to the value of their monthly pension or a maximum Rbs200 (depending on which was the larger sum).
Additionally, workers and pensioners could exchange notes above the maximum amounts provided that they completed an application form and could prove to special commissions that the money had been acquired legally.
Savings accounts in banks were left untouched, but the decree limited for the next six months the amount of cash which could be withdrawn from accounts to a maximum Rbs500 per month, although it authorized the use of bank transfers by individuals for payment to state shops and enterprises.
The measure was condemned by some economists as crude and ill-conceived, particularly since it threatened to wipe out the personal savings of many ordinary people: Soviet citizens were generally disinclined to place their money in accounts with the state savings bank, either because of mistrust, or because the low interest rate provided little incentive, or because it was necessary to carry a large amount of cash in case of chancing upon a scarce commodity which had suddenly come into stock in a state shop.
By contrast, many hardened black marketeers were likely to be untouched by the decree since they tended to move their rouble profits into property, gold or dollars.
Not only ordinary citizens but the savings banks were caught unawares by the decree, and there were chaotic scenes at bank branches as distraught pensioners found that cashiers had run out of lower denomination notes, and had not been issued with the new Rbs50 and Rbs100 notes.
Furthermore, a brisk black market sprang up immediately as people without savings bought old Rbs50 and Rbs100 notes for a fraction of their face value.
On Jan. 24 the Russian Federation government intervened with the announcement that it would increase the maximum amount for pensioners to Rbs500, and several republics said that they would extend the deadline for exchanges.
Developments in republics
Georgia: Worsening violence in South Ossetia — Establishment of National Guard
President Gorbachev on Jan. 7 issued a decree annulling South Ossetia's September 1990 declaration of secession from Georgia, and the December Georgian Supreme Soviet legislation stripping South Ossetia of its autonomy.
He also ordered all armed units other than USSR Interior Ministry troops to withdraw from South Ossetia within three days.
The Georgian Supreme Soviet on Jan. 9 unanimously rejected Gorbachev's decree as "gross interference" in Georgia's internal affairs, and it was announced that, far from withdrawing, the Georgian police units in South Ossetia would be reinforced.
On Jan. 10 Georgia's President Zviad Gamsakhurdia accused the Soviet government of stirring up the revolt in South Ossetia to provide an excuse to impose presidential rule on the whole of Georgia.
The Georgian authorities abruptly changed their position on Jan. 28, however, with the announcement that the police reinforcements were being withdrawn, and that the remaining units would patrol jointly with Soviet troops.
By this time more than 20 people had been killed since the beginning of the month in a spate of bombings and gun battles between Ossetes and Georgian militia detachments.
The concession resulted from negotiations initiated by the Georgian Interior Ministry which had also secured agreement by Ossete militants to surrender weapons stolen from the police.
However, prospects for the restoration of calm appeared to be jeopardized by the arrest by Georgian police on Jan. 30 of Torez Kolumbegov, chair of the South Ossetia regional soviet, reportedly as he was on his way to talks with Georgian leaders.
The Georgian Supreme Soviet on Jan. 30 voted to set up a de facto republican army as part of its transition to independence.
The 20,000-strong National Guard would be conscripted, the Supreme Soviet having on Nov. 15 declared illegal the conscription of Georgians into the Soviet Red Army.
In the wake of the recent clampdown in Lithuania against draft-dodgers, establishment of the National Guard was viewed by commentators as a blatant challenge to Soviet rule.
Transcaucasian republics: Voluntary military service for peacekeeping duties
The official Tass news agency announced on Jan. 1 that Soviet troops would henceforth only serve in the Transcaucasus on a voluntary basis.
A Defence Ministry spokesman said that this had been decided because of the "difficult conditions" in Armenia, Azerbaijan and Georgia.
Tadjikistan: Lifting of Dushanbe curfew
The curfew in force in Tadjikistan's capital, Dushanbe, for more than 10 months was finally lifted on Jan. 1.
It had been imposed at the height of serious anti-government rioting and pogroms in February 1990 [see p. 37256], and had been shortened several times, but only now was the security situation deemed by the city's military commandant to have stabilized.
The state of emergency in the city remained in force.
Ukraine: Referendum on Crimean independence
Residents of the Crimean Peninsula on Jan. 20 took part in a referendum organized by the regional soviet on restoring the region's autonomy.
More than 81 per cent of eligible voters took part, of whom 93.26 per cent voted in favour of restoring the Crimea as an autonomous republic, independent of the Ukraine.
The Crimea had been an autonomous republic from 1921 to 1945.
It was stripped of this status when its majority Tatar population was deported to Central Asia, accused of having collaborated during the Second World War with the Nazi German occupiers.
It was made an oblast of the Russian Federation and repopulated largely by Russians, but in 1954 it was ceded to the Ukraine.
Crimean Tatars had been drifting back to their former homeland since 1987, and a June 1988 central government ruling confirmed their right to residency [see p. 36036].
Representatives of the Crimean Tatar population had opposed the referendum on the grounds that, as the indigenous people, only they should be allowed to vote.
There was also a call for a boycott by the main Ukrainian nationalist group Rukh, on the grounds that the Ukraine's territorial integrity was being threatened.
Kirghizia: New Cabinet
The Kirghiz Supreme Soviet on Jan. 22 replaced the republican Council of Ministers with a Cabinet attached to the President.
Nasirdin Isanov, formerly Kirghizia's Vice-President, was elected as head of the Cabinet (de facto Premier).
City renamings
The Russian Federation Supreme Soviet on Jan. 29 decided that the Volga city of Kuybyshev should revert to its old name of Samara.
Renamed after a chief architect of 1930s industrialization, this was the second largest city thus far to benefit from the process of restoring historic names.
The largest had been Gorky (renamed in 1932 after the writer Maxim Gorky), which had reverted to the name Nizhny Novgorod by decree of the Russian Federation Supreme Soviet on Oct. 23, 1990, in compliance with residents' demands.
The October decree had also given back the name Vladikavkaz to North Ossetia's capital, Ordzhonikidze (renamed after Stalin's henchman Sergo Ordzhonikidze).
Other recent renamings included Khodzhent in Tadjikistan (previously Leninabad) and Kumayri in Armenia (previously Leninakan)[for 1989 renamings see p. 37046].
Media developments
Gosteleradio, the USSR State Television and Radio Committee, on Jan. 11 shut down the operations of the Interfax news agency.
This had been set up in September 1989 as a joint venture between Radio Moscow and a Franco-Italian consortium, and had been provided with technical equipment and premises at the Moscow Radio building.
A Gosteleradio statement declared that it had taken action after discovering that in September 1990 Interfax had registered as an independent agency without notifying Radio Moscow, but had persisted in using Radio Moscow facilities.
Moreover, Gosteleradio claimed that Interfax had never honoured an agreement to remit 50 per cent of its earnings to Radio Moscow.
For their part, Interfax staff issued a statement accusing Gosteleradio chairman Leonid Kravchenko of political censorship, and linking the shutdown with the suspension of the popular television documentary series Vzglyad.
On Dec. 28, 1990, a Vzglyad documentary discussing Shevardnadze's resignation had been were withdrawn on Gosteleradio's instructions.
Two further programmes alluding to the resignation, due to be aired on Jan. 4 and 11, had also been blocked.
Orthodox Church developments
Orthodox Christmas on Jan. 7 was celebrated as a public holiday for the first time since the arrival of communist rule in the Russian Federation, the Ukraine, Byelorussia, Georgia and Moldavia, with the endorsement of the USSR government.
A Christmas tree was put up in Moscow's Red Square for the first time, and on Christmas Eve the bells of St Basil's Cathedral in Red Square were rung for the first time since 1917.
Murder of investigator into killing of Fr Men
It was reported on Jan. 3 that Hegumen Lazar (Viyacheslav Solnyshko), a member of the Moscow Patriarchate's commission investigating the September 1990 murder of radical Russian Orthodox priest Fr Aleksandr Men, had been found murdered in his Moscow flat.
EUROPE
ALBANIA
Postponement of elections — Government reshuffle — Pardon for political prisoners — Refugee exodus to Greece
The government on Jan. 16 agreed to postpone Albania's first free multiparty elections from Feb. 10 to March 31.
This represented a significant concession to the opposition, which had otherwise threatened to boycott the election.
In his New Year address to the country on Jan. 1, and at a meeting with opposition representatives on Jan. 8, President Ramiz Alia had insisted that the elections would go ahead as scheduled.
The reversal of his stance was announced after he and other officials had held a further meeting with representatives of the Democratic Party (legalized in December), the Ecology Party (registered on Jan. 7) and the Republican Party (registered on Jan. 10).
Strikes
In exchange for the postponement the opposition agreed to back until May 1 a wage freeze and a ban on strikes because of the serious economic and political situation.
Up to 1,000 coalminers had gone on strike at the Valias mine near Tirana (the capital) on Jan. 11.
On Jan. 16, apparently fearing that the strike might spread to other mines, the government conceded pay rises of between 30 and 50 per cent and improvements in working conditions for all of Albania's 30,000 miners.
However, this settlement appeared to encourage workers in other sectors.
Within days Tirana and the southern town of Korce were in the grip of a public transport strike, and dockers were on strike in the port of Durres.
The strikes ended on Jan. 23, the day on which the government rushed legislation through the People's Assembly enshrining the right to strike, but obliging workers to give 15 days' notice of stoppages, and authorizing the Assembly to suspend a stoppage if it threatened the national interest.
Government reshuffle
The second government reshuffle in less than six weeks was carried out on Jan. 31.
Two young economists, Fatos Nano and Shkelqim Cani, were appointed Deputy Premiers, the former having been brought into the government in the last reshuffle, in December, as General Secretary of the Council of Ministers (in which capacity he was now replaced by Aleks Laurasi), and the latter having previously served as Director General of the Bank for Foreign Economic Relations.
Sabit Broka replaced Ahmet Kamberi as Health Service Minister, and Mojkom Zeqo replaced Alfred Uci in the Cabinet-rank post of Chair of the Committee for Culture and the Arts.
Pardons for political offenders
The Presidium of the People's Assembly on Jan. 5 agreed to proposals by the Interior and Justice Ministries to pardon 202 political prisoners sentenced for "agitation and propaganda against the state" and for "attempted defection abroad" .
It also ordered that the cases of all remaining political prisoners should be considered before its next meeting.
The announcement of the pardons also revealed that 191 political prisoners had already been pardoned by decrees on June 12 and July 31, 1990 [for February 1990 estimates of prison population see p. 37746].
Re-opening of Tirana mosque
Several hundred Albanians, watched by a crowd of more than 10,000 onlookers, on Jan. 18 packed into Tirana's Etem Bey mosque, on the city's central Skanderbeg Square, for Albania's first legal Moslem religious service since religious practice had been banned in 1967.
The prayers were led by acting Chief Mufti Ibrahim Bala.
Before the 1967 ban around 70 per cent of Albania's population had been Moslems.
[For November 1989 first open celebration of Roman Catholic mass since 1967 see pp. 37864-65.]
Refugee exodus to Greece
The flow of Albanian escapees across the southern border into Greece accelerated dramatically in December, and turned into a flood in early January.
Almost all of those fleeing were from the Greek minority living in southern Albania; most were unskilled men in their 20s and early 30s.
The increase coincided with the escalation of pro-democracy protests and with political reform, and there were reports that border guards were no longer shooting on sight people caught attempting to cross the heavily fortified frontier.
By late December the number of people leaving had risen to up to 600 a day, not far short of the total for the whole of the period 1987-89.
A sudden upsurge to 3,500 on Dec. 31-Jan. 1 was reportedly prompted by a rumour that the Greek authorities were going to seal the border, and on Jan. 2 a Greek government spokesman alleged that the rumour had been deliberately put about by the Albanian authorities in an attempt to rid the country of the Greek minority, which numbered nearly 59,000 according to the 1989 census.
The Greek Prime Minister Konstantinos Mitsotakis, visiting Tirana on Jan. 13-14, appealed to Albania's Greeks to stay put, and received a promise from Alia that the refugees could return to Albania without fear of punishment.
His visit did nothing to stem the exodus, however, and on Jan. 20 the Greek authorities declared that no Albanian would be allowed to enter Greece without a passport and visa.
By this time the number of refugees since Dec. 30 stood at over 11,000.
In the following week over 5,000 were repatriated, and it was also reported that another 1,500 had returned to Albania voluntarily.
EUROPE
ROMANIA
Timisoara demonstrations — Parliamentary reports on 1990 violence
The anti-government protests which began in Timisoara on Dec. 16 [see p. 37922]continued throughout January.
A general strike had been in effect in the city since December, with workers and students demanding the resignation of the President and the government, which, they alleged, were harbouring former Ceausescu supporters.
Protesters in Timisoara, the city which began the 1989 revolution, claimed that the full truth about those events had not been told.
On Jan. 10 the prefect of the Timis administrative region, the mayor of Timisoara, the region's police commander and other officials tendered their resignations to the government, saying that they could no longer control events.
Between Jan. 11 and Jan. 13 demonstrators massed in University Square, Bucharest, in solidarity with the Timisoara strikers.
The rally on Jan. 12 was led by members of Civic Alliance which backed calls for the government's resignation.
Members of a breakaway group who blocked traffic in University Square the same evening were forcibly dispersed by police.
Two parliamentary inquiries reported in January, one into the ethnic clashes in Tirgu Mures in March 1990 [see p. 37327], and the other into the violence surrounding the miners' dispersal of demonstrators in Bucharest in June [see pp. 37544-45].
Critics of the Tirgu Mures report said that it failed to spell out the reasons for the outburst of hatred between Romanians and ethnic Hungarians in Transylvania, preferring instead to lay the blame on Ceausescu's legacy, actions of the former Securitate political police, and disinformation on the part of extremists on both sides.
The opposition members of the commission investigating the June 1990 violence in Bucharest disagreed with the conclusions of the inquiry.
The 11 National Salvation Front (NSF) members presented the majority report blaming the protesters and opposition groups, while the seven opposition members in their report blamed the government.
Position of former King Michael
Former King Michael, who had tried to re-enter Romania on Dec. 25, 1990, only to be expelled after 12 hours at the airport, was given leave on Jan. 6 to have his Romanian citizenship restored.
The decision came after confusion in government circles over the move and a threat from Andrei Plesu, Minister of Culture, to resign.
EUROPE
YUGOSLAVIA
Confrontation between Croatia and federal army
Yugoslavia during January teetered on the brink of civil war because of a confrontation between the government of Croatia and the Serb-domination Yugoslav National Army (JNA).
This was sparked off by a federal Collective State Presidency order on Jan. 9, apparently aimed principally at republican-controlled forces in Slovenia and Croatia, which required that all "unauthorized" armed units should surrender their arms within 10 days to the JNA.
Civilian paramilitary units operated in several parts of Yugoslavia, notably among the Serbs of Kosovo and in Croatia, where extremists in the ruling Croatian Democratic Union (HDZ) had armed themselves to counter the insurgency by armed bands operating in the republic's Serbian municipalities.
The principal target of the order, however, appeared to be the territorial defence forces in Slovenia and Croatia, which had been placed under the control of the republican leaderships by legislation passed in Slovenia in October 1990 [see p. 37790]and in Croatia on Nov. 8, and a newly formed Croatian paramilitary police reserve known as the specijalci.
On Dec. 2 Federal Secretary for National Defence Gen. Veljko Kadijevic had declared that republican control of these units marked the beginning of republican armies, and he had threatened that the JNA would intervene to disarm them.
On Dec. 4 the Croatian Presidency called for Kadijevic's resignation since he was "imposing the army as the supreme arbiter in Yugoslavia's constitutional crisis" .
Croatian President Franjo Tudjman repeated warnings that the JNA might be plotting a coup against his administration [see p. 37790].
Both Croatia and Slovenia on Jan. 15 refused to comply with the State Presidency's order, and on Jan. 17 it was reported that republican leaders had met to co-ordinate resistance to a feared military crackdown.
On Jan. 19 the Slovene and Croatian police and territorial defence forces were put on alert and deployed around key installations in the republican capitals, even though the deadline for the surrender of arms was extended on that day by 48 hours.
Following expiry of the revised deadline, the Federal Defence Secretariat warned on Jan. 23 that it would put JNA units on combat readiness unless Croatia and Slovenia complied with the disarmament order immediately.
Conflict was averted by an emergency meeting between the Collective State Presidency and the Croatian leadership on Jan. 25.
It was agreed that the JNA would call off its alert and Croatia's specijalci would be demobilized (but not disbanded).
The Croats apparently also agreed that nationalist paramilitary gangs, including HDZ activists, should be disarmed.
Order for arrest of Croatia's Defence Minister
On Jan. 30 the JNA once again enraged Croats by ordering the arrest of Croatia's Defence Minister, Col.-Gen.
Martin Spegelj, on sedition charges.
A videotape made by the JNA had been broadcast on Jan. 25, purporting to show Spegelj at a private meeting boasting about Croatian arms purchases from Hungary, and discussing plans to kill JNA officers.
Four other people seen in the film were arrested on Jan. 30.
Spegelj denounced the film as a fabrication.
Start of inter-republican talks on Yugoslavia's future
The crisis overshadowed talks between the six republics on Yugoslavia's future constitutional structure, which opened and adjourned on Jan. 10.
When these resumed on Jan. 31 the Croatian delegation walked out after it had failed to secure the exclusion of the JNA from the negotiations.
Challenge to Slovene sovereignty — Macedonian sovereignty declaration
The Constitutional Court of Yugoslavia on Jan. 14 annulled the key articles of Slovenia's July 1990 sovereignty declaration [see p. 37622]on the grounds that they were unconstitutional.
At the same time the court suspended the October 1990 Serbian legislation erecting barriers to Serbian trade with Slovenia and Croatia [see p. 37867].
The Macedonian Assembly on Jan. 25 unanimously adopted a declaration of the republic's sovereignty, and a platform on Yugoslavia's future structure; the sovereignty declaration enshrined the right of the Macedonian people to self-determination, including the right to secede from Yugoslavia.
Serbian financial scandal
Information came to light on Jan. 8 that at the end of December the Serbian national bank had secretly issued 18,300 million dinars (US$1,400 million) of new money without approval by the federal National Bank of Yugoslavia, in order to make a loan to the Serbian government.
The money had been used to prop up Serbia's collapsing economy through subsidies to cover salaries in loss-making enterprises, farm subsidies, and increases in pensions.
The sum involved represented more than half of the federal government's planned increase in the money supply for 1991.
The federal government on Jan. 8 accused Serbia of having critically undermined the federal monetary system and of jeopardizing economic reforms because the illegal issue would trigger inflation and threaten the dinar's stability.
Western diplomats in Belgrade described the fraud as a "fatal assault" on Yugoslavia's standing with Western creditors, since it demonstrated that the federal government could not control the money supply.
There was also outrage in the other five republics that Serbia had robbed the common federal purse.
The federal government reacted by announcing plans to increase central control over the republican national banks.
The federal national bank set in train attempts to block the Serbian issue and to recover the money already released.
Devaluation of the dinar
The dinar was devalued on Jan. 1 by 22.2 per cent against the deutschmark to a rate of DM1.00=9 dinars.
Announced to the Federal Assembly on Dec. 28 by Federal Premier Ante Markovic, this was the first devaluation since his government had introduced at the beginning of 1990 a convertible dinar pegged to the deutschmark [see p. 37194].
Attempt at power-sharing in Macedonia — New Serbian and Montenegrin Premiers
Following the November-December 1990 elections to the Macedonian Assembly, leaders of the Internal Macedonian Revolutionary Organization — Democratic Party for Macedonian National Unity (VMRO-DPMNE), the Macedonian League of Communists (LC), and the Alliance of Reform Forces agreed in principle on Jan. 7 to form a coalition administration.
However, only the election of the Assembly President (Speaker) went through smoothly, Stoyan Andov from the Alliance of Reform Forces being elected on Jan. 8.
Kiro Gligorov of the Macedonian LC was elected President of the republic only at the second attempt on Jan. 27 after VMRO-DPMNE deputies had failed to back him (he was sole candidate) in a first ballot on Jan. 19, thereby depriving him of the necessary two-thirds majority.
On Jan. 28 the Assembly twice failed to elect Ljupco Georgievski, VMRO-DPMNE chairman, as Vice-President of the republic.
The new Serbian Assembly, elected in December 1990, on Jan. 15 elected Dragutin Zelenovic as Serbia's Prime Minister.
He was hitherto the member of the federal Collective State Presidency for Serbia's nominally autonomous Vojvodina province.
In Montenegro Milo Djukanovic was named as Prime Minister on Jan. 16.
EUROPE
CZECHOSLOVAKIA
Start of market economic reform — Bill of rights
The Czechoslovak government on Jan. 1 launched its long-awaited first package of market economic reforms, featuring price liberalization, privatization of small businesses, and internal convertibility of the koruna.
Legislation on "small" privatizations, whereby around 100,000 state-owned shops, restaurants and other small businesses would be put up for auction, had been passed on Oct. 25, 1990, after a long official debate on its pace and a spate of strikes by shopworkers fearing redundancy.
The first auction was held on Jan. 26 and was hailed as a great success.
Bids for the 16 shops on sale reached 10 times the starting price and raised 22,000,000 koruna (US$785,700).
As a first step towards privatization the Federal Assembly had approved on Oct. 2, 1990, the return to their former owners of some properties confiscated under communist rule.
It abolished 1959 legislation which had regulated the confiscation of an estimated 70,000 houses, shops and small business between 1955 and 1962; former owners were given six months to submit claims for restitution or financial compensation.
In order to achieve internal koruna convertibility (meaning that firms licensed to engage in foreign trade could buy as much foreign currency as they wanted), Federal Finance Minister Vaclav Klaus on Dec. 28, 1990, had announced the unification of exchange rates for the koruna against Western currencies.
This meant an effective 14.3 per cent devaluation of the commercial exchange rate against Western currencies to US$1.00=kcs28, but a 12 per cent increase in the tourist rate.
Public concern about price liberalization had led to a wave of panic buying which had emptied shops in the last days of December.
Price controls were lifted from 85 per cent of goods, causing prices on average to double in the course of January alone.
Klaus denied accusations by opposition parties that he was copying Poland's "shock therapy" , and that he was deliberately using inflation to soak up excess purchasing power.
IMF credit
The International Monetary Fund (IMF) on Jan. 7 announced the provision of resources worth US$1,800 million to Czechoslovakia, to be made available over the next 14 months.
Half of the loan was intended to help stabilize the koruna, and the other half to meet the cost of increased oil prices caused by the switch within COMECON to hard-currency sales [see p. 37979].
New Federal Ministers
President Vaclav Havel on Jan. 18 appointed Imrich Flassik of the Christian Democratic Movement as Minister in charge of the new Federal Office for Economic Competition.
On Jan. 25 Havel appointed Jozef Baksay from Public Against Violence (PAV) as Minister of Foreign Trade, a post which had been vacant since the death of Slavomir Stracar in August 1990 [see p. 37737].
Bill of rights
The Federal Assembly on Jan. 9 approved a bill of rights which was described as laying the legal cornerstones of the new constitution due to be adopted in 1991.
It codified democratic rights and freedoms including freedom of speech, assembly and association, and private ownership.
The bill was passed by 218 votes to one, with 19 abstentions, following two days of debate concerned primarily with abortion and minority rights.
An amendment which would effectively have outlawed abortion, by extending the provisions of a clause on the right to life to include life from the moment of conception, was defeated.
EUROPE
POLAND
New government
Jan Krzysztof Bielecki was approved by the Sejm (lower house of the National Assembly) as Prime Minister on Jan. 4 by 276 votes to 58, with 52 abstentions, following his nomination by President Lech Walesa on Dec. 29, 1990.
Bielecki's proposals for the composition of a new Council of Ministers were presented on Jan. 5 and accepted by the Sejm on Jan. 12 by 272 votes to four, with 62 abstentions.
Walesa had experienced difficulty in finding someone to take on the task of forming a government, which was likely to hold office only until a general election expected in the coming spring.
His first choice, Jan Olszewski, had abandoned attempts to form a government on Dec. 18 principally because of fundamental disagreements with Leszek Balcerowicz, the Finance Minister in the outgoing government and architect of the unpopular "shock therapy" free-market economic reforms.
The retention of Balcerowicz in the government was considered essential to reassure Western creditors.
(The Guardian of Jan. 8 claimed that United States emissaries from the IMF had actually threatened that, unless Balcerowicz remained in place, Western creditors who had so far lent Poland around US$13,000 million would end their support.)
Walesa had then appealed unsuccessfully to the outgoing Premier and his defeated presidential rival, Tadeusz Mazowiecki, to stay on.
Bielecki, 39, was reportedly a reluctant nominee for the premiership.
He was a former underground activist in Solidarity, and had entered the Sejm in 1989 on the Solidarity list, although he headed the Gdansk-based Liberal Democratic Congress, a small political party composed of economic experts which had outlined a radical programme for the rapid privatization of state-owned enterprises.
An economics graduate, he had become an adviser to Solidarity in 1980, and had started his own timber haulage company after losing his job in industrial training following the 1981 imposition of martial law.
In 1985 he had set up a consultancy firm which in the past year had advised the government on privatization.
On Jan. 5 he pledged to continue and consolidate the free-market reforms started by the Mazowiecki government.
Jan Krzysztof BieleckiChairman
Polish Council of Ministers
*Leszek BalcerowiczDeputy Chairman; Finance Michal BoniLabour and Social Policy Wieslaw ChrzanowskiJustice Jerzy EysmonttMinister-Director of the Central Planning Office Adam GlapinskiTown and Country Planning and Construction Robert GlebockiNational Education
*Vice-Adml.
Piotr KolodziejczykNational Defence Dariusz LedworowskiForeign Economic Co-operation Janusz LewandowskiOwnership Transformations Henryk MajewskiInternal Affairs Maciej NowickiEnvironmental Protection, Natural Resources and Forestry Marek RostworowskiCulture and Art
*Krzystof SkubiszewskiForeign Affairs Wladyslaw SidorowiczHealth and Social Welfare
*Jerzy Slezak**Communications Adam TanskiAgriculture and Food Economy
*Ewaryst WaligorskiTransport and Maritime Economy Andrzej ZawislakIndustry Krzysztof ZabinskiMinister-Head of the Office of the Council of Ministers
*Held same post in outgoing government.
**Previously given wrongly as Jan Wiktor Slezak.
Ministers of State — New National Bank President
Walesa on Dec. 28, 1990, appointed Senator Jaroslaw Kaczynski, leader of the Centre Alliance which had nominated Walesa as presidential candidate [see p. 37546], as head of the presidential Chancellery with the rank of Minister of State, and Jacek Merkel, who had directed Walesa's presidential election campaign, as Minister of State in charge of defence and security affairs.
Andrzej Drzycimski was confirmed as presidential spokesman.
The Sejm on Jan. 25 approved Walesa's proposal to appoint Grzegorz Wojtowicz as National Bank president.
Previously Bank vice-president, he succeeded Wladyslaw Baka, who had tendered his resignation on Jan. 17.
Split in Solidarity parliamentary group
The Citizens' Parliamentary Club (OKP — the name used by Solidarity deputies in the National Assembly) split on Jan. 4, when 43 Sejm deputies and 27 Senators formed a new parliamentary floor group called the Democratic Union.
It was led by Bronislaw Geremek, who had been removed as OKP leader in November 1990, a casualty of a factional struggle intensified by the presidential election campaign [see p. 37841].
Dropping of slander charge against Tyminski
It was announced on Jan. 13 that prosecutors had dropped a slander case against the defeated presidential candidate Stanislaw Tyminski, arising from the recent election campaign.
Tyminski had accused Mazowiecki of being a party to the "treasonous" sale of state-owned enterprises to foreigners allegedly for less than their true value [see p. 37840].
Prosecutors in Nowy Sacz province had instituted proceedings for criminal slander of a state official, which carried a maximum eight-year prison sentence, and following his defeat by Walesa in the December 1990 run-off election Tyminski had been required to post bail of US$100,000 before he could fly home to Canada.
He had returned to Poland on Jan. 4 to answer the charge, and on Jan. 7 it was reported that a lesser charge was being substituted because prosecutors had ruled that Tyminski had attacked Mazowiecki as a rival candidate rather than as the holder of state office.
Charges were dropped altogether at Mazowiecki's request.
Start of privatization
The issue of shares worth a total of Zl300,000 million (US$1.00=Zl9,713.39 as at Jan. 7, 1991) in five showcase state-owned enterprises closed on Jan. 11.
Although the government pronounced the sale a success, it was left with unsold shares in three of the companies.
The sale had begun on Nov. 30, and the struggle to attract enough investors had been reflected in a decision to extend the scheduled closure of the issue from Dec. 21.
On Jan. 10 Lewandowski told a Sejm committee assessing his candidacy for the post of Minister of Ownership Transformations that the performance of the share offer indicated that a different approach to privatization was needed, and he said that he favoured distributing to all Polish citizens free vouchers to be exchanged for shares.
EUROPE
HUNGARY
Cabinet changes — Devaluation
In the second Cabinet reshuffle in less than a month, Prime Minister Jozsef Antall on Jan. 12 named Elemer Gergatz as Agriculture Minister in place of Ferenc Jozsef Nagy, who became a Minister without portfolio, and Gyula Kiss (hitherto a Minister without portfolio) as Minister of Labour Affairs in place of Sandor Györivanyi.
He also confirmed the dismissal, first disclosed on Jan. 10, of Minister without portfolio Jenö Gerbovics.
The latter attributed his removal to the ongoing disagreement within the government coalition about legislation to allow former owners to repossess or receive compensation for lands and property confiscated under communist rule [see p. 37790].
Effective from Jan. 7, the government devalued the forint by 15 per cent against convertible currencies (US$1.00=F71.406 as at Jan. 7, 1991).
The move was designed to boost exports to Western markets in order to combat inflation, which had been around 34 per cent in 1990 and was projected at up to 40 per cent in 1991.
MIDDLE EAST — ARAB WORLD
PALESTINIAN AFFAIRS
Assassination of PLO officials
The assassination on Jan. 14 in Tunis of three Palestinians, including two leading members of the Palestine Liberation Organization (PLO), dealt a serious blow to the leadership of the Palestinian movement.
Salah Khalaf, known by his nom de guerre of Abu Iyad, was considered to be PLO chairman Yassir Arafat's closest and most influential aide, while Hayil Abd al-Hamid (Abu al-Hol) was the PLO's chief of security; the third man who died was Fakhri al-Umari (Abu Muhammad), an aide to Abu Iyad.
The assassin, a renegade bodyguard, was captured by Tunisian security forces after the shooting.
The Palestinian news agency WAFA identified him as Hamza Abu Zayd, "an infiltrated agent who had ties with a traitorous party" .
No group claimed responsibility, but PLO officials said that Zayd had come to Tunis in October 1989 among a group of defectors from the Revolutionary Council of Fatah led by Sabri al-Banna (Abu Nidal), who had been expelled from the PLO in 1974.
Other PLO sources speculated that the assassinations might have been commissioned by the Israeli security service Mossad, perhaps by infiltration of the Abu Nidal group.
An alternative explanation for Abu Nidal involvement was the suggestion that his group might have carried out the killings on behalf of the Iraqi regime; this version depended on the suggestion that Abu Iyad, while publicly backing the PLO's pro-Iraqi line, was expressing reservations about it to Arafat in private.
Abu Iyad was, with Arafat, a founder of Al-Fatah, the PLO's largest constituent group.
Although he was not a member of the PLO's 15-man executive committee and had no formal title within the organization, Abu Iyad had since 1987 been generally referred to as Arafat's second-in-command.
He was regarded as the architect of the PLO's security and counterintelligence apparatus and was frequently assumed to have presided over the creation of the Black September organization, which was active from 1971-73 and whose actions included the attack at the Munich Olympic Games in 1972.
The assassinations in Tunis sparked off angry protest in the West Bank and Gaza Strip, in defiance of widespread curfews imposed by the Israeli occupying authorities.
Israeli soldiers shot dead three Palestinians and injured more than 60 others.
Talks on Jerusalem
On Dec. 31 talks were held in the offices of the Hebrew newspaper Kol Ha'Ir between Teddy Kollek, the mayor of Jerusalem, and Faisal al-Hussaini, who was widely regarded as the unofficial representative of the PLO in the city.
The talks centred on the contentious issue of Jerusalem and the status of its inhabitants.
In their dialogue al-Hussaini refused to consider Jerusalem as separate from the West Bank and called for a unified Jerusalem as "two capitals with one municipal umbrella" .
Kollek, while agreeing that there should be a "certain amount of autonomy" for the Arabs of Jerusalem, ruled out any compromise on the unity of the city, declaring: "It is absolute for us that Jerusalem is one." 
Two capitals, Kollek maintained, would mean a border and different laws in the two halves, "and in no time the city would be divided as it was before" .
Palestinian radicals attacked al-Hussaini for meeting Kollek, while Eliakim Hayetzni, an Israeli Knesset member from the right-wing Tehiya party, accused Kollek of treason for meeting "a known agent of Arafat" .
Proposal for Israeli withdrawal from Gaza
On Jan. 1 a plan for unilateral Israeli withdrawal from the Gaza strip was proposed by two left-wing Israeli Knesset members, Ran Cohen of the Citizens' Rights Movement and Amnon Rubinstein of the Shinui Party.
The proposal was later made public in a joint statement by seven prominent members of the Israeli opposition Labour Party headed by Yossi Bellin, a former close aide to the party chairman Shimon Peres.
Pointing out the growing difficulty in policing the densely populated Gaza Strip, and stressing that, unlike the West Bank, Jews could find few meaningful historical links with Gaza, the plan advocated the handing over of the area either to the UN or to a governing body of Palestinians.
The plan was intended principally as a confidence-building measure to promote an Israeli-Palestinian dialogue.
The proposal received an enthusiastic welcome from the smaller political parties allied with Labour.
However, the party leadership appeared embarrassed by the proposal, describing it as running "contrary to the official platform" .
Moshe Arens, the Israeli Defence Minister, dismissed the plan as "nonsense" .
Security Council resolution and visit of UN envoy
On Jan. 4 the UN Security Council passed a non-binding resolution deploring Israel's treatment of the Palestinians in the occupied territories and calling for greater international protection for them.
The resolution reaffirmed the de jure applicability of the Fourth Geneva Convention to all territories occupied since 1967, including Jerusalem.
The resolution was dismissed by aides of Israel's Prime Minister Itzhak Shamir, who asserted that it was "a pity" that the UN found it necessary repeatedly to condemn Israel when the real Middle East crisis was in the Gulf.
The passing of the resolution coincided with a visit to Israel by the president of the UN General Assembly, Guido De Marco, on Jan. 3-4.
De Marco inspected refugee camps in the West Bank and Gaza Strip, although his tour of the Jabaliyah refugee camp in Gaza had to be cut short after disturbances erupted there.
Soldiers shot and injured 14 Palestinians during the unrest.
After his visit De Marco declined to speculate on any future action by the UN, but stressed that an international peace conference on the Middle East was essential, adding that "the intervention of the international community…is even more important now than ever" .
Sari Nusseibeh, a prominent Palestinian academic and PLO supporter, was arrested on Jan. 29 on the orders of Israeli Defence Minister Arens, who authorized him to be placed in "administrative detention" for six months.
He had been accused by Israel of spying for Iraq.
His arrest was condemned from many sides, including the United States State Department, which pointedly remarked that Nusseibeh is "a man whom Israel should be talking to, not placing under arrest" .
MIDDLE EAST — ARAB WORLD
JORDAN
Cabinet reshuffle — Closure of al-Ruweishid border crossing — Tension with Israel
Appointment of Moslem Brotherhood members to government
In a decree issued by King Hussein on Jan. 1, a leading Palestinian politician, Taher al-Masri, replaced Marwan al-Qasem as the Jordanian Foreign Affairs Minister, and members of the Moslem Brotherhood were appointed to the Religious Affairs, Health, Education, Justice and Social Development ministries.
There were nine new appointments in total, responsibility for Education and for Higher Education was split, that for Culture and for Youth Affairs was combined and the Ministry of state for Cabinet Affairs was abolished.
Al-Masri, formerly chairman of the foreign affairs committee of the lower house of parliament, the House of Representatives, had voiced stronger support for the Iraqi position on the Gulf crisis than al-Qasem.
The Moslem Brotherhood appointments followed six weeks of negotiations between the government and the political grouping and included the appointment of Ibrahim Zaid Keilani as Minister for Waaqfs (Religious Endowments), Islamic Affairs and Holy Places, replacing Ali al-Faqir.
Mudar BadranPrime Minister; Minister of Defence Salim Masa-idahDeputy Prime Minister; Minister of Interior
Jordanian Cabinet
*Taher al-MasriForeign Affairs
*Yousef AthemSocial Development
**Abdel-Karim al-DughmiLabour
**Muhammad Addub al-ZabinMunicipal, Rural and Environmental Affairs
*Ibrahim Zaid Keilani Waaqfs (Religious Endowments), Islamic Affairs and Holy Places Abd al-Ra'uf al-RawabidahPublic Works and Housing Ibrahim AyyubSupply Ziyad FarizIndustry and Trade
*Abdullah AkailehEducation
*Saad al-TalHigher Education Basil JardanaFinance and Customs Jamal SarairehTransport and Communications Thabit al-ThairEnergy and Mineral Resources Khalid Amin AbdullahPlanning Ibrahim IzziedinInformation
*Majed KhalefahJustice
*Mohammad AlawnehAgriculture
*Adnan JaljouliHealth
**Khalid al-KarakiCulture and Youth Affairs
**Dawud KhalafTourism and Antiquities
*Saad Hayel al-SrourIrrigation and Water Resources Abdel-Baqi GammoMinister of State for Parliamentary Affairs Sharif Zaid Ibn ShakerChief of the Royal Court
*New appointment.
**Altered responsibilities.
Closure of Jordanian border to refugees — Tension with Israel
The Jordanian government closed its al-Ruweishid post on the border with Iraq to all non-Jordanian refugees on Jan. 10, but reopened it on Jan. 18 following renewed promises of UN aid to help with the costs of accommodating refugees from Kuwait and Iraq.
Only refugees with firm arrangements for travel into another country were admitted during the border closure, which was in response to the alleged failure of the UN to disburse some US$40,000,000 promised for help with the first major influx of refugees after the August 1990 Iraqi invasion of Kuwait.
The Iraqi government closed the border crossing with Jordan on Jan. 23 for several days, without making any announcement.
Tension between Israel and Jordan, already at a high level with Jordan's deployment, starting at the end of December 1990, of 80,000 troops in defensive positions facing Israel, rose further on Jan. 16 when US-led forces began hostilities against Iraq.
The launch of Iraqi Scud missile attacks on Israel, and fears of Israeli retaliation [see p. 37939], led King Hussein to declare on Jan. 19 that Jordan would militarily defend its territory and air space against any incursions.
Anti-Western and anti-Israeli feeling in Jordan, illustrated by large-scale demonstrations against the military attacks on Iraq, led Germany and France to advise their remaining citizens to leave the country.
Restoration of diplomatic ties with Iran — Talks with US and French officials
Diplomatic ties between Jordan and Iran, severed in 1981 after the start of the Iran-Iraq war in September 1980, were restored on Jan. 14 in the midst of diplomatic activity by the two countries to bring an end to the Gulf crisis.
Al-Masri's visit to Tehran in late January for talks with the Iranian Foreign Minister, Ali Akbar Vellayati, was followed in early February by reports of Jordanian support for new Iranian proposals to end the Gulf conflict [see p. 37943].
King Hussein had himself undertaken a tour of major European capitals from Jan. 2 in a final attempt to prevent the outbreak of war with Iraq.
Diplomatic sources reported talks on Jan. 29 in Amman, the Jordanian capital, between François Cher, a special envoy of French President Mitterrand, and King Hussein.
In addition Richard Armitage, acting as a special US ambassador to the Middle East, held previously unannounced talks with King Hussein on Jan. 22, following a statement by US President Bush that he was not planning to "write off" Jordan because of differences of opinion on the Gulf conflict.
Arrest of Islamic fundamentalist leader
On Jan. 24 a spokesman for the Islamic Tahrir (Liberation) party, Atta Abu Rushtah, was arrested by security forces after a press conference in which he had called for suicide attacks to be launched on Western and allied interests throughout the world in retaliation for attacks on Iraq.
He was released a few hours later.
His statement echoed similar calls made by Sheikh Asad Bayyud al-Tamimi, spiritual leader of the Islamic Jihad Beit al-Maqdis, a few days earlier.
MIDDLE EAST — ARAB WORLD
LEBANON
Vote of confidence in Karami government — Resignation of Jumblatt
On Jan. 9 the Syrian-backed Lebanese government recently formed by Umar Karami [see pp. 37928-29]won a vote of confidence in the National Assembly by 37 votes to three, with 27 deputies not taking part in the voting.
The government suffered a serious setback the following day, however, with the resignation of the Druse Progressive Socialist Party militia leader and Minister of State Walid Jumblatt.
Samir Geaga, the leader of the Christian Lebanese Forces (LF), continued his campaign against the government and on 28 Jan. called for its dissolution.
Lebanese regular troops searched for concealed weapons and tore down militia posters and slogans in Beirut as part of the Karami government's demilitarization policy.
Israeli attacks on southern Lebanon
Israeli aircraft on Jan. 6 attacked Madjleyoun, a village 5 km east of Sidon near the refugee camp of Ayn-al-Hulwah, and claimed to have destroyed a base of the Syrian-backed Popular Front for the Liberation of Palestine (PFLP) which an Israeli official said was "used as a headquarters and launching-pad for terrorist attacks" .
A spokesman for the PFLP confirmed that one Palestinian was killed and five wounded when 16 rockets were fired at the base.
The raids followed Israeli fears of increased attacks from Lebanon.
On Jan. 14, Palestinian sources said that the PLO chairman Yassir Arafat had called on Palestinians in Lebanon to fight on the side of Iraq in the Gulf war.
On Jan. 28 Uri Lubrani, Israel's co-ordinator of government activities in Lebanon, said in an interview with Middle East Television that Israel did not object to the Lebanese government deploying its army in southern Lebanon on condition that it took action against terrorist organizations and did not support them.
On the morning of Jan. 29, the Voice of Israel and Israeli Defence Forces (IDF) Radio reported that dozens of Katyusha rockets were fired into Israel's self-proclaimed security zone in southern Lebanon.
In the evening of Jan. 29, Israeli gunboats shelled the Palestinian refugee camp of Rashidiyeh near the port city of Tyre in retaliation.
Security sources said that artillery units in the security zone also shelled Lebanese villages 15 km from the Israeli border, in the Iqilm and Toufah areas, where pro-Iranian Moslem fundamentalists were believed to be preparing to infiltrate the security zone; it was reported that Palestinians had set up multibarrel rocket-launchers aimed at Israel there.
Release of Belgian hostages
On Jan. 7 the extremist Palestinian Revolutionary Council of Fatah (RCF), led by Abu Nidal, issued a statement announcing the release of four Belgian nationals held hostage since 1987 [see p. 35868].
The four, Emmanuel Houtekins, his wife Godelieve Kets and their two children, had been on board a yacht, the Silco, in the Mediterranean; there was some uncertainty over whether they had been seized off the coast near Gaza by the Abu Nidal group or south of Malta by a Libyan naval vessel.
The decision to release the hostages came in response to appeals by the Libyan leader Col. Moamer al-Kadhafi.
They were to be exchanged for Nasir Sa'id, a Palestinian serving a life sentence in Belgium for an attack in 1980 on Jewish children in Antwerp, in which one person was killed and 16 wounded.
Although listed among the Western hostages held in Lebanon, the family was considered by many to have been held in Libya.
According to a member of the Lebanese Security Services they were transferred to Libya, where the RCF had its headquarters, and on Jan. 8 the Phalangist Radio Free Lebanon reported that Walid Khaled, the RCF spokesman in Lebanon, said they had been "moved to a friendly country in preparation" ; on Jan. 12 Sa'id was paroled and sent to Libya, and the hostages were handed over to the Belgian government.
Belgian Foreign Minister Mark Eyskens refused to describe the actions as an exchange; the Belgian government's official policy was not to negotiate with terrorists.
It was noted that Belgium was about to sign an economic co-operation accord with Libya for oil exploration by the Belgian firm Petrofina as well as a major contract with a construction company.
INTERNATIONAL
INDUSTRIALIZED COUNTRIES
G-7 Finance Ministers' meeting
Finance Ministers and central bank governors of the Group of Seven (G-7) industrialized countries (Canada, France, Germany, Italy, Japan, the United Kingdom and United States) met in New York on Jan. 20-21 to discuss the impact of the Gulf war on the global economy.
Although ministers agreed to "maintain stability in international financial markets" , there were marked differences in outlook between the main G-7 powers.
These reflected partly their divergent economic performance; the USA, the UK and Canada were in recession, while the French and Italian economies were slowing down, but those of Japan and Germany were still growing.
The announcement of a fall of 2.1 per cent in the US gross national product (GNP) for the fourth quarter of 1990 confirmed the recession in the US economy.
The overall growth in GNP in 1990 of only 0.9 per cent was the weakest since 1982.
Finance Ministers notably from the USA and France expressed concern that German plans to raise interest rates in order to check inflationary pressures precipitated by the costs of German unification [see pp. 37761-63]would enhance the prospects of world recession.
US officials, fearful of a growing budget deficit, were reported to have emphasised that any rise in German interest rates would reduce the chances of further cuts in US interest rates, and thus place additional strains on the economy.
The French authorities had resisted pushing up interest rates despite the franc's growing weakness in the European monetary system (EMS) exchange rate mechanism.
US Treasury Secretary Nicholas Brady denied reports that Treasury officials had sought an accord on currency "target zones" in an effort to bring international pressure to bear on fluctuation ranges for the German mark.
At a press conference on Jan. 22, the president of the German Bundesbank, Karl Otto Pöhl, also rejected the suggestion that currency "target zones" had been discussed, adding that Germany would reject any moves to limit currency movements among G-7 countries.
On Jan. 29, however, Pöhl disclosed to a German financial newspaper, Handesblatt, that Germany had been isolated in its opposition to an accord on currency "target zones" at the G-7 meeting.
A communiqué issued after the meeting stressed "the implementation of sound fiscal policies, combined with stability-oriented monetary policies" .
The communiqué also committed Germany to the creation of "conditions favourable to lower global interest rates" .
Although there was no mention of specific measures to stabilize currencies, ministers "reaffirmed their support for economic policy co-ordination at this critical time" and agreed "to monitor developments in exchange markets" .
Finance Ministers also agreed to a US-sponsored move to provide large-scale debt relief to Egypt and Poland.
Brady stressed that the two countries were special cases; Egypt, he said, had been the "foundation stone" of the coalition in the Gulf war, while Poland had led the way towards a free market economy in eastern Europe.
The French Finance Minister, Pierre Bérégovoy, said, however, that Poland would not get the 80 per cent write-offs that it had asked for.
Both Japan and Germany agreed to increase their financial assistance to help defray the costs of the Gulf war.
Brady met on Jan. 21 with the German Finance Minister Theo Waigel (who declined afterwards to state a figure for the German contribution) and with the Japanese Finance Minister Ryutaro Hashimoto (who had already stated on Jan. 18 that Japan would contribute a "substantial sum" to be decided "as soon as possible" ).
On Jan. 24 Japan announced that it would contribute a further $9,000 million to US-led forces in the Gulf, raising Japan's total commitments since August 1990 to $13,000 million, including $2,000 million as aid to countries suffering from the economic blockade, notably Jordan, Egypt and Turkey [see p. 37697].
Although the G-7 final communiqué made only a passing reference to "developments in the Soviet Union" , it was understood that a decision to shelve the issue of Soviet participation in the IMF and World Bank [see p. 37730]had been prompted by widespread condemnation of recent Soviet attacks on nationalists in Latvia and Lithuania [see pp. 37944-45].
The UK Chancellor of the Exchequer Norman Lamont said after the meeting that "there was a great feeling of disappointment" concerning economic reform in the Soviet Union, and added that there was no question of the industrialized nations assisting the Soviet Union with its balance of payments.
An IMF report commissioned by the G-7 countries [see pp. 37629; 37730]had recommended in December 1990 that loans to the Soviet Union be withheld until there was more evidence of a comprehensive economic overhaul.
The communiqué also "stressed the importance of a timely and successful completion of the Uruguay Round" [of multilateral trade talks — see p. 37930 for December deadlock].
Changes in German and US interest rates
The German Federal Bank raised its discount rate from 6 to 6.5 per cent on Jan. 31 to combat the risks of inflation and the costs of unification.
The following day the US Federal Reserve cut its discount rate to 6 per cent from 6.5 per cent; other leading banks quickly followed suit, cutting their rate from 9.5 to 9 per cent .
INTERNATIONAL
ENVIRONMENT
Conservation conferences
Over 20 countries party to the 1979 Berne Convention on the Conservation of European Wildlife and Natural Habitats sent representatives to Strasbourg, France, in the second week of January, for a conference on protecting rare wildlife and threatened habitats.
Greece was criticized at the conference as having the worst record among participating countries.
At French and Finnish initiative forestry experts from 30 east and west European countries met in Strasbourg on Dec. 18-19, 1990, for a conference on the protection of European forests.
Delegates concentrated on the issues of acid rain, atmospheric pollution and climate change in central and western Europe.
They resolved to form a European bank of information on the problem, to set up a research programme on mountain forests and a European reservation, to improve cross-border co-operation, and to extend the monitoring network established under the 1979 Geneva Convention on Long-range Transboundary Air Pollution [see p. 34775].
A report published on Dec. 17 by the European Communities indicated that 9.9 per cent of European forests had suffered up to 25 per cent defoliation in the previous year.
The worst-affected forests were in Czechoslovakia, Poland and the former East Germany.
INTERNATIONAL
ENVIRONMENT
Concern over nuclear plants
The Austrian and Czechoslovak governments announced in January that they would distribute iodine tablets, intended to help combat radiation sickness, to their citizens in the light of growing concern over the safety of some Czechoslovak nuclear plants.
The concern was heightened by small fires which broke out at the Jaslovske Bohunice plant in southern Slovakia, 55 km from the border with Austria, on Jan. 15, and at the Dukovany plant on Jan. 21.
Earlier, in December, an Austrian government report which concluded that Bohunice was unsafe had led the Chancellor, Franz Vranitzky, to demand that it be closed down.
He subsequently offered to supply free electricity to Czechoslovakia to compensate for the loss of generating capacity from the plant.
A government spokesman said that this would cost Austria US$330,000,000 per year.
The nuclear question was discussed at talks between Vranitzky and the Czechoslovak Prime Minister, Marian Calfa, in Bratislava, Czechoslovakia, on Jan. 29.
The two agreed to set up a joint commission examining the issue.
Calfa stressed that his government remained committed to the development of nuclear power, but would in future ensure that it conformed to the highest Western standards.
INTERNATIONAL
GATT
Accession of Macao
The acting Governor of Macao, Francisco Murteira Nabo, announced on Jan. 13 that Macao's application to join the General Agreement on Tariffs and Trade, supported by both China and Portugal, had been accepted with effect from Jan. 11.
Macao would retain its GATT status and independence as a free port after it reverted to China in 1999.
INTERNATIONAL
COMECON
Agreement on replacement of COMECON — Abolition of convertible rouble
The executive committee of the Council for Mutual Economic Assistance (CMEA or COMECON) announced on Jan. 5, at the end of a two-day meeting in Moscow, that it had approved a set of what it called "proposals for the radical overhaul of the system of economic co-operation by member states, including a draft charter for a new organization" .
Essentially, the committee had agreed to disband COMECON altogether, and to replace it with a new body, to be known as the Organization for International Economic Co-operation (OIEC).
The nine delegations at the talks (Soviet Union, Bulgaria, Czechoslovakia, Hungary, Poland, Cuba, Mongolia and Vietnam, as well as a group from Germany, representing the former East Germany) agreed to present the proposals for ratification at a summit-level meeting on Feb. 26-27 in Budapest (Hungary).
Yugoslavia and possibly Albania were also to be invited to the meeting, although neither was a COMECON member.
COMECON had been created in 1949 at Stalin's instigation in an effort to co-ordinate the development of East European economies in the post-war period, without having resource to the Marshall Aid Plan being promoted by the United States.
It had been dominated throughout its history by the Soviet Union, as the largest partner, but it had lost in significance after 1988, with political changes in its East European member countries and a growing dependence on trade and investment from Western Europe.
Bela Kádár, the Hungarian permanent representative to COMECON, said on Jan. 5 that in recent years the organization had "lost touch with the realities of international politics and economics" , and that for this reason it had been essential to wind it up.
The OIEC was expected to be based in Budapest, and to have a small staff of around 100.
Its first task would be to determine the ownership of the two major jointly owned COMECON institutions, the International Investment Bank and the International Bank for Economic Co-operation.
Later, it was to take on consultative functions; in practice, most observers expected it to act as a clearing house for mutual trade between its members, which was expected to remain important for some years, and to co-ordinate east European policy toward the European Communities (EC).
The members agreed at their January meeting on a six-month transitional budget to cover the period of winding down COMECON.
A major change in intra-COMECON trade patterns had been introduced on Jan. 1, when the members implemented a new agreement to settle all accounts in hard currencies.
Hitherto, most of their mutual transactions had been conducted either in the artificial "transferable rouble" , which was now abolished, or through direct barter and countertrade [see p. 37630].
Commentators noted that the switch to full hard-currency trading would badly hit the east European states.
They did not yet have the economic means to raise enough hard currencies to pay for their oil and gas imports from the Soviet Union, and most of them were burdened with heavy levels of external debt, also denominated in hard currencies.
Delay of Swedish nuclear power phase-out
The Swedish government announced in mid-January that it would delay a promised phase-out of nuclear power until alternative energy sources became viable.
In so doing it reversed an earlier commitment, made in 1988 in the aftermath of the 1986 Chernobyl disaster [see pp. 36161; 34831], to begin the shut-down of the country's 12 nuclear reactors in 1995.
It did, however, reaffirm its overall commitment to abandon nuclear power by 2010 (undertaken as a result of a 1980 referendum — see pp. 30335; 30994-96).
The government also announced that it would invest about US$670 million over the next five years in the development of alternative energies and the improvement of domestic electrical efficiency.
Among the alternative energies to be developed were wind-power generators and steam-turbine plants fired by wood chips, the waste product of the country's vast timber industry.
The compromise was reached after industrial leaders and some politicians had expressed fears that a precipitate phase-out of nuclear power would lead to large increases in energy costs.
African convention on hazardous and nuclear waste
A meeting of African environment ministers on Jan. 29 in Bamako, the Malian capital, adopted a convention making illegal the importation of hazardous and nuclear wastes into Africa [for similar earlier agreements see p. 36789].
INTERNATIONAL
DISARMAMENT
Resumption of START negotiations — Geneva Conference on Disarmament — PTBT Conference
Soviet and United States arms control negotiators resumed talks in Washington on Jan. 21 aimed at clearing obstacles to a Strategic Arms Reduction Treaty (START) on cutting long-range nuclear arsenals by 30 per cent.
Failure to resolve differences between the two sides reportedly contributed to the postponement of the US-Soviet summit scheduled for Feb. 11-13 [see p. 37945].
The Geneva Conference on Disarmament re-opened on Jan. 22 with delegates calling for an urgent and comprehensive ban on the use of chemical weapons.
Iraq was among more than 30 observers at the conference which was expected to last approximately 10 weeks.
Signatories of the nuclear Partial Test Ban Treaty (PTBT) signed in August 1963 [see pp. 19553-60], met in New York on Jan. 7-18 and agreed to achieve progress towards a comprehensive test ban.
The vote on the decision was 74 in favour to two against (the United Kingdom and the USA), with 19 abstentions.
INTERNATIONAL
WARSAW PACT
Announcement of Czechoslovakian, Hungarian and Polish withdrawal
Czechoslovakia, Hungary and Poland agreed on Jan. 21, at a trilateral meeting of their Foreign Ministers in Budapest, the Hungarian capital, to withdraw all co-operation with the Warsaw Treaty organization, with effect from July 1, 1991.
The move was announced as the Soviet Union came under increasing pressure to hold a summit meeting, at which it had been planned to initiate major changes in the organization, as agreed in principle at the June 1990 summit of the Pact [see p. 37550].
The three countries agreed that they would withdraw their co-operation even if the Warsaw Treaty summit now went ahead.
On the same day the Hungarian and Czechoslovak Defence Ministers signed a five-year bilateral defence treaty, in which they agreed to exchange information and experience "in the light of the dismantling of the Warsaw Treaty" .
A trilateral summit meeting was planned for the following month.
Most observers believed that the Soviet Union's reluctance to hold a Warsaw Treaty summit was connected with domestic anxieties about the instability of the Baltic states [see pp. 37944-45.
By the end of January, however, the three east European countries were moving vigorously towards an associate membership of the North Atlantic Treaty Organization (NATO); on Jan. 30 the Hungarian parliament voted almost unanimously to accept NATO's offer of associate (i.e. non-voting) membership, and further to seek "close and institutionalised relations with the Council of Europe and the European Community" .
The Bulgarian President, Zhelyu Zhelev, told the Czechoslovakian news agency CTK on Feb. 1 that it was "generally known that the Warsaw Pact (had) outlived its time" , and that Bulgaria was also planning to leave the organization.
Romania's Foreign Ministry had said on Jan. 18 that the organization had "lost its raison d'être" , and that it too favoured its dissolution.
Meanwhile, Poland and Czechoslovakia were refusing to allow the transit of Soviet military equipment being brought back to Moscow from Soviet installations in eastern Germany.
Poland was doing so in protest at the Soviet Union's refusal withdraw all its 50,000 Polish-based troops by early 1992, while Czechoslovakia was denying access to the Soviet convoys after the failure of talks on a cash payment for the proposed transit.
Some 20,000 of the original 73,500 Soviet troops were still present in Czechoslovakia at this time.