

MIDDLE EAST — ARAB WORLD
GULF CONFLICT
During February the United States-led allied forces continued their extensive and largely unopposed air campaign against Iraq and against Iraqi forces occupying Kuwait.
When the long-anticipated ground war was finally unleashed at 1 a.m.
GMT on Feb. 24, it encountered minimal Iraqi resistance; Kuwait City was swiftly liberated, a large swathe of southern Iraq was occupied, and the bulk of Iraq's armed forces were either destroyed, captured, or cut off south of the Euphrates-Tigris river system.
By the time that hostilities were suspended on Feb. 28, the 43rd day of the war, only 30,000 Iraqi troops in the Kuwaiti theatre of operations — a roughly 250-km square of territory south of the Euphrates-Tigris rivers — were thought to be still combat-effective.
For an account in detail of the progress of the "air war" , and the military conduct of the four-day allied land offensive at the end of the month, see pp. 37985-86 below.
The superiority of the allied armed forces, and the unfolding of a military strategy which effectively minimized allied casualties; allowed the political leadership in the USA, the United Kingdom and France to prosecute the war with overwhelming public support [see below].
In the diplomatic arena, the coalition made it clear throughout the campaign that it would not be amenable to peace initiatives so long as the Iraqi leadership remained unprepared to accede unconditionally to the requirements as laid down in the successive UN Security Council resolutions.
Only on Feb. 27, i.e. not until Iraq's comprehensive defeat in the land war, did the Iraqi government agree to meet these conditions.
In view of the defiant rhetoric of President Saddam Hussein until that point, it had seemed increasingly likely that the US-led offensive would continue until his regime was removed from power.
The removal of Saddam Hussein was frequently stated not to be an explicit allied war aim, but allied leaders nevertheless referred on a number of occasions to the desirability of such an outcome, notably on Feb. 15 when US President George Bush urged the Iraqi people to overthrow what he described as the brutal dictatorship.
Diplomatic activity
In these circumstances, the only diplomatic initiatives which appeared to have potential significance were those instigated by Iran in early February and by the Soviet Union in the middle of the month in a final attempt to avert a full-scale ground war.
[For Jordanian stance see p. 38024.]
Rafsanjani's offer of Iranian mediation — Non-aligned meeting — Other diplomatic initiatives
On Feb. 4, Iranian President Hashemi Ali Akbar Rafsanjani told a press conference in Tehran that he had sent "an idea" for peace to Saddam Hussein, that he was awaiting a reply, and that he was prepared to hold direct talks with Iraqi and US leaders in an effort to end the war.
He refused to elaborate on his message except to confirm that it fell within the framework of UN Security Council resolutions, and that it had been delivered to an Iraqi Deputy Prime Minister, Sa'adoun Hammadi, who had visited Tehran on Feb. 1-3.
Although he acknowledged that there had "been no sign of flexibility" during his talks with Hammadi, Rafsanjani asked rhetorically why he should not meet Saddam Hussein "if there is hope for the salvation of the Iraqi nation" , and added that it would be "logical" to talk to the US administration if the pursuit of peace made it necessary.
He revealed that there had been several Iranian-US contacts "in the last few days" through the Swiss embassy in Tehran.
On Jan. 31 the Iranian news agency IRNA had reported that Iran was hosting talks between Iraq, Algeria, France and Yemen on "ways to end the war" .
The secretary-general of the French Foreign Ministry, François Scheer, was in Tehran Jan. 31-Feb. 3, a period coinciding with Hammadi's visit and the presence of the Algerian and Yemeni Foreign Ministers, but the claim that Iran was hosting peace talks was described by French Foreign Ministry officials as "absurd" .
On Feb. 6 Iraq announced the breaking-off of diplomatic relations with France as well as with the USA, the UK, Italy, Saudi Arabia and Egypt.
The Rafsanjani initiative was welcomed by the Soviet Union, by UN Secretary-General Javier Pérez de Cuéllar, and by French and Turkish spokesmen, but a US State Department official said that "the Iranians are not directly involved in this conflict and our interest is in getting Iraq out of Kuwait" , while Bush said that "we have to go forward and prosecute this [the war]to a successful conclusion" .
On Feb. 10, at a press conference in Amman, Hammadi dismissed the Iranian peace proposals, saying: "We have told Iran that what is taking place is unrelated to Kuwait.
The question now is American aggression — imperialist aggression — which is intended to destroy Iraq and subjugate the region."
He disclosed that he had delivered a letter from Saddam Hussein to Rafsanjani in Tehran on Feb. 8 containing the Iraqi President's formal reply to the latest Iranian proposals.
A broadcast speech by Saddam Hussein on Feb. 10 made no reference to peace initiatives, but stressed that every hour for which the war continued was a fresh defeat for the "unbelievers" ranged against Iraq.
Iranian Foreign Minister Ali Akbar Vellayati was among foreign ministers from 15 countries of the Non-aligned Movement (NAM), and a representative from the Palestine Liberation Organization (PLO), who met in closed session in Belgrade on Feb. 11-12.
Iran and India sought to put forward a six-point peace plan, based on Iraqi withdrawal from Kuwait followed by the pull-out of Western forces from the region.
Vellayati said afterwards, however, that "it has been impossible to propose any plan as each attempt has been rejected by one side or the other" .
The meeting had been convened at the initiative of Yugoslavia as current chairman of the NAM, and the Yugoslav Foreign Minister Budimir Loncar said at a press conference afterwards that "the foreign ministers could not agree on a joint statement, but opted instead for a plan of action to prevent the war's escalation…starting with the rapid deployment of a mission of three to four ministers to Baghdad within a few days" .
He added that "at the same time we will send a delegation in the opposite direction, to Kuwait as well as to members of the coalition, the USA and the European Communities" .
It was reported that several pro-US countries, including Yugoslavia, Egypt, Venezuela, Argentina and Cyprus, had resisted attempts to link Iraqi withdrawal from Kuwait with the resolution of other Middle Eastern problems, in particular the Palestinian issue.
Soviet mediation — Primakov's Feb. 12 visit to Baghdad
With the dismissal of the Iranian initiative, remaining hopes of settling the conflict without a land war focused on Soviet mediation efforts, President Gorbachev having announced on Feb. 9 that he was sending his personal envoy Yevgeny Primakov to Baghdad.
The Soviet Union had been in close contact with the Iranians, Deputy Foreign Minister Aleksandr Belonogov having visited Tehran on Feb. 5-8 for talks with Vellayati and with Iranian Deputy Foreign Minister Mahmoud Va'ezi.
Also on Feb. 5 the Soviet Foreign Minister, Aleksandr Bessmertnykh, had held talks in Moscow with Syrian Deputy Prime Minister and Defence Minister Gen. Mustafa Tlass, while Yemeni Minister of State for Foreign Affairs Abdul Aziz al-Dali was received in Moscow on Feb. 7 by Soviet Deputy Foreign Minister Vladimir Petrovsky.
Conservatives in the Soviet army and the ruling Communist Party (CPSU) had opposed the Soviet Union's passive support for the actions of the US-led coalition, and a statement by a plenum of the CPSU central committee published on Feb. 4 had urged Gorbachev to "take the necessary additional steps before the international community and the UN to end the bloodshed, and get the conflict back on track towards a political settlement in line with UN resolutions" .
Some hardline elements, particularly in the army, were openly critical of the Soviet stance, and as the air war continued to inflict massive damage indignant calls were heard from that quarter for the Soviet Union to support Iraq under the terms of a 1972 treaty pledging co-operation in fighting "imperialism and Zionism" .
Sensitive to these pressures, Gorbachev in his Feb. 9 statement reaffirmed the Soviet Union's adherence to the UN resolutions but expressed concern that the "the logic of [coalition]military operations and the character of military actions" threatened to go beyond the mandate of Resolution 678 [see p. 37870].
On the previous day, Belonogov on his departure from Tehran complained about "deliberate destruction" of Iraqi residential areas.
The Soviet leadership appeared concerned that it should ensure for itself a role in any future Middle East peace settlement.
There was also anxiety about the proximity of the war to the Soviet Union's southern borders, and especially about the likelihood of its escalating into a chemical or nuclear conflict.
Primakov arrived in Baghdad on Feb. 12, and on the following day told a press conference that talks with Saddam and Aziz had produced "rays of light" , and that Aziz would travel to Moscow to continue discussions.
No other details were disclosed, but a meeting in Moscow with Kuwaiti Foreign Minister Shaikh Sabah al Ahmad al Jabir as Sabah on Feb. 14 Gorbachev said that Primakov had "met with some flexibility from the regime in Baghdad" .
Iraqi conditions for withdrawal
Iraq on Feb. 15 announced an offer to withdraw from Kuwait, complying with UN Security Council Resolution 660, provided that(i) there was a complete ceasefire;(ii) all subsequent resolutions on the conflict were annulled and economic sanctions lifted;(iii) coalition forces withdrew completely from the region within one month of a ceasefire being declared;(iv) Israel withdrew "from Palestine and the Arab territories it is occupying in the Golan and southern Lebanon" , or that in the event of its not doing so the UN passed against Israel resolutions identical to those passed against Iraq;(v) Iraq's "historical rights on land and at sea" were guaranteed; and (vi) the "political arrangement to be agreed" should proceed from "the people's will and in accordance with democratic practice" , and not on the basis of "the rights acquired by the al-Sabah family" .
Additionally, Iraq demanded reparations for damage inflicted by the coalition, the cancellation of Iraq's debts to coalition countries, and the cancellation of the debts of other countries of the region which had not joined the coalition.
The Gulf states, including Iran, should be given the task of drawing up regional security arrangements without foreign interference, and the Gulf should be declared a zone free of foreign military presence.
The offer of conditional withdrawal was immediately dismissed by Bush as a "cruel hoax" ; the UK Prime Minister John Major similarly dismissed it as "bogus" and most other European governments reacted with scepticism.
Talks in Moscow — Iraqi announcement of acceptance of Soviet plan
Iraq's Feb. 15 offer was hailed by Gorbachev's spokesman Vitaly Ignatenko as further cause for optimism that a settlement would be found.
On Feb. 16 Vellayati held talks in Moscow with Bessmertnykh, and Aziz flew to Moscow on Feb. 17, after first crossing by road into Iran (coalition commanders having announced that they could not guarantee his safety in Iraqi airspace).
In talks on the following day Gorbachev put to Aziz an eight-point peace plan, and Aziz left immediately afterwards for Baghdad to convey the plan to Saddam, the Soviet leadership having urged a quick response.
Details of the peace plan were also communicated to coalition leaders and to Iran, but were not immediately made public.
Giving his initial reaction on Feb. 19, Bush declared that the terms fell "well short of what is required" , being supported in this assessment by the UK, but on Feb. 20 Italy appeared to endorse the Soviet plan, Cabinet Secretary Nino Cristofori announcing that Prime Minister Giulio Andreotti had declared it "perfectly in line" with UN resolutions.
Aziz returned to Moscow on Feb. 21 and reported in a late-night meeting with Gorbachev that Iraq accepted the peace plan, although Saddam Hussein in a broadcast speech that same day had maintained an intransigent stance and urged on his forces in the "mother of battles" .
The terms of the Soviet plan, now made public, were that (i) Iraq would make a full and unconditional withdrawal from Kuwait;(ii) the withdrawal would start on the second day after hostilities ceased;(iii) Iraqi forces would depart according to a fixed timetable;(iv) after two-thirds of Iraqi forces had withdrawn economic sanctions against Iraq would be lifted;(v) after all Iraqi forces had left all UN Security Council resolutions against Iraq would lapse;(vi) all prisoners of war would be released when the ceasefire became effective;(vii) the troop withdrawal would be monitored by forces from countries not involved in the conflict, under direction of the UN Security Council; and (viii) work on details and specifics would continue and would be presented on Feb. 22 to Security Council members.
US ultimatum — Revised Soviet plan — Soviet and Iranian comment on launching of land war
The USA responded on Feb. 22 with an ultimatum from Bush stating that if Iraq wished to be seen as meeting the UN resolutions it would have to make a much more rapid withdrawal and to comply with associated conditions.
The specific terms of this ultimatum required that Iraq should (i) begin withdrawing from Kuwait by noon on Feb. 23 New York time (5 p.m.
GMT), and complete that withdrawal within seven days;(ii) within the first 48 hours remove all its forces from Kuwait City and allow the prompt return of the legitimate Kuwaiti government, and withdraw from all prepared defences along the Saudi-Kuwait and Saudi-Iraq borders and from Kuwait's portion of the Rumalla oilfield;(iii) release all prisoners of war and civilian detainees within 48 hours;(iv) remove all explosives and booby-trap devices from Kuwait; and (v) cease combat air fire and aircraft flights over Iraq and Kuwait, except for transport aircraft carrying troops out of Kuwait.
If these terms were met, coalition forces would not attack retreating Iraqi forces, but any breach of these terms would bring an instant response from coalition forces.
Bush justified the ultimatum on the grounds that Iraq was pursuing a "scorched earth" policy in Kuwait.
Iraqi forces were "wantonly setting fires to and destroying the oil wells, the oil tanks, the export terminals and other installations of that small country" , stated Bush.
As the President spoke, allied reconnaissance suggested that around 150 of Kuwait's 950 oil wells were burning as a result of Iraqi actions.
Some 50 of these had been ignited earlier in the war in an apparent attempt to use smoke to disrupt the allied air campaign.
A further 100 oil wells were reported to have been fired in the 24 hours prior to Bush's ultimatum.
Within hours of this US response, which Iraq's ruling Revolution Command Council denounced as "disgraceful" , the Soviet Union tried to rescue its peace initiative by announcing that Aziz (who was still in Moscow) had agreed to a revised six-point peace plan whereby (i) Iraq would agree to comply with Resolution 660;(ii) withdrawal from Kuwait would begin the day after a ceasefire;(iii) the withdrawal would be completed within 21 days, including withdrawal from Kuwait City within four days;(iv) once the withdrawal had been completed all relevant UN Security Council resolutions would lapse;(v) all prisoners of war would be released three days after a ceasefire; and (vi) monitoring of the ceasefire would be carried out by observers or peacekeeping forces as determined by the UN Security Council.
During Feb. 23 Gorbachev reportedly telephoned Bush and other coalition leaders to urge more time for negotiations to find a compromise between the Soviet plan and Bush's conditions.
Following the expiry of the US deadline at noon on Feb. 23, however, the US-led forces launched their full-scale land offensive within eight hours.
Soviet Foreign Ministry spokesman Vitaly Churkin read a statement to reporters on Feb. 24 that the Soviet government regretted that "a real chance to solve the conflict peacefully and achieve the goals set by UN Security Council resolutions has been missed" .
On Feb. 25 Soviet Vice-President Gennady Yanayev disclosed that after the start of the land war Gorbachev had telephoned Bush with an appeal to halt the offensive.
On Feb. 24, IRNA reported that Rafsanjani had laid the blame for the commencement of the ground offensive on Iraq.
It quoted him as saying that "if the Iraqis had given a positive response to our call sooner, the situation would be different now" , but also as adding that it had become "evident" that "the USA and its allies are pursuing wider aims than Iraq's withdrawal from Kuwait" .
There had been reports on Feb. 16 that the Iranian government intended to renew its diplomatic peace initiatives following Iraq's offer to withdraw from Kuwait.
On Feb. 18 IRNA reported that Saddam Hussein had responded "positively" to Iranian peace proposals, and quoted Rafsanjani as saying that "Iran's initiatives have fortunately produced positive results" .
These reports were confirmed by Vellayati in Bonn on Feb. 19 almost simultaneously with an appeal by Rafsanjani to delay a ground offensive in order to allow more time for a peace initiative to "materialize" .
Between Feb. 6 and Feb. 24 high-ranking Iranian officials, including Rafsanjani, discussed various peace proposals with visiting delegations from Austria, Cuba, India, Kuwait, the Soviet Union, Turkey and Yugoslavia.
The Speaker of the majlis, Mehdi Karrubi, toured Pakistan and North Korea in late February to publicize his own peace plan [for which see p. 37943].
(Pakistan's Prime Minister Mian Mohammad Nawaz Sharif had meanwhile toured Maghreb capitals in mid-February to win support for a new six-point peace plan.)
UN Security Council rejection of Iraqi ceasefire appeal
The UN Security Council, meeting in closed session on Feb. 26, agreed not to call for a ceasefire until Iraq had agreed to comply with all 12 relevant resolutions.
It rejected a letter from Aziz announcing compliance with some, but not all, of the resolutions, although Iraq was reportedly declaring willingness to comply with Resolution 660 on unconditional withdrawal from Kuwait.
The UN Security Council had reconvened on Feb. 13 for the first time since the outbreak of hostilities to review the progress of the conflict.
(On Feb. 4 the permanent representative of Zimbabwe, the holder of the Security Council presidency for February, had held talks with the 14 other members to explore their views on the Gulf war.)
The decision to conduct debate on the war in closed session was taken by a majority vote on Feb. 13 on the proposal of the UK.
The USA and its allies had apparently feared that their opponents would use an open meeting as a platform from which to denounce US war aims and civilian deaths.
Continuing allied air and naval campaign
Although January had ended with the first significant ground fighting of the war — the Iraqi offensive against Khafji — the Iraqi forces made no further offensive moves, and the allies continued with the air assault which they had begun on Jan. 17.
Meeting minimum resistance, the allied air forces continued to bomb targets in Iraq, but also concentrated increasingly on the Iraqi forces in Kuwait and their supply routes.
Among the units most heavily attacked were the 120,000-strong Republican Guard formations — Iraq's most effective troops — which were entrenched near the Kuwait-Iraq border.
On Feb. 3 the allies claimed that 25 of the 30 major bridges on routes leading into the Kuwaiti theatre of operations had been destroyed.
Iraqi convoys using secondary roads and pontoon bridges created serious congestion and became simple targets for air attack.
In addition to aircraft stationed in the Middle East, the US also used huge B-52 bombers based at Diego Garcia in the Indian Ocean and in the UK.
The first B-52s to operate from the UK arrived at Royal Air Force (RAF) Fairford base in Gloucestershire on Feb. 5.
Civilian casualties inflicted by bombing campaign
Although the allies stressed that every effort was being made to minimize "collateral damage" , it was generally accepted that significant civilian casualties were inflicted during the air campaign.
There was, however, little hard information on the subject.
Eye-witness reports suggested that at least 47 civilians were killed and 102 wounded when allied aircraft destroyed a bridge in the southern Iraqi city of Nasiriyah on Feb. 4.
There were reports of civilian casualties on the roads from Baghdad to Kuwait, and to the Jordanian border [see p. 38025 for Jordanian accounts of the destruction of a bus carrying Jordanian civilians leaving Kuwait].
It was also admitted that the city of Basra had been heavily bombed since the beginning of the war.
The first Westerner to enter Basra was a former US Attorney General, Ramsay Clark — a veteran anti-war campaigner — who toured the city on Feb. 5-6, and described what he saw there as "a human and civilian tragedy" .
Clark claimed to have seen little damage to military targets but maintained that residential areas and hospitals and other civilian facilities had been severely attacked, resulting in heavy civilian casualties.
At a press briefing on Feb. 11, Brig.
Gen. Richard I. Neal, a senior US military spokesman, described Basra as a "military town" , a place where military operations were "woven into the very fabric of the city" .
He acknowledged that attacks against the city had been extensive and that targets had included supply lines, naval installations, military warehouses, fuel and lubricant storage areas and chemical weapons storage facilities.
The most controversial attack in the air war occurred in the early hours of Feb. 13 when US aircraft destroyed an air raid shelter in the Amiriya district of western Baghdad.
Western journalists were taken by the Iraqi authorities to the site, where more than 300 bodies — including those of at least 91 children — were recovered, many burnt beyond recognition, and it was feared that many others remained buried in the wreckage.
The journalists, who were allowed free access to the site and were able to file reports without censorship, found no evidence of a military presence within the bunker which had been constructed as a civilian shelter during the Iran-Iraq war.
At a news briefing held after the raid, however, Brig. -Gen.
Neal insisted that the bunker was a "command and control facility" and asserted: "We don't feel like we attacked the wrong bunker or made a mistake.
We feel very comfortable that the attack was a legitimate target."
He admitted that he had "no idea why there were civilians in the bunker at 0400 in the morning" .
International condemnation of the attack was fuelled by Neal's failure to offer any unsolicited expression of regret over the civilian loss of life and by his praise of the pilot's skill in destroying the target.
The Iraqi authorities also claimed that a bomb from an RAF Tornado had killed up to 130 people and wounded 78 when it hit an apartment block and market place in the small town of Fallouja, west of Baghdad, on Feb. 14.
Foreign journalists reported a considerable amount of destruction within the town but were unable to corroborate Iraqi casualty figures.
On Feb. 17 the RAF admitted that a 1,000-lb laser-guided bomb had missed its target during an attack on a bridge at Fallouja, but claimed that the incident had occurred on Feb. 13.
Although the overall extent of civilian casualties remained unclear, Iraqi Deputy Prime Minister Hammadi suggested during his visit to Tehran in mid-February [see above]that more than 20,000 of his compatriots had been killed and 60,000 wounded in the first 26 days of the war.
Continued use of Scud missiles by Iraq
Whilst Iraq made no attempt to contest allied air superiority — the only recorded flights by Iraqi aircraft were of those fleeing to Iranian airfields — the firing of Scud missiles against Israel and Saudi Arabia continued throughout February.
Most were either destroyed by Patriot missiles or did little damage.
The one exception occurred during the night of Feb. 25-26 when a Scud landed on a US Army reserve barracks in Khobar City, near Dhahran, killing 28 US military personnel and wounding some 100 others.
Role of naval forces
Iraqi positions were also bombarded by allied warships which, by the beginning of February, had virtually obliterated that small Iraqi navy.
The US battleship Missouri, which had earlier launched cruise missiles against Iraq, on Feb. 4 fired its main 16-inch guns against coastal positions in Kuwait.
It was the first occasion on which the giant warship's guns had been fired in action since the Korean war.
It was also reported that work was under way to clear Iraqi mines from the coastal waters around Kuwait, in preparation for the amphibious assault which was widely expected to accompany any allied ground offensive.
A seaborne US Marine task force was reported to be heading towards Kuwait having completed a "dress rehearsal" amphibious assault on the southern shore of the Saudi Arabian peninsula.
Only after the war was it revealed that reports concerning the role of the task force had been an element of allied disinformation as it had already been decided not to conduct an amphibious assault.
The impression that such an attack was imminent, however, was sufficient to tie down five Iraqi divisions in defence of the Kuwaiti coastline.
Two US warships — the 18,000-ton assault ship Tripoli and the 9,600-ton guided missile cruiser Princeton — were both damaged by mines in the northern Gulf on Feb. 18.
Visit by Cheney and Powell to Saudi Arabia
It was announced on Feb. 5 that Bush was dispatching Defence Secretary Dick Cheney and the Chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff, Gen. Colin Powell, to Saudi Arabia to examine the situation.
Bush admitted that the mission was, in part, designed to assess whether air power alone could force an Iraqi withdrawal from Kuwait, expressing some scepticism that this would suffice "to get the job done" .
In view of the low cost of the air campaign in terms of allied casualties, many within the US Congress advocated continuing the bombardment indefinitely in preference to the risk of sustaining heavy losses in a ground assault.
Bush stressed that he would not be making a final decision until he had heard the reports from Cheney and Powell.
He was "rather calm" , he said, about the decision on whether or not to unleash a ground offensive.
Claiming that the allied forces had a "game plan" which was being followed, he said that he sympathized with the motives of those who called for an indefinite air campaign, but that any decision on the launching of a ground offensive would be based on military advice; there would be no "delay for the sake of delay, hoping that it would save lives" .
Powell and Cheney arrived in Saudi Arabia on Feb. 8 and held two days of talks with the allied military commander Gen. H. Norman Schwarzkopf and other senior military personnel.
During the visit Cheney confirmed that allied air power had destroyed a "very significant part of what was the world's fourth largest army" .
US estimates suggested that some 750 Iraqi tanks, 650 artillery pieces and 600 armoured personnel carriers in the Kuwaiti theatre of operations had been destroyed.
Cheney emphasized, however, that no predetermined level of attrition — no "magic trigger" — would activate the ground campaign, and stressed that "the capacity of US air power to do damage to Saddam Hussein's forces is still crucial" .
Upon their return to Washington, Cheney and Powell reported on Feb. 11 to Bush, who implied that they had conveyed no request from the military for an imminent beginning of the ground war, and that the air campaign would be continued "for a while" .
Increased skirmishing on eve of ground assault
Despite Bush's remarks, there were increasing signs of an imminent ground attack as allied units moved west along the Saudi border preparing to outflank the enemy by striking directly into Iraq.
There were also increasing reports of artillery bombardments against Iraqi positions and of forays into southern Kuwait by allied armoured units.
These continued to grow in number and scale despite the intense 11-hour diplomacy which followed Saddam's conditional offer on Feb. 15 to withdraw from Kuwait [see above].
US AH-64 Apache and OH-58 helicopters attacked a bunker complex at an undisclosed location north of the Saudi Arabian border on Feb. 20, capturing 421 Iraqi troops.
The US flew in CH-47 Chinook helicopters to transport the prisoners back to Saudi Arabia.
The engagement was the first occasion on which the US had admitted to the capture of enemy ground units inside Iraqi-controlled territory.
The unusual phenomenon of ground units surrendering en masse to a helicopter force fuelled speculation that the protracted bombing campaign had seriously eroded the morale of Iraq's forces.
In the final days before the ground assault there were reports of increasing allied artillery fire and skirmishing inside Iraqi-held territory as the allies sought to destroy those enemy fortifications — including sand ramparts known as berms, oil-filled ditches and mine fields — which had survived the bombing campaign.
There was little lraqi resistance or retaliatory fire, although two short-range Frog missiles were launched.
The failure of Iraqi units to respond to the increasingly aggressive tactics of the allied ground forces gave further credence to reports of low morale and inadequate supply.
Allied ground offensive
The full allied land offensive was launched at 4 a.m. local time (1 a.m.
GMT) on Feb. 24, and consisted of a series of feints together with a three-pronged attack across a 480-km front.
Supported by incessant air attacks and a heavy bombardment from the sea, each of the allied thrusts succeeded in breaking through Iraqi defences.
Enemy resistance was unexpectedly light, with many thousands of Iraqi troops either fleeing their defensive positions or waiting to be overrun in order to surrender en masse.
Beginning in the east, US Marines and Arab forces breached the Iraqi defences at several points on the Kuwait-Saudi-Arabian border and drove north and north-east towards Kuwait City.
Several hours later, to the west of Kuwait, the bulk of the allied armoured forces — the US VII Corps and the British 1st Armoured Division — outflanked the main enemy defence line and drove directly into Iraq before wheeling north-east to engage the Republican Guard divisions being held in reserve in northern Kuwait.
Further west the US XVIII Corps — composed around a nucleus of US airborne troops — together with the highly mobile French forces, thrust deep into Iraq from Rafha, with the objective of reaching the Euphrates at Nasiriyah in order to seal the Kuwaiti theatre of operations and to prevent Iraqi forces from escaping to the north.
As part of this western flanking manoeuvre some 2,000 troops from the US 101st Airborne Division were landed by helicopter 110 miles inside Iraq where they established an airbase and supply depot called "Cobra" .
This was described as the largest helicopter operation in military history.
The surprise decision to concentrate the main allied armoured thrust to the west of Kuwait was in part motivated by the desire to avoid having to make a frontal assault upon the extensive Iraqi fortifications on the Kuwaiti-Saudi Arabian border.
The other advantages inherent in the strategy were that (i) it enabled the allied forces to capitalise on their superior mobility and air power by minimizing the possibility of becoming bogged down in a static war;(ii) it made the allies less vulnerable to attack by chemical weapons, as such weapons were most easily used from a static defensive position against an enemy engaged in a frontal assault;(iii) it offered the possibility of cutting off all forces within Kuwait and southern Iraq — including the Republican Guard — thereby enabling the allies to destroy Iraq's military capability in addition to liberating Kuwait; and (iv) it meant that the allies would capture a swathe of Iraqi territory, a potentially useful lever in the event of the negotiation and implementation of ceasefire conditions.
Although Iraqi forces behind the front line put up more of a fight than those overrun in the initial phase of the offensive, resistance remained both light and sporadic.
By the end of the second day the allies claimed to have taken 20,000 prisoners, to have destroyed 270 enemy tanks and to have progressed more rapidly than anticipated.
Liberation of Kuwait City — Destruction of Iraqi forces on road to Basra
In an order broadcast on Feb. 26 Saddam instructed his troops to withdraw immediately from Kuwait, although he continued to present all military developments in terms of Iraqi victory.
Bush dismissed the move as an attempt by the Iraqi leader to regroup his overwhelmed forces, and stated that the allies would continue to press the ground war "with undiminished intensity" , emphasising that the fighting would stop only if Iraqi forces "lay down their arms" .
Nevertheless, news of Saddam's forthcoming instruction, together with the approach of allied units, led the Iraqi occupying forces to begin abandoning Kuwait City in disarray on the evening of Feb. 25.
As thousands of troops and vehicles, many loaded with looted goods, struggled north on the main road to Basra, they became caught in a congested and disorganized column many kilometres in length, and were subjected to hours of ruthless attack from the air with cluster bombs and, possibly, incendiary weapons.
Allied pilots described the destruction of the struggling column as like "shooting fish in a barrel" .
Although some Iraqi pockets remained, by the evening of Feb. 26 the Kuwaiti resistance movement claimed to be in control of Kuwait City.
There were also reports of US and Saudi Arabian special forces units operating within the city.
Saudi Arabian forces entered the city on Feb. 27, but for days there was little evidence of the establishment of any effective central authority.
Although the Kuwaiti army's 6th Brigade had originally been chosen for the honour of liberating the city, it appeared that the Saudi commander ordered the Kuwaiti force to delay its advance, after US special forces attached to the Kuwaiti army had warned that returning Kuwaiti soldiers might seek vengeance on the capital's 240,000 Palestinian inhabitants for the atrocities committed by the Iraqi forces.
In the final days of the occupation the Iraqis were alleged to have perpetrated a reign of terror within the city, including random killings, rape, the destruction of many public buildings and the seizure of up to 5,000 Kuwaiti citizens who were believed to have been taken to Iraq as hostages.
All of Kuwait's 950 producing oil wells were reported to have been set ablaze or damaged.
Most of the destruction was caused by Iraqi sabotage, although allied bombing was reported to have ignited as many as 34 wells and to have damaged 13 of the country's 18 oil-gathering facilities.
Accidental killing of UK forces by US aircraft
On Feb. 26 the UK forces suffered their worst losses when nine soldiers were killed after being mistakenly attacked by a US aircraft.
The nine were travelling in two Warrior armoured infantry vehicles when they were fired on by an A-10 "tankbuster" war plane.
Six of the dead were from the 3rd Battalion of the Royal Regiment of Fusiliers and three from the Queen's Own Highlanders attached to the Fusiliers as part of the British 4th Brigade.
Collapse of Iraqi military resistance
By the end of the third day Iraqi resistance appeared to be collapsing, with the allies claiming to have taken more than 30,000 prisoners and to have destroyed over 2,000 tanks.
Among the shattered Iraqi forces only the Republican Guard was reported to be standing firm north of the Kuwait-Iraq border.
The final engagements of the land war, between armoured units of the VII Corps and Republican Guard forces south and west of Basra, were the most ferocious of the whole campaign.
In heavy rain and the permanent twilight created by the burning oil wells and smoke-laden sky, allied commanders acknowledged that the many Guard units offered "determined resistance" and in some instances even launched localized counterattacks.
Of the 30,000 Iraqi troops estimated still to be combat-effective at the time of the allied suspension of military action, most were Republican Guard formations.
On the final day of the war thousands of disorganized Iraqi troops attempted to flee north through Basra but were unable to find a means to cross the Shatt-al-Arab waterway as all bridges had been destroyed by allied aircraft.
Some managed to cross by using overloaded pontoon bridges or a range of small vessels, but these too were the objects of relentless allied air attack, as were the troops and vehicles stranded on either bank of the waterway.
Iranian pilots, patrolling their border 15 km to the east, described the resulting scene as a "rat shoot" .
Announcement of allied suspension of military action
In a nationwide televised address from the Oval Office on the evening of Feb. 27 Bush declared: "Kuwait is liberated; Iraq's army is defeated; our military objectives are met." 
Accordingly he announced a suspension of allied military action from midnight (i.e. 5 a.m.
GMT on Feb. 28).
He stressed that this did not constitute a formal ceasefire, however, saying that a ceasefire would be achieved only if Iraq agreed to surrender all allied and Kuwaiti prisoners; to provide maps of all minefields; and to accept all relevant UN resolutions on the Gulf.
The Iraqi government had informed the UN that same evening that it accepted all 12 UN resolutions without conditions.
Bush said that Iraq should designate military commanders to meet their coalition counterparts within the next 48 hours to arrange for the military aspects of the ceasefire.
He told the US public: "This is not a time for euphoria, certainly not a time to gloat, but it is a time of pride…
This is a victory for all mankind and the rule of law."
He did not mention the future of Saddam Hussein, but did take the opportunity to restate his earlier assertion that the war had not been conducted against the Iraqi people as a whole.
At the time of the suspension of military action the left flank of the allied attacking force had reached the Euphrates and allied units were only 250 km south of Baghdad.
Speaking on Feb. 27, Schwarzkopf confirmed that allied forces could have gone on to take the Iraqi capital had they been so ordered.
The destruction of bridges across the Euphrates and Tigris rivers, together with the "extraordinary movement" of the XVIII Corps, he said, meant that "the door was shut" for any Iraqi armour or artillery attempting to leave the Kuwaiti theatre of operations.
He confirmed that Iraq had been effectively disarmed as a military power, and was left with an army largely composed of infantry which could not constitute a threat to neighbouring states in the immediate future.
Agreement of formal ceasefire
Although some local clashes between allied and Iraqi units were reported, there were no major violations of the de facto ceasefire which followed the allied suspension of combat operations.
A meeting between Schwarzkopf and Iraqi commanders agreed the details of a formal ceasefire on March 3.
[Further details will be given in the March News Digest.]
Assessment of casualties
At the end of February total casualty figures among the 700,000-strong allied force were estimated to be at least 131 killed in action and 100 in accidents or other incidents.
US losses were given as 79 killed, 213 wounded, 45 missing and nine captured; UK losses as 16 killed in action (including nine from US fire but excluding a further eight who died in accidents or from illness), 31 wounded, 12 missing and two captured (officially amended on March 8 to 17 killed and 43 injured with eight servicemen still missing); French as two killed in action and at least 25 wounded; one Italian pilot was killed and another captured.
Amongst the Arab coalition forces the Saudi Arabian losses were given as at least 26 killed (19 of whom died in the Iraqi attack on Khafji — see p. 37938) and 10 missing; Egyptian as 19 killed and 74 wounded; and six dead from the United Arab Emirates.
One Kuwaiti pilot was also captured.
Kuwaiti civilian casualties since Aug. 2, 1990, were estimated by the resistance to run into thousands.
There were no official figures for Iraqi lives lost, and throughout the campaign allied commanders refused to speculate upon the subject.
Unofficial estimates varied wildly, with some experts suggesting that as many as 100,000 or 150,000 Iraqis might have died during the war.
A more commonly cited figure, however, was of total casualties of 100,000, of whom up to 35,000 might have been killed.
Based on Iraq's own admission [see above]it was believed that the air war might have killed 20,000 (of whom an estimated 1,000 were civilians), while a further 15,000 troops were thought to have been killed in the ground campaign.
The Ministry of Defence in London estimated that 175,000 Iraqi troops had been captured.
On the outbreak of war the Iraqi army, including recalled reservists, numbered some 955,000, of whom 620,000 were estimated to be committed to the Kuwaiti theatre of operations (however, post-war evaluation called seriously into question initial Western intelligence estimates and it was suggested that the figure was nearer 300,000).
Of these, the 30,000 who were still capable of resistance at the time of the ceasefire were to be allowed to return to Baghdad through the encircling allied forces although they were not to be permitted to take their remaining 700 or so tanks.
Of those troops not in the Kuwaiti theatre, eight or nine divisions were on the border with Turkey, seven were on the frontier with Iran and five or six were based in Baghdad.
Two divisions of Republican Guard were also based in or around the capital to serve as Saddam Hussein's personal bodyguard.
Losses of materiel
Since Jan. 17 the allies were estimated to have flown more than 110,000 sorties and to have lost 36 aircraft in combat (USA 27 (plus one helicopter), UK six, Kuwait one, Italy one, Saudi Arabia one).
Non-combat losses totalled nine aircraft (USA seven, UK one, Saudi Arabia one) plus nine US helicopters.
Allied figures suggested a massive destruction of Iraqi military materiel.
Of the 5,500 tanks possessed by Iraq at the outbreak of war, 4,200 had been based in the Kuwaiti theatre, and 3,500 of these were reported to have been destroyed or captured.
Of the 1,300 tanks not committed, many were older models such as the Soviet-designed T-54s and T-55s.
Of Iraq's 3,700 artillery pieces, 3,110 had been located in the Kuwaiti theatre, and at least 2,140 of these were destroyed or captured.
The army also lost 2,000 of its 2,900 armoured personnel carriers.
The Iraqi decision not to attempt to contest allied air supremacy meant that a substantial portion of Iraq's air force survived the war.
A total of 147 aircraft, 121 of which were combat planes (including some of the best possessed by Iraq), found refuge in Iran.
A further 141 aircraft were destroyed by the allies either in the air or on the ground.
Of the 400 or so warplanes left unaccounted for, some 200 were thought to have survived the conflict by remaining concealed in reinforced shelters.
Impact of war on Iraq
Various reports during February attempted to give some assessment of the damage sustained in Iraq as a result of the UN embargo [see pp. 37639-40; 37695; 37871]and the air war.
On Feb. 23, experts from the World Health Organization (WHO) and the UN Children's Fund (UNICEF) visited Baghdad at the invitation of the government.
They reported that all parts of the country were threatened with epidemics as a result of severe shortages of medicines and drinking water and lack of sanitation.
The team found that the supply of fresh water for all purposes in Baghdad had fallen to between 5 and 20 litres per person per day compared with 500 litres before the war, and that diarrhoeal diseases among children had quadrupled.
Conditions were much worse in rural areas and especially in the town of Basra.
The report also confirmed that the lack of electricity had drastically impaired the quality of medical services.
(A report in the Guardian of Feb. 19 had claimed that in Baghdad alone, the lack of electricity was causing the death of 50 babies a day.)
Reports in early February had suggested that extensive bombing by allied forces had "totally destroyed" electric and telecommunications facilities in Baghdad.
On Feb 13 Syrian Radio, quoting refugee sources, said that "life in Iraq has become unbearable as a result of the lack of food supplies and cuts in electricity and drinking water" .
The (Egyptian) Middle East News Agency (MENA) reported on Feb. 14 that life in the Iraqi capital had become "virtually primitive" owing to the "rise in the cost of living and food prices" prompted by "the economic siege" .
According to one estimate in the Financial Times of Feb. 28, it would take at least a year to restore full electricity supplies to the capital.
On Feb. 24 IRNA, quoting the chief of the Iraqi Red Crescent, Ibrahim al-Nouri, reported that more than 5,000 women, children and elderly people had died in various hospitals throughout the country since Jan. 17 due to shortages of medicines and medical facilities.
The Independent of Feb. 20 also reported that al-Nouri had estimated that 18 million people were threatened with epidemics of cholera and typhoid because of damage to water and sewage systems.
The Middle East Economic Digest (MEED) of March 8 quoted an Algerian Red Cross official as saying that an estimated 9,000,000 Iraqis were in danger of disease as a result of medical shortages, and that the mortality rate in emergency cases had risen from 6 per cent to 20 per cent.
On Feb. 9 the Revolutionary Command Council (RCC) issued a decree appointing popular committees to supervise prices and distribute food to citizens.
On Feb. 18 the mayor of Baghdad, Khalid Abdul Munim, confirmed that the destruction of the city's sewage system and its water purification plants posed a substantial risk of the spread of cholera and typhoid.
International relief assistance
Offers of assistance, especially of food and medical supplies, came from a number of countries.
On Feb. 16, UNICEF confirmed that 50 tonnes of medical aid for the treatment of mothers and children had arrived in Baghdad.
(Medical supplies were exempt from the economic sanctions imposed by the UN Security Council in August 1990 — see pp. 37639.)
On Feb. 19 the UN Security Council authorized the International Committee of the Red Cross (ICRC) to make emergency deliveries of water purification equipment to reduce the risk of epidemics.
On Feb. 27 the Guardian reported that the WHO-UNICEF delegation to Iraq (see above) had delivered a shipment of 51 tonnes of medical supplies.
On Feb. 1 the Yemeni Red Crescent informed the ICRC that it was ready to send medical aid to Iraq.
On Feb. 7 Morocco sent 60 tonnes of medicines amidst reports that the Moroccan Red Cross had offered to co-ordinate relief supplies to Iraq.
The first convoy of medical supplies from Iran arrived on Jan. 31, followed by a second on Feb. 9.
On Feb. 10 Iran sent a further 16 tonnes of medical supplies under the supervision of the ICRC.
On Feb. 9 Turkey's Foreign Minister, Ahmet Kurtcebe Alptemocin, confirmed that Turkey had sent humanitarian aid and added that his government would respond positively to any further requests for aid.
Libyan aid comprising baby food, medicine and milk came in the wake of an official request by Iraq on Feb. 9 asking the UN to send a fact-finding mission to investigate Iraqi claims that allied forces had bombed a factory producing baby milk formula on Jan. 21.
US officials had claimed earlier that the factory was being used to produce biological weapons.
On Feb. 21 India announced that it was sending medicines worth Rs10,000,000 while Algeria donated some 8 tonnes of food and medicines.
On Feb. 25 medical teams left Jordan and Tunisia carrying consignments of medicines, medical supplies and baby food.
Fuel rationing
The Oil Ministry on Feb. 4 suspended sales of fuel, including petrol, kerosene and heating oil, to the public until further notice.
The suspension of petrol sales, first adopted as a temporary measure on Jan. 24 [see also p. 37759], came amidst allied claims that bombing raids had destroyed up to 80 per cent of the country's oil refining capacity.
However, US intelligence sources cited in the Guardian of Feb. 8 claimed that there were still 30,000,000 barrels of refined petroleum in storage, "enough for four months of sustained combat" .
A decree issued by the RCC on Feb. 13 warned that anyone violating fuel restrictions would face penalties ranging from a two-year prison sentence to fines of up to 3,000 dinars (US$900).
Intensification of dissident activities
There were reports in mid-February that leaders from the 17-party Joint Action Committee of the Iraqi Opposition (JACIO) established in Damascus in December 1990 [see p. 37927]and the pro-Western Free Iraq Council (FIC) formed in London on Feb. 9, had gathered in the Saudi capital, Riyadh, to discuss the formation of a government-in-exile.
The gathering was held under the auspices of the Saudi government, and was also understood to have had the backing of Iran, which had conducted separate talks with opposition leaders.
Reports in the Guardian and the International Herald Tribune of Feb. 23 claimed, however, that Saudi Arabia was eager to prevent Iraqi Shia Moslems based in Iran, especially those belonging to the Supreme Assembly of the Islamic Revolution of Iraq (SAIRI) under Ayatollah Mohammad Bakr al-Hakim, from gaining influence amongst Iraqis.
A group describing itself as the "Iraqi national opposition" called on Feb. 19 for the overthrow of Saddam Hussein, as had a communiqué issued on Jan. 28 by the Islamic opposition in Iraq.
Similar calls came on Feb. 24 from opposition leaders based in Saudi Arabia, including former members of the RCC now in exile.
On Feb. 26 sources close to the Patriotic Union of Kurdistan (PUK) called on Iraqis to "topple" the regime of Saddam Hussein.
Reports grew also of anti-government demonstrations in Iraqi cities.
On Feb. 22 opposition sources on behalf of the National Committee for the Salvation of Iraq (NCSI) claimed that one of its members had been shot while leading a march protesting against civilian deaths resulting from the raid on the Amiriya bomb shelter [see above].
The NCSI also reported that an anti-government demonstration in the city of Diwaniya in Samawah province on Feb. 18 had led to the execution of the governor of the province, reportedly for his failure to control the demonstrators.
Other sources claimed that 10 members of the ruling Ba'ath party had also been killed by the demonstrators.
Reports of further anti-government demonstrations were confirmed by Saudi sources on Feb. 28.
Impact of Iraqi occupation in Kuwait
Kuwait, liberated on Feb. 26 after 208 days of Iraqi occupation, had reportedly suffered severe shortages of essential supplies including food and medicines, and epidemics of cholera and dysentery.
The Guardian of Feb. 12 said that Kuwaiti refugees arriving in al-Ruweishid, Jordan, had confirmed an outbreak of cholera and worsening food shortages.
The refugees also claimed that water and electricity supplies had been cut in some parts of Kuwait City but not in others.
IRNA, quoting refugee sources in Abu Dhabi on Feb. 12, also reported an outbreak of cholera.
It was reported on March 1 that the ICRC had provided a water purification plant for hospitals and vulnerable groups, especially women and children.
A US army report released on Feb. 26 said that as much as 25 per cent of the population might either have died, have been injured or suffered from cholera or dysentery.
It warned that instances of plague could recur following an explosion in the rat population as a result of the huge quantity of unburied rubbish which had accumulated in and around Kuwait City.
Allegations of Iraqi army brutality, including summary executions and the robbing of civilians at gun-point for food, were also reported frequently during February.
On Feb. 7 a report compiled by the Physicians for Human Rights in the USA and Denmark provided new evidence of an Iraqi army campaign of summary executions, torture, arbitrary arrests and mass intimidation of Kuwaiti citizens.
Based on eye-witness testimonies by health workers, it concluded that more than 7,000 people had died during Iraqi occupation and that an estimated 17,000 had been held and subjected to torture in camps in Iraq and Kuwait.
The report chronicled the systematic destruction of the medical system, and included three accounts of the death of premature babies who had been removed from incubators [see also p. 37927].
The chairman of the Kuwait Information Office in Dhahran said on Feb. 12 that Iraqi soldiers were continuing "atrocities" including "killing, torture and rape" .
On Feb. 14 Col. Abdullah al Kandari of the Kuwaiti air force said that over 200 people had been executed since the start of the allied bombing.
On Feb. 19 a spokesman for the London-based Association for Free Kuwait said that more than 7,000 civilians had been killed and 17,000 detained since Aug. 2.
In a letter to the International Confederation of Free Trade Unions (ICFTU) on Feb. 25, the leader of the Kuwaiti Trade Union Federation, Hayaf Issam al-Ajami, said that Iraqi death squads had killed and tortured trade unionists.
First- and second-hand accounts of shooting, torture, mass rape and murder were also given at a meeting of the UK all-party parliamentary committee on human rights on Feb. 19.
On Feb. 25 allied commanders also accused Iraqi soldiers of murdering, raping and mutilating hundreds of civilians.
Their claims were supported on the same day by UK Foreign Office sources who said that Iraqi forces were pursuing a policy of "tremendous inhumanity" .
A Reuters report on Feb. 25, however, said that refugees arriving from Kuwait in al-Ruweished, Jordan, had said that they had seen no evidence of Iraqi troops engaging in systematic atrocities or executing civilians.
Post-war plans for reconstruction of Kuwait
Efforts intensified to finalize plans for post-war reconstruction estimated to cost around $100,000 million, or well in excess of the $40,000 million estimated earlier.
US officials quoting Kuwaiti sources said on Feb. 26 that the Kuwaiti government was prepared to spend up to $800,000,000 to restore emergency health care, sanitation, communications, transport, utilities, food and water in the first three months after the end of the war.
It was reported on Feb. 11 that a total of 171 foreign companies, 75 per cent of which were US-based, had signed contracts to take part in emergency re-building.
Ten leading UK industrialists accompanied UK Foreign Secretary Hurd when he visited Taif in Saudi Arabia on Feb. 9-10, to offer their services for post-war reconstruction.
Later, officials described the meeting between the businessmen and members of the government-in-exile as "extremely positive" .
There were reports on Feb. 20 that US and UK businesses had clashed over post-war contracts, and on Feb. 21 The Times reported that the UK government had begun negotiations with the Kuwaiti government-in-exile for an extension to a deadline for bids, after UK companies claimed that US businesses had secured an unfair advantage in bidding for postwar reconstruction work.
Martial law — Campaign by pro-democracy groups
Pro-democracy groups [see pp. 37428-29]reacted with consternation to an announcement on Feb. 26 by the Amir of Kuwait, Shaikh Jabir al Ahmad al Jabir as Sabah, placing the country under martial law for a period of three months.
Kuwaiti radio said that the Amir's move had been designed "to ensure life in Kuwait against remnants of aggression" and to protect "people, honour and property against what might re-imperil the country" .
The announcement added that the Crown Prince and Prime Minister, Shaikh Saad al Abdullah as Salim as Sabah, had been named military governor with the task of co-ordinating Kuwait's armed forces with those of the allied coalition.
Responding to the imposition of martial law, Ahmed al-Khatib, a leading dissident politician and former National Assembly deputy, was quoted on Feb. 27 as saying that "the Sabah family don't want to share power" .
the Guardian of March 1 reported that at a meeting between the government and members of the opposition in Jeddah, Saudi Arabia, angry debate had erupted over demands by the opposition that martial law be declared not by the government in exile, but by an emergency national unity government reflecting various political views.
Reports earlier in the month suggested that the government had already planned to impose a period of martial law.
Speaking in Taif, Saudi Arabia, on Feb. 11, the Information Minister, Badr Jasim al Yaqub, had dismissed the possibility of early elections and had hinted that a period of martial law might be necessary.
He added, however, that the government would adhere to the 1962 Constitution [see pp. 34767-68; 37549]guaranteeing democracy.
On Feb. 12 the Crown Prince denied foreign press reports that the political leadership intended to renege on its commitment to the 1962 Constitution.
Earlier, on Feb. 6, the union leader Ajami had said in London that "pressure will have to be put on the Kuwaiti royal family to honour" decisions taken at Jeddah in 1990 [see p. 37759].
The Kuwaiti news agency KUNA reported on Feb. 28 that the Amir had established a committee under the Crown Prince to oversee security at home and abroad.
Although the committee was expected primarily to identify people suspected of having collaborated with the Iraqi army, opposition sources quoted in the Guardian of Feb. 13 expressed the fear that such a committee might be used against dissidents, adding that, if this were so, such a body "would be very dangerous if there were no parliament" .
On Feb. 20 the Information Minister was quoted as saying that Kuwait will have to be "purified of intruders…who seek to sow doubt in the unity of Kuwaiti ranks" .
Coalition efforts to cover financial costs of war
GFCCG meeting — Further pledges from Germany and Japan — Other contributions
In Washington 26 countries belonging to the Gulf Financial Crisis Co-ordination Group (GFCCG) met on Feb. 5 to discuss progress on disbursing amounts pledged towards assisting countries most affected by the Gulf crisis [see p. 37730].
US Treasury Under-Secretary David Mulford, who chaired the meeting, said afterwards that a total of $14,300 million had been pledged in financial support for 1990 and 1991.
Saudi Arabia, Kuwait and other Gulf states had so far promised to provide a total of $9,500 million.
Mulford said that about $6,700 million of the pledged aid had already been disbursed, mostly to front-line states, and he appealed to Japan and Germany to speed up payments.
Egypt, Jordan and Turkey were expected to receive $10,300 million of the total pledged for 1990-91, while Djibouti, Lebanon, Morocco, Pakistan and possibly Bangladesh would get $3,300 million.
The distribution of the remaining $700 million had not yet been decided.
Reports in Washington suggested that the Gulf states had so far refused to allocate any money to Jordan because of its apparent support for Iraq [see also p. 38024].
The GFCCG also drew up plans to raise additional funds, estimated at $4,000 million-$5,000 million, for 1991.
According to the Bush administration, the war was estimated to have cost about $50,000 million, most of which was expected to be offset by contributions of $36,000 million made recently by Japan, Saudi Arabia and Kuwait.
A pledge by Japan to allocate a further $9,000 million [see pp. 37977-78]was reported, however, to have run into difficulties after the Japanese Finance Minister, Ryutaro Hashimoto opposed offering any more aid to front-line states until an earlier grant of $2,100 million [see p. 37697]had been disbursed.
According to the GFCCG, only $400 million of this amount had been disbursed so far [see also p. 38010].
On Jan. 26 Saudi Arabia announced that it would commit $13,500 million to US costs for the first three months of the war.
The Saudis confirmed on Feb. 17 that $3,500 million had been raised by borrowing from foreign banks, the first such resort to the international money market.
On Jan. 25 Kuwait announced that it would also contribute $13,500 million to help defray US costs.
On Feb. 11 and 25, Kuwait announced that it would allocate £660,000,000 ($1,320 million) towards UK war costs and F5,000 million ($1,000 million) towards French costs.
On Feb. 6 Japan, apparently responding to GFCCG appeals, announced that it would shortly provide Egypt, Jordan and Turkey with more than $1,030 million in low-interest loans [see p. 38010].
On Feb. 12 the German Foreign Minister, Hans-Dietrich Genscher, was quoted in the Independent as saying that Egypt, Syria and Jordan "can rely on the fact of further help from Bonn" .
Germany had so far given DM1,000,000 million ($700,000,000) to Egypt and DM221 million to Jordan.
Syria had not received any specific conflict-related aid.
On Feb. 20, Germany offered to pay DM400 million towards UK war costs, bringing the total German contribution to allied costs to $12,000 million.
It was reported on Feb. 27 that Belgium had agreed to contribute $32,200,000 towards UK and French costs.
It was estimated that the Gulf war would cost the UK about £3,000 million ($6,000 million).
Oil prices
The price of crude oil stood at just over $20 per barrel at the beginning of February (Brent light crude marker price for three-month delivery).
It dipped further on occasions when an end to the war seemed in prospect, notably on Feb. 15 and again on Feb. 19, when it went briefly below $16 for the first time since July 1990.
A modest price increase accompanied the launching of the ground war, but took the price only just above $20 before a slight fall at end February to approximately $18.
Despite the extensive damage to Kuwaiti oilfields in particular, the earlier predictions of massive oil price increases in the event of war were thus not fulfilled.
[See p. 37697 for World Bank prediction of prices exceeding $65 per barrel, made in September as the price was moving upwards past the $40 barrier.
See also pp. 37758; 37943 for oil price movements in October 1990 and marked drop in January 1991.]
Over-estimation of number of refugees
There were reports that international relief organizations had vastly over-estimated the number of refugees fleeing Kuwait and Iraq following the outbreak of hostilities on Jan. 16-17.
According to some estimates in late January, between 500,000 and 1,300,000 people were expected to come out of Iraq as refugees.
A UN "plan of action" drawn up in the week before the commencement of hostilities had estimated that more than 1,000,000 foreigners were still working in Iraq, most of them Egyptians, Sudanese and Palestinians.
The "plan of action" stated that "we could soon be witnessing a dramatic exodus exceeding even that of August-September 1990" [see p. 37697].
A report in the Middle East International (MEI) of Feb. 22 said, however, that only 14,300 people had been evacuated through Jordan since the war began, although they did not include an unknown number of Jordanians and Palestinians who failed to register at camps on the border.
The MEI report added that about 1,000 people had arrived in Turkey (most of them Iraqi citizens, probably Kurds), and about 7,700 in Iran, including 2,000 Sudanese.
IRNA said on Feb. 26 that a total of 9,657 refugees from 27 countries had fled to Iran from Iraq since the outbreak of the war.
Of these 5,478 were back in their own countries.
The report added that it had cost Iran between $30,000,000 and $40,000,000 to provide services for the refugees.
A report from the Syrian news agency (SANA) on Feb. 23 said that an undisclosed number of refugees had arrived from Baghdad and Dahuk province in Iraq.
Relief operations were being co-ordinated by the UN Disaster Relief Organization (UNDRO), with some assistance from intergovernmental organizations, including the International Organization for Migration (IOM).
Non-governmental organizations, including OXFAM and Médecins sans Frontières were also involved.
Appeals for assistance for refugees, estimated by UN agencies as costing $175,000,000, had elicited pledges of only $60,000,000 as of Jan. 26.
The Rome-based World Food Programme (WFP) announced that it would allocate 31,000 tonnes of food for refugees, while France, Japan and Argentina undertook to provide aircraft to help evacuate refugees and distribute relief supplies.
Oil and air pollution
The giant oil slick in the Gulf, caused mainly by the deliberate action of Iraqi forces in Kuwait [see p. 37937-38], continued to cause concern during February.
The slick's southerly progress down the Gulf led to the temporary closure of the Saudi desalination plant at Safaniya on Feb. 8.
It reopened several days later, however, and no further desalination plants came under direct threat during February.
Some experts suggested that the damage resulting from the slick was not as severe as had first been assumed.
There was some speculation that the Saudi government had been encouraging "worst-case" estimates in an effort to attract international assistance.
A Saudi spokesman claimed that the costs of dispersing the slick and defending the desalination plants would amount to $1,000 million over six months.
The slick continued to wreak havoc among the Gulf's bird life, with large numbers of cormorants and grebes dying, often as a result of ingesting oil while attempting to preen themselves clean.
Iraq's action in setting fire to an estimated 600 oil wells prior to withdrawing from Kuwait resulted in widespread air pollution over the northern Gulf region.
This problem to some extent overshadowed the oil slick as an environmental issue.
Clouds of soot and oily particles obscured the sun and led to downpours of "black rain" in northern Saudi Arabia and Kuwait.
Although initial fears that the smoke would cause climatic change on a global scale appeared to be exaggerated, it posed a threat to the health of both humans and animals in the northern Gulf states, southern Iraq and parts of western Iran.
Particular concern was caused by the fact that Kuwaiti crude included a high sulphur content, which would turn into sulphur dioxide on burning and fall as acid rain.
Also present in the oil, and hence in the smoke from its combustion, were benzene and polycyclic aromatic hydrocarbons, both of which were carcinogenic.
The incidence of fatal bronchitis was also expected to increase.
In the long term, experts predicted that the pollution could cause serious contamination of agricultural land and water supplies, particularly in the fertile and well-populated Tigris and Euphrates Valleys in Iraq.
Western popular reaction to Gulf war
During the war opinion polls in the United States implied that around 80 per cent of people supported Bush's Gulf policy; this rose further after the start of the land war on Feb. 24.
Opposition came primarily from students but was minor compared with the pervasive feeling that the war was laying to rest the ghost of the unsuccessful US involvement in Vietnam 20 years earlier.
On Feb. 21 rallies at the universities of Columbia and Michigan (both former centres of war resistance) were attended by 250 and 100 students.
In Amherst, Massachusetts, in a lone protest, Gregory Levey, 30, burned himself to death on Feb. 18; 1,000 students rallied in the town on Feb. 21.
In the United Kingdom opinion polls in mid-February showed some 78 per cent of public support (up from 61 per cent the previous month) for the policy of the Conservative government, which continued to receive broad cross-party support in Parliament.
The Committee to Stop the War in the Gulf (formed in late August 1990) continued to organize protests, and on Feb. 2 around 30,000 rallied in London.
After Feb. 24 opposition to the war was reduced, although 500 Moslems marched in London on that day calling for the withdrawal of allied troops.
On Feb. 14 Labour MP Clare Short resigned from the opposition front bench after criticizing her party's support for the allied bombing campaign.
MP Tony Banks also resigned from the Labour front bench after the parliamentary debate on Jan. 21, as did two other Labour front bench MPs after the debate on Jan. 15.
In France President Mitterrand's policy was supported by around 70 per cent of the population in early February according to opinion polls, rising to 78 per cent after Feb. 24.
In a televised address on that day Mitterrand declared: "The order given to the forces is to liberate Kuwait, not to attack Iraq." 
The Middle East International of Feb. 22 described the anti-war movement as "relatively inactive" , although Marseille dockers from the communist CGT trade union refused on Feb. 13 to load arms, ammunition and equipment for the Gulf.
The strongest opposition came from the Communists (PCF) and their youth wing, the Jeunesse Communiste.
On Feb. 19 protesters, officially given as numbering 5,000 but unofficially as 45,000, who were largely supporters of the PCF and the CGT, marched through Paris demanding negotiations and an immediate ceasefire.
Smaller demonstrations were held on Feb. 25 in Paris and other towns.
Within the ruling Socialist Party (PS), the supporters of the "socialism and republic" faction led by Jean-Pierre Chevènement (who resigned as Defence Minister on Jan. 29 — see p. 37941) refused to back presidential policy on the Gulf at a meeting of PS officials on Feb. 2, and attacked the Feb. 1 decision temporarily to let US B-52 bombers overfly the country.
(The UK government had announced on Jan. 31 that B-52s could use the Fairford base in Gloucestershire.)
France sought to maintain its contacts with north African countries during February.
Numerous politicians and government officials visited Algeria, Morocco and Tunisia including Michel Vauzelle, head of the foreign affairs committee of the National Assembly (French lower house of parliament) who had visited Iraq in January [see p. 37934].
In Germany the government decided in early February to send two anti-aircraft batteries of Roland and Hawk missiles to Turkish air bases to defend the Alpha jets sent in January [see p. 37941].
However, the Soviet pilot of the aircraft chartered to transport the missiles refused to do so and it was not until mid-February that a US aircraft set out.
Conscientious objection rose markedly; 40 of the 400-strong military contingent ordered to go out with the anti-aircraft missiles refused to do so.
On Feb. 13 a senior German foreign policy adviser announced that low flying (severely restricted since September 1989 — see pp. 37226; 37677) would be permitted for UK aircraft en route for the Gulf.
Genscher went to Egypt, Syria and Jordan on Feb. 12-14.
In Egypt he added DM150 million to the DM1,000 million already promised to help cover Egypt's costs in the war, and pledged a dozen armoured gas detection vehicles from the former East German arsenal.
Syria was offered development aid of DM100 million [see above; see also p. 38025 for other loans to Syria].
Jordan, already the beneficiary of DM221 million in assistance approved in November 1990, would receive a further DM150 million.
[For Genscher's January visit to Israel see p. 37942.]
A spokesperson for the German Greens resigned on Feb. 21.
He had been quoted in the Jerusalem Post at the start of a visit by a Green delegation as saying that the Iraqi Scud attacks on Israel were the logical consequence of Israel's policy towards its neighbours.
In Spain opposition to the war drew on pacifist and anti-US sentiment.
At the end of January an opinion poll showed support for the war at less than 30 per cent.
Prime Minister Felipe González was criticized for attempting to conceal the level of Spanish involvement in the war.
On Feb. 1 the Spanish news agency EFE revealed that US B-52 bombers en route for the Gulf were using the Morón air base south-east of Seville.
On Feb. 3 between 3,000 and 10,000 protesters marched 14 km from Madrid to the Torrejón air base demanding the closure of US-Spanish bases as staging posts to the Gulf; 3,500 marched on the same day to the Rota naval base on the south Atlantic coast.
Large anti-war demonstrations followed the outbreak of the land war on Feb. 24, when a total of 50,000 protesters marched through the streets in Madrid and Barcelona demanding an immediate ceasefire.
Like its French counterpart, the Spanish government sought to maintain contacts with north African countries.
In mid-February Foreign Minister Francisco Fernández Ordóñez toured Mauritania, Morocco, Algeria, Tunisia and Libya.
In Italy support for the war stood at 61 per cent according to an opinion poll published on Feb. 12.
Opposition came principally from the communists, the Roman Catholic Church and Christian youth groups.
On Feb. 3 Pope John Paul II declared that combatants were in breach of the commandment "that thou shalt not kill, which applies to every man and obliges every man" ; his support helped mobilize Italian Catholics into a peace movement on a scale which caused surprise and unease among Western leaders.
In the Netherlands, known during the 1980s for the strength of its peace movement, there was widespread support for the war.
On Feb. 8 the government announced that Patriot missiles were to be sent to Israel.
Patriots and Lance missiles were also sent to Turkey and F-16 fighters were offered to reinforce mobile NATO forces there.
In Luxembourg the government announced on Feb. 11 that it had authorized the USA to use its airport for the transit of materiel, troops and casualties.
In Austria the government's decision on Feb. 5 to allow 103 US M-88 tanks to cross by rail from Germany to Italy resulted in a bomb attack on the railway line near Innsbruck on the night of Feb. 8-9.
The allied bombing on Feb. 13 of the Baghdad bomb shelter, in which over 300 civilians were killed [see above]prompted differing reactions.
In the UK and France the government rejected responsibility for the bombardment, for which Saddam Hussein as instigator of the war was described as responsible.
In Italy Foreign Affairs Minister Gianni De Michelis declared on Feb. 14 that it would be better to avoid bombing urban centres.
In Spain González expressed his concern in a letter to Bush, suggesting that allied aerial bombardment of Baghdad and other cities should be halted, and calling for an international inquiry by the UN and the ICRC into the incident.
North African opposition to war
During February there were major pro-Iraqi and fundamentalist anti-coalition protests across north Africa.
In particular after the air raid on the Baghdad bunker, days of national mourning were declared in Algeria, Mauritania and Tunisia and young people took to the streets upon hearing the announcement of the raid.
During February the Libyan government said that it would supply food, medicines and blankets to Iraq [see also above]and blood donation programmes for Iraq were oversubscribed in Morocco and Tunisia.
In Morocco, on Feb. 3, in the largest protest since the 1975 "green march" [see pp. 27575-77], 300,000 marched through the capital, Rabat, shouting slogans against the allied forces and burning French, Israeli, UK and US flags.
Called by the five main opposition parties and by trade unions, the protest took place with government consent.
King Hassan declared on Feb. 13 that the troops sent to Saudi Arabia were there "to defend the soil of a fraternal Arab state and not to commit aggression against another fraternal Arab state" .
The Middle East International of Feb. 22 described Morocco as the "weakest link in the anti-Iraq coalition" .
Pro-Iraqi feeling in Algeria prompted the massive Feb. 1 demonstration [see p. 37940], and further large demonstrations in Algiers and other towns on Feb. 15 in protest at the bombing of the Baghdad shelter.
In Tunisia on Feb. 25 a general strike at university campuses protested against the outbreak of the ground war; pacifist rallies were held by several thousand students.
In Egypt, where 36,000 troops had been sent to the Gulf, opposition was less evident.
On Feb. 7 riot police in Cairo outnumbered and forcibly broke up the first protest march against the war by opposition leaders and 50 supporters.
On Feb. 25 Egyptian police charged several hundred students on the Cairo university campus who were chanting anti-US, anti-government and even anti-Saddam Hussein slogans.
Thousands of students demonstrated in Cairo the following day in protest at the death of one student in the fracas.
Attacks against allied targets worldwide
Reports continued of attacks by Iraqi-inspired militant groups against allied targets around the world.
[For attacks in Turkey see p. 38022.]
US State Department sources said on Feb. 12 that there had been more than 100 such attacks against allied targets since Jan. 17.
Five people had died and about 50 were wounded.
The "vast majority" of such attacks, however, had been committed by local groups based in Turkey, Greece, Lebanon and Peru, with no known links to Iraq; in only one attack, in Manila on Jan. 19 [see p. 37938], had there been a direct connection with the Iraqi government.
On Feb. 3 two US servicemen and a Saudi security guard were injured when gunmen attacked an airport bus in Jeddah.
The Financial Times reported on Feb. 5 that arsonists had set fire to a British Airways office in East Jerusalem.
On Feb. 6, bombs aimed at a US bank and a French diplomat exploded in Athens.
There were no casualties.
Three people died in Sialkot (Pakistan) on Feb. 6 after a bomb, attributed to pro-Iraqi groups, exploded under a minibus.
On Feb. 20, explosions at the British, German, Italian and Turkish embassies in Tehran, caused minor damage but no injuries.
On Feb. 21, arson attacks against three department stores in Frankfurt were reported to have been protests against western involvement in the Gulf.
Earlier, on Jan. 13, members of the Red Army Faction, protesting against "the war of annihilation against the Iraqi people" , fired shots at the US embassy in Bonn.
Gulf crisis chronology, July 1990 to February 1991
1990
July 18 Broadcast of Aziz's July 15 accusation that Kuwait had stolen US$2,400 million of Iraqi oil and built military installations on Iraqi territory.
July 24 30,000 Iraqi troops reportedly mass on Kuwaiti border, rising to 100,000 by end-July.
July 26-27 Emergency OPEC session.
Aug. 2 Iraqi invasion of Kuwait.
UN Resolution 660 demands withdrawal.
Aug. 3 14 Arab League states condemn invasion as does joint Baker-Shevardnadze statement.
USA and UK announce sending of naval forces to Gulf.
Aug. 6 Saudi Arabia invites allies to reinforce defence against Iraq.
UN Resolution 661 imposes economic sanctions.
Aug. 7 US troops committed to Gulf.
Aug. 8 Formal Iraqi annexation of Kuwait.
France sends naval forces to Gulf.
Aug. 10 Twelve of 20 Arab League members approve sending of forces to Saudi Arabia.
Aug. 12 Saddam Hussein links Kuwaiti "occupation" with other Middle East "occupations" .
Aug. 15 Iraq accepts Iranian peace terms ending Iran-Iraq war.
Aug. 16 US and UK citizens in Kuwait are ordered to surrender to the Iraqi authorities as "human shield" policy is launched.
Aug. 28 Kuwait is declared to be 19th governorate of Iraq.
Iraq offers to free women and children detainees.
Sept. 1 Two days of meetings between Pérez de Cuéllar and Aziz end in Amman.
Sept. 9 Bush-Gorbachev Helsinki summit.
Sept. 11 UK commits ground forces to Gulf.
Sept. 27 Iranian-UK diplomatic relations resumed.
Oct. 9 Oil prices reach US$40 per barrel.
Oct. 29 UN Resolution 674 calls for immediate end to Iraqi hostage-taking and reminds Iraq that it would be liable for "restitution or financial compensation" .
Nov. 8 Iraqi Chief-of-Staff dismissed and allegedly executed.
Nov. 8 US forces in Gulf doubled, Bush explaining on Nov. 9 that this would give USA "offensive capability" .
Nov. 18 Iraq announces freeing of all hostages from Dec. 25 but process begins earlier.
Nov. 19 Iraq mobilizes 250,000 more soldiers so that Iraqi forces in Kuwait and southern Iraq total an estimated 700,000.
Nov. 26 Aziz visits Moscow.
Nov. 28 Syrian-UK diplomatic relations resumed.
Nov. 29 UN resolution 678 authorizes allies "to use all necessary means" to implement UN resolutions on Kuwait if Iraq does not withdraw by Jan. 15, 1991.
Nov. 30 Bush offers to hold direct talks with Iraq to go "the extra mile for peace" .
Dec. 1 Iraqi Revolutionary Command Council accepts Bush proposal for talks but says Arab-Israeli problem must be "at the forefront" of discussions.
Dec. 6 Saddam Hussein orders release of all Western hostages in Iraq and Kuwait.
Dec. 10 Algerian President Chadli initiates Arab mediation effort, but Saudis on Dec. 16 refuse to see him.
Israeli Prime Minister Shamir visits USA.
Dec. 12 Saddam Hussein dismisses Defence Minister.
Dec. 16 Closure of UK embassy in Kuwait, the last still open.
Dec. 18 Bush confirms cancellation of planned Bush-Aziz talks in Washington after controversy over timing of visit.
Dec. 24 Saddam Hussein announces that Israel would be first Iraqi target if war broke out.
Dec. 26 Israel pledges not to attack Iraq without consulting USA.
1991
Jan. 4 EC Foreign Ministers invite Aziz to talks in Luxembourg, but this and an offer on Jan. 9 for talks in Algiers are rejected.
Jan. 6 Saddam Hussein promises "the mother of all battles" if war breaks out.
Jan. 9 Baker-Aziz talks in Geneva.
Jan. 10 Pérez de Cuéllar flies to Baghdad.
Jan. 12 US Congress authorizes use of force against Iraq.
Last US diplomats leave Baghdad; France is only Western country to keep diplomats there.
Jan. 13 Pérez de Cuéllar meets Saddam Hussein before leaving Baghdad.
Jan. 14 Last-minute French peace proposals blocked.
Iraqi National Assembly unanimously supports Saddam Hussein's handling of the crisis and calls for jihad.
Jan. 15 Pérez de Cuéllar's final appeal to prevent "a conflict that none of [the world's]peoples want" .
UN deadline for Iraqi withdrawal from Kuwait expires at midnight New York time.
Jan. 16 Operation Desert Storm begins shortly before midnight GMT.
Jan. 17 First Iraqi Scud missiles hit Israel.
Price of oil falls from US$30 a barrel to $18 on perceptions of overwhelming allied military strength; oil price stands just below $20 at end-January and about $18 at end-February.
Jan. 19 USA airlifts Patriot missiles to Israel.
Jan. 20 First Scuds against Riyadh launched.
Jan. 24 Japan increases contribution to allied war effort at G-7 meeting.
Jan. 25 USA accuses Iraq of pumping oil into the Gulf.
Jan. 26 Widespread peace demonstrations include protests by 200,000 in Bonn, 100,000 in Washington and San Francisco and 50,000 in Paris.
Jan. 27 Iran announces that 12 Iraqi aircraft are being held.
Number reaches 100 by end-January.
Jan. 29 Iraq captures Saudi town of Khafji.
Baker-Bessmertnykh Washington meeting.
French Defence Minister Chevènement resigns.
German contribution to allied war effort increased.
Jan. 31 Allies recapture Khafji.
Feb. 2 Iranian peace initiative presented to Saddam Hussein, whose rejection is made known on Feb. 10.
Feb. 6 Iraq severs diplomatic relations with Egypt, France, Italy, Saudi Arabia, UK and USA.
Feb. 13 At least 300 civilians killed in allied attack on Baghdad bomb shelter.
Feb. 15 Iraq announces that it will withdraw from Kuwait but sets conditions.
Feb. 18 Gorbachev meets Aziz in Moscow and announces peace plan.
Feb. 22 After second meeting with Gorbachev Aziz announces Iraqi acceptance of Soviet plan; but Bush ultimatum demands that Iraq begin troop evacuation of Kuwait by midday on Feb. 23.
Feb. 22-25 Iraq destroys Kuwaiti installations, setting alight oil pumping stations.
Feb. 23 A new, stricter Soviet plan is accepted by Aziz but does not meet terms of Bush's ultimatum.
Feb. 24 Ground offensive begins at 1.00 a.m.
GMT.
Feb. 26 Saddam Hussein announces Iraqi "victory" and start of Iraqi troop withdrawal from Kuwait.
Feb. 26-27 Kuwait City is liberated and Iraqi forces are overwhelmingly defeated.
Feb. 27Iraqi government announces unconditional acceptance of UN resolutions on Kuwait.
Feb. 28 Suspension of allied military operations.
AFRICA
SOUTH AFRICA
President's promise to abolish apartheid
Exactly one year after he announced the unbanning of black opposition groups, President F. W. de Klerk promised at the opening of Parliament on Feb. 1 to scrap all remaining apartheid legislation.
If Parliament adopted the proposals, he said, "the South African statute book will be devoid, within months, of the remnants of racially discriminatory legislation" .
The legislation proposed would repeal the Land Acts of 1913 and 1936 which reserved up to 87 per cent of the country's land for the white minority, the Group Areas Act of 1966 which enforced the racial segregation of communities, the Black Communities Act of 1984 reinforcing the separate status of black townships, and the Population Registration Act of 1950.
The proposed repeal of the Population Registration Act, the legislation under which South African citizens were classified into four racial groups, appeared at first sight to throw into doubt the legitimacy of Parliament as at present constituted.
Hitherto the government had stated that its eventual repeal would have to await the writing of a new constitution extending the political franchise to the black majority.
According to de Klerk, its repeal now appeared possible "provided that this is accompanied by the adoption of temporary transitional measures toward the acceptance of a new constitution" ; Parliament and the existing constitution could thus continue to function by means of temporary legal provisions.
The Minister for Constitutional Development, Gerrit Viljoen, later explained that the racial classification of newborn babies and immigrants would end once the Act was repealed, while other South Africans would retain their classifications pending the eventual constitutional changes.
The proposals were received coolly by the African National Congress (ANC) whose deputy president, Nelson Mandela, warned that the time had not yet come for the lifting of sanctions.
Mandela later rejected de Klerk's offer of a say in government during a transition period, and ANC militants held a street demonstration against the whites-only "apartheid parliament" while de Klerk was speaking.
There were renewed fears of a "white backlash" of right-wing and Afrikaner extremist hostility.
Members of the official opposition Conservative Party walked out en masse during de Klerk's speech, the party's leader, Andries Treurnicht, complaining that the proposals struck at the roots of white community life.
It appeared unlikely, however, that de Klerk would have difficulty steering the proposed legislation through the Parliament, where the ruling National Party together with the pro-reform Democratic Party controlled almost three-quarters of the seats.
European and US reactions
There was swift and, as expected, divided international reaction to de Klerk's speech.
The European Communities (EC) Commissioner responsible for external affairs, Frans Andriessen, responding immediately, stated on Feb. 1 that the initiatives would allow the EC to ease further the sanctions which its members adopted in 1986 [see p. 37910].
Despite this stance and the pressure from the United Kingdom Foreign and Commonwealth Secretary Douglas Hurd to respond positively to de Klerk's announcement, however, EC Foreign Ministers decided in Brussels on Feb. 4 not to ease sanctions until "legislative action was taken" in South Africa, apparently meaning that they would do so as soon as the legislation was tabled.
De Klerk's speech was also welcomed in the United States but with markedly less enthusiasm for an early end to sanctions.
A US State Department spokesman referred to de Klerk's "courageous statesmanship" but called for the release of all political prisoners.
Any attempt by the administration to bring about a comprehensive lifting of sanctions before all US conditions were met had long been expected to meet strong opposition in Congress.
Detecting a weakening of international resolve on sanctions, Mandela responded angrily to the Western countries' positions.
In a speech in Johannesburg on Feb. 8, he warned that the ANC would organize a wave of "mass action" , aimed at making investment impossible, should the EC or the USA lift sanctions.
The EC, he said, had made "a very serious mistake" and an "error of judgement" in announcing its decision before consulting the ANC.
Leaders of southern Africa's seven "frontline" states met in Harare, the Zimbabwean capital, on Feb. 7, together with representatives from the Organization of African Unity's 18-country ad hoc committee on southern Africa.
They gave the de Klerk proposals a cautious welcome but called for sanctions to remain strictly in force until all arrangements were in place for a new constitution and democratic elections.
Mandela and the president of the Pan Africanist Congress (PAC), Clarence Makwetu, attended.
Commonwealth position
The nine-country Commonwealth Committee on South Africa met in London on Feb. 16 and decided to maintain all Commonwealth trade, financial and sporting sanctions pending the adoption of concrete steps by Pretoria to end apartheid.
Ministers from Australia, Canada, Guyana, India, Malaysia, Nigeria, Tanzania, Zambia and Zimbabwe attended.
They agreed to meet again in New Delhi on April 30 to consider an "appropriate response" depending on what progress the promised legislation had made.
UK Prime Minister John Major and his Australian counterpart, Bob Hawke, were said to have agreed to try to win other Commonwealth leaders round to accepting a process of dismantling sanctions.
Australia, New Zealand and the UK had advocated an end to sports sanctions, but the committee stated that "the Commonwealth should continue to be guided in this respect by the views of representative non-racial sporting organizations" .
Major was understood to want to prevent the Commonwealth Conference in Harare in October from being dominated once more by the sanctions issue.
ANC-government relations
Negotiations between the government and the ANC on constitutional reform, deadlocked for six months, finally seemed set to move ahead after a compromise was reached on Feb. 12 at a 12-hour meeting in Cape Town between delegations led respectively by de Klerk and Mandela.
Against the background of the trial of Nelson Mandela's wife Winnie on charges of kidnapping and assault [see below], the deadlock appeared to threaten relations between the government and the ANC.
Misunderstanding had arisen over the "Pretoria Minute" , summarising agreements reached in talks in August 1990 [see p. 37642]when the ANC agreed to suspend its 30-year policy of armed struggle "and related activities" .
The government insisted that this meant that the ANC should also end recruitment and training, but the ANC asserted that it had the right to recruit inside South Africa for training abroad.
Settlement of the disagreement was only announced on Feb. 15 after it had been ratified by the Cabinet and the ANC executive committee.
The most significant aspect of the new agreement was the ANC's commitment to end infiltration into the country by armed guerrillas.
It was agreed that there would be no armed attacks, infiltration of men and material, creation of underground structures, statements inciting violence, threats of armed action or training inside the country by the ANC.
De Klerk was quoted as saying that the agreement had cleared the way for negotiations, but he emphasized the government line that "mere suspension of the armed struggle" by the ANC or its armed wing, Umkhonto we Sizwe, was insufficient.
The ANC's chief spokesman, Pallo Jordan, said that the ANC welcomed the agreement and would observe it to the letter.
De Klerk said that the ANC's concessions were linked to further releases of political prisoners and the right of exiled dissidents to return.
The ANC had claimed that there were more than 3,000 political prisoners and some 40,000 dissidents in exile.
Viljoen was quoted as saying on Radio South Africa on Feb. 5 that there was no reason why a deadline of April 30 for the release of political detainees and the return of exiles could not be met.
According to the Minister of Law and Order, Adriaan Vlok, the question of stockpiled AK-47 rifles, mines and other weapons had not been cleared up, and a process of "achieving control" over these weapons would be started.
Relations between black organizations
The Pan-Africanist Congress (PAC) condemned the ANC's agreement with the government.
Its secretary-general, Benny Alexander, said on Feb. 18 that the organization remained "committed to the armed struggle" , adding: "Neither the ANC nor the regime has the right to prescribe the method used by the broad liberation movements.
They bind themselves only."
The PAC's condemnation came only two weeks after a meeting between delegations led respectively by Makwetu and Mandela, the first formal contact between the two movements for 30 years.
The meeting had ended in agreement to establish a permanent liaison committee.
As regards the ANC's relation with the Zulu-based Inkatha movement, the peace agreement signed after five years of sporadic violence in Durban on Jan. 29 [see p. 37951-52]was tested in renewed bloody confrontations in the succeeding two weeks, in which as many as 40 people were believed to have been killed.
Ten people were killed and perhaps 60 wounded on Jan. 31, at Umgababa, in Natal.
The massacre of 17 Inkatha members in a roadside ambush in Natal on Feb. 10, which a local Inkatha official blamed on ANC supporters, was followed by the signature of a joint statement on Feb. 11 by Mandela and the chairman of the Inkatha Freedom Party, Frank Mdlalose, pledging to work for "peace and political tolerance among our people" , and to "uncover the roots of these acts of violence" .
The agreement was expected to be further threatened by the murder on Feb. 25 of Chief Mhlabunzima Maphumulo, a pro-ANC traditional Zulu leader and rival of the Inkatha leader Chief Mangosuthu Buthelezi, which the ANC promptly blamed on "death squads who are defending apartheid" .
Following violence between ANC and Azanian People's Organization (AZAPO) militants in the township of Bekkersdal, west of Johannesburg, where at least 11 people died in the first week of February, there was a joint peace appeal by the four main black political organisations.
Winnie Mandela led an ANC delegation at a peace rally in the Bekkersdal stadium, which was also addressed by senior PAC and Inkatha leaders.
Trial of Winnie Mandela
Winnie Mandela appeared before the Rand Supreme Court on Feb. 4 to face trial with three others on eight charges of kidnapping and assault in connection with the alleged abduction of four youths in December 1988.
The prosecution claimed that the four had been brought from a manse in Soweto to her house, and one of her bodyguards had already been sentenced to death for the murder of one of them, "Stompie" Moeketsi Seipei [see p. 37441].
She pleaded not guilty to all the charges.
The proceedings attracted great media and public interest.
The support given to Winnie Mandela by her husband, and by other leading ANC figures, received prominent coverage.
Another subject of much speculative comment was the disappearance of four of the seven original co-accused, who were key witnesses and whose absence threatened the prosecution case.
The judge ruled on day two that charges would not be quashed despite defence claims of inadequate evidence, ordering the state prosecution to prepare a more detailed indictment, and ordering an adjournment until Feb. 11.
When the court reconvened, it was told that a key prosecution witness, Gabriel Mekgwe, had been kidnapped the night before, forcing a further adjournment.
In the increasingly murky circumstances surrounding the trial, two senior Conservative Party officials were subpoenaed on Feb. 19 to appear before a magistrate after refusing to disclose the sources of their allegation that Mekgwe had been kidnapped by the state intelligence service.
The Johannesburg Sunday Times had meanwhile disclosed on Feb. 10 that one of the co-accused who had been missing the day the trial opened, Katiza Cebekhulu, had actually been seen, and duly photographed by the newspaper, among the crowd on the Supreme Court steps, apparently unconcerned by the heavy police presence.
When two of the alleged victims, Kenneth Kgase and Barend Mono, were produced in court on Feb. 13, they refused to testify, stating that they feared for their lives.
The judge then adjourned the trial until March 6, to allow police time to trace Mekgwe.
It was later reported that South Africa had applied to the Botswana government on Feb. 22 for the extradition of the other three missing co-defendants.
Renewed fears of "hit squad" activities
The ANC demanded "total and verifiable" evidence that hit squad activities had been stopped after a prominent black lawyer was killed on Feb. 15 by a booby-trapped tape-recorder posted to his Soweto home.
The victim, Bheki Mlangeni, had been engaged in investigations into the activities of police "death squads" [see p. 37952]and the much-criticized Civil Co-operation Bureau (CCB) of the South African Defence Force, which, it had been alleged, was formed to eliminate anti-government activists.
The bomb was apparently addressed originally to Dirk Coetzee, a South African former police captain then living in Lusaka, Zambia.
Coetzee was quoted as telling the Johannesburg Sunday Times that he had refused to accept the parcel, in October 1990, because of the duty he was asked to pay.
Coetzee reportedly stated that the sender's name was written on the parcel as "Bheki" .
In the following days, the opposition Conservative Party and the Democratic Party, joined by sections of the press, called on de Klerk to dismiss Defence Minister Gen. Magnus Malan over the findings of an Auditor General's report on the CCB's finances.
In November 1990 the Harms Commission, set up by the government to investigate allegations of political murders, had recommended an investigation of allegations that the CCB was implicated in assassinations of ANC activists.
Future status of Ciskei
Two weeks after army officers failed in an attempt to overthrow him [see p. 37952], the Ciskei's military ruler, Brig.
Joshua Oupo Gqozo, survived a further attempted coup.
Junior officers were reported to have fought a gun battle on Feb. 9 with the former army chief, Andrew Jamangile, and three other officers, later arrested.
The Ciskei leadership had accused Chris Hani, chief of staff of Umkhonto we Sizwe, of organizing the Jan. 26 attempt.
On Feb. 27 the Ciskei took what Gqozo called "the first step to reincorporation into a new, non-racial South Africa" .
Under an agreement signed by Gqozo and South African Foreign Minister Roelof "Pik" Botha, the South African government was to take over the key ministries of economic affairs, finance and justice and a fourth ministry concerned with agriculture, public works and transport.
The Ciskei thus appeared on the point of disappearing as a separate state, amid speculation that other homelands might follow suit.
Gqozo later issued a decree amending the homeland's constitution to allow sovereignty to be relinquished.
ANGOLA
Collapse of peace talks
Optimism surrounding a peace plan worked out in January by Soviet, Portuguese and US diplomats faded when the sixth round of talks, postponed from Jan. 28 and rescheduled for Feb. 6-8 in Lisbon, failed to take place.
Both sides in the 15-year civil war, the Popular Movement for the Liberation of Angola (MPLA) government and the United States-backed National Union for Total Independence of Angola (UNITA), blamed the other, and no date appeared to have been set for a resumption.
A Portuguese Foreign Ministry official said in Lisbon on Feb. 7 that talks could start the following day but would only begin when both sides were prepared to initial documents already on the table.
A feverish round of consultations ensued among the Portuguese mediating team, the Soviet and US observers, and the MPLA and UNITA delegations.
Lopo do Nascimento, the head of the Angolan government delegation, was quoted as saying that the three political and military documents would be initialled "if a date for the signing of a ceasefire is established" .
UNITA's spokesman, Norberto de Castro, insisted that his organisation was ready to initial the documents, which would have established the framework for a ceasefire and the transition to a pluralist democracy.
It then transpired that a date, April 15, 1991, had been accepted by both sides, but that the MPLA delegation was objecting to UNITA's insistence on adding the condition that April 15, 1992, be accepted as a firm date for multiparty general elections.
In a news conference reported on Portuguese radio on April 9, UNITA vice-president Jeremias Chitunda said that resolution of the conflict was contingent on the signing of a ceasefire agreement and the holding of free, fair and internationally monitored elections which, he said, "make up an indivisible component of the process that will lead to lasting peace and national reconciliation in Angola" .
For his part, do Nascimento said on Angolan radio the same day that acceptance of a ceasefire was linked to the setting of a date for elections.
 "By April 15, we should have resolved all these issues: the date for elections, the establishment of a single army, the approval of laws." 
With a new intensification of the civil war threatening, it was reported that the mediators were to meet again on March 4.
MOZAMBIQUE
Further disputes over ceasefire
Talks in Rome were reported on Feb. 1 to have been broken off at the end of January by the South African-backed rebel Mozambique National Resistance (MNR or Renamo) which accused the government of violating the ceasefire agreement signed on Dec. 1.
MNR officials disputed the government side's assertion that all Zimbabwean troops were confined to the immediate area of the Beira and Limpopo corridors, a key provision of the Dec. 1 Rome agreement [see p. 37909].
Claiming that Zimbabweans in Mozambican uniforms were operating in 52 other places (in seven of Mozambique's 11 provinces), the MNR complained of an alleged lack of impartiality on the part of the international Joint Verification Commission (JVC) set up to monitor the Rome agreement.
A JVC report, presented at the talks by its chairman, Italy's ambassador in Mozambique, Manfredo di Camerana, said that the Commission could confirm eight out of 14 reported ceasefire violations up to Jan. 10, adding that the MNR was probably responsible for at least six.
Radio Mozambique on Feb. 21 reported Di Camerana as saying that after investigation of some sites mentioned by MNR, its military experts had found no evidence of a Zimbabwean presence.
An MNR spokesman in Nairobi, Joaquim Vaz, announced on Feb. 21 that the movement intended to restart attacks on the Beira and Limpopo corridors, on the grounds that Zimbabwean troops were still stationed in other areas of the country.
However, the MNR failed to produce any evidence to support its claim.
The JVC met in Maputo on Feb. 21 and, according to Radio Mozambique, was shocked by Vaz's announcement, although di Camerana stated that Zimbabwean troops had been found at Chimoio airport during January, in violation of the agreement.
On Feb. 23 the leader of the government delegation to the Rome talks, Transport and Communications Minister Armando Guebuza, was reported as saying that the MNR's reading of the Rome agreement differed from that of the government's.
The MNR did not regard certain areas as part of the Beira corridor, he said, whereas the government approved the JVC's definition of a corridor as "a continual strip of land between two known points" .
(At the talks the MNR had said that cities should be excluded from the corridors and remain at war.)
In a broadcast on the same day Foreign Affairs Minister Pascoal Mocumbi denied that there had been violations, and accused the MNR of contradicting itself.
The ceasefire agreement nevertheless appeared to be holding in the corridors, at least up to the final week of February, and there had still been no reports of any serious breaches of the Rome agreement.
With an estimated 250,000 refugees from more dangerous parts of Mozambique living in makeshift villages along the protected corridors, the greatest threat appeared to come from the increasingly desperate shortage of food, following the failure of the rains.
Elsewhere in the country, the MNR was reported to have stepped up its attacks, killing 45 people, mostly Mozambican troops and Zimbabwean lorry drivers, in an attack on a protected convoy on the Tete highway on Feb. 11.
The convoy was reportedly carrying Zimbabwean maize for Mozambican refugees in Malawi.
The route had been reopened two weeks previously following an attack in January when two people were killed.
AFRICA
ZAIRE
Amnesty decree
President Mobutu Sese Seko signed a decree on Feb. 10 granting amnesty to Zaïrean exiles who had been accused of threatening state security through speech, writing or in any other manner; it also covered those who had been removed from official posts or banned by the government from involvement in civic and political life.
The offer was conditional on the exiles returning to the country by Dec. 31, 1991.
Imprisonment of journalist
The Association of Printing Employers (APEP) on Feb. 20 asked for the release of N'Sasse Ramazani, a regional director of the journal Elima, imprisoned two weeks previously for contempt of court, having written an article against corruption.
AFRICA
RWANDA
Cabinet reshuffle
President Juvénal Habyarimana announced on Feb. 4 a Cabinet reshuffle which featured new Defence, Interior and Justice Ministers, and which according official sources reflected concern about rebel activity.
Lt.-Col. Augustin Ndindiliyimana, hitherto Minister for Transport and Communications, was appointed to the new post of Minister in the Presidency responsible for Defence (the Defence portfolio had been held hitherto by Habyarimana).
Faustin Myunyazesa replaced Jean-Marie Mugemana as Interior and Community Development Minister, and Sylvestre Nsanzimana replaced Theoneste Muryanama as Justice Minister.
Other new appointees were Enoch Ruhigira to the new post of Minister in the Presidency responsible for Public Service; Hildesonse Hijaniro to Transport and Communications; François Xavier Nsengumuremyi as Health Minister; and Constantin Cubahiro as Higher Education and Scientific Research Minister, taking over from Charles Nyandwi, who became Civil Service and Professional Training Minister.
A notable casualty of the reshuffle was the Minister for Institutional Relations, Antoine Ntashamaje, who was dismissed apparently because his son had been linked to the rebel activity.
No replacement was announced.
Agreement on ceasefire
President Ali Hassan Mwinyi of Tanzania hosted talks held in Zanzibar between Habyarimana and Ugandan President Yoweri Museveni on Feb. 17.
The talks resulted in Habyarimana agreeing to observe an immediate ceasefire in the fighting against the Uganda-based rebel forces of the Rwandan Patriotic Front (FPR), in return for Museveni's promise that he would undertake to "persuade" the FPR to reciprocate and respect a ceasefire.
The FPR's latest unsuccessful incursion into Rwandan territory had been in late January [see p. 37950-51].
The two leaders also agreed to accelerate the process of peace dialogues, and to restore "harmony, brotherhood, and good neighbourliness between the two countries especially along their common border" .
They welcomed the forthcoming regional conference on the problem of an estimated 500,000 Rwandan refugees displaced in neighbouring countries due to ethnic violence.
The regional conference was held in Dar es Salaam, the capital of Tanzania, on Feb. 19 and was attended by the Presidents of Rwanda, Uganda, Zaïre, Burundi, Kenya and Tanzania.
The main agreements included a comprehensive general amnesty offered by the Rwandan government to all refugees which, subsequent to a ceasefire, would be extended to all those who had allegedly committed acts against the state.
The conference also called on the Organization of African Unity (OAU) and the UN High Commissioner for Refugees (UNHCR) to convene a conference with prospective donor countries to formulate an aid plan which would assist in the social and economic integration of refugees who chose to return to Rwanda and of those seeking naturalized status in their present country of residence.
AFRICA
BURUNDI
Cabinet reshuffle — Referendum
President Pierre Buyoya reshuffled his Council of Ministers on Feb. 12, appointing six new ministers, moving five others and creating two new ministries.
The changes were viewed as an attempt to the heal the bitter rift between the politically dominant Tutsi and the more numerous Hutu population, which in 1988 had led to 5,000 civilians being killed in ethnic violence [see pp. 36328-29; 37056-57].
Twelve members of the cabinet were now Hutus, including Prime Minster Adrien Sibomana, Finance Minister Gerard Niyibigira, and the first Hutu head of public security, Laurent Kagimbi (Secretary of State in the Ministry of Interior and Development of Local Collectives in charge of Public Security).
Buyoya retained the Defence portfolio.
Adrien SibomanaPrime Minister Cyprien MbonimpaExternal Relations and Co-operation Jumaine HusseinAgriculture and Animal Husbandry Gabriel ToyiRural Development and Handicrafts
Burundi Council of Ministers
*Louis NduwimanaLand Use, Tourism and Environment
*Libere BararunyeretseInterior
*Sebastien NtahugaJustice
**Gilbert MidendeHigher Education and Scientific Research Gamariel NdaruzaniyePrimary and Secondary Education
**Adolphe NahayoHandicrafts; Professional Training; Youth*** Gerard NiyibigiraFinance
*Astere GirukwigombaCommerce and Industry
*Bonaventure BangurambonaEnergy and Mines Evariste SimbarakiyePublic Works and Urban Planning Lt.-Col. Simon RusukuTransport, Posts and Telecommunications
**Julie NgiriyeLabour and Social Security***
**Charles KarikurubuCivil Service
*Victoire NdikumanaWomen's Advancement and Social Protection Norbert NgendabanyikwaPublic Health
**Frederick NgenzebuhoroCommunication; Culture; Sports*** Salvator SahinguvuSecretary of State for Planning in the Prime Minister's Office Fridolin HatungimanaSecretary of State for Economic Planning
*Laurent KagimbiSecretary of State in the Ministry of Interior and Development of Local Collectives in charge of Public Security***
*New appointment.
**Reshuffled.
***New or reconstituted portfolio.
Referendum endorsement of National Unity Charter
Buyoya signed a decree on Feb. 9 establishing a National Unity Charter which had been overwhelmingly endorsed by voters in a referendum held on Feb. 5.
The official results showed that of the 2,186,567 people eligible to vote, 2,103,938 (96.22 per cent) had done so.
Of these, 1,876,957 (89.21 per cent) had voted for the charter and 213,817 (10.16 per cent ) against.
LIBERIA
Formal signing of ceasefire monitoring agreement
The ceasefire signed by the Liberian factions in Bamako in November 1990 and reaffirmed in Banjul in December, continued to hold throughout January and February.
At two days of talks convened in Lomé on Feb. 12-13 by the Economic Community of West African States (ECOWAS) mediation group, the factions signed their agreement to a detailed plan for monitoring the ceasefire, and agreed to hold a national conference in March with a view to establishing a transitional government.
The document, drawn up by the ECOWAS mediation committee chaired by Oumar Sey, Foreign Affairs Minister of The Gambia, was signed by Charles Taylor, leader of the National Patriotic Front of Liberia (NPFL), the rival Independent National Patriotic Front of Liberia (INPFL) leader Prince Yormie Johnson, and Gen. Hezekiah Bowen, leader of the Armed Forces of Liberia (AFL), constituted from the rump of former President Doe's pre-civil war national army.
It was reported that the final signing had been held up over successive objections raised by Taylor, and that he eventually signed only under pressure from Capt. Blaise Compaore, the head of state of Burkina, a country which, according to some reports, had previously been an important source of arms supplies to Taylor's faction.
Role of ECOMOG
The Liberian crisis, which had caused an estimated 700,000 refugees to flee into Côte d'Ivoire, Guinea and Sierra Leone in the previous 16 months, continued to preoccupy leaders of the 16 members of ECOWAS, concerned for the stability of their region.
The ECOWAS Monitoring Group (ECOMOG), the 10,000 strong Nigerian-led peacekeeping force, seemed to be succeeding in holding the factions in the areas they occupied in November.
The February agreement gave ECOMOG the additional task of disarming the factions.
Under a plan to which all factions had consented, the AFL troops were to assemble at the Barclay Training Centre and Camp Schiefflin, in Monrovia, the Liberian capital.
The INPFL forces were to remain at their Caldwell base.
Taylor's men were to hand in their weapons at the NPFL bases at Firestone, Naama, Salala, Ganta, Gbarnga, Zwedru, and Toedi-Mesurado.
In addition to supervising the handing in of weapons, ECOMOG units were to register troops, and receive the sick and wounded, with a view to beginning the process of rehabilitation.
It was unclear what the future role of the ECOWAS-installed interim Government of National Unity headed by Professor Amos Sawyer was to be.
NPFL leader's protests
Taylor, who had proved the most obdurate of the faction leaders at all stages of the ceasefire negotiations, was reported to feel angry and cheated over the Lomé agreement.
According to one report, he told a group of journalists that he believed he ought to have been given the interim presidency.
Leaders of some ECOWAS member countries were reported to have agreed privately that ECOMOG forces would be ordered on to the offensive should Taylor's group renege on the agreement.
Taylor was reported to have protested at the arrival in Monrovia in mid-February of 10 Nigerian air force fighter planes, and to have warned that he would continue to oppose Sawyer's interim government and the presence of ECOMOG.
Taylor had earlier alleged that Sierra Leone had allowed Sawyer's government to send some 6,000-8,000 men for military training at two camps there.
As of late February Monrovia was said to be calm, with emergency food and other supplies flowing in, and some shops reopening, although relief agencies emphasised that people were still dying from starvation.
CAPE VERDE
Election of new President
The incumbent President, Arístides Maria Pereira, was defeated in the islands' first free presidential elections on Feb. 17.
In a turnout unofficially set at 59 per cent of the approximately 165,000 registered voters, Antonio Mascarenhas Monteiro, a former Supreme Court judge, obtained 73.5 per cent of the votes, while Pereira gained only 26.5 per cent.
Pereira's defeat had been widely predicted following the rout of his nominally Marxist African Party for the Independence of Cape Verde (PAICV) in the first multiparty legislative elections, on Jan. 13, when Monteiro's Movement for Democracy (MPD) won 56 of the 79 seats in the National People's Assembly [see p. 37948].
Monteiro, 47, had resigned from the PAICV in 1971.
His government was expected to start work without delay on a new constitution enshrining a pluralist democratic system.
Pereira, who conceded defeat on Feb. 18, had been President since independence from Portugal in 1975, and was a generally respected figure.
An erstwhile guerrilla in the campaign against Portuguese rule in mainland Guinea-Bissau, his regime had not been tarnished by corruption or human rights abuses.
AFRICA
MALI
Growing pressure for political reforms
The anti-government mood in the streets of Bamako, the capital, and other main towns, which erupted into rioting in January [see p. 37947], persisted into February, amid continuing demands from opposition groups for multiparty democracy.
On Jan. 31 state television announced that all but 34 of the 232 people arrested on Jan. 21 and 22 had been freed.
Two days earlier the human rights organization Amnesty International had reported on the conditions under which the detainees were held, and on allegations of torture.
A number of pro-democracy and student organizations held a lengthy meeting with Gen. Sekou Ly, the new Interior Minister, on Feb. 21, as troops with armoured vehicles patrolled the capital.
Apparent first signs of a crack in establishment resolve occurred on Feb. 19 when Djibril Diallo, political secretary of the ruling Mali People's Democratic Union (UDPM) and the number two in the party, spoke in a broadcast interview in favour of a change to multiparty democracy.
It was reported that an extraordinary UDPM congress set for March 28-31 would discuss the transition to a multiparty system.
THE GAMBIA
Amnesty for political prisoners
President Dawda Jawara pardoned 35 prisoners in an amnesty allowed him by the Gambian Constitution, to mark the 26th anniversary of independence on Feb. 18.
Among those who were released, 19 of them serving life sentences, was a prominent lawyer, Pap Cheyassin Secka, who was among those found guilty of complicity in the abortive coup of 1981 and had initially been sentenced to death [see pp. 31165-66; 31684; 32957].
The latest releases meant that all those convicted in connection with the 1981 plot were now free.
The leader of the coup attempt, Kukoi Samba Sanyang, was thought to be living in Burkina.
KENYA
Formation of opposition party
In a direct challenge to a December 1990 vote by the ruling Kenya African National Union (KANU) to retain the one-party system [see p. 37908], the veteran opposition leader Oginga Odinga announced on Feb. 13 that he was forming the National Democratic Party (NDP).
Odinga, who resigned as Kenya's Vice-President in 1966, told a press conference that the NDP would seek formal registration and the repeal of provisions in the national Constitution setting up the single party state.
An associate of Odinga, Luke Obok, was reported to have been arrested on Feb. 23 and charged with possessing seditious literature.
Copies of three magazines which reported the formation of the NDP were seized on Feb. 28.
AFRICA
SUDAN
Criticism of famine relief operation — Regional reorganization
The Sudanese government was criticized in February by the United Kingdom Minister for Overseas Development, Lynda Chalker, and by the European Communities (EC) for its handling of the crisis in food supplies.
On Jan. 25 it had been announced that 50,000 tonnes of cereals supplied as famine relief by the EC would be distributed in Sudan through Danish and UK relief agencies.
Returning from a visit to East Africa in the first week of February, Chalker announced that the UK would send a further 20,000 tonnes of food, worth £4,000,000 (US$7,800,000), in response to an appeal from the UN World Food Programme.
Chalker said, however, that the Sudanese government was evading its responsibilities in the organization of the relief operation.
No one in the Sudanese government had been willing to meet her, she said, and the Sudanese government had not responded to approaches made by the UK ambassador to Sudan, Allan Ramsay, in his capacity of chairman of the group of west European donor countries in Khartoum.
Sudanese Information Minister Abdullah Mohamed Ahmed issued a statement on Feb. 6 rejecting Chalker's accusations as an "unjustified attack" .
He denied that the Sudanese government was concealing widespread famine from the public, and also said that the Sudanese Foreign Minister had in fact held several meetings with Sir Allan.
The EC issued a statement on Feb. 7 saying that its member states were "shocked and dismayed at the government of Sudan's continued failure…to co-operate with donors and non-governmental organizations in implementing measures to ensure that emergency supplies reach the needy populations in time" .
UN officials had estimated that 7,000,000 Sudanese were threatened with starvation before the end of February.
The Sudanese media reported on Feb. 13 a speech by the Chairman of the ruling Revolutionary Command Council (RCC), Lt-Gen.
Omar Hassan Ahmad al-Bashir, at a rally in central Sudan, in which he criticized foreign relief organizations for "defaming Sudan by begging on behalf of the Sudanese people" .
Sudan, he said, would "free itself from dependence on relief supplies and achieve self-sufficiency in food production in a year or two" .
Regional re-organization — Ruling on Islamic law
Bashir signed on Feb. 8 decree, passed by the RCC four days earlier, dividing Sudan into nine states, subdivided into 66 provinces and 281 local government areas.
New state governments would be responsible for local administration and some tax collection, with central government retaining control over foreign policy, military affairs, trade, the economy and other key sectors.
The new states were Khartoum, Central, Kordofan, Darfur, Northern, Eastern, Bahr al-Ghazal, Upper Nile and Equatoria (the last three being southern states, with majority non-Moslem populations).
With the exception of Khartoum (previously a province) they had all previously been regions.
On Feb. 8 the former regional governors were reappointed governors of the corresponding states, except in the cases of Equatoria and Khartoum.
The new state governments each consisted of a governor, deputy governor and a cabinet of ministers.
This regional reorganization was presented by the military government as a devolution of power away from the centre and as therefore a move towards resolving the conflict between the predominantly Moslem north and the largely non-Moslem south.
In the south, the Sudan People's Liberation Army (SPLA) had since its emergence in 1983 demanded the abolition of Islamic sharia law and the restoration of regional autonomy [see p.33010; for collapse of talks between RCC and SPLA in August and December 1989 see pp. 36886; 37114].
A decree signed by Bashir on Feb. 1 introduced a new penal code based, as was the previous one, on sharia law, which was to come into effect on March 22, but which did not apply to the three southern regions (now states) "for the time being, pending the establishment of elected assemblies there to deal with the issue" (an official information document as quoted in the Middle East Economic Digest of Feb. 15).
Col. Mohammad al-Amin Khalifah, an RCC member, visiting the Equatoria region in January, had said that the "federal system" would allow for the greater religious freedom.
Visiting the Upper Nile state on Feb. 21 he again referred to the exclusion of the southern states from sharia law and said that citizens had shown their support for the "new political system and transference of powers to the people" .
An SPLA spokesman was quoted, however, in a Radio SPLA broadcast of Feb. 2 as rejecting as "unrealistic" a government peace plan which offered a "devolution of power" as its major concession.
On Feb. 18 a SPLA spokesman was quoted on the same station as saying that the governors of the three southern states, although non-Moslems, would merely be "figureheads" , as all three deputy governors were Moslems and retained responsibility for finance, commerce, supply and co-operatives.
 "The NIF [the fundamentalist National Islamic Front, officially banned but regarded as strongly influencing the RCC]meaning of federalism is very clear: it is to promote Arabism and Islam in the south." 
AFRICA
DJIBOUTI
Defence agreements with France
Two draft agreements signed on Feb. 12 gave French forces responsibility for the surveillance of air and maritime traffic, including civilian traffic.
The agreements were a response to the Gulf crisis and the consequent use of Djibouti as a training ground for French helicopter crews.
They extended the treaty signed in 1977 upon independence, under which France guaranteed the country's external security and was allowed to maintain military bases there.
Detentions of Afars following coup attempt
Between 20 and 60 people were said to remain in detention following what was described as a failed coup attempt on Jan. 8-9 by Afar politician Ali Aref Bourhan.
Further incidents in late January also involved members of the minority Afar community.
On 17 Feb. the government agreed to an inquiry by Amnesty International into the conditions of imprisonment of 35 detainees, including Ali Aref.
AFRICA
MADAGASCAR
Cabinet changes
Gen. Christopher Raveloson-Mahasampo, the brother-in-law of President Didier Ratsiraka and a former chief of the political police, resigned as Defence Minister on Feb. 18 and was replaced by Gen. Evariste Razafitumb.
The Minister of Agricultural Production, José Michel Andrianoélison, also resigned.
A close associate of the President, he had nevertheless distanced himself from the ruling party, the Vanguard of the Malagasy Revolution (AREMA).
AFRICA
ETHIOPIA
Peace talks
Peace talks between the Ethiopian government and the Eritrean People's Liberation Front (EPLF) were held in Washington on Feb. 21-22.
The Ethiopian government offered "broader autonomy" for Eritrea, "tantamount to a federal structure" , according to Vice-Minister of Information Merid Bekele.
He said that the EPLF had continued to demand a referendum on independence.
Deputy Prime Minister Ashagre Yigletu, the Ethiopian government delegate, had on the eve of negotiations denied press reports that his government was prepared to offer Eritrea federal status to be followed by a referendum on independence.
A solution involving the secession of Eritrea, he said, "would not only bring a great deal of difficulty to Ethiopia, but also to a large number of other countries in similar positions" .
An EPLF representative in Washington, Tesfai Ghermazien, had meanwhile said that a "major breakthrough" might be possible if the Ethiopian government were to offer a referendum on independence for Eritrea.
The talks were chaired by United States Assistant Secretary of State for African Affairs, Herman Cohen.
It was the first time that the USA had officially sponsored negotiations between the two sides, although talks mediated by former US President Jimmy Carter had been held in September and November 1989 [see pp. 36886-87; 37034-35.].
According to US officials cited in the press, the Soviet Union had also pressed the Ethiopian government to negotiate.
A US State Department statement at the end of the meeting said that significant differences remained between the two sides, but they had agreed on the importance of ending the war peacefully.
The statement added: "Both sides agreed on the importance of continued relief activities and other humanitarian confidence-building measures." 
Fresh grants of aid
It was reported on Feb. 6 that World Bank project lending to Ethiopia would be increased from approximately US$100,000,000 to $125,000,000, in the form of a long-term, low-interest loan from the International Development Association.
The European Communities (EC) announced grant aid for Ethiopia worth $387,000,000 over the next five years, to be directed towards rural development and small-scale industry and agriculture, with the emphasis on the private sector.
AMERICAS
UNITED STATES
Presentation of 1992 budget
President George Bush presented to Congress on Feb. 4 a $1,445,900 million budget request for the fiscal year 1992 (beginning Oct. 1, 1991).
This represented a modest rise of 2.9 per cent in total federal spending and was predicted to result in a cut of 1.5 per cent in real terms (after adjustment for inflation).
Budget Director Richard Darman stated that the budget was "reformist" in intention, its main thrust being to shift "mandatory" federal spending away from the middle class towards the poor.
The budget's prediction that the current economic recession would be short-lived, and that the economy would soon show signs of growth, was widely doubted especially in the light of the latest unemployment figures and economic indicators [see below].
According to the administration's budget proposals, the budget deficit would reach a record $318,100 million in fiscal 1991 but drop to $280,900 million in fiscal 1992, based on an estimated 5.7 per cent rise in revenues to $1,165,000 million.
Darman stated that the size of the 1991 deficit reflected (i) an increase of $105,500 million in estimated outlays to help pay off debts resulting from the collapse of savings and loans institutions, or "thrifts" [see pp. 36843; 37412]; and (ii) a decline of $87,000 million in estimated receipts resulting from a weaker than expected economy.
The administration's fiscal 1991 and fiscal 1992 deficit totals both excluded the costs of US military deployment and operations in the Gulf, which were to be the subject of a separate submission to Congress later in the month.
Such costs, budgeted so far at $15,000 million, were expected to be offset by pledges of $51,000 million from US allies [for details of defence budget see budget headings below].
The budget proposed increases of $17,800 million in 250 federal programmes (including drug prevention, space exploration, education, research and development and highway construction), but reductions in spending of $8,300 million on 109 others (including subsidies on urban mass transport and Amtrak, the public railway system — see below under transport proposals) and outright termination of 238 programmes at an estimated saving of $4,600 million (including public housing construction and student financial aid programmes — see below).
The control of 11 federal programmes totalling an estimated $15,000 million was to be passed over to individual states in order to encourage "flexible" spending.
In general, taxes remained largely unchanged, although the budget revived proposals for phasing in by 1993 a sliding-scale reduction in capital gains tax on long-term investment, according to the period for which the investment had been made.
(Bush had been forced by Congressional pressure to abandon his controversial proposals to reduce capital gains tax in 1990 — see p. 37036.)
Minor tax adjustments allowed for the creation of special family savings accounts, based on small deposits limited to $2,500, which, if held for more than seven years, would produce tax-free interest.
Details of budget proposals
Defence
The 1992 defence budget, contained within the administration's overall budget submission, called for spending of US$295,500 million, i.e. $3,700 million less than in fiscal 1991.
Increased spending was requested for major strategic weapons systems, including increases of $2,900 million for SSN-21 nuclear powered submarines, $1,600 million for the previously beleaguered anti-missile Strategic Defence Initiative (SDI), and $4,800 million for four more B-2 "stealth" bombers.
The last two projects were expected to meet stiff congressional resistance.
In addition the navy was to receive a new aircraft carrier and the army and air force would get the LH helicopter and an advanced tactical fighter aircraft, among a new generation of high technology systems expected to be partly financed by the termination of many existing systems.
Programmes to be cancelled or phased out (subject to post-Gulf war evaluation) included the navy's F-14D fighter aircraft and Trident submarine, the airforce's Maverick missile and F-15E and F-16 fighter aircraft and the army's M-1 tank, Apache helicopter and Bradley fighting vehicle; the remaining two US battleships, Missouri and Wisconsin, were both set to be decommissioned in September 1991.
Other modernization and development projects to be cancelled included the navy's A-12 "stealth" fighter aircraft [see pp. 37953-54]and P-7 anti-submarine patrol craft, and the air force's upgraded F-14D fighter, Lance missile and Tacit Rainbow drone.
The cuts were part of a major Defence Department five-year plan, detailed in the budget, to reduce the armed forces by 25 per cent in response to the decline in the perceived threat from the Soviet Union.
The plan was designed to create a streamlined force capable of responding rapidly to "global crises" .
However, Defence Secretary Dick Cheney stated that in the light of recent political events in the Soviet Union, which had given him "some pause for concern" , the cutback programme could be halted if the Soviet military showed signs of reasserting its power.
Under the plan, active and reserve army divisions would be cut from 28 to 18, aircraft carriers from 14 to 13 and navy ships from 545 to 451, tactical fighter wings from 36 to 26 and strategic bombers from 268 to 181.
Social programmes
A major thrust of the budget was federal cutting of "mandatory" spending.
Darman's claim that this would save $47,000 million on social spending over the next five years drew a sceptical response from opposition Democrats, who feared that it masked a real intent to cut back on social programmes.
Their room for manoeuvre, however, was judged to be limited because the budget was generally considered to be the product of the constraints which the Democrat-dominated Congress had imposed in October 1990 on domestic and defence expenditure [see p. 37768].
Subsidies on Medicare health premiums to individuals earning over $125,000 and couples earning $150,000 were to be reduced, saving an estimated $2,850 million in fiscal 1992 rising to $6,880 million by 1996.
A similar proposal had been defeated by Congress in October 1990.
Reductions of $25,300 million over five years in reimbursements to doctors, hospitals and laboratories were also proposed.
Subsidies to farmers earning a yearly non-farm income of over $125,000 would be ended.
The administration's "empowerment" agenda was intended to help low-income families with home ownership, to encourage parental "choice" in education and to increase the "choice" of poor families in such areas as child care and child health insurance.
The Home Ownership and Opportunity for People Everywhere (Hope) programme was set to be expanded, but overall the proposed expenditure on "choice" was to be an estimated $16,000 million in fiscal 1992, approximately $3,700 million less than in the current fiscal year.
On education, a $6,200 million remedial education programme was the centre of the administration's request.
It also proposed granting $200 million to school districts already operating a voucher system allowing parents to choose between schools, and $30 million to those districts intending to establish such a system.
An additional $100 million was targeted for "magnet" schools which specialized in specific subjects.
In higher education an estimated 400,000 students were expected to lose their grants as a result of a proposal to target the federal student grant fund of $5,800 million, a rise of 7 per cent, at students from families with incomes lower than $10,000.
Space research
It was proposed that the budget of the National Aeronautics and Space Administration (NASA) should rise by $1,200 million to $14,700 million, including $175 million for design work on a new family of heavy lift rockets.
Foreign aid
An increase in economic and humanitarian aid from the current $5,700 million to $6,700 million was proposed.
A cut in security assistance from the current $7,800 million to $7,100 million was also requested.
Other programmes
A record budget of $76,000 million was requested for research and development, a rise of $8,400 million.
Of this, $43,000 million was for the military and the remaining $33,000 million for civil research in such areas as medicine and space.
Proposed spending on Department of Agriculture programmes, including crop subsidies, the forests service and federal nutrition programmes, was set at $55,700 million, compared with $55,430 million the previous year.
Cut in interest rates
Bush's optimistic forecast for the economy set out in his Jan. 29 State of the Union address [see pp. 37952-53]was not supported by the unemployment figures released on Feb. 1, the worst since the recession of the early 1980s.
The news caused the dollar to fall almost to an all-time low against the German mark on European money markets, on Feb. 4 dropping to US$1.00=DM1.4455.
The figures showed that the jobless total for January had reached more than 7,700,000 or 6.2 per cent of the workforce, up from 6.1 per cent the previous month, with an increase of 230,000 in unemployment outside the farming sector.
In response the Federal Reserve on Feb. 1 cut its discount rate (which determined the cost of short-term loans to banks) by half a percentage point to 6 per cent, its second half-point cut in six weeks, in an attempt to stimulate investment by encouraging banks to increase consumer borrowing.
Several large commercial banks cut their prime lending rates by half a percentage point to 9 per cent.
Also on Feb. 1, in a further indicator that the economy was facing recession, the National Association of Purchasing Managers announced a marked drop in its index of industrial conditions, to 37.7 in December 1990, the lowest level since May 1982.
Proposals to reform banking system
Treasury Secretary Nicholas Brady announced on Feb. 5, in the wake of the latest series of bank failures in January [see p. 37953], a package of measures to reform the US banking system.
The proposals, described as the most far-reaching for 50 years, were expected to be the subject of intense lobbying from the financial and banking sectors when they came before Congress for approval.
Brady stated that the reforms were essential to protect depositors and tax payers, to strengthen the economy and to restore US banks to international prominence.
(Only one US bank, Citibank NA, currently ranked among the top 30 in the world.)
To simplify bank regulation, two regulatory bodies would replace the existing four — the Federal Reserve, the Office of the Comptroller of the Currency, the Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation (FDIC) and the Office of Thrift Supervision.
A new Federal Reserve would be responsible for the supervision of all banks chartered by individual states and their holding companies and a new Federal Banking Agency under the Treasury would supervise all national banks and their holding companies.
Although the FDIC would continue to exist it would now focus on insurance and deal with failed institutions.
Individual deposit insurance would be limited to $100,000 per institution, phased in over two years (plus a further $100,000 per institution to cover a retirement account).
There would also be limits on coverage of uninsured deposits of more than $100,000, as a means of reducing taxpayer exposure to losses from wealthy individuals holding multiple accounts and to deter risk taking; in future uninsured deposits would only be covered by the FDIC if this was the least costly measure, and in rare cases of high risk by the Treasury and Federal Reserve.
The banking reforms would end "pass through" coverage, which had allowed banks to raise large sums from institutional investors on a fully insured basis, and would eliminate brokered insured deposits, which had allowed brokers to deposit funds of up to $100,000 on behalf of wealthy clients in a variety of banks to be used for secured investment at no personal risk.
Coverage of non-deposit creditors would be eliminated and would continue to be denied to deposits in the foreign branches of US banks.
An urgent recapitalization of the seriously depleted FDIC bank deposit insurance fund would place the emphasis on contributions from the private sector and not solely from taxpayers; specific proposals on this were postponed.
Restrictions on nationwide banking would be eliminated over a three-year period.
The Glass-Steagall Act of 1933, which had placed barriers between commercial and investment banking, would be repealed in order to permit well-capitalized banks to set up affiliates in other sectors of the financial areas.
This would be subject to strict regulation and only banks would have access to deposit insurance.
Leading bankers voiced enthusiasm for the programme.
It was given a qualified welcome by Donald Riegle and Henry Gonzalez, the (Democrat) chairmen of the Senate and House banking committees respectively, who stated that an extension of bank operations into financial services should be delayed until the implementation of the supervisory and deposit insurance reforms, the latter being expected to attract widespread public opposition.
Transport proposals
A five-year $105,000 million plan to prepare US transportation "for the next American century" was announced by the administration on Feb. 13.
Subject to congressional approval, it proposed increased spending on highways, mass public transport systems, bridge improvement and highway safety programmes.
This was to be financed without raising federal taxes.
Responsibility would be passed to state and local governments for the spending of their share of federal transportation funds on priorities of their choice, either on highways or public transport, and they would be required to raise substantial sums to meet the full development costs.
Federal government funding included $87,700 million over five years for the restructuring of highways.
This included a scheme for a new 150,000-mile National Highway System made up from the existing inter-state system and other major roads.
A second system based on 700,000 miles of urban and rural roads would also be created.
Federal spending on mass public transport was set to rise slightly, from $3,200 million a year to $3,300 million by 1996, but the overall federal funding for projects in this sector was to be cut sharply [see budget proposals above].
Critics of the plan claimed that passing the burden of expenditure to states and local authorities would mean increased fuel taxes and higher train and bus fares.
They called for increased federal spending, citing expert opinion that the country needed between $1,000,000 million and $3,000,000 million to repair crumbling roads and bridges.
The plan, however, envisaged the involvement of the private sector in such repair work and the charging of tolls and user fees to help recover the costs.
Conclusion of ethics hearings on Keating Five
The ethics committee of the US Senate on Feb. 27 concluded its investigation into the conduct of five senators — the so-called "Keating Five" — accused of having had improper links with Charles Keating, the owner of a failed savings and loan institution.
The senators, Republican John McCain and Democrats Alan Cranston, John Glenn, Dennis De Concini and Donald Riegle, had accepted a total of $1,300,000 in campaign contributions from Keating and his associates in the mid-1980s and had later intervened on his behalf when he was investigated for criminal fraud.
The committee decided not to take any further action against four of the five senators.
Only in the case of Cranston did the committee find "substantial credible evidence that provides credible cause" to conclude that he might have engaged in improper conduct.
Keating, an Arizona land developer, owned the Lincoln savings and loan company which collapsed at a cost of up to $2,000 million to the US taxpayer.
During two meetings in 1987 the five senators allegedly attempted to use collective pressure to persuade a senior federal regulator to delay an investigation into the collapse of the Lincoln.
The conduct of the Keating Five was the subject of considerable public interest for two reasons.
First, their case focused attention upon the ambiguous ethical relationship between campaign contributions and political favours by elected officials.
Secondly, the case became representative of the whole thrift scandal, where the newly deregulated savings and loan industry had been pillaged through ruthless speculation and outright fraud.
It was estimated that the cost to the public of rescuing the stricken industry could amount to $500,000 million over the next 30 years.
Following the ethics committee's investigation, the case of Cranston was due to be brought before the full Senate for possible censure.
Cranston claimed that his relationship with Keating was essentially no different from that of the other four senators, but that, because he was suffering from cancer and had announced his intention not to seek re-election on the expiry in 1992 of his current term, he had been singled out for sanction as a "scapegoat" .
Indictment of Arizona legislators
Seven Arizona state legislators, four lobbyists and seven others were indicted in early February on charges which included bribery, money laundering and campaign-law violations.
In a year-long "sting" operation by state authorities, an agent had posed as a casino owner in Las Vegas, Nevada, seeking to extend his empire into Arizona.
Meetings had been videotaped at which the legislators accepted from him a total of $370,000.
This was the latest in a series of corruption cases involving Arizona.
Former Governor Evan Mecham had been impeached and dismissed in 1988, while both of the state's representatives in the federal Senate were involved in the case of the Keating Five [see above].
Indictment of federal judge
US Federal District Judge Robert F. Collins of New Orleans was indicted on Feb. 8 for allegedly promising a "favourable consideration" to a marijuana smuggler — who was awaiting sentence — in return for a bribe.
After concluding the deal through an intermediary, John H. Ross, Collins arranged to have the case transferred from another judge and then sentenced the man to 42 months' imprisonment despite a recommendation of eight years by the probation officer.
Unbeknown to the judge, however, the prisoner had been persuaded to tape-record his conversation with Ross during which a price of $100,000 had been agreed.
Collins, 60, dismissed the charges as "nothing more than a blatant attempt by a twice-convicted dope dealer, aided and abetted by government agents, to set up a black judge" .
Appointed by President Carter in 1978, Collins became the fifth sitting judge to be indicted in the past decade.
All were convicted apart from Alcee Hastings who was impeached and removed from the bench despite his acquittal.
Sentencing of spy
Richard W. Miller, 53, a former agent with the Federal Bureau of Investigation (FBI), was sentenced to 20 years' imprisonment on Feb. 4 for having supplied classified documents to a female Soviet agent in exchange for sexual favours and promises of money and gold.
The sentence followed Miller's third trial for the offences.
His first trial — following his arrest in 1984 — had ended with a deadlocked jury.
The case was heard for a second time in mid-1986, when he was convicted on six counts of espionage and sentenced to life imprisonment, but the verdict was later overturned.
Abortion
The Maryland House of Delegates on Feb. 18 approved legislation guaranteeing continued access to legal abortions, whilst requiring doctors to inform the parents of any young woman under 18 who was seeking an abortion.
The bill, attacked by opponents as the most liberal abortion law in any state, was passed by 84 votes to 52, having already been approved by the State Senate on Feb. 12 by 29 votes to 18.
Governor William Donald Schaefer signed the bill into law within hours of its enactment by the House.
The legislation was similar in scope to the current federal abortion law enshrined within the Supreme Court's 1973 Roe v. Wade landmark ruling, the foundation for legal abortions within the USA.
It provided for abortion without restriction until the foetus was capable of sustaining life outside its mother's womb.
Its only significant concession to opponents of abortion was a clause which required parental notification in the case of young women under the age of 18, although notification could be waived if a doctor concluded that it was not in her best interest.
Although the law was due to come into force on July 1, 1991, the notification provisions would be the only aspect of the legislation to become operational whilst Roe v. Wade remained in force.
The Maryland legislation was symptomatic of the continuing national debate over abortion, and the uncertainty surrounding the future of Roe v. Wade since the Supreme Court's decision in July 1989 undermining that ruling by enabling states to restrict access to abortion [see pp. 36809-10].
The newly established conservative majority on the Supreme Court also led many people to predict that it was only a matter of time before Roe v. Wade was struck down in its entirety, thereby leaving individual state laws as the sole arbiters governing access to abortion.
In enacting a liberal abortion law Maryland pursued an course opposite to that being followed in much of the rest of the country.
Earlier in the year Utah had approved legislation which virtually outlawed all abortions, while legislation prohibiting abortions even in cases involving rape, incest and maternal risk, was passed in February by the legislature of South Dakota.
In all, it was estimated that some 110 bills — all of which sought to restrict access to abortion to some degree — had been introduced in 47 state legislatures since July 1989.
Seven states had enacted restrictive abortion laws, whilst two — Nevada and Connecticut — had adopted liberal legislation similar to that of Maryland.
AMERICAS
HAITI
Inauguration of new President
Jean-Bertrand Aristide, the unexpected winner of a landslide victory in elections on Dec. 16, was sworn in as Haiti's 40th President on Feb. 7.
The ceremony, at the Legislative Assembly in Port-au-Prince, the capital, was five years to the day since the popular overthrow of "President for Life" Jean-Claude Duvalier.
The election of Aristide, a 37-year-old left-wing priest who had survived numerous assassination attempts, followed a series of short-lived governments, three of which were military administrations and none of which was the product of free elections.
Born in poverty in the village of Port Salut, south of Port-au-Prince, Aristide became a Catholic priest and one of the country's foremost biblical scholars, studying in Rome and Jerusalem.
A proponent of liberation theology, he strongly denounced the prevailing order within Haiti, his targets including the army, the church and the influence of the USA.
His commitment to the poor and the dispossessed, combined with his mesmerising oratory — a seductive blend of traditional folklore, proverb and responsive litany — rapidly gave him a huge following within the slums of the capital.
Criticised by some of his superiors as a communist, Aristide was expelled from his Salesian order in 1988 for failing to comply with an order transferring him to Canada.
The new President delivered his inaugural address in Creole, punctuated with sections in French, English, Spanish, German, Italian, Hebrew and Arabic which were directed towards the many foreign dignitaries who attended the ceremony.
Whilst swearing to uphold the country's 1987 Constitution, he emphasised that his election marked a break with the past and promised to combat the greed and corruption which had characterized the county's previous governments.
In a symbolic gesture to this effect, he renounced his $10,000 monthly presidential salary, saying that he would accept whatever sum the legislature chose to pay him.
He also promised that the country's schools — which had been closed for two months because of fears of political violence — would reopen within days, and that a civic work programme would be implemented for Haitian youths.
Aristide also called for a "wedding between the army and the people" , and appealed to the army Chief of Staff, Lt.-Gen.
Hérard Abraham, to "help us get rid of everything that threatens democracy by applying the law and discipline" .
To this end Aristide successfully persuaded Abraham to retire six of the country's eight generals, as well as the colonel who commanded the Palace Guard.
On the day after his inauguration the new President ordered at least 162 people — including his immediate predecessor Ertha Pascal-Trouillot and her entire Cabinet — not to attempt to leave the country for one month.
Of those listed, 30, including Pascal-Trouillot, were required to answer inquiries concerning the coup attempt of Jan. 6-7.
The other 132 were senior state employees responsible for the management of public funds, who were required to remain in the country until a routine administrative review was performed by government auditors.
The ban complied with a request by the head of a judicial commission set up to investigate instances of corruption and abuse perpetrated by the 29-year Duvalier family dictatorship and by successor governments.
It was reported also that the Justice Ministry had on Feb. 12 begun proceedings to extradite former President Duvalier from France on charges of the theft of US$800,000,000, the abuse of power and the murder of political opponents.
It was reported on Feb. 12 that the new government had been promised over $250,000,000 in foreign loans and aid.
The European Communities had pledged $144,000,000, while the United States announced that it would increase its $54,000,000 in annual aid to $84,000,000 to assist the transition to democracy.
Smaller amounts were promised by international agencies and other countries, including $12,000,000 from Taiwan.
Appointment of Cabinet
Prior to taking office Aristide let it be known that he intended to remain outside the existing structure of political parties within Haiti.
He underlined this position on Feb. 9 by appointing René Preval, 48, the owner of a Port-au-Prince bakery, as Prime Minister.
Preval, a Belgium-trained agronomist, was a trusted friend of Aristide and, like the new President, was a member of no political party and had no experience in government.
Preval, who also held the portfolios of National Defence and Interior, on Feb. 19 named an eclectic Cabinet drawn largely from close associates of Aristide.
Many commentators praised the appointment as Finance Minister of Marie-Michele Rey, a senior official of the private National Bank of Paris, and as Trade and Industry Minister of Smark Michel, but expressed reservations concerning the choice of Denise Jean-Louis, an anaesthesiologist with no government experience, as Foreign Minister.
René PrevalPrime Minister; National Defence; Interior Marie-Michele ReyEconomy and Finance Denise Jean-LouisForeign Affairs; Worship Smark MichelTrade and Industry François SevrainAgriculture, Natural Resources and Rural Development Renaud BernardinPlanning, Foreign Co-operation and State Service Marie-Laurence LassegueInformation and Co-ordination Frantz VerellaPublic Works; Transport and Communications Ernst VerdieuSocial Affairs Daniel HenrysPublic Health and Population Lesly VoltaireEducation, Youth and Sports Bayard VincentJustice
New Haitian Cabinet
AMERICAS
BARBADOS
New Cabinet
Prime Minister Erskine Sandiford of the Democratic Labour Party (DLP), elected for a second five-year term in the general election on Jan. 22 [see pp. 37955-56], announced his new Cabinet on Jan. 26 [for previous Cabinet see p. 37821].
Philip Greaves, had the portfolios of Public Works and Communications added to his existing responsibilities; he was also Leader of the House of Assembly Warwick Franklin had hitherto been Agriculture Minister, where his tenure had been a controversial one.
Harcourt Lewis, hitherto Franklin's deputy, was also named Leader of the Senate.
Another non-elected member of the Cabinet, Carl Clarke, was hitherto Minister of State for Finance and Foreign Affairs.
David Thompson, the only new appointment, took on the combined portfolio of Community Development and Culture, hitherto the responsibilities of different ministries.
New Barbados Cabinet
*Erskine SandifordPrime Minister; Finance and Economic Affairs,; Civil Service Philip GreavesDeputy Prime Minister; International Transport, Telecommunications and Immigration; Public Works; Communications
*Maurice KingAttorney General; Foreign Affairs
*Branford TaittHealth Evelyn GreavesHousing and Lands Keith SimmonsJustice and Public Safety Warwick FranklinLabour, Consumer Affairs, Environment
*Wesley HallTourism and Sports Harcourt LewisAgriculture, Food and Fisheries Cyril WalkerEducation Carl ClarkeTrade, Industry and Commerce
**David ThompsonCommunity Development and Culture Harold BlackmanMinister of State for Finance and Economic Affairs
*Unchanged.
**New appointment.
The government's election pledges had included a clampdown on crime, but Simmons, taking charge of a new portfolio which included jurisdiction over the police, prisons and fire service (hitherto the responsibilities of the Attorney General), faced immediate controversy when he supported the use of flogging with the cat o"nine tails.
Mr Justice Elliot Belgrave had on Feb. 7 and Feb. 8 ordered the flogging of four convicted armed robbers, a measure immediately condemned by Amnesty International and other human rights organizations.
AMERICAS
EL SALVADOR
Peace talks — Denial of secret UN plan — Return of missiles to Nicaragua — Attack on newspaper
A new round of UN-mediated peace talks between the government and the opposition guerrilla Farabundo Martí National Liberation Front (FMLN) began on Feb. 19 in San José, Costa Rica.
The details of the talks were secret but it was thought that a UN discussion paper for reform of the army, a key FMLN demand, was on the agenda.
Neither side had publicly acknowledged the reported existence of a secret UN document proposing a post-ceasefire division of the country into two zones, one guerrilla-controlled and the other army-controlled.
On Feb. 15 the UN mediator, Alvaro De Soto, denied that he had drawn up such a report.
According to FMLN sources, the plan envisaged giving the guerrillas full administrative control over their zone in a "transitional period" , until peace talks produced a final accord which would allow them to disarm and convert themselves into a purely political movement.
Government negotiators, however, reportedly declined to accept this interpretation, seeing the zone as simply an area where the rebels could disarm and disband.
Return of missiles to Nicaragua
A ceremony was held on Feb. 2 to mark the formal handing back to Nicaragua of 17 Soviet-made anti-aircraft missiles, out of a shipment of 28 sent to the FMLN by officers in the Nicaraguan army [see p. 37956].
The ceremony, in the FMLN stronghold of Perquín in the north-eastern province of Morazán, was witnessed by Nicaragua's Deputy Interior Minister and the chief of military intelligence, and by the Nicaraguan and Mexican ambassadors, whose presence had been accepted reluctantly by the Salvadorean government.
The 18 journalists present were later detained and their videotapes, notes and films confiscated.
The FMLN stated that the handover demonstrated its "willingness to negotiate and its support for a political solution and peace" but did not affect its anti-aircraft capability.
In an FMLN mortar attack on the headquarters of the Defence Ministry in the capital, San Salvador, on Feb. 19, one person was reported killed and eight others injured.
Attack on newspaper
The San Salvador office of the country's oldest and most respected newspaper, El Latino, was destroyed in an arson attack on Feb. 9.
Extreme right-wing elements in the government and army were suspected; the newspaper, with a long history of opposition to authoritarian governments, had been highly critical of the armed forces for their alleged involvement in the massacre on Jan. 28 of 15 peasants in El Zapote, near San Salvador.
The Archbishop of San Salvador, Mgr Arturo Rivera y Damas, claimed that he had evidence that members of the army's 1st Infantry Battalion had been involved in the massacre.
AMERICAS
NICARAGUA
Assassination of former contra leader
A former "contra" leader, Enrique Bermúdez Varela, 58, was shot dead in the capital, Managua, on Feb. 16.
Once a colonel in the notoriously brutal National Guard of former dictator Anastasio Somoza Debayle, Bermúdez helped set up, with United States assistance, the National Resistance (RN) contra forces opposed to the then ruling Sandinista government.
He became the contras' military chief in the mid-1980s, but was ousted from the leadership in February 1990 [see p. 37236]by a number of his fellow commanders who considered his background too tainted by human rights abuses and association with the corruption of the Somoza years for him to negotiate the eventual disbanding and resettlement of the contras [for which see p. 37450]
Vice-President Virgilio Godoy stated that the murder, which was seen as a setback for the attempt of President Violeta Barrios de Chamorro to promote national reconciliation, should not go unpunished and would have to be solved "even if this has to be done outside government institutions" .
A communiqué issued on Feb. 18 by the National Directorate of the Sandinista National Liberation Front (FSLN) denied any connection with the killing, the specific motive for which remained a mystery.
Bermúdez, however, was a vocal opponent of any political accommodation with the FSLN and was known to have been planning to visit to one of the special resettlement regions for former contras [for details of unrest among former contras in November 1990 see pp. 37849-50].
AMERICAS
COLOMBIA
Presidential visit to USA — Opening of Constitutional Assembly — Guerrilla offensive
President César Gaviria Trujillio signed four accords on Feb. 26, the first day of his official two-day visit to the United States.
They provided for the promotion of bilateral trade and for increased co-operation against drug trafficking.
US courts which had collected evidence against drug traffickers would now be able to pass this on to Colombian courts where it could be used against suspects standing trial.
Gaviria denied that drug traffickers would be more leniently treated as a result of his decision not to extradite them to stand trial in the USA [see p. 37957].
Opening of Constitutional Assembly
The Constitutional Assembly, approved by referendum and elected in December [see pp. 37450; 37914], and so far with 73 members, began on Feb. 5 its five months of meetings intended to produce political and legal reforms and thus to rescue the country from endemic violence.
The 70 members elected by direct vote were expected to form into two major factions.
The ruling Liberal Party (which held 24 seats) and its supporters were expected to face a rival coalition comprising the left-wing former guerrillas of the April 19 Movement (M-19, 19 seats), the conservative National Salvation Movement (11 seats), and the Embera and Guambino Indian leaders Francisco Rojas and Lorenzo Muelas, from the north-west jungle region and the southern mountain region respectively.
Of three delegates directly appointed by Gaviria, two were from the Maoist Popular Liberation Army (EPL), including its leader Jairo Morales, and one from the Revolutionary Workers Party (PRT).
Both organizations had agreed to accept seats in return for laying down their arms [see p. 37958].
They were expected to support the M-19 coalition.
In its first act the Constitutional Assembly denounced the use of violence, calling on guerrillas still fighting to renounce armed struggle, and asking the Medellín cartel to release the three remaining journalists they were holding as hostages [see pp. 37957-58].
Beatriz Villamizar, one of the journalists, was reported to have been set free by the cartel in the capital Bogotá on Feb. 5.
Guerrilla offensive
The Revolutionary Armed Forces of Colombia (FARC) and the National Liberation Army (ELN), acting together under the umbrella of the Simón Bolívar Guerrilla Co-ordinating Board (CNG), launched a major countrywide offensive on Feb. 5 to coincide with the opening of the Constituent Assembly.
By Feb. 11, guerrilla attacks had been recorded in 15 departments, with communications, gas and electricity supplies severely disrupted and a total of 14 soldiers, 11 police and 39 guerrillas killed, according to army reports.
Gaviria announced on Feb. 12 that a special tax would be levied on oil, coal, gas and nickel exports and on international telephone calls, in addition to a 5 per cent surcharge on income and other taxes (from which low earners were to be exempt), in order to raise 50,000,000 pesos to establish special mobile brigades to combat the guerrillas and protect the country's infrastructure.
It was reported on Feb. 20, however, that the government had decided to meet the CNG for exploratory peace talks, without demanding that the guerrillas declare a ceasefire in advance.
Conflicting interpretations of this move saw it either as a sign that the armed forces were no longer capable of confronting internal subversion, or as an astute move aimed at allowing the guerrillas to save face and disarm before taking up seats in the Constitutional Assembly.
Medellín bullring bomb
A bomb estimated to contain more than 400 lb of dynamite was detonated outside La Macarena bullring in the centre of the city of Medellín on Feb. 16, killing 22 people, 10 of them police, and injuring 135 others.
This was the largest bomb attack since the July 1990 "truce" called by the drug cartels in their "war" against the government.
No group claimed responsibility for the attack, but there was speculation that it might be the work either of a "freelance" splinter group in the Medellín drug cartel, or of the rival Cali drug cartel, since the Medellín cartel leaders themselves, and many of their followers, were loyal bullfight fans.
The attack also came only hours after Juan David Ochoa, 42, a leading Medellín cartel leader, had given himself up to the authorities; his two younger brothers were already in custody after accepting a government offer of reduced sentences and no extradition in return for their surrender and confession [see pp. 37772; 37851; 37914].
AMERICAS
ECUADOR
National strike against economic austerity measures
A 24-hour general strike was called by the United Workers' Front (FUT) on Feb. 6, and violent clashes were reported between strikers and the police.
The government had issued a decree on the same day suspending public activities "so that internal order should be preserved" .
The FUT president Fausto Dután warned that an indefinite general strike would be called if the government did not grant pay rises to offset price increases resulting from the economic austerity measures announced on Jan. 24.
The economic measures devalued the sucre by 6.1 per cent(US$1.00=966.748 sucres as at Jan. 28, 1991), increased fuel prices by 15 per cent and raised public transport fares by 25 per cent .
Violent street demonstrations took place in the capital, Quito, on Jan. 25, and the FUT dismissed as a "joke" the government's offer to raise the monthly minimum wage by 38 per cent to 44,000 sucres (approximately US$48), demanding a minimum of at least 150,000 sucres ($166).
AMERICAS
PERU
Resignation of Prime Minister — Cabinet changes — Cholera epidemic
The Prime Minister, Juan Carlos Hurtado Miller, who also held the Economy and Finance portfolios, resigned from the government on Feb. 14.
The entire Council of Ministers then formally resigned, making this the second such formal resignation in two months [see p. 37958].
Hurtado had been involved in disagreements over economic policy with Industry and Commerce Minister Guido Pennano, who criticized the government's IMF-backed tight fiscal policy for deepening the recession, failing to cure hyperinflation, and making exports uncompetitive by overvaluing the inti.
Pennano had leaked an "alternative economic plan" , advocating indexation of salaries and key prices and the creation of a new inti with a fixed parity against the US dollar.
Pennano was not reappointed to the new Council of Ministers.
A new Council of Ministers was sworn in on Feb. 15, when Hurtado was succeeded as Prime Minister by former Labour Minister Carlos Torres y Torres Lara.
Torres also took on the Foreign Affairs portfolio, Vice-Adml. (retd) Raúl Sánchez Sotomayor being unexpectedly dropped from the Cabinet.
The new Economy and Finance Minister Carlos Boloña Bohr, a technocrat and former director of the right-wing economic think tank Institute of Liberty and Democracy (ILD), was known to be a supporter of the existing IMF-backed strategy.
In all there were four new appointments.
Fernando Sánchez Albavera, of the left-wing Socialist Left (IS) was now the only remaining Cabinet member with party political ties [for previous Cabinet and subsequent changes see pp. 37608; 37773; 37958].
Peruvian Council of Ministers
**Carlos Torres y Torres Lara Prime Minister, Foreign Affairs
*Carlos Boloña Bohr Economy and Finance Gen. Adolfo Alvarado FournierInterior Augusto Antoniolli VásquezJustice Gen. (retd) Jorge Torres AciegoDefence Fernando Sánchez AlbaveraEnergy and Mines
*Víctor Joy WaIndustry, Commerce, Tourism and Integration Enrique Ross LinkAgriculture
*Alfonso de los HerosLabour Félix Canal TorresFisheries
*Francisco de la FuenteEducation Guillermo del Solar RojasHousing and Construction Jaime Yoshiyama TanakaTransport and Communications Carlos Vidal LaysecaHealth
*New appointment.
**Changed responsibilities.
Cholera epidemic
By late February the Health Ministry claimed to have brought under control a cholera epidemic in which an estimated 150 people had died.
The epidemic, the first cholera outbreak in Latin America since the 1880s, had spread from late January onwards from the northern fishing port of Chimbote down the Pacific coast to the capital, Lima, affecting some 20,000 people.
The bacillus was thought to have arrived from Asia and to have proliferated in waters polluted by raw sewage pumped from the shore.
Fish and shellfish, popularly eaten raw, were polluted, although thousands of fishermen staged demonstrations in Lima protesting that fresh fish was safe to eat.
Foul drinking water, especially in Lima's teeming shanty areas, was also blamed.
The European Communities (EC) granted a credit of US$700,000 in medical aid, and the government established a $4,000,000 emergency fund to fight the outbreak.
Travellers leaving Peru were screened at border crossings and on arrival at international airports.
A total ban on Peruvian food products had by mid-February been imposed by the United States, Germany, France, Japan, Spain, Argentina, Uruguay, Colombia, Ecuador and Bolivia.
The Association for Exporters predicted that if the ban was not removed by the end of the month approximately US$150,000,000 in exports would be lost, mainly in fishmeal, fish oil and canned and frozen fish products.
AMERICAS
CHILE
Removal of legal status of Colonia Dignidad
President Patricio Aylwin Azócar on Feb. 1 issued a decree revoking the legal status of Dignity Colony (Colonia Dignidad), a secretive community run by German nationals and situated in Parral, 400 km south of Santiago, the capital.
The colony's German settler inhabitants had been accused of sexually abusing children, of torturing inmates and using them as slave labour, and also of acting as a torture centre for the DINA secret police following the 1973 military coup [see also pp. 36346; 36932; 37490].
The decree, however, emphasized that it was the colony's "grave and reiterated infractions" both of its status as a non profit-making charity and of the country's tax, educational, labour and health laws which lay behind the decision.
The decree, which was welcomed by the German government, did not, however, allow for the extradition to Germany of the colony's founder, Paul Schaeffer, a Baptist pastor already wanted by Interpol on charges of sexually abusing children in a religious community and in children's homes.
This led to doubt as to the effectiveness of the decree, which also ordered the colony's property to be handed over to a Methodist church, even though much of it had been sold to individual members of the colony, who were not themselves to be subject to specific government action.
AMERICAS
BRAZIL
New anti-inflation plan
A new plan went into effect on Feb. 1 to combat inflation, which in January had risen above 20 per cent.
Described by Economy Minister Zelia Cardoso de Mello as a "deepening" of the government's economic policies, the announcement of the plan, issued by presidential decree on Jan. 31, was generally regarded as marking the failure of the anti-inflation measures introduced in March 1990 by President Fernando Collor de Mello [see pp. 37312-13]and it was opposed by businessmen, bankers and trade union leaders alike.
An immediate freeze on prices and wages was imposed, the latter to be adjusted twice yearly instead of according to monthly indexation mechanisms.
The price of petrol was increased by 47 per cent, domestic butane gas by 60 per cent and electricity by 71 per cent , and telephone and postal rates went up by 58 per cent and 81 per cent respectively.
Short-term money market accounts yielding high interest were abolished, to be replaced by a "Social Development Fund" where short-term money would be pooled to finance the debts of state and local government, blamed by the government as being primarily responsible for driving up the money supply.
In addition savings accounts and bank certificates of deposit would no longer be automatically corrected for inflation on top of interest.
The daily and monthly Treasury bond indicators (the BTN and BTNF) which linked prices to inflation and were commonly used as economic indices were also abolished in a bid to restore the official currency, the cruzeiro, as the only mechanism for financial transactions.
Government spending would be reduced by the equivalent of a further US$5,000 million.
The banks were closed on Feb. 1 to adjust to the new measures and long queues formed outside cash points as people tried to withdraw money.
Sao Paulo and Rio de Janeiro stock markets showed record index gains of 36 per cent and 32 per cent respectively on Feb. 4 as individuals transferred money from bank accounts in response to the abolition of the indexation on savings and certificates of deposits.
Supermarket and shop owners, having anticipated the price freeze by raising prices in advance, refused to restock with meat, milk, rice and cooking oil, claiming that it was now uneconomic to sell such products; general shortages of basic food commodities and the growth of a black market for food were reported to be much more prevalent than during the previous four price freezes since 1986.
Union leaders protested that while wages had been frozen at a low level, a freeze on prices could not be maintained because of the lack of government inspectors — a fear endorsed by Collor's television appeal of Feb. 3 asking the general public to be watchdogs against price rises.
The municipalities of Sao Paulo and Rio de Janeiro, despite government threats to cut their funding, raised bus fares by 40 per cent on Feb. 1.
Oil and petroleum workers threatened industrial action in support of demands for a 310 per cent salary adjustment, for an end to plans to privatize the state oil company PETROBRAS, and the reinstatement of 800 colleagues dismissed in government cutbacks.
Similarly, in response to the Feb. 19 announcement by the major car manufacturer Autolatina (the holding company for Ford and Volkswagen in Brazil) that it intended to shed 8,000 jobs, workers at two car plants in Sao Bernardo near Sao Paulo stopped production and blocked a highway, and leaders of the Sao Paulo Metal Worker's Union stated that they would not accept the dismissals.
Autolatina claimed that a combination of the price freeze and the government decision to reduce tariffs on imported cars (see below) had forced it to make the decision.
Trade liberalization
In an attempt to stimulate imports and thus force down prices and inflation, the government announced measures on Feb. 6 to liberalize access to Brazil's heavily protected domestic market.
Under these, the average tariff would fall to 14.2 per cent by 1994, and those on 13,500 items to be detailed later would fall from 32.2 per cent to 25.3 per cent.
Tariffs on imported cars would drop from 85 per cent to 60 per cent in 1991 and to 35 per cent by 1994.
A US$5,900 million development fund would be set up to help domestic industry modernize so that its products could compete with new imports.
Murder of Amazonian union leader
Expédito Ribeiro de Souza, 43, the president of the Farm Workers Union of Rio Maria, a small Amazonian jungle town in the state of Pará, was shot dead on Feb. 2.
The suspected assassin, José Sales, who was arrested later, was believed to be a professional gunman hired by local landowners who had been blamed for the murder in 1985 of his predecessor Joao Canuto.
Souza, like the murdered leader of the seringueiros rubber-tappers' union Francisco "Chico" Mendes Filho [see pp. 36459; 37914], was a well known environmentalist who campaigned against the destruction of the rain forest for cattle pasture, and against cattle ranchers who expelled and often killed landless workers who occupied their land.
A delegation to the then Minister of Justice, Bernardo Cabral, in April 1990 had warned of the danger to Souza's life but the promised protection had never materialized.
AMERICAS
ARGENTINA
Emergency tax plan
Argentina's Economy Minister, Domingo Cavallo, appointed on Jan. 29 [see p. 37959], announced an emergency tax plan on Feb. 4 in an attempt to halt the current economic crisis and to establish fiscal solvency by increasing revenues by the equivalent of $2,400 million a year.
The lower house of the Congress, the Chamber of Deputies, endorsed the package on Feb. 15 with only minor changes following an agreement between the ruling Peronists and opposition Radical Civic Union (UCR) that the government would allow the Congress 30 days to review each future privatization of state assets.
The Senate was expected to follow suit.
Details of measures
Revenue-raising measures under the plan included (i) the stamping out of tax evasion, especially of capital gains tax, and reform of the tax penal law;(ii) increases in general taxes on assets (up by 2 per cent) and on assets in the services sector (up by 4 per cent );(iii) higher taxes on the purchase and sale of foreign exchange, although the stamp tax would be eliminated and import tariffs cut to 11 per cent for semi-finished goods and raw materials, while previous item-specific duties would be replaced by a single 22 per cent duty;(iv) the elimination of remaining tax discrimination favouring foreign investments;(v) the increase of value added tax (VAT) to rates of between 16 and 25 per cent and increased taxes on bank loans; and (vi) rises of 33 per cent in fuel taxes and adjustments in the rates charged for all public services, which acknowledged the continuing steep fall of the austral against the dollar.
Workers would receive a single bonus payment equivalent to US$27 to offset the price rises.
The plan also proposed the realignment of the responsibilities of state banks.
In future they would no longer be allowed to finance public-sector deficits or loan applications from large debtors.
This measure was intended to eliminate corruption and prevent unrecoverable loans being passed on to the Central Bank.
A reform of provincial government banking was also announced.
An element in the plan dealing with privatization of the National Savings and Insurance Bank was withdrawn on Feb. 5 [see below].
Roque Fernandez was named as the new President of the Central Bank, replacing Javier González Fraga who had resigned on Jan. 28 when the austral dropped dramatically against the US dollar [see p. 37959].
Jorge Pereyra de Olazabal was appointed President of the National Development Bank.
Reaction to plan
Although industrialists were reported to have reacted with guarded optimism to the plan, many independent economists were agreed that the revenue increases would not cover all projected government spending, and that the government would thus be compelled to delay payments, including those on foreign debt service.
State-sector workers went on strike in response, ignoring government restrictions on those in essential services.
Bank workers went on strike on Feb. 4 and occupied the headquarters of the National Savings and Insurance Bank in the capital, Buenos Aires, in protest at the announcement that it was to be privatized, Cavallo withdrawing this intention on Feb. 5.
Railway workers at the state-owned Ferrocarrilles Argentinos began an indefinite strike on Feb. 5, demanding a wage increase of 200 per cent and threatening to resist a government threat to use the army to break the strike.
The government, however, attempted to avert a threatened national teachers' strike, by claiming that the emergency tax plan had raised enough revenues to increase their wages.
Assassination attempt on former President
Raúl Alfonsín Foulkes, President from 1981 to 1989 and leader of the UCR, narrowly escaped assassination on Feb. 23 when a former member of the customs and border guard Ismael Abdala, 29, tried to shoot him.
Abdala's revolver jammed as he pulled the trigger and he was immediately overpowered.
The incident took place in the town of San Nicolás, 180 km north-west of Buenos Aires, as Alfonsín was addressing an election rally in support of the UCR's candidate for the governorship of Buenos Aires province, Juan Carlos Pugliese.
No clear motive was reported for the attack other than that Alfonsín had strongly criticized the government's Dec. 29 pardoning of eight former high-ranking military officers imprisoned for masterminding the "dirty war" of the 1970s [see p. 37913], and had denounced ultra-right civil and military groups as "public enemy number one" .
AMERICAS
PARAGUAY
New Finance Minister
The Finance Minister Enzo Debernardi stated on Feb. 19 that he had tendered his resignation to President Andrés Rodriguez "for reasons of health" .
He was replaced by Juan José Díaz Perez.
Restoration of relations with Nicaragua
Diplomatic relations were restored with Nicaragua on Feb. 25, 10 years after bilateral ties were broken off.
ASIA — PACIFIC
THAILAND
Military coup
The armed forces toppled the elected government of Maj.-Gen.
Chatichai Choonhaven in a bloodless coup on Feb. 23.
Chatichai, leader of the Chart Thai Party and a member of the House of Representatives, had served as Prime Minister since 1988 [see pp. 36149-50].
The coup was the 17th successful intervention by the military since the removal of the absolute monarchy in 1932, but the first since in 1977 [see pp. 28861-62].
A group of young officers had failed twice, in 1981 and 1985, to overthrow the government of Gen. Prem Tinsulanonda [see pp. 30957-58; 33920].
Preceding tension between government and armed forces
The Feb. 23 coup came after months of increasing tension between the military and the Chatichai government.
In June 1990 Gen. Chaovalit Yongchaiyut, the former Army C.-in-C., resigned as Deputy Prime Minister and Defence Minister after a dispute with Police Capt. Chalerm Yubamrung, a Minister attached to the Prime Minister's Office [see p. 37532].
Chatichai resisted pressure from the military to dismiss Chalerm.
The armed forces were further alarmed in August by what they regarded as Chatichai's provocative decision to appoint as a Deputy Prime Minister Gen. Arthit Kamlang-Ek, a former Supreme Commander of Armed Forces and Army C.-in-C. who had a bad relationship with the current Army leadership [see pp. 37655-56].
In November another dispute arose involving Chalerm when he criticized the Army's seizure of a mobile radio unit.
On this occasion Chatichai was forced to relent and Chalerm was demoted, although he remained in the government as Deputy Education Minister [see p. 37857].
The controversial figure of Maj.-Gen.
Manoon Rupkachorn also re-emerged as a fresh source of military-government tension during 1990.
Manoon had organized the abortive "Young Turk" coups of 1981 and 1985 and was the leader of the Class 7 graduates of Chulachomklao Royal Military Academy.
In early 1990 Chatichai had allowed Manoon to return to Thailand from exile and had appointed him to a high-level post within the Defence Ministry.
Manoon's rehabilitation had enraged Class 5 graduates from Chulachomklao (led by the current Army C.-in-C., Gen. Suchinda Kraprayoon) who regarded it as an attempt to reduce their position of dominance.
In January 1991 pamphlets were circulated in Bangkok implicating Manoon and Chatichai's son and adviser, Kraisak Choonhaven, in a 1982 assassination plot against Gen. Prem, Gen. Arthit and "a prominent figure in high places" , later identified as Queen Sirikit.
Investigations into the plot had remained dormant until late 1990 when it was re-opened by high-level police officers, including a Class 5 graduate, Lt.-Gen.
Boonchu Wangkananond.
In January Boonchu and police chief Gen. Sawaeng Thirasawat were transferred from their posts.
According to some sources, Chatichai had ordered the transfers in order to protect Manoon.
On Feb. 19, Chatichai, already aware that the military were plotting against him, appointed Gen. Arthit as Deputy Defence Minister.
The appointment provided Arthit with some control over the military budget and promotions, and as such was unacceptable to the current military leadership.
Launching of coup — Formation of National Peace-Keeping Council
The armed forces launched the coup just before noon on Feb. 23.
Chatichai and Arthit were arrested at Bangkok airport aboard an aircraft bound for the royal palace in Chiang Mai, where they were to attend Arthit's swearing-in ceremony.
The armed forces apparently believed them to be carrying an order for King Bhumibol Adulyadej to sign dismissing Gen. Sunthorn Kongsompong as Armed Forces Supreme Commander.
After the arrest of Chatichai and Arthit the coup was swift and bloodless and caused little disruption in Bangkok where the key installations were all placed under military control.
News of the coup was first broadcast on Army Television Channel 5 when Gen. Sunthorn announced that a National Peace-Keeping Council (NPKC) had taken control of the country in order to preserve the democratic system.
Martial law was imposed and the country's 1978 Constitution terminated; the House of Representatives, the Senate and the Cabinet were dissolved.
Orders were issued banning political gatherings, but political parties remained legal.
Gen. Sunthorn headed the NPKC, supported by four deputies: Gen. Suchinda (Army C.-in-C.),
Adml.
Praphat Kritsanachan (Navy C.-in-C.),
Air Chief Marshal Kaset Rojananil (Air Force C.-in. -C.) and Police Gen. Sawasdi Amornvivat (Police Director-General).
Gen. Issarapong Noonpakdi (Deputy Army C.-in. -C.) was appointed NPKC secretary-general.
A National Policy Committee was established, composed of the six NPKC members, nine other officers and a civilian.
A 34-member Advisory Board made up of bureaucrats, technocrats and businessmen was also created.
In a broadcast on Feb. 23 the NPKC explained why it had carried out the coup.
The Chatichai government had become a "parliamentary dictatorship" characterized by widespread corruption and abuse of power.
The government had seriously undermined the position of the armed forces, and had attempted to distort the details of the 1982 assassination plot against Queen Sikrit for its own ends.
The NPKC travelled to Chiang Mai for an audience with the King on Feb. 23.
Three days later King Bhumibol effectively legitimized the coup when he formally appointed Gen. Sunthorn as NPKC head.
Timetable for new constitution, elections and interim government
Gen. Suchinda addressed a news conference on Feb. 24 in which he announced that the NPKC would attempt to complete the drafting of a new Constitution and the holding of a fresh general election within six months.
He said that both Chatichai and Arthit were being treated with respect and would be kept in custody for the minimum length of time.
He also announced that Manoon and Chalerm had escaped from Bangkok, but when located would be arrested and charged with creating a situation detrimental to national security.
Further details of the junta's plans were revealed at a press conference given by Gen. Sunthorn on Feb. 25.
The NPKC, he said, would hand over administrative authority to an interim government within a week.
Appointment of anti-corruption committee — Investigation of former ministers
A seven-member Asset Verification Committee (AVC) headed by former Interior Minister Gen. Sitthi Jirarote was appointed on Feb. 25 to investigate politicians who were "wealthier than anyone with an honest profession could be" .
The Bank of Thailand issued a circular to all the country's banks on Feb. 27 ordering them to give financial information about 22 ex-ministers to the AVC.
The list included seven full ministers in Chatichai's last Cabinet (appointed in December 1990 — see p. 37916), namely Korn Dapparungsi, Pramual Sabhavasu, Maj.-Gen.
Pramarn Adireksarn, Banharn Silpa-Archa, Gen. Tienchai Sirisamphan, Narong Wongwan and Samak Sundaravej.
Gen. Tienchai resigned as leader of the Rassadorn Party on Feb. 28, saying that he was deeply hurt by the junta's decision to investigate his financial background.
Reaction to coup
Public reaction to the coup was muted, largely reflecting the undramatic manner in which it had been carried out.
The Far Eastern Economic Review of March 7 commented that the coup was "widely accepted, almost popular" .
In an attempt to head off possible dissension, the NPKC introduced sweeping tax cuts on Feb. 28.
However, student demonstrations erupted at Bangkok's Ramkhamhaeng University on Feb. 25, and 15 people were arrested for illegal assembly.
A group of 96 academics issued an open statement on Feb. 28 claiming that the coup had "impaired" Thailand's position in the world community and asking the NPKC to withdraw martial law as soon as possible.
Japan, Thailand's principal foreign investor, expressed surprise at the coup, but stated that it had no plans to sever aid.
The United States suspended military and economic aid, but such support had been worth only US$16,400,000 in 1990.
Truck explosion
A truckload of dynamite and detonators exploded in the village of Thung Maproa in the southern province of Phang-nga on Feb. 15, killing at least 180 people.
The accident occurred five months after a truck carrying liquid petroleum gas had exploded in Bangkok, killing some 60 people [see p. 37712].
ASIA — PACIFIC
MYANMA
Continued repression by military authorities
Human rights report — Death of NLD representatives
The UN Human Rights Commission began discussion in late February of a report on Myanma prepared after a six-day visit by Sadako Ogata in November 1990 [see p. 37931 for Ogata's appointment in December as UN High Commissioner for Refugees].
The report stated that a "large number" of people had been imprisoned under "law and order" restrictions.
A night curfew was in force in cities, all demonstrations were banned and the universities remained closed.
Press reports highlighted the deaths of several elected People's Assembly representatives of the opposition National League for Democracy (NLD — which won an overwhelming majority in the May 1990 elections), apparently while in custody.
The Independent of Feb. 27 cited diplomatic sources as stating that 44 elected representatives had been imprisoned since the previous May.
Tin Maung Win of the NLD was reported by Voice of Myanma radio on Jan. 31 to have "passed away" on Jan. 18; on Feb. 8 the Associated Press news agency reported that diplomats were claiming that he died in the city's Insein prison.
Another NLD representative, Maung Maung Gyi, died on Feb. 8.
Earlier, in November 1990, NLD representative Maung Ko had died in military custody; the authorities claimed that he had committed suicide, but his relatives insisted that he had been tortured to death.
Deregistering of political parties
The following political parties were deregistered by the military authorities during January and February: the Anti-Fascist People's Freedom League (Jan. 31); the League for Democracy and Peace (Feb. 4); the National Politics Front for Youth (Feb. 6); and the Patriotic Democratic Youth Front (Feb. 11).
Arms deal with China
The Independent of Feb. 11 reported that Myanma had agreed to purchase arms worth almost US$1,000 million from China.
The report, citing diplomatic sources, said that the deal had been signed in late 1990 and provided for Myanma to pay at least half the price in rice and timber.
ASIA — PACIFIC
VIETNAM
New economic accord with Soviet Union
A fresh set of agreements on Vietnamese-Soviet economic and trade relations for 1991 was signed on Jan. 31.
According to a report in the Far Eastern Economic Review of Feb. 21, these would involve a sharp reduction in Soviet aid (to around US$110 million) and would require Vietnam to make its purchases from the Soviet Union in hard currency at prices determined by international market rates.
During 1990, the Soviet Union was estimated to have exported goods to Vietnam worth 1,170 million roubles (over US$2,000 million), nearly twice the value of Vietnamese exports to the Soviet Union.
In the past, the Soviet Union had allowed Vietnam to pay concessionary prices calculated and paid in roubles.
For 1991, however, bilateral trade was to be balanced and the two-way total reduced to under US$1,000 million.
Commentators judged that the aid and trade cuts would worsen Vietnam's already steep budget deficit and increase shortages, inflation and unemployment.
The issue of Vietnam's debt to the Soviet Union remained unsettled.
Vietnam owed the Soviet Union some 10,000 million roubles (6,000 million roubles due by 1995), but the two sides failed to agree on an exchange rate for converting the debt into hard currency.
Opening of Malaysian consulate in Ho Chi Minh City
The Vietnam News Agency (VNA) reported on Feb. 6 that Malaysia had recently opened a consulate in Ho Chi Minh City.
Malaysia was the first ASEAN country to open a diplomatic office in the southern city, which was regarded as the country's commercial capital and where, according to the VNA report, "a number" of Malaysians were "doing business" .
A Vietnamese delegation led by Senior Gen. Vo Van Kiet, First Vice-Premier, visited Malaysia in early February to attend a World Bank seminar on development strategy.
During the visit the Vietnamese delegation reportedly received economic advice from a group of Malaysian, Indonesian and South Korean officials.
ASIA — PACIFIC
CAMBODIA
Diplomacy — Fighting
Visit to Vietnam by PICC chairs — Thai initiative
In an attempt to revive the deadlocked UN peace plan [see p. 37712], the Indonesian Foreign Minister, Ali Alatas, and the French Minister-Delegate attached to the Foreign Affairs Ministry, Edwige Avice (co-chairs of the Paris International Conference on Cambodia — PICC), visited Vietnam in early February.
Alatas and Avice failed, however, to persuade the Vietnamese to place pressure on the Phnom Penh leadership of the State of Cambodia (SOC) to accept the plan as a whole.
After the visit Avice said that "finding a solution will take longer than we thought at the end of last year" .
Alatas and Avice travelled from Vietnam to Thailand where efforts were made to arrange a meeting of the all-party Supreme National Council (SNC) in Jakarta [see p. 37916 for SNC meeting in Paris in December 1990].
By mid-February all factions had apparently agreed to a Jakarta meeting, but no date had been set.
Maj.-Gen.
Chatichai Choonhaven, then Prime Minister of Thailand, met with all the Cambodian factions in Bangkok, the Thai capital, in early and mid-February in an attempt to win approval for a new initiative which called upon the warring groups to begin rebuilding the shattered Cambodian infrastructure before implementation of a peace settlement.
Members of the rebel National Government of Cambodia (NGC) expressed reservations over the initiative, saying that it should be incorporated into the wider UN draft peace proposal.
The initiative received a warmer welcome from the visiting SOC Foreign Minister, Hor Nam Hong, who nevertheless commented that national restoration would be impossible without a ceasefire agreement.
Replacement of SNC members — Extension of SOC National Assembly term
The SOC replaced three of its six SNC members on Feb. 11 [see p. 37712 for full list].
Gen. Sin Song, Kong Samol and Chem Snguon were replaced by Maj.-Gen.
Sin Sen, Dit Munty and Im Chhunlim.
The SOC National Assembly voted on Feb. 2 to extend its term for one year.
A general election had last been held in Cambodia in 1981, and the term of the Assembly had been routinely extended.
On Feb. 4 Hor Nam Hong announced that it was the last extension of the Assembly's mandate, and that elections would be held in 1992 with or without a political settlement.
Continued fighting in north and north-west — Report on Khmer Rouge strategy
There were reports of serious fighting in the north and north-west of Cambodia during February.
The city of Battambang was subjected to heavy Khmer Rouge artillery fire.
Some reports claimed that the Khmers Rouges had used tanks in an operation around Pailin.
According to an Associated Press report on Feb. 6, an offensive launched by Sihanoukist and KPNLF guerrillas in the north-west was aimed at extending the "liberated zones" to prevent attacks on United States-funded development programmes in these areas.
According to the report, the USA was "pouring millions of dollars into north-western Cambodia" in an attempt to win support for the non-communist rebels ahead of any peace settlement.
The Far Eastern Economic Review of March 7 quoted from Khmer Rouge documents recently obtained in Cambodia, including a 68-page strategy speech by Pol Pot, the former Prime Minister of Democratic Kampuchea (1976-79).
The speech indicated that the Khmers Rouges had abandoned plans to seize power by force of arms, and were directing their efforts to improving their image in the countryside.
The report concluded that the Khmer Rouge tactic was proving successful and that grassroots sympathy for the group had probably been underestimated.
ASIA — PACIFIC
INDIA
Political and economic developments — Foreign relations
During February India's various political parties, factions and power-brokers were increasingly preoccupied with working towards an apparently inevitable 1991 general election.
Congress (I) continued at this stage to prop up Chandra Shekhar's fragile minority Janata Dal (S) government but extracted a number of major concessions for its support.
Resignation of "disqualified" ministers
Five ministers submitted their resignations on Feb. 19 following their disqualification in January from membership of the Lok Sabha (the lower house of the Indian parliament) under the anti-defection law [see p. 37963].
President Ramaswamy Venkataraman accepted the resignations on Feb. 21, but no replacements were announced by Chandra Shekhar.
A Press Trust of India (PTI) report on Feb. 21 claimed that Congress (I) had threatened to withdraw its support for the government unless the five ministers were removed.
The five were: V. C. Shukla (External Affairs); Shakul-Ur-Rehman (Health and Family Welfare); Bhagya Gowardhan (Minister of State for Human Resources); Sarwar Hussain (Minister of State for Food and Civil Supplies); Basavaraj Patil (Minister of State for Steel and Mines).
Government policy reversal on US refuelling rights
Chandra Shekhar announced on Feb. 17 that US military aircraft would no longer be permitted to refuel in India en route to the Gulf war theatre.
Shekhar had granted the USA refuelling rights in late 1990 and the US administration had reportedly responded by helping to facilitate an IMF loan to India [see below].
Opposition criticism of the decision increased during early February; Shekhar was eventually forced to act when Congress (I) announced on Feb. 16 that it would not oppose a no confidence motion against the government unless the refuelling was halted.
Postponement of budget presentation — IMF funding — Balance of payments crisis
On Feb. 20 the government announced that it had postponed the presentation of the 1991-92 budget, due to be placed before the Lok Sabha on Feb. 28.
The announcement came only hours before the Lok Sabha convened for the annual budget session.
A number of reports claimed that the postponement resulted from pressure by Congress (I) leaders who feared that the budget would be sufficiently unpopular seriously to diminish support for the party.
According to some sources the postponement of the budget seriously undermined India's ongoing negotiations with the IMF over a US$2,000 million standby credit.
The Financial Times of Feb. 21 reported that the credit was conditional on the 1991-92 budget incorporating a "credible stabilization package" .
In mid-January India had secured from the IMF the equivalent of US$1,800 million ($777 million as the first tranche of a standby arrangement and $1,009 million under the compensatory and contingency financing facility — CCFF) in order to boost foreign exchange reserves which had been eroded by rising oil prices and the loss of remittances from the Gulf and which had reached an unprecedented low in late 1990.
In November the government had been forced to revalue its gold reserves to provide additional cover for the rupee.
At the same time the Finance Ministry had started to sell its holdings of foreign securities in order to finance imports.
By January, virtually all foreign securities had been sold, but India still came extremely close to technical default on interest payments on its foreign debt.
Visit by External Affairs Minister to China — Agreement to resume border trade
V. C. Shukla visited China on Feb. 1-6 for talks with, amongst others, his Chinese counterpart, Qian Qichen, and the Chinese Premier, Li Peng.
During talks on Feb. 2 the two sides agreed to resume border trade which had been cut off since the 1962 Sino-Indian War.
Shukla's visit was an indication of the improvement in Sino-Indian relations following Rajiv Gandhi's visit to Beijing in December 1988 [see p. 37352].
The second meeting of the China-India Joint Group on Economy, Trade and Science and Technology was held in Beijing on Feb. 6-8.
On the final day of the meeting the Indian Commerce Minister, Subramanian Swamy, and the Chinese Minister of Foreign Economic Relations and Trade, Li Lanqing, signed a protocol on the opening of Garbyang, an Indian town near the Uttar Pradesh-Tibet border, as a new transit point for Sino-Indian border trade.
Under the protocol 14 areas were identified for the purpose of increasing, diversifying and balancing trade and economic co-operation between the two countries.
State developments
Tamil Nadu and Bihar
Opposition parties boycotted the first day of the budget session of the Lok Sabha on Feb. 21, and two state governors were replaced earlier in the month, in connection with the decision to impose president's rule in Tamil Nadu in late January [see p. 37964].
A critic of that decision, Mohammad Yunus Saleem, was dismissed as Governor of Bihar on Feb. 13.
President Venkataraman then attempted to replace him by transferring Surjit Singh Barnala, the Governor of Tamil Nadu, who had himself incurred the central government's displeasure in late January when he refused formally to recommend the imposition of president's rule.
Barnala, however, refused the transfer and resigned his governorship.
Bhishma Narain Singh, a senior Congress (I) leader, was then appointed as Governor of Tamil Nadu, while the Uttar Pradesh Governor, B. Satya Narain Reddy, was appointed to take additional charge of Bihar.
The Independent of Feb. 7 reported that more than 26,000 people had been arrested in Tamil Nadu during a Feb. 6 general strike in protest against president's rule.
Assam
PTI reported on Feb. 2 that the separatist United Liberation Front of Assam (ULFA) had set out its terms for discussions with the central government in a recent letter to the state Governor D. D. Thakur.
The terms included an immediate withdrawal of president's rule (imposed in November 1990 — see pp. 37854-55) and the implementation of a ceasefire.
In late January ULFA had issued a statement saying that it was ready to respond to any mediatory initiative [see p. 37964].
A report in the Financial Times of Feb. 19 claimed that ULFA had stepped up violent attacks in February and had proved itself very much intact despite a large Army presence in the state.
Manavendra Sharma, the Assam Congress (I) general secretary, was assassinated by suspected ULFA guerrillas in Guwahati on Feb. 22.
Punjab
Five militant Sikh groups issued a statement on Feb. 19 rejecting Chandra Shekhar's recent offer of talks on Punjab [see pp. 37915; 37964].
The statement said that Simranjit Singh Mann, the Akali Dal leader who had held talks with Shekhar in December, had no right to speak on their behalf and that they "would not settle for anything less than a separate state" .
Political developments elsewhere at state level
In Goa the new Chief Minister, Ravi S. Naik [see p. 37964], expanded his ministry on Feb. 12 and won a vote of confidence in the state legislative assembly on Feb. 18.
In Manipur the Manipur People's Party (MPP), the leading party in the ruling ULF, split into two factions on Feb. 16, one supporting Chief Minister Raj Kumar Ranbir Singh and the other the MPP president Haobam Bhuban Singh.
In Gujarat the Gujarat Janata Party, led by Indubhai Patel, merged with the state Janata Dal, the ruling party, on Feb. 4.
In district elections in Kerala on Jan. 30 the ruling Left Democratic Front won what the Hindu described as "breath-taking [electoral]victory" , gaining absolute majorities on the councils in 12 of the state's 14 districts.
ASIA — PACIFIC
BANGLADESH
General election
A general election held in Bangladesh on Feb. 27 was dominated by the Bangladesh Nationalist Party (BNP) and the Awami League, both of which had boycotted the previous elections held in March 1988 [see pp. 35835-36].
The elections had been called in mid-December 1990 after student protestors and the opposition parties had forced the resignation of the President, Lt.-Gen. (retd) Hussain Mohammed Ershad [see pp. 37906-07].
The BNP, broadly perceived as leading a right-of-centre grouping, was led by Begum Khaleda Zia, the widow of Maj.-Gen.
Ziaur Rahman (Gen. Zia), President from April 1977 until his assassination in May 1981.
It narrowly failed to win an overall majority in the elections and the caretaker government appointed by Acting President Shehabuddin Ahmed in December 1990 remained in place as of early March 1991.
The Awami League, which led a broadly socialist alliance, was led by Sheikh Hasina Wajed, the daughter of Sheikh Mujibur Rahamn, Bangladesh's first Prime Minister from January 1972 until January 1975, when he became President until his murder in August of that year.
It had been expected to pose a strong challenge to the BNP, but in the event gained less than 30 per cent of the seats.
Ershad's Jatiya Party won over 10 per cent of the seats, including that won by Ershad himself (who was under arrest and facing serious corruption charges) in his home district of Rangpur.
Ershad's trial had been scheduled to open on Feb. 16, but was postponed for a month on a technicality.
Election campaign
The campaigning, which ended on Feb. 25, was widely described as the most peaceful in Bangladesh's turbulent 20-year history.
Nevertheless, some 15 people died in campaign-related clashes.
On Feb. 25 almost 400,000 soldiers and police were deployed across the country to guard polling booths.
In addition, the All-Party Student Unity group, which had played a central role in Ershad's downfall, stationed groups across the country to assist Election Commission officials in ensuring peaceful and fair voting.
The caretaker government had earlier introduced new laws increasing the penalties for election offences.
Polling and results
Voting took place on Feb. 27 for 298 seats in the 330-member Jatiya Sangsad (National Assembly); polling was postponed in two seats due to the death of candidates.
A further 30 seats were reserved for women, to be filled by indirect election by the Jatiya Sangsad.
The election was contested by over 2,700 candidates representing 79 political parties.
Radio Bangladesh described the polling as "brisk" and peaceful.
The Agence France-Presse news agency reported that one person had been killed and 86 injured in clashes between Awami League and BNP supporters.
The election was observed by groups from the United States, Japan, the Commonwealth and other South Asian countries.
In its report the 12-member Commonwealth group described the election as "palpably free and fair" .
It had constituted an "outstanding achievement" by Acting President Ahmed and the Election Commission and was a "triumph for the people of Bangladesh" .
Unofficial results from 294 of the 298 contested seats were broadcast by Radio Bangladesh on March 1.
BNP140 Awami League84 Jatiya Party35 Jamaat-i-Islami18 Bangladesh Communist Party5 Bangladesh Krishak Sramik4 Islami Oikya Jote1 Ganotantrik Party1 Jatiya Samajtantrik Dal (Shahjahan Siraj) 1 Bangladesh Workers Party1 National Awami Party (Muzaffar) 1 Independents3
Unofficial election result — Allocation of seats
ASIA — PACIFIC
PAKISTAN
Earthquake — Introduction of economic reforms — Splits over Gulf policy — Resignation of Foreign Minister
Earthquake
An earthquake measuring 6.8 on the Richter scale hit parts of the North West Frontier Province on the morning of Feb. 1.
According to official estimates, at least 300 people were reported killed, with as many as 500 injured.
[For effects in Afghanistan see this page.]
In Malakand district 111 people were reported to have died, and casualties were also reported from the remote northern districts of Swat, Chitral, Dir and Bajaur.
The earthquake destroyed homes, electricity supplies, telephone lines and roads.
The Prime Minister, Mian Mohammad Nawaz Sharif, who toured affected areas in Chitral and Bajaur on Feb. 2, declared the region a disaster area.
On Feb. 29 Saudi Arabia announced a donation of US$10,000,000 for relief work in the affected areas.
Introduction of economic reforms
On Feb. 7 Sharif announced a programme of economic reforms to encourage foreign investment and to compensate for losses resulting from the Gulf crisis.
The Far Eastern Economic Review of Feb. 14 reported that the government had estimated export losses caused by the war at 30 per cent of 1990's performance.
The current-account deficit for the 1990/91 financial year (starting on July 1, 1990) had already passed US$2,000 million, as compared to US$1,600, million for the whole of fiscal 1989/90.
The new measures lifted all controls on foreign currency entering the country; abolished lengthy approval procedures required for trade transactions; and allowed foreign banks and companies to underwrite capital issues and to have greater access to domestic credit markets.
Restrictions on the repatriation of private and corporate profits and capital were also lifted.
Earlier, on Jan. 22, the government had announced the abolition of ceilings on the rate of interest and front-end fees for foreign private loans for new industries, modernization and replacement.
The government was also pursuing plans for the increased privatization of state-owned enterprises.
However, attempts to push through a programme for the privatization of the banking sector in January foundered on legal difficulties, while on Feb. 19 police in Karachi clashed with union activists protesting against the government's plans to sell off state-owned industries.
Splits over Gulf policy
Amid growing reports of a split between the army and the government over Gulf war policy, Sharif declared on Feb. 9 that his government would not change its stance.
There had been widespread public opposition to the commitment of some 8,000 Pakistani troops to the United States-led coalition [see pp. 37641; 37694].
Criticism within the armed forces of the government's policy had been given public expression in a Jan. 28 speech by the Army Chief of Staff General Mirza Aslam Beg, who described the Gulf war as part of a "Zionist" strategy.
Referring to the spate of recent pro-Iraqi demonstrations, Beg added that "the distrust of the USA among the people [of Pakistan]is because they fully know that Israel's security interests are dearer to it than anyone else" .
In a veiled reference to Beg's speech on Jan. 31, President Ghulam Ishaq Khan warned the army against interfering in politics.
Reports in the Independent of Feb. 24 suggested that splits over the government's Gulf war policy had prompted new political alignments between the army and right-wing opponents of Sharif.
The reports also suggested that there were signs of a growing rapprochement between sections of the Islamic Democratic Alliance (IDA) led by Sharif and pro-US factions in the Pakistan People's Party (PPP) led by Benazir Bhutto.
Resignation of Foreign Minister
On Feb. 26 Sharif announced in Beijing while on an official visit to China, that the Foreign Minister, Sahibzada Yaqub Khan, had resigned for personal reasons.
A retired general, Yaqub Khan had first become Foreign Minister in 1982 during the regime of Gen. Zia ul-Haq [see p. 31707].
There were no reports of an immediate replacement.
It was understood that, despite Sharif's urging him to stay on, Yaqub Khan had been under intense pressure from sections of the IDA critical of his support for the US-led alliance in the Gulf.
ASIA — PACIFIC
AFGHANISTAN
Earthquake — Meeting of Soviet and mujahaddin delegations — Detention of ICRC representatives
An earthquake measuring between 6.5 and 6.8 on the Richter scale, with its epicentre in the Hindu Kush mountains, struck remote northern and eastern parts of Afghanistan on Feb. 2.
A Foreign Ministry spokesman said that almost 1,000 people were estimated to have been killed "and many more injured" .
The earthquake was concentrated in the Badakshan province, largely under the control of anti-government mujahadeen.
Le Monde of Feb. 6 reported that the quake had caused floods which killed at least 200 people in the south-west of the country.
Other reports confirmed that flooding had left an estimated 3,000 people homeless.
The government appealed to the UN and the International Committee of the Red Cross (ICRC) to help co-ordinate relief supplies to the affected areas.
Meeting of Soviet and mujaheddin delegations
The Times of Feb. 16 reported that a high-ranking Soviet delegation had held direct talks with mujaheddin leaders in Islamabad, the Pakistan capital, in an effort to settle the civil war.
On Feb. 15 the Soviet Foreign Ministry spokesman Vitaly Churkin said that, in the course of a visit to Islamabad, the Soviet ambassador to Afghanistan had held routine meetings with "the leadership of the Pakistani Foreign Ministry, representatives of the diplomatic body and members of the Afghan opposition, including Gulbuddin Hekmatyar" .
He added that "the USSR is taking part in the joint efforts to settle the conflict in Afghanistan and in this context it is ready to maintain any contacts, including with the opposition, if they can help to solve the problem" .
He rejected, however, the suggestion made by an Indian newspaper that Soviet representatives had told mujaheddin leaders in Islamabad that the Soviet Union intended to put pressure on President Najibullah to resign.
Detention of ICRC representatives
The International Committee of the Red Cross (ICRC) confirmed on Feb. 21 that four of its representatives had been held by a faction of the mujaheddin, reported to be the Hezb-e-Islami (led by Hekmatyar), since Jan. 12.
The four had left Quetta (Pakistan) to conduct a survey of the Kandahar region.
ASIA — PACIFIC
SRI LANKA
New human rights organization — Ambush
Launch of new human rights organization
A new Sri Lankan human rights organization, the Mothers' Front (MF), claimed on Feb. 8 to have documentary evidence of more than 40,000 "disappearances" in the country in the past three years.
All the documented cases were from the Sinhalese-majority south and centre, and included victims of the security forces and the Sinhalese guerrilla JVP group.
The MF's inaugural convention and rally in Colombo on Feb. 19 was attended by some 10,000 people, including a number of opposition MPs.
Tamil Tiger ambush
At least 44 Sri Lankan soldiers were killed in an ambush set by guerrillas of the Liberation Tigers of Tamil Eelam (LTTE) in the northern district of the island of Mannar on Feb. 17 [see p. 37965 for ending of brief ceasefire in early January].
The deaths constituted the highest government loss in a single incident since the launch of the Tamil separatist campaign in 1983.
The ambush came after a week of heavy army activity in the north, especially around the government-controlled town of Vavuniya, 100 km south of Jaffna.
ASIA — PACIFIC
NEPAL
Visit by Indian Prime Minister
The visit to Nepal of Chandra Shekhar on Feb. 13-15 was the first by an Indian Prime Minister since 1977.
A visit to India by the Nepalese Prime Minister, Krishna Prasad Bhattarai, in June 1990 had marked the end of a 15-month period of soured Indo-Nepalese relations [see p. 37531].
Shekhar's visit confirmed that good relations had been fully restored.
During talks between the two sides, India agreed to purchase all of Nepal's surplus electricity and to upgrade rail links between the two countries.
Election date — Formation of new United Front
It was announced on Feb. 11 that Nepal's first multiparty general election in 30 years would be held on May 30.
The Nepal Praja Parishad, led by Tanka Prasad Acharya (Prime Minister 1956-57), and the Nepali National Congress, led by former Foreign Minister Dilli Raman Regmi, formed a "United Front" on Feb. 20 [for merger of two major factions of the Nepal Communist Party in January 1991 see pp. 37965-66].
ASIA
CHINA
Trials of dissidents
Trials in connection with the June 1989 Tiananmen Square demonstrations continued, with four intellectuals facing charges related to a "conspiracy to overthrow the government" .
The hearings, closed to foreign observers, began on Feb. 5, and on Feb. 12 two of the accused were sentenced to 13 years in prison, but those showing "repentance" were less severely treated.
Those sentenced to 13 years were Chen Zeming, a 37-year-old economist who had gone on hunger strike on Feb. 7 demanding more time for the preparation of his defence, and Wang Juntao, the 32-year-old editor of the banned journal Economic Studies Weekly (of which Chen had been the publisher).
Both had been active in the 1976 movement of dissent, and Wang had subsequently held office in the Communist Party.
A third accused, Liu Gang, who had "shown willingness to repent" , received a six-year sentence.
Chen Xiaoping, 29, a law lecturer, was released.
Official accounts of the trial noted that although he had been involved in plotting the occupation of Tiananmen Square, he had given himself up to the police and had shown "repentance" .
In a letter to his lawyers cited by foreign correspondents in Beijing on Feb. 18, Wang commented on other "leaders and initiators of this movement" who "dared not take responsibility for it and sought to defame it" .
He said that it was strange that so few were facing charges after the widespread upheaval of 1989.
Foreign criticism of Chinese government
A human rights report published by the US State Department in late January 1991 criticized the Chinese government's record, and estimated that 1,000 people had been sentenced to prison or re-education since the Tiananmen Square crackdown.
A Chinese Foreign Ministry spokesman described the report on Feb. 7 as "an unscrupulous interference in the internal affairs of many countries" .
A statement by the human rights organization Amnesty International on Feb. 5 said that the recent trials of Tiananmen dissidents fell "far short of international standards" .
Executions
The Chinese news media reported the executions of nine people in Kunming, Yunnan Province, on Feb. 5 for crimes including drug smuggling, robbery and hooliganism.
On Feb. 6 10 convicted train robbers and five people convicted of robbery and murder were publicly executed in Shanghai and Lanzhou city respectively.
ASIA — PACIFIC
MONGOLIA
MPRP congress — New party leadership
The 20th congress of the ruling Mongolian People's Revolutionary Party (MPRP) was held in Ulan Bator, the capital, on Feb. 25-28 [for 19th congress in 1986 see pp. 34677-78; for extraordinary congress in April 1990 see p. 37374].
The congress was attended by 409 delegates representing some 100,000 party members, as well as the leaders of other Mongolian political parties and delegations from the Soviet and Chinese communist parties.
Gombojavyn Ochirbat, elected general secretary of the MPRP in March 1990 and in April to the restyled post of chair of the central committee [see pp. 37317; 37374], delivered his report to the congress on Feb. 25.
Ochirbat's report described the April 1990 extraordinary congress as a "turning point" , when the MPRP had "taken a step from being a party of theoretical dogmatism towards becoming a creatively thinking party asserting pluralism of opinions" .
On Feb. 28 the congress approved this report and an amended party platform and constitution, and also elected a new leadership, including Budragchaagiyn Dash-Yondon as replacement for Ochirbat.
Dash-Yondon, 45, had been elected to the central presidium at the party's fifth plenum in November 1990, replacing Foreign Minister Tserenpilyn Gombosuren.
He would now chair the new 99-member central committee; delegates also elected a nine-member central presidium (first elected in April 1990 to replace the politburo — see p. 37374), three-member secretariat and 33-member control commission.
New MPRP senior appointments
Central Presidium: *Budragchaagiyn Dash-Yondon,
*Sanduyjavyn Dashdabaa, *Natsagiyn Bagabandi,
*Badamdorjiyn Bathishig, Dansengiyn Lundaijancan, Budsurengiyn Tumen, **Lodongiyn Tudev, Choyjilsurengiyn Purebdorj, Jigjidyn Boldbaatar.
Secretariat: *Natsagiyn Bagabandi, *Badamdorjiyn Bathishig, Jigjidyn Boldbaatar.
*First elected at November 1990 plenum.
**First elected at March 1990 plenum to politburo (renamed in April as central presidium — see p. 37374).
Visit by Prime Minister to Soviet Union
The Prime Minister, Dashiyn Byambasuren, visited the Soviet Union on Feb. 8-13, for talks with, amongst others, President Mikhail Gorbachev and Premier Valentin Pavlov.
At a news conference on his return from the Soviet Union, Byambasuren said that the two sides had reached a basic agreement on the terms of settlement of Mongolia's debt owed to the Soviet Union.
Membership of international and regional organizations — Passage of legislation on oil extraction
Finance Minister Ayursaniyn Bazarhuu signed agreements on Feb. 14 admitting Mongolia to membership of the World Bank and the IMF [see p. 37610 for July 1990 application to join the IMF].
Mongolia joined the Asian Development Bank on Feb. 26.
The People's Rights newspaper reported on Feb. 20 that the Little Hural had passed a law permitting foreign companies to explore and recover Mongolia's estimated 400 million tonnes of oil reserves.
Over 60 foreign firms had expressed interest in investing in Mongolian oil exploration.
ASIA — PACIFIC
TAIWAN
Six-year development plan
On Jan. 31 the Executive Yuan approved an ambitious six-year development plan for 1991-96 to be financed in part by a massive flotation of government bonds.
The plan, which still required approval by the Legislative Yuan, aimed to transform the country's infrastructure.
According to the Prime Minister, Gen. Hau Pei-tsun, it would lead Taiwan into the ranks of the world's top 20 countries in terms of per capita income by the year 2000.
However, the International Herald Tribune of Feb. 1 reported that some Taiwanese economists believed that the plan "could prove to be only a temporary crutch that will fail if the worldwide economic slump continues" .
Drawn up by the Council for Economic Planning and Development, the plan involved expenditure of the equivalent of over US$300,000 million on 779 projects, including road, rail and subway systems, petrochemical and other heavy industry installations, a fourth nuclear power station and new pollution-control facilities.
The plan assumed inflation of 3.5 per cent per year, with unemployment averaging 2.1 per cent, and aimed for 7 per cent annual growth in gross national product (GNP).
Figures released by the Bureau of Statistics on Feb. 12 showed GNP growth down from 7.3 per cent in 1989 to 5.3 per cent in 1990, the lowest for eight years; officials blamed a collapse in the stock market (its index having fallen by almost 80 percentage points between February and October 1990), lower industrial production and falling domestic investment.
ASIA — PACIFIC
NORTH KOREA
Report of attempted coup
The Japanese News Agency, Kyodo, on Feb. 5 quoted Radio Pyongyang — the official mouthpiece of the North Korean government — as having said that the ruling Korean Workers' Party (KWP) had crushed a plot by "anti-revolutionary sectarian elements" within the party.
According to Kyodo, the broadcast did not say when the incident had occurred or who was involved, but did state that the KWP had "liquidated the tendencies of every unorthodox thought which was going to disrupt the lineage" .
Most commentators concluded from this that the aim of the alleged conspiracy had been to prevent Kim Jong Il, 49, from inheriting power upon the death of his father.
It was widely believed that 78-year-old President Kim Il Sung — around whom an extraordinary personality cult had been created — desired that his son should succeed him, but that the younger Kim lacked sufficient authority within either the ruling party or the army to be sure of a smooth succession.
The Kyodo-inspired rumours of a plot were denied by the North Korean Foreign Ministry as "false and groundless" .
South Korean officials also expressed doubts concerning the veracity of the story, and suggested that no such North Korean reports had been monitored in the South.
ASIA — PACIFIC
SOUTH KOREA
Revelation of major bribery scandal — Cabinet and DLP changes
The government of President Roh Tae Woo, who since his election in 1988 had promised to free the South Korean political process from corruption, was undermined during February by the revelation of several scandals.
These included a massive bribery case — the Suso housing scandal — which led Roh to reshuffle his Cabinet and to appear on national television on Feb. 19 to apologize.
The Suso case was revealed when a report on a 10-day investigation by the Seoul District Prosecutor's Office was published on Feb. 18.
The report stated that eight people — including three legislators from the ruling Democratic Liberal Party (DLP), two from the opposition Party for Peace and Democracy (PPD), and a presidential aide — had accepted 990,000,000 won [nearly US$1,400,000]in bribes from a building conglomerate — Hanbo Housing Development Co — in return for pressurizing the Seoul municipal authorities into granting permission for Hanbo to build 4,000 apartments in the Suso district, part of the capital's green belt.
The eight were all arrested, as was the chairman of Hanbo, Chung Tai Soo, who was indicted on charges which included bribery and misappropriation of funds.
Roh stated that the Suso housing scandal was "deeply regrettable" .
He also said that the fact that a staff member in the presidential office had been involved was "due to my carelessness and I apologize to the people for this" .
He restated his "firm resolve to become a clean president…and…to root out any fraud and irregularities and achieve clean and honest government" .
The timing of the Suso affair was particularly unfortunate, for on Feb. 11 three other legislators — two of whom were members of the PPD and one a member of the DLP — were arrested for having accepted bribes from lobbyists.
The three, all members of the legislature's trade and industry committee, were accused of having accepted $60,000 from the Korean Automobiles Manufacturers' Association in return for helping it to gain the National Assembly's approval for a package of state aid.
Changes in Cabinet and ruling party
On Feb. 18, only hours before his television appearance, Roh attempted to bolster confidence in his government by making changes to the Cabinet and to the leadership of the DLP.
Lee Seung Yoon was replaced as Deputy Prime Minister and head of the Economic Planning Board by Choi Gak Kyu.
Lee Hang See, the Construction Minister who had approved the Suso project, was replaced by Lee Jin Seol.
Although not directly linked to the Suso affair, Lee Seung Yoon had been criticized for the country's rising inflation and trade deficit.
Choi, nicknamed "razor blade" because of his sharp intellect, had served as the ruling party's chief policy-maker since October 1990.
Chung Soon Duk was replaced as secretary-general of the DLP by Kim Young Whan, the party's floor leader.
The other important non-Cabinet change was the appointment of Rhee Hai Won, a former Cabinet Minister, to succeed Park Seh Jik as mayor of Seoul.
Notwithstanding Roh's efforts at damage limitation, however, the opposition attempted to exploit the government's vulnerability by suggesting that a cover-up had been perpetrated in order to minimize the government's involvement in the Suso scandal.
Although Roh dismissed suggestions of his personal involvement in the affair as "nonsensical" , the opposition's case was supported by anti-government demonstrations in several cities, including Seoul, by those who demanded a deeper investigation of the Suso affair.
ASIA — PACIFIC
NORTH-SOUTH KOREA
Increased tension — Cancellation of Premiers' talks — Agreement to form joint sports teams
Tension between the two Korean states — technically at war since 1950 — increased during February as a result of the Gulf war and the approach of the annual "Team Spirit" military exercise held jointly by South Korea and the United States.
The 1991 exercise, which was due to involve 140,000 troops and to last for 10 days starting on March 11, was the smallest to be held.
On Feb. 4 President Roh Tae Woo placed South Korea's armed forces on maximum alert, stating that the US preoccupation with the Gulf war meant that "the possibility of North Korean provocation is higher than ever before" .
Roh alleged that North Korea had positioned Scud missiles — similar to the weapons used in the Gulf war by Iraq against Saudi Arabia and Israel — along the Demilitarized Zone (DMZ) which formed the border between the two Korean states.
On Feb. 26 the Supreme Command of the North Korean army ordered a full mobilization of its forces as "a legitimate step to cope with the new war provocation moves of the USA and the South Korean authorities" .
The move was interpreted more as a mechanism for displaying the North's disapproval of the decision to proceed with Team Spirit than a direct response to South Korea's military alert.
The North also expressed its displeasure on Feb. 18 by unilaterally cancelling the fourth round of North-South Premiers' talks scheduled for Feb. 25-28.
Claiming that the climate for the talks had been rendered unsuitable by Team Spirit, the North also cited other factors including the South's co-operation with the coalition forces in the Gulf war and the suppression of anti-government protests in the South.
In the past North Korea had frequently expressed its disapproval of Team Spirit by cancelling any ongoing dialogue for the duration of the exercises.
It was anticipated, therefore, that the Premiers' talks — three sessions of which had been held since September 1990 — would be resumed in April or May.
Agreement over joint sports teams
Despite the deterioration in inter-Korean relations, the two countries did reach an agreement on Feb. 12 to enter joint Korean teams for two international sporting events.
Although efforts to form a joint sports team dated back to 1963 — when the two countries discussed the possibility of joint participation in the 1964 Olympic Games — no consensus had ever been achieved.
Under the terms of the Feb. 12 agreement — which was reached during the fourth round of the current inter-Korean sports talks — the two countries arranged to send a single team to the 41st World Table Tennis Championships in Japan (April 24-May 6) and to the sixth World Youth Football Championships in Portugal (June 14-30).
A working-level committee, established to resolve the practical aspects of joint participation, met on Feb. 21 at Panmunjom in the DMZ.
It reached agreement over a number of issues including selection procedure and the team's uniform, flag and song.
ASIA — PACIFIC
JAPAN
Achievement of majority support for increased Gulf aid
During the course of February Prime Minister Toshiki Kaifu finally managed to achieve the necessary legislative support for his plan to provide an additional US$9,000 million towards the cost of the allied war effort against Iraq.
The issue damaged his Liberal Democratic Party (LDP) government, however, to the extent that opinion polls in late February put support for the government at only 41 per cent, the lowest figure recorded since Kaifu took office in August 1989.
Kaifu's problem lay in attempting to reconcile the domestic unpopularity of the Gulf war with international pressure for Japan to make a major contribution to the war effort.
The Japanese government had pledged $4,000 million in August 1990; half of this was non-military aid to the allied forces and half was in the form of low-interest loans to Egypt, Turkey and Jordan.
However, plans to send members of the Japanese armed forces to the Gulf in a non-combat role had collapsed in November after Kaifu failed to secure the necessary bipartisan support for the measure's approval in the House of Councillors — the upper chamber of the Diet — where the LDP lacked an overall majority.
Having announced on Jan. 24 that Japan would contribute a further $9,000 million to the multinational war effort, the government unveiled the details of the package on Jan. 31.
The $9,000 million was to be borrowed by issuing short-term bonds to be redeemed in the next financial year by increasing taxes on oil and cigarettes and by introducing a corporate tax surcharge.
The package was to be incorporated within a supplementary budget due to be presented for Diet approval prior to the beginning of the new fiscal year on April 1.
The country's largest opposition party, the Social Democratic Party of Japan (SDPJ)— the new English language name adopted by the Japan Socialist Party at a convention held on Jan. 30-Feb. 1 — resolutely opposed both the war and the $9,000 million aid package.
Throughout early February the SDPJ's charismatic leader, Takako Doi, lambasted the Prime Minister for violating Japan's pacifist Constitution.
Kaifu's lacklustre performance in response once again fuelled speculation about his future as leader of the LDP.
The Kaifu government attempted to win the support of the second-largest opposition party, Komeito, or Clean Government Party, which controlled sufficient seats in the upper house to ensure a pro-government majority.
Created by the Soka Gakkai lay Buddhist movement in 1964, in recent years Komeito's level of support had fallen in the aftermath of a series of financial scandals involving the LDP.
By the end of 1990, however, there was evidence that the Komeito leadership wished to move away from its association with the SDPJ and to re-establish co-operation with the LDP.
However, the party was traditionally pacifist, and drew a large amount of support from women, a section of Japanese society strongly opposed to the war.
In a reversal of his previously stated position Kaifu informed the Diet on Feb. 4 that the $9,000 million would be used only for transportation, medical supplies, food and logistical support.
The United States Secretary of State James Baker had previously announced that the Japanese contribution had been offered without precondition and would be used for military purposes, but within hours of Kaifu's pledge the US State Department indicated that it had no objection to such a restriction.
Although denounced by the SDPJ as an entirely cosmetic guarantee, the non-military usage pledge laid the foundation for Komeito's acceptance of the Gulf package.
Kaifu's revised package, including further compromises and in particular meeting Komeito's insistence that the entire sum should not be raised by tax increases, was publicly accepted by Komeito on Feb. 16, thereby making its approval by the end of March almost inevitable.
The small Democratic Socialist Party (DSP)— whose ideological position was to the right of the LDP — also pledged its support to the government.
In its revised form the plan included raising over 40 per cent of the $9,000 million through cuts in government spending, especially in the defence budget.
The remainder was to be raised by the issuing of one-year bonds which would be redeemed by smaller tax increases than originally proposed.
The proposed cigarette tax was abandoned.
The government also postponed the implementation of its plan to send Air Self-Defence Force transport aircraft and crews to help evacuate refugees from the Gulf, and thereby avoided rekindling the debate about the constitutionality of despatching Japanese military units overseas.
Effect of negotiations on Tokyo gubernatorial campaign
A further consequence of LDP efforts to win Komeito's support was evident in the political manoeuvring prior to the forthcoming gubernatorial contest in Tokyo.
The 80-year-old three-term LDP incumbent, Shunichi Suzuki, on Feb. 5 announced his intention to stand for re-election.
Although he had previously enjoyed support from Komeito and the DSP in addition to his own party, in December 1990 the Komeito chairman, Koshiro Ishida, had questioned the wisdom of a candidate of such "advanced age" .
On Feb. 7 Kaifu, Ishida and DSP chairman Keigo Ouchi announced their parties' support for the candidacy of Hisanori Isomura, 61, a television presenter and executive from the Japan Broadcasting Corp.
The Tokyo councillors from the LDP and the DSP defied their leaders, however, by announcing that they would continue to support Suzuki.
The Tokyo gubernatorial contest was seen as a threat to the position of Ichiro Ozawa, the LDP's general secretary who was frequently tipped as a future Prime Minister.
Ozawa's concessions in the negotiations with Komeito were seen by many commentators as having severely undermined his position.
As one of Isomura's strongest supporters, it was widely felt that Ozawa's position could become untenable in the event of Isomura's defeat on April 7.
Nuclear accident
Japan's oldest nuclear reactor was shut down on Feb. 10 after the rupture of a pipe in its cooling system.
The accident occurred at the Mihama plant near Fukui, some 350 km west of Tokyo.
No-one was hurt in the incident, and there was only a slight release of radioactivity (0.134 curies, according to Japanese authorities) into the atmosphere.
The 500-KW pressurized light water reactor, in operation since 1972, was shut down automatically by an emergency cooling system which flooded the reactor core, thereby avoiding the risk of a partial "meltdown" similar to that at Three Mile Island in Pennsylvania in 1979 [see p. 29991].
Amidst expressions of growing concern by environmentalists and politicians, the Japanese Energy Agency later admitted that engineers had been forced to use a back-up water sprinkler system after a valve had failed during the emergency shut-down process.
The Agency also confirmed that technicians had initially delayed taking action, in the belief that a gauge showing an abnormal increase in radioactivity was giving false readings.
The incident provoked calls from anti-nuclear campaigners for the reactor to be closed, together with Japan's other pressurized water reactors, which accounted for 17 of the country's 40 nuclear plants.
A further small release of radioactivity occurred later in the month at the Tokai Mura plant, north-east of Tokyo.
ASIA — PACIFIC
INDONESIA
Amnesty International report on East Timor — Execution of Moslem extremist
A report issued by the human rights organization Amnesty International in early February claimed continuing abuses of human rights in East Timor (annexed by Indonesia in 1975).
According to the report, over 100 people had been detained and possibly tortured in East Timor during the previous six months for their alleged involvement in pro-independence activities.
There had been indications in late 1990 that the security forces faced an upsurge in demonstrations in protest at the transmigration of non-Timorese into East Timor [see p. 37861].
The Agence-France Presse news agency reported on Feb. 9 that Azhar Muhammad Safar, a member of the banned Indonesian Islamic Revolutionary Council (IIRC), had been executed on Feb. 8 [see p. 37577 for execution of Communist Party detainees in February 1990].
Azhar had been sentenced to death in 1982 for his part in the 1981 hijacking by IIRC guerrillas of a domestic airliner to Thailand [see pp. 32256-57].
The Far Eastern Economic Review of Feb. 21 reported that Azhar's execution was widely interpreted as a warning to those contemplating carrying out acts of terrorism in connection with the Gulf war.
ASIA — PACIFIC
MALAYSIA
Cabinet reshuffle
Prime Minister Mahathir Mohamed announced on Feb. 8 the details of a Cabinet reshuffle to take effect from March 15 [see p. 37861 for Cabinet appointed in October 1990].
Mahathir had been forced to make changes after accepting the resignation from politics of his friend and close colleague, Finance Minister Daim Zainuddin.
Daim was replaced by the Education Minister, Anwar Ibrahim, now widely regarded as Mahathir's political heir.
However, the reshuffle also featured the return to the Cabinet of Anwar's chief rival, Abdullah Ahmad Badawi, as Foreign Minister.
The Far Eastern Economic Review of Feb. 21 reported that Daim had made clear his intention to retire before the October 1990 general election.
Anwar, aged 43, had served as Education Minister since 1986, and since 1987 had been a vice-president of the United Malays National Organization (UMNO), the dominant party in the governing federal National Front.
Abdullah had resigned as Defence Minister in 1987 after supporting an unsuccessful rebellion against Mahathir during that year's divisive UMNO general assembly [see p. 35459].
Both Anwar and Abdullah had been re-elected as UMNO vice-presidents at the 1990 general assembly [see p. 37919].
Abu Hassan Omar was transferred from Foreign Affairs to Internal Trade and Domestic Affairs, filling the vacancy arising from the promotion of Sulaiman Daud to take charge of the Education Ministry.
ASIA — PACIFIC
PHILIPPINES
Arrest of rebel leaders — Approval of loans
The authorities scored a significant success in the ongoing struggle against the underground movement within the armed forces — which had been responsible for numerous coup attempts against the government of President Corazon Aquino — with the arrest in Manila on Feb. 6 of Lt.-Col. Victor Batac and Maj. Abraham Purugganan.
Batac, a key strategist in the December 1989 coup attempt [see pp. 37120-21], was alleged to be a member of the executive of the dissident Reform the Armed Forces Movement (RAM), led by Gregorio "Gringo" Honasan, who remained at large.
Purugganan was believed to be a member of a newer, more hardline underground group, known as the Young Officers Union (YOU).
Approval of loan agreements
The IMF on Feb. 20 approved the draft agreement negotiated in January to provide loans to the Philippines totalling 629,400,000 special drawing rights (US$916,000,000).
The loans constituted the core of an 18-month economic stabilization programme designed to reduce inflation and to ease the balance of payments deficit.
The IMF's approval also cleared the way for further assistance from Western aid donors.
During a meeting of the Philippines' consultative group, organized by the World Bank in Hong Kong on Feb. 26, the group pledged a total of $3,300 million to the Philippines in the form of loans and grants for the current year.
The total sum was significantly higher than that which had been anticipated.
ASIA-PACIFIC
AUSTRALIA
Rescue of State Bank of Australia — News Corporation debt agreement
The debt-burdened Australian banking system received a further serious setback on Feb. 10 when the State Bank of South Australia (SBSA) announced a loss of nearly A$1,000 million (US$781 million), and warned that its bad debts could be as high as A$2,500 million, 20 per cent of its loan exposure.
The announcement of the losses, which came to light following a report by the US investment bank J.P.
Morgan, acting as a consultant to the SBSA, did not provoke a public run on the bank and withdrawals were reported to be only slightly higher than normal.
An A$970,000,0000 (US$748,000,000) rescue operation by the state government had been set in motion before the announcement, which followed on from the collapse of the merchant banking section of the State Bank of Victoria in August 1990 [see p. 37658]and that of Western Australia's Rothwells merchant bank in November 1988 [see p. 37920].
The total of bad debts written off by state-owned regional banks had reached almost A$3,000 million since the deregulation in 1984 of banking activities [see p.33533].
These losses were largely put down to aggressive lending to domestic property and corporate sectors, both of which were now in recession.
The South Australia state government ordered an official inquiry on Feb. 11 into the SBSA's management and auditing procedures.
The federal Treasurer Paul Keating suggested that the state should either offer up the SBSA for sale, or sell off some of its other assets to cover the losses, rather than raise taxes in order to keep control of the bank.
News Corporation debt deal
News Corporation, an international media group controlled by Rupert Murdoch, on Feb. 1 finalized a three-year US$7,600 million rescheduling agreement with 150 banks covering its short and medium term debts.
Recent heavy capital expenditure coinciding with the extreme tightening of credit facilities had created a liquidity crisis and led to share the group's share price falling to a low in January of A$3.30 on the Australian Stock Exchange.
News of the agreement and the announcement of a 34 per cent increase to A$183 million in net profits for the six months to the end of December 1990 helped the share value to recover to stand at A$7.26 on Feb. 14.
Analysts, however, said that the result confirmed that the group, whose debts totalled more than US$7,800 million, would be unable to meet outstanding debt repayment requirements without selling off approximately US$1,000 million of its assets.
Under the agreement News Corporation was permitted to borrow a further US$600 million on condition that this was repaid as part of a US$800 million reduction in its debt burden by February 1992.
A further US$400 million was required to be repaid every six months thereafter.
The rate of interest payable to the banks to cover all outstanding loans would be 1 percentage point over market rates.
During the period of the rescheduling, the group would be prohibited from raising dividend payments by more than 10 Australian cents per ordinary share, and its performance would be monitored by a steering committee made up of representatives of the banks.
An additional undisclosed fee had to be paid to cover expenses associated with the organization of the rescheduling.
The group confirmed that it would not sell its "core" media and film assets to meet the terms of the agreement.
EUROPE
SOVIET UNION
Western "economic coup" plot allegation
Prime Minister Valentin Pavlov on Feb. 12 made the astonishing announcement that January's sudden withdrawal of Rbs50 and Rbs100 banknotes had been prompted by the discovery of a Western plot to flood the Soviet economy with billions of roubles to create artificial hyper-inflation.
He said that the aim had been the overthrow of President Mikhail Gorbachev, and the takeover of the Soviet government by "advocates of swift privatization" , who would have sold the country's assets to the highest bidders.
He also insinuated that pro-independence republics were implicated, commenting that Soviet monetary collapse would make it easier for "ultra-radicals in a number of republics to solve the problem of changing over to their own currencies" .
Interviewed in the trade union newspaper Trud, Pavlov claimed that (unnamed) banks in Switzerland, Austria and Canada had co-operated with non-governmental Soviet organizations to buy large-denomination rouble notes in massive quantities on the black market, and had been smuggling them out of the country.
He claimed that their plans to dump the roubles back into the Soviet money supply had been forestalled, a matter of hours before it was due to begin, only by his quick decision to order the immediate withdrawal of the high-denomination rouble notes.
Pavlov combined his allegations with an attack on free marketeers and private enterprise joint venture companies.
He suggested that many Western partners in joint ventures were blatant speculators, "shadow wheeler-dealers" and the "rejects of entrepreneurship" .
Pavlov's allegations contradicted earlier official statements which portrayed the currency confiscation as an attack on black marketeers and excess money supply.
The allegations were greeted with incredulity by Western commentators, who also saw in Pavlov's xenophobic and anti-free market assessments further confirmation of the ascendency of conservative thinking in the Soviet leadership.
Many concluded that he was trying to shift elsewhere the blame for the hugely unpopular currency confiscation, and they also noted the likely damage Pavlov's comments would do to his government's credibility in future dealings with foreign banks and companies, especially if the Soviet Union needed to reschedule its foreign debt in 1991 or 1992, as many bankers feared.
Apparently mindful of this consequence, on Feb. 22 Pavlov told a press conference that he "regretted very much" that his accusations had been interpreted as an attack on foreign businesses.
He stressed that his government "stands for co-operation with the West and will encourage foreigners to own up to 100 per cent of businesses" .
Nevertheless, he repeated accusations that the Soviet Union had been the victim of large-scale currency swindles.
On Feb. 8 the USSR State Bank (Gosbank) announced that January's rouble note withdrawal had netted some Rbs40,000 million from a total of Rbs48,200 million-worth of Rbs50 and Rbs100 notes previously in circulation.
Since those Rbs40,000 million roubles represented money exchanged legally for lower denomination notes, the amount of money actually withdrawn from supply was therefore only Rbs8,200 million, less than one-third of the target Rbs26,000 million (i.e. 20 per cent of the money supply; US$1.00=Rbs0.5425 as at Feb. 11, 1991).
Russian government involvement in suspect financial dealings
Russian Federation Deputy Premier Gennady Filshin, one of the leading architects of the republic's radical economic reform, resigned on Feb. 13 in the midst of a financial scandal involving the kind of suspect foreign investment dealings referred to by Pavlov.
The affair had come to light in late January when a United Kingdom businessman, Paul Pearson, representing a South African-registered company, Dove Trading International, was stopped and searched at Moscow's Sheremetyevo Airport on his way out of the country.
He was found to be carrying a letter from Filshin which endorsed a deal whereby Dove Trading International would provide a credit line of US$7,500 million to a Russian firm, The Revival of the Urals Countryside, to import consumer goods and food.
In return, Dove Trading International would be allowed to spend inside the Soviet Union profits from the sales of the goods calculated at Rbs140,000 million.
Filshin claimed that the profits would be used for investment in Russian industry, likening it to arrangements under the Marshall Plan in post-war West Germany, whereby the United States had used depreciated German marks to invest in German industries.
However, the State Security Committee (KGB) claimed that Dove Trading International would have engaged simply in asset-stripping, using the profits to buy exportable Soviet commodities such as caviar, gold and diamonds for sale abroad for hard currency.
The affair was seized on by the Soviet conservative press, which made particular note of the implication in the deal that Rbs140,000 million was worth US$7,500 million, which suggested a calculation based on the black-market exchange rate.
Filshin claimed that he had been set up, and announced that he was resigning in protest at an "anti-democratic campaign" being waged by the KGB and "central Soviet structures" to discredit the Russian Federation government.
Enhanced powers for KGB against "economic sabotage" 
Gorbachev on Jan. 26 issued a decree "on measures to promote the struggle against economic sabotage and other economic crime" .
This empowered the KGB and police to enter the premises of any enterprise or institution (including foreign businesses) without any form of search warrant, to carry out inspections of equipment, stock, documentation and accounts, to demand samples of goods, to seal safes and cashier offices, and to inspect bank records.
Critics of the decree expressed concern that it would affect not only the targeted black marketeers but legitimate entrepreneurs in co-operatives and small private businesses, and would act as a further deterrent to foreign investors.
The Financial Times of Jan. 28 noted that the co-operative and private sector was already reeling from the previous week's monetary reform, having "relied heavily on the large cash economy and soaring prices to fuel its takeoff" .
Joint army-police patrols
From Feb. 1 soldiers joined police in patrolling the streets of major cities and towns throughout the Soviet Union.
This had been authorized in a joint directive issued by Defence Minister Dmitry Yazov and Interior Minister Boris Pugo on Dec. 29, 1990.
The directive had been unpublicized, and was only confirmed officially on Jan. 25 after the news had been leaked by the independent Interfax news agency (which was now operating with the support of the Russian Federation government and Moscow city council after Gosteleradio had withdrawn its support in January — see p. 37972).
An Interior Ministry spokesman announced that joint patrols would be organized to combat violent crime and attacks on monuments and on the army, and to police "mass gatherings" in case of civil disturbance.
The directive was reinforced by a presidential decree issued on Jan. 29.
Many liberal politicians complained of the automatic extension to the army of the rights of police in respect of civilians.
Concern was also expressed that the sight of armoured vehicles on the streets would heighten public fears of the onset of dictatorship.
The Russian Federation government on Jan. 29 called the patrols "tantamount to a state of emergency" , and complained that their presence in Russian cities and towns would be a violation of Russian sovereignty.
Protests were also heard from the leaderships in the Baltic republics, Georgia and Armenia, all of them making it clear that they would not co-operate with the army in organizing joint patrols, while the Moldavian Supreme Soviet on Jan. 31 passed a resolution saying that the presidential decree had no legal force on its territory.
Senior Soviet officials stressed that the patrols were an emergency measure decided in the face of the soaring crime rate, and denied that they would be used for political ends or would violate human rights.
In response to a formal complaint from the Russian Federation Supreme Soviet, the USSR Committee for Supervision of the Constitution gave an interim ruling on the legality of the joint patrols on Feb. 15.
It found "substantial flaws" in Gorbachev's decree of Jan. 29 and in the regulations to enforce it.
It commented that in the latter "there is lacking a clear legal procedure for the justification and terms for the use of the armed forces of the USSR inside the country when no state of emergency has been declared" .
No action was likely to result, however, at least until a final ruling from the Committee.
1990 crime figures
Grim statistics revealing the extent of the crime wave were announced by Pugo on Feb. 19.
There had been nearly 28,000,000 crimes reported in 1990, an increase of 13 per cent over 1989.
Serious crime, including murder and rape, had risen by 15 per cent, burglary by 18 per cent , and drug offences by 24 per cent .
Yeltsin's call for Gorbachev's resignation
Russian Federation President Boris Yeltsin used a live nationwide television broadcast on Feb. 19 to launch a personal attack on Gorbachev and to demand his immediate resignation.
It provoked a furious backlash from Yeltsin's opponents, including those inside the Russian Federation Supreme Soviet, where moves were set in train to hold a vote of no confidence in his leadership.
Yeltsin's 30-minute broadcast was permitted only after four weeks of difficult negotiations with the USSR Television and Radio State Committee (Gosteleradio — see below).
For much of the broadcast he was answering questions put by two interviewers, but as it was drawing to a close he suddenly began reading from a prepared text, declaring: "I warned in 1987 that Gorbachev has in his character an aspiration for absolute personal power.
He has already done this and has brought the country to dictatorship, to presidential rule as they call it.
I distance myself from the position and the policy of the President and advocate his immediate resignation [and]the handing over of power to a collective body, the Federation Council."
He concluded by appealing to the people of Russia for support.
The CPSU newspaper Pravda on Feb. 20 expressed shock at Yeltsin's "irresponsible appeal to confrontation" .
There was condemnation in speeches on the same day in the USSR Supreme Soviet, followed by the approval by 292 votes to 29, with 27 abstentions, of a resolution declaring that Yeltsin's statement violated the Constitution, and calling on the Russian Federation Supreme Soviet to declare its position.
On Feb. 21 Yeltsin's opponents in the Russian Federation Supreme Soviet condemned his leadership and in an apparent attempt to oust him they succeeded in getting the backing of the required one-fifth of deputies to convene an emergency sitting of the Russian Federation Congress of People's Deputies on March 28.
Yeltsin was not present at the Russian Federation Supreme Soviet session.
Moscow demonstrations
Up to 400,000 people took part on Feb. 22 in a rally in Moscow's Manezh Square in support of defending glasnost in the face of a revival of political censorship [see below; p. 37972].
By contrast a rally was held in Manezh Square on the following day in support of the authority of the army and CPSU and the indissolubility of the Soviet Union.
Attendance was put officially at 300,000 people, but unofficial estimates were as low as 40,000.
On Feb. 24 over 100,000 people rallied in Manezh Square in support of Yeltsin.
CPSU appointments
The Moldavian Commmunist Party (CP) on Feb. 4 elected Grigory Yeremey as party first secretary.
He thus became, ex officio, a member of the politburo of the Communist Party of the Soviet Union (CPSU).
Yeremey succeeded Pyotr Luchinsky (first secretary since November 1989 — see p. 37047) who was elected by the CPSU central committee plenum on Jan. 31 to the CPSU secretariat in place of Gennady Yanayev (the USSR Vice-President since Dec. 26 — see pp. 37903-04).
A split in the Estonian Communist Party was recognized by the Jan. 31 plenum when it elected to the politburo Lembit Annus, who was first secretary of a recently created "Estonian CP on the CPSU platform" .
It was confirmed on Feb. 19 that the CPSU was continuing also to recognize as a constituent party the pro-independence Estonian CP, led by chairman Vaino Vaelaes and first secretary Enn-Arno Sillari.
Sillari also sat on the CPSU politburo.
Lithuania independence referendum
With the all-union referendum on the new Union Treaty scheduled to take place on March 17, Lithuania reinforced its refusal to take part by holding its own national referendum on Feb. 9.
Voters were asked the question: "Are you in favour of the Lithuanian state being an independent, democratic republic?" 
According to official results announced on Feb. 11 the turnout was 84.43 per cent of eligible voters, of whom 90.47 per cent voted "yes" and only 6.56 per cent voted "no" .
The referendum had been called by a resolution of the Lithuanian Supreme Council on Jan. 16 (the day on which the USSR Supreme Soviet decided the scheduling of the all-union referendum), and was clarified by a further resolution on Jan. 18.
Gorbachev did not respond until Feb. 5, when he issued a decree declaring that Lithuania's referendum was juridically invalid, and ordering elected Lithuanian bodies to ensure the holding of the all-union referendum.
The rules of the referendum gave a vote to anyone who had been permanently resident in the republic since before Nov. 3, 1989.
This formula meant that Soviet military officers and their families permanently stationed in the republic could take part, but not conscript soldiers.
In their enthusiastic welcome for the referendum result, Lithuanian leaders pointed out that many ethnic Poles and Russians (who made up 20 per cent of Lithuania's population) must have voted for independence, contradicting Soviet allegations that Lithuania's minorities felt persecuted and needed to be defended by Soviet troops.
However, low turnouts were reported in the predominantly Russian Vilnius suburb of Novaya Vilnya, and in the predominantly Polish rural district of Salcininkai.
While the referendum had not been intended as legally binding by the government, on the strength of the result the Supreme Council on Feb. 11 adopted a constitutional law proclaiming Lithuania "an independent democratic republic" .
It also adopted a declaration "on the equitable participation of the Lithuanian republic in the community of world states" , which called on "all states, their parliaments and governments to take into account the results of the poll…and render assistance to Lithuania" .
Renewed Lithuanian-Soviet negotiations
Signalling a partial retreat from the hardline stance which had apparently allowed January's military crackdown, Gorbachev on Feb. 1 published decrees announcing the composition of delegations to hold talks with the three Baltic republics on "political, social and economic questions" .
Each was to be led by a Soviet Deputy Premier.
Preliminary negotiations between Lithuania and the Soviet government, suspended since the beginning of January, were resumed on Feb. 7.
On Feb. 21 the post of Minister in the Lithuanian government for talks with the Soviet Union was created by Prime Minister Gediminas Vagnorius [whose appointment on Jan. 13, replacing Albertas Shiminas, was omitted from the report on p. 37944].
Kazimiera Prunskiene, Prime Minister until Jan. 8, was reported on Feb. 20 to have returned to Lithuania.
On Feb. 28 she joined the Supreme Council's economic commission, although there were suggestions that she intended to stand in opposition to the administration of President Vytautas Landsbergis.
Recall of Soviet ambassador to Iceland
It was announced on Feb. 14 that the Soviet ambassador in Reykjavík, Igor Krasavin, was being recalled until "suitable explanations" were given by Iceland regarding the Jan. 31 decision to establish diplomatic relations with Lithuania as an independent republic.
of Communist Party leader
Developments in other republics
Georgia: Situation in South Ossetia — Disarming of Mkhedrioni paramilitary group — National Guard — Resignation
The inter-ethnic conflict in the autonomous oblast (region) of South Ossetia took a new turn on Feb. 1 with the suspension of electricity and water supplies into the region from Georgia proper.
A week later it was reported that a two-month-old economic and information blockade was being stepped up by Georgian militants, who were preventing convoys of emergency food supplies for Ossete communities arriving from the North Ossetia autonomous region [for map see p. 37971].
Violence continued to be reported mainly from communities outside Tskhinvali, the capital of South Ossetia, while in the first week of February Soviet television showed footage of the principal buildings in Tskhinvali ransacked apparently by Georgian militants during January's violence.
At the same time the Soviet Red Cross and Red Crescent Society was reported to be dealing with 8,000 Ossete refugees who had fled into North Ossetia, and up to 3,000 Georgians from South Ossetia who had fled to Georgia proper.
It was reported on Feb. 11 that Torez Kolumbegov, the chair of the South Ossetian regional soviet and president of the self-proclaimed "South Ossetian Soviet Democratic Republic" who had been arrested by Georgian police at the end of January, had been arraigned on charges of fomenting inter-ethnic hostility and abuse of office.
A USSR Supreme Soviet resolution on Feb. 20 gave the Georgian leadership three days to extend a state of emergency throughout South Ossetia, to disarm paramilitary gangs and to restore electricity and food supplies, or face having those measures imposed (the existing state of emergency covered only Tskhinvali and the Dzhava district).
USSR Interior Minister Boris Pugo announced that the death toll from the inter-ethnic violence since January stood at 33 (14 Ossetes and 19 Georgians).
Although it was reported on Feb. 26 that electricity supplies were being restored the resolution was otherwise ignored, despite six further deaths in armed clashes on Feb. 23-24.
Georgia's President Zviad Gamsakhurdia continued to warn of the prospect of Gorbachev attempting to impose presidential rule, and he told the Georgian Supreme Soviet on Feb. 27 that he believed that Gorbachev was preparing to detach South Ossetia and the other troubled enclave of Abkhazia from Georgia if the republic persisted in refusing to sign the new Union Treaty.
Early on Feb. 18, Soviet troops supported by three tanks and 10 armoured vehicles stormed a training camp of the Mkhedrioni, a paramilitary Georgian nationalist group, near the Georgian capital, Tbilisi.
Unofficial reports said that three Mkhedrioni militiamen and two soldiers had been wounded, and that all 30 Mkhedrioni in the camp had been arrested.
The Mkhedrioni, who opposed the Georgian government as insufficiently militant in securing Georgia's independence, claimed 7,000 members.
It was the most prominent of a number of paramilitary groups which had emerged in Georgia and which had created a climate of growing instability characterized by frequent gun battles on the streets of Tbilisi and other towns [for Mkhedrioni involvement in September 1990 pre-election violence see p. 37723].
Recently the Georgian Supreme Soviet had responded to this increasing violence by voting to make the carrying of firearms by the general public illegal, and had given the population until the end of February to surrender weapons.
Later on Feb. 18 the leader of the Mkhedrioni, Dzhaba Iosseliani, addressed a rally of around 2,000 supporters on Tbilisi's main Rustaveli Prospekt.
He alleged that Gamsakhurdia was behind the raid on the camp, and announced that he was forming a political party to combat the "fascism" of Gamsakhurdia's Georgia government.
On the following day, Iosseliani was arrested by Georgian police and on Feb. 22 the government claimed that the Mkhedrioni had been "neutralized" as a result of a republic-wide crackdown.
On Feb. 8 the official news agency Tass had disclosed that Georgia's Prime Minister Tengiz Sigua had written to the director of an armaments factory in the Russian city of Tula offering to barter Georgian food products for guns and ammunition.
The Georgian order was for 10,000 hunting rifles, 500 pistols and 500 Kalashnikov automatic rifles.
Sigua on Feb. 18 denied insinuations that the weapons were intended for the new Georgian National Guard, and claimed that his government was seeking to replenish Georgian Interior Ministry weapons stores depleted by confiscations ordered by the USSR Interior Ministry and by thefts perpetrated by paramilitary groups.
The first 1,000 guardsmen were sworn in at a ceremony in Tbilisi on Feb. 23, the Soviet Army Day public holiday.
Avtandil Margiani resigned as first secretary of the Georgian CP on Feb. 18, citing the complex political situation in Georgia and the loss of the party's prestige among the public.
He had held the post only since a December 1990 congress when the party had been declared independent of the CPSU [see p. 37920].
He was replaced by D. Mikeladze.
Ukraine: Restoration of Crimean ASSR
The Ukrainian Supreme Soviet voted on Feb. 12 to restore to the Crimea the status of an autonomous Soviet socialist republic (ASSR), within the Ukraine.
This followed a referendum in January, held without Supreme Soviet approval, in which a large majority of the Crimea's predominantly Russian population had voted for the restoration of the Crimean ASSR outside the Ukraine.
It was unclear whether the restoration would be recognized as constitutionally valid by the USSR authorities by their giving the Crimea a seat on the Federation Council (a recent spate of autonomous regions' and districts' unilaterally proclaiming themselves ASSRs, and indeed of ASSRs' proclaiming themselves full republics, had so far gone unrecognized — see pp. 37664; 37788).
Moldavia: President's resignation offer
Moldavia's President Mircha Snegur tendered his resignation on Feb. 21.
He complained of increased media attacks on him by the Moldavian Communist Party under its new first secretary Grigory Yeremey [for whose appointment see above], featuring allegations that his administration was failing to protect party property; of "back-stage scheming" against him in Moldavia's Supreme Soviet; and of his inability to work with republican Prime Minister Mircha Druk.
Snegur asked to stay in office pending direct presidential elections, but the Moldavian Supreme Soviet refused his resignation, and instead formed a commission to formulate proposals to reform executive power in Moldavia.
Azerbaijan: Convening of new Supreme Soviet
More than four months after the start of elections, the new Azerbaijan Supreme Soviet finally convened on Feb. 5, albeit with 20 of the 360 seats still vacant.
More than 80 per cent of deputies were from the Azerbaijan CP, while the opposition deputies from the Popular Front, the Social Democrats, the Greens and the Union of the Democratic Intelligentsia united in parliament in an umbrella Democratic Bloc of Azerbaijan.
On Feb. 7 the Supreme Soviet re-elected Gasan Gasanov as Prime Minister.
Kirghizia: Renaming of capital
By decision of the Kirghiz Supreme Soviet on Feb. 5, Kirghizia's capital city, Frunze, reverted to its original name of Bishkek.
Corrupted to Pishpek in the 19th century following Kirghizia's conquest by the Uzbek Khanate of Kokand, the name had been changed in 1926 in honour of Mikhail Frunze, a Bolshevik military commander and native of the city who had established Soviet rule in Central Asia.
Media developments
New Broadcasting Corporation — Journalists' Union congress
A new All-Union State Television and Radio Broadcasting Corporation was set up by presidential decree on Feb. 8 in place of Gosteleradio, the USSR State Television and Radio Committee.
Leonid Kravchenko, hitherto Gosteleradio chair [see p. 37864], was named as chair of the Corporation.
The reorganization took account of the fact that many republican television and radio committees had become independent of the Gosteleradio structure, and the new Corporation would be an umbrella administration only for Soviet Central Television, Leningrad Television, All-Union Radio and Moscow Radio World Service.
Kravchenko came in for fierce criticism at the seventh congress of the USSR Journalists' Union held on Feb. 5-7, over the return of political censorship of state television, as witnessed recently in the withdrawal of the Vzglyad documentary series and the return by the flagship news programme Vremya to official propaganda and exhortation.
The congress elected as the union's new chair Eduard Sagalayev, a former head of Soviet Central Television's main current affairs unit, who was described by The Times of Feb. 8 as a "leading advocate of free speech and Western-style news reporting" .
Curbs on Radio Russia
In what many observers regarded as a further example of the new censorship, Gosteleradio on Feb. 1 withdrew from Radio Russia two frequencies giving it an audience throughout the Soviet Union, and assigned to it instead a frequency on which it could reach only 60 per cent of the population and which reduced the quality of reception.
The Moscow-based independent station, which had begun broadcasting less than two months earlier, was sympathetic to the views of the Russian Federation leadership, and was known to have infuriated Gorbachev and leading conservatives with its critical reporting of January's military crackdown in Lithuania and Latvia [for February disagreement between Yeltsin and Gosteleradio see above].
Alleged assassination attempts on prominent journalist
An attempt to murder a well-known television journalist, Aleksandr Nevzorov, was reported on Feb. 3.
He escaped unharmed from an alleged ambush of his car near the Latvian capital, Riga.
Official Soviet reports suggested that Latvian nationalists were responsible, but the Latvian government cast doubts on the authenticity of the reported events, suggesting that the incident had been staged by pro-Soviet extremists in order to raise political tensions.
For many pro-reform Soviet citizens, Nevzorov personified the hardline editorial shift in television broadcasting.
Previously regarded as a champion of glasnost for the controversial 600 Sekund programme in which he frequently had investigated the Soviet criminal underworld and corrupt officials, he had become cast in the role of chief apologist for hardline government policies after broadcasts he had made justifying January's military crackdown in the Baltic republics.
There was growing scepticism about an earlier reported attempt on Nevzorov's life: on Dec. 12, 1990, he allegedly had been wounded by a gunman who had lured him to a rendezvous in a Leningrad street by offering him sensitive documents.
This had brought Nevzorov international media attention because of a suggested link to mafia-style organized crime and public expressions of concern from Gorbachev, but increasingly there were suspicions that Nevzorov worked for the KGB (State Security Committee), and that the KGB had staged the shooting to enhance his reputation as an heroic investigative reporter.
Murder of third Orthodox priest
Hegumen Serafim Shlykov, a priest at a Russian Orthodox Church in central Moscow, was beaten to death in his flat on Feb. 2.
He was the third Orthodox priest to be murdered in Moscow in five months.
As with the previous killings police suggested robbery as the motive, although church and media sources suspected a campaign of political murders of radical priests.
US aid to Baltic republics — Baker warning against CFE ratification
Two developments on Feb. 6 were taken by commentators as signals of the deterioration in Soviet-United States relations resulting from the Soviet leadership's hardline shift of the previous two months.
The US administration announced emergency medical aid to be channelled directly to the Baltic republics.
Commenting that President Bush wanted to demonstrate "US concern for the situation in the Baltic states" , White House spokesman Marlin Fitzwater said that the administration would give US$5,000,000 towards the cost of transporting medical supplies and equipment which had been donated by private companies.
Carefully structured so as not to antagonize the central Soviet authorities, however, the package also included humanitarian aid to cancer victims of the 1986 Chernobyl disaster.
In the US Congress, Secretary of State James Baker recommended that the President should not submit the Treaty on Conventional Armed Forces in Europe (CFE), signed in Paris in November 1990 [see p. 37838], for Senate ratification.
Alluding to recent Soviet attempts to remove from the purview of the treaty three motorized divisions due for disbandment, by reclassifying them as naval shore defence units, he declared that difficulties were being encountered which "go to the heart of credibility and trust" .
Baker coupled his recommendation with expressions of support for the "courageous people" of the Baltic states, and a warning to the Soviet leadership that "perestroika cannot succeed at gunpoint" .
EUROPE
ALBANIA
Renewed unrest — President's rule
President Ramiz Alia declared presidential rule on Feb. 20 following renewed student-led demonstrations in the capital, Tirana.
Earlier that day there had been dramatic scenes in Tirana's central Skanderbeg Square as protesters toppled a huge statue of Enver Hoxha, Albania's hardline Stalinist leader from 1944 until his death in 1985.
Student strike — Demonstrations
Students at Tirana's Enver Hoxha University began boycotting classes on Feb. 6 to press demands for improvements to their accommodation, for an end to compulsory study of Marxist theory and the history of the ruling Party of Labour (PLA), and for a change in the university's name.
By Feb. 9 sympathy strikes had broken out at higher education establishments in several cities.
The protests were stepped up on Feb. 18 when over 700 Enver Hoxha University students and lecturers started a hunger strike.
On Feb. 20 thousands of people rallied at the university campus in the support of the hunger strikers.
Police fired warning shots over the heads of the demonstrators to disperse them, but this angered the crowd, and several thousand people marched on Skanderbeg Square.
Amid chants of "Hoxha-Hitler!" ,
Hoxha's statue was pulled down, and there were clashes with police in which up to 20 people were injured according to opposition sources, although eyewitness reports said also that some members of the security forces had gone over to the side of the demonstrators.
Later, large concentrations of police backed up by tanks appeared on the streets.
A Hoxha monument was also attacked on Feb. 20 by protesters in the port of Durrës, which 11 days earlier had been the scene of rioting by would-be emigrants trying illegally to board a ferry for Italy.
Creation of Presidential Council — New government
In response to the events in Skanderbeg Square, Alia announced in a statement broadcast on the evening of Feb. 20 that he had decided to assume the "direction of affairs of state" himself, and to form a Presidential Council and a new government, in view of the gathering political crisis and the threat to "national freedom, independence and sovereignty" .
Denouncing the demonstrators as "vandals" , and suggesting that behind them stood "dark forces" seeking to destroy Albania, he appealed for the co-operation of opposition parties in restoring calm.
On the following day the main opposition Democratic Party (formed in December 1990 — see p. 37924) warned against further demonstrations, but blamed the government for the events of Feb. 20.
On Feb. 22 Alia dismissed the government of Prime Minister Adil Carcani, and appointed a provisional government to hold office until the multiparty elections scheduled for the end of March.
Including only nine of the 24 members of the outgoing government, the provisional government was led by Fatos Nano, hitherto a Deputy Chair, who had enjoyed a rapid rise in the two previous government reshuffles since December.
The Presidential Council, which was authorized to formulate and enact "necessary measures" to tackle the country's political and economic crises, was also named by Alia on Feb. 22.
The members were Nano, Supreme Court President Kleanthi Koci, writer Kico Blushi, Maj.-Gen.
Haxhi Lleshi (President from 1953 to 1982), leading academics Lefter Xhuveli and Rexhep Mejdani, journalist Minella Dalani, and a senior army officer, Xhenet Muco.
Albanian Provisional Council of Ministers
***Fatos NanoChair
*Shkelqim CaniDeputy Chair
*Aleks LuarasiMinister, General Secretary of the Council of Ministers Muhamet KapllaniForeign Affairs
*Kico MustaqiPeople's Defence Gramoz RucajInternal Affairs Dashamir KoreJustice Leontjev CuciChair of State Planning Commission Drini MeziniIndustry, Mines and Energy
*Qemal DishaFinance
**Ylli BufiFood and Light Industry Ahmet OsjaAgriculture
**Shane KorbeciForeign Trade and Economic Co-operation with Foreign Countries Altin YlliDomestic Trade Leonard NanoConstruction
*Sakvador FranjaTransport Kastriot IslamiEducation
*Sabit BrokaHealth Zydi PepaChair of State Control Commission
*Held same post in outgoing government.
**Retained from outgoing government, with expanded portfolio.
***Retained from outgoing government, with new responsibilities.
Concessions to demonstrators — Continuing protests
One of the last acts of Carcani's government was the announcement on Feb. 20 that it was acceding to the students' demand to strip Hoxha's name from Tirana University.
The hunger strike was immediately called off, but anti-Hoxha demonstrations continued in Tirana.
There were also reports from around the country of pro-Hoxha rallies, apparently orchestrated by the PLA.
On Feb. 21 protesters attacked bookshops and burned Hoxha's works.
The anti-Hoxha demonstrations were put down by the police and troops with increasing force, and on Feb. 23 it was officially reported that two demonstrators and a policeman had been shot dead when a crowd reportedly tried to storm the Tirana military academy (the opposition claimed up to 30 dead, and attributed some of the shooting to clashes between rival pro- and anti-reform factions within the army).
Tanks were withdrawn from Tirana on Feb. 25 and the city was reported to be calm, but army patrols remained, and sporadic gunfire was reported each night until the end of the month.
On Feb. 28 it was announced that 54 people had been arrested in connection with the attacks on Hoxha monuments.
On the previous day the Democratic Party had claimed that at least 200 people had been arrested for their part in the previous week's demonstrations.
Release of more political prisoners
Representatives from the recently formed Forum for the Defence of Human Rights met on Feb. 12 with the then Interior Minister Hekuran Isai, and received from him a list of 108 political prisoners who had been released unannounced since Jan. 6, according to a Forum statement issued on Feb. 18.
The Forum statement, reported by Tirana radio home service, also called for the immediate release of an estimated 107 political prisoners still in detention.
Legalization of private car ownership
A government decree on Feb. 27 authorized the private ownership of cars and motorcycles.
This had been banned throughout Albania's more than four decades of communist rule, and the only motorized vehicles seen on the streets were those used by state enterprises, by the army and police, and by senior officials.
The decree allowed enterprises and institutions to sell their vehicles to private citizens through state retail outlets.
Legalization of beards
Another sign of liberalization was the end of a ban on beards.
Until the start of reforms in late 1990 a beard had been considered an "alien manifestation" , and bearded men had been liable to arrest, but the Guardian of Feb. 9, quoting an opposition activist, reported that beards were no longer illegal.
EUROPE
BULGARIA
Economic reform
The removal of price subsidies on many basic goods and utilities, with effect from Feb. 1, marked the first stage of Bulgaria's major market economic reforms.
Domestic fuel and electricity prices went up by between 400 and 600 per cent, fares on public transport by 1,200 per cent , and the prices of 16 basic foodstuffs, including bread, meat and dairy products, by up to 700 per cent .
In preparation for the reform the government had on Jan. 8 signed with representatives of the trade unions and employers' organizations a six-month agreement "on preserving social peace" , whereby salaries were to increase by 270 leva (US$90) and pensions by 182 leva a month.
The agreement also featured a commitment by the two national trade union confederations not to call strikes.
On the day before the price liberalization took effect there was a wave of panic buying.
Also on Feb. 1 the government increased the bank base interest rate from 15 to 45 per cent.
A comprehensive programme of economic reform had been endorsed by the Grand National Assembly (GNA) on Jan. 31.
Presenting it on Jan. 23, Prime Minister Dimitur Popov complained that time wasted on partisan arguments about reforms during 1990 meant that the government would have to "pursue a considerably more severe budget policy, maintain higher interest rates, and restrict incomes to a greater degree than in other countries" .
Central to the reform would be rapid and extensive privatization (legislation on private land ownership, including restoring collectivized land to former owners, was passed by the GNA on Feb. 22, and a decree on privatization of small businesses was passed on Feb. 26).
On Feb. 12 the programme won the endorsement of the IMF, which on Feb. 25 approved a drawing of SDR60,600,000 under the compensatory and contingency financing facility.
The 1991 budget was approved by the GNA on Feb. 8.
It envisaged revenue of 62,967,000 leva and expenditure of 70,476,500 leva.
UK visit by Zhelev
President Zhelyu Zhelev began a week-long official visit to the United Kingdom on Feb. 16, the first by a Bulgarian head of state since that of King Boris in 1936.
His talks with Prime Minister John Major on Feb. 18 were followed by the announcement that Bulgaria was to receive a share, estimated at around £1,000,000 in the first year, of the UK "Know How Fund" designed to provide technological and educational assistance to Eastern Europe's new democracies.
Zhelev was received by Queen Elizabeth II on Feb. 19.
On Feb. 21 Zhelev visited the grave at Whitchurch Canonicorum in Dorset of Georgi Markov, the Bulgarian dissident writer who had been assassinated in London in 1978 by the Bulgarian secret police by means a poisoned umbrella tip [see p. 32997].
He promised Markov's widow his support in uncovering the truth about the killing.
Start of Zhivkov's trial
Todor Zhivkov on Feb. 25 became the first of Eastern Europe's ousted communist leaders to go on public trial, 14 months after the "palace coup" which had ended his 35 years in power.
Also on trial was Milko Balev, Zhivkov's former second-in-command.
The charges of gross embezzlement and abuse of power carried a maximum sentence of 20 years' imprisonment, but Zhivkov, aged 79, looked unlikely to suffer this fate since Bulgarian law did not permit anyone over 80 to be sent to prison.
Answering the indictment on Feb. 26, Zhivkov pleaded not guilty, as did Balev on the following day.
In a spirited performance which prompted the Independent of Feb. 27 to describe him as "a virtuoso in the arts of presidential memory-lapse and sheer buffoonery" , Zhivkov argued with the prosecution lawyers and joked with the court before leaving the witness stand after three hours, complaining that the trial was a "farce" and refusing to answer further questions.
Zhivkov had been called as a witness in the trial, beginning on Feb. 13, of Stoyan Ovcharov, who had been removed as Minister of Economy and Planning and as a candidate member of the former Bulgarian Communist Party politburo immediately after Zhivkov's fall from power.
He was charged with "taking undue advantage of authority in favour of a third person" , it being alleged that in October 1989 he had authorized sending Zhivkov's grandson Todor Slavkov to study in Switzerland for five years at the state's expense.
EUROPE
CZECHOSLOVAKIA
Civic Forum split
After several months of uncertainty over the future political direction of the Civic Forum movement, its contending factions agreed in February to form separate organizations; the Democratic Right Club's supporters were to become the Civic Democratic Party, while the Liberal Club would formed itself into the Civic Movement.
The two would remain in coalition under the Civic Forum umbrella, however, until the next general election due, by June 1992.
This "amicable divorce" was designed to end political infighting and to allow Civic Forum to concentrate on pressing economic problems and working out a constitution.
Civic Forum in the Czech Lands, and its Slovak sister organization Public Against Violence (PAV), had led the November 1989 revolution and won the June 1990 general election.
Within its ranks, however, Vaclav Klaus, Civic Forum chair since October 1990 [see p. 37791]and Czechoslovak Finance Minister, led a right-wing group which favoured creating a tighter party structure and pushing through rapid free-market economic reforms.
Klaus had emerged in December 1990, after a meeting in Olomouc (Moravia), as the leader of the newly formed Democratic Right Club; its creation immediately prompted the formation of the rival Liberal Club.
The liberals, including eight of the 10 Civic Forum members of the federal government, favoured a gentler pace of economic reform and stressed individual rights.
At a Civic Forum congress in Prague on Jan. 12-13 Klaus's faction appeared to dominate proceedings.
Delegates voted in favour of becoming a political party rather than remaining a more loosely organized movement, and approved a draft statute emphasizing the development of a market economy and support for private business.
Liberal Club supporters protested that these moves would call into question the mandate of elected Civic Forum parliamentary deputies, and would thereby provoke a constitutional crisis.
The agreement to form separate groups was worked out at a meeting on Feb. 10 at the presidential residence in Lany, attended also by Czechoslovak President Vaclav Havel, who numbered many Liberal Club supporters among his closest associates but who had remained outside the conflict.
The split was formally approved at an extraordinary congress in Prague on Feb. 23.
Each group would be equally represented on a co-ordinating committee and neither would be able to use the Civic Forum name or emblem.
Klaus would cease to be Civic Forum chair.
On Feb. 24 Klaus's supporters, announcing that they would use the working name Civic Democratic Party, confirmed that they would follow the draft statute approved on Jan. 12-13.
Former Communist Party members and workers or collaborators of the former Security Service (StB) would be debarred from joining.
On the same day a preparatory committee began work towards setting up a Civic Movement, its members comprising leading liberals including federal Foreign Minister Jiri Dienstbier and Deputy Premier Pavel Rychetsky, and the Czech Premier Petr Pithart.
Legislation on property restitution and "large-scale" privatization
After months of debate the Federal Assembly on Feb. 21 approved legislation returning nationalized property to former owners or their heirs.
[For similar legislation in the former East Germany see p. 37536; for October 1990 Czechoslovak legislation restoring ownership of shops and small businesses confiscated in 1955-62 see p. 37974.]
The legislation covered property illegally seized after Feb. 25, 1948, representing about 10 per cent of property in Czechoslovakia and worth an estimated total of 300,000 million koruna, of which about kcs60,000 million would be paid out as cash or bonds and the remainder as real estate (US$1.00=kcs26.4234 as at Feb. 18, 1991).
The restitution was described by Klaus as accelerating the re-establishment of a property-owning entrepreneurial middle class.
On Feb. 26 the Federal Assembly approved the related bill on "large-scale" privatizations, which would come into effect on April 1, 1991 [for legislation on "small" privatizations approved in January 1991 see p. 37974].
By the end of the year the government planned for 4,500 industrial enterprises, valued at a total of kcs3,500,000 million, to be available to domestic or foreign purchasers.
Status of Moravia-Silesia — Establishment of constitutional Court
A key issue in debates on the constitutional structure of Czechoslovakia concerned the status of Moravia-Silesia (currently part of the Czech Lands — see map).
The Movement for Self-Administered Democracy — Society for Moravia-Silesia favoured the establishment of a "tri-federation" of a Czech Republic, a Moravia-Silesian Republic and a Slovak Republic (rather than the current "bi-federation" of the Czech Lands and the Slovak Republic).
MPs from the Movement decided on Feb. 19 to boycott the Czech National Council, which had "adjourned indefinitely" its discussion on the issue.
On Feb. 27 the Federal Assembly approved legislation establishing a Constitutional Court from April 1, 1991.
There would be 12 judges (six from the Czech Lands and six from Slovakia) appointed by the President upon the proposal of the Federal Assembly Presidium, having been chosen from 24 proposed by the legislative bodies (eight by the federal and eight by each national parliament).
They were permitted to be members of political parties or movements.
Controversy over politicians' StB links
Controversy over politicians' links with the StB centred during January and February on Bedrich Moldan, who was suspended as Czech Environment Minister on Jan. 7 and dismissed on Jan. 24 by the relevant Czech parliamentary commission (being replaced on Feb. 20 by Ivan Dejmal).
Moldan, whose name was on the StB register although he had not been an agent, admitted to meeting with StB agents but declared that "in the conditions in Czechoslovakia at that time it never crossed by mind that I could refuse" .
The Federal Assembly declared his dismissal to be unjustified.
On Jan. 10 the Federal Assembly had approved opening a new inquiry into those working in parliament, government and the president's office in order to unmask former StB agents and collaborators.
On Feb. 1 the state news agency CTK announced that the government had revoked an agreement with the Soviet State Security Committee (KGB), thus rendering any further KGB activities in Czechoslovakia illegal.
EUROPE
ROMANIA
Rail strike — Energy shortage
Some 20,000 railway workers in the region around Iasi city in north-eastern Romania went on strike on Feb. 8.
They were joined on Feb. 11 by railway workers in Timisoara in western Romania.
Their demands included improved salaries, the application of certain employment laws, and state payment for uniforms.
On Feb. 13 Prime Minister Petre Roman declared that "due to the anarchic strikes in the railway system…the national economy is in danger of collapse" .
Soviet trade through Iasi was severely disrupted, as was trade with the West through Timisoara.
On Feb. 15 the Supreme Court ordered the suspension of the strike for 60 days with immediate effect, to allow negotiations to proceed, but the strikers contested the ruling on procedural grounds and continued their protest.
The strike was called off on Feb. 21 after all 20 of the workers' claims were resolved in negotiations with the government.
Ion Aurel Stoica, leader of the government's negotiating team and Minister of State for the Quality of Life and Social Security, offered his resignation on the same day but it was rejected by Roman.
Energy shortages, exacerbated by severe winter conditions and a reduction in Soviet gas imports to 35 per cent of their early 1990 levels, had already led the government on Feb. 6 to order a halt to production for the months of February and March at 92 units and 190 industrial installations in the metallurgy, chemicals, petrochemicals, machine building and furniture industries.
It was announced on Feb. 11 that the 247,000 people thus made temporarily redundant would receive tax-free allowances corresponding to 60 per cent of their salaries.
EUROPE
POLAND
New Solidarity chairman
Marian Krzaklewski was the unexpected choice of a special congress of the Solidarity trade union to succeed Lech Walesa as chairman on Feb. 23.
In three rounds of voting on the first day of the two-day congress held in Gdansk, Krzaklewski emerged as winner from a field of seven candidates.
Walesa's favourite for the post, former Gdansk Solidarity underground leader Bogdan Borusewicz, was eliminated on the second round, and in the final round Krzaklewski defeated Lech Kaczynski, who had been secretary-general and de facto second-in-command under Walesa and temporary co-chairman since Walesa's resignation (which followed his election as President of Poland in December).
Aged 41 and a member of the presidium of the Solidarity national commission, Krzaklewski was an engineer by training and currently lectured at the Silesian Technical University in Wroclaw.
Commentators suggested that with his election the centre of power in Solidarity would shift from Gdansk and the Baltic shipyards to Silesia's coalfields and steelworks.
EUROPE
YUGOSLAVIA
Slovenia secession law — Related measures in Croatia
The Slovene Assembly on Feb. 20 adopted almost unanimously a resolution on the "disassociation of Slovenia from Yugoslavia" .
This set in motion concrete steps towards Slovenia's secession.
The secession process envisaged the gradual abolition of the federal government's prerogatives in Slovenia.
An amendment to the republic's constitution, adopted on Feb. 20, took back into Slovene control all sovereign rights previously transferred by Slovenia to Yugoslavia.
The resolution called also for the creation of a Slovene currency and separate banking and taxation systems, and promotion of diplomatic recognition for Slovenia.
Slovene President Milan Kucan estimated that the process would take at least six months, and he promised that during that time Slovenia would negotiate with the federal government to avoid financial and administrative conflicts.
He also noted that the task of sharing out responsibility for Yugoslavia's foreign debt would take longer.
Although Kucan said that Slovenia was not "closing the door" on negotiations on Yugoslavia's future, the resolution signalled that Slovenia had abandoned hope of those negotiations achieving a formula which it could accept.
Two further rounds of talks during February between the six republics under the auspices of the federal Presidency failed to make any headway towards achieving agreement on Yugoslavia's future constitutional structure.
Following Slovenia's example, the Croatian Assembly on Feb. 21 approved resolutions asserting the primacy of Croatia's constitution and laws over those of the federation, and on the procedure for Yugoslavia's dissolution into sovereign states.
The latter set out the conditions under which Croatia would be prepared to participate in a remodelled Yugoslavia based on an association of those sovereign states.
Croatia-Slovenia defence pact
On Feb. 8 the Croatian and Slovene governments disclosed details of a mutual defence pact between the two republics concluded on Jan. 20.
Central to the pact was a declaration that in the event of armed intervention by the Yugoslav National Army (JNA) in either republic, both would immediately declare their full independence from Yugoslavia.
Indictment of Croatian Defence Minister
The military prosecutor in Zagreb, Croatia's capital, on Feb. 26 formally indicted Croatian Defence Minister Col.-Gen.
Martin Spegelj on a charge of armed rebellion.
Spegelj had gone into hiding after the military authorities ordered his arrest at the end of January, and the Croatian authorities had repeatedly refused to co-operate with the JNA in detaining him.
On Feb. 27 Spegelj reportedly sent a letter reminding the prosecutor that as a government member he enjoyed immunity from prosecution.
The Hungarian Prime Minister's office on Feb. 2 issued a statement confirming that a Hungarian firm had delivered a small consignment of machine guns to Yugoslavia in October 1990, complying with an order from a commercial company in a third country.
In the Feb. 5 edition of the Hungarian newspaper Magyar Hirlap Hungarian Foreign Minister Geza Jeszensky confirmed that the weapons in question had gone to Croatia.
The Yugoslav Federal Foreign Affairs Secretariat on Feb. 4 sent a diplomatic note to the Hungarian embassy in Belgrade protesting about Hungary's sale of arms to Yugoslavia without the approval of the federal authorities.
In reply the Hungarian government expressed its regret concerning the sale.
Unilateral secession of Serb region from Croatia
The group of municipalities in Croatia with majority Serb populations, which in late 1990 had unilaterally declared the "Serbian Autonomous Region of Krajina" , on Feb. 28 declared the region's separation from Croatia.
A meeting in Knin of the region's self-proclaimed government adopted a resolution saying that Krajina wished to unite with Serbia and Montenegro and the Serb population of Bosnia-Hercegovina.
It also declared that the Serbs of Krajina did not challenge the right of Croats to secede from Yugoslavia "on their ethnic territory" .
The declaration said that until such time as Krajina's separation from Croatia could be negotiated with the Croatian government, Croatian laws would continue to be observed in the region, provided that they were not at variance with federal laws or laws unilaterally adopted by the Krajina government.
New federal Presidency member
Following Dragutin Zelenovic's resignation as Vojvodina's member of the federal Presidency in connection with his election in January as Serbian Prime Minister, it was reported on Feb. 14 that the Presidency had agreed that Jugoslav Kostic, the President of the Vojvodina Presidency, should succeed Zelenovic in an acting capacity.
EUROPE
UNITED KINGDOM
Mortar attack on Downing Street
The Irish Republican Army (IRA) claimed responsibility for a mortar attack on the Prime Minister's residence at 10 Downing Street, London, shortly after 10 a.m. on Feb. 7.
Three bombs were launched from improvised pipe mortars inside a van which had parked two minutes earlier on the corner of Horse Guards Avenue and Whitehall, around 200 metres from Downing Street.
One landed in the garden behind 10-12 Downing Street, shattering windows in the room where 15 ministers and officials of the (Gulf) War Cabinet were meeting.
The two other bombs failed to explode fully, landing nearby in Mountbatten Green, behind the Foreign and Commonwealth Office.
Four people sustained minor injuries and the van burst into flames; the two people believed to have carried out the attack, however, escaped on a motorbike.
The attack, the most audacious IRA operation on the UK mainland since the 1984 Brighton bombing [see p. 33365], came at a time of heightened security because of threatened terrorist attacks in connection with the Gulf war.
Investigators ruled out any connection with the Gulf war, however.
Prime Minister John Major declared that the IRA's tactics had failed to change policies by "one single iota" .
Station bombs
One man was killed and more than 40 people were injured when a bomb exploded at 7.46 a.m. on Feb. 18 at Victoria Station, London, just before the start of the morning rush-hour.
Earlier that morning, at 4.23, a bomb hidden in a roof support at Paddington Station had exploded, causing damage but no injuries.
Over the ensuing days traffic and commuters in London were seriously disrupted by hoax bomb warning calls which led to station closures.
The IRA claimed responsibility for the station attacks, blaming the Victoria casualties on "the cynical decision…not to evacuate railway stations" after a caller had warned 45 minutes earlier that bombs were to go off at all mainline stations.
Since the Harrods department store bombing of December 1983 [see p. 32809], the IRA had desisted from attacks on the mainland in which the public was directly endangered, and the station bombings were thus seen as marking a change in IRA tactics.
[For use of "human bombs" in attacks in Northern Ireland in late 1990, see pp. 37784; 37869.]
EUROPE
IRELAND
New Defence Minister
Brendan Daly was named on Feb. 5 as Defence Minister.
This portfolio had been held by Prime Minister Charles Haughey since October 1990, when he dismissed Brian Lenihan (whose successor as Deputy Prime Minister was John Wilson — see p. 37868).
EUROPE
DENMARK
Approval of 1991 budget
On Feb. 1 the Danish Folketing (unicameral parliament) approved the 1991 budget.
The budget provided for expenditure of DKr312,100 million (including interest payments of DKr58,200 million) and for revenue of DKr282,600 million, resulting in a deficit of DKr29,500 million (US$1.00=DKr5.6548 as at Feb. 4, 1991).
Its passage had been delayed by the calling of the December general election, at which Prime Minister Poul Schlüter had sought to strengthen his position by obtaining a mandate both for the budget and for a programme of tax reforms [see pp. 37868; 37924-25].
In the event Schlüter had ended up heading a minority coalition with the Liberals (Venstre).
To secure backing for the budget from the Radical Liberals, the Centre Democrats and the Christian People's Party, he was obliged to abandon plans to reduce direct taxes (although corporation tax was reduced).
The Socialist People's Party and the Progress Party voted against the budget, while the Social Democratic Party (the largest single parliamentary party) abstained, not wishing to precipitate another general election.
EUROPE
GERMANY
Measures tightening export controls
On Feb. 6 the Cabinet approved and sent on to parliament a package of measures to tighten German export controls.
Reports had indicated that German companies had broken the UN trade embargo imposed on Iraq in August 1990.
The package, already outlined in late January [see pp. 37941-42], included measures (i) increasing the maximum prison sentence for breaches of export laws from three to 10 years;(ii) allowing income from illegal trade to be seized;(iii) giving extra powers to customs and export control authorities and staff; and (iv) allowing the security services to tap telephones and open mail in their investigations.
According to a minister of state in the Foreign Affairs Ministry at the end of January 110 companies were being investigated for alleged illegal deliveries to Iraq, of which 11 were being prosecuted, although none involved exports to Iraq after the August 1990 embargo came into force.
Military exports to the Gulf region had been banned from the start of the Iran-Iraq war in 1980.
Notwithstanding this the US Arms and Disarmament Control Agency reported that in 1984-88 alone Germany sold weapons worth US$675 million to Iraq.
[See pp. 36385; 36411 for Rabta affair involving illegal chemical exports to Libya.]
EUROPE
AUSTRIA
Sentences in Noricum trial — Budget — Government change
On Feb. 1 the Linz district court (Landesgericht) acquitted four people but handed down prison sentences ranging from six months to 2@1/2 years (with portions of some terms suspended) on 14 others convicted of violating Austrian neutrality or legislation on war materiel by selling arms to Iran during the Iran-Iraq war.
All 14 appealed against the verdict.
Those convicted, whose trial had begun in April 1990 [see p. 37688], were former executives of the state-owned Voest-Alpine AG and its subsidiaries — the Noricum ordnance and the Hirtenberger munitions factories.
Austrian newspaper reports indicated that eight consignments of weapons, illegally delivered to Iran via third countries during 1985-86, had included 180 GHN-45 cannons, 180 cannon gun barrels, and shells to a total value estimated at Sch4,000 million.
(about US$390 million).
The defence maintained that the sales had gone ahead with government knowledge.
Former Chancellor Fred Sinowatz, former Interior Minister Karl Blecha and former Foreign Minister Leopold Gratz were due to appear before the court in this respect.
Investigations were also under way into alleged sales to Iraq during the Iran-Iraq war of 200 GHN-45 cannons via Jordan.
1991 budget
The 1991 draft budget presented on Feb. 27 by Finance Minister Ferdinand Lacina provided for expenditure of some Sch600,000 million and revenue of Sch537,000 million (US$1.00=Sch10.7933 as at March 4, 1991).
The resulting deficit of Sch63,000 million was unaltered as compared with 1990 and was projected to represent 3.3 per cent of gross domestic product (GDP).
The 1987 joint programme of the ruling Social Democrats (SPÖ) and Austrian People's Party (ÖVP)[see p. 35088]had set a target of keeping the 1991 deficit below 3 per cent.
Replacement of Environment Minister
Marilies Flemming resigned as Minister for the Environment, Youth and Family Affairs on Feb. 27 when it was revealed that she had not fully declared all her sources of income before taking office 1990.
She was replaced by Ruth Feldgrill-Zankel, 48, also of the ÖVP, who was sworn in on March 5.
EUROPE
FRANCE
By-elections in Lyon and Paris
By-elections for two National Assembly seats in Lyon and for one in Paris were held in two rounds on Jan. 27 and Feb. 3.
They were precipitated by the resignations in December 1990 of Michel Noir, 46, and of two fellow dissident members of the "Renovator" faction of the opposition neo-Gaullist Rally for the Republic (RPR), all of whom stood as ex-RPR by-election candidates.
Although Noir — a popular local politician — was re-elected to his seat, his challenge to Jacques Chirac's leadership of the RPR failed to gather the momentum he had hoped.
In Lyon, Noir (also mayor of Lyon) and Jean-Michel Dubernard won 43.34 and 40.14 per cent respectively of the vote in the first round.
Candidates from the right-wing extremist National Front (FN) came second, ahead of the official RPR candidates (one of whom was Pierre Botton, Noir's son-in-law and his former campaign manager, running against Dubernard).
Noir and Dubernard both won the second-round run-offs.
The turnout was around 30 per cent in each round considered to reflect in part electors' preoccupation with the Gulf war.
In the Paris by-election, in the 13th ward, Michèle Barzach (Minister-Delegate for Health and the Family in 1986-88 and once regarded as a protegé of Chirac) trailed behind the official RPR candidate René Galy-Dejean by 26.56 per cent to 41.17 per cent on the first round.
She withdrew from the second round, allowing the unopposed election of Galy-Dejean (the mayor of the 15th arrondissement, of which the ward formed a part).
The strong showing by the FN in the Lyon by-elections followed a surge in support for the extreme right at a municipal election on Jan. 20 and 27 in the Paris suburb of Clichy-sous-Bois, where the mayoralty had hitherto been held by the Communist Party (PCF).
The Gulf crisis had focused attention on racial tensions and on attitudes towards France's large Moslem community, numbering some 3,000,000 and of predominantly North African origin.
André Déchamps, running as an independent, defeated the FN candidate in the Jan. 27 run-off.
Déchamps, whose first-round opponents included an official PCF candidate who finished fifth, had himself been PCF mayor from 1965 until March 1990, but had then been expelled for "racist remarks" (for which a Paris court fined him F10,000 — US$2,000 — on Jan. 23).
EUROPE
ITALY
Reconstitution of Communist Party
On Feb. 3 the 70-year old Italian Communist Party (PCI) was formally dissolved by the 1,500 delegates to its congress in Rimini, and reconstituted as the Democratic Party of the Left (Partito Democratico della Sinistra — PDS).
Aimed at reversing the decline since the mid-1970s in PCI membership and electoral support, the creation of the new party was marked by divergences between the traditional left wing and a social democratic tendency.
One focus of current disagreements was the role of Italy in the Gulf crisis [see pp. 37941; 37989].
Achille Occhetto, PCI general secretary, had opened the congress with a speech on Jan. 31 designed to conciliate the left wing by calling for a unilateral ceasefire in the Gulf and the withdrawal of Italian naval and air force contingents from the anti-Iraq coalition.
A group of left-wingers led by the veteran Pietro Ingrao and Aldo Tortorella — representing, under the title of "Communist Refoundation" about 29 per cent of the delegates — nevertheless threatened secession from the new party.
They called for Italian air and naval bases to be closed to United States forces participating in Gulf operations, and also stressed the continuing importance of a "class analysis" .
In the event, only a smaller group of about 100 delegates led by Armando Cossutta walked out of the final session of the congress, with the declared intention of continuing the Italian communist tradition elsewhere.
Occhetto's position on the Gulf war had meanwhile lost him some support among the social democratic wing of the party, led by Giorgio Napolitano.
It had also drawn public criticism from Bettino Craxi, secretary of the Socialist Unity Party (PSU — formerly the Italian Socialist Party — see p. 37786), who in March 1990 had indicated that an alliance with a reformed and renamed Communist Party might be possible [see p. 37508].
Occhetto, leader of the PCI since 1988, narrowly failed to secure the necessary 274 votes for election as secretary of the PDS in the first round of voting by the new party's national council on Feb. 4, mainly due to the absence of 132 members.
The Financial Times of Feb. 8 commented that Occhetto had fallen victim to "a miscalculated attempt by both left and right to elect him…with an underwhelming majority" .
Lobbying of Napolitano's followers over the following days resulted in Occhetto's gaining 71.5 per cent of the votes in a second vote on Feb. 8, in which he was again the only candidate.
The events surrounding the creation of the PDS were regarded as having illustrated the difficulties awaiting Italy's second-largest party in any bid to present a convincing challenge to the Christian Democrats (CD) through new alliances with the PSU, independent leftists or radical Catholics.
Formation of regional party bloc
Five regional autonomy parties moved towards forming a political bloc under the leadership of the Lombardy League.
At a meeting in Milan on Feb. 10, political parties based respectively in Piedmont, Veneto, Liguria, Emilia Romagna and Tuscany united with the Lombardy League to form the Northern League.
Under its founder, Senator Umberto Bossi, the Lombardy League had taken 19 per cent of the vote in regional elections in May 1990, when the two local leagues of Piedmont and Veneto also showed increased support [see pp. 37468-69].
Resignation of Justice Minister
The resignation of Justice Minister Giuliano Vassalli on Feb.1 was followed by speculation that he would shortly be appointed as a constitutional court judge.
A member of the Socialist Unity Party (PSU, until October 1990 the Socialist Party (PSI)— see p. 37786), Vassalli had been Justice Minister since July 1987 [see p. 35589].
This portfolio was provisionally taken over by Deputy Prime Minister Claudio Martelli, pending the appointment of a successor.
The post of Minister for State Participation remained vacant, following the death on Dec. 27, 1990, of Franco Piga, who had been appointed in July of that year.
Controversy over release of Palestinians
On Feb. 5 lawyers for two Palestinians convicted following the October 1985 hijacking of the Italian cruise ship Achille Lauro [see pp. 34077-79]announced that they had been released in December 1990 and had left for Algeria.
Responding to criticism from other political parties in his coalition government, Prime Minister Giulio Andreotti stressed that the two men, Mohammed Issa Abbas and Youssouf Ahmed Saad, had secured release about two years early as part of a general amnesty programme; it was "fantasy" , he said, to suggest that their freeing only two weeks before the outbreak of hostilities in the Gulf was aimed at protecting Italy from terrorist attacks.
Issa Abbas and Saad had been sentenced in 1986 and 1987 respectively for supplying money, passports and logistical support to the four-man team which carried out the hijacking.
The hijackers themselves, members of a faction of the PLF (Palestine Liberation Front), continued to serve sentences ranging from 17 to 30 years.
Arms trade trial
The Times of Feb. 22 reported that seven senior executives from the Valsella Meccanotecnica company in Brescia, northern Italy, had been convicted by a Brescia court of illegally exporting 9,000,000 land mines to Iraq in 1982-86.
The mines, estimated to be worth US$180,000,000, had been exported via Singapore without the requisite government approval.
At that time Iraq was at war with Iran, and Italian law forbade trade in arms to countries at war.
The seven executives received suspended sentences of under two years.
EUROPE
GREECE
KKE leadership election
The election of Aleka Papariga as general secretary of the (orthodox) Communist Party of Greece (Kommunistikon Komma Ellados — KKE-Exterior) at the end of party's 13th congress in Athens on Feb. 27 confounded expectations that the successful candidate would represent the party's reformist wing.
When the congress opened on Feb. 19 Harilaos Florakis, appointed president of the central committee on his resignation as general secretary in July 1989 and the party's leader since 1973, had raised the reformists' hopes with his unexpected announcement that he now wanted "to be a simple foot-soldier in the party" .
Papariga, 47, the first woman to hold the post of general secretary, was chosen by the newly elected central committee, on which the "conservatives" had won 60 seats and the reformists 51.
She received 57 votes against 53 for Yannis Dragasakis.
A member of the outgoing politburo and a hardline conservative aligned with Florakis, she succeeded Grigoris Farakos, elected in July 1989 [see p. 37515], who had been conciliatory towards the party's reformists.
The outcome fuelled speculation about possible realignments on the left in Greek politics, where the KKE was the major element in the Coalition of the Left and Progress (Synaspismos, of which Florakis was president) since its formation in 1989, and had been part of the two government coalitions in power from July 1989 until February 1990 [see pp. 36738-39; 37050-51; 37263-64].
EUROPE
TURKEY
Dismissal of Defence Minister — Allocation of additional US aid — Terrorist attacks
President Turgut Özal dismissed Defence Minister Husnu Dogan on Feb. 22.
His successor, Mehmet Yazar, formerly a Minister of State, was appointed on March 1 and thus became Turkey's third Defence Minister since the start of the Gulf crisis [see p. 37786].
Dogan, a nephew of the President and a leading conservative in the ruling Motherland Party (ANAP), was described by official sources as having been dismissed on the President's orders "apparently over a rift in domestic politics" .
Unofficially it was suggested that the rift related to Dogan's opposition to a campaign by the President's wife, Semra Özal, to assume leadership of the Istanbul branch of the Motherland Party (ANAP).
Earlier resignation of Chief of General Staff
The Chief of General Staff, Gen. Necip Torumtay, had resigned on Dec. 3, stating that he was unable "to serve with the principles and view of the state in which I believe" .
While the Financial Times of Dec. 4 suggested that Torumtay's resignation had been precipitated by the government's pro-Islamic policies [see pp. 37592-93], according to reports on Dec. 5, senior army officials also attributed it to differences with Özal over the Turkish response to the Gulf crisis [see pp. 37641; 37694].
Torumtay, who had been appointed in mid-1987 [see p. 35910], was replaced on Dec. 4 by Gen. Dogan Gures, hitherto Ground Forces Commander [see p. 37592], who was in turn succeeded by Gen. Muhittin Fisunoglu.
Allocation of additional US aid
It was announced officially in Ankara on Feb. 8 that the USA had agreed to allocate an extra US$82,000,000 in military aid during 1991 [see also p. 37942].
The aid was in addition to grants of US$553,400,000 announced earlier in the month.
Extremist attacks
Members of the left-wing extremist group, Dev Sol claimed responsibility for the killing of a US civilian, Bobby Eugene Mozelle, at the Incirlik air base near Adana on Feb. 7.
Dev Sol also claimed responsibility for bomb explosions in the grounds of the French consulate in Istanbul on Feb. 9.
There were no casualties or damage.
On Feb. 16 one person was killed and a number injured when a train, part of a military convoy carrying supplies to the NATO base at Malatya, was derailed near Pazarcik.
Military sources said that the derailment had been an act of sabotage.
EUROPE
EUROPEAN COMMUNITIES
Proposals for common foreign and defence policies
Discussions during February within the context of the intergovernmental conference (IGC) on political union of the European Communities (EC) centred on the question of a common foreign and defence policy.
The EC's failure to present a united front on the Gulf crisis [see p. 37934]was widely cited as making greater foreign co-ordination even more imperative.
At their first IGC meeting on political union on Feb. 4 in Brussels, EC Foreign Ministers discussed joint proposals presented by Hans-Dietrich Genscher and Roland Dumas, the German and French Foreign Minister respectively.
Under these proposals EC heads of state and government (i.e. the European Council) would decide, under conditions requiring unanimous agreement, which aspects of foreign policy should become matters for common policy.
Decisions on these would then be made by majority vote in the Council of Ministers.
Initially the Western European Union (WEU — comprising all EC members except Denmark, Greece, and Ireland) would act as an EC-NATO link.
The EC would then consider taking over the WEU's functions in 1996-97 (i.e. before the WEU's 50-year Brussels Treaty expired in 1998).
The proposals were opposed by the non-WEU countries (in particular neutral Ireland) and by the United Kingdom and the Netherlands which were concerned about Europe's relations with the United States.
Netherlands Foreign Minister Hans Van den Broek maintained that "the essence of the debate is the future position of the EC in the world and the position of the EC with regard to the USA" .
UK draft treaty proposals on foreign policy co-ordination, presented on Feb. 27, envisaged procedures based on consensus without legally binding obligations; defence issues (as distinct from common security policy) would remain within the framework of the WEU.
A Commission document published the following day supported majority voting on foreign policy issues within the Council of Ministers and a fully fledged defence policy as an eventual EC goal.
WEU Foreign and Defence Ministers, meeting on Feb. 22 in Paris, approved an interim report describing the WEU as able to play "a bridging role between the process of European integration and the Atlantic alliance" .
They agreed to examine the question of transferring WEU headquarters from London and Paris (seats of the Secretariat and Parliamentary Assembly respectively) to Brussels (headquarters of both the EC and NATO).
There were important differences, however, as to whether ambassadors to the EC should double as those for the WEU (as advocated by France) or whether those for NATO should double as ambassadors to the WEU (as advocated by the UK).
Other proposals on political union made during February came from Italy (envisaging the possibility of joint deployment of EC military forces), Belgium (envisaging a treaty obligation to introduce a common EC industrial policy), and Germany (envisaging a treaty commitment to privatization and radically increased powers for the European Parliament — EP).
The German proposals on the role of the EP went beyond those of other member states.
They provided for some right to initiate legislation (at present the prerogative of the Commission), and for the EP to see Commission proposals before the Council of Ministers, which would then work on texts already amended by the EP.
By contrast both France and the UK were reported to favour the exercise of greater democratic control over the EC through national parliaments.
German draft treaty on monetary union
EC Economic and Finance Ministers held parallel discussions on economic and monetary union (EMU) in Brussels on Feb. 25.
These centred on the extent to which the EC should exercise control over national economic policy-making, and on what surveillance measures, sanctions or safety net should be provided.
A draft text drawn up by the Luxembourg government outlined measures to harmonize economic policy in conjunction with the harmonization of monetary policy, to be introduced from Jan. 1, 1994, when "stage two" of the Delors plan for economic and monetary union [see p. 36598]was scheduled to start.
A German draft monetary union treaty presented on Feb. 26 was critically received, principally because it envisaged delaying the establishment of an EC central bank until at least 1997.
It also favoured hardening the existing European currency unit rather than creating a separate "hard ecu" , as proposed by the UK [see p. 37969].
A working visit on Feb. 11 to Bonn, Germany, by UK Prime Minister John Major was described by The Times of Feb. 12 as marking the start of "a new era of close co-operation" .
1991/92 agricultural support proposals — Broader reform issues
On Feb. 27 the EC Commission agreed on its proposals for agricultural support for the 1991/92 EC agricultural year starting on April 1.
These provided for cuts which would nevertheless increase price support spending by 30 per cent to ECU32,500 million.
They assumed agricultural savings of ECU540 million and a supplementary budget to bring 1990 expenditure to the maximum permitted under the "guideline" agreed in February 1988 [see p. 35914].
(ECU1=US$1.35507 as at Feb. 25, 1991.)
According to press reports on Feb. 12, a confidential Commission memorandum revealed that agricultural spending was expected to exceed the 1988 "guideline" by ECU880 million in 1990 and by ECU2,000 million in 1991 if trends continued.
The increase was attributed to falling demand for EC agricultural produce, the falling value of the dollar, and the cost of integrating the former East Germany into the common agricultural policy (CAP).
On Feb. 27 the Commission voted to make cuts in the 1990 budget to keep spending within the "guideline" .
After several years during which agricultural surpluses had been substantially reduced, they had risen by the end of 1990 and stood at: cereals — 18,000,000 tonnes; beef — 700,000 tonnes; butter — 278,000 tonnes; skimmed milk powder — 335,000 tonnes; wine — 8,000,000 hectolitres; and tobacco — 30,000 tonnes.
[For earlier levels see pp. 35915; 35534; 34884.]
The escalating expenditure and increasing surpluses combined with pressure for more fundamental agricultural reform from the USA within the context of the "Uruguay round" of the General Agreement on Tariffs and Trade (GATT)[see p. 37930].
On Feb. 4-5 the EC Commission presented a package of agricultural reform measures to the Council of (Agriculture) Ministers meeting.
These envisaged cuts in intervention prices, reduced quotas, measures to protect the environment, full compensation for small farmers and graduated reimbursement for larger farmers.
EUROPE
EUROPEAN INVESTMENT BANK
Annual report — Increase in subscribed capital
The European Investment Bank (EIB) published on Feb. 7 its annual report on lending activity, showing that during 1990 EIB loans totalled 13,393 million European currency units, an increase of 9.4 per cent on 1989 (ECU1=US$1.41 as at Feb. 4, 1991.)
The majority of EIB lending (ECU12,680 million) was within, or of direct benefit to, the European Communities (EC).
Of this 30.4 per cent went to projects in Italy, 15.3 per cent to Spain, 14.9 per cent to the United Kingdom, 13.3 per cent to France, 6.8 per cent to Germany, 6.3 per cent to Portugal, 4.5 per cent to Denmark and under 2 per cent to each of the other five member states.
EIB lending outside the EC amounted to ECU713 million, of which 48 per cent went to (non-EC) Mediterranean countries, 30 per cent to Poland and Hungary, and 21 per cent to those African, Caribbean and Pacific countries party to the Lomé Convention [see p. 37210-11].
From Jan. 1, 1991, the EIB's subscribed capital was doubled to ECU57,600 million, as agreed by the Board of Governors in June 1990.
[For previous doubling in January 1986, see pp. 33932-33.]
MIDDLE EAST — ARAB WORLD
ISRAEL
Gulf war — Relations with USA — New minister
Impact of Gulf war
The United States-led coalition's military victory over Iraq in late February was greeted with qualified satisfaction by the Israeli government.
Delight over Iraq's defeat was tempered by anxiety that President Saddam Hussein had survived the war, and that a refocusing of international attention on a new post-war Middle East "order" would inevitably involve attempts to settle the Palestinian issue.
The Prime Minister of Israel, Itzhak Shamir, told a meeting of his ruling Likud Party on Feb. 26 that the end of the war would bring a new "period of trial" for Israel and that there would "be an effort to use political means to snatch from Israel what could not be snatched from us by force" .
In what was widely seen as an attempt to draw Israel into the conflict, Iraq had launched a number of missile attacks on Tel Aviv and Haifa [see pp. 37936-37; 37984].
Israel, however, had maintained a policy of "restraint" towards Iraq.
The Shamir government was commended for this by Western leaders, and some commentators speculated that in the immediate post-war period the USA would reward Israel by refraining from putting on pressure over the Palestinian issue.
According to figures supplied by the Israeli Defence Forces, Iraq fired a total of 39 Scud missiles at Israel between Jan. 18 and Feb. 25.
One person was killed by a missile, and 12 additional deaths resulted indirectly from missile attacks.
Almost 200 people were injured in the attacks.
Of the 4,095 buildings damaged, 3,991 were residential, 331 public institutions, 17 educational and 54 business.
Opinion polls showed a high level of domestic approval for Shamir's handling of the war.
The only real criticism Shamir received came from hardline "hawks" , such as Ariel Sharon, who pressed for a military attack on Iraq.
However, the general cross-party consensus on the handling of the war collapsed once discussion of the post-war peace began in late February.
The opposition Labour Party made clear that it would support concessions on the occupied territories in exchange for peace.
Likud, meanwhile, rejected any "land for peace" formula, with some party supporters arguing that the Iraqi Scud attacks had demonstrated that a secure Israel required broad territorial margins.
Visit by Arens to the USA — Formal request for military aid — Cancellation of Levy visit
Moshe Arens, the Israeli Defence Minister, visited the United States on Feb. 10-12 for talks with senior US officials including President Bush, Secretary of State James Baker and Defence Secretary Dick Cheney.
Arens was the first senior Israeli minister to visit the USA since the outbreak of the war in mid-January.
Discussions centred on what were officially described as "issues of joint interest about the Gulf crisis" .
The Washington Post of Feb. 12 reported that Arens made a request for greater US-Israeli co-ordination, including sharing of so-called "friend-or-foe" recognition codes to avoid conflict between the two countries' military aircraft in the event of Israel entering the conflict.
Arens insisted that he had not made any requests for US financial aid to cover the costs of the conflict.
However, State Department spokeswoman Margaret Tutwiler said on Feb. 13 that Baker and Arens had discussed "a ballpark figure" which she declined to disclose.
In mid-January Finance Minister Itzhak Moda'i had announced that Israel would need US$13,000 million in additional US aid — US$3,000 million for military and economic assistance, and US$10,000 for the absorption of Jewish immigrants from the Soviet Union [see p. 37939].
US officials had been alarmed at the size of Moda'i's estimate and had unofficially rejected it.
Eventually, on Feb. 25, the Israeli Foreign Ministry disclosed that it had formally requested additional US military aid worth US$1,000 million to offset defence costs incurred as a result of the crisis.
The USA already supplied Israel with annual military aid worth US$1,800 million as part of the total US$3,000 million aid package.
Israeli Foreign Minister David Levi cancelled a visit to the USA for talks with Bush and Baker shortly before he was supposed to leave Israel on Feb. 12.
The Voice of Israel radio reported on Feb. 12 that Levy had been "angry" to hear that Arens had already met with Bush and Baker.
Apparently, Shamir had privately arranged Arens' meetings with Bush and Baker and had failed to notify Levy.
Approval of US housing loan guarantees
A dispute which had soured Israeli-US relations for over a year ended on Feb. 20 when Baker telephoned Levi to inform him that he had signed a guarantee for a US$400,000,000 loan for the housing of immigrants, mainly Soviet Jews.
The guarantee had been approved by Congress in April 1990, but Baker had refused to sign it because of concerns that Israel would use the funds to settle Soviet Jews in the occupied territories.
As recently as Feb. 6, 1991, Baker was still insisting that Israel had not provided the necessary technical data on its settlements policy.
In a press interview with the Reuters newsagency on Feb. 14 the Israeli ambassador to the USA, Zalman Shoval, said that Israel was being "given the run-around" by the US administration over the guarantee; his remarks were described by Bush the following day as "outrageous" .
When Baker finally signed the guarantees on Feb. 20, the Israelis insisted that they had not provided any records of settlement spending in the occupied territories.
Instead, Levy had simply assured Baker that Israel would not use the US funding in the occupied territories, and would henceforth share information regarding settlement with US officials.
Addition of Moledet to ruling coalition
On Feb. 3 the Israeli Cabinet voted to approve the admission of the Moledet Party to the ruling Likud-led coalition, and the appointment of the party's leader, Gen. (retd) Rehavam Ze'evi, as Minister Without Portfolio with membership of the Ministerial committee on security affairs.
This highly controversial decision, adopted on Shamir's recommendation, was opposed within the cabinet by Levy, Justice Minister Dan Meridor and Health Minister Ehud Olmert, while Arens and Moda'i abstained.
Moledet was the most extreme right-wing party represented in the Knesset and was renowned for its advocacy of the "transfer" of Palestinians from the West Bank and Gaza Strip to neighbouring Arab countries.
Shamir insisted that the alliance was made for purely pragmatic reasons and that his government remained firmly opposed to the policy of "transfer" .
The Middle East Economic Digest of Feb. 15 commented that Ze'evi's appointment was an indication that Shamir was in "no mood for compromise on the Palestine question" .
With the addition of the two seats held by Moledet, the coalition now held 66 seats in the 120-member Knesset [see p. 37872 for addition of four-member Agudat Yisrael to the coalition in November 1990].
MIDDLE EAST — ARAB WORLD
PALESTINIAN AFFAIRS
Impact of Gulf war
Occupied territories
As soon as the aerial bombing of Iraq started on the night of Jan. 16-17 the Israeli authorities imposed a strict curfew throughout the West Bank and Gaza Strip.
The primary purpose of the curfew was to prevent Palestinians from intensifying the intifada indicating support for Iraq.
The Israeli security forces also claimed that the curfew would protect Palestinians from Israeli citizens enraged by grassroot support in the occupied territories for Iraqi missile attacks on Israel.
The security forces began easing the curfew restrictions on Feb. 5.
However, Palestinians were forced to remain within the occupied territories so that the majority were effectively barred from their jobs in Israel.
A small number of Palestinian workers were permitted to enter Israel from Feb. 10, but this had little impact on the mounting economic problems in the occupied territories.
A total curfew was imposed throughout the territories on Feb. 23 after the expiry of the deadline for the withdrawal of Iraqi troops from Kuwait.
The restrictions began to be phased out towards the end of the month.
A report issued on Feb. 13 by the Israeli human rights group B'tselem claimed that the effects of the curfew threatened the "health, livelihood and welfare" of Palestinians.
It estimated that total earning losses from Jan. 17 to Feb. 10 were more than US$130,500,000 and that exports had dropped by 95 per cent during the same period.
The report also claimed that 3,650 people had been arrested during the curfew and that the Israeli authorities had distributed only 50,000 gas masks — to protect against possible Iraqi chemical attack — among a Palestinian population of 1,700,000.
The PLO and the peace process
Many commentators claimed that the Palestine Liberation Organization (PLO), and more specifically Yassir Arafat, the PLO leader, had committed a grave tactical error by openly supporting Iraq throughout the Gulf war.
Support for Iraq had isolated the PLO from its traditional patrons in the Gulf and Egypt.
The international sympathy achieved by the Palestinians as a result of the intifada was now largely transferred to Israel, widely commended for its policy of "restraint" in the face of numerous Iraqi missile attacks.
An example of this occurred in early February when Foreign Ministers of the European Communities (EC), meeting in Brussels, agreed that the support given to Iraq by the PLO should disqualify it from further high-level contacts.
Some reports also claimed that the Gulf war had generated divisions within the PLO leadership.
Arafat's stance of "positive neutrality" had been criticized by more militant leaders, who had pressed for military support for Iraq and the opening of a "second front" against Israel in Lebanon or the occupied territories.
While support for the PLO fell in the West, there was little sign of the emergence of any alternative Palestinian leadership.
On the contrary, according to the Middle East International of Feb. 22, in the occupied territories the supporters of the PLO and those of its rival, the strongly Islamic Hamas, were brought together by a blend of secular nationalism and Islamic fundamentalism similar to that achieved by the Iraqi President Saddam Hussein.
MIDDLE EAST — ARAB WORLD
JORDAN
Impact of Gulf war
Major speech by King Hussein — Deterioration in relations with USA — Foreign aid
King Hussein attacked United States Gulf policy during a televised address on Feb. 6, prompting a threat of the severance of all US aid to Jordan.
According to the King the war was being waged against all Arabs and Moslems.
Its real purpose was the destruction of Iraq and the "rearrangement" of the Middle East, with the ultimate end of placing the area "under direct foreign hegemony" .
The King saluted "the heroic army of Iraq and Iraq's steadfast and courageous people" .
During his speech he made no mention of Kuwait, although he repeated his call for a ceasefire, to be followed by US-Iraqi talks and inter-Arab dialogue.
US officials condemned the speech, claiming that Jordan had abandoned its neutral position and had sided with Iraq.
US President Bush said on Feb. 8 that King Hussein "seems to have moved over, way over, to [Iraqi President]Saddam Hussein's camp" .
On Feb. 9 the US administration confirmed that some US$107,000,000 of US aid to Jordan had been placed under review.
The impact of this US threat was reduced by the subsequent announcement of a US$450,000,000 concessionary loan from Japan as part of a US$2,000 million package to Jordan, Egypt and Turkey.
The Middle East Economic Digest of Feb. 15 reported that the European Communities (EC) had also allocated a grant of ECU150,000,000 (about US$207,000,000) to Jordan as one of the countries most affected by the Gulf War, and during a visit by Foreign Minister Hans-Dietrich Genscher on Feb. 14 [see p. 37989]Germany agreed to provide further aid.
The Middle East Economic Digest of March 1 reported that total foreign aid received or pledged to Jordan since the onset of the crisis in August stood at US$1,150 million.
Economic impact of war
The Jordanian Prime Minister and Minister of Defence, Mudar Badran, announced on Feb. 24 that the confrontation in the Gulf had so far cost Jordan some US$8,000 million, or double the value of the country's domestic economic output.
The UN Children's Fund (UNICEF) announced on Feb. 20 that it was to launch an appeal for humanitarian aid for Jordan.
A recent UNICEF study had revealed that the proportion of Jordanians living below the poverty line had risen to 30 per cent(from 20 per cent before the crisis).
The outbreak of war in January had led to a sharp reduction in oil supplies from Iraq.
The government introduced petrol rationing on Feb. 5, and by mid-February deals had been agreed to import oil from both Syria and Yemen.
Before the war Jordan had been importing some 55,000 barrels a day from Iraq at a fixed price of US$16.40, well below the market rate.
Jordan had been entirely dependent on Iraqi oil since September when Saudi Arabia had cut off supplies to Jordan [see p. 37728].
Bombing of Jordanian trucks in Iraq — Rioting in Ramtha
Anti-US sentiment increased in Jordan during early February as news emerged of the deaths of at least eight Jordanian truck drivers killed in Iraq during air attacks on the Baghdad-Ruweishid highway.
The trucks were part of a convoy transporting oil from Iraq to Jordan.
Refugees fleeing Iraq said on Feb. 13 that some 30 Jordanians had been killed in a recent missile attack on a civilian bus travelling on the Iraq-Kuwait border.
Serious rioting erupted in the northern town of Ramtha on Feb. 6-8 when police intervened to protect Syrian and Turkish trucks en route to Saudi Arabia.
Crowds in Ramtha demanded that the government ban the passage of food to Saudi Arabia in retaliation for a Saudi ban on trade with Jordan.
The government eventually responded by imposing a new tax on the Syrian and Turkish trucks.
Execution of Israeli spies
An air force officer and a truck driver were executed on Feb. 3 after being found guilty by a military court of spying for Israel.
The two were identified as Lt. Ali Abd al-Hafez and Ahmad Mohammed Ahmad.
According to Jordanian officials Hafez had been recruited in early 1990 during a training course in Germany when he was approached by a female agent for Mossad (the Israeli intelligence service) posing as a US civilian.
MIDDLE EAST — ARAB WORLD
SYRIA
Improvement in relations with Western countries
Visit to UK by Foreign Minister — Exchange of ambassadors
The Syrian Foreign Minister, Farooq ash-Shar", visited the United Kingdom on Feb. 6-7.
It was the first visit to the UK by a senior member of the Syrian government since the restoration of diplomatic relations in November 1990 [see p. 37873].
Syria and the UK exchanged ambassadors on Feb. 25.
Talks between Shar"and UK Foreign Secretary Douglas Hurd were centred primarily on Gulf war developments, both Syria and the UK having contributed forces to the United States-led anti-Iraqi coalition.
During the talks Shar"indicated that the Syrian government would do its best to secure the release of British hostages held in Lebanon.
EC loan package agreement — Japanese loan pledge
European Community (EC) Foreign Ministers agreed at a meeting in Brussels held on Feb. 4 to unblock an ECU146 million (nearly US$205 million) loan package to Syria, thereby ending a four-year freeze on financial co-operation following accusations of Syrian support for terrorism.
The formal agreement signed on Feb. 7 provided for ECU110,000,000 in loans from the European Investment Bank, ECU34,000,000 in grants from the EC budget and ECU2,000,000 as venture capital.
The Financial Times of Feb. 6 reported that the money would be disbursed quickly, because from November 1991 the EC planned to start a new ECU2,000 million five-year aid programme to Syria and seven other countries from the Middle East.
However, the Associated Press news agency reported on Feb. 8 that the package could be held up in the European Parliament, due to opposition from the socialist group because of concerns about Syria's human rights record.
The Kyodo news agency reported on Feb. 20 that the Japanese government was planning to extend a US$500,000,000 loan package to Syria, the first since 1986.
[For German aid to Syria see p. 37989.]
Speculation over Syrian-Israeli peace talks
Syria's co-operation with Western countries during the Gulf War aroused some media speculation over the possibility of a future Israeli-Syrian peace agreement.
The speculation was heightened after a Feb. 13 visit to Damascus by Hans-Dietrich Genscher, the German Foreign Minister.
Speaking after talks with President Hafez al-Assad, Genscher said that he was "convinced that Syria wishes a peace settlement with Israel within the framework of an overall peace system" .
The following day, however, Israeli Prime Minister Itzhak Shamir vowed publicly that Israel would never relinquish the Golan Heights, captured from Syria in 1967.
MIDDLE EAST-ARAB WORLD
LEBANON
Border-zone tension — Deployment of Lebanese army
Tension in the south escalated from Jan. 29 to Feb. 5 as the firing of rockets into the "security zone" along the border with Israel was countered by Israeli forces and the Israeli-sponsored South Lebanese Army (SLA).
Five consecutive nights of rocket fire into the border zone (defined by the Israeli army in 1985 and 10-15 km wide) began on Jan. 28.
There were no casualties.
Between Jan. 29 and Feb. 3 Israeli and SLA artillery hit in retaliation the Rashidiya camp and a number of Palestinian targets in Iqlim al-Tuffah (the region to the south-east of Sidon from which many of the rocket attacks had been launched).
On Feb. 5 the Israeli air force launched a major air raid against Palestine Liberation Organization (PLO) Fatah bases in Lebanon north of the border zone, killing eight people, and in a ground operation by Israeli commandos on the night of Feb. 6-7 an ammunition dump was destroyed.
Le Monde of Jan. 31 had quoted Bassam Abou Sherif, a PLO spokesman in Tunis, as denying that the PLO had opened a "second front" against Israel in support of Iraq.
Uri Lubrani, co-ordinator of Israeli government activities in Lebanon, stressed in reply that Israel would not exercise the same restraint in south Lebanon that it was showing in the face of Iraqi missile attacks.
On Feb. 6-7 regular Lebanese army units numbering some 1,500 men moved into Iqlim al-Tuffah and positions around Zahrani, Nabatiya and Tyre.
This deployment had been decided at a Feb. 1 meeting of the Lebanese Council of Ministers, as part of a Syrian-backed initiative to restore the authority of the Lebanese government within the terms of the 1989 Taif agreement [see pp. 36986; 37928].
It had then been the subject of negotiations with Palestinian and other militia leaders in the area.
It was reported that Palestinian forces, and militias of the Syrian-backed Amal movement and the Iranian-backed Hezbollah, withdrew from the Iqlim al-Tuffah area in compliance with previous agreements.
Le Monde reported that the Lebanese army units were "warmly welcomed" by local inhabitants.
An official Israeli statement on Feb. 9 emphasized that the Lebanese army had to prevent any further attacks emanating from this area if Israeli reprisals were to be avoided.
On Feb. 12 Lebanese Deputy Prime Minister and National Defence Minister Michel al-Murr, returning from talks with Syrian officials, said that the army had instructions to ban any displays of armed force there.
The Washington Post of Feb. 12 commented that Israel and Syria were "effectively but unofficially cooperating" in neutralizing PLO forces in south Lebanon.
Seventeen people died in armed clashes in Palestinian-controlled areas east of Sidon on Feb. 15, when members of Fatah suppressed a rebellion by other Fatah regulars who were refusing to hand over their positions to the Lebanese army.
An Israeli air raid on Feb. 20, the first since the recent deployment of the Lebanese army, destroyed a building in Ezzi, close to the Lebanese-Syrian border.
MIDDLE EAST — ARAB WORLD
SAUDI ARABIA
Criticism of human rights record
In a press release issued on Feb. 21 the human rights organization Amnesty International said that it had continued to receive reports of the use of torture and of the death penalty in Saudi Arabia since the start of the Gulf war.
The latest claims came as part of a campaign by Amnesty International to raise public awareness of persistent human rights abuses in allied countries.
Amnesty said that while "human rights violations [in Kuwait and Iraq]were being exploited as propaganda, others were being committed in the name of national security" .
A Le Monde report of Feb. 23 said that Amnesty had confirmed the detention without trial of a journalist, Salih al-Azzaz for having filmed a peaceful demonstration by Saudi women on Nov. 6, 1990.
There were also reports from the Iraqi News Agency (INA) on Feb. 18 and 20 of widespread arrests of Saudi anti-war demonstrators.
Reports of clampdown on "terrorism" 
A report in the International Herald Tribune of Feb. 1 said that officials had confirmed that six men, alleged to have been terrorists, had recently been executed.
On Feb. 5 the Interior Ministry renewed a security warning stating that it would "strike most severely" against anyone committing acts of "anarchy, sabotage or aggression" , and on Feb. 13 Algerian radio reported that the Saudi authorities had arrested 12 persons for "terrorism" since the beginning of the Gulf war.
MIDDLE EAST — ARAB WORLD
YEMEN
Reduction of US aid
According to the Middle East Economic Digest (MEED) of Feb. 2, a United States official confirmed on Jan. 29 that the USA had cut its grant aid to Yemen for fiscal 1990/91 from US$20,500,000 to $2,900,000, and that "everything is on hold" .
MEED cited the official, from the Agency for International Development (USAID), as also hinting that US aid for fiscal 1991\92 was under review, and that "the contribution should be $24,000,000, but now it could be reduced to $3,000,000" .
Although there was no indication of cuts in the $10,000,000 in agricultural commodity loans previously allocated, MEED suggested that it was likely that this part of the assistance package would also be reduced.
The move was regarded as a sign of US displeasure at Yemen's vote on Nov. 29, 1990, against UN Security Council Resolution 678 authorizing the use of force to secure an Iraqi withdrawal from Kuwait [see pp. 37870-71].
The number of US personnel in the USAID office in Yemen was reduced from 19 to one before the outbreak of the war on Jan. 15, with the remaining official scheduled to leave by Jan. 30, and local staff were given "administrative leave" as of Feb. 2.
MIDDLE EAST — ARAB WORLD
TUNISIA
Detention of Islamists — Cabinet changes
Tension remained high in Tunisia after a major demonstration on Jan. 24 against the actions of the United States-led coalition in its war with Iraq.
The government had dissociated itself from the coalition, but the Islamic and leftist opposition nevertheless capitalized on widespread anti-war feeling.
Islamist opposition leaders were detained on Jan. 31 and Feb. 1.
Hamadi Jebali, editor of the newspaper of the fundamentalist Nahda movement (Mouvement de la renaissance), was sentenced to one year in prison on Jan. 31, after publishing criticism of military tribunals.
El País reported that "a dozen" Nahda leaders were detained the next day.
On Feb. 6 Tunisian radio said that live ammunition had been used against demonstrators attacking National Guard headquarters in the southern towns of Souk al-Ahad and Kebili; eight people were injured, including three National Guardsmen.
The offices of the ruling Democratic Constitutional Rally in Tunis were attacked on Feb. 17 by some 30 people, described in an official statement as "a commando of extremists" who attacked staff and destroyed archives.
Later on Feb. 17 Interior Minister Abdulhamid Escheikh was dismissed, apparently because of this security lapse.
He was replaced by Abdallah Kallal, hitherto the Defence Minister, whose brief was reportedly to prepare a hardline response and to restore law and order.
An extensive Cabinet reshuffle on Feb. 19 involved some 20 changes and numerous new appointments, and included the transfer of the Foreign Affairs Minister Habib Boulares, regarded as the most pro-Iraqi member of the government, to Defence; the departure from the Cabinet of Hamouda Ben Slama, who as Minister of Youth and Sports had been seen as having an "affinity" with Islamists; and the appointment of Habib Ben Yahia, a US-educated career diplomat and former ambassador to the UN, to take over Foreign Affairs.
Reduction in US aid
On Feb. 19 the US State Department announced a reduction in total aid to Tunisia to US$19,000,000 for the current fiscal year.
All support for military equipment purchases, worth some $30,000,000, was withdrawn and economic aid was reduced by 76 per cent, from $12,500,000 to $3,000,000; food aid would not be affected.
INTERNATIONAL
WARSAW PACT
Dissolution of military alliance — Trilateral summit
At a meeting of the political and consultative committee of the Warsaw Treaty Organization in Budapest on Feb. 25, Foreign and Defence ministers from Bulgaria, Czechoslovakia, Hungary, Poland, Romania and the Soviet Union unanimously approved and signed a protocol cancelling the validity of all military agreements, organs and structures of the Warsaw Treaty with effect from March 31.
Absent among the original signatories of the Warsaw Treaty, concluded in 1955 [see pp. 14249-51], were Albania, which withdrew in 1968 [see p, 22944], and East Germany which ceased to exist on its unification with West Germany in October 1990 [see pp. 37761-63].
Moves to dissolve the military alliance, which were first apparent at a Warsaw Pact summit meeting in June 1990 [see pp. 37550], were intensified after a trilateral meeting in January 1991 of the Foreign Ministers of Czechoslovakia, Hungary and Poland [see p. 37979].
They were followed by reports on Feb. 11 that Soviet President Mikhail Gorbachev had written to leaders of member states recommending "the liquidation of Warsaw Pact military structures by April 1" .
On Feb. 12 a Soviet Foreign Ministry official confirmed that members of the Warsaw Treaty organization had "concluded that the time has come to take steps to wind up the military structure of the organization" and that the final decision would be taken at ministerial, and not summit, level.
He also disclosed that the Soviet Union was awaiting "some sort of reaction from NATO" .
A communiqué issued after the Feb. 25 meeting said that the decision to dismantle the Treaty's military organization had been taken by "member states…acting as sovereign states with equal rights" .
It noted that the "elimination of Europe's dividedness offers a historical possibility to attain a new quality in security relations" based on each sovereign state's "freedom of choice" .
At a press conference attended by participants from all member states except the Soviet Union, Hungarian Foreign Minister Geza Jeszenszky revealed that members had held "different views" concerning the Treaty's political structures, which ministers had agreed to transform temporarily into a purely voluntary consultative organization.
It was understood that while ministers from East European member states had been keen to dissolve the entire organization, preferably by the end of 1991, the Soviet delegation had expressed a preference for the continuation of a bloc as a counterpart to NATO, at least until the conclusion of all talks related to the Helsinki process.
Jeszenszky also disclosed that the dissolution of the Council for Mutual Economic Assistance (CMEA or COMECON) which was to have taken place at the same time, had been postponed for "technical reasons" [see pp. 37979].
Trilateral summit
Leaders from Czechoslovakia, Hungary and Poland met in Visegard, near Budapest, on Feb. 15 to sign a declaration endorsing their countries' "total integration into the European political, economic, security and legislative order" and to adopt a common stance towards the dissolution of the Warsaw Pact.
The declaration, signed by President Vaclav Havel of Czechoslovakia, Prime Minister Jozsef Antall of Hungary and President Lech Walesa of Poland, undertook to establish democratic structures, to ensure full rights for all minorities, to promote "market-based economic co-operation" , and to encourage consultation on security issues.
At a press conference after the meeting, Antall emphasised that the declaration did not signal the birth of a new organization in opposition to either the Warsaw Pact or COMECON.
Rejecting suggestions of a concerted move against the Soviet Union, Antall asserted that the declaration was not directed against any fourth party.
INTERNATIONAL
CONFERENCE ON SECURITY AND CO-OPERATION IN EUROPE
Suspension of CFE talks — Opening of CSCE Secretariat
Representatives from the 22 North Atlantic Treaty Organization (NATO) and Warsaw Pact countries meeting in Vienna on Feb. 21 accepted a NATO proposal to suspend formal talks on a Conventional Forces in Europe (CFE) treaty signed in Paris in November 1990 [see p. 37838].
Delegates agreed to resume negotiations on March 21, or earlier, provided that the Soviet Union signalled its willingness to comply with the terms of the accord.
The Vienna talks, known as CFE1A, had begun on Feb. 11 amidst accusations from Western states that the Soviet Union had circumvented the spirit and letter of the CFE treaty.
The accusations related to three main issues: the reclassification by the Soviet army of three motorized divisions as naval coastal units (excluded from the CFE treaty and not liable to destruction); the discrepancy between NATO and Soviet estimates of the precise number of Soviet tanks and other military hardware subject to inspection and verification under the terms of the treaty; and the "surreptitious" withdrawal of an estimated 60,000-70,000 items of Soviet military equipment east of the Ural mountains and thus beyond the territorial scope of the treaty [see p. 37838; 37931].
The Guardian of Feb. 2 reported, however, that United States officials had privately acknowledged "a significant intelligence error" which had overestimated Soviet forces in Eastern Europe and the western Soviet Union.
US intelligence assessments actually made in October 1990, but only handed in two days before the Nov. 20 signing of the CFE treaty, had led US officials to assume that Soviet weapons had been withdrawn behind the Urals only shortly before the signature of the treaty.
On Feb. 6 the US Secretary of State James Baker announced that the US administration would delay submitting the CFE treaty to Congress for ratification so long as questions remained about Soviet compliance with the treaty.
His announcement came amidst reports that he had warned Soviet Foreign Minister Alexsandr Bessmertnykh, during a private meeting in Washington on Feb. 1, that the US administration would be unlikely to submit a Strategic Arms Reduction (START) treaty to Congress for ratification if the Soviet Union failed to respond to US complaints about Soviet violations of the CFE treaty.
Baker was quoted by one US official as saying, in response to Soviet proposals for a compromise, that "there could be no ex post rewriting" of the CFE treaty".
Opening of CSCE Secretariat
President Vaclav Havel of Czechoslovakia formally opened the Secretariat of the Conference on Security and Co-Operation in Europe (CSCE) in Prague on Feb. 20.
This was the first permanent institution endorsed by the 34 heads of state and government following their adoption of the Charter of Paris in November 1990 [see p. 37838].
INTERNATIONAL
ENVIRONMENT
Entry into force of European nitrogen oxides protocol — First session of UN global warming conference
A European protocol governing restrictions on emissions of nitrogen oxides (NOx) came into force on Feb. 14.
The protocol had been agreed by environment ministers of 24 member states of the UN Economic Commission for Europe at a meeting in Bulgaria in November 1988 [see p. 36792].
It committed its signatories to "freeze" NOx emissions at 1987 levels by 1994.
The first session of a long-running UN conference on global warming took place in Washington on Feb. 4-14.
Its aim was to produce an international agreement on measures to limit global warming and climate change.
Conference organizers hoped that a treaty could be in place for signature at the UN conference on environment and development, to be held in Brazil in June 1992.
The conference was attended by delegates from 130 countries, who agreed that future talks should concentrate on identifying "appropriate commitments" to reduce emissions of carbon dioxide (CO2) and other greenhouse gases, and on providing aid to Third-World countries in developing less polluting industries.
The US administration once again showed itself reluctant to consider proposals for setting firm targets for emission reductions or Third-World aid.
Most other Western countries, including the United Kingdom, however, expressed support for the principle.
The next meeting was scheduled to be held in Nairobi, Kenya, in June.
INTERNATIONAL
GATT
Resumption of Uruguay Round
The "Uruguay Round" of General Agreement on Tariffs and Trade (GATT) negotiations, aimed at liberalizing world trade, resumed formally in Geneva on Feb. 26 after being suspended in December 1990 [see p. 37930].
INTERNATIONAL
UNPO
Signature of founding charter
An Unrepresented Nations and Peoples' Organization (UNPO) claiming to represent those ethnic and minority groups unrecognized by the UN, was formally established in The Hague on Feb. 11.
The new body undertook to defend "the right of self-determination of oppressed peoples around the world" .
The founding charter was signed by representatives of Tibet, the Kurds, Turkestan, Armenia, Estonia, Latvia, Georgia, the Volga, the Crimea, the Greek minority in Albania, North American Indians, Australian aborigines, West Irians, West Papuans, and the minorities of the Cordillera in the Philippines and non-Chinese in Taiwan.
The organization established a general assembly and named Linnarrat Mall, an Estonian, as its chairman.
AFRICA
BENIN
Area: 112,622 sq km.
Population: 4,593,000 (1989 World Bank estimate).
Capital: Porto-Novo.
Languages: French (official); Fon, Bariba, Yoruba, Fulami.
Religion: traditional beliefs (majority), Christianity (15%), Islam (13%).
Armed forces: 4,350 (1990).
Currency: franc of the Communauté financière africaine (US$1.00=252.863 francs CFA as at Jan. 28, 1991).
Major international affiliations: ECOWAS; ICO; NAM; OAU.
POLITICAL SYSTEM
The Republic of Benin (known as a People's Republic until February 1990) achieved full independence from France in 1960.
A National Conference of Active Forces of the Nation in February 1990 suspended the 1977 Fundamental Law (Constitution) and all existing state institutions and decided on wide-ranging political reforms [see below].
Main government leaders as at end-1990
President: Mathieu Kerekou, also Head of the Armed Forces.
Prime Minister: Nicéphore Soglo, also Minister of Defence.
Other principal ministers: Florentin Feliho (Interior, Public Security and Territorial Administration); Paul Dossou (Plan and Statistics); Théophile Natta (Foreign Affairs and Co-operation); Idelphonse Lemon (Finance); Paulin Hountondji (National Education).
Cabinet changes in 1990
None since the appointment of the new government in March 1990 [see p. 37308].
Ruling party
Parti de la révolution populaire du Bénin (PRPB — Benin People's Revolutionary Party): Mathieu Kerekou (ch. of central committee)
Other parties
In accordance with a new law adopted on Aug. 13, 1990, a total of 24 new parties were registered by the deadline of Oct. 11.
The party political scene remains fluid, with parties merging and forming alliances in the run-up to the March 1991 general elections.
Elections
Multiparty elections were held in March 1991 [see p. 38804; for June 1989 legislative elections, August indirect presidential elections see pp. 36726; 36841].
1990 OVERVIEW
The political scene was transformed in February and March, when the National Conference of Active Forces of the Nation, a policy-making national conference convened to approve certain reforms, proclaimed itself a sovereign body, suspended the Constitution and all existing state institutions, and appointed Nicéphore Soglo, a former World Bank administrator, to form an interim government [see pp. 37238-39; 37308].
The then President, Mathieu Kerekou, subsequently accepted the decisions.
Legislative power was vested in a 50-member High Council of the Republic for an 11-month period of transitional government which was to culminate in contested elections in March 1991.
A draft constitution providing for direct presidential elections and multiparty democracy was published in May 1990 [see p. 37812]and approved by 77 per cent of voters in a referendum on Dec. 2.
The 1990 budget was adopted in April 1990 [see p. 37812].
Full diplomatic relations were established with Thailand and South Korea in October 1990.
AFRICA
BURKINA
BASIC DATA
Area: 274,200 sq km.
Population: 8,776,000 (1989 World Bank estimate).
Capital: Ouagadougou.
Languages: French (official); Mossi and other indigenous languages.
Religion: traditional beliefs (45%), Islam (43%), Christianity (12%).
Armed forces: 8,700 (1990).
Currency: franc of the Communauté financière africaine (US$1.00=252.863 francs CFA as at Feb. 28, 1991).
POLITICAL SYSTEM
Burkina Faso (the Popular Republic of Burkina — known until August 1984 as Upper Volta) achieved full independence from France in 1960.
A civilian government, elected in 1978, was overthrown in a military coup in November 1980, after which the 57-member National Assembly and the Constitution were suspended.
A series of military governments followed, with a radical left-wing regime being installed by Capt. Thomas Sankara in August 1983.
He himself was overthrown and killed in October 1987 by a faction of the armed forces calling itself the Popular Front.
A new constitution is due to be adopted in 1991 [see below].
Main government leaders
Head of state and head of government: Capt. Blaise Compaore, who is Chairman of the Popular Front, head of the government and Minister of Popular Defence.
Other principal ministers: Roch Christian Kabore (Minister of State without portfolio); Thomas Sanon (Economic Promotion); Clément Oumarou Ouedraogo (Minister-Delegate to the Co-ordinating Committee of the Popular Front); Prosper Vocouma (External Relations).
Government changes in 1990
None since a reshuffle in April 1990 [see p. 37366]and new appointment in July [see p. 37807; for full Cabinet list see p. 37807].
Ruling party
Front Populaire (FP — Popular Front), an umbrella organization of four national unions and five political parties; chairman of executive committee: Capt. Blaise Compaore.
Other parties
By the end of 1990 there were 14 legal political parties.
In addition there are a number of banned opposition parties operating either underground or in exile.
Elections
No recent elections (last held 1978).
According to the electoral timetable published on Dec. 27, a referendum on the constitution will be held in June 1991, presidential elections in November and legislative elections in December.
1990 OVERVIEW
As in many other African countries, political developments in Burkina were dominated by moves to create a more pluralistic form of government.
In March 1990 the Popular Front set in motion plans to draft a new constitution [see p. 37309].
Published in August 1990 [see p. 37807]and adopted by a constituent assembly on Dec. 15, it provided for a multiparty system and direct elections for the presidency in 1991.
1990 BUDGET
The 1990 budget was adopted in Feb. 1990 [see p. 37807].
FOREIGN RELATIONS
Major international affiliations: ECOWAS; ICO; NAM; OAU.
AFRICA
CAPE VERDE
Area: 4,033 sq km.
Population: 369,000 (1989 World Bank estimate).
Capital: Cidade de Praia.
Languages: Portuguese (official), Crioulo (a Portuguese-based creole).
Religion: Christian (nearly 100%, overwhelmingly Roman Catholic).
Armed forces: 1,300 (1990).
Currency: escudo (US$1.00=Esc65.2801 as at Jan. 28, 1991).
Major international affiliations: ECOWAS; NAM; OAU.
POLITICAL SYSTEM
The Republic of Cape Verde, composed of 10 islands off the west coast of Africa, achieved independence from Portugal in July 1975.
Until 1990, the President's term of office was five years, as was that of the legislature, which was elected from a single list of candidates put forward by the ruling party, the African Party for the Independence of Cape Verde (PAICV).
Political reforms adopted in 1990 provided for a multiparty system of government and a 79-member National Assembly.
Main government leaders as of end-1990
President: Arístides Maria Pereira, also C.-in-C. of the Armed Forces.
Prime Minister: Gen. Pedro Verona Rodrigues Pires, also Minister of Defence.
Cabinet changes
The Cabinet appointed in July 1990 [see p. 37802]tendered its resignation after the general election held in January 1991 [see p. 37948].
Political parties
Partido Africano da Independência de Cabo Verde (PAICV — African Party for the Independence of Cape Verde, Gen. Pedro Pires s. -g., the ruling party until the January 1991 election); Movimento para Democracia (MPD — Movement for Democracy, Carlos Viega l.).
Elections
The country's first multiparty legislative elections were held in January 1991 [see pp. 37948], and presidential elections were held on Feb. 17 [see pp. 37994-95].
1990 OVERVIEW
In April 1990 the PAICV ruling council agreed on a range of political reforms, including direct elections for the presidency and a multiparty system.
Constitutional amendments adopted by the Assembly on Sept. 28 abolished the position of the PAICV as the sole ruling party, separated party and state and allowed the formation of other political parties.
In the country's first multiparty elections in January 1991 [see p. 37948], the newly formed MPD defeated the PAICV and was expected to form the next government after the February presidential elections.
AFRICA
COTE D'IVOIRE
Area: 322,462 sq km.
Population: 11,713,000 (1989 World Bank estimate).
Capital: Abidjan (in the process of being moved to Yamoussoukro).
Languages: French (official); Akan, Kru and other indigenous languages.
Religion: traditional beliefs (60%), Islam (20%), Christianity (10%).
Armed forces: 7,100 (1990).
Currency: franc of the Communauté financière africaine (US$1.00=252.863 francs CFA as at Jan. 28, 1991).
Major international affiliations: ECOWAS; NAM; OAU.
POLITICAL SYSTEM
The Republic of Côte d'Ivoire became fully independent from France in August 1960, the French version of the name being declared the official version in 1985.
Executive power is vested in the President, who is elected for a five-year term.
Legislative power is vested in a single-chamber National Assembly of 175 members, also elected for a five-year term.
The post of Prime Minister was created in November 1990.
The Democratic Party of Côte d'Ivoire (PDCI) has been in power since independence, the country being a de facto one-party regime until May 1990, when opposition parties were allowed to function.
Main government leaders
President: Félix Houphouët-Boigny.
Alassane Ouattara Prime Minister; Economy and Finance Daniel Kablan Duncan Minister-Delegate to the Prime Minister for Economy, Commerce and Plan Guy-Alain Emmanuel Gauze Minister-Delegate to the Prime Minister for Raw Materials Léon Konan Koffi Defence Amara Essy Foreign Affairs Emile Constant Bombet Interior and Security Jacqueline Lohoues Oble Justice, Keeper of the Seals Bamba Vamoussa National Education Alhassane Salife N'Diaye Scientific Research, Professional Training and Technical Education Lambert Kouassi Konan Agriculture and Animal Husbandry Yed Essaie Angoran Industry, Mines and Energy Alain-Frédéric François Ekra Public Health and Social Protection Auguste Severin Miremont Communications, Government Spokesman Adama Coulibaly Equipment, Transport and Tourism Ezan Akele Environment, Construction and Town Planning Patrice Kouame Planning, Employment and Civil Service Henriette Dagri Diabate Culture Claire-Thérèse Elisabeth Grah Women's Promotion Yao Nicholas Kouassi Akon Posts and Telecommunications René Djedjemel Diby Youth and Sports 
Côte d'Ivoire Council of Ministers
Government changes
The current government was appointed on Nov. 30, 1990.
Ruling party
Parti démocratique de la Côte d'Ivoire (PDCI — Democratic Party of Côte d'Ivoire, Houphouët-Boigny ch.).
Other parties
Front populaire ivoirien (FPI — Ivorian People's Front, Laurent Gbagbo l.);
Parti ivoirien travailliste (PIT — Ivorian Labour Party, Francis Wodie l.).
In addition there are 23 smaller opposition parties.
Elections
In the most recent presidential elections, in October 1990, Houphouët-Boigny, who had previously been elected unopposed for six terms, was unsuccessfully challenged by an opposition party candidate and won a seventh term [see p. 37767].
In the first multiparty general election, held in November 1990, the PCDI gained an overwhelming majority, winning 163 of the 175 seats [see pp. 37841-42].
1990 OVERVIEW
Popular pressure, in particular mass protests in March, April and May, forced the PDCI government to introduce wide-ranging political reforms in 1990 [see pp. 37307-08; 37805].
Other political parties were allowed to operate from May onwards, and 17 parties fielded candidates during the first multiparty general election in November [pp. 37841-42].
Opposition parties alleged voter intimidation and irregularities during the election, which was easily won by the PDCI.
The same allegations were made concerning the presidential elections held the previous month [see p. 37767].
The 1990 budget was adopted in December 1989 [see p. 37806].
AFRICA
THE GAMBIA
Area: 11,295 sq km.
Population: 848,000 (1989 World Bank estimate).
Capital: Banjul.
Languages: English (official); Malinke and other indigenous languages Religion: Islam (95%), Christianity (4%).
Armed forces: 900 (1990).
Currency: dalasi (US$1.00=GD7.3096 as at Jan. 28, 1991).
Major international affiliations: ECOWAS; ICO; NAM; OAU.
POLITICAL SYSTEM
The Gambia became an independent state within the Commonwealth in February 1965, and a Republic in April 1970.
Executive power is vested in the President, who is elected by universal suffrage for a five-year term.
Legislative power is vested in the unicameral 50-seat House of Representatives, comprising of 36 directly elected for a five-year term, five chiefs elected by the Assembly of Chiefs, eight non-voting nominated members and the Attorney General.
Main government leaders
President: Sir Dawda Kairaba Jawara, also Minister of National Defence.
Other principal ministers: Bakary Bunja Darbo (Vice-President, Education, Youth and Sports); Omar Amadou Jallow (Agriculture and Natural Resources); Memba Jatta (Trade, Industry and Employment); Omar Sey (External Affairs); Saihou S. Sabally (Economic Affairs).
Government changes: Cabinet reshuffles in May and August 1990 [see p. 37801; for full Cabinet list see p. 37801].
Ruling party
Progressive People's Party (PPP, Sir Dawda Jawara l.).
Other parties
National Convention Party (NCP, Sherif Mustapha Dibba l.);
Gambia People's Party (GPP, Assan Musa Camara l.);
People's Democratic Organization for Independence and Socialism (PDOIS, Halifa Sallah, Sam Sarr and Sidia Jatta ls.).
Elections
Presidential and legislative elections were most recently held in March 1987 [see pp. 35109-10].
The PPP held 31 seats and the NCP five seats in the House of Representatives.
1990 OVERVIEW
The political scene in 1990 was dominated by the issue of relations with neighbouring Senegal, which had deteriorated after the dissolution of the Confederation of Senegambia in September 1989 [see p. 37602].
The governments of the two countries agreed in January 1991 on a basic framework for future formal links [see p. 37949].
News reports in December indicating that there had been an attempted coup were subsequently dismissed by Jawara as groundless rumours.
The 1990-91 budget was adopted by the House of Representatives in June 1990 [see p. 37801].
AFRICA
GHANA
Area: 238,533 sq km.
Population: 14,425,000 (1989 World Bank estimate).
Capital: Accra.
Languages: English (official); Akan and other indigenous languages.
Religion: Christianity (approximately 40%), traditional beliefs, Islam.
Armed forces: 12,200 (1990).
Currency: cedi (US$1.00=C344.737 as at Jan. 28, 1991).
Major international affiliations: ECOWAS; NAM; OAU.
POLITICAL SYSTEM
The Republic of Ghana achieved independence within the Commonwealth in March 1957.
Since the overthrow of the country's first President, Kwame Nkrumah, in a coup in February 1966, Ghana has experienced long periods of military rule interspersed with short-lived civilian governments.
The Provisional National Defence Council (PNDC) took power in December 1981 under the leadership of Flt. -Lt.
Jerry Rawlings (who had also staged a successful coup in June 1979 against the then military rulers, and had handed over power to President Hilla Limann in September of that year).
The 1979 Constitution was suspended, and parliamentary institutions were abolished.
Political parties are banned.
Executive power is vested in the PNDC, which rules by decree.
Main government leaders
Head of state: Flt. -Lt.
Jerry Rawlings, who is Chairman of the PNDC and Chief of Defence Staff.
Other members of the PNDC: Capt. (retd) Kojo Tsikata; Justice D. F. Anna; Alhaji Mahamad Idrisu; Maj.-Gen.
Winston Mensah-Wood; Lt.-Gen.
Arnold Quainoo; Ebo Tawiah; Zachariah Ali; P. V. Obeng; Mary Grant.
Prime Minister: P. V. Obeng, Chairman of the Committee of Secretaries.
Principal secretaries: Kwesi Botchwey (Finance and Economic Planning); Kwamena Ahwoi (Local Government and Rural Development); Commodore Steve Obimpeh (Agriculture); Huudu Yahaya (Trade and Tourism); Mahamad Idrisu (Defence).
Government changes in 1990
No changes since a reshuffle in December 1989 [see p. 37808; for full Cabinet list as of October 1990 see p. 37807].
Political parties
Political parties are formally banned, but under the right of association there is no bar on the formation of what are in effect political organizations.
Main opposition groups active internally include:(i) the Kwame Nkrumah Revolutionary Guards (KNRG — John Ndebugre l.);(ii) the New Democratic Movement (NDM — Kwame Karikari l.).
Both organizations in August 1990 joined a new umbrella organization, the Movement for Freedom and Justice (MFJ — see below), headed by Adu Boahen.
Elections
There have been no recent elections at national level.
Elections to district assemblies with executive powers were held in December 1988 and in January and February 1989 [see p. 36543].
1990 OVERVIEW
Under pressure from Western donor governments and from opposition groups calling for the restoration of multiparty civilian government, the PNDC on July 5, 1990, announced the opening of "a national discussion on the country's political future" with the purpose of developing an "authentic, African brand of democracy" .
Although it did not rule out a return to multiparty politics per se, the PNDC argued that in the past this had only bred "hatred, division and bloodshed" .
Opposition groups criticized the move as inadequate, and accused the regime of trying to control the debate on the issue by restricting access to the media, and of only feigning an interest in democracy.
They reiterated their call for a popular referendum on the country's future political system.
A new umbrella organization, the Movement for Freedom and Justice (MFJ) was launched on Aug. 1 to further the aim of a return to multiparty politics and civilian rule.
Among its most prominent leaders were Adu Boahen, a former history professor, who became interim chairman, and Johnny Hansen, Interior Secretary in 1982-83, who became first vice-chairman.
Two major opposition groups, the KNRG and the NDM, affiliated to the new formation.
The MFJ's inaugural rally on Sept. 15 in Kumasi had to be cancelled because the police refused to give permission for the event.
The 1991 budget, approved in January, provided for a total income of C385,000 million and expenditure of C341,000 million.
The government's economic policy objectives for 1991-93 were defined as (i) increasing real GDP growth to 5 per cent per year (mainly through expansion of the private sector);(ii) reducing the level of inflation from 37 per cent in 1990 to 10 per cent in 1991 and 5 per cent by 1993;(iii) maintaining the overall surplus in the balance of payments; and (iv) achieving further improvements in the social infrastructure.
Launch of stock exchange
Ghana's first stock exchange, based in the capital, Accra, began business on Nov. 12, 1990.
Three stockbroking firms were initially registered.
The exchange would be governed by a 10-member council, headed by Gloria Nikoi, a former Finance Minister.
Principal trading partners in 1989 were: exports to United States, United Kingdom, other European Community countries; imports from United Kingdom and other European Community countries.
AFRICA
GUINEA
Area: 245,857 sq km.
Population: 5,547,000 (1989 World Bank estimate).
Capital: Conakry.
Language: French (official); Fulani, Malinke, Soussou and other indigenous languages.
Religion: Islam (85%), traditional beliefs (5%).
Armed forces: 9,700 (1990).
Currency: franc (US$1.00=GF299.725 — official rate — as at Jan. 28, 1991).
Major international affiliations: ECOWAS; ICO; NAM; OAU.
POLITICAL SYSTEM
The Republic of Guinea achieved full independence from France in October 1958.
Post-independence history was dominated by Guinea's first President, Ahmed Sekou Toure, who pursued a policy of socialist revolution and suppressed opposition to his regime.
After his death in March 1984 the armed forces seized power and the country has since been ruled by a Military Committee for National Recovery (CMRN).
The 1982 Constitution, which provided for an elected National Assembly, was suspended after the coup, as was the Democratic Party of Guinea (PDG), formerly the ruling and sole legal party.
A new constitution was approved by referendum in December 1990 [see below].
Main government leaders
President: Maj.-Gen.
Lansana Conte (since 1984), who is also Chairman of the CMRN, head of government, and Minister of Defence, Security, Planning and Co-operation and Information.
Other members of CMRN:(executive committee members) Maj. Babacar N'Diaye (permanent secretary with ministerial rank, in charge of relations with non-governmental organizations); Maj. Kerfalla Camara; Lt.-Col. Sory Doumbouya (Resident Minister in Middle Guinea); Maj. Sekou Mantong Camara; Maj. Alhousseini Fofana (Resident Minister in Forest Region); Maj. Jean Traore; Capt. Mamadou Baldet; Capt. Abdourahmane Diallo; Maj. Facine Toure; Capt. Joseph Gbago Zoumanigui;(ordinary members) Maj. Kekoura Camara; Maj. Alfa Oumar Barou Diallo (Resident Minister in Upper Guinea); Maj. Jean Kolipe Lama; Maj. Babacar N'Diaye; Maj. Ousmane Sow; Capt. Mohamed Traore.
Principal ministers (other than CMRN members): Maj. Abou Camara (Resident Minister in Maritime Guinea); Ministers delegated to the Presidency: Maj. Henri Tofani (National Defence); Maj. Henri Foula (Economic and Financial Control); René Alseny Gomez (Secretary-General to the Presidency); Hervé Vincent Bangoura (Information, Culture and Tourism).
Government changes in 1990
A minor reshuffle took place in March [for this and full Committee list see p. 37803].
Political parties
All political parties are banned.
Main opposition groupings operating in exile include:(i) Rassemblement du peuple guinéen (RPG — Rally of the Guinean People, Alpha Conde l.);(ii) Mouvement pour le renouveau en Guinée (MRG — Movement for Renewal in Guinea, Maj. Diallo Thierno l.);(iii) Organisation unifiée pour la libération de la Guinée (OULG — Unified Organization for the Liberation of Guinea, Ibrahima Kake l.).
Elections
No recent elections.
1990 OVERVIEW
Recent political developments in Guinea have been dominated by plans for the introduction of multiparty democracy.
All Guineans convicted of political crimes were given an amnesty in February 1990 [see p. 37804].
A new constitution was submitted to the nation for discussion and amendment, and approved in a referendum in December [see below].
Appeals by the government urging exiled opposition leaders, in particular Alpha Conde of the RPG, to return to Guinea to participate in the political liberalization were largely ignored.
Students at the University of Conakry were on strike for most of November 1990 in support of demands for increases in their grants and for improvements in the quality of teaching and of library and other facilities.
Three students were killed in clashes with the police on Nov. 22, and several members of the strike committee were arrested.
The unrest then spread to secondary schools in Conakry.
Further clashes occurred over the following two weeks, and on Dec. 6 two high-school students were killed.
A new Constitution was overwhelmingly approved in a referendum on Dec. 23, 1990.
Official results showed that 98.7 per cent of voters had endorsed the document, and that the turnout had been 97 per cent.
The Constitution, drafted by a commission chaired by Foreign Minister Maj. Traore, provided for an end to military rule, the formation of a National Transition Council (NTC) in place of the CMRN, and the creation of a two-party system of government within five years.
Opposition groups in exile had rejected the terms of the Constitution and called for a boycott.
They advocated an immediate end to military rule and the holding of a national conference of all political forces.
AFRICA
GUINEA-BISSAU
Area: 36,125 sq km.
Population: 960,000 (1989 World Bank estimate).
Capital: Bissau.
Languages: Portuguese (official); Crioulo (a Portuguese-based creole), Balante and other indigenous languages.
Religion: traditional beliefs (65%), Islam (30%), Christianity (small minority).
Armed forces: 9,200 (1990).
Currency: peso (US$1.00=649.405 pesos as at Jan. 28, 1991).
Major international affiliations: ECOWAS; ICO; NAM; OAU.
POLITICAL SYSTEM
The Republic of Guinea-Bissau gained independence from Portugal in September 1974.
The National Assembly was dissolved after a coup in November 1980.
The Constitution approved in May 1984 defined Guinea-Bissau as an "state of revolutionary national democracy" , in which the African Party for the Independence of Guinea and Cape Verde (PAIGC) defines policy in all fields.
It also established a 150-member National Assembly elected from among the members of eight directly elected regional councils.
The Assembly elects a 15-member Council of State, to which its powers are delegated between sessions.
Main government leaders
President Brig. -Gen.
Joao Bernardo Vieira, who is Chairman of the Council of State, C.in-C. of the armed forces, head of government, and Minister of Defence and Interior.
Other members of the Council of State: Col. Iafai Camara (Minister of State for the Armed Forces); Vasco Cabral (Minister of State in charge of Co-ordination of the Social Sector); Carlos Correia (Minister of State for Rural Development and Agriculture); Maj. José Pereira; Filinto de Barros; Tiago Aleluia Lopes; Buato Na Batcha; Bengate Na Beate; Júlio Semedo; Francisca Pereira; Mário Mendes; Teoboldo Barboza; Bana Match.
Principal ministers, with the rank of Minister of State: Fidelis Cabral de Almada (Minister of State at the Presidency); Carmen Perreira (Social Affairs); Col. Manuel dos Santos (Economy and Finance); Júlio Semedo is Minster for Foreign Affairs.
Government changes in 1990
A reshuffle took place in mid-1990 [for this and full Cabinet list as of October see p. 37802].
Col. Iafai Camara was reported to be under house arrest in November [see p. 37842], but charges were reported to have been dropped and he remained in post.
Ruling party
Partido Africano da Independência da Guiné e Cabo Verde (PAIGC — African Party for the Independence of Guinea-Bissau and Cape Verde, Joao Bernardo Vieira s. -g., the sole legal party).
Other parties
Movimento da Resistência da Guiné-Bissau (MRG — Guinea-Bissau Resistance Movement, Domingos Fernandes Gomes l., opposition movement operating in exile).
Elections
The last election (unopposed) of Vieira as President, and the last indirect elections for the National Assembly were held in June 1989 [see pp. 36727-28].
1990 OVERVIEW
Popular pressure mounted in 1990 for a transition to a multiparty system of government.
Vieira launched the process in May 1990 [see p. 37802]and the PAIGC formally approved in January 1991 the introduction of multiparty democracy [see p. 37948].
AFRICA
LIBERIA
Area: 97,754 sq km.
Population: 2,475,000 (1989 World Bank estimate).
Capital: Monrovia.
Languages: English (official); numerous indigenous languages.
Religion: Christianity (65%), traditional beliefs (20%), Islam (15%).
Armed forces: 7,800 (1990).
Currency: Liberian dollar (US$1.00=L$1.00 as at Jan. 28, 1991).
Major international affiliations: ECOWAS; NAM; OAU.
POLITICAL SYSTEM
The Republic of Liberia, founded by freed black slaves from the United States, became an independent state in 1847.
Master-Sergeant (later Gen.) Samuel Kanyon Doe assumed power in a bloody coup in April 1980, overthrowing the previously dominant Americo-Liberian elite.
After four years of martial law, a new Constitution was adopted in 1984 and came into effect in January 1986, providing for a return to a civilian multiparty system of government [see p. 33322].
Executive power was vested in the President, directly elected for a six-year term.
Legislative power was vested in the directly elected bicameral National Assembly, comprising a 64-member House of Representatives and a 26-member Senate.
Opposition forces launched a rebellion in January 1990, and in September Doe was killed in the ensuing civil war [see pp. 37699-700].
An interim government supported by a regional peace-keeping force (ECOMOG — the Economic Community of West African States Monitoring Group) was announced in November [see p. 37908 and below].
The interim government was not recognized by the major rebel movements.
Main government leaders
President of interim government: Amos Sawyer; Vice-President of interim government: Reginald Diggs.
Political parties
Until the collapse of the Doe government, the ruling party had been his National Democratic Party of Liberia (NDPL, Augustus Caine ch., Patrick Biddle s. -g.).
Prior to the civil war of 1990, an opposition coalition had been formed in 1986 by the Liberian Action Party (LAP, Jackson F. Doe l.); the Liberian Unification Party (LUP, William Gabriel Kpolleh l.); and the Unity Party (UP, Edward Kesselly l.).
[See below for anti-government forces which emerged in 1990.]
Elections
Direct elections were held for the presidency, the vice-presidency and the National Assembly in October 1985 [see pp. 34146-48].
In the House of Representatives, the NDPL gained 51 seats, the LAP eight, the LUP three and the UP two.
1990 OVERVIEW
A former politician, Charles Taylor, launched a rebellion in January 1990 at the head of the National Patriotic Front of Liberia (NPFL).
The Doe regime collapsed and Doe himself was killed in September.
At this stage three armed groups were contending for power:(i) units of the Armed Forces of Liberia (AFL), led by Brig. -Gen.
David Nimley, still loyal to what had been the Doe government;(ii) Charles Taylor's NPFL; and (iii) the "Independent NPFL" , a breakaway group led by Prince Yormie Johnson.
The Economic Community of West African States (ECOWAS), which in August had sent a regional peace-keeping force known as ECOMOG, in November sponsored the formation of an interim government headed by Sawyer, a former opposition leader.
The three warring factions signed a ceasefire agreement in November, which held through December and January 1991, and in December agreed plans to set up their own interim government.
[For detailed reports on events in Liberia in 1990 see pp. 37174-15; 37366-67; 37601-02; 37644-45; 37699-700; 37766; 37908; 37948.]
AFRICA
MALI
Area: 1,240,192 sq km.
Population: 8,212,000 (1989 World Bank estimate).
Capital: Bamako.
Languages: French (official); Bambara and other indigenous languages.
Religion: Islam (about 80%), traditional beliefs (18%), Christianity (less than 2%).
Armed forces: 7,300 (1990).
Currency: franc of the Communauté financière africaine (US$1.00=252.863 francs CFA as at Jan. 28, 1991).
Major international affiliations: ECOWAS; ICO; NAM; OAU.
POLITICAL SYSTEM
Formerly French Soudan, Mali achieved independence in June 1960 in a short-lived federation with Senegal (the Federation of Mali, effectively dissolved in August 1960, when Senegal seceded).
The title Republic of Mali was adopted in September 1960.
The country was ruled by a Military Committee for National Liberation from 1968 until 1979, when a new Constitution came into force.
The President, who is directly elected for a six-year term, is also secretary-general of the sole legal political party, the Mali People's Democratic Union (UDPM).
There is an 82-member National Assembly elected by universal adult suffrage for a three-year term from a list of candidates drawn up by the party, based on local branch committee nominations.
Main government leaders as at end-1990
President: Gen. Moussa Traoré, also C.-in-C. of Armed Forces, Head of Government.
Principal Ministers: Django Cissoko (Secretary-General to the Presidency); Abdoulaye Diallo (Public Health and Social Affairs); Ngolo Traoré (Foreign Affairs and International Co-operation); Gen. Sekou Ly (Interior and Grassroots Development); Bakary Traoré (National Education); Moulaye Mohammed Haidara (Agriculture); Tienan Coulibaly (Finance and Trade); Brig. -Gen.
Mamadou Coulibaly (National Defence).
Government changes
Reshuffles took place in September 1989 [see p. 37800]and in January 1991 [see p. 37947; for full Cabinet list as of November 1990 see p. 37800].
Ruling party
Union démocratique du peuple malien (UDPM — Mali People's Democratic Union, the sole legal political party, Gen. Moussa Traoré s. -g., Djibril Diallo political sec.).
Other parties
Comité nationale de l'initiatif démocratique (CNID, National Committee of Democratic Initiative, Mountaga Tall l.);
Alliance pour la démocratie en Mali (ADEMA, Alliance for Democracy in Mali, Abderahmane Babe Toure l.), both set up in October 1990 [see below]and active internally; Rassemblement pour la démocratie et le progrès (RDP, Rally for Democracy and Progress, set up in Gabon in October 1990 by a group of exiles).
Elections
Presidential elections were last held in June 1985 [see p. 33769]; legislative elections were last held in June 1988 [see p. 36086].
1990 OVERVIEW
In April 1990 the ruling UDPM held a series of conferences on the issue of democracy, during which, it was reported, a number of speakers called for the introduction of a multiparty system.
At a meeting on Aug. 23-24 the UDPM executive decided to defer any further discussion of the country's political system until its next congress, scheduled for March 1991.
As in many other African countries, pressure for change continued to mount [see below].
In response, the government claimed that political reform could not be contemplated while the rebellion of the Tuareg in the north of the country [see p. 37800]continued to pose a threat to national security.
A peace agreement with the rebels was signed in January 1991 [see p. 37947].
Formation of opposition groups
Two bodies were set up in October 1990 to press for the introduction of multiparty democracy and the convening of a national conference on the country's political future.
On Oct. 19 a group of lawyers formed the CNID, and on Oct. 25 a group of eminent Malians who had sent an open letter to Traoré in August, urging him to introduce reforms, set up the ADEMA.
The CNID organized a mass demonstration in Bamako in support of multiparty democracy on Dec. 10.
Further demonstrations, described by observers as the largest since independence, were held subsequently and led to widespread unrest in January 1991 [see p. 37947].
The calls for political change were backed by the central trade union, religious bodies and by some sections within the UDPM itself.
The 1990 budget was adopted by the National Assembly in December 1989 [see p. 37800].
The 1991 budget was adopted by the National Assembly on Dec. 29, 1990.
Expenditure was set at 230,795 million francs CFA, and revenue at 224,950 million francs CFA, a drop of approximately 11.5 per cent in expenditure and of 8 per cent in revenue from the 1990 anticipated outturn.
Full diplomatic relations were established with South Korea in September 1990.
AFRICA
MAURITANIA
Area: 1,030,700 sq km.
Population: 1,954,000 (1989 World Bank estimate).
Capital: Nouakchott.
Languages: Arabic and French (both official).
Religion: Islam.
Armed forces: 11,100 (1990).
Currency: ouguiya (US$1.00=76.25 ouguiya as at Jan. 28, 1991).
Major international affiliations: Arab League; AMU; ECOWAS; ICO; NAM; OAU.
POLITICAL SYSTEM
The Islamic Republic of Mauritania, formerly part of French West Africa, gained full independence in 1960.
It was ruled after a military coup in 1978 by a Military Council of National Recovery (CMRN), which was replaced in April 1979 by the Military Committee of National Salvation (CMSN), headed by a chairman who is President of the Republic and whose executive power derives from a Constitutional Charter published in the same year.
The Charter suspended the National Assembly and the country's sole political party and is to remain effective "until new democratic institutions are established" .
Main government leaders
President: Col. Moaouia Ould Sidi Mohamed Taya who is also Chairman of the Military Council of National Salvation (CMSN), Prime Minister and Minister of Defence.
Other members of the CMSN: Lt.-Col. N'Diaye Kane; Lt.-Col. Mohamed Lamine Ould N'Dayan (permanent secretary); Col. Cheikh Ould Boyda; Col. Ahmedou Ould Abdallah; Maj. Cheikh Sidi Ahmed Ould Babamine; Maj. Ahmed Ould Minnih; Lt.-Col. Ann Amadou Babaly; Lt.-Col. Gabriel Cimper; Lt.-Col. Moulaye Ould Boukhreiss; Lt.-Col. Brahim Ould Alioune N'Diaye Lt.-Col. Sidina Ouir; Lt.-Col. Diallo Mohammed; Lt.-Col. Sidi Ould Mohamed Lemine; Maj. Sidiya Ould Mohamed Yehya; Maj. Ahmedou Haida; Maj. Mohamed Ould Lekhal; Maj. Sidi Ahmed Ould Boylil; Maj. Sidibi Toumani; Capt. Jiddou Ould Haki; Capt. Diop Djibril; Capt. Niang Arouna; Capt. Ely Ould Mohamed Fall.
Other principal ministers: Hassiny Ould Didi (Foreign Affairs and Co-operation); Maj. Cheikh Ahmed Ould Baba (Interior, Posts and Telecommunication); Sow Adema Samba (Justice); Sidi Mohamed Ould Boubaker (Finance); Mouhamedou Ould Michel (Planning and Employment).
Government changes in 1990
In February the Interior Minister, Col. Djibril Ould Abdullah, who had generally been considered to be second in the political hierarchy and had been involved in 1986 in the vigorous suppression of unrest among black Mauritanians, was dismissed and replaced by Col. Mohammed Sidina Ould Sidya, a southerner [see p. 37239].
A reshuffle took place in October [for this and full Cabinet list see p. 37798].
Political parties
All political parties are banned.
Two main opposition groups operate from exile:(i) Alliance pour une Mauritanie démocratique (AMD — the Alliance for a Democratic Mauritania);(ii) Organisation des nationalistes mauritaniens (ONM — Organization of Mauritanian Nationalists).
In addition there are three groups waging an armed struggle against the government on behalf of the black minority, the most important of which is the Forces de libération africaine de Mauritanie (FLAM — African Liberation Forces of Mauritania)[see also pp. 37798-99].
Elections
No recent elections at national level.
Local elections, postponed in 1989 because of the conflict on the Senegalese border, were held on Dec. 7-14, 1990.
As in the past, voters in each municipality were allowed to choose between four rival lists of candidates compiled by the government.
In Nouakchott, the capital and by far the largest city in Mauritania, an Islamic fundamentalist list gained two-thirds of the seats.
1990 OVERVIEW
Political developments in 1990 continued to be dominated by the worsening ethnic conflict between the Moorish (Arabic-speaking) majority and the mainly French-speaking blacks (who constitute about one-fifth of the country's population), the growing military activities of black opposition movements, and the related tense relations with Senegal [see pp. 36579-80; 36840; 36863-64; 37799; and below; for dismissal of Interior Minister see above].
The human rights organization Amnesty International on Oct. 2 claimed that the government had launched an undeclared war against the country's black citizens, with arrests, torture, disappearances and killings reaching unprecedented levels.
The organization accused the government of abandoning the rule of law in the south, where the black population was concentrated.
While it conceded that there had been arrests, the government rejected the other allegations as "groundless" .
The government on Dec. 4 announced the arrest of an unspecified number of people who, it said, had been implicated in a coup attempt on Nov. 27.
According to the Information Minister, Mohamed Ahmed Ould Lamine, the majority of those involved had been members of the army and navy and had admitted that they had "received orders from Senegal" .
The Senegalese government denied any involvement in the coup attempt.
AFRICA
NIGER
Area: 1,267,000 sq km.
Population: 7,479,000 (1989 World Bank estimate).
Capital: Niamey.
Languages: French (official); Hausa (about 50%), Tuareg, Djerma and Fulani.
Religion: Islam (more than 85%), traditional beliefs, Christianity.
Armed forces: 3,300 (1990).
Currency: franc of the Communauté financière africaine (US$1.00=252.863 francs CFA as at Jan. 28, 1991).
Major international affiliations: ECOWAS; ICO; NAM; OAU.
POLITICAL SYSTEM
The Republic of Niger became independent from France in August 1960.
The Constitution was suspended in 1974 following a military coup [see pp. 26496-97], and the country was ruled by a Supreme Military Council under Lt.-Col. Seyni Kountché until his death in November 1987, when the Military Council appointed the Chief of Staff of the Armed Forces, Brig.
Ali Saibou, as his successor.
An elected National Development Council (CND) in 1986 drafted a national charter to serve as the basis for a new Constitution which was adopted by referendum in September 1989.
In May 1989 Saibou had been elected head of the country's new supreme ruling body, a half-military and half-civilian Conseil Superieure d'Orientation National (CSON — Higher Council for National Orientation).
The CND was superseded by a 93-member National Assembly elected in December 1989 [see p. 37115], and assumed the role of an economic and social council.
In November 1990 the President confirmed that a multiparty system was to be established [see p. 37841].
Main government leaders
President: Brig.
Ali Saibou, also President of the Higher Council for National Orientation (CSON), C.-in-C of the Armed Forces, Minister of Defence.
Prime minister: Aliou Mahamidou.
Other principal ministers: Lt.-Col. Tanja Mamadou (Interior); Adamou Souna (Agriculture and Animal Breeding); Malam Annou Mahamane Badamassi (Finance); Sani Bako (Foreign Affairs); Aboubakar Adamon (National and Higher Education).
Government changes in 1990
A reshuffle was announced in March [see p. 37308; see p. 37811 for full Cabinet list, to which should be added Sani Bako as Minister of Foreign Affairs].
Ruling party
Mouvement national pour une société de développement (MNSD — National Movement for a Development Society, Brig.
Ali Saibou l.); formed in August 1988 as the sole legal party pending formal authorization of new parties, due by April 1991).
Other parties
A number of parties deposited application forms for registration after the opening date of Dec. 7, 1990.
Among the most influential are: Parti progressiste nigerien/Rassemblement démocratique africaine (PPN-RDA — the Niger Progressive Party/African Democratic Rally, Léopold Kaziende l.);
Union des forces populaire pour la démocratie et le progrès (UDFP — the Union of Popular Forces for Democracy and Progress, Djibo Akary l.).
Elections
Legislative elections (with a single list of candidates approved by the CSON) for the new National Assembly and presidential elections (in which Saibou was the only candidate) were held in December 1989 [see p. 37115].
1990 OVERVIEW
A Cabinet reshuffle in March 1990 [see p. 37308]restored the post of Prime Minister which had been abolished in December 1989 [see p. 37115].
The post was given to Aliou Mahamidou, hitherto director of the state-owned cement manufacturing company.
At the same time three key ministers and a prominent MNSD official were dismissed because of their responsibility for austerity plans which led to student protests and the killing of a number of students at a demonstration [see p. 37308].
As in many other countries, popular demands for the introduction of multiparty democracy grew in the first half of 1990.
In June Saibou announced plans to establish a multiparty democracy which were confirmed after a five-day national strike in November [see p. 37841].
According to a timetable finalized the following month, the constitution would be amended by April 1991 and multiparty elections would be held in the first quarter of 1992.
The 1991 budget was adopted by the National Assembly on Dec, 22, 1990; amounting to 106,000 million francs CFA and substantially lower than the previous one, it was the first to correspond strictly to the 12-month calendar year, previous ones being based on a 15-month period.
AFRICA
NIGERIA
BASIC DATA
Area: 923,768 sq km.
Population: 113,665,000 (1989 World Bank estimate).
Capital: Abuja (government institutions in process of transfer from Lagos).
Languages: English (official); Hausa, Yoruba, Ibo and other indigenous languages.
Religion: Islam (about 50%), Christianity (about 40%), traditional beliefs (5%).
Armed forces: 94,500 (1989).
Currency: naira (US$1.00=9.0916 naira as at Jan. 28, 1991).
Major international affiliations: ECOWAS; ICO; NAM; OAU; OPEC.
POLITICAL SYSTEM
Nigeria achieved independence within the Commonwealth in October 1960, and part of what had been British-administered Cameroons was incorporated into it in 1961.
The Federal Republic of Nigeria was proclaimed in 1963.
The civilian government was deposed in a military coup in January 1966; ethnic tensions led to the Biafra secession and civil war (1967-70).
Civilian government was restored under President Shagari in the Second Republic (1979) but the army staged another coup in December 1983, and Gen. Babangida took power in an "internal" military coup in August 1985.
The principal decision-making body is the Armed Forces Ruling Council (AFRC), composed of senior officers and members of the police force; as most recently reorganized, in February 1989, it consisted of 18 members in addition to Babangida, its chairman.
The 21 state Governors along with the President, the Chiefs of Staff and other members of the AFRC form the Council of States.
There is a National Council of Ministers, appointed by the AFRC, which is responsible for federal administration.
A timetable providing for a return civilian rule by 1992 was announced in July 1987 [see pp. 35554-55].
A new Constitution for the future Third Republic was promulgated and the ban on political parties was lifted in May 1989 [see p. 36648].
Main government leaders
President: Maj.-Gen.
Ibrahim Babangida, who is also C.-in-C. of the Armed Forces and head of the government.
Principal ministers: Vice-Adml. (retd) Agustus Aikhomu (Vice-President); Shetima Mustapha (Agriculture and Natural Resources); Babs Fafunwa (Education); Bonu Shariff Musa (Employment, Labour and Productivity); Maj.-Gen. (retd) Ike Nwachukwu (External Affairs); Abubakar Alhaji (Finance and Economic Planning); Maj.-Gen. (retd) A. B. Mamman (Internal Affairs): Jibril Aminu (Petroleum Resources); S. J. Ukpanah (Trade).
Government changes in 1990
A reshuffle took place in August [see p. 37644; for full Cabinet list as of October see p. 37809.
Tunji Olagunju was appointed Minister for Special Duties on Nov. 5.
Political parties
Two parties were created with official approval in October 1989 [see p. 36968]and registered in May as part of the government's close management of the reintroduction of civilian political structures: the National Republican Convention (NRC — Chief Tom Ikimi ch.), and the Social Democratic Party (SDP — Baba Gana Kingibe ch.).
No other parties are allowed to operate.
Elections
No recent elections at national level.
Local elections (the first since the military coup of 1983) were held in December 1990 [see pp. 37908-09].
1990 OVERVIEW
Progress towards the phased return to civilian rule continued in 1990 with the registration in May of the two political parties which would be allowed to operate in the Third Republic, the lifting of the ban on party politics at local level in June, and the holding of local elections in December [see p. 37908].
In related developments, Babangida carried out an extensive Cabinet reshuffle in August which was intended further to "demilitarize" the process of politics [see pp. 37644-45], and in September announced a major restructuring with the eventual reduction in the size of the armed forces [see p. 37700].
Dissident middle-ranking army officers staged a coup attempt in April, which was foiled the same day after heavy fighting [see p. 37367].
By Sept. 13, 69 soldiers had been put on trial and executed for their part in the coup attempt [see pp. 37700; 37810].
Principal trading partners in 1989 were European Community countries and the United States.
The trade balance was reported as a deficit of US$3,230 million.
AFRICA
SENEGAL
Area: 196,722 sq km.
Population: 7,211,000 (1989 World Bank estimate).
Capital: Dakar.
Languages: French (official); Senegalo-Guinean, Mandé and Peulh language groups.
Religion: Islam (90%), Christianity (5%, mainly Roman Catholic), traditional beliefs.
Armed forces: 9,700 (1990).
Currency: franc of the Communauté financière africaine (US$1.00=252.863 francs CFA as at Jan. 28, 1991).
Major international affiliations: ECOWAS; ICO; NAM; OAU.
POLITICAL SYSTEM
Senegal became independent from France in June 1960 as part of the Federation of Mali, from which it seceded soon afterwards, and the Republic of Senegal was proclaimed in September of the same year.
Executive power is vested in the President, who is head of state and head of government.
The President is elected by direct popular vote for a five-year term at the same time as elections take place to the 120-member National Assembly.
The President appoints the Council of Ministers.
Main government leaders
President: Abdou Diouf, who is also Commander of the Armed Forces and head of government.
Principal ministers: Medoune Fall (Armed Forces); Seydina Oumar Sy (Foreign Affairs); Famara Ibrahima Sagna (Interior); Moussa Toure (Economy, Finance and Planning); Djibo Ka (National Education); Serigne Lamine Diop (Justice); André Sonko (Minister and Secretary-General at the Presidency); Seydou Madani Sy (Minister and special adviser to the President).
Government changes in 1990
A reshuffle took place in March [see p. 37366; for full Cabinet list as of October see p. 37799].
Ruling party
Parti socialiste sénégalais (PS — Senegalese Socialist Party, Abdou Diouf s. g., Djibo Ka political sec.).
Other parties
Parti démocratique sénégalais (PDS — Senegalese Democratic Party, Abdoulaye Wade s. g., the main opposition party); in addition there are 15 smaller parties, none of which gained more than 1.5 per cent of the vote at the last elections.
Elections
A total of six political parties contested the general election of February 1988 [see p. 35812], in which the PS gained 71.3 per cent of the vote and 103 seats in the National Assembly and the PDS 24.7 per cent of the vote and the remaining 17 seats.
Diouf was re-elected for a second term at the same time.
1990 OVERVIEW
Opposition parties continue to accuse the ruling PS of suppression of dissent, in particular by restricting access to the media and by an unfair electoral law.
All major opposition parties boycotted local elections in November 1990 because they believed that the results would be rigged.
The government sought to suppress a growing armed separatist movement in the southern region of Casamance [see pp. 37799-800; 37949].
The 1990-91 budget was adopted in April 1990 [see p. 37800].
Relations with neighbouring Mauritania were affected by the continuing ethnic conflict [see pp. 36579-80; 36840; 37800; 37949].
A new framework for bilateral co-operation was agreed with Gambia in January 1991 [see p. 37949].
AFRICA
SIERRA LEONE
Area: 71,740 sq km.
Population: 4,040,000 (1989 World Bank estimate).
Capital: Freetown.
Languages: English (official); Mende, Limba and Temne.
Religion: traditional beliefs (52%), Islam (39%), Christianity (8%).
Armed forces: 3,150 (1990).
Currency: leone (US$1.00=Le184.02 as at Jan. 28, 1991).
Major international affiliations: ECOWAS; ICO; NAM; OAU.
POLITICAL SYSTEM
The Republic of Sierra Leone became independent within the Commonwealth in April 1961.
After a period of military rule (1967-68) a republican Constitution was adopted in April 1971.
The country was established as a one-party state in June 1978, under the All-People's Congress (APC) as the sole legal political organization.
Legislative power is vested in the unicameral House of Representatives, which has 105 elected members, 10 elected paramount chiefs and 10 presidential nominees.
Executive power is vested in the President, elected by popular vote for a seven-year term, after endorsement as leader of the APC and presidential candidate by the National Delegates' Conference of the party.
A Constitutional Review Commission began work in November 1990 [see below].
Main government leaders
President: Joseph Saidu Momoh,(since 1985) who is also head of government and Minister of Defence and Public Services.
Other principal ministers as at end-1990: Alhaji Abu Bakar Kamara (First Vice-President); Salia Jusu-Sheriff (Second Vice-President); Tommy Taylor-Morgan (Finance); Sheka Kanu (Economic Planning and National Development); Alhaji Abdul Karim Koroma (Foreign Affairs); Moses Dumbuya (Education, Cultural Affairs and Sports).
Government changes
None since a reshuffle in November 1989 [see p. 37804, where full Cabinet list is given].
Ruling party
All-People's Congress (APC, Joseph Saidu Momoh s. -g.).
Other parties
All other parties are banned.
There are several opposition movements operating in exile, including the Sierra Leone Alliance Movement (SLAM, Ambrose Ganda was leader in 1988); the Sierra Leone Democratic Party (SLDP, Edison Milton Gorvie was interim chair in 1988); and the National Alliance Party (NAP).
Elections
Presidential elections were last held in October 1985 [see pp. 33959-60].
In the legislative elections held in May 1986, up to five APC-approved candidates were permitted to contest each seat.
1990 OVERVIEW
The ruling All-People's Congress at first resisted growing pressure for the introduction of a multiparty system of government, but the party's central committee in August 1990 decided to set up a commission to review the Constitution.
Its brief was to "ensure full participation and equal opportunity for every Sierra Leonean in the decision-making process of the country" .
The commission's chair, Peter Tucker, said at the first session on Nov. 13 that it would consider the issue of single- or multiparty forms of government.
The 1990-91 budget was adopted in August 1990 [see p. 37805].
AFRICA
TOGO
Area: 56,785 sq km.
Population: 3,507,000 (1989 World Bank estimate).
Capital: Lomé.
Languages: French, Ewe, and Kabiye (all official).
Religion: Animism (50%), Christianity (35%, mostly Roman Catholic), Islam (15%).
Armed forces: 5,900 (1990).
Currency: franc of the Communauté financière africaine (US$1.00=252.863 francs CFA as at Jan. 28, 1991).
Major international affiliations: ECOWAS; NAM; OAU.
POLITICAL SYSTEM
The Togolese Republic, a former German protectorate subsequently administered by France as a UN Trust Territory, became fully independent in April 1960.
The current head of state seized power as Army Chief of Staff in a bloodless coup in January 1967, assuming the title of President three months later.
Existing political parties were banned; after a period of military rule a single-party system was established in 1969.
A new constitution, with an executive presidency, was approved by referendum in December 1979; a new Constitution is currently being drafted.
Main government leaders
Head of state: Gen. Gnassingbe Eyadema, who is President, C.-in-C. of the Armed Forces, Head of Government and Minister of National Defence.
Principal Ministers: Barry Moussa Barque (Planning and Mines); Gbegnon Amegboh (Minister-Delegate at the Presidency); Koffi Edoh (Technical Education and Professional Training); Yagninim Bitokotipou (Justice); Tchaa-Kozah Tchalim (National Education and Scientific Research); Gen. Mawulikplimi Amegi (Interior and Security); Koudjolou Dogoh (Rural Development); Komlan Alipui (Finance and Economy); Yaovi Adodo (Foreign Affairs and Co-operation).
Government changes in 1990
A reshuffle took place in February 1990 [see pp. 37808-09; for full Cabinet list see p. 37808].
Ruling party
Rassemblement du peuple togolais (RPT — Rally of the Togolese People, established 1969 as the sole legal party; Gen. Eyadema ch.; Yao Kunale Eklo admin. sec.; its political bureau, appointed by Gen. Eyadema is the country's chief policy-making body).
Other parties
Alliance des démocrats togolais (ADT — Alliance of Togolese Democrats, founded in December 1990 but not officially registered [see also below]; Dani Ife s. -g.);
Mouvement togolais pour la démocratie (MTD — Togolese Movement for Democracy, Paulin Lossou s. -g.);
Convention démocratique des peuples africains (CDPA — Democratic Convention of African Peoples); the MD and CDPA are both umbrella organizations operating in exile.
Elections
The last presidential elections were held in December 1986 (Gen. Eyadema, as the sole candidate, was re-elected for a second seven-year term — see p. 35111).
Legislative elections to the National Assembly were last held in March 1990 [see pp. 37308; 37809].
1990 OVERVIEW
Pressure mounted in 1990 for political reforms.
The ruling RPT firmly rejected in May a return to a multiparty system government [see p. 37809], but after mass protests and rioting in Lomé in October, described as the worst disturbances in 23 years of one-party rule, the RPT central committee approved a proposal for the drafting of a new constitution which was expected to provide for political pluralism [see p. 37767].
The founding of the ADT on Dec. 13, 1990, when Dani Ife was appointed interim party leader, marked the birth of the first opposition party in 24 years.
Despite the plans to introduce a multiparty system, government sources confirmed that new parties would remain banned until further notice.
An amnesty for political exiles was declared in January 1991 [see p. 37949].
1991 BUDGET
The 1991 budget adopted on Dec. 31, 1990, provided for revenue and expenditure in balance at 92,490 million francs CFA.
This was identical to the previous year's budget [see p. 37808].
Particular attention would be given in 1991 to creating jobs and boosting the private sector.
AFRICA
CAMEROON
Area: 475,442 sq km.
Population: 11,554,000 (1989 World Bank estimate).
Capital: Yaoundé.
Languages: French and English (official); Fang, Bamileke, Duala and other indigenous languages.
Religion: Christianity (53%), traditional beliefs (25%), Islam (22%).
Armed forces: 11,600 (1990).
Currency: franc of the Co-opération financière en Afrique centrale (US$1.00=252.863 francs CFA as at Jan. 28, 1991).
Major international affiliations: CEEAC; ICO; NAM; OAU.
POLITICAL SYSTEM
The Republic of Cameroon (whose name was changed in 1984 from United Republic of Cameroon) comprises (i) the former German colony and subsequently French-administered UN trust territory of Cameroon, which became independent as the Republic of Cameroon in 1960; and (ii) formerly British-administered territories (Southern Cameroons) which voted for union with the republic simultaneously with independence in 1961.
The Constitution adopted in 1972 effectively turned the country into a one-party state under the Cameroon People's Democratic Movement (RDPC).
Executive power is vested in the President, who is directly elected for a five-year term.
Legislative power is vested in the 180-member National Assembly, also elected for a five-year term.
In December 1990 the Assembly adopted legislation providing for a multiparty system [see below].
Main government leaders
President: Paul Biya, first elected in 1982, who is also C.-in-C. of the Armed Forces and head of government.
Principal ministers: Edouard Akame Mfoumou (Defence); Gilbert Andze Tsoungui (Territorial Administration); Yaou Aissatou (Social Affairs and Women's Affairs); John Niba Ngu (Agriculture); Ogork Ebot Ntui (Minister at the Presidency in Charge of Special Missions); René Owona (Industrial and Commercial Development and Trade); Simon Bassilekin (Finance).
Government changes in 1990
There was an extensive Cabinet reshuffle in September 1990 [see p. 37701; for full Cabinet list as of May 1990 see p. 37477].
Ruling party
Rassemblement démocratique du peuple camerounais (RDPC — Cameroon People's Democratic Movement, known as the Cameroon National Union (UNC) until 1985, national president Paul Biya, political secretary François Sengat Kuo).
Other parties
Front social-démocrate (FSD — Social Democratic Front, Albert Mukong l.);
Mouvement social pour la nouvelle démocratie (MSND — Social Movement for New Democracy, Yondo Black l.);
Front démocratique camerounais (FDC — Cameroon Democratic Front, an umbrella organization of opposition movements operating in exile, Ndeh Ntumaza l.);
Union des populations camerounaises (UPC — Union of Cameroonian Peoples, operating latterly as a Paris-based clandestine organization, having been banned since 1960; it was held responsible for unrest in the 1960s and was regarded as communist-led).
Elections
Presidential and legislative elections were last held simultaneously in April 1988 [see p. 36009].
1990 OVERVIEW
Popular pressure mounted in 1990 for the reintroduction of a multiparty system of government.
Reforms were initially firmly rejected by the ruling RDPC, but after violent demonstrations, particularly in May [see p. 37445], Biya at the party congress in June hinted at the need for changes [see p. 37523]and subsequently sponsored a range of reforms, including a relaxation of press censorship.
The National Assembly on Dec. 6 enacted a law affirming the right to form political parties and simplifying registration procedures.
Hitherto the government had been able to thwart all attempts by opposition leaders to form new parties, although the right to do so was formally enshrined in the Constitution.
Under the new law, promulgated by Biya on Dec. 19, the authorities would have to give reasons for refusing an application, and registered parties would receive state support during election campaigns.
Parties based on regional or tribal support would not be allowed to operate.
Mukong and Black, two prominent opposition leaders, founded new parties in May and December respectively [see parties above].
The 1990/91 budget for the financial year starting July 1, 1990, adopted on June 27, was fixed at 550,000 million francs CFA, a reduction of 8.7 per cent on the 1989/90 budget [for which see p. 37478].
Investment was allocated 186,000 million francs CFA, and administrative costs 364,000 million francs CFA.
Cuts in expenditure were made as part of the country's structural adjustment programme.
AFRICA
CENTRAL AFRICAN REPUBLIC
Area: 622,984 sq km.
Population: 2,951,000 (1989 World Bank estimate).
Capital: Bangui.
Languages: French (official); Sango.
Religion: Animism, Christianity.
Armed forces: 6,500 (1990).
Currency: franc of the Coopération financière en Afrique centrale (US$1.00=252.863 francs CFA as at Jan. 28, 1999).
Major international affiliations: OAU; CEEAC; NAM.
POLITICAL SYSTEM
The Central African Republic became fully independent from France in August 1960.
The country's first President, David Dacko, was ousted in 1966 in a coup led by Col. Jean-Bedel Bokassa, who proclaimed himself Emperor of the Central African Empire.
Bokassa was deposed by former President Dacko in 1979, the country reverting to the status of republic.
The present ruler, Gen. André Kolingba, seized power in a bloodless coup in 1981.
Kolingba's Military Committee for National Recovery was dissolved in 1985 and a predominantly civilian Council of Ministers was appointed as part of a gradual process of returning the country to civilian rule.
In November 1986 a referendum backed the establishment of a one-party state, the sole party being the Central African Democratic Rally (RDC) set up in February 1987.
Main government leaders as at end-1990
President: Gen. André Kolingba, also Prime Minister and Minister of Armed Forces' and Veterans' Affairs.
Other principal ministers: Dieudonné Wazoua (Economy, Finance, Planning and International Co-operation); Lt.-Col. Christophe Grelombe (Defence, Justice, Keeper of the Seals); Laurent Gomina-Pampali (Foreign Affairs).
Cabinet changes in 1990
June 5: nine ministers were dismissed, 11 new appointments made, including Edouard Franck as Minister of State at the Presidency in charge of Co-ordination, the Cabinet Secretariat and Relations with Parliament.
Sept. 24: Hugues Dobozendi replaced as Justice Minister by Christophe Grelombe.
Political parties
Ruling and sole legal party: Rassemblement democratique centrafricain (RDC — Central African Democratic Assembly), founded in February 1987; André Kolingba ch.).
Central African Movement of National Liberation (MCLN, Idi Lala l., an illegal party operating in exile).
Elections
National Assembly elections were last held on a single-party basis in July 1987 [see p. 35428].
1990 OVERVIEW
On May 10 Kolingba told an extraordinary meeting of the RDC executive committee that multipartyism required a gradual preparation and education of the population and was in no way a guarantee of democracy.
The meeting voted for a revision of the Constitution to allow the head of state to appoint a Prime Minister but ruled out the introduction of a multiparty system.
In mid-May some 250 civil servants and intellectuals issued a petition which demanded that the President organize a national conference to discuss the establishment of a pluralist system, complaining that the RDC leadership was unrepresentative and alleging that the country's administration was corrupted by tribal discrimination, nepotism, fraud and injustice.
Kolingba eventually agreed to the holding of a special RDC congress, which was held in Berberati, 600 km west of Bangui, in late October.
At the end of the five-day meeting, participants stressed the "unique nature" of the RDC and the risk of "civil war" which a multiparty system would bring, although the congress also approved guarantees of individual freedom and free expression.
The congress organizer, Sammy Macfoy, said that the CAR was "not afraid" of a multiparty system, adding: "No-one has rejected it, but we want it to be controlled and devoid of excesses." 
Idi Lala, leader of the exiled MCLN, described the RDC's decision to stick to a one-party system as "thoughtless and dangerous" , because it ignored recurrent social unrest and mass support for a multiparty system.
The 1990 budget was approved by the National Assembly on Feb. 15, 1990 [see p. 37481].
Kolingba visited China on April 16-20, when he had talks with Chinese Premier Li Peng in Shanghai.
AFRICA
CONGO
Area: 342,000 sq km.
Population: 2,208,000 (1989 World Bank estimate).
Capital: Brazzaville.
Languages: French (official); Kongo, Lingala and other indigenous languages.
Religion: traditional beliefs (more than 50%), Christianity (about 40%, mainly Roman Catholic, some Protestant).
Armed forces: 8,800 (1990).
Currency: franc of the Co-opération financière en Afrique centrale (US$1.00=252.683 francs CFA as at Jan. 28, 1991).
Major international affiliations: CEEAC; NAM; OAU.
POLITICAL SYSTEM
The Congo achieved full independence from France as the Republic of the Congo in August 1960, the country's name being changed to the People's Republic of the Congo in January 1970 after the establishment of a Marxist regime in which the Congolese Party of Labour (PCT) became the sole political party.
The chairman of the PCT central committee is also head of state and has executive powers.
Legislative power is vested in the 133-member National People's Assembly.
Plans to change to a multiparty system of government were announced in September 1990 [see p. 37701]and legislation to this effect was adopted in December [see p. 37908].
Main government leaders
President: Gen. Denis Sassou-Nguesso (since 1979), who is also C.-in.C. of the armed forces.
Government changes in 1990
A new government was appointed in January 1991 [see p. 37949; for full Cabinet list as of May 1990 see p. 37481].
Gen. Louis Sylvain Goma Prime Minister Ministers Col. Celestin Ngoma Foutou Interior; Information; Physical Education and Sport Brig. -Gen.
Raymond Damas Ngollo Defence Jean-Baptiste Tati-Loutard Culture and Arts Alphonse Boudenesa Trade, Small and Medium-sized Enterprises Hilaire Babassana Fishing, Industry and Crafts Aimé Emmanuel Yoka Mines and Energy; State Control Col. Florent Tsiba Equipment, Environment Rodolphe Adada Secondary and Higher Education, Scientific Research Jeanne Dambenzet Labour and Social Security Pierre-Damien Bassoukou-Boumba Basic Education and Adult Education Ossebi Douniam Health and Social Affairs Jean-Claude Ganga Tourism, Posts and Telecommunications Alphonse Nzoungou Justice and Keeper of the Seals; Administrative Reform Auxence Ickonga Minister in the Presidency with responsibility for State Control Edouard Ngakosso Finance and Budget François Bita Transport and Civil Aviation Pascal Ngayama Secretary of State for Foreign Affairs and Co-operation Ministers of State Pierre Moussa Plan and Economy Gabriel Oba-Apounou Youth and Rural Development Paul Ngatse Forestry Antoine Ndinga Oba Foreign Affairs and Co-operation.
Congo Cabinet as of January 1991
Ruling party
Parti congolais du travail (PCT — Congolese Party of Labour, Gen. Denis Sassou-Nguesso ch., Obami Itou s. -g.).
Other parties
Union pour la démocratie congolaise (UDC — Union for Congolese Democracy, Sylvain Bamba l. — see p. 37482); Union nationale pour la démocratie et le progrès (UNDP — National Union for Democracy and Progress, Pierre Nze l.).
Elections
Sassou-Nguesso was most recently re-elected both as party chairman and as President of the Republic at the PCT's fourth congress in July 1989 [see p. 36842].
Elections to the National Assembly were most recently held in September 1989 [see p. 36887].
1990 OVERVIEW
Popular pressure for political change mounted in 1990.
In July the central committee of the ruling PCT agreed on wide-ranging reforms, including the abandonment of Marxism-Leninism as the ideology of the state, but retained the status of the PCT as the sole legal party [see p. 37602].
In September, after the central trade union federation had called for an acceleration of the process of democratization, the PCT decided to abolish the one-party system [see p. 37701].
Legislation providing for the formation of opposition parties was adopted in December [see p. 37908].
As part of the timetable for the introduction of a multiparty system, a transitional government was appointed in January 1991 pending the holding of a conference on the country's political future and contested elections at a later date [see p. 37949].
The 1990 budget was adopted in December 1989 [see p. 37482].
AFRICA
EQUATORIAL GUINEA
Area: 28,051 sq km.
Population: 344,000 (1989 World Bank estimate).
Capital: Malabo.
Languages: Spanish (official); Fang, Bubi and other indigenous languages.
Religion: Christianity (89%, mostly Roman Catholic), traditional beliefs (5%).
Armed forces: 1,300 (1990).
Currency: franc of the Co-opération financière en Afrique centrale (US$1.00=252.863 francs CFA as at Jan. 28, 1991).
Major international affiliations: CEEAC; NAM; OAU.
POLITICAL SYSTEM
The Republic of Equatorial Guinea achieved independence from Spain in 1968.
The current President, Brig. -Gen.
Teodoro Obiang Nguema Mbasogo, seized power in a coup in August 1979 and established the ruling Supreme Military Council (composed of both military and civilians since December 1981).
All political parties were banned until mid-1987, when the President announced the formation of the Equatorial Guinea Democratic Party (PDGE) as the "party of government" .
A new Constitution, approved by referendum in August 1982, extended the President's term of office for a further seven years, created a 41-member House of Representatives of the People, and provided for the holding of presidential and legislative elections in the course of a gradual transition from military to civilian rule.
Main government leaders
President: Brig. -Gen.
Teodoro Obiang Nguema Mbasogo, also President of the Supreme Military Council and Minister of Defence.
A number of key ministerial portfolios (including Economic and Financial Affairs, Foreign Affairs and Co-operation, and Economy, Commerce and Planning) are also under his supervision in the form of ministries-delegate.
Other principal ministers: Capt. Cristino Seriche Bioko (Prime Minister); Isidoro Eyi Monsuy Andeme (Deputy Prime Minister and Minister of Education, Youth and Sports); Marcelino Nguema Ongueme (Minister of State for Economy, Trade and Planning), Casto Nvono Akhele (Secretary-General to the Presidency); Eloy Elo Nve Mbengono (Minister of State at the Presidency, in charge of relations with constitutional organs); Alejandro Evuna Asangono (Minister of State at the Presidency in charge of missions); Santiago Eneme Ovono (Minister-Delegate for Foreign Affairs and Co-operation).
Government changes in 1990
In two major changes announced on Oct. 16, Nvono Akhele was promoted from a minister-delegate to become Secretary-General to the Presidency, taking over from Nguema Ongueme, who was appointed to the new post of Minister of State in charge of Economy, Trade and Planning [for full Cabinet list as of May 1990 see p. 37478].
Cdr.
Melanio Ebendeng Nsomo, Minister Delegate for Defence, was arrested in early December [see below].
Ruling party
Partido Democràtico de Guinea Ecuatorial (PDGE — Equatorial Guinea Democratic Party, the sole legal party, Brig. -Gen.
Teodoro Obiang Nguema l.).
Other parties
Junta Coordinadora de las Fuerzas de Oposición Democrática (Co-ordinating Board of Democratic Opposition Forces, the main opposition alliance operating in exile, comprising five parties, Teodoro Mackuandji Bondjale Oko l.).
Elections
Elections to the House of Representatives of the People last took place in July 1988, when all candidates were nominated by the President and were elected unopposed for a five-year term [see p. 36200].
Obiang Nguema was re-elected unopposed for a further seven-year term as President in June 1989 [see p. 36727].
1990 OVERVIEW
Contrary to a trend towards multiparty politics in many African countries, control of the political system remained firmly in the hands of President Obiang Nguema and the ruling PDGE.
According to a report by the human rights organization Amnesty International, some 30 parliamentarians and other high-ranking officials were arrested in early December for advocating the introduction of a multiparty system.
The detained included Francisco Boddien Ngalo, President of the Chamber of People's Representatives, Julio Ela Mangue, President of the Supreme Court, and Cdr.
Melanio Ebendeng Nsomo, Minister Delegate for Defence.
AFRICA
GABON
Area: 267,667 sq km.
Population: 1,105,000 (1989 World Bank estimate).
Capital: Libreville.
Languages: French (official); Fang and other indigenous languages.
Religion: Christianity (about 60%, mostly Roman Catholic), animism.
Armed forces: 4,750 (1990).
Currency: franc of the Co-opération financière en Afrique centrale (US$1.00=252.863 francs CFA as at Jan. 28, 1991).
Major international affiliations: CEEAC; ICO; NAM; OAU; OPEC.
POLITICAL SYSTEM
The Gabonese Republic achieved full independence from France in August 1960.
The Gabonese Democratic Party (PDG) was formed in 1968, when a single-party system was adopted.
Executive power is vested in the President, who is elected for a seven-year term.
Legislative power is vested in the 120-member National Assembly, which is elected for a five-year term.
A National Conference in March-April 1990 approved the introduction of a pluralist system [see p. 37307].
Casimir Oye Mba Prime Minister Zacharie Myboto Public Works and Construction Ali Ben Bong Foreign Affairs, Co-operation and Francophone Affairs André Dieudonne Berre Trade and Industry Michel Anchouey Justice Adrien Nkoghe Essingone Housing, Land Registration and Town Planning Martin Fidèle Magnaga Defence, Public Security and Immigration Antoine Mboumbou Miyakou Territorial Administration and Local Collectives Paulette Moussavou Missambo (f) Civil Service and Administrative Reform Paul Toungui Finance and Budget Marcel Doupamby Matoka Planning, Economy, Territorial Administration Jean-Remy Pendy Bouyiki Information, Posts and Telecommunications; Government Spokesman Jean Ping Mines, Petroleum, Energy and Water Resources Marc Ropivia National Education, Higher Education and Scientific Research Eugène Kalou Mayaka Health and Population Serge Mba Bekale Employment, Human Resources and Professional Training Emmanuel Ondo Methogo Agriculture, Livestock and Rural Economy Eugène Capito Water and Forestry Pierre-Clavier Nzeng Youth, Sports, Art and Culture Jerome Ngoua Bekale Transport Pepin Mongockodji Tourism, Environment and National Parks Victor Mapangou Moucani Muetsa Small and Medium-Sized Enterprises and Handicrafts Simon Oyono Aba'a Decentralization Jean-Baptiste Obiang Etoughe Inspection and Parastatal Reform Patrice Nziengui Social Affairs and National Solidarity André Mba Obame Human Rights and Relations with Parliament
Gabon Council of Ministers November 1990
Main government leaders
President: Omar Bongo (since 1967).
Government changes in 1990
A new government was appointed in November 1990 in which PDG member held three-quarters of the portfolios [not one-third as stated on p. 37841]and the five largest opposition parties were represented by eight ministers [for previous full Cabinet list as of May 1990 see p. 37480].
Ruling party
Parti démocratique gabonais (PDG — Gabonese Democratic Party, Omar Bongo ch., Léon Mébiame first sec.).
Other parties
Mouvement de redressement nationale (Morena — Movement of National Recovery); Parti gabonais du progrès (PGP — Gabonese Progress Parti); Association pour le socialisme au Gabon (APSG — Association for Socialism in Gabon); Union socialiste gabonais (USG — Gabonese Socialist Union); Cercle pour le renouveau et le progrès (CRP — Circle for Renewal and Progress); Union pour la démocratie et le développement Mayumba (UDDM — Mayumba Union for Democracy and Development); Rassemblement nationale des bücherons (RNB — National Rally of Lumberjacks); Union du peuple gabonais (UPG — Gabonese People's Union), Pierre Mamboundou l., operating in exile).
Elections
Bongo was most recently re-elected as President in November 1986 [see p. 34784].
Multiparty legislative elections were held in September, October and November 1990 [see pp. 37701; 37767; 37841].
1990 OVERVIEW
Popular pressure mounted in 1989 and 1990 for the introduction of a multiparty system of government, which was agreed at a national conference in April [see p. 37307]; a transitional constitution was adopted in May, and 13 opposition parties were legalized.
Widespread disturbances occurred in May after the death in suspicious circumstances of an opposition leader [see p. 37444].
In multiparty legislative elections held in September, October and November the ruling Gabonese Democratic Party (PDG) retained an overall majority in the National Assembly, but seven opposition parties gained representation; a new government, in which the five largest opposition parties were also represented, was appointed in November [see pp. 37701; 37767; 37841].
The 1990 budget was adopted in December 1989 [see p. 37480].
The 1991 budget, approved in December 1990, was set at 490,000 million francs CFA.
Oil revenue was expected to be 257,000 million francs CFA, with other revenue (excluding loans) set at 181,000 million francs CFA; the investment budget was set at 102,000 million francs CFA.
AFRICA
SAO TOMÉ AND PRINCIPE
Area: 964 sq km.Population: 122,000 (1989 World Bank estimate).
Capital: Sao Tomé.
Languages: Portuguese (official); Crioulo.
Religion: Christianity (mostly Roman Catholic).
Armed forces: 1,000 (1989).
Currency: dobra (US$1.00=150.562 dobras as at Jan. 28, 1991).
Major international affiliations: CEEAC; NAM; OAU.
POLITICAL SYSTEM
The Democratic Republic of Sao Tomé and Príncipe became fully independent from Portugal in July 1975.
Under the 1975 Constitution, legislative power was vested in the 40-member National Assembly indirectly elected for a five-year term, executive power was vested in a President elected indirectly for a five-year term, and the Movement for the Liberation of Sao Tomé and Príncipe (MLSTP) was the sole legal political party.
As part of a process of "democratization" the Constitution was amended in 1987 to provide for direct election of the President and the National Assembly deputies, the election to public office of independents and candidates put forward by "organizations with recognized representation" , and the re-creation of the post of Prime Minister.
A new Constitution embodying the change to a multiparty system was approved by referendum in August 1990 [see p. 37645].
Main government leaders as of end-1990
President: Manuel Pinto da Costa, who is also C.-in-C. of the Armed Forces.
Prime Minister: Celestin Rocha da Costa.
Government changes
The government resigned after the general election on Jan. 20, 1991.
Political parties
Movimento de Liberaçao de Sao Tomé e Príncipe (MLSTP — Movement for the Liberation of Sao Tomé and Príncipe, Manuel Pinto da Costa, l.);
Partido de Convergencia Democrática (PCD — Democratic Convergence Party, Daniel dos Santos Daio, l.);
Coalizao Democrática de Oposiçao (CDO — Democratic Opposition Coalition); Christian Democratic Front.
Elections
The country's first multiparty legislative elections were held in January 1991 [see pp. 37949], and presidential elections on March 3 [see p. 38084].
1990 OVERVIEW
Popular pressure for political reforms induced the then ruling MLSTP to initiate a transition to a multiparty system of government in December 1989 [see p. 37479].
A new Constitution embodying the change was adopted in August 1990 [see p. 37645].
In the country's first multiparty elections in January 1991 [see p. 37949], the opposition PCD defeated the MLSTP and formed an interim government pending the presidential elections scheduled for March 3.
AFRICA
ANGOLA
Area: 1,246,700 sq km.
Population: 9,694,000 (1989 World Bank estimate).
Capital: Luanda.
Languages: Portuguese (official); local languages (principally Ovimbundu, Kimbundu, Bakongo and Chokwe).
Religion: Traditional beliefs, Christianity (large minority — mainly Roman Catholic).
Armed forces: 100,000.
Currency: Kwanza (US$1.00=30.0358 Kwanza as at Jan 28, 1991).
Major international affiliations: CEEAC (observer); NAM; OAU; SADCC; PTA.
POLITICAL SYSTEM
The People's Republic of Angola achieved full independence from Portugal in November 1975.
The legislative body is the National People's Assembly composed of 289 full and 29 alternate members elected indirectly for a five-year term.
Effective political control has been exercised since independence by the Popular Movement for the Liberation of Angola, restructured in 1977 as the Marxist-Leninist Popular Movement for the Liberation of Angola — Workers' Party (MPLA-PT), which is the sole legal party and responsible, under the 1975 Constitution (as amended in 1976 and 1980), for the political, economic and social leadership of the country.
The party chairman is also head of state.
In December 1990 the third MPLA-PT congress agreed that a multiparty system would be introduced [see p. 37909].
Main government leaders
Head of State: José Eduardo dos Santos, who is also C.-in-C. of the Armed Forces, Chairman of the Council of Ministers, Minister of State for the Economic and Social Sector.
Other principal ministers as at end-1990: Kundi Paihama (Minister of State for Inspection and State Security); José de Franca Dias Van-Dúnem (Planning); Col.-Gen.
Pedro Maria Tonha "Pedalé" (Defence); Lt.-Col. Pedro de Castro Van-Dúnem "Loy" (External Relations); Lt.-Col. Francisco Antonio Magalhaes Paiva "Nvunda" (Interior); Lazaro Manuel Dias (Justice); Aguinaldo Jaime (Finance); Zeferino Cassa Yombo (Petroleum and Energy); José Leitao da Costa e Silva (Secretary of the Council of Ministers).
Government changes
Cabinet reshuffles were announced on May 5, 1990, on June 14, on Aug. 24 and in November, and in January 1991 [for details and for Cabinet lists as of early June 1990 and January 1991 see pp. 37523; 37555; 37643; 37951].
In June Maria Luis Perdigao Abrantes was appointed head of the foreign investment office, to replace Aguinaldo Jaime who had become Finance Minister [see p. 37523].
In November Ambrosio de Oliveira Silvestre became acting Minister of Foreign and Internal Trade and Industry, in replacing Domingo das Chagas Simoes Rangel.
At the same time, former Prime Minister and Planning Minister Lopo Fortunato Ferreira do Nascimento, became a special political assistant to the President (as well as head of the official negotiating team with anti-government rebels — see pp. 37842).
Fernando Alberto da Graca Teixera replaced Pedro da Cunha Neto as governor of the Central Bank, following the latter's appointment as Deputy Finance Minister.
Ruling and sole legal party
Movimento Popular de Libertaçáo de Angola, Partido do Trabalho (MPLA-PT — Popular Movement for the Liberation of Angola-Workers' Party, José Eduardo dos Santos ch., Roberto de Almeida ideology sec.).
At its third party congress in December [see pp. 37909]the MPLA decided to replace its Marxist-Leninist ideology with a commitment to "democratic socialism" .
Other political groupings
Uniao Nacional para a Independência total de Angola (UNITA — Union for the Total Independence of Angola, Jonas Savimbi l.), a rebel nationalist group backed, financially and militarily, by South Africa and the United States, which has been fighting the MPLA-PT government since independence; Movement for Socialist Unity in Angola (MUSA, formed by leaders from the three mainstream nationalist movements in 1977); in July 1990 the creation was announced of the Angolan Social Democratic Party (PSDA, an offshoot of MUSA, Moises André Lima l.); the Frente de Libertaçao do Enclave de Cabinda (FLEC — The Front for the Liberation of the Cabinda Enclave, Francisco Xavier Lubota pres.) and the National Union for the Liberation of Cabinda (UNLC) fight for the secession of Cabinda district.
Elections
Elections to the National People's Assembly, postponed since 1983, took place in late 1986; the next elections are due in 1991.
1990 OVERVIEW
The collapse of the ceasefire agreement reached in Gbadolite (Zaire) in June 1989 [see p. 36726]was followed by a period of intense fighting between the MPLA-PT government and UNITA in the first half of 1990, centred on the battle for control of Mavinga, a strategic UNITA base near its Jamba headquarters in the south-east of the country.
UNITA lost South African logistical support in the area as a result of Namibian independence, but after an initially successful government offensive early in the year the military balance swung in the rebels' favour.
In May UNITA not only recaptured Mavinga but also switched the focus of its campaign to its military base in Béu in the north-west near the border with Zaïre, from where it received major airlifts of US supplies and equipment.
Béu became the launching-pad from which an offensive against Luanda could be organized.
The government accused the US government of planning a coup by giving direct military assistance to UNITA and also by providing extra funds for anti-aircraft missiles.
The position of the MPLA-PT government also appeared weakened by the imminent withdrawal of all Cuban troops under the December 1988 tripartite Namibian independence agreements which had failed to address the conflict in Angola [see pp. 36380; 36479-81].
According to Havana, 37,000 Cuban forces had left Angola by September 1990, leaving just 13,000 due to depart by mid-1991.
From April to November government-UNITA talks were held in Portugal, joined from September onwards by Soviet and United States advisors [see pp. 36365; 37702; 37842].
In spite of a Soviet offer of a mutual end to arms supplies, the USA continued to supply military aid to UNITA.
The government remained reluctant to recognize UNITA until it agreed to end its destabilization campaign, while UNITA would not commit itself to ending hostilities until its future political role was guaranteed.
The MPLA-PT insisted that it could not formally recognize UNITA until the Constitution had been revised, and that elections could not be held for several years until a census and electoral rolls had been drawn up.
Angola's vast mineral resources consisted not only of diamonds but also of oil, which was the backbone of the economy, providing 90 per cent of export earnings and making it, after Nigeria, the second largest oil producer in sub-Saharan Africa.
Because of its favourable climate, terrain and irrigation facilities, the country had considerable agricultural potential, including one of the richest fishing grounds.
The main cash crops were coffee, sugar cane and cotton, with cassava the domestic staple.
Economic development since independence was severely handicapped by sabotage and political strife.
Military expenditure therefore absorbed 70 per cent of revenues, and over half the country's industry was at a standstill, the remainder working below capacity.
In 1990 drought and floods added to the socio-economic impact of the conflict, affecting 1,500,000 people [see p. 37702].
The government was also in difficulty over payments on its foreign debt, estimated at US$6,000 million.
A member of the IMF and the World Bank since 1989, Angola adopted a series of austerity measures in August (following Cabinet changes in the Finance and Planning portfolios — see above), including (i) the first devaluation of the kwanza since 1976;(ii) cuts in public spending by up to 50 per cent(partly by reducing the civil service);(iii) increases in rents, and fuel and electricity prices;(iv) tax reforms aimed at boosting government revenue and reducing the budget deficit (estimated at US$1,700 million); and (v) an overhaul of the banking sector, which in November was authorized to conduct foreign exchange transactions; there were also plans to create a central bank and allow private commercial banks.
In July, an anti-corruption drive was also launched to stimulate the economy.
In November it was announced that exports of coffee — of which Angola was the fourth largest producer in the world before independence — were less than half those expected.
Nevertheless, increased oil revenues, due to production increases and the sharp rise in prices, were expected to produce a 3 per cent growth in GDP.
The United States continued to withhold diplomatic relations.
The government signed a number of accords with neighbouring Namibia after the latter gained its independence in March.
The first, on May 21, dealt with border security, with both sides stressing that this did not involve an alliance against UNITA.
The second, signed on Sept. 18, was a general co-operation agreement, and the third, signed on Nov. 26, was an energy accord, with agreements on joint use and development of water resources in Cunene province and on the electrification of southern Angola and northern Namibia.
On Sept. 5 South African Mineral and Energy Minister Dawie de Villiers held talks with dos Santos on trade co-operation.
AFRICA
BOTSWANA
Area: 582,000 sq km.
Population: 1,217,000 (1989 World Bank estimate).
Capital: Gabarone.
Languages: English (official); Setswana.
Religion: mainly traditional beliefs, Christian minority.
Armed forces: 4,500 (1990).
US$1,410 (1987).
Currency: Pula (US$1.00=P1.8548 as at Jan. 28, 1991).
Major international affiliations: NAM; OAU; SADCC.
POLITICAL SYSTEM
Botswana became an independent republic within the Commonwealth in 1966.
Executive power is vested in the President, who is elected by universal suffrage for a renewable five-year term.
The legislature is the 40-member National Assembly, of whom 34 are directly elected for a five-year term (with four specially elected members and two ex officio); 31 of the directly elected seats are currently held by the ruling Botswana Democratic Party and three by the Botswana National Front.
The 15-member House of Chiefs considers draft legislation on constitutional change or chieftaincy matters, making representations to the President on issues affecting tribes.
The President appoints a Vice-President and a Cabinet, all of whom are responsible to the Assembly.
Main government leaders
President: Quett K. J. Masire, also C.-in-C. of the armed forces.
Vice-President: Peter Mmusi, also Minister of Local Government and Lands.
Chairman of the House of Chiefs: Chief Seepapitso.
Other principal ministers: Festus Mogae (Finance and Development Planning); Gaositwe K.T. Chiepe (External Affairs); Archibald M. Mogwe (Mineral Resources and Water Affairs); Patrick Balopi (Labour and Home Affairs); Lt.-Gen.
Mompati Merafhe (Presidential Affairs and Public Administration).
Ruling party
The Botswana Democratic Party (BDP, Quett K. J. Masire l.), has been the ruling party since independence.
Its traditional power base has been the rural cattle-owning sector.
Other political parties
The Botswana National Front (BNF, the left-oriented main opposition party which holds both of Gabarone's two constituency seats and draws support from the growing urban working class; Kenneth Koma, l.).
The other parties to contest the 1989 election were the Botswana People's Party (BPP); the Botswana Independence Party (BIP, Motsamai Mpho l.); the Botswana Freedom Party (BFP, formed in September 1989 by a former BNF member of parliament); the Botswana Progressive Union (BPU) and the Botswana Liberal Party (BLP).
The centre-left Botswana Labour Party was formed in September 1989, mostly by former members of the BNF.
Elections
Legislative and presidential elections were last held in October 1989 [see p. 36966]; they are next scheduled for 1994.
1990 OVERVIEW
Opposition parties continued moves towards unity in order to challenge the BDP.
In August the BNF, BPP and BPU formed a joint working committee under the slogan "Unity in Diversity" .
The BIP refused to join the committee, and objected to what it saw as the more militant tactics advocated by the BNF.
Opening the parliament on Nov. 19, 1990, Masire expressed concern that the High Court was flooded with legal complaints over the conduct of the 1989 general election.
In July the court had ordered a re-election in the Mochudi constituency, won by Education Minister Ray Molomo.
In September it was revealed that the government was soliciting comments from the opposition parties on the election process.
With average GDP growth of 10 per cent, Botswana's was one of the fastest growing economies in the world in the 1980s.
The rapid expansion was due to development of the country's mineral resources, dominated by diamonds (which contributed over 84 per cent of export earnings) and the beef industry (which accounts for most of agriculture's 3 per cent contribution to GDP).
Industry accounted for 7 per cent of GDP in 1989.
Unemployment was a major problem, with high population growth and a decline in the number of Botswana working abroad, particularly in South Africa.
Presenting the seventh development plan (1991-97) to the National Assembly on Nov. 19, Masire said that he expected a slowdown in revenue in the coming period and that the private sector would have to play a greater role in diversifying the economy and reducing the dependence on mineral exports.
The Bank of Botswana reported a significant decline in revenue from the main exports of diamonds, copper-nickel and meat for the first quarter of 1990.
However, on Dec. 5, 1990, a long-term agreement was signed with the US jewellery company Lazare Kaplan International for the establishment of a diamond cutting and polishing factory.
Masire agreed, during a four-day visit to Namibia in July, to form a joint commission to promote trade and communications, and to create a protocol on defence and security.
Masire also visited Libya in July where he held talks with the Libyan leader, Col. Moamer al Kadhafi, and visited Mozambique on October 23-26.
It was reported in July that China would provide financial and technical help to relay the main railway line between Francistown and Serula in eastern Botswana.
On Nov. 26 diplomatic relations were established with Malaysia.
On Dec. 10 a further agreement on development assistance was signed with Sweden.
AFRICA
BURUNDI
Area: 27,834 sq km.
Population: 5,299,000 (1989 World Bank estimate).
Capital: Bujumbura.
Languages: French and Kirundi (official); Swahili (used commercially).
Religion Christianity (more than 60%); animism.
Armed forces: 7,200 (1990).
Currency: Burundi franc (US$1.00=FBu161.511 as at Jan. 28, 1991).
Major international affiliations: CEEAC; OAU; PTA; CEPGL.
POLITICAL SYSTEM
Formerly a Belgian trusteeship under the UN, Burundi became independent in 1962.
The Republic of Burundi was declared in 1966 upon the overthrow of the monarchy.
Col. Jean-Baptiste Bagaza came to power in a coup in 1976, and introduced a civilian Constitution (1981) under which single party elections were held in 1982, the sole legal party being the Union pour le progrès national (UPRONA).
Bagaza was overthrown in 1987 by a bloodless armed coup led by Maj. Pierre Buyoya, the Constitution was suspended, and a Military Council for National Salvation (CMSN) was established to rule the country.
Main government leaders
President: Maj. Pierre Buyoya, also Chairman of the CMSN and Minister of Defence.
Prime Minister: Adrien Sibomana.
Other principal ministers: Cyprien Mbonimpa (External Relations and Co-operation); Sebastien Ntahuga (Justice); Libere Bararunyeretse (Interior); Gerard Niyibigira (Finance).
Cabinet changes
None.
[For February 1991 extensive Cabinet reshuffle and full list see p. 37994.]
Political parties
Union pour le progrès national (UPRONA — sole legal party; Pierre Buyoya ch.).
1990 OVERVIEW
On March 14 Buyoya rejected the idea of a multiparty system on the grounds that each tribe would want its own party.
Buyoya, who was from the politically dominant minority Tutsi tribe, expressed his preference for "democracy within the single party [UPRONA]" .
On May 16 Buyoya announced a Unity Charter which promised an end to military rule by the end of 1990, a political referendum and restoration of the Constitution.
He said that his government was prepared to share power with the Hutu majority, who comprised 85 per cent of the population.
The army would also reopen its ranks to Hutus, who were purged from it after the ethnic warfare of 1972.
The new plans followed the recommendations of a government commission formed after Hutu massacres of Tutsis in 1988 and army retaliation against the Hutus [see pp. 36328-29].
On Aug. 29 an amnesty was announced for all political prisoners, said by the authorities to number 66; of these 44 had been arrested after the inter-ethnic massacres of August 1988, and the rest had been accused of a plot against the government in March 1989.
In December 1990 an extraordinary UPRONA congress elected Buyoya as chairman of the party central committee, which would replace the CMSN.
On Aug. 13 three soldiers and four guerrillas were killed when 50 members of a Hutu opposition group, who had come from a refugee camp in Tanzania, attacked an army barracks at Madamba in the south of the country.
A captured guerrilla said that the aim of the attack had been to undermine the visit of Pope Jean-Paul II which was due in early September [see p. 37732].
Buyoya paid a three-day visit to Rwanda on May 5-7.
Prime Minister Sibomana visited Tanzania on May 21-23, and again on Sept. 28 for talks on border security and ways of curbing sabotage by Burundian dissident groups based in Tanzania.
AFRICA
LESOTHO
Area: 30,355 sq km.
Population: 1,722,000 (1989 World Bank estimate).
Capital: Maseru.
Languages: English and Sesotho (official).
Religion: Christianity (approx. 90%, mainly Roman Catholic, Lesotho Evangelical and Anglican).
Armed forces: 2,000 (1990).
Currency: loti (US$1=2.6638 maloti as at Jan. 28, 1991).
Major international affiliations: NAM; OAU; PTA; SADCC.
POLITICAL SYSTEM
The Kingdom of Lesotho became an independent hereditary monarchy within the Commonwealth in October 1966.
In January 1970 the Constitution was suspended and the country was ruled until January 1986 by a Council of Ministers; the power of the King was considerably reduced during this period.
In January 1986 Prime Minister Chief Leabua Jonathan was deposed in a South African-backed coup led by Maj.-Gen.
Justin Metsing Lekhanya, and executive and legislative powers were conferred upon the King.
The Military Council, however, became the effective ruling body, advising the King and appointing the Council of Ministers.
Political activity was banned in March 1986.
The Military Council took effective power from the King in February 1990, and in November he was replaced as King by his son [see below].
A transition to democracy was planned for 1992 [see p. 37238].
Main government leaders
Head of state: King Letsie III.
Chairman of the Military Council: Maj.-Gen.
Justin Metsing Lekhanya, who is also Minister for Defence and Internal Security; Public Services; Youth and Women's Affairs; the Cabinet Office; Agriculture, Marketing and Co-operatives).
Other principal ministers: Chief Evaristus Retselisitsoe Sekhonyana (Finance); Tom Thabane (Foreign, Information and Broadcasting); Kgotsi Matete (Interior); A. K. Maope (Attorney General); Col. Alexander Lesole Jane (Water, Energy and Mining); Maj. Meharensin Habe (Highland Water and Energy).
1990 Cabinet changes
On July 17 Kgotsi Matete replaced Patrick Molapo as Minister of the Interior.
Political parties
Despite the continued suspension by the Military Council of political activity, by May 1990 there were seven registered political parties, including the Basutho Congress Party (BCP, the main opposition party, Ntsu Mokhehle l.);
Basutho National Party (BNP); Basutho Democratic Alliance (BDA, A. S. Nqojane l.);
National Independent Party (NIP, A. C. Manyeli l.);
Marematlou Freedom Party (MFP, S. H. Mapheleba l.);
United Democratic Party (UDP, C. D. Mofeli l.).
Elections
The only contested general election since independence was held in January 1970, when Chief Jonathan's ruling BNP appeared to have been defeated, precipitating the suspension of the Constitution [see p. 23865].
On June 15, 1990, South African Foreign Minister Pik Botha visited Lesotho.
In September Lenkhanya held talks with President Chissano of Mozambique on changes taking place in South Africa.
Foreign Minister Tom Thabane visited Mozambique, Zimbabwe, Swaziland and Malawi in August on a one-week southern African tour.
1990 OVERVIEW
In March the ruling Military Council confirmed the actions in February of the Chairman of the Military Council in removing executive and legislative powers from King Moshoeshoe II, and vesting them "for the time being" in himself in conjunction with the Military Council.
The King went into exile in the United Kingdom.
On Nov. 12 he was effectively dethroned with the election of his eldest son as King Letsie III by an assembly of chiefs [see p. 37843].
The forced abdication followed major differences with Maj.-Gen.
Lekhanya over (i) the King's desire for dialogue with the South African liberation movement;(ii) his complaints at corruption; and (iii) his concern for broader participation in constitutional reform and the transition to democracy planned for 1992.
The exiled monarch had also called for an immediate end to military rule.
The Constituent Assembly, inaugurated on June 28, adopted in August the 1966 Constitution as the working document with which to formulate a new charter.
Leaders of the seven registered political parties expressed concern that the Assembly would merely be an advisory body to the Military Council in the preparation of a new constitution.
Lesotho remained highly dependent on South Africa, with Basutho workers employed in South Africa providing vital foreign exchange.
Agriculture was the backbone of the economy, employing over 80 per cent of the resident labour force; pastoral husbandry was the main activity, with wool and mohair the principal exports.
Staple food crops are maize, sorghum and wheat.
Efforts were being made to develop the country's substantial water resources, both for export and to provide electricity, through the Highlands Water Project [see p. 31304; 34789; 35815].
In June 1990 the Lesotho Highlands Development Authority (LHDA) reportedly signed agreements worth over 700 maloti with a consortium of South African banks and the Development Bank of South Africa.
In September the LHDA signed another agreement, worth F2,000 million (approximately US$377,000,000) with a French consortium.
On June 5 the IMF announced its approval of a loan equivalent to SDR3,020,000 (US$3,960,000) under the third annual arrangement under the structural adjustment facility.
The three-year arrangement, approved in June 1988, was worth a total of SDR10,570,000 ($13,850,000), of which SDR7,550,000 ($9,890,000) had already been disbursed.
AFRICA
MALAWI
Area: 118,484 sq km.
Population: 8,230,000 (1989 World Bank estimate).
Capital: Lilongwe.
Languages: English (official); Chichewa.
Religion: Christianity (approx. 50%), traditional beliefs, Islam and Hinduism.
Armed forces: 7,250 (1990).
Currency: Malawi kwacha (US$1.00=MK2.6055 as at Jan. 28, 1991).
Major international affiliations: NAM; OAU; PTA; SADCC.
POLITICAL SYSTEM
The Republic of Malawi was established in July 1966, two years after gaining independence from the United Kingdom.
A member of the Commonwealth, Malawi is a one-party state with an executive president.
Hastings Kamuzu Banda, Malawi's ruler since independence, was proclaimed Life President in 1971 following a constitutional amendment.
Legislative power is vested in the unicameral National Assembly, 112 of whose members are directly elected for a five-year term; the President can also appoint an unlimited number of deputies to the Assembly.
The President appoints the Cabinet, the Chief Justice, senior civil servants and senior officers of the armed forces.
Main government leaders
Life President: Hastings Kamuzu Banda who is also Minister of External Affairs, Agriculture, Justice, and Works and Supplies.
Other principal ministers: Louis Chimango (Finance); Robson W. Chirwa (Trade and Industry).
Cabinet changes in 1990
New Cabinets were appointed in February and May [see p. 37558].
Ruling and sole legal party
Malawi Congress Party (MCP), Hastings Kamuza Banda (life president).
Elections
A general election was last held in May 1987, when voters had a choice of candidates in 69 constituencies, but all candidates were required to be members of the Malawi Congress Party.
The next general election is due in 1992.
1990 POLITICAL OVERVIEW
Edward Bwanali, a veteran Minister hitherto seen as a possible successor to Banda, was dismissed from the Cabinet in the April reshuffle [see p. 37558], and in May was dismissed as MCP chairman for the populous southern region.
He remained a member of the MCP executive committee.
In June Banda nominated new members of the National Assembly to fill vacant seats in constituencies in all three regions of the country.
Relations with Zimbabwe continued to improve, with Banda invited as guest of honour to Zimbabwe's 10th anniversary celebrations in early 1990, and continued operation of the joint co-operation commission between the two countries.
In June a new trade agreement, superseding a 1967 agreement, was signed with South Africa, providing for the duty-free entry into South Africa of all Malawian goods.
1990 ECONOMIC OVERVIEW
Agriculture was the mainstay of the economy, contributing 37 per cent of GDP, the main food crops being maize, cassava, millet, sorghum and rice.
Tobacco, tea, coffee, sugar, groundnuts and cotton were exported.
The main industrial activity was also based on agriculture.
On May 14-16 a group of donors led by the World Bank promised assistance to the value of US$508,000,000 for 1990-91, aimed at reducing balance of payments problems under a special programme of assistance for debt-laden low-income sub-Saharan African states.
The IMF on Aug. 9 approved a loan equivalent to SDR18,600,000 (US$25,500,000), under the third annual arrangement under the enhanced structural adjustment facility, of which half was made available on Aug. 31.
Malawi's main trading partners in 1988 were: imports from South Africa, Japan and the United States; exports to the United States, the United Kingdom and Zambia.
FOREIGN RELATIONS
AFRICA
MOZAMBIQUE
Area: 799,380 sq km.
Population: 15,357,000 (1989 World Bank estimate).
Capital: Maputo.
Languages: Portuguese (official); Ronga, Shangaan and Muchope.
Religion: Christianity (majority Roman Catholic), Islam.
Armed forces: 72,000 (1990).
Currency: Metical (US$1.00=1,026.05 meticais as at Jan. 28, 1991).
Major international affiliations: NAM; OAU; PTA; SADCC.
POLITICAL SYSTEM
Mozambique gained independence from Portugal in June 1975.
A new constitution came into effect on Nov. 30, 1990, which provided for a multiparty system, direct elections and a free market economy, and dropped the designation People's Republic, the country's formal title becoming simply the Republic of Mozambique [see pp. 37843-44].
Prior to this, the post-independence period was dominated by the (Marxist-Leninist) Front for the Liberation of Mozambique (Frelimo) whose president was also head of state.
The President was henceforth to be elected by direct, universal, secret suffrage for a five-year term, for a maximum of only two consecutive terms.
The Assembly of the Republic (the legislature), formerly the People's Assembly, was to be elected similarly for a five-year term, and consists of a minimum of 200 and a maximum of 250 deputies.
Main government leaders
President: Joaquim Chissano who is also C.-in-C. of the Armed Forces.
Prime Minister: Mario da Graca Machungo, also Minister of Planning.
Other principal ministers: Lt.-Gen.
Alberto Joaquim Chipande (Defence); Lt.-Gen.
António Hama Thai (Chief of General Staff of the Armed Forces, Deputy Minister of Defence); Pascoal Mocumbi (Foreign); Maj.-Gen.
Jacinto Soares Veloso (International Co-operation); Mariano Matsinhe (Security); Manuel Antóni (Interior); Abdul Magid Osman (Finance); Ossmane Ali Dauto (Justice); Alexandre José Zandamela (Agriculture); Joao Kachamila (Mineral Resources); Manuel António (State Administration); António José Lima Rodrigues Branco (Industry and Energy); Lt.-Gen Armando Guebuza (Transport and Communications, leader of government delegation in recent talks with rebels).
Government changes in 1990
On May 15 Chissano appointed two Deputy Defence Ministers, Lt.-Gen.
António Hama Thai (who retained his post as Chief of General Staff of the Armed Forces), and Maj.-Gen.
Eduardo da Silva Nihia (who was National Political Commissioner of the Armed Forces).
At the same time Salomé Moiane became Deputy Foreign Affairs Minister, and two other Deputy Ministers (of Agriculture, and of Construction and Water) were appointed.
On Nov. 14, Filipe Mandlate became Secretary of State for Social Action.
Ruling party
The Front for the Liberation of Mozambique (Frelimo, Joaquim Chissano, pres., Jorge Robelo,.
ideology sec.).
Other political groupings
The Mozambique National Resistance (Renamo, rebel movement, set up by Rhodesian intelligence in the 1970s, latterly backed by South Africa, and believed to receive military training and supplies in Kenya; Alfonso Dhlakama, l.).
The Mozambican National Union and the Liberal and Democratic Party of Mozambique were reported to have been created in December.
Elections
Indirect elections to the People's Assembly were last held on a single-party basis in 1986.
Legislative elections were scheduled for 1991 following formal registration of political parties.
1990 OVERVIEW
Frelimo gave a major boost to its drive for peace on Aug. 16, when its central committee unanimously endorsed the scheduling of multiparty elections in 1991 and the effective abandonment of the one-party state [see p. 37643; 37843-44].
The decision followed months of debate on a new draft of the Constitution, and removed a major obstacle to progress in negotiations with Renamo rebels waging a violent destabilization campaign against the government.
Direct talks with the Renamo in Rome in July and in August were also attended by representatives of the Mozambican Catholic Church, the Vatican and the Italian government [see p. 37603].
A third round, however, was stalled until Nov. 10.
Renamo insisted on Kenyan mediation and claimed that the Frelimo government had launched a major offensive against rebel-controlled zones.
On Dec. 1 the two sides finally reached an agreement, to be monitored internationally, confining Zimbabwean troops to corridors around two vital rail links with the Indian Ocean [see p. 37909].
The agreement followed Frelimo's Nov. 30 introduction of a new Constitution embracing political pluralism and a market economy [for accusations of ceasefire violations, February 1991 suspension of talks see p. 37993].
Drought and civil war have combined to make Mozambique one of the world's poorest countries, with nearly 1,000,000 displaced people and an acute danger of famine.
Agriculture represents 45 per cent of GDP, with cash crops including cashew nuts (the major agricultural export), sugar cane, sisal, cotton and tea.
The main subsistence crop is cassava.
Commercial fishing has recently been developed and the export of prawns is the principal foreign exchange earner (providing US$39,400,000 of a total of $101,100,000 in 1989).
Coal is the main mining resource.
Manufacturing contributed 17 per cent of GDP in 1989.
Agricultural production was affected in 1990 by a severe drought in the fertile Zambezia province, a major food-producing region.
The government stated that its appeal for famine aid totalling $136,000,000 had received a weak response from international donors [see pp. 37561; 37643; 37644].
Heavily dependent on foreign aid, the government launched in 1990 a second three-year programme for economic rehabilitation (with agricultural exports the key sector), supported by the International Monetary Fund (IMF) which promised $112,800,000 in June.
In December the fourth World Bank consultative group meeting in Paris promised $1,200 million (in grants, loans and debt relief) to Mozambique, to cover its 1991 shortfall, and provide the country with the opportunity to continue the reforms begun in 1987.
Total 1990 exports were estimated at $300,000,000, compared with current-account payments of $1,150 million and debt repayments of a further $300,000,000 (on its total foreign debt of approximately $5,000 million).
In October parliament approved a revision of the 1990 budget, allowing for an increase in income from $252,000,000 to $285,000,000 and in expenditure from $300,000,000 to $347,000,000.
An increase in spending on investment projects, from $400,000,000 to $424,000,000 was also allowed for.
The Finance Minister warned that there would be no increase in public spending in the 1991 budget.
Opening the eighth session of the People's Assembly on Sept. 19, Chissano reported that official visits had been made to Algeria, Ghana, Libya, Portugal, Rwanda, Spain, Switzerland, Uganda, the United Kingdom and the United States.
He also referred to the visits to Mozambique by the Deputy President of the African National Congress, Nelson Mandela, South African President F.W. de Klerk, Namibian Prime Minister Hage Geingob, Swaziland Prime Minister Obed Dlamini, and Chairman of the Lesotho Council of Ministers Justin Lekhanya.
In October, Foreign Minister Pascoal Manuel Mocumbi visited Cuba, the UK and the USA.
In September it was reported that a trade co-operation agreement had been signed with Zimbabwe.
In July a protocol was signed with Chile for the establishment of diplomatic relations.
AFRICA
NAMIBIA
Area: 824,292 sq km.
Population: 1,300,000 (1989 World Bank estimate).
Capital: Windhoek.
Languages: English (official); Afrikaans, German, local languages.
Religion: Christianity (approx. 90%).
Armed forces: approx. 9,000 (1990).
Currency: South African Rand (US$1.00=R2.5459 as at Jan. 28, 1991).
Major international affiliations: SADCC; OAU; NAR; ACP.
POLITICAL SYSTEM
The Republic of Namibia achieved independence in March 1990.
A German colony from 1884, the territory came under South African rule in 1915, and in 1920 a League of Nations mandate provided for a further period of South African administration.
South Africa's continuing presence was ruled illegal by the International Court of Justice, however, after the UN had terminated the mandate in 1966.
Implementation of UN-sponsored independence plan was finally agreed in December 1988.
Under the 1990 Constitution Namibia is a multi-party republic [see p. 37296].
The head of state is the Executive President, directly elected for a term of five years, with a limit of two terms.
The President appoints a Prime Minister and a Cabinet, with whom he governs.
Legislative authority rests with parliament: the Constituent Assembly (elected by direct, secret, universal adult suffrage) was converted upon independence into the lower house of a bicameral National Assembly, with 72 members serving a five-year term.
Future elections are to be held under a proportional representation system.
An upper house representing regional leaders is to be created in 1992.
Main government leaders
President:Sam Nujoma.
Prime Minister: Hage Geingob.
Other principal ministers: Theo-Ben Gurirab (Foreign Affairs); Peter Mueshihange (Defence); Andimba Toivo ja Toivo (Mines and Energy); Hifikepunje Pohamba (Home Affairs); Ngarikutuke Tjiriange (Justice); Otto Herrigel (Finance); Gerhard Hanekon (Agriculture, Fisheries, Water and Rural Development); Zedekia Ngarivue (National Planning); Peter Tsheehama (Security); Hidipo Hamutenya (Information and Broadcasting).
Ruling party
South West Africa People's Organization (SWAPO, Sam Nujoma, pres., with 41 Assembly seats).
Formed in 1960 as a national liberation movement, SWAPO led the struggle against colonial rule, and in April 1990 Nujoma said that it now faced the challenge of transformation into a political party, geared to political campaigning and fighting elections.
Other political parties
The Democratic Turnhalle Alliance (DTA, Dirk Mudge, pres.; Mishake Muyongo, vice-pres.; the majority political formation in the previous South African-appointed transitional government, and since independence the main opposition party, with 21 Assembly seats); the United Democratic Front (UDF, Justus Garoeb, l.); the right-wing Action Christian National (ACN, led until Janni de Wet until May 1990, and since then by Kosie Pretorius, whose National Party of South West Africa, part of the ACN, decided in August to change its name to the National Party, NP, and to admit non-whites into its ranks); the Namibia Patriotic Front (NPF Moses Katjiuongua, l.); the Federal Convention of Namibia (FCN, J.G.A. Diergaardt, l.); the Namibia National Front (NNF, V. Rukoro, l.).
All of these groupings have representation in the Assembly.
The other three parties to contest the 1989 elections were the SWAPO-Democrats (SWAPO-D, founded by SWAPO dissidents in the 1970s and a participant from 1985 in the transitional government, Andreas Shipanga, l.; on Aug. 13 SWAPO-D announced that it would disband and join the NPF); Christian Democratic Action (CDA, Rev. Peter Kalangula, l.); and the Namibia National Democratic Party (NNDP, Paul Helmuth, l.).
Two factions of the South West Africa National Union (SWANU) exist, one led by Reinhard Rukoro, the Deputy Minister of Justice.
Elections
Elections to the Constituent were held in November 1989.
Nujoma, whose SWAPO liberation movement had spearheaded the independence struggle since 1960, was elected President on Feb. 16, 1990, by a unanimous vote of the Assembly.
1990 OVERVIEW
Despite the claims of its opponents that SWAPO was motivated by ideological extremism, the pragmatism it showed on coming to power, exemplified by the inclusion of non-SWAPO members in the government (notably the white Finance Minister, Otto Herrigel) was reflected in cautious economic policies and a policy of national reconciliation.
This helped promote political stability, but also led to friction within the government and with its supporters, disappointed in their expectation of a major improvement in living conditions.
Some of the 40,000 returned exiles resented the continued presence of established, mainly white, civil servants whose jobs are guaranteed by the Constitution.
Almost 40 per cent of the country's budget goes on the 57,000-strong civil service.
A skills shortage exists and the reintegration of former freedom fighters has proved difficult, with many incidents of undisciplined conduct.
The September decision of Prime Minister Hage Geingob to withdraw the Border Guards and the Special Constables — formed by ex-members of SWAPO's People's Liberation Army of Namibia (PLAN), and of the South West Africa Territory Force — and replace them temporarily with trained members of the new Namibian Defence Force (until properly trained police officers could take over) proved unpopular, with SWAPO's Youth League demanding reinstatement of ex-SWAPO fighters.
SWAPO loyalists were also concerned that top police and intelligence posts went to former security chiefs of the previous transitional government.
The Department of National Intelligence, created in 1987, and its director were retained.
On Aug. 1 the government announced that it had discovered a coup plot.
The statement followed a report in the pro-SWAPO Namibian, alleging that former members of the Koevoet counter-insurgency unit and Angolan rebels were involved in the conspiracy.
The Namibian was bombed, allegedly by right-wingers, four days later.
SWAPO continued to be dogged by allegations of ill-treatment and death in SWAPO detention camps during the liberation struggle.
In October Maj.-Gen.
Solomon "Jesus" Hawala, the former head of PLAN security and widely accused of such crimes, was appointed chief of staff of the new Namibian Defence Force, despite the reported opposition of Nujoma and Geingob.
Church leaders and opposition parties expressed concern that the appointment had been made before an all-party parliamentary commission, led by the Prime Minister, had released a report to the National Assembly on the issue.
In October the human rights organization, Amnesty International, called on the SWAPO government to set up an impartial inquiry, claiming that at least 350 prisoners were still unaccounted for.
On Nov. 9, the National Assembly approved a motion to ask the Red Cross to investigate.
Namibia is one of the biggest producers of non-fuel minerals in Africa.
Mining — especially diamonds, but also uranium, copper, lead and zinc — is the cornerstone of the economy, accounting for 30 per cent of GDP and 75 per cent of foreign exchange earnings.
Fishing is also of major importance, while around 70 per cent of the population depend on subsistence agriculture.
Manufacturing only accounts for five per cent of GDP, and the internal market is small and undeveloped.
The first budget after independence, presented on July 6, estimated total expenditure at R2,580 million (US$977,000,000) for the 1990-91 fiscal year.
With the end of the annual budget subsidy from South Africa and the need to increase spending on infrastructure — the Ministry of Transport, Works and Communications received the highest allocation — there was a deficit of R210,000,000.
No tax increases were planned, and, while the budget was welcomed by the business community as "sensible" , it was criticised by the DTA as too restrictive.
On Aug. 1, a Central Bank began operation, but the authorities said they did not intend to introduce an independent currency to replace the South African Rand until 1992.
The Central Bank's first director, Wonter Bernard (a Dutch official whose appointment was financed by the IMF resigned after reported disagreements with Herrigel over the bank's independence from government control.
On Sept. 24 Namibia was admitted to the World Bank and the IMF.
In November it was reported that the European Communities had agreed to proposals for Namibia to join the Lomé Convention, under which the country would secure an annual beef quota, at an estimated price 40 per cent higher than the world market, which would make Namibia the second largest beef exporter among the African, Caribbean and Pacific countries (after Botswana).
Efforts have been made to attract foreign investment.
In June, an international conference of donors in New York promised aid worth $200,000,000 in 1990 and $150,000,000 for each of the two subsequent years of the country's 1990-92 investment and development programme.
Nujoma also signed in June a bilateral agreement with the Overseas Private Investment Corporation designed to attract private US investment.
On Dec. 4 the National Assembly unanimously adopted a foreign investment bill, allowing for a liberal regime.
New mining and petroleum regulations were also expected, with plans announced for joint ventures with the mining sector's three main multinational companies, the South African-owned Consolidated Diamond Mines, the UK-owned Rossing Uranium and the US Tsumeb Corporation.
Following the signing of a bilateral economic co-operation accord with Angola in September, an agreement was signed for Angola to supply the bulk of Namibia's fuel needs, reducing dependence on South Africa.
Southern African Development Co-ordination Conference (SADCC) projects in Namibia, included the construction of an oil terminal at Swakopmund.
By August 1990, the government reported that agreements had been signed to establish diplomatic relations with approximately 100 countries and that 21 missions had already been established in Windhoek.
It stated that Namibia would establish missions in Washington, London, Stockholm, Moscow, Brussels, Addis Ababa, Lusaka and Lagos in the current financial year, and in Havana, Paris, Beijing, Berlin, Algiers, Tokyo, Luanda, Harare and New Delhi in the future.
At independence, Geingob declared that Namibia could not have full diplomatic relations with South Africa until the situation had been normalized there, but he said that trading relations would continue.
A key issue in relations with South Africa was the Namibian desire for negotiations over Walvis Bay, the South African enclave with important port facilities.
In September Information Minister Hamutenya was reported as stating that a diplomatic mission, but not a fully-fledged embassy, would be established in Pretoria.
In July Namibia became the fifth member of the Southern African Customs Union (along with South Africa, Lesotho, Swaziland and Botswana).
At SWAPO's invitation, the African National Congress opened an office in Windhoek.
During a visit to the United States in June, Nujoma signed four economic and technical aid agreements at a meeting with his US President Bush.
On Nov. 24, the UK government announced that it would provide a second year of training for the new Namibian Defence Force, following a visit to the UK in April by Foreign Minister Gurirab, and a visit to Windhoek by UK Defence Secretary Tom King in July.
An aid agreement worth R170,000,000 was signed with Germany in November.
Close co-operation between SWAPO and the Nordic countries continued, with Sweden, Denmark, Finland and Norway contributing a third of all Western promised at the June international donors' conference.
Regionally, bilateral co-operation agreements were signed with Angola (including a security pact), Zambia and Botswana.
In June, Namibia became the fourth member of the Joint Commission on South-Western Africa (along with Cuba, South Africa and Angola), established by the Brazzaville Protocol [see pp. 36380]to supervise regional peace.
AFRICA
RWANDA
Area: 26,338 sq km.
Population: 6,893,000 (1989 World Bank estimate).
Capital: Kigali.
Languages: Kinyarwanda and French (both official).
Religion: Animism (approx. 50%) Christianity (mostly Roman Catholic) Islam (small minority).
Armed forces: 5,200 (1990).
Currency: Rwanda franc (US$1.00=RF119.099 francs as at Jan. 28, 1991).
POLITICAL SYSTEM
The Republic of Rwanda, hitherto a UN trust territory administered by Belgium, gained independence in July 1962.
Executive power is vested in the President, elected for a five-year term by universal adult suffrage: he is assisted by a Council of Ministers.
Legislative power is exercised jointly by the President and the 70-member National Development Council, whose members are also directly elected for five years from a list of candidates put forward by the sole legal party, the National Revolutionary Movement for Development (MRND).
Main government leaders as at end-1990
President: Maj.-Gen.
Juvénal Habyarimana, who is also head of government.
Other principal ministers: James Gazana (Agriculture, Livestock and Forests); François Nzabahimana (Economy and Consumption); Benoît Ntigulirwa (Finance); Casimir Bizimungu (Foreign Affairs and Co-operation); Jean-Marie Vianney Mugemana (Interior and Community Development); Daniel Mbangura (Primary and Secondary Education).
Government changes in 1990
Key changes in a Cabinet reshuffle carried out on July 12, 1990, were the appointments of Gazana and Nzabahimana in place of Anastase Nteziryayo and Juvénal Uwilingiyimana [for a full Cabinet list as of May 1990 see p. 37554; for February 1991 Cabinet reshuffle see p. 37993].
Ruling party
The Mouvement révolutionnaire national pour le développement (MRND — National Revolutionary Movement for Development, Maj.-Gen.
Juvénal Habyarimana, pres., Bonaventure Habimana, s. -g.) is the sole legal party.
Other parties
The Front patriotique rwandaise (FPR — Rwandan Patriotic Front, Col. Alex Kanyerengwe l.) is based in Uganda.
Elections
Presidential and legislative elections were last held in December 1988 [see p. 36482].
1990 OVERVIEW
Political developments in 1990 were dominated by the insurrection launched in October by armed forces of the FPR, which posed a significant threat to the Habyarimana government [see pp. 37765-66; 37950-51].
The FPR called for the overthrow of the regime and the return of all Rwandan refugees (mostly Tutsi who had been forced to flee to neighbouring countries after ethnic clashes with the dominant Hutu over the previous 30 years).
As a response to popular demands for greater democracy, Habyarimana in November announced plans to abandon one-party rule and set up a review commission, whose brief was to make recommendations on the country's future political system.
The 1990 budget was adopted on Jan. 19, 1990, by the National Development Council [see p. 37554].
Major international affiliations: CEEAC; NAM; OAU; PTA; CEPGL.
AFRICA
SOUTH AFRICA
Area: 1,221,037 sq km.
Population: 34,925,000 (1989 World Bank estimate).
Capital: Pretoria (administrative), Cape Town (legislative), Bloemfontein (judicial).
Languages: Afrikaans and English (official); main African languages are Xhosa, Zulu and Sesotho.
Religion: Christianity (majority), Hinduism and Islam.
Armed forces: 77,400 (1990).
Currency: rand (US$1.00=R2.5459 as at Jan. 28, 1991).
POLITICAL SYSTEM
South Africa's social and political structure has been based on the policy of racial segregation (apartheid); under the Constitution of 1984, there is a tricameral Parliament, with a House of Assembly (178 members) elected by whites, a House of Representatives (85 members) elected by people of mixed race ( "Coloureds" ), and a House of Delegates (45 members) elected by Indians, but no representation for the majority black population.
In each of the three houses of Parliament there is a Ministers' Council, each chamber having separate responsibility for the affairs of the population group it represents (including housing, social welfare, health and education), while joint parliamentary responsibility is taken for "general" or national affairs (including foreign policy, defence, finance and law and order), each of these functions at national level being reflected in a portfolio in the Cabinet itself.
The President is chosen by an electoral college composed of 50 members of the House of Assembly, 25 members of the House of Representatives and 13 from the House of Delegates [see pp. 36880-81].
A 60-member President's Council acts as an advisory body, to which are referred, among other things, disagreements on general affairs among the three chambers of Parliament.
Ten parts of South Africa (not necessarily contiguous geographical entities but based on ethnic groupings) have been designated by the government as "homelands" for Africans; four of these (Bophuthatswana, Ciskei, Transkei and Venda) have been declared independent sovereign states but are recognized only by South Africa and each other; the remainder (Gazankulu, KaNgwane, KwaNdbele, KwaZulu, Lebowa and Qwaqwa) are at various stages of "self-government" .
A process of constitutional change involving the dismantling of the apartheid system began in South Africa following the announcement by the President in his speech at the opening of Parliament on Feb. 2, 1990, not only that the release of African National Congress (ANC) leader Nelson Mandela was imminent, but also that the ANC, the Pan-Africanist Congress and the South African Communist Party were to be unbanned and that the 1953 Reservation of Separate Amenities Act was to be repealed.
He added that the government was prepared to begin talks with black leaders on "a totally new, just, constitutional settlement in which every inhabitant will enjoy equal rights, treatment and opportunities in every sphere of endeavour: constitutional, social and economic" [see p. 37232].
Main government leaders
State President: Frederik Willem de Klerk.
Principal ministers: Roelof "Pik" Botha (Foreign Affairs); Gerrit van N. Viljoen (Constitutional Development); Gen. Magnus A. Malan (Defence); Barend J. du Plessis (Finance); Adriaan Vlok (Law and Order); Kobie (H. J.) Coetsee (Justice).
Government changes in 1990
A Cabinet reshuffle was announced on Nov. 14, including the appointment of Louis Pienaar, the former administrator-general of Namibia, as National Education and Environment Affairs Minister, and of Amie Venter, Budget and Local Government Minister in the House of Assembly, as in addition Regional Development Minister.
A number of deputy ministers were also appointed.
Ruling party
The National Party (NP) has been the party of government since 1948 and continues to command a majority in the House of Assembly.
In August 1990 the NP, formerly an exclusively white party, voted to open membership to all races [see p. 37642].
Other political parties
Parties represented in Parliament include the right-wing Conservative Party (Andries Treurnicht, l.), the largest opposition party in the white House of Assembly and committed to opposing De Klerk's reforms; the liberal opposition Democratic Party (Zach de Beer, elected as its sole leader at its first national congress in September, replacing the "troika" of de Beer, Wynand Malan and Denis Worrall); and the Labour Party (Rev. Allan Hendrickse, l.), which has its basis in the coloured community.
The main anti-apartheid parties, unbanned by the government in February 1990 are: the African National Congress (ANC, Oliver Tambo, pres., Nelson Mandela, deputy pres.); the Pan-Africanist Congress (PAC; Clarence Makwetu was elected president in December after the death in October of Zephania Mothopeng; PAC general secretary is Benny Alexander — see pp. 37765, 37910); the PAC refuses to negotiate with the government until a constituent assembly has been elected by universal suffrage; the Azanian People's Organization (Azapo, Pandelani Nefolovhodwe, pres.), which rejects outright any negotiations with the government; and the South African Communist Party (SACP, Joe Slovo gen. sec.), which re-launched itself as a legal political party within South Africa in July 1990.
The Zulu-based Inkatha movement (Chief Mangosuthu Buthelezi l.), in July 1990 announced that it was to become a multiracial political party, the Inkatha Freedom Party.
Elections
F. W. de Klerk was on Sept. 14, 1989, elected as executive President by the electoral college, after elections on Sept. 6 to all three houses of the tricameral Parliament.
1990 OVERVIEW
De Klerk's Feb. 2 speech [see p. 37232]announcing the release of Mandela, the unbanning of the ANC and other anti-apartheid organizations, and the start of discussions on a new constitution, created a mood of optimism that the ending of apartheid was at last in sight.
However, the government continued to resist demands for universal suffrage, preferring a power-sharing system.
The ANC and other anti-apartheid groups demanded elections for a constituent assembly which would then draft a new constitution.
The government for its part insisted on all-party negotiations to draw up the constitution, with elections to follow.
In May, government and ANC representatives — in their first formal meeting since the ANC's founding in 1912 — began "talks about talks" aimed at preparing the way for future negotiations on a constitution [see p. 37440].
One key ANC demand was met in part when the state of emergency was lifted in three of South Africa's four provinces in June, but not until Oct. 18 in Natal, the scene of bitter violence between supporters of the ANC and of the Zulu-based Inkatha movement [see pp. 37522; 37764].
On June 19 a bill was passed repealing the 1953 Reservation of Separate Amenities Act, which had legalized separate facilities for different races [see p. 37567].
A second round of talks between the government and the ANC in early August was followed by the ANC's announcement that it had decided to suspend its armed struggle; all activities by the ANC's military wing, Umkhonto we Sizwe, would cease.
Concessions by the government on the release of political prisoners and the return of exiles were also announced [see p. 37642].
Differences remained, however, on the procedure for constitutional negotiations.
Talks between the government and the ANC had been taking place against a background of mounting violence, particularly in Natal and the townships of the Transvaal, between supporters of the ANC and of Inkatha [for eventual Mandela-Buthelezi meeting in January 1991 see p. 37951].
The violence reached a peak in August and September and threatened to disrupt the ANC-government talks, with ANC leaders questioning the government's willingness to act against the perpetrators of the violence and alleging that members of the security forces were involved.
At its December consultative conference, its first inside South Africa for 31 years, the ANC repeated its commitment to continue negotiations.
However, the conference also emphasized the differences between the ANC and the government, threatening to break off negotiations if the government had not acted before April 30, 1991, to halt township violence, release all political prisoners, repeal "repressive" legislation and halt political trials.
The conference called for mass action in support of a transitional government and for a constitutional assembly to negotiate the new constitution.
Finance Minister du Plessis presented the 1990/91 budget on March 14, 1990.
Spending was projected at R72,900 million, a 9.7 per cent increase on the previous year, with revenue expected to reach just under R65,000 million, a 7.3 per cent increase on the previous year.
The deficit, before borrowing, amounted to 2.8 per cent of GDP.
Du Plessis announced that about 40 per cent of the budget would go on social services [see p. 37568].
A R1,000 million increase in the contingency reserve for the year was announced by de Klerk in June, bringing total projected spending to R73,900 million.
Overseas visits by South African government leaders centred on efforts to convince foreign countries of the sincerity of the government's commitment to reform and win concessions on sanctions.
De Klerk visited nine European countries in May in the most extensive overseas tour by a South African leader since the National Party came to power in 1948.
The tour, considered a diplomatic triumph for de Klerk, included meetings with politicians in France, the United Kingdom, West Germany, Greece, Portugal, Switzerland, Spain, Belgium and Italy [see p. 37440].
At their Dublin summit the following month, European Community (EC) leaders stated their willingness to consider a gradual relaxation of sanctions when there was further clear evidence of change in South Africa.
De Klerk visited the United States in September, the first visit by a South African leader for 44 years.
No concessions on sanctions were announced, but US President Bush welcomed the changes in South Africa as "irreversible" [see p. 37698].
De Klerk visited the UK, the Netherlands and Morocco in October, and Foreign Minister Botha toured Eastern Europe in November, after which he noted the establishment of consular relations with Czechoslovakia and Romania.
In December the EC announced the suspension of its voluntary ban on new investments in South Africa (already lifted by the UK in February), promising further steps to ease sanctions as and when the government took further steps to end apartheid [see p. 37910].
AFRICA
SWAZILAND
Area: 17,363 sq km.
Population: 761,000 (1989 World Bank estimate).
Capital: Mbabane (administrative); Lobamba to become legislative capital.
Languages: English and siSwati (official).
Religion: Christianity (approx. 60%), traditional beliefs.
Armed forces: 2,657 (1983).
Currency: lilangeni (US$1.00=2.5459 emalangeni as at Jan. 28, 1991).
Major international affiliations: NAM; OAU; PTA; SADCC.
POLITICAL SYSTEM
The Kingdom of Swaziland became independent within the Commonwealth in September 1968.
Succession to the throne is governed by Swazi law and custom.
Under the 1978 Constitution, considerable power is vested in the King and exercised by a Cabinet appointed by him.
A bicameral legislative body, the Libandla, composed of a 20-member Senate and a 50-member House of Assembly, has limited powers.
Under the 1978 electoral law the people of each of the 40 traditional tribal communities (Tinkhundla) elect two members of an electoral college which in turn elects 40 members of the Assembly and 10 senators, with the King appointing the remainder.
Main government leaders
Head of state: King Mswati III who acceded in April 1986 [see pp. 34337], after a regency had ruled since the death in 1982 of his predecessor King Sobhuza II.
Prime Minister (acting): Obed Dlamini.
Other principal ministers: Sibusiso Barnabas Dlamini (Finance); Sipho Hezekiel Mamba (Agriculture); Douglas Ntiwane (Commerce, Industry and Mines); Sir George M. Mamba (Foreign Affairs); Zonke Khumalo (Justice).
Government changes in 1990
On Nov. 16 former Deputy Prime Minister Zonke Khumalo replaced Reginald Dhladhla as Justice Minister.
Political parties
Following a 1973 ban on political activity, political parties were constitutionally proscribed in 1978.
In 1990, however, the illegal People's United Democratic Front (PUDEMO) re-emerged after being dormant for several years [see below].
Elections
Elections to the Libandla were held on Nov. 5, 1987 [see p. 36008].
1990 OVERVIEW
On Aug. 9 King Mswati called for the creation of an indaba (popular parliament).
This would act as a public forum to discuss and recommend improvements to the controversial Tinkhundla system of indirect elections.
The call followed growing public unrest with several confrontations between the trade union movement and the government.
The PUDEMO also reportedly stepped up its underground political campaign for electoral reform, multiparty democracy and an end to corruption.
In September it was reported that South African lawyers would be brought to Swaziland to prosecute 15 people charged with forming a party to overthrow the government.
The accused, including trade unionists, students, a banker, a lecturer and a lawyer, had been arrested in May following a police crackdown on political dissent.
In November a student died after police entered the Kwaluseni campus of the University of Swaziland to end a student boycott, held in protest at the conviction of two students for PUDEMO membership.
The campus was closed indefinitely by the authorities.
King Mswati held talks in June 1990 with visiting South African Foreign Minister Pik Botha, and an extradition treaty was signed, also in June, with Mozambique.
In August the King visited Botswana and held talks with President Quett Masire.
In November Nelson Mandela, deputy president of the African National Congress, visited Swaziland for the first time since his February release.
Export earnings were expected to rise when the Maloma coal mine development began to produce high quality anthracite.
Sugar was the country's principal export; also important were maize, pineapple and citrus fruit production, cotton, animal husbandry and forestry.
Swaziland's main trading partners in 1988 (both for imports and exports) were South Africa, the United States and the United Kingdom.
On June 1 diplomatic relations were established with Yugoslavia.
AFRICA
ZAIRE
Area: 2,344,885 sq km.
Population: 34,442,000 (1989 World Bank estimate).
Capital: Kinshasa.
Languages: French (official); Luba, Kongo and other indigenous languages.
Religion: Christianity (91%, of which Roman Catholic 48%, Protestant 29%).
Armed forces: 51,000 (1990).
Currency: zaïre (US$1.00 =Z3,166.05 as at Feb. 28, 1991).
Major international affiliations: CEEAC; NAM; OAU; CEPGL.
POLITICAL SYSTEM
The Republic of Zaïre (known until 1971 as the Republic of the Congo) became independent from Belgium in June 1960.
Engulfed almost immediately in violence and facing the threatened secession of mineral-rich Katanga, the country's early post-independence years were fraught with factional and ideological conflicts.
Marshal Mobutu Sese Seko took power as head of the central government in the November 1965 military coup.
Under the 1978 Constitution (the country's fourth), the leader of the sole legal political party, the Popular Movement for the Revolution (MPR) is ex officio head of state, with executive powers, elected for a seven-year term.
Legislative power is vested in the 310-member Legislative Council, elected for a five-year term.
Political reforms, envisaging the introduction of a multiparty system after a one-year transitional period and the appointment of a prime minister, were announced in May 1990 [see pp. 37445-46].
Main government leaders as at end-1990
President: Marshal Mobutu Sese Seko, C.-in-C. of the Armed Forces.
Prime Minister:(with the title of First State Commissioner) Lunda Bululu.
Other principal ministers (with the title of State Commissioner): Engulu Baanga Mpongo Bakokele-Lokonga (Deputy First State Commissioner, Territorial Administration and Decentralization); Selemani Muana Yile (Deputy First State Commissioner; Economy, Industry and Commerce); Mushobekwa Kalimba Wa Katana (Foreign Affairs); Adml.
Mavua Mudima (National Defence, Territorial Security and Veterans' Affairs); Muyabu Nkulu (Justice); Bompito Botomba (Finance).
Government changes in 1990
After the appointment of the new government in May 1990 [see pp. 37445-46], two reshuffles were carried out in June and November; the most significant appointment was that of Selemani Muana Yile as a Deputy First State Commissioner in place of Nzanda Buana Kalemba on Nov. 30.
Ruling party
Mouvement populaire de la révolution (MPR — Popular Movement for the Revolution, Nsinga Udjuu Ongwakebei ch.).
Other parties
By the end of 1990 more than 60 opposition parties had been formed, notably Union pour la démocratie et le progrès social (UDPS — Union for Democracy and Progress, Etienne Tshisekedi l.);
Parti démocrate et social chrétien (PDSC — Christian Social Democrat Party, Ileo Nsongo Amba l.);
Parti des republicains indépendants (PRI — Party of Independent Republicans, Nguza Karl I. Bond l.).
Elections
Mobutu was most recently re-elected as President in July 1984 [see p. 33268].
Legislative elections were last held in September 1987 [see p. 35748].
1990 OVERVIEW
Popular pressure for political change induced Mobutu to announce reforms in April 1990 [see p. 37366].
He outlined a timetable for a transition to a multiparty system of government the following month [see pp. 37445-46].
As part of the process he resigned as chairman of the ruling MPR and appointed a transitional government headed by a First State Commissioner (Prime Minister).
Legislation providing for the organization and functioning of parties was adopted in November [see p. 37844].
The 1991 budget, adopted in January 1991, provided for expenditure of Z2,167,000 million, 100,000 million less than in the previous year.
Priority would be given to improving the country's infrastructure and boosting production.
AFRICA
ZAMBIA
Area: 752,614 sq km.
Population: 7,837,000 (1989 World Bank estimate).
Capital: Lusaka.
Languages: English, Tonga, Kaonde, Lunda, Luvale (all official), Bembe (30%).
Religion: Christianity (majority), Islam and Hinduism.
Armed forces: 16,200 (1990).
Currency: Zambian Kwacha (US$1.00=K47.2456 as at Jan. 28, 1991).
Major international affiliations: NAM; OAU; PTA; SADCC.
POLITICAL SYSTEM
The Republic of Zambia became an independent republic within the Commonwealth in October 1964.
From December 1972 the sole legal political organization was the United National Independence Party (UNIP); in September 1990 the party agreed to end its monopoly of power, and in December a bill was passed to allow for the formation of other political parties.
Executive power is currently vested in the President, elected by popular vote for a five-year term, who is also leader of the UNIP.
The Cabinet, appointed by the President, has hitherto been subordinate to the UNIP central committee.
Legislative authority rests with the National Assembly, with 125 elective members, elected by direct popular vote for a five-year term at the same time as the President, and 10 members chosen by the President.
Candidates have hitherto been required to be UNIP members and endorsed by the party's central committee.
Main government leaders
President: Kenneth Kaunda, since independence, having been Prime Minister since January 1964.
He is also C.-in-C. of the Armed Forces.
Prime Minister: Gen. Malimba Masheke.
Other principal ministers as of end-1990: Alex Shapi (Secretary of State for Defence and Security); Dodson Siatalimi (Defence); Gen. Kingsley Chinkuli (Home Affairs); Gen. Benjamin Mibenge (Foreign Affairs); Gibson Chigaga (Finance and National Commission for Development Planning); Frederick Chomba (Legal Affairs, Attorney General); Bernard Fulembo (Mines); Rabson Chongo (Commerce and Industry); Justin Mukando (Agriculture).
Government changes in 1900
Cabinet reshuffles were announced on Nov. 1, 1990 [see p. 37844]and on Dec. 4, when Dodson Siatalimi replaced as Defence Minister Lt.-Gen.
Hannaniah Lungu, who himself had been appointed on July 1, replacing Frederick Hapunda, an advocate of pluralist democracy [see pp. 37523; 37909].
Ruling party
The United National Independence Party (UNIP), leader (since 1960) Kenneth Kaunda.
The secretary-general is Alexander Grey Zulu, who is also a member of the Cabinet.
Other political parties
In July 1990 campaigners for an end to one-party rule formed the National Interim Committee of the Movement for Multiparty Democracy (MMD), a loose alliance of trade unionists, political opponents of UNIP, and former government ministers and supporters.
Elected as chairman and deputy chairman respectively were Arthur Wina, a prominent businessman and former Finance Minister, and Frederick Chiluba, leader of the Zambia Congress of Trade Unions.
The MMD applied for registration as a political party in December immediately after the enabling legislation was enacted.
Elections
Elections to the Assembly's 125 elective seats last took place in October 1988 [see pp. 36264-65], when Kaunda was also re-elected for a further five-year term as President.
A general election on a multiparty basis has been scheduled for October 1991.
1990 OVERVIEW
Widespread social unrest followed the introduction of economic austerity measures in June 1990, leading to sustained mass pressure for an end to one-party rule [see p. 37523].
In September UNIP agreed to end its monopoly on power and allow multiparty elections; and on Dec. 17 Kaunda signed into law a bill approved on Dec. 4 by the National Assembly amending the Constitution to allow the formation of other parties [see pp. 37602; 37701; 37909].
Mining is Zambia's main economic activity, with copper accounting for over 90 per cent of metal production and metal exports providing most foreign exchange earnings.
Improved world prices led to a recovery in copper production (448,500 tonnes in 1989-90), albeit still below full capacity.
In July the Paris Club of industrialized creditor nations agreed to reschedule US$1,600 million of Zambia's official foreign debt (which totalled US$7,200 million), thus complementing undertakings by the International Monetary Fund and the World Bank in March to give Zambia's economic recovery plan financial support [see p. 37557].
Presenting the 1991 budget on Nov. 16, 1990, Finance Minister Chigaga announced an increase in expenditure to K50,100 million (compared with expenditure of K24,500 million in 1990 — for 1990 budget see p. 37143), as a result of the rise in oil prices and increased international aid.
AFRICA
ZIMBABWE
Area: 390,759 sq km.
Population: 9,567,000 (1989 World Bank estimate).
Capital: Harare.
Languages: English (official); Chishona, Sindebele.
Religion: Traditional beliefs, Christianity, Islam and Hinduism.
Armed forces: 54,600 (1990).
Currency: Zimbabwe dollar (US$1.00=Z$2.6775 as at Jan. 28, 1991).
Major international affiliations: NAM; OAU; PTA; SADCC.
POLITICAL SYSTEM
Zimbabwe became independent in April 1980 as a republic within the Commonwealth, after a 15-year period of unilaterally declared independence under the government of Ian Smith ended in 1979 with the Lancaster House agreement on the Constitution [see p. 30165].
Under the 1980 Constitution as amended in November 1987 the executive President, who holds office for a six-year term and is eligible for re-election, is both head of state and head of government.
In April 1990 the bicameral parliament set up at independence was replaced by a single-chamber House of Assembly with 150 members (120 elective, 10 traditional chiefs, eight provincial governors designated by the president and 12 other presidential appointees) and a life of six years.
The December 1987 unification agreement between the ruling Zimbabwe African National Union-Patriotic Front (ZANU-PF) and the other main party, the Patriotic Front-Zimbabwe African People's Union (PF-ZAPU), created a de facto one-party state.
Main government leaders
President: Robert Mugabe, who is also C.-in-C. of the Defence Forces.
Vice-Presidents: Joshua Nkomo; Simon Vengesai Muzenda.
Other principal ministers: Didymus Mutasa (Political Affairs); Bernard Chidzero (Finance, Economic Planning and Development); Nathan Shamuyarira (Foreign Affairs); Emmerson Munangagwa (Justice, Legal and Parliamentary Affairs); Richard Hove (Defence); Moven Mahachi (Home Affairs).
Ruling party
Zimbabwe African National Union-Patriotic Front (ZANU-PF) officially defines itself as Marxist-Leninist in orientation.
Party president and first secretary: Robert Mugabe.
Party vice-presidents and second secretaries: Joshua Nkomo, Simon Muzenda.
Unity with Joshua Nkomo's PF-ZAPU was finally sealed at a joint national congress of the two parties in December 1989.
Other political parties
Four opposition parties contested the 1990 elections.
They were: the Zimbabwe United Movement (ZUM, former ZANU-PF secretary-general Edgar Tekere l.), the main opposition party, formed in April 1989, which incorporated the all-white Conservative Alliance of Zimbabwe; Zimbabwe African National Union (Ndonga)(ZANU (Ndonga), Rev. Ndabaningi Sithole l.) which had emerged as a breakaway ZANU faction; the nationalist United African National Council (UANC, formerly led by Bishop Muzorewa); and the National Democratic Union.
Elections
In the March 1990 general election ZANU-PF won 116 of the House of Assembly's elective seats and Mugabe was re-elected for another term as President.
1990 OVERVIEW
Mugabe's proposals in August to introduce a one-party state were successfully opposed by the majority of the ZANU-PF politburo, who preferred to capitalize on the party's de facto domination of political life rather than formalize it constitutionally [see p. 37643].
Although ZANU-PF had won a comfortable victory in the March general election, voter turnout had been low; the forcing of the one-party issue had led to strains within the party.
Considerable opposition to one-party rule had also been registered by the churches, the trade union movement and students, as well as by the opposition parties.
In a move to normalize the political climate, Mugabe in July ended the state of emergency — in force since 1965 and renewed continually since independence — and declared a general amnesty, benefiting imprisoned independence fighters loyal to Nkomo's defunct ZAPU-PF [see p. 37602].
After the passing of an amendment to the Constitution allowing for the creation of a second Vice-President, Nkomo was appointed to the post on Aug. 6.
According to reports, however, former ZAPU members continued to be disgruntled at the unequal distribution of Cabinet portfolios.
ECONOMY
Zimbabwe's was one of the most sophisticated economies in Africa, with manufacturing contributing about 25 per cent of gross domestic product.
Tourism was a growing service industry.
Agriculture contributed 11 per cent of GDP, with tobacco (the main cash crop and export), sugar, maize, beef and cotton accounting for some two-thirds of the sector's production.
Mining (mainly gold, nickel, asbestos and coal) contributed 7 per cent of GDP and around one-third of foreign exchange earnings.
Presenting on July 26, 1990, the budget for the year staring July 1, Finance Minister Chidzero stated that economic performance and living standards had deteriorated since 1982.
Market forces would over the next five years be given a greater role so as to boost production and secure an average growth rate of 5 per cent(against 3.2 per cent during the 1980s).
Controls on imports and foreign exchange would be reduced, and export incentives including free trade zones created, with tax breaks for foreign investors.
(In its drive to attract foreign capital, Zimbabwe had in September 1989 acceded to the World Bank-backed Multilateral Investment Guarantee Agency convention.)
Chidzero added that in order to reduce the budget deficit — from 9 per cent of GDP in 1990/91 to 5 per cent by 1994/95 — private share-holdings would be allowed in state companies and subsidies for loss-making public enterprises would be phased out.
The size of the 188,000-strong civil service would also be reduced.
Chidzero's budget allowed for expenditure in the year to June 30, 1991, to rise to Z$8,200 million (US$3,350 million) from Z$6,400 million in 1989-90.
On Oct. 1 the government removed price controls on all goods except basic foods.
A World Bank team arrived in Harare in October to discuss a structural adjustment programme.
FOREIGN RELATIONS
Mugabe's statement on March 4, 1990, that "all progressive forces" should prepare for negotiations with the apartheid regime in spite of the continuation of the armed struggle was seen as criticism of the Pan Africanist Congress (PAC) with which, rather than the ANC, ZANU had traditionally been aligned.
His words echoed those of visiting African National Congress (ANC) leader Nelson Mandela.
Mugabe held talks with President Suharto of Indonesia in June 1990.
AFRICA
CHAD
Area: 1,284,000 sq km(including the Aouzou strip disputed with Libya).
Population: 5,537,000 (1989 World Bank estimate).
Capital: Ndjamena.
Languages: French and Arabic (official); 25 indigenous languages also spoken.
Religion: Islam (44%), Animism, Christianity (6%).
Armed forces 17,000 (1990).
Currency: franc of the Co-opération financière en Afrique centrale (US$1.00=252.863 francs CFA as at Jan. 28, 1991.
Major international affiliations: NAM; OAU; ICO.
POLITICAL SYSTEM
The Republic of Chad became independent from France in 1960.
The country has subsequently been riven by civil war, although from 1987 the regime of President Hissène Habré sought to build greater national unity and succeeded in expelling Libyan troops from the north.
Habré arranged elections and was sworn in for a further seven-year presidential term on Dec. 22, 1989, but was overthrown on Dec, 1, 1990, by rebel forces from the east under the leadership of his one-time military commander Idriss Déby, leader of the Patriotic Salvation Movement (MPS)[see p. 37907].
An interim Council of State was established on Dec. 4.
Main government leaders
President of Council of State: Idriss Déby.
Vice-President: Maldoum Badda Abbas.
Principal ministers: Soungui Ahmad (Foreign Affairs); Mahamat Saleh Adoum (Interior and Security); Jean Aligue Bavoyeu (Agriculture); Abakar Mallah (Justice); Djibrine Dassert (Defence); Mohiaaine Salah (Finance and Materials).
Political Parties
Mouvement patriotique du salut (MPS — Patriotic Salvation Movement), Idriss Deby (l.).
Before the December 1990 overthrow of former President Hissène Habré the following active opposition movements also existed: Mouvement pour le salut national du Tchad (Mosanat — Movement for Chadian National Salvation); Mouvement pour la démocratie et le socialisme au Tchad (MDST — Movement for Democracy and Socialism in Chad)[for details of former opposition movements which had either joined Habré's government or accepted reconciliation see pp. 37213; 37603].
A Parti de la troisième république (PTR — Third Republic Party), with Francisco Javier Iturriaga Aste as president and Leonardo Rivera Reyes as secretary-general was reported to have been formed on Feb. 2, 1990.
Elections
Last general election: July 1990.
Reappointment of Habré as President for seven-year term endorsed by referendum Dec. 22, 1989.
1990 OVERVIEW
Déby's rebel forces, a serious irritant throughout 1990, took power at the end of the year with an ease which revealed the final failure of Habré's so-called national reconciliation.
Notwithstanding the constitutional changes which led up to the general election of July [see p. 37603], the Habré government had remained an alliance of faction leaders lacking any real popular support.
Meanwhile the talks between Chad and Libya [see pp. 37213-14; 37645]had been making no progress, thereby disappointing any initial hopes invested in them.
The French, whose military presence had appeared to make them Habré's main ally, stood aside when he was overthrown, alienated in part by the regime's continued disregard for human rights.
A revised 1991 budget was adopted by the Council of State on Dec. 29, 1990.
Expenditure was set at 135,502 million francs CFA, with revenues at 126,554 million francs CFA; the projected deficit was thus 8,948 million francs CFA.
Investment expenditure was set at 96,000 million francs CFA and operational expenses estimated at 39,502 million francs CFA.
The ambassadors of France, the United States and Zaïre on Dec. 12 reportedly committed their countries to maintain friendly relations with the new government.
During the Dec. 23 visit of Capt. Blaise Compaoré, head of state of Burkina, agreement was reached to set up a permanent joint commission to promote co-operation and to open up diplomatic missions in the respective capitals as soon as possible.
President Ibrahim Babangida of Nigeria assured a visiting Chadian delegation on Jan. 3, 1991, that he shared and would support the new government's objectives on economic development, democratization and human rights.
AFRICA
COMOROS
Area: 1,862 sq km.
Population: 459,000 (1989 World Bank estimate).
Capital: Moroni (on Njazidja).
Languages: Arabic, French; majority of population speaks Comoran.
Religion: Islam.
Armed forces: Nil [see also p. 37309].
Currency: Comoros franc (US$1.00=252.863 Comoros francs as at Jan. 28, 1991).
Major international affiliations: OAU; PTA; IOC.
POLITICAL SYSTEM
The Comoros became an independent state by unilateral declaration in 1975, after the French colonial authorities had had baulked at agreeing to independance without agreement to the constitution of all the islands, including Mayotte, which has remained under (contested) French rule.
The Comoros are ruled by a President elected for a six-year term.
There is a Federal Assembly of 42 members, elected by universal adult suffrage for a five-year term.
Main government leaders
President: Said Mohamed Djohar, who is also head of government.
Comoros Council of Ministers
Ministers of State
*Said Hassan Said Hachim Equipment, Posts and Telecommunications; Government Spokesman Said Ali Youssouf Transport, Tourism and Urban Development
*Ali Mroudjae Production, Industry, Rural Development and Environment Ministers Mtara Maecha Foreign Affairs and Co-operation
**Ahmed Abdallah Souret Finance, Economy, Budget and Plan Mohammed Taki Mboreha Interior, Immigration, Administrative Reform and Local Government
**Houmadi Kaambi Public Health and Population Said Attoumane Justice, Civil Service, Employment and Professional Training Arbabidine Mohammed National Education, Vocational and Technical Training
**Adamou Mohamed Information, Culture, Youth and Sports Secretaries of State Daoud Attoumane Islamic and Arab Affairs and Koranic Teaching Mouhtare Rachid Commerce and Crafts
*New appointment in October 1990.
**Promoted to Minister of State in October 1990.
Cabinet changes in 1990
Djohar formed a new Cabinet after his election in March including figures from the Abdallah regime as well as some of his defeated opponents.
The Interior Minister, Ibrahim Halidi, was dismissed on Sept. 23, 1990, although he denied that he had any knowledge of an alleged coup attempt discovered in late August.
He was replaced by Mohamed Taki Mboreha.
Further Cabinet changes followed the resignation in mid-September of Minister of State for Finance, Economy and the Budget Said Ali Kemal, hitherto regarded as second in the government only to Djohar.
On Oct. 18, Djohar announced the formation of a new government.
Ruling party
Union comorienne pour le progrès (Udzima — Said Mohamed Djohar l.).
Other political parties
Union nationale pour la démocratie aux Comores (UNDC — Mohammed Taki l.);
Chuma (Islands' Friendship and Unity Party — Prince Said Ali Kemal l.);
Parti comorien pour la démocratie et le progrès (Ali Mroudjae l.);
Mouvement démocratique populaire (Abbas Djoussouf l.);
Parti socialiste des Comores (Ali Mballa l.);
Front populaire Mohélien (Mohammed Hassanaly l.);
Front démocratique (Moustapha Said Cheikh l.).
Elections
Djohar, who was appointed interim President after the assassination in November 1989 of Ahmed Abdallah Abderrahman [see pp. 37033-34], in March 1990 won presidential elections contested by several parties, thus marking the end of one-party rule [see p.37309].
The Federal Assembly was last elected in March 1987, when all seats were declared won by candidates of the then sole legal party, Udzima, although opposition candidates were permitted to stand.
1990 OVERVIEW
The government appointed by Djohar in March held out hopes of national reconciliation.
In April, the President announced measures to safeguard democracy and under which to begin discussions on constitutional reform, designed to lead to parliamentary elections.
However, his main opponent, Mohamed Taki, who won the first round of the presidential election, continued to accuse Djohar of vote-rigging and was linked to an alleged attempt to overthrow the government discovered in August [see below].
The visit in April by French President Mitterrand confirmed French support for the new government.
The Foreign Ministry on Aug. 21 announced that there had been discovered an attempt by supporters of defeated presidential candidate Mohamed Taki to destabilize the government, and that one French mercenary and two Comorans had been arrested.
In October it was reported that Max Veillard, a French mercenary and adviser to Taki wanted for his part in the August coup attempt, had been shot dead by police.
The 1990 budget was presented to parliament on Nov. 17, 1989, by then Finance Minister Said Ahmed Said Ali.
Expenditure was budgeted at 10,100 million Comoros francs, with revenue of 8,500 million francs; the shortfall was expected to be covered by French aid as in previous years.
The 1991 budget, passed by the Federal Assembly on Dec. 31, projected spending of almost 12,000 Comoros francs.
The budget for equipment and investments, wholly financed by external funds, would be balanced at 10,000 million Comoros francs.
AFRICA
DJIBOUTI
Area: 23,200 sq km.
Population:410,000 (1989 World Bank estimate).
Capital: Djibouti.
Languages: Arabic and French (official); Cushitic languages.
Religion: Islam.
Armed forces: 4,100 (1990).
Currency: Djibouti franc (US$1.00=173.028 Djibouti francs as at Jan. 28, 1991).
Major international affiliations: OAU; Arab League; ICO; IGADD; PTA.
POLITICAL SYSTEM
The Republic of Djibouti (formerly the French Territory of the Afars and the Issas) became independent in June 1977; under the terms of the 1981 Constitution the President may serve for no more than two six-year terms.
There is a 65-member Chamber of Deputies, elected by universal adult suffrage for a term of five years; all candidates are elected from a single list put forward by the Popular Rally for Progress, the sole legal party since October 1981.
Main government leaders
President: Hassan Gouled Aptidon (since independence).
Prime Minister: Barkat Gourad Hamadou, who is also Minister of Planning and Land Development).
Other principal ministers: Moumin Bahdon Farah (Foreign Affairs and Co-operation); Moussa Bouraleh Robleh (Finance and National Economy); Khaireh Allaleh Hared (Interior, Posts and Telecommunications).
Government changes in 1990
A Cabinet reshuffle announced on Nov. 25 involved changes in the portfolios of 10 existing ministers and the appointment of Ibrahim Idris Mohamed as Minister of Public Works, Construction and Housing.
Moussa Bouraleh Robleh, hitherto Minister of Commerce, Transport and Tourism, was appointed Minister of Finance and National Economy [see p. 37844].
Ruling and sole legal party
Rassemblement populaire pour le progrès (RPP — Popular Rally for Progress, Hassan Gouled Aptidon ch., Moumin Bahdon Farah s. -g.).
Other parties
The two leading exiled opposition groups, the Front démocratique pour la libération de Djibouti (FDLD, Mohammed Adoyta Yussuf l.), and the Mouvement national djiboutien pour l'instauration de la démocratie (MNDID, former Commerce Minister Aden Awaleh Robleh l.), agreed in January 1990 to form a common front, the Union des mouvements démocratiques [see p. 37401].
A third group, the Mouvement pour l'unité et la démocratie (former presidential economic adviser Mohammed Moussa Kahin l.), calls for the introduction of multiparty democracy.
Elections
Gouled, the sole candidate, was re-elected President in June 1981 and April 1987; the next presidential elections are due in 1993, when Gouled will no longer be eligible to stand.
The Chamber of Deputies was last elected in April 1987 [see p. 35180]; the next legislative elections are due in 1992.
1990 OVERVIEW
Domestic developments were dominated during the second half of the year by the Gulf crisis, which emphasized Djibouti's close relationship with France at a time when it had been striving to build up its image as a non-aligned Arab state.
The government, which had had good relations with Iraq, stressed its desire for a peaceful Arab solution to the conflict.
Sensitivities on the issue were highlighted by a grenade attack aimed at French personnel in September [see below].
The Gulf crisis also brought out divisions among the factions within government contending for the succession to President Gouled on his completion of two terms of office in 1993.
SECURITY
A grenade attack on Sept. 27 on a Djibouti café popular with French servicemen killed a child and injured 17 other people.
Responsibility for the attack was later claimed by a pro-Iraqi group, the Movement for Djibouti Youth.
The group had earlier threatened to attack French, United States and United Kingdom targets in the city in revenge for what they described as planned Western aggression against Iraq.
The 1990 budget was approved by the Chamber of Deputies on Dec. 23, 1989.
The budget totalled 23,987 million Djibouti francs and provided for higher social services expenditure.
Djibouti's principal trading partners in 1988 were: exports to North Yemen, Somalia, South Yemen; imports from Bahrain, France, Saudi Arabia.
The trade balance in the same year was in deficit by US$300,000,000.
AFRICA
ETHIOPIA
Area: 1,251,282 sq km.
Population: 48,861,000 (1989 World Bank estimate).
Capital: Addis Ababa.
Language: Amharic (official); many local languages, English widely used in commerce and Arabic spoken in Eritrea.
Religion: Christianity (Ethiopian Orthodox Church).
Armed forces: 438,000 (1990).
Currency: birr (US$1.00=2.0534 birr as at Jan. 28, 1991).
Affiliations: NAM; OAU; ACP; PTA; IGADD; COMECON (observer).
POLITICAL SYSTEM
Ethiopia, whose independence was recognized by the European colonial powers in 1896, was dominated for more than 50 years (apart from the period of the Italian occupation from 1936 to 1941) by Haile Selassie, who was regent, then King and eventually Emperor until his deposition in 1974.
Lt.-Col. Mengistu Haile Mariam came to power in February 1977 after a struggle within the military leadership.
After a 12-year period of military rule, a new Constitution was adopted by referendum in February 1987 [see p. 35367].
A National Shengo (Assembly) formally replaced the military administration in September, and the establishment of the People's Democratic Republic of Ethiopia was proclaimed.
There is a 24-member Council of State which is the permanent organ of the National Shengo, and is elected by it.
Main government leaders
President: Mengistu Haile Mariam, who is also president of the Council of State and C.-in-C. of the armed forces.
Vice-Presidents: Lt.-Col. Fisseha Desta (also vice-president of the Council of State); Lt.-Col. Berhanu Bayeh.
Prime Minister: Hailu Yimenu, Deputy Prime Minister and acting Prime Minister.
Other principal ministers: Alemu Alegbe (Deputy Prime Minister); Wole Chekol (Deputy Prime Minister in charge of Economic Affairs); Ashagre Yigletu (Deputy Prime Minister in charge of Social Affairs); Tesfaye Dinka (Foreign Affairs); Col. Tesfaye Wolde Selassie (Internal Affairs); Tekola Dejene (Finance).
Cabinet changes in 1990
Getachew Habte Selassie replaced Tadesse Gebre-Kidan as Foreign Trade Minister in February.
The demotion of Culture and Sports Minister Girma Yilma to an ambassadorial post was announced by Mengistu in June.
Ruling party
Ethiopian Democratic Unity Party.
Mengistu announced on March 5, 1990, that the Workers' Party of Ethiopia, which had been created in 1984 as the sole legal party [see p. 33384], was to be transformed into a new Ethiopian Democratic Unity Party [see p. 37310], in what was portrayed as a move towards wider political participation intended to embrace opposition groups.
Mengistu is general secretary of the party, which is governed by an 11-member political bureau.
Other movements
A number of rebel movements are fighting the government in various parts of the country, notably the Eritrean People's Liberation Front (EPLF) and the Tigray People's Liberation Front (TPLF) in the north and the Oromo Liberation Front (OLF) in the east.
The Ethiopian People's Democratic Revolutionary Front (EPDRF), an alliance between the TPLF and the Ethiopian People's Democratic Movement, a smaller group operating in Wollo and Gondar provinces, became the main direct threat to the government in 1990; other groups under the EPDRF umbrella include the Ethiopian Democratic Officers' Movement, the Oromo People's Democratic Organization and the Afar Democratic Union.
A number of smaller groups are also active, including the Eritrean Liberation Front in Eritrea and the Ethiopian People's Revolutionary Army and Ethiopian Democratic Union in Gondar province.
Elections
The National Shengo was elected in June 1987 for a five-year term.
Mengistu was elected President by the Shengo at its inaugural session in September of that year.
1990 OVERVIEW
1990 was a year of continuing setbacks for the government: there were a series of defeats in its long-running war with separatist and rebel movements, chronic economic problems and the increasing threat of severe famine.
The year began with the capture by the EPLF of the Eritrean port of Massawa in February [see pp. 37401-02], which left the EPLF in effective control of the whole of Eritrea apart from the capital, Asmara.
The TPLF continued to score successes further south.
In March the EPRDF began an advance through Shoa province which took it to within striking distance of Addis Ababa on several occasions by mid-year.
Further defeats for government forces were reported in June and July, with renewed activity by the OLF in eastern Ethiopia and serious casualties suffered by government forces defending Asmara.
The government responded to its difficulties on the economic front with Mengistu's announcement of limited liberalization measures in March, including steps towards the introduction of a mixed economy, with scope for private enterprise and a free market in agricultural trade, although the state would continue to own the land.
A degree of political liberalization was also promised, but the measures were rejected as insufficient by rebel groups [see p. 37310].
In a sombre May Day speech, Mengistu admitted that the government had suffered setbacks and called for renewed commitment to the war, saying: "It is no longer a question of national unity, but rather of national survival." 
The government came under growing pressure to negotiate a peace settlement after the Soviet decision to stop supplies of military aid at the end of 1990.
Mengistu in June welcomed a joint United States-Soviet call for an international peace conference, suggesting that he would accept UN observers to oversee peace talks [for collapse of talks with EPLF in Kenya in November 1989 see pp. 36886-87].
The EPLF, however, now sought a UN-sponsored referendum on the future of Eritrea.
On June 23, the EPDRF announced that it was prepared to cease fire if the government agreed to the establishment of a broadly-based transitional government.
The government, however, issued a call for a general mobilization to defeat the rebels.
With the rebels recording further military successes [see p. 37702]talks between the government and the EPLF took place in Washington on Oct. 2, chaired by US Assistant Secretary of State for African Affairs Herman Cohen.
Renewed fears of famine towards the end of 1990 led to further efforts to agree safe passage of relief supplies through Massawa port, closed since its capture by the EPLF and subject to repeated government air attacks.
In December, the World Food Programme announced that it had reached an agreement with the government and the EPLF to reopen the port [see p. 37907].
Ethiopian and international relief officials estimated that between 4,300,000 and 6,000,000 people faced severe food shortages, two-thirds of them in Eritrea and Tigray.
ECONOMY
A number of moves to liberalize the economy were announced in the wake of Mengistu's March speech on the introduction of a mixed economy.
They included, in May, the legalization of private banking and the reduction of taxes on company profits from 89 per cent to 59 per cent in an attempt to encourage investment.
Tax concessions for new companies and the end of the state monopoly on import-export trade were also announced.
A one-year emergency development programme presented to aid donors in Paris in September projected export earnings of 1,000 million birr for 1990, but the estimates were regarded as optimistic in view of the worsening famine situation.
Development plans for the next decade envisaged large-scale investment in agriculture and in industry, principally backed by foreign investment and international aid.
Ethiopia's principal trading partners in 1989 were: exports to West Germany, USA, Japan; imports from Soviet Union, Italy, West Germany.
The balance of trade showed a deficit in 1988 of US$699,300,000.
AFRICA
KENYA
Area: 582,646 sq km.
Population: 24,900,000 (1989).
Capital: Nairobi.
Language: Kiswahili (official); English, Kikuyu and Luo widely spoken.
Religion: Traditional beliefs, Christianity (25%) and Islam (6%).
Armed forces: 23,600 (1990).
Currency: Kenya shilling (US$1.00=KSh24.3177 as at Jan. 28, 1991).
Major international affiliations: NAM, OAU, ACP, PTA, IGADD.
POLITICAL SYSTEM
The Republic of Kenya was proclaimed in December 1964, having achieved independence within the Commonwealth the previous year.
Executive power: vested in the President, the Vice-President, and the Cabinet (appointed by the President).
The President is elected for a five-year term by universal adult suffrage; Daniel arap Moi was returned for a third five-year term as President in February 1988 [see p. 36137]without recourse to the electorate, having been proposed as sole candidate by the Kenya African National Union (KANU), the sole legal party.
Legislative power: vested in the unicameral National Assembly, comprising the Attorney General, the Speaker, 188 elected members and 12 members nominated by the President.
Main government leaders
President: Daniel arap Moi.
Vice-President: George Saitoti (also Finance Minister).
Other principal ministers: Davidson Ngibuini Kuguru (Home Affairs and Natural Heritage), Wilson Ndolo Ayah (Foreign Affairs and International Co-operation), Elijah J. Mwangale (Agriculture), Kiprono Nicholas K. Biwott (Energy).
Cabinet changes in 1990
A Cabinet reshuffle on March 9, 1990, involved the appointment of Wilson Ndolo Ayah in succession to Robert J. Ouko, who had been murdered in mid-February [see pp. 37309, 37239].
Two ministers were dismissed later in the year for criticizing government actions: the Information and Broadcasting Minister, Waruru Kanja, in April (replaced by Nahashion Kanyi), and the Agriculture Minister Maina Wanjigi, in June (replaced by Elijah Mwangale).
The Labour Minister Peter Okondo resigned in August [see also below]and was replaced by Philip Masinde.
Ruling party
Kenya African National Union (KANU) is the sole legal political organization; Daniel arap Moi (ch.);
George Saitoti (vice-ch.);
John Joseph Kamotho (s. -g.).
Elections
Last Assembly elections: March 1988 [see pp.36136-37].
1990 OVERVIEW
The government set its face in 1990 against growing demands for political reform.
The murder of Foreign Minister Robert Ouko in February provoked large-scale protests by students claiming that the government was attempting to cover up the circumstances of his death and calling for the resignation of President Moi; the government responded by banning demonstrations.
An investigation into Ouko's murder was carried out by police officers from the United Kingdom; the results, handed over to the government in September, were not made public.
In July the authorities arrested two leading opponents of the government, Charles Rubia and Kenneth Matiba, who had called for a referendum on the future of one-party rule; in subsequent protest riots 20 people died [see p. 37603].
President Moi continued to oppose political reform, claiming that a pluralist system would revive intertribal conflict, and sought to portray the unrest as the work of a small minority of trouble-makers, although he also at times adopted a more conciliatory tone and in July approved the establishment of a commission of inquiry into the political system, headed by Vice-President George Saitoti.
Moi went to particular lengths to pay tribute to Alexander Muge, Bishop of Eldoret, a long-standing critic of the government who was killed in a car crash in August [see p. 37645].
Muge, who had accused government members of being involved in Ouko's murder, had been threatened by Labour Minister Peter Okondo a few days before his death; Okondo later resigned from the government.
Allegations of a plot against the government were again made following the arrest in October of dissident Koigi wa Wamwere on his return from exile in Norway and of three others.
Wamwere was accused of entering Kenya to foment an armed uprising and was in December charged with treason [see p. 37908].
His arrest led to the severing of diplomatic relations with Norway, where Wamwere had been given refugee status and which Kenya accused of supporting subversion in Kenya.
Wamwere's lawyers claimed that he had been kidnapped from Uganda.
In November the human rights organization Amnesty International called on Kenya to investigate its human rights record, claiming that hundreds of government opponents had been arrested and some tortured; several aid donors, including the United States and Denmark, withheld or froze aid disbursements, expressing concern about the government's treatment of its opponents.
On Nov. 23 former Vice-President Oginga Odinga announced that he planned to set up a political party, saying that an open political process was necessary to wipe out "political hooliganism and thuggery" .
The commission of inquiry into the political system reported at the beginning of December to a special KANU meeting, which endorsed its recommendations for a continuation of the one-party system [see p. 37908].
Kenya and Uganda agreed to restore full diplomatic relations after a meeting between Moi and Uganda's President Museveni in August 1990.
Relations between the two neighbouring countries had been downgraded in 1987 following border clashes and accusations by each country that the other was supporting harbouring dissidents [see p. 36138].
South African Foreign Minister Roelof "Pik" Botha met Moi in Nairobi on Nov. 30.
The official Kenya News Agency described the meeting as a "courtesy call" , during which Botha delivered a message from South African President de Klerk.
1990 BUDGET
The 1990/91 budget, for the year beginning July 1, 1990, was presented to the National Assembly on June 7.
Total expenditure for 1990/91 was estimated at KSh79,196 million, of which KSh57,996 million was allocated to recurrent spending.
Government revenue was estimated at KSh48,560 million, leaving a deficit of KSh30,636 million to be financed by foreign aid and domestic borrowing.
GDP growth was projected at 5.2 per cent in 1990/91, compared with 5 per cent the previous year, and inflation was expected to fall to 7.5 per cent.
Saitoti announced measures to promote exports, including a reform of the import tariff system to assist imports of manufacturing inputs.
Export processing zones were to be developed with World Bank and African Development Bank assistance.
Spending cuts were announced in November to help the government cope with the impact of the Gulf crisis on oil prices.
Government officials announced that spending would be cut by 15 per cent and civil service recruitment by 40 per cent, with consequent savings of over KSh600,000,000.
AFRICA
MADAGASCAR
Area: 587,041 sq km.
Population: 11,174,000 (1989 World Bank estimate).
Capital: Antananarivo.
Languages: Malagasy and French (both official); Hova and other dialects.
Religion: Animism (majority), Christianity (about 40%) and Islam.
Armed forces: 21,000 (1990) Currency: Malagasy franc (US$1.00=FMG1,332.06 as at Jan. 28, 1991)
Major international affiliations: OAU; PTA; IOC.
POLITICAL SYSTEM
The Democratic Republic of Madagascar (known officially until 1975 as the Malagasy Republic) achieved independence from France in 1960.
Executive authority: the President; legislative authority: the National Assembly; both elected by universal adult suffrage.
The President is also chairman of the Supreme Revolutionary Council, which is defined in the Constitution as "the guardian of the Malagasy Socialist Revolution" .
Two-thirds of the members of the Council are nominated by the President, who also selects the rest from a list nominated by the Assembly.
The Prime Minister is appointed by the President; the government is responsible to the Assembly.
Main government leaders
President: Didier Ratsiraka.
Prime Minister: Lt.-Col. Victor Ramahatra.
Other principal ministers: Jean Bemananjara (Foreign Affairs), Jean Robiarivuny (Economy), Leon Rajaobelina (Finance), Augustin Ampy Portos (Interior).
Cabinet changes in 1990.
None [for February 1991 Cabinet changes see p. 37996].
Ruling party
Antoky Ny Revolosiona Malagasy/Avantgarde de la révolution malgache (Arema — Vanguard of the Malagasy Revolution)(President Didier Ratsiraka, s. -g.).
Other parties
Until March 1990 all political parties were obliged to belong to the Front national pour la défence de la révolution (FNDR — National Front for the Defence of the Revolution).
A decree permitting the free formation of parties came into effect that month [see p. 37402]and was followed by the formation of a number of new parties.
The larger parties included Antoko'ny Kongresi'ni Fahaleovantenan Madagasikara (AKFM — Independence Congress Party of Madagascar), split in March 1989 [see p. 36678]; the main (Marxist) party continued as AKFM-Kongresi or AKFM-KDRSM (Andriantiana Rakotovao, former Minister of Posts and Telecommunications, ch.), which supported Arema; the breakaway faction formed the socialist AKFM-Fanavoazana,(AKFM — Renewal) led by the Rev. Richard Andriamanjato.
Parti social-démocrate (PSD — Social Democratic Party, led by former Interior Minister André Resampa); AMFM-3FM (led by Andrianalijoana Andriamanmapy); Mouvement des démocrates chrétiens malgaches (Christian Democratic Movement, led by Jean-Jacques Rakotoniaina); Union nationale pour la démocratie et le développement (UNDD — National Union for Democracy and Development, led by Zafy Albert); Mouvement pour le pouvoir prolétarien/Mpitolona ho amin'ny Fanjakana ny Madinika (MFM — Movement for Proletarian Power; centre-left, led by Manandafy Rakotonirina); Vonjy Irai Tsy Mivaki (VITM or Vonjy — Popular Movement for National Unity; centre-right); Madagaskira Ottronin'ny Malagasy/Monima ka Miviombio (Monima-K — Madagascar for the Malagasy, conservative, led by Monja Jaona).
The Front for the Defence of Malagasy Socialism (FMSM — an alliance led by Jérôme Marojama Razanabahiny of Vonjy), was set up by the government as a counterweight to the new opposition parties.
Elections
The President was last elected in March 1989 for a seven-year term [see pp. 36518; 36678]; the national People's Assembly (normal term five years) was last elected in May 1989 [see p. 36648].
1990 OVERVIEW
The freeing of political parties in March 1990 led to the formation of numerous new parties and the emergence as official opposition of some of those which had been operating within the FNDR.
Many of the new parties also made calls for further political reforms.
A conference on Aug. 16-19 attended by representatives of 14 political parties as well as church, trade union, student and business leaders, called for the establishment of an all-party transitional government which would conduct elections for a constituent assembly to draw up a new constitution.
The conference criticized Ratsiraka's leadership but praised his recent reforms.
A group of armed rebels on May 13 captured the radio station in Antananarivo and announced the overthrow of the government, but were soon overpowered by security forces [see p. 37446].
FOREIGN RELATIONS
1990 developments
April: An extension of links with South Africa was announced by Ratsiraka, including a direct air service and expanded economic and commercial relations, although he emphasized that diplomatic recognition would not take place until South Africa had abolished apartheid.
June: A visit by French President Mitterrand led to the announcement that France had accepted Madagascar's claim, supported by a UN vote in 1980, to the islands of Les Glorieuses, Juan de Nova, Europa and Bassas de India, which had been under French control since 1882.
In return, Madagascar promised compensation for French companies nationalized in 1972.
August: South African President de Klerk the first South African head of state to visit the island, signed an agreement to expand economic relations.
November: Thailand and Madagascar agreed to establish diplomatic relations at ambassadorial level, with effect from Nov. 30.
AFRICA
MAURITIUS
BASIC DATA
Area: 2,040 sq km.
Population: 1,062,000 (1989 World Bank estimate).
Capital:Port Louis.
Languages: English (official), Creole.
Religion: Hinduism (46%), Christianity (35%) and Islam (16%).
Armed forces: No standing defence force.
Currency: Mauritian rupee (US$1.00=R13.8931 as at Jan. 28, 1991).
Major international affiliations: OAU; NAM; PTA; IOC.
POLITICAL SYSTEM
Mauritius became an independent state within the Commonwealth in March 1968.
Executive power is formally vested in the British monarch, represented by a Governor-General who acts on the advice of a Council of Ministers.
There is a unicameral 70-seat Legislative Assembly.
The Governor-General appoints the Prime Minister and, on the latter's advice, the other members of the Council of Ministers, who are responsible to the Assembly.
Governor-General: Sir Veerasamy Ringadoo.
Main government leaders
Prime Minister: Aneerood Jugnauth (also Minister of Finance, Defence, Interior, Communications and Information).
Other principal ministers: Prem Nababsingh (MMM — Deputy Prime Minister, Health); Bergoonath Ghurburrun (MSM — Deputy Prime Minister, Planning and Economic Development); Cassam Uteem (MMM — Industry and New Technology); Jean-Claude de l'Estrac (MMM — Foreign Affairs and Emigration).
1990 Cabinet changes
A new Cabinet was announced on Sept. 24, following the formation of a new coalition government.
Six new members joined the Cabinet and three other ministers took on new responsibilities [see p. 37702].
Political parties
Governing coalition formed in September 1990: the Mouvement socialist mauricien (MSM — Aneerood Jugnauth l.) and the Mouvement militant mauricien (MMM — Paul Bérenger s. -g.); the Organization du peuple rodriguais (OPR — Serge Clair l.), is represented by one minister in the Cabinet.
The Mauritius Labour Party (MLP) was a member of the government coalition until September 1990.
After its departure from government, Sir Satcam Boolell stepped down as leader in favour of Nuvin Ramgoolam, son of Mauritius' first Prime Minister, Sir Seewoosagur Ramgoolam.
Other parties include the Parti mauricien social-démocrate (PMSD — Sir Gaetan Duval l.); the Comité d'action musulman; the Parti socialiste mauricien; and the Mouvement des travaillistes démocrates.
Dissident former members of Jugnauth's MSM, led by former Finance Minister Vishnu Lutchmeenaraidoo, were expected to form their own party.
Elections
Legislative Assembly last elected August 1987 for five-year term [see p. 35490].
1990 OVERVIEW
The signing of an electoral pact between Jugnauth's MSM and the opposition MMM in July triggered a political crisis.
Jugnauth's plans to transform Mauritius into a republic within the Commonwealth were defeated in August, and six members of the MLP then left the governing coalition [see p. 37645].
A new government was formed in September including six ministers from the MMM [see p. 37702], Jugnauth's accord with the MMM marking a reconciliation with his former ally, Bérenger, who was to have become president if a republic had been established, and the final collapse of his fragile alliance with the MLP.
The new coalition government gave the Prime Minister an increased majority in parliament, but observers commented that this might not translate into electoral support.
The 1990/91 budget for the financial year starting July 1, 1990, was presented to the Legislative Assembly on June 18 by then Finance Minister Vishnu Lutchmeenaraidoo.
Total spending was set at R11,600 million, of which R9,000 million was allocated to recurrent expenditure.
Debt servicing was allocated R2,700 million, 27 per cent more than the previous year.
Revenue was forecast at R9,500 million.
The overall budget deficit was targeted at 2.3 per cent of gross domestic product (GDP), as compared with 3.2 per cent the previous year.
In his budget speech, the Minister stressed that the fight against inflation was one of his top priorities.
Mauritius' principal trading partners in 1989 were: exports to the United Kingdom, France and the United States; imports from France, Japan and South Africa.
The trade balance in 1989 showed a deficit of US$282,000,000.
AFRICA
SEYCHELLES
BASIC DATA
Area: 454 sq km.
Population: 68,000 (1989 World Bank estimate).
Capital: Victoria, on Mahé island.
Languages: Creole (official); English and French.
Religion: Christianity (92% Roman Catholic).
Armed forces: 1,300 (1990).
Currency: Seychelles rupee (US$1.00=SR5.0053 as at Jan. 28, 1991).
Major international affiliations: OAU; NAM; IOC.
POLITICAL SYSTEM
Independent within the Commonwealth since 1976, the Republic of Seychelles was established in March 1979 as a one-party state.
Executive power: vested in the President, elected for a five-year term by direct suffrage, who appoints the Council of Ministers, members of the judiciary and the holders of certain public offices.
Legislature: a unicameral National Assembly of whom 23 members are elected by direct popular vote for five years and two are appointed by the President.
Main government leaders
President: France-Albert René (also Minister of Defence, Environment, Industry and Legal Affairs).
René seized power in a military coup in June 1977.
Other principal ministers: Maj. James Michel (Finance), Danielle de St Jorre (Planning and External Relations), Jacques Hodoul (Tourism and Transport)
Cabinet changes in 1990
None.
Ruling party
Seychelles People's Progressive Front (SPPF), sole legal party since 1978.
France-Albert René (s. -g.)
(James Michel (dep. s. -g.).
Other parties
Two opposition movements operate in exile: the Crusade for Democracy in Seychelles (led by James Mancham, the former President overthrown by René in 1977); and the Seychellois National Movement (SNM).
Elections
Last general election: December 1987 [see p. 36530]; last presidential elections: June 1989 [see p. 36729].
1990 OVERVIEW
René was at pains during 1990 to deny any plans to change the one-party system, stating in February that events in eastern Europe had no relevance to seychelles.
However, government leaders showed more willingness to encourage debate and more open government and took a more pragmatic approach to economic matters, including the preparation of regulations to encourage foreign private investment.
1990 BUDGET
In the 1990 budget presented on Dec. 30, 1989, expenditure was to increase by 38 per cent compared with 1988, to SR1,282 million, with debt servicing taking almost one-quarter of recurrent expenditure of SR844,8000,000.
Total revenue was estimated at SR972,200,000 including SR87,000,000 in grants and SR520,000,000 from tourism.
The overall budget deficit was expected to represent 5.1 per cent of GDP, to be financed from domestic borrowings.
There were to be increases in civil service wages and in minimum salary levels.
AFRICA
SOMALIA
Area: 637,657 sq km.
Population: 6,089,000 (1989 World Bank estimate).
Capital: Mogadishu.
Languages: Somali and Arabic; English and Italian widely spoken.
Religion: Islam (majority Sunni Moslems); small Christian minority.
Armed forces: 65,000 (1989).
Currency: Somali shilling (US$1.00=SS2,629.27 as at Jan. 28, 1991).
Major international affiliations: NAM; OAU; Arab League; ICO; IGADD.
POLITICAL SYSTEM
Somalia, independent since 1960, was formed by bringing together the former British Somaliland Protectorate and the UN Trust Territory of Somalia (once an Italian colony).
Maj.-Gen.
Mohammed Siyad Barre seized power in a bloodless coup in October 1969, abolishing the multiparty system.
A socialist state was proclaimed one year later.
A new Constitution was approved by referendum in August 1979; under this, the sole legal party, the Somali Revolutionary Socialist Party (SRSP), proposed a presidential candidate for election by direct universal suffrage for a seven-year term.
The People's Assembly, the unicameral legislative body, was elected for a five-year term by direct popular vote.
In October 1990 a new constitution, which would permit the formation of other political parties, was approved by the People's Assembly, subject to confirmation by a national referendum "within 12 months" .
The propagation of any religion other than Islam would not be permitted.
The Siyad Barre government was overthrown on Jan. 28, 1991, following its defeat in a protracted civil war [see p. 37946].
Main government leaders
President: Mohammad Siyad Barre was replaced as President in January 1991 by the rebel United Somali Congress leader Ali Mahdi Mohammed.
Cabinet changes in 1990
New governments were appointed in February and September [see pp. 37240; 37702-03]; further Cabinet changes took place in November [see p. 37844].
Political parties
Somali Socialist Revolutionary Party, the sole legal party under the regime of Siyad Barre, who was party chairman until the October 1990 constitutional changes obliged him to stand down, when he was replaced by his brother-in-law, Ahmad Sulayman Abdullah.
The rebel Somali National Movement (SNM) by 1990 controlled most of northern Somalia.
At its sixth congress in April 1990, the SNM elected a new leadership: Abdel-Rahman Ahmed Ali "Taur" as chairman and Hassan Issa Jama as vice-chairman.
The Somali Patriotic Movement, which operated in the southern Ogaden, in November 1989 agreed to co-operate with the SNM.
The United Somali Congress (USC) was active in central Somalia.
The SNM, SPM and USC agreed in August 1990 to co-ordinate their offensive against the government.
Elections
Elections to the People's Assembly were last held in December 1984 on a single-party basis under the Siyad Barre regime [see p. 34407].
1990 OVERVIEW
The final year of Siyad Barre's 21-year rule was marked by a rapid deterioration of the security situation throughout the country, with the government's authority increasingly confined to a small area around the capital.
The government responded with a mixture of repression and concessions.
A number of the 115 prominent Somalis who signed a manifesto calling for the appointment of a caretaker government to restore human rights and law and order in June were detained and put on trial.
The following month, however, the President announced that plans for a multiparty system were to be implemented and that elections would be held in February 1991.
He also announced the formation of a committee to hold talks with the opposition [see pp. 37767-68].
A new constitution, permitting the formation of political parties and guaranteeing freedom of speech, was approved in October.
The response of the rebel movements to these concessions was, however, to intensify their offensives and by December fighting had reached the streets of the capital.
Somalia's principal trading partners in 1989 were: exports to Saudi Arabia, other Arab states and Italy; imports from Italy, France and Saudi Arabia.
The trade balance in 1989 showed a deficit of US$271,000,000.
AFRICA
SUDAN
Area: 2,506,000 sq km.
Population: 24,423,000 (1989 World Bank estimate).
Capital: Khartoum.
Religion: Islam (state religion, followed by most in the north); Christianity and Animism (majority in the south).
Armed forces: 75,700 (1990).
Currency: Sudanese pound (US$1.00=£S4.4958, official rate as at Jan. 28, 1991).
POLITICAL SYSTEM
The Republic of the Sudan, from 1899 an Anglo-Egyptian condominium, achieved independence in 1956.
A 15-member Revolutionary Command Council for National Salvation (RCC), whose chairman was both head of state and Prime Minister, held power after a June 1989 military coup [see p. 36728; 36805-06], after which the Constitution was suspended and the National Assembly and all political institutions were dissolved.
Major international affiliations: NAM; OAU; ICO; ACP; Arab League.
Main government leaders
Chairman of RCC, Prime Minister, Minister of Defence: Lt.-Gen.
Omar Hassan Ahmad al-Bashir.
Deputy Prime Minister: Brig. -Gen.
Zubir Mohammed Saleh.
Other principal ministers: Ali Sahlul (Foreign Affairs); Brig. -Gen.
Ahmad Mahmud Hasan (Justice, Attorney-General); Lt.-Col. Tayib Ibrahim Mohammed Khayr (Presidential Affairs); Brig. -Gen.
Faisal Ali Abu Salih (Interior); Abdul Rahman Mahmoud Hamdi (Finance and National Economic Planning).
Cabinet changes in 1990
Cabinet reshuffles took place in April 1990 and Jan. 1991 [see pp. 37368; 37947].
Ruling party
Although all political parties were officially banned the ruling RCC was generally judged to be strongly influenced by the fundamentalist National Islamic Front, led by Hassan Abdullah al-Turabi.
Opposition groups
Sudanese People's Liberation Army (SPLA — a southern guerrilla movement, led by Col. John Garang de Mabior, estimated strength 20,000, committed to overthrowing Bashir, but not advocating a secessionist solution to the country's north-south division — see pp. 37114; 37174).
1990 OVERVIEW
Renewed famine, more devastating even than that of 1984-85, threatened an estimated 8,000,000 of the population, who faced starvation in 1991 unless they received 1,500,000 tonnes of food, according to relief agency estimates [see p. 37945].
International relief efforts were hindered by the regime's pro-Iraqi stand on the Gulf crisis, its initial refusal to recognise the gravity of the famine, and fears that it would obstruct the distribution of food, especially to non-Moslem regions in the south where the war with the SPLA was at its height.
Reports indicated that further relief from the United States, the European Communities (EC) and other donors would depend on discernable improvements in human rights; reports in April and November from the international human rights organizations Amnesty International and Africa Watch stated that the RCC had detained hundreds of political opponents, many of whom had been tortured and executed [see also pp. 37114; 37367-68; 37845].
The role of "parallel" NIF-dominated systems of security and control was of particular concern to human rights organizations.
As the regime's dependence on the Islamic fundamentalists became more and more pronounced, it cracked down hard against the threat of opposition, whether from the left and the unions or from within the military; following alleged coup attempts in April and September 43 officers accused of involvement were summarily executed [see pp. 37367; 37703].
Efforts to merge the country with Libya [see pp. 37367; 37703]were treated with great scepticism by analysts of the region, who interpreted it as an attempt by the regime to end its isolation from the mainstream of the Arab world.
ECONOMY
With Sudan already declared a "defaulter nation" with outstanding debts of US$1,200 million to the IMF, the government's demands for fresh credits of $1,500 million were made dependent on an IMF-approved austerity programme which included currency devaluation, price liberalization and an increase in tariff and interest rates.
The 1990/91 budget, for the financial year starting July 1, 1990, was announced on June 25, 1990.
Expenditure was set at £S16,100 million (US$1,320 million) with a revenue target of £S15,400 million ($1,260 million).
A supplementary budget was announced in February 1991 in the light of the negative effects of the Gulf crisis on the economy.
This planned to reduce expenditure by $S2,200 million (US$180 million — US dollar conversions are made here at the unofficial rate US$1.00=£S11.4).
AFRICA
TANZANIA
Area: 945,087 sq km.
Population: 25,627,000 (1989 World Bank estimate).
Capital: Dar es Salaam.
Language: Swahili and English (official); tribal languages.
Religion: Christianity, Hinduism, Islam and traditional beliefs.
Armed forces: 46,800 (1990).
Currency: Tanzanian shilling (US$1.00=TSh195.321 as at Jan. 28, 1991)
Major international affiliations: NAM; OAU; ACP; PTA; SADCC.
POLITICAL SYSTEM
Tanzania was formed in 1964 by the union of Zanzibar (a former British protectorate, briefly independent in 1963-64) with Tanganyika, itself independent since 1961 (having been a German colony, then a British administered mandated territory and then UN Trust Territory).
Julius Nyerere, its Prime Minister at independence, was President of Tanganyika and subsequently of Tanzania from 1962 to 1985, when, on his resignation, Ali Hassan Mwinyi was elected in his place.
Executive power is vested in the President, who is nominated by the sole legal party, the Revolutionary Party of Tanzania (CCM), and is elected by direct popular vote for a five-year term, renewable once only.
The two Vice-Presidents, one of whom is the President of Zanzibar and the other the Prime Minister of the Union government, are appointed by the President, as is the Cabinet (in consultation with the Prime Minister).
Legislative power is vested in the National Assembly, which has both elected and nominated members and whose term is five years.
Internal matters in Zanzibar are in the exclusive jurisdiction of the Zanzibar executive, the Revolutionary Council of Zanzibar.
Main government leaders
President: Ali Hassan Mwinyi.
Vice-Presidents: John Malecela (First Vice-President; Prime Minister); Salmin Amour (Second Vice-President; President of Zanzibar).
Other principal ministers: Rashidi Mfaume Kawawa, Horace Kolimba (Ministers Without Portfolio); Stephen Kibona (Finance); Ahmed Hassan Diria (Foreign Affairs and International Relations); Cleopa Msuya (Industries and Trade); Augustine Lyatonga Mrema (Interior).
Government of Zanzibar: Omar Ali Jumma (Chief Minister).
Cabinet changes in 1990
A Cabinet reshuffle in March 1990 included the appointment of Stephen Kibona as Finance Minister [see p. 37395].
A further reshuffle on Nov. 8-10, following the general election in October, included the appointment as Prime Minister of John Malecela, a former high commissioner to the UK, and of a second Minister without Portfolio, CCM secretary-general Horace Kolimba.
Ahmed Hassan Diria, hitherto Information and Broadcasting Minister, exchanged portfolios with Benjamin Mkapa, hitherto Foreign Minister.
A total of six new ministers joined the Cabinet and a number of ministerial responsibilities were re-allocated [see p. 37844].
Ruling party
Chama Cha Mapinduzi (CCM — the Revolutionary Party of Tanzania) is the sole legal party, and must approve all National Assembly candidates.
The party congress in August 1990 amended the party constitution to enable the same person to hold both the post of party chairman and that of President of the Republic, reversing an amendment made in 1985 when Julius Nyerere stepped down as President.
Nyerere stood down as CCM chairman on Aug. 17, 1990, and Mwinyi was elected to the post in his place.
Veteran politician and former Prime Minister Rashidi Mfaume Kawawa, hitherto CCM secretary-general, was elected vice-chairman in Mwinyi's stead.
The party constitution was also amended to allow for two deputy secretaries-general (one with responsibility for Zanzibar, the other for the mainland).
Horace Kolimba was elected secretary-general.
Elections
Presidential elections were held in October 1990, when Mwinyi was re-elected.
Legislative elections were held on the same day [see p. 37766].
1990 OVERVIEW
Mwinyi's position was consolidated with his election as CCM chairman on the retirement at the August party congress of his predecessor, Julius Nyerere, and with his re-election as President in October [see p. 37766].
He followed his re-election with a Cabinet reshuffle designed to strengthen support within the government for his market-oriented economic reforms.
At the opening of the National Assembly in November, Mwinyi responded to growing demands for a return to multiparty democracy by announcing the appointment of a commission to investigate possible changes to the political system.
Salmin Amour was elected President of Zanzibar as the sole candidate following the decision in August of Idris Abdul Wakil (President since 1985 — see pp. 34149-50) not to stand again.
Zanzibari opposition to the union with the mainland had been the cause of sporadic unrest on the islands, and the detention of several hundred dissidents on the islands was reported during the run-up to the elections.
1990/91 BUDGET AND ECONOMY
Finance Minister Stephen Kibona presented the 1990/91 budget to the National Assembly on June 7.
Total spending was put at TSh206,000 million, a rise of 45 per cent in local currency terms from the 1989/90 budget estimate of TSh142,000 million (because of the devaluation of the shilling, the rise was equivalent to only 9 per cent in dollar terms).
Kibona said that 42 per cent of government spending would be devoted to tackling transport and communications problems, which were hindering economic recovery.
Recurrent spending for 1990/91 was targeted at TSh160,000 million, a 35 per cent rise (although inflation stood at 30 per cent for 1989); development spending, at TSh46,000 million was more than double the previous year's level of TSh22,000 million.
Revenue from tax and non-tax sources was estimated at TSh118,547 million, while some TSh85,653 million — about 42 per cent of the total budget — was expected to come from overseas donors.
The IMF was expected to signal its support for Tanzania's economic reforms by approving an enhanced structural adjustment facility early in 1991.
Reforms expected to be linked to the IMF credit included reconstruction and possible privatization of parastatal companies and liberalization of the state-owned banking system.
Tanzania's principal trading partners in 1989 were:(exports) West Germany, USA, UK;(imports) UK, Japan, Italy.
The trade balance in that year showed a deficit of US$805,000,000.
AFRICA
UGANDA
Area: 241,139 sq km(incl. inland water).
Population: 16,195,000 (1989 World Bank estimate).
Capital: Kampala.
Languages: English (official); many local languages including Luganda.
Religion: Christianity (60%), Islam.
Armed forces: 70,000 (1990).
Currency:New Uganda shilling (US$1.00=Sh564.819 as at Jan. 28, 1991).
Major international affiliations: NAM; OAU; PTA; ACP; IGADD.
POLITICAL SYSTEM
Since gaining independence within the Commonwealth (as an "independent sovereign state" from 1963 and as a republic from 1967), Uganda has been ruled by regimes dominated first by Milton Obote (1962-71) and then by Idi Amin (1971-79); Obote was re-elected as President in 1980 in the aftermath of the Tanzanian backed overthrow of Amin the previous year, but was himself overthrown in 1985.
President Yoweri Museveni came to power in January 1986 [see pp. 34536-38]at the head of the National Resistance Movement which had waged a guerrilla war since 1981, first against the Obote regime and subsequently against the military government which deposed Obote in July 1985.
The President is assisted by a Prime Minister and a Cabinet composed of representatives of a number of political parties; although the parties continue to exist, political activity is banned, and elections to the National Resistance Council (NRC — hitherto comprising 98 appointed members) were conducted on a non-party basis in February 1989 [see p. 36455], since when the NRC, now consisting of 210 elected and 68 presidentially appointed members, has acted as a legislative body for the interim period until a new constitution is framed.
In October 1990, Constitutional Affairs Minister Sam Njuba announced that the draft constitution would be ready by March 1992.
Main government leaders as of December 1990
President: Yoweri Museveni, who is also Defence Minister.
Prime Minister: Samson Kisekka.
Other principal ministers: Eriya Kategaya (First Deputy Prime Minister); Paul Ssemegorere (Second Deputy Prime Minister, Foreign Affairs and Regional Co-operation Minister); Abubakar Mayanja (Third Deputy Prime Minister); Crispus Kiyonga (Finance); Ibrahim Mukiibi (Internal Affairs); Victoria Ssekitoleko (Agriculture and Forestry).
Cabinet changes in 1990
No changes.
Ruling party
National Resistance Movement (NRM, Yoweri Museveni l., the political wing of the National Resistance Army which took power in January 1986; regarded by the government as a national movement rather than a political party).
The ban on political activity imposed when the NRM came to power was extended for a further five years in March 1990.
However, the main traditional parties, the Democratic Party, led by Paul Ssemegorere, and the Uganda People's Congress (UPC) are both represented in the Cabinet.
Opposition parties operating from exile include the Ugandan People's Democratic Movement (UPDM, led by Otema Alimadi, Prime Minister under Obote from 1980-85), with which the government signed a peace agreement in July 1990 [see p. 37602].
Elections
The new constitution is expected to provide for elections to replace the non-party NRC elected in February 1989.
1990 OVERVIEW
The position of the NRM government appeared secure, although rebel activity continued in several parts of the country [see below].
Although not representing any direct threat to the government these rebellions did hinder the country's economic recovery.
The invasion in early October of Rwanda from Ugandan territory by Rwandan exiles from the Tutsi tribe [see pp. 37765-66]proved embarrassing for the government, particularly as the rebels were led (until he was killed soon after the invasion began) by Maj.-Gen.
Fred Rwigyema, a Rwandan exile, former Chief of Staff in Uganda's National Resistance Army (NRA) and close associate of President Museveni.
The government was quick to deny involvement in the invasion and to reaffirm its non-aggression pact with Rwanda.
In November it was announced that the government had "retired" all non-Ugandan members of the NRA.
Uganda and Kenya agreed to restore full diplomatic relations after a meeting between Museveni and Kenya's President Moi at the border town of Malaba (Kenya) in August 1990.
Relations had deteriorated in 1989 following accusations that Uganda was supporting Kenyan dissidents [see p. 36918].
Security
The government continued to be plagued by the activities of armed rebel groups in the north and east of the country.
NRA forces were reported to have committed atrocities against the civilian population in Soroti district in the east, where the government had been fighting the Uganda People's Army (UPA), led by Peter Otai; in September it was reported that 30 NRA personnel had been arrested for the killing of 60 civilians in the area.
In October Museveni announced the appointment of a commission to investigate ways of ending the rebellion in the east.
There were signs of an improvement in the situation in northern Uganda during the year, after a series of successful government offensives.
Rail links from Gulu (in the north-west) to Tororo (in the east) were restored in April after a three-year break, although a train on the line was ambushed in August.
The signing in July of a peace agreement with the UPDM [see p. 37602], whose guerrillas had been active in Gulu district, was followed by the return of UPDM leader Alimadi from exile, but the response to his call for UPDM rebels to lay down their arms was limited.
Youth and Sport Minister Moses Ali was arrested in April, accused of plotting a coup against the government.
A Moslem from West Nile province, Ali had been Finance Minister in the Idi Amin regime but went into exile before Amin's overthrow, joining the Museveni government as Tourism and Wildlife Minister in 1986.
Ali's trial, on charges of treason and terrorism, opened on Oct. 24.
The prosecution alleged that he had been found in possession of military equipment used to supply rebels based in Zaïre.
1990/91 BUDGET
Finance Minister Crispus Kiyonga presented the 1990/91 budget for the year beginning July 1, 1990, to the NRC on June 28, 1990.
Spending for the fiscal year was put at Sh320,800 million, with revenues expected to be Sh206,960 million, leaving a deficit of Sh113,840 million.
Of total spending, Sh209,200 would be devoted to the recurrent budget.
External debt servicing would cost Sh73,600 million during the year.
Kiyonga also announced that a black market for foreign exchange was in effect to be legalised, in a measure designed to increase availability of foreign currency and stimulate foreign investment and non-traditional exports.
Licences would be issued to those wishing to trade in foreign exchange.
Kiyonga said that gross domestic product (GDP) had grown by 6.8 per cent in 1989/90, slightly down on the 1988/89 growth rate of 7.2 per cent.
Inflation had slowed to an annual rate of 30 per cent by the end of the financial year, compared with 89 per cent the previous year.
In September the IMF approved a loan totalling 54,780,000 special drawing rights (SDRs — equivalent to US$76,000,000) as the second annual arrangement under Uganda's three-year enhanced structural adjustment facility, agreed in April 1989 [see p. 37398].
The IMF said that the credit was designed to support continuing economic reforms with the aim of achieving 5 per cent growth in 1990/91, reducing inflation to 15 per cent and strengthening the balance-of-payments position.
AFRICA
AFRICAN REGIONAL ORGANIZATIONS
Continental groupings
Organization of African Unity (OAU).
Secretary-general: Salim Ahmed Salim.
Founded:1963.
Membership:51 countries, including Namibia from independence in March 1990.
Main 1990 meetings: 26th Assembly of heads of state and government, Addis Ababa, Ethiopia, July 9-11 [see p. 37604]; ad hoc committee of heads of state and government on southern Africa, one-day meeting, Lusaka, Zambia, March 19, and fifth ordinary session, Kampala, Uganda, Sept. 8; permanent steering committee, ministerial meeting, Addis Ababa, Dec. 1, when a draft treaty on establishing an African Economic Community was approved for submission to the Council of Ministers and the Assembly in 1991.
Other organizations: UN Economic Commission for Africa (ECA), executive secretary Adebayo Adedeji; African Development Bank, president Babacar N'Diaye; Francophone states including France [for June 1990 summit in La Baule see p. 37524]; Franc zone — members of the Union monétaire ouest-africaine use the franc of the Communauté financière africaine (CFA franc) whose central issuing bank is the Banque centrale des états de l'Afrique de l'ouest (in Dakar, Senegal), while central African countries in the franc zone use the franc of the Co-opération financière en Afrique centrale,(also known as the CFA franc) with the same parity of 50 to the French franc, but whose central issuing bank is the Banque des états de l'Afrique central (in Yaoundé, Cameroon); Lusophone states — Portugal, Angola, Cape Verde, Guinea-Bissau, Mozambique, Sao Tomé and Príncipe — whose Foreign Ministers met on Nov. 24, agreeing to hold a first summit in 1991.
Sahelian countries
Permanent Inter-State Committee on Drought Control in the Sahel (CILSS).
Executive secretary: Aly Djabord Diar of Chad, appointed in February 1990 to succeed Brah Mahamane of Niger.
Founded:1974.
Membership:Burkina, Cape Verde, Chad, The Gambia, Guinea, Guinea-Bissau, Mali, Mauritania, Niger, Nigeria, Senegal.
Main 1990 meetings: 9th (biennial) conference of heads of state and government, Bissau, Guinea-Bissau, February.
West Africa
Economic Community of West African States (ECOWAS).
Executive secretary: Abbas Bundu.
Founded:1975.
Membership: 16 countries — Benin, Burkina, Cape Verde, Côte d'Ivoire, The Gambia, Ghana, Guinea, Guinea-Bissau, Liberia, Mali, Mauritania, Niger, Nigeria, Senegal, Sierra Leone, Togo.
Main 1990 meetings: May summit in Banjul, The Gambia,[see pp. 37446-47]; emergency involvement in Liberian civil war; preparation and planning relating to goal of removal of all internal tariff barriers by 1994.
West African Economic Community (CEAO — Communauté économique de l'afrique de l'ouest).
Secretary-general: Mamdou Haidara.
Founded: 1974.
Membership: 7 countries — Benin, Burkina, Côte d'Ivoire, Mali, Mauritania, Niger, Senegal — all of whom also belong to the wider ECOWAS.
Main 1990 meetings: no summit meetings; these are normally biennial, the last was held in Cotonou, Benin, in October 1989, and the next was due in Niger in 1991.
Other organizations: Gambia River Development Organization (OMVG), grouping The Gambia, Guinea, Guinea-Bissau and Senegal, held 18th ministerial meeting, Dakar, Senegal, October; Senegal River Development Organization (OMVS), headquartered in Dakar and grouping Mali, Mauritania and Senegal, held 30th ministerial session, Bamako, Mali, July; Mano River Union, grouping Guinea, Liberia and Sierra Leone, held 14th ministerial meeting, Conakry, Guinea, January; Lake Chad Basin Commission (LCBC), grouping Cameroon, Chad, Niger and Nigeria, held 7th summit, Yaoundé, Cameroon, February; prospective Gulf of Guinea Commission, a Nigerian initiative for a five-member institution for joint offshore resource management with Cameroon, Gabon, Equatorial Guinea and Sao Tomé and Príncipe.
Central Africa
Economic Community of Central African States (CEEAC — Communauté économique des états de l'afrique centrale).
Executive secretary: Lunda Bululu.
Founded: 1983.
Membership: 10 countries [see p. 37569].
Main 1990 meetings: Annual summit, Kigali, Rwanda, in January [ibid.].
Other organizations: Economic Community of the Great Lakes Countries (CEPGL)[see p. 37569 for recent summits]; Customs and Economic Union of Central Africa (UDEAC), held 26th summit, Congo, December, and called an extraordinary summit meeting for April 1991 in Gabon to tackle its economic crisis.
East Africa
Inter-Governmental Authority on Drought and Development (IGADD).
Executive secretary: David Stephen Muduuli was appointed in October 1990 to work alongside Makonnen Kebret and to succeed him from Jan. 22, 1991.
Founded: 1986.
Membership: Djibouti, Ethiopia, Kenya, Somalia, Sudan, Uganda.
Main 1990 meetings: biennial summit in January [see p. 37399], July meeting, Addis Ababa, Ethiopia, on security issues [see p. 37604], follow-up ministerial meeting in Nairobi, Kenya, on Aug. 27-28 discussing implementation of the July Addis Ababa declaration; extraordinary ministerial session in October to appoint new executive secretary.
Other organizations: Kagera Basin Organization grouping Burundi, Rwanda, Tanzania and Uganda, held fifth biennial summit, Bujumbura, Burundi, April, nominated Jean Bosco Balinda as its director, and fixed sixth summit for April 1992 in Rwanda; Indian Ocean Commission, grouping Comoros, Madagascar, Mauritius, the Seychelles and France (representing Réunion's interests), held eighth annual ministerial meeting, Madagascar, April 10-11.
East and Southern Africa
Preferential Trade Area for Eastern and Southern African States (PTA).
Secretary-general: Bingu Wa Mutharika took over in November from Bax Nomvete.
Founded: 1981.
Membership: 19 countries with the addition of Angola on Aug. 14, 1990 [see p. 37569 for other 18].
Main 1990 meetings: 9th annual summit on Nov. 23-24 in Mbabane, Swaziland, endorsing targets of a regional bank by 1992, a common currency by 1995, and complete currency union within a free trade area by 2000.
Southern Africa
Southern African Development Co-ordination Conference (SADCC).
Executive secretary: Simbarashe Makoni.
Founded: 1980.
Membership: 10 countries with admission of Namibia in March [see p. 37569 where list is given].
Main 1990 meetings: 10th annual conference Feb. 1-2 [ibid.],
March 31 anniversary summit [ibid.], further anniversary summit in August [see p. 37644].
Front-line states.
Namibia in 1990 joined the informal grouping of six existing front-line states, i.e. Angola, Botswana, Mozambique, Tanzania, Zambia and Zimbabwe, defined by their position vis-à-vis South Africa's apartheid regime.
These countries were involved in effectively continuous diplomatic activity in 1990 in the context of the rapidly changing situation in South Africa.
MIDDLE EAST — ARAB WORLD
ALGERIA
Area:2,381,741 sq km.
Population: 24,700,000 (1990 — estimate of National Office of Statistics).
Capital: Algiers.
Languages: Arabic (official); French and Berber (now forbidden — see below).
Religion: Islam (state religion).
Armed forces: 125,500 (1990).
Currency: Algerian dinar (US$1.00=AD11.989 as at Jan. 28, 1991).
Major international affiliations: NAM; Arab League; AMU; ICO; OPEC; OAPEC; OAU.
POLITICAL SYSTEM
The Democratic and Popular Republic of Algeria became independent from France in 1962.
The head of state is the President, who since 1976 has been nominated by the congress of the ruling National Liberation Party (FLN) and formally elected by universal adult suffrage for a five-year term.
The President appoints and presides over the Council of Ministers.
Legislative power is shared by the President and a 281-member National Assembly which is also elected every five years.
National referendums held in November 1988 [see pp. 36320; 36505-06]and February 1989 [see p. 36475]overwhelmingly approved amendments to the Constitution transferring power away from the presidency and marking the end of what had been in effect a one-party state.
The referendums had been called by the government following riots in early October 1988 [see p. 36257].
Laws approving the formation of new parties and outlining new electoral regulations were passed by the National Assembly in July 1989 [see p. 36834].
Main government leaders
President: Col. Chadli Bendjedid, first elected in 1979 (following the death in office of Houari Boumedienne).
Prime Minister: Mouloud Hamrouche
Other principal ministers: Sid-Ahmed Ghozali (Foreign Affairs); Mohammed Saleh Mohammedi (Interior); Ghazi Hidouci (Economy); Ali Benflis (Justice); Said Chibane (Religious Affairs); Benali Henni (Minister-Delegate for Local Authorities); Maj.-Gen.
Khaled Nezzar (Defence).
Cabinet changes
A Cabinet reshuffle took place on July 25 [see p. 37628].
Ruling Party
The Front de libération nationale (FLN — National Liberation Party, formed in 1954, Chadli Bendjedid s. -g.) had enjoyed virtual monopoly of political life under the legal framework effectively dismantled by legislation approved in July 1989 [see p. 36834].
Other main parties
Front islamique du salut (FIS — Islamic Salvation Front, Abbasi Madani l.);
Parti d'Avant-Garde Socialiste (PAGS, communist); Parti Nationale pour la Solidarité et le Développement (PNSD); Parti Social-Democrate (PSD, centre party advocating economic liberalization); Rassemblement pour la Culture et la Démocratie (RCD, secular party advocating recognition of Berber as national language, Saïd Saadi s. -g.);
Front des Forces Socialistes (FFS, Hocine Aït Ahmed l.);
Mouvement pour la Démocratie en Algérie (MDA, Ahmed ben Bella l.);
Parti pour le Renouveau de l'Algérie (PRA).
[For other parties registered before June 1990 local elections see pp. 37549-50.]
The Algerian Movement for Justice and Development was formed in November 1990 by a former Prime Minister, Col. Kasdi Merbah, who had resigned in October from the central committee of the FLN.
By Dec. 13, the Interior Ministry had granted licences to 34 political parties.
Elections
The last presidential elections were held in Dec. 1988 [see p. 36506].
Multiparty local elections were held June 1990 [see pp. 37549-50].
1990 OVERVIEW
The victory of the FIS in the June local elections [see p. 37549-50]and the return from exile of leading dissidents such as Ahmed Ben Bella [see p. 37729]provided evidence of the emergence of a strong political opposition.
In response the government, eager to distance itself from the ruling FLN, which was itself in disarray [see pp. 37628; 37795-96], and secure its own survival, promised that free and open parliamentary elections would be held in the first half of 1991.
However, government austerity policies and plans to reform the previously restricted economy by privatizing state monopolies and encouraging the private sector and international investment were bitterly criticized by organized labour, disaffected FLN traditionalists and opposition parties [ibid.].
More than 100,000 people demonstrated on Dec. 27 in Algiers, protesting at political and religious intolerance and over rapid Arabization symbolized by a new law forbidding the use of French and Berber.
The new law, passed by the National Assembly on Dec. 26, made Arabic the national language and exacted stiff fines for using anything else in official transactions and in schools.
Aït Ahmed of the FSF accused the government of "complicity" with Islamic forces who, he claimed, were behind the new law.
1991 BUDGET — ECONOMY
The National Assembly adopted the budget for 1991 on Dec. 29, 1990.
Revenue was set at AD189,500 million, compared with AD144,400 million for 1991, and expenditure at AD176,000 million, as compared AD149,000 million the previous year.
The projected surplus of AD13,500 million was seen as evidence of an upturn in the economy.
The budget proposal, calculated on an annual average oil price of US$23 per barrel, also contained major changes in local taxation, including the introduction of value added tax (VAT).
Principal trading partners in 1989 were: exports to Netherlands, Czechoslovakia and Romania; imports from France, Italy and West Germany.
The Italian government agreed a US$7,000 million loan package for Algeria on Dec. 20.
A first tranche of $2,500 million was for the refinancing over the next seven years of Italian state guaranteed credits due between January 1990 and January 1991.
The remaining $4,500 million, to be raised through banks, was for the purchase of Italian goods and services.
MIDDLE EAST — ARAB WORLD
EGYPT
Area: 997,738 sq km.
Population: 51,390,000 (1989 World Bank estimate).
Capital: Cairo.
Languages: Arabic (official); some English and French.
Religion: Islam (more than 80% — mainly Sunni Moslems); Christianity (mainly Coptic).
Armed forces: 450,000.
Currency Egyptian pound (US$1.00=E£2.9228 as at Jan. 28, 1991).
Major international affiliations.
NAM; Arab League; OPEC; OAPEC; OAU; ICO; ACC.
POLITICAL SYSTEM
Formerly part of the Ottoman Empire, Egypt was a British protectorate from 1914 until it was granted nominal independence in 1922.
It achieved full independence in 1936 as the kingdom of Egypt.
The Arab Republic of Egypt was declared after a bloodless coup in 1953.
Under the 1971 Constitution, the unicameral 454-member People's Assembly has 10 of its number appointed directly by the President, the rest being elected by universal suffrage for a five-year term.
The Assembly nominates the President who is confirmed by popular referendum for a six-year term.
There is also a 210-member consultative council, the Majlis ash-Shura, which has advisory powers; 140 of its members are elected and 70 are appointed by the President, who also appoints the Council of Ministers.
Main government leaders
President: Hosni Mubarak succeeded both to the presidency and to the premiership in October 1981 following the assassination of President Anwar Sadat.
He was renominated and confirmed by referendum for a further six-year term in October 1987.
Assistant President: Field-Marshal Mohammed Abdel-Halim abu Ghazalah.
Prime Minister: Atef Sidki.
Other principal ministers: Youssef Sabry abu Taleb (Deputy Prime Minister, Defence and Military Production); Ahmed Esmat Abdel Meguid (Deputy Prime Minister, Foreign Affairs); Kamal Ahmed Ganzouri (Deputy Prime Minister, Financial and Economic Affairs, Planning); Mohammed Abdel-Halim Moussa (Interior), Mohammad Ahmed al-Razaz (Finance); Farouk Seif al Nasr (Justice).
Cabinet changes in 1990
No changes.
Ruling party
National Democratic Party (NDP, established 1978, Hosni Mubarak l.).
Other political parties
Eight other parties were legally recognised by April 1990 [see p. 37393], including the Socialist Labour Party (SLP, the main opposition centre right party, Ibrahim Mahmoud Shukri l.);
National Progressive Unionist Party (NPUP, small and left-wing, Khaled Mohieddin l.);
New Wafd Party (centre left, Fuad Serageddin l., Ibrahim Farrag s. -g.);
Liberal Socialist Party; Umma (National) Party (Islamic fundamentalist).
In addition Ikhwan ((Moslem) Brotherhood, mainstream Islamic) was officially illegal but tolerated.
Elections
In elections held in November and December 1990 the NDP won an overwhelming majority in the People's Assembly, capturing 384 seats [for May Supreme Constitutional Court invalidation of 1987 elections, October referendum on dissolution of Assembly, election results see pp. 37472; 37795; 37929].
1990 OVERVIEW
Following the Aug. 2 Iraqi invasion of Kuwait, Mubarak on Aug. 12 sent troops (estimated by Le Monde of Dec. 2 at nearly 20,000) to Saudi Arabia, after playing a key role in persuading delegates at the Aug. 10 Arab League summit in Cairo to denounce Iraqi aggression against Kuwait and to call for its immediate withdrawal and the deployment of "Arab forces" to help Saudi Arabia [see p. 37635].
Domestic opposition to this policy was limited, due largely to reports of the mistreatment of Egyptian workers in Iraq, 500,000 of whom returned home.
The Oct. 12 assassination of the Speaker of the National Assembly, Rifaat al-Mahgoub, was initially believed to have been the work of the Palestinian Abu Nidal group, sponsored by Iraq [see pp. 37794-95].
However, it was subsequently discovered that the real target had been the Interior Minister Moussa, the attack being carried out by the Islamic fundamentalist group Al Jihad, allegedly in retaliation for the killing of two Islamic leaders by the security forces in August and September.
The Gulf crisis caused revenues from tourism to fall by 65 per cent(official estimate) by December and dues from the Suez canal were down by 25 per cent compared with 1989.
In addition, the loss of remittance income from workers repatriated from Iraq and lost export markets in Iraq and Kuwait were officially projected to total as much as US$4,500 million.
These losses were expected to be offset by increases in the value of oil exports, which doubled to $210,000,000 a month in July-September.
The effects of the crisis were also expected to be eased by October debt write-offs by the Gulf Co-operation Council countries and the United States totalling $14,100 million [see p. 37795], and economic aid of $400,000,000 and $300,000,000 from Japan and Germany respectively [see p. 37695; 37795].
On Nov. 25 Canada cancelled a $11,000,000 debt and agreed $22,000,000 in further aid and on Dec. 4 Saudi Arabia pledged $1,500 million in aid.
New loan agreements were also expected to be signed when the already protracted talks with the IMF were completed [see also p. 37472], leaving the way open for negotiations with the "Paris Club" of creditor countries.
Mubarak's visits in May to Syria and to the Soviet Union marked the full normalization of relations with these two countries [see p. 37471-72].
1990/91 BUDGET
The 1990/91 budget, for the financial year starting on July 1, 1990, was approved by the People's Assembly on May 30, 1990.
A net deficit of E£3,775 million was expected, with expenditure set at E£41,248 million, a rise of 36 per cent over the previous year, and revenues and resources set at E£37,473 million.
The current-account deficit of the balance of payments had decreased, falling to $1,200 million in 1989/90 from $1,600 million in the previous year.
Principal trading partners in 1988 both for imports and exports were the USA, the European Communities and Japan.
MIDDLE EAST — ARAB WORLD
LIBYA
Area: 1,775,500 sq km.
Population: 4,395,000 (1989 World Bank estimate) Capital: Tripoli.
Languages: Arabic (official); English, Italian and Berber also spoken.
Religion: Islam (97% — Sunni Moslems), Christianity (2.5%).
Armed Forces: 85,000 (1990).
Currency Libyan dinar (US$1.00=LD0.2671 as at Jan. 28, 1991.
Major international affiliations: NAM; Arab League; OPEC; OAU; ICO; AMU.
POLITICAL SYSTEM
The Socialist People's Libyan Arab Jamahariyah became independent (as the United Kingdom of Libya) in 1951; it took its present name after a military coup in 1969.
Officially authority is vested in the Libyan people, with local "basic people's congresses" forming an electoral base for the General People's Congress (GPC — parliament) which is served by a Secretariat [for details of GPC 16th session see p. 37333].
The Congress exercises a degree of control over the General People's Committee, which is broadly equivalent to a Council of Ministers or Cabinet.
Main government leaders
Libyan politics has been dominated for over two decades by Col. Moamer al Kadhafi who came to power in the military coup of 1969 [see p. 23569].
He holds no official office but is referred to as "the leader of the revolution" .
Senior Adviser: Maj. Abdel Salem Jalloud, also commonly known as "Libyan number two" .
Secretariat of General People's Congress: Muftah al-Usta Umar (Secretary-General); Ibrahim Bukhizam (Assistant Secretary-General); Salmin Ali al-Uraybi (Assistant Secretary-General); Abu Zaid Omar Dourda (Secretary for People's Congress Affairs); Soleiman Sasi al-Shuhumi (Secretary for People's Committees Affairs); Bashir Huwayj Huwaydi (Secretary for the Affairs of Vocational Congresses).
Principal General People's Committee Members: Ibrahim Mohammad Bashari (Foreign Affairs); Umar Mustafa al-Muntasir (Planning and Economy); Abdullah Salem al-Badri (Petroleum); Farhat Sharnanah (Economy and Foreign Trade); Ibrahim Mohammad Bakkar (Justice).
Cabinet changes in 1990
A major reshuffle of the General People's Committee took place on Oct. 7 [see p. 37795].
Ruling party
No official party.
Under the 1977 constitution "people's power" is held by the Socialist People's Libyan Arab Jamahariyah ( "Society of the Masses" ).
Other parties
National Front for the Salvation of Libya:, an opposition party in exile.
1990 OVERVIEW
Relations with Egypt continued to improve during 1991.
Khadafi and Egyptian President Hosni Mubarak met for talks in February and June to discuss regional issues and ways of increasing co-operation in agriculture, industry, health and telecommunications.
In November, the two countries agreed on a plan to extend the Egyptian rail system westwards to Tobruk.
Some commentators suggested that the improved relations were at the root of Khadafi's adoption of an uncharacteristically low profile during the Gulf crisis.
The Libyan leader condemned equally Iraq's occupation of Kuwait and the United States presence in the region.
Khadafi's alleged production of chemical weapons and alleged support of international terrorist movements meant that diplomatic relations with the United States remained deadlocked.
However, the USA relaxed its sanctions against Libya in late March to allow US technicians to travel to Libya to combat rampant screwworm infestation which was threatening the region's cattle.
Relations with the USA deteriorated sharply in late 1990 over the issue of alleged Libyan involvement in the overthrow of President Hissène Habré of Chad.
The European Community (EC) sanctions (imposed in 1986), which included restrictions on the number of Libyan diplomats in EC countries [see p. 34459]and banned the sale of military and high-technology equipment were also thought unlikely to be relaxed, especially following reports that Libya had breached the UN trade embargo on Iraq.
Relations remained strained with Germany over the continuing repercussions of the Rabta chemical factory controversy, but improved with France after the return in March of three Libyan Mirage fighter planes, held in France since 1986, and the release of three French and Belgian hostages in Beirut by the Libyan-sponsored Fatah Revolutionary Council (RFC).
Despite this diplomatic isolation, an estimated 40 per cent rise in oil revenues due to the Gulf crisis (which prompted November forecasts of a current-account surplus of US$2,650 million instead of a feared deficit of $950 million) was expected to accelerate international investment and involvement in the development of the country's hydrocarbon sector.
It was expected that an economic upturn would lead to attempts to repay foreign debts and thus gain Libya access to fresh lines of international credit.
Internally, a policy to liberalize and slowly reform the domestic economy caused widespread fears that the government intended to reduce public sector employment and cut subsidies on basic goods and services.
In October sweeping changes were made to the secretariats and the General People's Congress, including the appointment of the former chair of the National Oil Corporation Abdullah al-Badri as head of the Petroleum Secretariat.
MIDDLE EAST — ARAB WORLD
MOROCCO
Area: 458,730 sq km(not including the disputed territory of Western Sahara).
Population: 24,567,000 (1989 World Bank estimate).
Capital: Rabat.
Languages: Arabic (official); Berber, Spanish and French also widely used.
Religion: Islam (90% Sunni Muslim), Christian (1%), Jewish (0.2%).
Armed forces: 192,500 (1990).
Currency: Moroccan dirham (US$1.00=MD7.8638 as at Jan. 28, 1991).
Major international affiliations: NAM; Arab league; ICO; AMU.
POLITICAL SYSTEM
Under its 1972 Constitution Morocco is a constitutional monarchy; the monarch appoints the Prime Minister and the Cabinet.
Legislative authority is vested in a Chamber of Representatives elected for a six-year term and comprising 306 members, of whom 206 are directly elected by universal adult suffrage and the remainder by an electoral college composed of local councillors and representatives of professional bodies.
Main government leaders
King Hassan II has ruled continuously since 1961.
Prime Minister: Azzedine Laraki.
Principal Ministers: Moulay Mustapha Ben Larbi Alaiou (Justice), Mohamed Berrada (Finance), Abdel Latif Filali (Foreign Affairs and Co-operation), Driss Basri (Interior and Information), Abdelkebir Alaoui M'Daghri (Religious Endowments and Islamic Affairs).
Cabinet changes in 1990
Hasan Abou Ayoub was appointed to the new post of Minister of Foreign Trade on Jan. 17, 1990; Moulay Driss Alaomi M'Daghri became Minister for Energy and Mines, Abdallah Kadiri Minister for Tourism and Abdeslam Baraka Minister for Arab Maghreb Affairs on July 31 [for Cabinet list as of early January 1990 see p. 37219].
Ruling party
The government is a coalition, dominated by the centre-right Union Constitutionelle (UD), of seven of the 10 political parties represented in the Chamber following legislative elections in September 1984.
The other main parties in the coalition are the Rassemblement National des Indépendants (RNI>, the Mouvement Populaire (MP) and the Parti national démocrate (PND).
Other parties
The main opposition parties, the nationalist Istiqlal (Independence Party; Mohamed Bucetta l.), the centre-left Union Socialiste des Forces Populaires (USFP; Abdirrahim Bouabid l.) and the more radical socialist Union National des Forces Populaires (UNFP; Abda Liah Ibrahim s. g.) met on Jan. 11, 1991, to discuss the formation of a united front to create a force for democracy in the country.
The communist Parti du progrès et du socialisme (PPS), although not present, reportedly supported the campaign.
The Islamic fundamentalist Adl wa Lihsane (Justice and Welfare Party) remained illegal [see p. 37472].
Elections
The legislative elections were in September 1984 [see p. 33247-48].
A referendum on Dec. 1, 1989, approved Hassan's decision to extend by two years the term of the current Chamber [see p. 37219].
1990 OVERVIEW
A poor economic performance, with trade and current-account deficits, coupled with the negative effects of higher oil prices, jeopardized government economic reforms supported by the International Monetary Fund (IMF), although a six-year privatization programme of state assets to the value of MD9,500 million was set to go ahead.
Austerity measures caused violent public demonstrations [see pp. 37472; 37929-30], during which more than 1,000 people were arrested.
Debt rescheduling agreements [see pp. 37393; 37729]had reduced some of the pressure on the government, which, although it had committed forces on the allied side in the current Gulf war, identified with popular support for Iraq [see p. 37940].
A UN mediation process to resolve the protracted dispute over control of Western Sahara began in June [see pp.37628-29]; the issue of control of the Spanish enclaves of Ceuta and Melillia also remained to be resolved [see p. 37222].
The 1991 budget was presented to the National Assembly on Nov. 22, 1990, but was subject to revision following a government decision on Jan. 2, 1991, to raise the minimum wage by 15 per cent to the equivalent of US$200 a month in an attempt to relieve internal political tension.
Expenditure 81,900.1 (79,557) of which: current 33,111.6 (30,347) investment 12,889.8 (15,168) debt payments 24,604.5 (22,433) Revenues 80,288.5 (81,900) Deficit 1,611.6 (2,343)(Exchange rate: US$1.00=MD8.1258 as at November 26, 1990).
Source: Middle East Economic Digest.
1991 Budget (MD millions — 1990 figures in parentheses)
Principal trading partners in 1988 were: exports to EC, India and Japan; imports from EC, USA and Canada.
MIDDLE EAST — ARAB WORLD
TUNISIA
Area: 164,150 sq km.
Population: 7,916,106 (1989).
Capital: Tunis.
Languages: Arabic (official); Berber and French are also widely spoken.
Religion: Islam (98%); Jewish and Christian minorities.
Armed forces: 38,000 (1990).
Currency: Tunisian dinar (US$1.00=D0.8297 as at Jan. 28, 1991).
Major international affiliations: NAM; OPEC; OAPEC; OAU; ICO: Arab League; AMU.
POLITICAL SYSTEM
The Republic of Tunisia achieved independence from French colonial rule in 1957.
Under the 1959 Constitution executive power is held by President, elected every five years, whose maximum period in office was limited in July 1988 to three five-year terms [see p. 36066].
The President appoints a Prime Minister and Council of Ministers.
A unicameral legislature, the National Assembly, is also elected every five years by universal suffrage.
Main government leaders
President: Gen. Zine el-Abidine Ben Ali, appointed in November 1987 after a bloodless coup to replace "President for Life" Habib Bourguiba, who had already been declared mentally and physically unfit for office.
Prime Minister: Hamed Karoui.
Other principal ministers: Habib Ammar (Special Adviser to the President), Abdelhamid Escheikh (Interior), Chedli Neffati (Justice), Habib Boulares (Foreign Affairs), Mohamed Ghanouchi (Economy and Finance).
1990 Cabinet changes
A Cabinet reshuffle took place in March 1990; on Aug. 28 Habib Boulares was appointed Foreign Minister [see pp. 37333; 37668].
Ruling party
Rassemblement constitutionel démocratique (RCD) is the new name (adopted February 1988) of the Destour Socialist Party (PSD), until 1981 the sole legal party.
Other parties
Nahdha (Renaissance) Movement (al-Nahdha — Islamic fundamentalists lacking official recognition led by self-exiled Rachid Ghannouchi); Mouvement des démocrates socialistes (MDS, Mohammed Moada s.g.);
Parti communiste tunisien (PCT, Mohamed Harmel s. -g.);
Mouvement d'unité populaire (MUP — illegal, Ahmed Ben Salah l.);
Parti d'unité populaire (PUP)(Mohamed Bel Hadj Amor l.).
The MDS, PCT and MUP began talks in May 1990 to form a joint committee to co-ordinate activities.
Elections
The President was last elected in April 1989 as the sole candidate with over 99 per cent of the vote [see p. 36603].
In simultaneous legislative elections the RCD was officially declared to have taken all 141 seats in the National Assembly.
In the June 1990 local elections, which were boycotted by opposition parties, the RCD was judged to have won control of all but one of 245 municipal councils [see p. 37550].
1990 OVERVIEW
Public opposition to economic liberalization and an austerity programme and continued criticism, especially from Islamic fundamentalists, of the RCD's continued domination of domestic affairs, was counterbalanced later in the year by the regime's identification with popular support for Iraq in the Gulf war (although the official stance was that an "Arab solution" was the only way out of the crisis).
This position was also felt to have been influenced by the controversial decision taken by the Arab League Council in September to speed up the transfer of the Arab League headquarters from Tunis to the Egyptian capital Cairo, a decision first taken in March [see pp. 37334; 37726], and by the lack of large-scale Western aid to support domestic economic reforms and to compensate for serious economic losses forecast as a result of the Gulf crisis.
By Feb. 1991 it was reported that export shortfalls had totalled D180,000,000 in 1990 and D300,000,000 in 1991.
European investment in major internal development projects, however, involving France, Italy and Germany, was set to continue.
Drought, which had seriously affected the country between 1987 and 1989 and had led to severe job losses, remained a problem, the resulting need to increase food imports contributing to a rising trade deficit (which for the period January to July 1990 totalled US$1,125 million, an increase of 35 per cent on the corresponding period in 1989) and expected to offset any gains from higher prices for oil exports.
However, by November it was expected that the 1990 cereal harvest, an important element in gross domestic product (GDP), would be the best since 1987.
1991 BUDGET
The National Assembly approved the 1991 budget on Dec. 11, 1990.
Total state expenditure was set to rise by 10 per cent to D4,080 million (US$4,970 million) of which D1,805 million (US$2,200 million) was for current spending (a 14.2 per cent rise on 1990).
Development spending was set to rise by 9.2 per cent to D1,477 million (US$1,800 million).
D929 million (US$1,136 million) was allocated to social services.
A deficit was projected of D410 million, equivalent to 3.4 per cent of GDP.
Principal trading partners in 1988 were: exports to EC, Middle East and USA; imports from EC, USA and Canada.
Diplomatic relations were restored with Iran on Sept. 24 [for details see p. 37729].
MIDDLE EAST — ARAB WORLD
WESTERN SAHARA
Area: 252,120 sq km(the area claimed by Morocco as the provinces of Boujdour, el-Aaiún, es-Smara and Oued ed-Dahab).
Population 186,488 (1989 est.).
Languages: Moroccan and Hassaniya Arabic.
Religion: Islam.
Currency: Moroccan dirham (US$1.00=MD7.8638 as at Jan. 28, 1991).
Major international affiliations: OAU.
RECENT HISTORY
Western Sahara was divided between Morocco and Mauritania under a 1975 treaty following Spain's decision to withdraw from a region which it had controlled since the 19th century [see pp. 27575-77].
This treaty was opposed by the Algerian backed Frente Popular para la Liberación de Saguia y Rio de Oro (Polisario Front) which in February 1976 proclaimed an independent Saharan Arab Democratic Republic (SADR), which by the time of its admission to the Organization of African Unity (OAU) in 1982 had been recognized by more than 70 countries.
Morocco refused to withdraw its claim to the region and continued to wage war on the Polisario guerrillas; Mauritania had declared its neutrality and withdrawn its troops after concluding a peace treaty with the Polisario Front in 1979 [see pp. 29565-67].
Main SADR government leaders
Prime Minister, Interior, Justice: Mahfoud Ali Beiba.
Principal Ministers:Mohammed Lamine (Defence), Mohammed Sidati (Foreign Affairs).
1990 OVERVIEW
It was expected that a UN-supervised referendum to resolve the conflict over the region [for details and background see pp. 37628-29]would be held in early 1991.
However, Brahim Ghali, a member of the Polisario Executive Committee, had stated in an interview given to the Madrid newspaper El País of Oct. 22, 1990, that if the Moroccan government decided not to agree to the holding of the referendum, or tried to interfere in the running of it, then the armed struggle would be renewed on all fronts.
Ghali described the unilateral Polisario ceasefire in January 1990 (a cessation of hostilities being achieved by April) as a gesture of good faith in the UN peace plan.
The Moroccan Interior and Information Minister Driss Basri was reported on Jan. 12, 1991, as saying that the Western Sahara question would be settled definitively with the organizing of a referendum which would confirm conclusively the Moroccan character of the recovered Saharan provinces.
MIDDLE EAST — ARAB WORLD
ARAB MAGHREB UNION
The Arab Maghreb Union (AMU), comprising Algeria, Libya, Mauritania, Morocco and Tunisia, was established in February 1989 [see p. 36474].
Its Consultative Council was enlarged in January 1990 from 50 to 100 members — 20 representatives from each of the five member countries.
The AMU Presidential Council, composed of the heads of the member states, was chaired in the first half of 1990 by President Ben Ali of Tunisia, who was succeeded at the end of June by Algerian President Chadli Bendjedid who in turn was succeeded on Dec. 31 by the Libyan leader, Col. Moamer al-Kadhafi.
The AMU in December 1990 and January 1991 issued peace proposals to end the Gulf war.
These were viewed by analysts as an expressions of the common concern of member states that growing pro-Iraqi sentiment across the region could foster anti-Western feeling and promote Islamic fundamentalism, which might threaten continued AMU integration and jeopardize future economic links with the West, especially with the European Communities (EC) which provided the market for two-thirds of the exports from AMU member countries (with the exception of Libya, with which the EC had suspended relations).
In efforts to reduce the region's dependency on Europe, AMU Foreign and Economic Ministers meeting in December examined draft proposals to establish, in three stages by the year 2000, a free trade zone, a customs union and finally a common market.
Agreements in March and June provided for the introduction of common identity cards; the relaxation of travel restrictions; the construction of a rail link joining Rabat, Algiers, Tunis and Tripoli, and a motorway linking Algiers to Casablanca; and the creation of a joint Maghreb airline company.
Plans to standardise exchange rates and to allow the free movement of capital and goods across borders remained at the planning stage.
MIDDLE EAST — ARAB WORLD
ISRAEL
Area: 20,770 sq km.(excluding occupied territories in the Gaza Strip, the West Bank and the Golan Heights).
Population: 4,822,000 (Israeli Central Bureau of Statistics, estimate end-1990).
Capital: Jerusalem (not recognized as such by the United Nations — most embassies are in Tel Aviv).
Languages: Hebrew (official); Arabic (about 15%), European languages.
Religion: Judaism (about 82%), Islam (about 14%).
Armed forces: 141,000 (1990).
Currency: shekel (US$1.00=IS2.0101 as at Jan. 28, 1991).
POLITICAL SYSTEM
The State of Israel declared its independence in 1948.
Legislative power is vested in a single-chamber 120-member Knesset, elected for a maximum of four years on the basis of proportional representation, with candidates chosen by party list.
The President is elected by the Knesset every five years, and appoints a Prime Minister on the basis of distribution of power between parties in the Knesset.
The Prime Minister is head of government and is responsible, as is the Cabinet, to the Knesset.
Main government leaders
President: Chaim Herzog was first elected by the Knesset to the largely ceremonial post of President in 1983; he was re-elected for a second term in 1988.
Prime Minister: Itzhak Shamir has served as Prime Minister since 1986.
Other principal ministers: David Levi (Likud — Vice Prime Minister; Foreign Affairs); Moshe Nissim (Likud — Vice Prime Minister; Trade and Industry); Moshe Arens (Likud — Defence); Itzhak Moda'i (Likud — Finance); Arie Der'i (Shas — Interior); Ariel Sharon (Likud — Housing and Construction); Itzhak Peretz (Independent — Immigration and Absorption).
Ruling coalition
Likud (Itzhak Shamir l.): the main component of the ruling coalition following the collapse in March 1990 of the "national unity" government [see below; pp. 37303-04].
Other members of the coalition: Shas (Rabbi Eliezer Shach spiritual l.);
Mafdal (Avner Shaki l.);
Degel Hatora (Haim Epstein s. -g.);
Moledet (Gen. Rechavam Ze'evi l.);
Tehiya (Yuval Ne'eman, Geula Cohen, Rabbi Eliezer Waldman, ls.).
Agudat Yisrael (Moshe Feldman, Menachem Porush ls.) joined the coalition in November 1990 [see p. 37872].
In addition, the coalition included three independents.
Main opposition party
Israel Labour Party:(Shimon Peres ch.; Micha Harish s. -g.).
[For retention of Peres as chair in face of mid-1990 challenge by Itzhak Rabin see p. 37626.]
Cabinet changes in 1990
January: resignation of Ezer Weizmann from Inner Cabinet [see pp. 37199-00].
February: resignation of Ariel Sharon from Cabinet and minor Cabinet reshuffle [see p. 37265].
March: dismissal of Peres, resignation of Labour ministers [see pp. 37303-04].
June: new Cabinet [see p. 37547].
Elections
Elections to the Knesset due by late 1992; presidential elections due by March 1993.
1990 OVERVIEW
Chief political events 1990
March: collapse of "national unity" government [see pp. 37303-04].
April: negotiations on formation of new government; continued controversy over Jerusalem [see pp. 37391-92].
June: formation of new Likud-led government [see pp. 37546-47].
September: Der'i affair [see p. 37728].
November: government defeat of no confidence motion [see p. 37872].
After less than 15 months in power Israel's "national unity" coalition government collapsed in March, reflecting fundamental differences between the two main coalition partners, Likud and Labour, over the Middle East peace process.
In June the Likud leader Itzhak Shamir managed to form a new right-wing coalition with a number of small religious and nationalist parties.
The formation of the new government brought to an end United States efforts to broker a peace plan involving Palestinian elections in the occupied territories.
The collapse of the plan only served to worsen the already poor state of relations between the USA and Israel.
The massive influx of Soviet Jews into Israel during 1990 increased tension further, with the USA opposing the settlement of Soviet Jews not only in the West Bank, but also in East Jerusalem [for May Arab League and August ICO consideration of Soviet Jewish immigration see pp. 37472; 37668].
However, as Israeli-US relations deteriorated, Israel's relations with the Soviet Union improved dramatically, culminating in the reopening of an Israeli consulate in Moscow in early 1991.
Iraq's invasion and annexation of Kuwait in August 1990 was a serious shock to the Israeli leadership; during the months prior to the invasion Iraq had adopted an extremely aggressive attitude towards Israel.
The USA moved swiftly to placate Israeli hardliners following the Iraqi invasion, advising the government to adopt a low profile.
It was eager to play down its close links with Israel in order not to alienate potential Arab supporters, and made it clear that any Israeli military involvement in the crisis would cause a radical shift in the already unstable Arab ranks, possibly leading a number of those currently allied to the USA to side with Iraq.
During the latter months of 1990 Israel appeared to become increasingly isolated, with the USA using every opportunity to gain support among its Arab partners in the anti-Iraqi coalition.
One effect of this was to fuel concern in Israel that a deal might be struck which would somehow link the Kuwait and Palestinian issues.
However, the restraint shown by Israel at the start of the crisis continued even after full hostilities broke out in mid-January 1991.
Iraqi attempts to draw Israel into the conflict through the launching of Scud missile attacks on Tel Aviv and Haifa failed.
A major effect of this show of restraint was swiftly to reverse the recent downward trend of US-Israeli relations.
SECURITY
January: incidents on Jordanian border [see p. 37747].
February: attack on Israeli tour bus in Egypt [see p. 37265-66].
May: unsuccessful Palestine Liberation Front assault on Israeli beaches [see pp. 37443-44].
August-December: Israeli response to Gulf crisis [see p. 37638; 37696; 37750-60; 37929].
September: publication of By Way of Deception [see p. 37728].
October: Temple Mount massacre [see pp. 37759-60; 37873].
November: assassination of Meir Kahane; border incidents with Jordan, Egypt and Lebanon [see p. 37872]; December: border incident with Lebanon [see p. 37928].
BUDGET AND ECONOMY
In economic terms, Israel suffered badly from the Gulf crisis.
Some estimates put the cost to Israel at nearly US$4,000 million up to mid-February 1991.
However, the indications were that the USA and Europe would provide substantial aid to cover the costs.
Response to massive Soviet immigration
During 1990 the government attempted to deal with the economic consequences of massive Soviet immigration, which presented a more serious threat to the Israeli economy than the Gulf crisis.
Some 200,000 immigrants arrived in Israel in 1990, the vast majority Soviet Jews, and a far larger number were expected to arrive in 1991-92.
Commentators warned that if the government's absorbtion planning was inadequate or incorrect, then the country inevitably faced the prospect of spiralling inflation, high unemployment and housing shortages.
In late July 1990 Housing and Construction Minister Ariel Sharon presented the Cabinet with a US$13,500 million five-year programme to provide housing for Soviet immigrants.
Finance Minister Itzhak Moda'i warned that the government spending required to finance Sharon's scheme would cause a massive expansion in the budget deficit, and might trigger a return to the high inflation of the early 1980s.
The Cabinet adopted an emergency US$1,200 million plan for immigration absorption in early August which fell far short of Sharon's demands, but nevertheless infuriated Moda'i.
The plan's central aim was the importation of some 9,000 prefabricated houses and 5,000 trailer homes (as compared with Sharon's aim to import 90,000 homes over 2 years).
Moda'i plan
Moda'i presented his solution to the immigration dilemma to the Cabinet in September in the form of a radical New Economic Plan aimed at inducing private-sector growth through accelerated liberalization [see p. 37728].
The plan envisaged that most of the new immigrants would find work in the private sector.
The central features of the "Moda'i plan" included a lowering of real wages, a substantial reduction in the government's role in the capital and foreign exchange markets, the exposure of the economy to foreign imports and a reduction of the linkage between wages and prices.
The Cabinet approved the plan unanimously and placed it before the Knesset where it was attacked by Labour, who claimed that it would increase the financial burden for the middle and lower classes, boost inflation and fail to promote the absorbtion of immigrants.
Histadrut (trades union) leaders announced that the signing of a new national wage agreement with manufacturers and public-sector employees would be virtually impossible given the new plan's effective erosion of the wage-price-index link.
1991 budget
The Cabinet approved a US$38,200 million budget for 1991 in late November which included tax increases to pay for the cost of immigration absorption.
The budget was based on the arrival of an estimated 300,000 Soviet immigrants during 1991.
The tax increases included a surcharge of 5 percentage points on income tax payments from January 1991 and an increase of 2 per cent in VAT on all goods and services, raising the figure to 18 per cent, effective April 1991.
The Cabinet also agreed to reduce cash allocations and other benefits to new immigrants, to reduce child allowances and to implement a 2 per cent across-the-board cut in spending by all ministries except Defence.
Defence Minister Moshe Arens had successfully argued that defence spending could not be reduced in the light of the ongoing Gulf crisis.
Even with the tax increases the 1991 deficit predicted in the budget would more than double, from US$2,150 million in 1990 to US$4,750 million.
Total expenditure was projected at US$5,600 million more than 1990.
In early December approximately 500,000 public-sector workers effectively closed Tel Aviv airport, radio and TV stations, schools and government offices during an indefinite strike called by Histadrut to protest against elements of the proposed budget and the "Moda'i plan" .
The strike was called off two days later, after Moda'i and Histadrut leaders agreed that legislation to reduce the minimum wage would not be presented to the Knesset until a compromise had been worked out.
In late December the Knesset gave its initial approval to the budget.
During his speech to the Knesset Moda'i stated that the government would not permit the budget deficit for 1991 to exceed 5.5 per cent of GNP, a figure which he nevertheless described as "exceptionally high" .
Principal trading partners in 1989 both for exports and imports were USA, UK and West Germany.
FOREIGN RELATIONS
Principal events in 1990
March: controversial statement by US President Bush on the Jerusalem issue [see p. 37304]; April: tour of the Middle East by US Senator Bob Dole; US Senate and House resolutions on Jerusalem [see p. 37392].
July: resignation of Israeli ambassador to Egypt [see p. 37626].
September: visit to Soviet Union by Israeli ministers; upgrading of Israeli-Soviet relations [see p. 37728].
December: visit to the USA by Shamir [see p. 37929].
MIDDLE EAST — ARAB WORLD
JORDAN
Area: 97,740 sq km.
Population: 3,903,000 (1989 World Bank estimate).
Capital: Amman.
Language: Arabic.
Religion: Islam (over 90% Sunni, Shia minority) and Christian minority.
Armed forces: 82,250.
Currency: Jordanian dinar (US$1.00=JD0.647 as at Jan. 28, 1991).
Major international affiliations: ACC; Arab League; NAM; ICO.
POLITICAL SYSTEM
The Hashemite Kingdom of Jordan (known as Transjordan until 1949) formally attained full independence in 1946, having hitherto been administered by the United Kingdom under a League of Nations mandate.
As a constitutional monarch the King appoints the Prime Minister who selects a Council of Ministers responsible to the bicameral National Assembly (consisting of a 30-member Senate or House of Notables, and an 80-member House of Representatives).
A Royal Commission was appointed in April 1990 to draw up national charter to regulate political life [see pp. 37392-93].
Main government leaders
King Hussein ibn Talal, of the Hashemite dynasty, has played the major role in Jordanian politics since he succeeded his father as King in 1952.
Prime Minister: Mudar Badran (also Defence Minister).
Other principal ministers: Salim Masa-idah (Deputy Prime Minister; Interior); Taher al-Masri (Foreign Affairs); Basil Jardana (Finance and Customs).
Government changes 1990
No major changes in 1990 [for changes in January 1991 see p. 37979].
Political parties
Political parties have technically been banned since 1957, but the Moslem Brotherhood (which commands a bloc of 22 in the House of Representatives), has charitable status and is therefore exempt from the ban.
Various other parliamentary blocs exist including pro-government members, Palestinian and Arab nationalists, leftists, liberals and independent Islamists.
In late October a 42-member Parliamentary Arab-Islamic Coalition Front (PAICF) was formed, consisting of the Moslem Brotherhood, the independent Islamists, the nationalists and the liberals.
In mid-November votes from the PAICF members secured the election of Abdel-Latif Arabiyat of the Moslem Brotherhood as Speaker of the House of Representatives.
The Jordanian Popular Democratic Unity Party (JPDUP) was formed in November by supporters of the radical Popular Front for the Liberation of Palestine (PFLP).
The formation of the JPDUP followed the return to Jordan in September of PFLP leader George Habash to attend a meeting of radical Arab political groups and parties [see p. 37728].
The meeting was also attended by leaders of the Democratic Front for the Liberation of Palestine (DFLP), Jordanian supporters of which had established the Jordanian People's Democratic Party (JPDP) in July 1989.
Elections
Elections to a new House of Representatives in November 1989 were the first for 22 years [see pp. 37052-53].
1990 OVERVIEW
The Iraqi invasion of Kuwait had an enormous political and economic impact on Jordan.
The 12 months prior to the August invasion had been a positive period for Jordan.
A general election and the freezing of martial law in late 1989 and the appointment of a Royal Commission in April 1990 to draw up a national political charter indicated King Hussein's intention to press ahead with his "democratic experiment" .
The economy made good progress during the first half of 1990, with GNP growth of 1.5 per cent, a reduction in the budget deficit, a noticeable improvement in the trade balance and a fall in inflation to 8 per cent from around 25 per cent in 1989.
The onset of the Gulf crisis swiftly reversed Jordan's economic recovery.
The imposition of international sanctions against Iraq, its largest trading partner, forced Jordan to halt vital exports.
In addition shipping into and out of the Jordanian port of Aqaba was seriously disrupted and remittance and aid income from both Iraq and Kuwait halted.
The crisis ruined Jordan's efforts to complete vital debt-rescheduling arrangements.
Soon after the invasion of Kuwait Jordan was forced to halt payments on all bilateral foreign debts; during the last half of 1990 there was no movement on rescheduling arrangements with the "Paris Club" of 10 creditor countries or the "London Club" of commercial creditors.
Disbursements from an IMF standby credit arrangement and a World Bank structural adjustment loan were halted and the IMF announced the postponement of the completion date for Jordan's economic restructuring programme from 1993 to 1995.
After a visit to Amman in October the UN special envoy, Jean Ripert, estimated that the crisis would cost Jordan as much as 30 per cent of GDP in 1990 and about 50 per cent in 1991.
Jordanian requests for emergency international compensation payments were initially frustrated by King Hussein's reluctance to offer support to the United States-led anti-Iraqi coalition.
Iraq had the overwhelming support of the vast majority of Jordanians, and the US intervention in the Gulf had the effect of uniting previously disparate political and social strands behind the King.
The USA, in particular, remained unconvinced by the King's declarations of neutrality and refused to proffer compensatory aid to Amman.
Nevertheless, by early December Jordan had received firm commitments for some US$500,000,000 in aid (from Canada, China, France, Germany, Japan, South Korea, the Netherlands and Taiwan); in addition, a further US$12,600 million had been pledged by the European Communities (EC) and the Gulf financial crisis co-ordination group to the three so-called "front-line states" , Jordan, Egypt and Turkey.
SECURITY
In April the government confirmed an intensified campaign against PFLP guerrillas and the arrest of Islamic Jihad members [see p. 37752]; in May serious unrest in Palestinian camps followed the Rishon Le Zion massacre near Tel Aviv [see p. 37443]; in July the Jordanian army killed four PFLP guerrillas attempting to infiltrate from Syria; in November Baker Al-Khawaldeh, a leading official of the militant Islamic Liberation Party, was arrested by security police.
BUDGET AND ECONOMY
The 1991 budget was presented to the House of Representatives on Dec. 2, 1990 [see p. 37752 for 1990 budget].
In addition to the ordinary budget, Finance Minister Basil Jardana presented an emergency budget of JD120,000,000 aimed at increasing the capacity of the national economy to enable it to deal with effects of the Gulf crisis.
However, Jardana stated that implementation of the budget depended on the availability of foreign grants, aid and easy-term loans.
1991 1990 (revised) Expenditure 1,119.2 1,033.7 of which: capital expenditure 230.0 188.3
Jordanian budgets, 1990-91 (JD million)
current expenditure 889.2 845.4 Revenue 902.5 938.7 of which: domestic 702.5 746.1
foreign assistance 150.0 162.6
unused loans 50.0 30.0 Deficit before financing 216.7 95.0 Repayment of domestic and foreign loans 135.2 87.4 Total deficit 351.9 182.4 Source: Middle East Economic Digest
Jordan's principal trading partners in 1989 were: exports to Iraq, Saudi Arabia and India; imports from the European Communities, the United States and Saudi Arabia.
MIDDLE EAST — ARAB WORLD
LEBANON
Area: 10,452 sq km.
Population: 2,830,000 (1988 IMF estimate).
Capital: Beirut.
Languages: Arabic (official); French, Kurdish and Armenian.
Religion: Moslem (about 57% — Sunni, Shia and Druse); Christian (about 43% — mainly Roman Catholic of the Maronite rite, but also Armenian, Greek and Syrian sects and Protestants).
Armed forces: 21,800 (National Armed Forces — 1990).
Currency:Lebanese pound (US$1.00=L£1,046.67 as at Jan. 28, 1991).
Major international affiliations: Arab League; NAM; ICO.
POLITICAL SYSTEM
The Republic of Lebanon gained full independence from France 1944.
Under a "National Covenant" agreed in 1943, institutional power was allocated between religious groups on the basis of relative numerical strength, according to a 1932 census.
By convention the President is a Maronite Christian, the Prime Minister is a Sunni Moslem and the Speaker of the (unicameral) National Assembly is a Shia Moslem.
Constitutional amendments signed by the President in September 1990 [see p. 37729]instituted far-reaching political reforms.
The National Assembly was to be expanded from 99 to 108 members, equally divided between Christians and Moslems, the powers of the Prime Minister and Cabinet increased and those of the President reduced.
Main government leaders
President: Elias Hrawi, a Maronite businessman, who maintains good relations with both Syria and the Maronite leadership.
Prime Minister: Umar Karami.
Other principal ministers: Michel al-Murr (Deputy Prime Minister; Minister of National Defence); Ali al-Khalil (Finance); Faris Buwayz (Foreign and Expatriate Affairs); Maj.-Gen.
Sami al-Khatib (Interior).
Cabinet changes in 1990
June: return of Phalangist Party leader Georges Sa'adah to Cabinet [see p. 37548]; December: resignation of Hoss government and appointment of Karami government [see p. 37928].
Political parties
Parties with members or supporters in the National Assembly include the Parti socialiste progressiste (Progressive Socialist Party — Walid Jumblatt l.);
Phalanges libanaises — Al-Kata'eb (Phalangist Party — Georges Sa'adah pres.); the Bloc national (Maronite — Raymond Edde l.); the Parti tachnag (Armenian Revolutionary Federation); the Ba'ath party (Arab socialist — Assem Qansou regional s. -g.); the Lebanese Communist Party (Georges Hawi s. -g.); the Syrian National Socialist Party (Dawoud Baz l.); the National Liberal Party (right-wing).
January: re-election of Jumblatt as PSP leader; Hezbollah (Party of God) leadership elections [see p. 37755].
October: assassination of National Liberal Party president Dany Chamoun [see p. 37793].
Elections
The last presidential elections were held in November 1989 following the assassination of René Mouawad.
The last elections to the National Assembly were held in 1972; the Assembly term was routinely extended, most recently in November 1989, when it was extended until the end of 1994.
Of the 99 members elected in 1972, only 70 were still alive at the start of 1990.
1990 OVERVIEW
Gen. Michel Aoun's two-year-long rebellion finally ended in October when Hrawi invited Syrian forces to extract Aoun from Christian East Beirut.
The Syrians performed the task swiftly, and Aoun was forced to take refuge in the French embassy, where he remained at the end of the year.
During the first half of the year, Aoun's "war of liberation" against Syria had degenerated into a bloody and pointless battle with the Lebanese Forces (LF) militia for control of the Christian heartlands.
With Aoun removed and the Syrians in firm control of Beirut, President Hrawi set about implementing a security plan for the city and its environs.
The plan was part of the general peace formula worked out by Lebanese leaders and the Arab League in Taif in 1989.
In September, Hrawi had enacted another part of the Taif accord by amending the Constitution to allow for the introduction of political reforms.
The withdrawal of the militias from greater Beirut, the main plank of the security plan, went ahead with relative ease so that by early December the Lebanese army, with Syrian support, was in control of the capital.
A large number of militiamen, including fighters from the rival Shia groups Amal and Hezbollah who had signed a peace agreement prior to the withdrawal, moved south, which alarmed Israel and prompted a spate of Israeli military incursions into southern Lebanon in late 1990.
In late December Hrawi formed a new government headed by a pro-Syrian Sunni, Umar Karami.
Karami's attempts to incorporate all major militia factions in his government failed when the LF chief, Samir Geaga, refused a Cabinet post in protest at the pro-Syrian stance of most of the ministers.
The year ended with the government taking tentative steps to tackle the country's enormous economic problems.
Work started on rebuilding utilities and refineries, and the government began administering the operation of the country's ports, which had previously been under militia control.
Analysts suggested that the revenue from the ports would provide much-needed resources to reduce the country's massive budget deficit.
Hrawi's government closely followed Syria's anti-Iraqi line on the Gulf crisis, a move which virtually ensured increased Saudi reconstruction aid.
SECURITY
Principal security events 1990
January: Amal-Hezbollah fighting, Palestine Liberation Organization involvement; Democratic Front for the Liberation of Palestine (DFLP) attack on Israeli forces [see p. 37755].
February: outbreak of serious fighting between Aoun and LF [see pp. 37264-65]; Israeli raids into southern Lebanon [see p. 37755].
March: continued LF/Aoun fighting; Amal-Hezbollah fighting in Beirut; Israeli air attacks on Hezbollah positions in south [see pp. 37331-32].
April: recognition of Hrawi regime by LF [see p. 37391]; assassination of leading Amal official in Beirut, outbreak of serious fighting with Hezbollah [see p. 37755].
June: Vatican/French peace initiatives [see p. 37548]; assassination of Amal politburo member [see p. 37755].
July: Hrawi peace initiative; Amal-Hezbollah fighting in south; Israeli air attacks on Hezbollah positions [see pp. 37625-26].
September: imposition of blockade against Aoun; intra-Palestinian fighting in south; Amal-Hezbollah ceasefire [see p. 37729].
October: Removal of Aoun; beginning of implementation of greater Beirut security plan; assassination of Dany Chamoun [see pp. 37792-93].
November: Syrian- and Iranian-brokered agreement between Amal and Hezbollah; serious Israeli incursions into southern Lebanon [see p. 37928-29].
December: withdrawal of all militias from greater Beirut [see p. 37928].
Military force Strength (est.)
Leader Main area of operation Syrian Army 42,000 Brig. -Gen.
Ghazi Kan'an (chief of Syrian military intelligence in Lebanon) Much of the country; especially greater Beirut and eastern Lebanon National Army of Lebanon 21,000 Gen. Emile Lahud Greater Beirut; extending south in late 1990.
UNIFIL 5,500 Lt.-Gen.
Lars-Eric Wahlgren South, bordering Israeli security zone and Golan Heights Iranian Revolutionary Guards 2,000 not known Bekaa Valley
Military forces in Lebanon (1990)
*Palestinian guerrillas 7,000 In and around Sidon and Tyre Lebanese Forces (Phalangist) 10,000 (active) Samir Geaga North of greater Beirut Amal (Shia) 5,000 (active) Nabi Berri Iqlim al-Tuffah (south) Hezbollah (Shia) 5,000 (active) Sheikh Fadlallah (spiritual leader) Iqlim al-Tuffah (south) Progressive Socialist Party (Druse) 3,500-10,000 (active) Walid Jumblatt Chouf Mountains South Lebanon Army (Israeli-proxy) 2,500 Maj.-Gen.
Antoine Lahad Israel's self-declared "security zone" 
*Palestinian groupings present in Lebanon include: Al Fatah; PLF; FRC ( "Fatah Rebels" ); PFLP; PFLP — GC; PPSF; DFLP; and RCF [see reference article on Palestinian Affairs for details].
Western hostages released in 1990
April: Robert Polhill (US), Frank Reed (US), Fernand Houtekens (Belgian), Jacqueline Valente (French), Sophie-Liberté Valente (French)[see p. 37391; the last three were released by representatives of the Revolutionary Council of Fatah, not by the Fatah Revolutionary Council as given on that page]; August: Emanuel Christen (Swiss), Elio Erriquez (Swiss), Brian Keenan (Irish-British)[see p. 37768]; October: 40 Shia Moslem "hostages" from Khiyam prison, southern Lebanon [see p. 37793].
Expenditure 597,000
1990 Budget, approved April 21 (L£million)
of which: debt service 183,557
defence 97,486
education 66,454
internal security 36,960 Revenue 210,000
of which: direct taxes and duties 66,600
indirect taxes 40,598 Deficit 387,000 Source: Middle East Economic Digest.
Lebanon's principal trading partners in 1987 were: exports to Saudi Arabia, Switzerland and Jordan; imports from Italy, France and the United States.
Major foreign relations events in 1990
June: tour of Middle East by President Hrawi [see p. 37548]; December: visit to Beirut by President Chadli Bendjedid of Algeria, the first official visit to Lebanon by a foreign head of state for some five years.
MIDDLE EAST — ARAB WORLD
PALESTINIAN AFFAIRS
Area of West Bank and Gaza Strip: 5,879 sq km and 378 sq km.
Population of West Bank and Gaza Strip: 860,000 and 564,100 (1988 estimates).
PLO affiliations: Arab League; ICO.
PALESTINIAN ORGANIZATIONS
The Palestine Liberation Organization (PLO) was founded in 1964 as "the only legitimate spokesman for all matters concerning the Palestinian people" .
The PLO's supreme organ is the Palestine National Council (PNC, the Palestinian "parliament in exile" ).
The PNC elects a Central Council and an Executive Committee to administer the day-to-day running of the organization.
Since 1969 Yassir Arafat, leader of the main Palestinian guerrilla organization Al-Fatah, has led the PLO.
The 19th session of the PNC held in Algiers in 1988 culminated in the declaration of the independent State of Palestine, with Jerusalem as its capital [see p. 36438].
The opportunity for the PLO to assert sovereignty over a specific territory arose through the Jordanian decision in July 1988 to sever administrative and legal links with the West Bank [see p. 36120].
The declaration of independence cited the UN General Assembly Resolution 181 (1947) which partitioned Palestine into two states, one Jewish and one Arab, as providing the legal basis for the right of the Palestinian people to national sovereignty and independence.
A political statement released by the PNC at the end of the session called for an international conference on the Middle East, under UN supervision, to be convened on the basis of UN Security Council Resolutions 242 (1967 — see pp. 22473; 25029; 34898) and 338 (1973 — see p. 26197), and the guaranteeing of the legitimate national rights of the Palestinian people, of which the most important was "the right to self-determination" .
The new state received immediate recognition from all Arab States except Syria, from most non-aligned countries and from China; the Soviet Union recognized the declaration, but not the state itself.
By mid-1989, over 90 countries had recognized either the state itself or the declaration.
At its 19th session the PNC announced its intention to form a provisional government-in-exile.
Disagreement arose within the PLO regarding its composition and the issue was referred back to the Executive Committee.
An Executive Committee decision to nominate Arafat as President of the State of Palestine and Farouk Qaddumi as Foreign Minister was endorsed by the Central Council in April 1989.
Main PLO factions
Al-Fatah (Yassir Arafat l.; Farouk Qaddumi s. -g.).
Popular Front for the Liberation of Palestine (PFLP — Georges Habash l.);
Democratic Front for the Liberation of Palestine (DFLP — Nayef Hawatmeh s. -g.);
Arab Liberation Front (ALF — Abd ar-Rahim Ahmad l.);
Palestine Popular Struggle Front (PPSF — Samir Ghosheh s. -g.);
Palestinian Communist Party (PCP — Bashir al-Barghuti s. -g.).
Palestinian Liberation Front (PLP — Mahmoud Abul Abbas l.).
The following "rejectionist" groups boycotted the 19th PNC session: Popular Front for the Liberation of Palestine — General Command (PFLP — GC — Ahmed Jabril l.);
Al-Saiqa (Issam al-Qadi l.);
Revolutionary Council of Fatah (RCF — Abu Nidal (Sabri Khalil al-Banna) l.);
Fatah Revolutionary Council (FRC — Col. Saed Abu Musa l.);
Revolutionary Palestinian Communist Party (RPCP — Arbi Awad s. -g.).
Name Organization Position Yassir Arafat Fatah Chair; Military Department Farouk Qaddumi Fatah Political Department Mahmoud Abbas Fatah Pan-Arab and International Relations Department Abd ar-Rahim Ahmad ALF Labour and Population Organization Department Sulayman an-Najjab PCP Social Affairs Department Yasser Abd ar-Rabbuh DFLP Information Department Mustafa az-Zibri PFLP Repatriates Affairs Department Brig. -Gen.
Abd ar-Razzaq al-Yahya Independent Economic Affairs and Education Department Muhammad Milhem Independent Occupied Homelands Affairs Department Jamal as-Surani Independent Administrative Affairs Department Abdullah Hourani Independent Cultural Affairs Department Mahmoud Darwish Independent Chair of Supreme Council for Culture, Heritage and Information Bishop Ilya Khuri Independent Jawid al-Ghusayn Independent 
PLO Executive Committee (elected at 18th PNC in Algiers, 1987).
1990 OVERVIEW
United States efforts to broker a Middle East peace plan floundered in March when Israel's national unity coalition collapsed under the pressure of differences between Likud and Labour over the country's Palestinian policy.
The final collapse of the peace plan took place in June with the formation of a new right-wing Likud-led Israeli government.
The peace process suffered a further blow in June when the USA suspended its 18-month-long dialogue with the PLO in retaliation for a Palestinian guerrilla attack on Israeli territory.
The cessation of the talks prompted speculation that Palestinian moderates would come under increased pressure to abandon their policy of negotiation and resume the armed struggle against Israel.
With the collapse of the US peace plan, PLO relations with Iraq grew ever closer.
Iraq's military strength and President Saddam Hussein's willingness to challenge Israel openly appealed strongly to a PLO leadership deeply disillusioned with the failed peace process.
It came as little surprise, therefore, that the close relationship appeared to be unaffected by Iraq's August invasion of Kuwait.
Given the emotional fervour in support of Saddam Hussein among Palestinians living in the West Bank and Gaza Strip, Arafat felt compelled to continue his support for Iraq.
Other Palestinian groups, including Syrian-based "rejectionist" groups and Hamas ( "Zeal" — a non-PLO fundamentalist Islamic group which had played an increasingly large role in the intifada during 1990), were obliged to follow the Arafat line.
In addition there was a strong feeling among Palestinians and other Arabs that international reaction to the Kuwaiti crisis was hypocritical.
There thus was widespread support for Saddam Hussein's attempt to connect an Iraqi withdrawal from Kuwait with an Israeli withdrawal from the occupied territories.
The October Temple Mount massacre in Jerusalem [see pp. 37759-60]had the effect of reviving the flagging intifada, which entered its fourth year in December.
Instead of the usual stonings and demonstrations, a number of Arabs took it upon themselves to launch unprovoked knife attacks on Israeli civilians.
The stabbings provoked widespread alarm in Israel and often led to retaliatory attacks on innocent Arabs.
Sept. 15-17 Radical Arab groups, including the DFLP and the PFLP, convene in Jordan [see p. 37728].
Oct. 8 Israeli paramilitary police shoot dead 17 unarmed Arabs at the Temple Mount in Jerusalem, further fuelling the argument for a possible "linkage" between resolution of the Palestinian issue and the Gulf crisis [see pp. 37759-60].
Oct. 12 UN Security Council unanimously adopts Resolution 672 condemning the Temple Mount shootings and welcoming the UN Secretary-General's decision to send a mission to the area [ibid.].
Oct. 14 Israeli Cabinet votes not to co-operate with the UN mission [ibid.].
Oct. 21 In the first of a spate of stabbings, a Palestinian labourer kills three Israelis in a West Jerusalem knife attack [ibid.].
Oct. 31 The UN Secretary-General's report on the Temple Mount killings proposes a conference of the signatories of the Fourth Geneva Convention on the protection of civilians in time of war to discuss measures to protect Palestinians in the occupied territories [see p. 37873].
Nov. 3 Serious rioting erupts in the Gaza Strip; one Palestinian is killed and 100 injured [ibid.].
Nov. 12 Israel conditionally accepts a visit by a UN mission [ibid.].
Nov. 13 Three prominent Palestinians are placed under administrative detention [ibid.].
Nov. 15 Second anniversary of the Palestinian declaration of independence.
Dec. 10 The intifada enters its fourth year [see p. 37928].
Dec. 14 Three Israelis are stabbed to death in Jaffa by Hamas guerrillas [ibid.].
Dec. 15 Israel orders the deportation of four middle-ranking Hamas members [ibid.].
Dec. 29 Four Palestinians are killed and 150 injured on the Gaza Strip during clashes with the Israeli security forces [ibid.].
Palestinian affairs and the intifada
Chronology, August-December 1990 [for chronology January 1989-August 1990 see p. 37750]
UNCTAD report on "Palestinian economy" 
A report was issued in 1990 by the UN Conference on Trade and Development (UNCTAD) which stated that the decline of the "Palestinian economy" in 1989 was due to "the worsening [Israeli]policy orientation under the continued occupation and the regional economic environment" .
The study estimated that total GDP in the West Bank, East Jerusalem and the Gaza Strip fell to between US$1,200 million and US$1,500 million in 1989, some 35 per cent less than the pre-intifada level.
UNCTAD, by applying Israeli figures, estimated the GNP of the occupied territories at about US$2,000 million in 1989.
MIDDLE EAST — ARAB WORLD
SYRIA
Area: 184,050 sq km.
Population: 12,028,000 (1989 World Bank estimate).
Capital: Damascus.
Language: Arabic (official); Kurdish, Armenian, Aramaic, Circassian also spoken.
Religion: Sunni Moslem (74%); Alawite, Druse and other Moslem sects (16%); Christian (10%).
Armed forces: 404,000 (1990).
Currency: Syrian pound (US$1.00=£S20.9807 as at Jan. 28, 1991).
Major international affiliations.
NAM; OPEC; OAPEC; ICO; Arab League.
POLITICAL SYSTEM
Formerly part of the Ottoman Empire, Syria was in 1920 occupied by France under a League of Nations mandate; it achieved full independence in 1946.
Under its 1973 Constitution Syria is defined as a "Socialist popular democracy" .
An executive President is elected every seven years, although in practice political power is to a great extent in the hands of the Arab Socialist Renaissance (Ba'ath) Party.
Legislative authority is vested in the People's Assembly (Majlis al-Sha'ab).
Main government leaders
President: Lt.-Gen.
Hafez al-Assad, who with members of his small Alawite clan has dominated Syrian politics for two decades.
Assad seized power in 1970 at the head of the Ba'ath Party's "nationalist" wing and the following year he was elected President.
Vice-Presidents: Abdel Halim Khaddam, Zuheir Masharqa.
Prime Minister: Mahmoud Zubi.
Other principal ministers: Gen. Mustafa Tlass (Deputy Prime Minister, Defence); Salim Yassin (Deputy Prime Minister; Economic Affairs); Farooq ash-Shar"(Foreign Affairs); Mohammad Harbah (Interior); Khaled al-Mahayni (Finance); Khalid Ansari (Justice).
Cabinet changes 1990
There were no Cabinet changes in 1990.
Ruling party
Ba'ath Party (regional organization with branches in most Arab countries; Lt.-Gen.
Hafez al-Assad s. -g.; Abdullah al-Ahmar asst. s. -g.; Zuheir Masharqa regional asst. s. -g.).
Other parties
The National Progressive Front, headed by President Assad, was formed in 1972 by the Ba'ath Party with the four parties listed below, all of which are also represented in the People's Assembly.
Arab Socialist Party (Abdel Ghani Kannout l.);
Arab Socialist Unionist Party (Sami Soufan l.);
Communist Party of Syria (Yusuf Faisal s. -g.);
Syrian Arab Socialist Unity Party (Jamal Atasi l.).
Elections
For May 1990 general election to People's Assembly see p. 37472.
1990 OVERVIEW
Syria reaped great political and economic benefits from the Gulf crisis.
President Assad's decision to support the United States-led anti-Iraqi alliance after the Iraqi President and Assad's Ba'athist adversary, Saddam Hussein, had ordered Iraqi forces into Kuwait in August 1990 led to a swift international reappraisal of Syria, a country long ostracised by the West as a sponsor of international terrorism.
Syria's rehabilitation culminated in a November meeting in Geneva between Assad and United States President Bush.
The previous month the USA had given Syria, with its long association with Lebanon, a free hand to curb the rebellion of Gen. Michel Aoun in Lebanon.
The Syrians ended the year in a commanding position, with Aoun sheltering in the French embassy in Beirut.
The Syrian stance during the Gulf crisis effectively confirmed the country's return to mainstream regional politics.
A close alignment with Egypt was established, confirming a relationship which had been improving since 1989.
The Gulf states showed their appreciation for Syria's stand against Iraq by providing large amounts of money, ostensibly to offset loss of remittances from Kuwait.
According to some sources Syria had received US$1,000 million, mostly from Saudi Arabia, by early December.
Analysts claimed that Syria was already investigating the possibility of purchasing some of the world's most advanced weaponry.
1990 BUDGET — ECONOMY
The 1990 budget was approved by the National Assembly on Feb. 21, 1990.
Expenditure was set at £S61,875 million, £S4,875 million more than the 1989 figure.
Current expenditure accounted for £S37,575 million and investment expenditure for £S24,300 million.
In 1989 Syria had recorded its first trade surplus in 30 years, largely reflecting substantial increases in crude oil production since the mid-1980s.
However, some commentators observed that the book value of exports to the Soviet Union, which accounted for over one-third of all exports, had been inflated by the use of unrealistic exchange rates.
Higher oil production and prices ensured that the trade balance remained in surplus (at US$409 million) in the first half of 1990. 1988 1989 Exports 1,348 2,812 Imports 1,986 1,821 Balance -639 +991
Syrian trade figures 1988-89 (US$ million)
Syria's principal trading partners in 1988 were: exports to Italy, Romania and the Soviet Union; imports from Iran, West Germany and the Soviet Union.
Principal events in 1990
January: Syrian criticism of Turkish diversion of Euphrates river [see p. 37201].
May: normalization of relations with Egypt, visit to Damascus by President Mubarak [see p. 37471]; Assad refused to attend the Arab League summit in Baghdad [see pp. 37472-73].
July: visit to Egypt by Assad [see p. 37626].
September: visit to Iran by Assad, visit to Damascus by Baker [see p. 37727].
November: meeting between Assad and Bush in Geneva [see p. 37870]; restoration of diplomatic relations with the UK [see p. 37873].
For Syrian involvement in Lebanon during 1990 see pp. 37332; 37390; 37792-93; 37928; for Syrian role in the Gulf crisis see pp. 37637-38; 37694; 37870; 37926-27.
MIDDLE EAST — ARAB WORLD
BAHRAIN
Area: 691,200 sq km.
Population: 489,000 (1989 World Bank estimate).
Capital: Manama.
Languages: Arabic (official); Farsi and Urdu are also spoken and English is widely used in commercial sectors.
Religion: Islam (Shia almost 60%, Sunni over 40%).
Armed forces: 6,000 (1990).
Currency: Bahrain dinar (US$1.00=BD0.3761 as at Jan. 28, 1991.
Major international affiliations: Arab League; GCC; ICO; NAM; OAPEC.
POLITICAL SYSTEM
The State of Bahrain became fully independent in 1971, having previously been a British protected state.
An absolute monarch, the Amir governs through an appointed Cabinet.
The 1973 Constitution provides for a National Assembly made up of the Cabinet and 30 members elected by popular vote.
However, the last National Assembly was dissolved in 1975 on the grounds that it interfered with the administrative affairs of government.
No political parties are allowed.
Main government leaders
Amir: Shaikh Isa bin Suluman al-Khalifa.
Prime Minister: Shaikh Khalifa bin Sulman al-Khalifa.
Other principal ministers: Maj.-Gen.
Shaikh Khalifa bin Ahmed al-Khalifa (Defence); Shaikh Mohammed bin Mohammed al-Khalifa (Interior); Shaikh Mohammed bin Mubarak al-Khalifa (Foreign Affairs); Shaikh Abdullah bin Khaled al-Khalifa (Justice and Islamic Affairs); Ibrahim Abdel-Karim Mohammed (Finance and National Economy).
Cabinet changes in 1990
No changes.
1990 OVERVIEW
The Gulf crisis strongly affected business confidence with a serious downturn in the financial sector; commercial and offshore banks registered a 14.6 per cent drop in total deposits in August.
A decline in the value of shares and the volume of trading on the new stock exchange, opened in 1989 [see p. 37432], persuaded the government to delay plans to reduce its share in state-owned enterprises.
Important industrial and development projects were also either postponed or cancelled.
The foreign trade deficit widened by 42 per cent to BD97,200,000 (US$259,000,000) in 1989, compared with BD68,400,000 the previous year.
Principal trading partners in 1988 were: exports to US, UAE and Japan; imports from UK, Saudi Arabia and USA.
Diplomatic relations at ambassadorial level were established with the Soviet Union on Sept. 28, 1990, with Czechoslovakia on Oct. 12 and with Iran in December.
MIDDLE EAST — ARAB WORLD
IRAN
Area: 1,648,000 sq km.
Population: 50,204,000 (1989 World Bank estimate).
Capital: Tehran.
Languages: Farsi (Persian — official — spoken by 45%); Turkic, Kurdish, Arabic are also spoken.
Religion: Islam (93% Shia, 5% Sunni), Christianity, Judaism and Zoroastrianism (2%).
Armed forces: 504,000. (1990) Currency: Iranian rial (US$1.00=R65.4593 as at Jan. 14, 1991).
Major international affiliations.
NAM; OPEC; ICO.
POLITICAL SYSTEM
The Islamic Republic of Iran came into being in January 1979 after the overthrow of the Shah.
Overall authority is exercised by the wali faqih (the country's spiritual leader).
The state President and the 270-member Majlis (Islamic consultative assembly or parliament) are elected by universal adult suffrage every four years.
The Majlis approves the appointment of all members of the Council of Ministers.
A 12-member Council of Guardians ensures that all legislation conforms with the Islamic Constitution and has power to veto candidates for high office.
A referendum held on July 28, 1989, backed constitutional amendments which greatly strengthened presidential authority [see p. 36833].
Main government leaders
Wali faqih, C.-in-C. of the armed forces: Ayatollah Seyed Ali Khamenei.
President: Hojatolislam Hashemi Ali Akber Rafsanjani, representing ascendant moderate factions within the Majlis, was elected President in July 1989 [see pp. 36832-33], following the death in June 1989 of Ayatollah Ruhollah (Khomeini, wali faqih since the 1979 overthrow of the monarchy, and the election of Khamenei, then President, as his successor [see pp. 36724-25].
Vice-Presidents: Hassan Ebrahim Habibi; Seyed Ataollah Mohajerani (Legal and Majlis Affairs); Massoud Roghani Zanjani (Head of Planning and Budgetary Organization); Reza Amrollahi (Head of Atomic Energy Organization of Iran); Mansour Razavi (Head of Organization for State Employment and Administrative Affairs); Mehdi Manafi (Head of Environment Protection Organization); Hassan Ghafurifard (Head of Physical Education Organization).
Presidential Advisor on Domestic and Foreign Affairs: Hossain Moussavi.
Speaker of the Majlis: Ayatollah Mehdi Karrubi
Principal Ministers: Ali Akbar Vellayati (Foreign Affairs), Abdollah Nouri (Interior, Chairman of State Security Council); Mohsen Nourbakhsh (Economic Affairs and Finance); Gholamreza Foruzesh (Jihad ( "crusade" ) for Reconstruction); Hojatolislam Ismail Shostari (Justice); Akbar Torkan (Defence and Armed Forces Logistics); Hojatolislam Ali Fallahiyan (Intelligence and Security).
Cabinet changes in 1990
None.
Ruling party
The then ruling Islamic Republican Party was officially disbanded in June 1987 by Ayatollah Khomeini.
official political recognition were subject to examination by a committee established under a 1981 law on the registration of political parties; this law was amended in May 1989 to secure the representation on the committee of the Intelligence and Security Ministry — see p. 37422.)
Other parties
All other parties [listed below]remained illegal, and many of their leaders were abroad in exile.
(Parties seeking
Society for the Defence of Freedom (liberal, former Prime Minister Mehdi Bazargan l. — arrested in Tehran in June 1990); Association for the Defence of the Liberty and Sovereignty of the Iranian People (liberal, Ali Ardalan head of central committee); Flag of Freedom Organization for the Liberty of Iran (monarchist/liberal, Manoucher Ganji pres.);
Mojahedin-e Khalq (People's Holy Warriors, Massoud Rajavi l.);
Sazmane Socialishays Iran (Organization of Iranian Socialists, Fariborz Jaafarpur l.);
Tudeh Party (communist); Democratic Party of the Iranian People (social democrat, Farhad Faryad l.);
Monarchist Patriots of Iran (Reza Golipur l.);
Nationalist Republican Party (conservative, Hasan Nazie l.);
Kurdish Democratic Party (Sadeq Sharafbandi l.).
Elections
Elections to the 83-member Assembly of Experts, the body first elected in 1982 [see p. 32098]and empowered to appoint the wali faqih and to interpret the Constitution, were held on Oct. 8, 1990 [see pp. 37793-94].
1990 OVERVIEW
The victory of supporters of Rafsanjani's "moderate" administration in the October elections for the Assembly of Experts [see above], coinciding as it did with higher oil revenues and regional political developments as a result of the Gulf crisis, worked to strengthen the administration and effectively silence the Islamic regime's "radical" wing suspicious of internal reforms and of economic and political opening to the West.
The government was encouraged to accelerate the pace of domestic economic and social reforms by improved international relations including the resumption of diplomatic relations with the United Kingdom [see below], improved relations with the United States through the speeding up of Iran-US financial claims at a special tribunal in The Hague [see p. 37471](despite anxiety about the large US military presence in the Gulf), and the lifting of all European Community (EC) restrictions (dating from the imposition of the death decree on the British author Salman Rushdie — see pp. 36450-51).
In addition there had been a positive international response, including a US$400,000,000 World Bank emergency loan, to the June earthquake [see pp. 37521-22].
A reconstruction programme, calculated to cost at least US$10,000 million, was expected to take several years.
A five-year development plan drawn up in January 1990 [see pp. 37422-23]was bolstered by continued growth in industrial output (up by 4 per cent in the previous year) and by increased oil earnings (providing an extra US$1,000 million in August alone).
Improved finances and international ties resulted in increased imports and attracted strong foreign involvement, predominantly from France, Germany and Italy (but also including the UK and Japan), in major projects to rebuild and expand the war-damaged oil industry and to develop the petrochemical, steel and mineral processing sectors as well as new industries such as car manufacturing.
1990/91 BUDGET
The Majlis on March 19, 1990, approved the 1990/91 budget for the year beginning March 21, 1990, as part of the five-year development plan [see above].
The general budget was set at R13,156,289 million (US$187,900 million at an exchange rate of US$1.00=R71.1848 as at March 19, 1990) which included the budget for state-owned companies, foreign project financing and the government budget; the latter comprised some 40 per cent of the total, overall expenditure being set at R5,596,000 million ($79,900 million) with revenue set at R4,000,000 million ($57,300 million) leaving a deficit of R1,596,000 million ($22,600 million).
Iran's principal trading partners in 1988 were: exports to Japan, Turkey and Italy; imports from West Germany, Japan and Turkey.
FOREIGN RELATIONS
Full diplomatic relations were restored with Tunisia on Sept. 24 [see p. 37729], with the UK on Sept. 27 [see p. 37727], and with Mauritania on Oct. 5; improved relations with Kuwait were signalled by a visit to Kuwait in early July by Foreign Affairs Minister Vellayati [for details of restoration in October 1988 of diplomatic relations at ambassadorial level see p. 36951].
MIDDLE EAST — ARAB WORLD
IRAQ
Area: 438,317 sq km.
Population: 18,271,000 (1989 World Bank estimate).
Capital: Baghdad.
Languages: Arabic (official); Kurdish (about 15%) and Turkoman (small minority).
Religion: Islam (60-65% Shia, 32-37% Sunni).
Armed forces: 1,000,000 (1990).
Currency: Iraqi dinar (US$1.00=ID0.302 as at Jan. 28, 1991).
Major international affiliations.
ACC; Arab League; OPEC; NAM; ICO.
POLITICAL SYSTEM
The Republic of Iraq was declared in 1958 following the overthrow of the monarchy.
Political power, wielded in the main by Sunni Moslems, is concentrated in the hands of the Revolutionary Command Council (RCC)(appointed by the President) and the Ba'ath Party's Regional Command.
The President, who also serves as Prime Minister, is elected by the RCC from among its own members; he also appoints the Council of Ministers.
Legislative authority is shared between the RCC and the 250-member National Assembly, elected by universal adult suffrage.
Main government leaders
President: Saddam Hussein has dominated Iraqi politics since the late 1970s with a small clique of relatives and supporters from his home town of Takrit in northern Iraq.
Since 1979 Saddam Hussein has held the posts of President, Prime Minister, RCC chair and secretary-general of the Ba'ath regional command.
Vice-President: Taha Mohieddin Maarouf.
Revolutionary Command Council members: Izzat Ibrahim (vice-chair); Khaled Abdel-Moneim Rasheed (s. -g.);
Taha Yasin Ramadhan; Tariq Aziz; Hassan Ali-Nassar al-Amiri; Sa'adoun Hammadi; Taha Mohieddin Maarouf.
Principal Ministers: Taha Yasin Ramadhan (First Deputy Prime Minister); Tariq Aziz (Deputy Prime Minister; Foreign Affairs); Sa'adoun Hammadi (Deputy Prime Minister); Maj.-Gen.
Saadi Tuma Abbas al-Jaburi (Defence); Samir Muhammad Abdul Wahhab (Interior); Mohammad Mehdi Saleh (Finance and Trade); Brig. -Gen.
Hussein Kamil (Military Industries; Oil; Industries and Minerals); Latif Naseef al-Jasim (Information and Culture).
Regime personnel changes in 1990
March: appointment of Abdul Wahab Mahmoud al-Sabbagh as Minister of Agriculture and Irrigation [see p. 37424]; August: appointment of members of "Provisional Free Kuwait Government" to Iraqi Council of Ministers [see p. 37635]; September: retirement of Sa'adoun Shaker from RCC; October appointment of Kamil as Oil Minister [see p. 37759]; November: dismissal and reported execution of Iraqi Army Chief of Staff (Gen. Abdel-Karim al-Khazraji); reported assassination of Iraqi governor of Kuwait [see p. 37872]; appointment of Mohammad Saeed al-Sahaf as Minister of State for Foreign Affairs.
December: appointment of al-Jaburi as Defence Minister [see p. 37927]and Gen. Abdel-Jabber Khalil al-Shanshal as Minister of State for Military Affairs.
Ruling party
Arab Ba'ath Socialist Party (regional movement with branches in most Arab countries; Saddam Hussein regional command s.; Izzat Ibrahim deputy regional command s.).
Other parties
National Progressive Patriotic Front (Sa'adam Hammadi regional s. -g.) was formed by the Ba'ath Party in 1973 as the National Progressive Front.
The other two principal members are the Kurdistan Democratic Party (Hashim Hassan Aqrawi s. -g.) and the Kurdistan Revolutionary Party (Abd as-Sattar Taher Sharef s. -g.).
Main opposition groupings
Kurdish opposition groups: the two main Kurdish opposition guerrilla groups are the Democratic Party of Kurdistan (Masoud Barzani l.) and the Patriotic Union of Kurdistan (Jalal Talabani l.).
Other groups also exist: Socialist Party of Kurdistan (Rasoul Marmand l.);
United Socialist Party of Kurdistan (Mahmoud Osman l.);
Kurdish Hezbollah (Sheik Muhammad Kaled l.).
Arab opposition groups: Iraqi Communist Party (Aziz Mohammed — first s.);
Al-Dawa al-Islamiya (main Shia opposition grouping).
Elections
National Assembly elections due April 1993 [see p. 36601 for 1989 elections].
1990 OVERVIEW
Iraq's invasion and annexation of Kuwait in August led to the outbreak of a war less than six months later between Iraq and United States-led multinational forces.
The Iraqi move into Kuwait was the culmination of several months of incident in the Middle East which appeared to be aimed at building up Saddam Hussein's anti-Western and anti-Israeli credentials while at the same time confirming Iraq's regional ascendency.
The invasion occurred after a build-up of tension between Iraq and Kuwait.
Saddam Hussein blamed Kuwaiti over-production of oil for the slump in world prices which had seriously strained Iraq's cash resources.
Shortly after the invasion US troops, backed up by forces from various European, Arab and Asian countries, were swiftly dispatched to Saudi Arabia.
Meanwhile, the UN Security Council passed a series of resolutions (Resolutions 660-665), including the imposition of mandatory sanctions against Iraq.
The embargo halted Iraqi oil exports (the source of almost all Iraqi revenue) and stopped imports of food and raw materials.
Despite the hardships caused by the sanctions Saddam Hussein remained in firm control in Iraq and refused to withdraw his forces from Kuwait.
The UN Security Council in late November approved Resolution 678 authorizing the use of force to ensure Iraq's complete withdrawal from Kuwait before a deadline of Jan. 15, 1991.
Iraq failed to comply with this resolution, and US-led air raids on Baghdad began early on Jan. 17.
Iraq's invasion of Kuwait generated a series of major realignments in the Arab world, with two distinct blocs emerging.
One included Egypt, Saudi Arabia and Syria at the core of a group fully committed to securing Iraq's unconditional withdrawal from Kuwait.
A pro-Iraqi bloc, including the Palestine Liberation Organization (PLO), Jordan, Sudan, Yemen, Tunisia and Algeria, supported the formulation of an Arab settlement to the conflict.
The invasion also induced Iraq to conclude a peace treaty with Iran in order to facilitate a redeployment of Iraqi divisions hitherto based on the Iraq-Iran border.
Main security-related events in 1990
October: death of leader of Democratic Rescue Movement [see p. 37727]; November: reports of opposition activities in Iraq [see pp. 37871-72].
December: issuing of common anti-Saddam Hussein programme by 17-member, Syrian-based Iraqi National Joint Action Committee (comprising Kurds, communists, Islamic fundamentalists, socialists and nationalists)[see p. 37927].
1991 BUDGET — ECONOMY
The 1991 budget was approved by the National Assembly on Jan. 2, 1991 [see p. 37425 for 1990 budget].
As in previous budget debates, few figures were revealed, but the Middle East Economic Digest of Jan. 18, 1991, reported that overall spending was "likely to be considerably less" than under the 1990 deficit budget of ID24,400 million.
The report stated that under the terms of the new budget, the government had agreed to meet all demands submitted by the Defence Ministry in order to ensure maintenance of Iraq's combat capabilities.
The other main aims of the budget were to check inflation and to ensure the minimum required level of consumer goods.
1990 1989 GDP 19,745 million 20,811 million GDP per capita 1,133 1,186 Source: Middle East Economic Digest 
Gross Domestic Product (GDP) /GDP per capita, 1989-90, in Iraqi Dinars
Principal foreign relations events 1990
[For Iraq-Iran relations see Iran.]
January: Iraqi opposition to Turkish diversion of Euphrates river [see p. 37201].
February: ACC summit in Amman [see p. 37266].
March: execution of Observer journalist Farzad Bazoft; interception in United Kingdom of suspected nuclear triggers [see p. 37332].
April: threat by Saddam Hussein to respond to any Israeli attack with the use of chemical weapons; emergence of "supergun" affair [see pp. 37390].
May: further developments in "supergun" affair [see p. 37471; Arab League summit in Baghdad [see pp. 37472-73].
July: release of British nurse Daphne Parish; execution of Swedish citizen [see p. 37627].
Gulf crisis
July: deterioration of relations between Iraq and Kuwait [see pp. 37631-32].
August: Iraqi invasion and annexation of Kuwait [see pp. 37632-35]; international response to the invasion [see p. 37635-41].
September: strengthening of US-led multinational forces in Saudi Arabia [see p. 37694]; tightening of UN embargo [see p. 37695]; diplomatic activity and further international developments [see pp. 37695-96]; economic impact and refugees; foreign "hostages" in Iraq and Kuwait [see p. 37697]; opening of border between Kuwait and Saudi Arabia [see p. 37727].
October: continuing diplomatic efforts to secure peaceful solution; "hostage" developments [see pp. 37758-59].
November: approval of UN Resolution 678 authorizing use of force [see p. 37870]; Bush's offer of talks; abortive Arab peace initiative; further "hostage" releases; military build-up; impact of sanctions in Iraq [see p. 37871].
December: release of all "hostages" [see p. 37926]; cancellation of US-Iraq talks, further Arab initiative [see pp. 37926-27].
MIDDLE EAST — ARAB WORLD
KUWAIT
Area: 17,818 sq km.
Population: 2,014,135; of whom 550,181 are Kuwaitis (Kuwaiti Planning Ministry figures released mid-1990).
Capital: Kuwait City.
Languages: Arabic (official); English (commercial).
Religion: Islam (95% at 1975 census, 70% of whom are Sunni); Christianity and Hinduism.
Armed forces: 20,300 (1990).
Currency: Kuwaiti dinar (US$1.00=KD0.2899 as at July 24, 1990).
Major international affiliations: NAM; Arab League; GCC; OPEC; OAPEC.
POLITICAL SYSTEM
The State of Kuwait, since 1899 a UK protectorate, gained independence in 1961.
It is governed by an Amir, chosen by and from the members of the royal family.
Since the dissolution of the National Assembly in 1986 after its repeated criticism of the government the Amir has ruled by decree, advised by a Cabinet [see below for June 1990 elections to interim National Council].
Kuwait was invaded and completely overrun by Iraqi forces in August 1990.
A Kuwaiti government-in-exile, led by the Amir, was established in Taif in Saudi Arabia.
Agreement to proceed with political reforms upon liberation of Kuwait was reportedly reached at a "popular congress" of government and opposition figures held in Saudi Arabia in October [see p. 37759].
Main government leaders
Amir: Shaikh Jabir al Ahmad al Jabir as Sabah succeeded his cousin in 1977.
Prime Minister: Crown Prince Shaikh Saad al Abdullah as Salim as Sabah.
Other principal members of government-in-exile: Shaikh Sabah al Ahmed al Jabir as Sabah (Deputy Prime Minister; Foreign Affairs); Shaikh Salim as Sabah as Salim as Sabah (Interior); Shaikh Ali as Khalifah al Adhibi as Sabah (Finance); Shaikh Nawaf al Ahmad al Jabir as Sabah (Defence); Rashid Salim al Amiri (Oil).
Cabinet changes in 1990
June: appointment of new Cabinet [see p. 37549]; November: new Information Minister [see p. 37872].
Political parties
There are no organized political parties; opposition groups are centred around members of the dissolved National Assembly.
Elections
Elections held to new interim National Council in June 1990 [see p. 37549].
1990 OVERVIEW
Kuwait was invaded and annexed by Iraq in August, a move which in January 1991 led to the outbreak of war and in late February to the defeat and expulsion of Iraqi forces from Kuwait.
The ruling Sabahs escaped to Saudi Arabia shortly after the invasion and established a government-in-exile in Taif.
Over 300,000 others were believed to have crossed into Saudi Arabia from Kuwait by the end of the year.
Reports issued by human rights organizations claimed that members of the civilian population remaining in Kuwait were being subjected to brutal torture and repression.
Some reports estimated that some 7,000 Kuwaiti civilians had been killed by Iraqi forces by the end of the year.
The Iraqis had also carried out widespread looting and had caused serious damage to the country's infrastructure.
With the outbreak of hostilities in January 1991, the US-led forces caused further damage to the infrastructure during air attacks on Iraqi positions.
Leading Kuwaiti exiles convened in Taif in October for a "popular congress" at which the Sabahs indicated to opposition leaders that new democratic institutions would be created once Kuwait had been freed [see p. 37759].
During the early part of 1990, the Kuwaiti opposition had openly campaigned for the restoration of the National Assembly.
The Amir had responded to the campaign by holding elections in June for an interim National Council.
Following the Iraqi invasion, the opposition pledged to support the Sabahs fully until Kuwait was liberated.
Immediately following the invasion governments around the world had acted to freeze Kuwait's foreign assets (estimated at US$100,000 million) to prevent Iraq gaining control of these funds.
The assets were gradually unfrozen to allow Kuwaiti companies and the government-in-exile to resume business dealings.
London, home of the Kuwait Investment Office, became the centre of the Kuwaiti economy-in-exile.
The Kuwaiti government used its funds to provide substantial assistance to the build-up of anti-Iraqi forces in the Gulf and to provide funding for countries adversely affected by the imposition of international sanctions against Iraq.
1990 BUDGET — ECONOMY
The budget for the 1990/91 financial year (starting July 1, 1990) was approved by official decree on June 30 [see p. 37429 for details of 1989/90 budget].
Expenditure was set at KD3,600 million; revenue KD2,400 million (of which oil would account for over 85 per cent); the budget deficit was estimated at KD1,200 million.
The Middle East Economic Digest of Dec. 21, 1990, reported some estimates of the cost of reconstructing Kuwait following an Iraqi withdrawal.
In early December a former Kuwaiti minister had estimated total costs resulting from the invasion at over US$40,000 million, half as a result of destruction and looting, and half as a result of the freezing of Kuwaiti foreign assets, losses to private businesses and unrealized oil production.
Kuwait's principal trading partners in 1988 (both for exports and imports) were Japan, the United States and West Germany.
MIDDLE EAST — ARAB WORLD
OMAN
Area: 300,000 sq km.
Population: 1,486,000 (1989 World Bank estimate).
Capital: Muscat.
Language: Arabic (official); English (commercial).
Religion: Ibadi Moslems (75%), Sunni and Shia Moslems and Hindus (25%).
Armed forces: 29,500 (1990).
Currency: rial Omani (US$1.00=RO0.3839 as at Jan. 28, 1991).
Major international affiliations.
NAM; Arab League; GCC;
POLITICAL SYSTEM
The Sultanate of Oman gained independence from the United Kingdom in 1951.
The Sultan, who rules by decree, is advised by the Cabinet (which he appoints) and by the nominated 55-member State Consultative Assembly.
In November 1990 he announced plans for the creation of new Consultative Council of provincial representatives [see p. 37873].
Main government leaders
Sultan Qaboos bin Said has ruled Oman since he deposed his father in a palace coup in 1970.
Sultan Qaboos also holds the posts of Prime Minister and Minister of Foreign Affairs, Defence and Finance.
Other principal ministers.
Sayyid Fahr bin Taimour al-Said (Deputy Prime Minister for Security and Defence), Sayyid Fahad bin Mahmoud al-Said (Deputy Prime Minister for Legal Affairs), Qais Abdel-Moneim al-Zawawi (Deputy Prime Minister for Financial and Economic Affairs), Said Ahmed al-Shanfari (Petroleum and Minerals).
Cabinet changes.
Cabinet reshuffle Jan. 2, 1990 [see p. 37431].
Political parties
No political parties.
Elections
No elections.
1990 OVERVIEW
The impact of Iraq's August 1990 invasion of Kuwait was less in Oman than in other Gulf Co-operation Council (GCC) states.
Situated to the east of the other GCC states, the immediate and direct threat to Oman by Iraq was minimal.
Nevertheless, Oman assiduously followed the general GCC line, supporting the Saudi decision to invite United States forces to defend the Gulf and agreeing to the stationing of foreign forces on Omani territory.
Oman's economy benefited from oil price rises following the invasion and some reports estimated that a projected budget deficit for 1990 might be turned into a surplus.
By the end of the year Oman had raised its production close to capacity (700,000 barrels per day) and efforts were under way to boost production capability.
The major political event of the year was the announcement by Sultan Qaboos in late November of plans to establish a new Consultative Council to be composed of regional representatives.
Diplomatic relations established with Czechoslovakia Oct. 15, 1990.
ECONOMY
The 1991 budget was presented on Jan. 1, 1991 [see p. 37431 for 1990 budget].
1990 1991 Expenditure1,747 1,814 Revenue 1,433 1,577 Deficit 314 237 Exchange rate: US$1.00=RO0.3817 as of Dec.31, 1990.
Source: Middle East Economic Digest
1991 budget (RO million)
Details of Oman's fourth five-year plan (1991-95) were announced on Jan. 7, 1991.
Under the plan there were to be changes in public finance policy; budget deficits were to be limited to 10 per cent of total revenue; government bonds were to be issued on the Muscat securities market to replace dependence on foreign borrowing; the state general reserve fund was to be strengthened by a transfer of oil revenues; a contingency fund was to be created to "cope with any international or domestic variables" ; and privatization of selected assets was to go ahead.
Revenue: 8,571 oil 6,586 Expenditure: 9,450 current 7,214 development 2,107 support to private sector 129 Deficit (879) Deficit financing: reserve funds 450 government bonds 429 external grants and loans —— Source: Middle East Economic Digest
Fourth five-year plan, 1991-95 (RO million)
MIDDLE EAST — ARAB WORLD
QATAR
Area: 11,437 sq km.
Population: 330,000 (IMF International Financial Statistics 1988 estimate).
Capital: Doha.
Languages: Arabic (official), English (commercial).
Religion: Islam (native Qataris — less than one-third of the population — principally adhere to the orthodox Wahhabi sect of Sunni Moslems).
Armed forces: 7,500 (1990).
Currency: Qatar riyal (US$1.00=QR3.633 as at Jan. 28, 1991).
Mamor international affiliations.
NAM; Arab League; GCC; ICO; OPEC; OAPEC.
POLITICAL SYSTEM
Qatar gained full independence from the United Kingdom in 1971.
The Amir, an absolute monarch, appoints the Cabinet and the 30-member Advisory Council; the latter's term was extended for four years in April 1990.
Main government leaders
Amir and Prime Minister: Shaikh Khalifa bin Hamad al-Thani came to power in 1972 after ousting his cousin, Shaikh Ahmed, in a palace coup.
Other principal ministers: Shaikh Hamad bin Khalifa al-Thani (Heir Apparent; Defence); Mubarak Ali al-Khater (Foreign Affairs); Shaikh Abdullah bin Khalifa al-Thani (Interior); Shaikh Abdul Aziz bin Khalifa al-Thani (Finance and Petroleum); Shaikh Hamad bin Jasim bin Hamadi al-Thani (Economy and Commerce).
Cabinet changes in 1990
Sayed Abdullah bin Khalifa al-Attiya resigned as Foreign Minister on May 13 and was replaced by Mubarak Ali al-Khater, hitherto Minister of Power and Water.
Minister of Municipal Affairs and Agriculture, Shaikh Hamad bin Jasim bin Jabr al-Thani took temporary charge of Power and Water.
Political parties
No political parties.
Elections
No elections.
1990 OVERVIEW
Qatar followed the general line of its Gulf Co-operation Council (GCC) partners over the Gulf crisis.
Canadian, French and United States aircraft were based in the country and Qatari troops joined the GCC contingent of the anti-Iraqi coalition in Saudi Arabia.
Nevertheless, Qatar, along with Oman and the United Arab Emirates, tended to stress the importance of continuing efforts towards a political compromise, unlike Kuwait and Saudi Arabia which both endorsed a military solution.
Qatar benefited from windfall oil profits as a result of the crisis but not to the same extent as other Gulf states.
Qatar's limited private sector made it less vulnerable to the dwindling of business confidence which affected other countries in the region.
Major political events in 1990 included the surprise resignation of Foreign Minister Sayed al-Attiya in May after only 10 months in the post.
Shaikh Khalifa continued during 1990 with his plans to introduce new blood into the country's leading positions; in January Abdulla Khalid al-Attiya, an experienced commercial banker, was appointed head of the Qatar Monetary Agency [see p. 37432].
The 1990-91 budget issued on March 28, 1990, for the financial year beginning April 1, aimed to reduce the budget deficit by 14 per cent to QR4,900 million.
Current expenditure was set to rise by only 1.7 per cent to QR11,700 million; details of additional capital expenditure were not released.
Oil revenues were expected to increase by 33 per cent to QR7,800 million.
Principal 1990 developments
March — visit to Doha by Chinese Foreign Minister Qian Qichen.
July — Draft agreement on economic, commercial and technical co-operation initialled with Soviet Union.
October — Diplomatic relations established with Hungary, Bulgaria and Czechoslovakia.
December — GCC summit in Doha [see p. 37927].
MIDDLE EAST — ARAB WORLD
SAUDI ARABIA
Area: 2,149,690 sq km.
Population: 13,562,000 (1989 World Bank estimate).
Capital: Riyadh (royal), Jeddah (administrative).
Languages: Arabic (official).
Religion: Islam (about 85% Sunni and 15% Shia).
Armed forces: 67,500 (1990).
Currency: Saudi riyal (US$1.00=SR as at Jan. 28, 1991.
Major international affiliations: NAM; Arab League; OPEC; OAPEC; ICO; GCC.
POLITICAL SYSTEM
Saudi Arabia is an absolute monarchy; the King, whose official title is "Custodian of the Two Holy Mosques" (i.e. Mecca and Medina), appoints and leads a Council of Ministers which serves as the instrument of royal authority in both legislative and executive matters.
There is no legislative assembly although on Nov. 8, 1990, King Fahd announced that a long promised Consultative Council (Majlis al-Shura) would be set up to help him run the country without specifying a date for its creation.
There are no political parties and no elections.
Main government leaders
 "Custodian of the Two Holy Mosques" , Prime Minister: King Fahd ibn Abdul Aziz, since 1982.
Crown Prince; First Deputy Prime Minister; Commander of the National Guard: Prince Abdullah Ibn Abdul Aziz.
Other principal ministers: Prince Sultan ibn Abdul Aziz (Second Deputy Prime Minister; Defence, Civil Aviation); Prince Nayef ibn Abdul Aziz (Interior); Prince Saud al Faisal (Foreign Affairs), Shaikh Muhammad ibn Ibrahim ibn Jubair (Justice); Shaikh Hisham Nazer (Petroleum and Mineral Resources, Planning (acting); Shaikh Abdul Wahhab Ahmed Abdul Wasi (Haj (Pilgrimage) Affairs and Waqfs (Religious Endowments)); Muhammad Ali Abdul Khail (Finance and National Economy).
Cabinet changes in 1990
No changes.
1990 OVERVIEW
Iraq's invasion in August of Kuwait, and the Saudi Arabian government's subsequent decision to invite coalition forces to defend the kingdom was expected to have profound effects on internal political and economic affairs.
Relations improved with Egypt and Syria, while Yemen and Jordan, both of which were perceived to be sympathetic to Iraq [see pp. 37728; 37927], became increasingly marginalized; in addition full diplomatic relations were re-established with the Soviet Union [see below].
A further important consequence was the more rapid implementation of planned petrochemical projects in response to sharp rises in oil production and oil prices.
This increased revenue was needed to meet the dramatic costs of assisting the war effort [see below]and of financing vastly increased domestic defence spending, including arms purchases from the United States to the value of US$6,750 million, approved in November by the US Congress.
The focus of world attention on the region was also felt to have encouraged domestic pressure for political reform and to have influenced King Fahd's November decision to revive plans, shelved since 1980, for the creation of central and regional consultative councils.
Full diplomatic relations were established with China on July 21 [see p. 37628]and with the Soviet Union on Sept. 17 [see p. 37696].
1990 and 1991 BUDGETS
The announcement of the 1991 budget, expected on Dec. 31, 1990, was delayed because of the cost of the Gulf crisis (estimated at $21,000 million by the end of 1990) and uncertainty over world oil markets; the 1990 budget was to be extended for as long as necessary.
It had projected total spending at SR143,000 million ($38,100 million), and a deficit of SR25,000 million ($6,700 million).
The Gulf International Bank estimated that oil earnings had risen by 63 per cent in 1990 to $41,300 million, a $16,000 million increase in revenues over those for 1989, and compared with a budgeted 1990 figure of $31,500 million.
A new stock exchange was opened in late May 1990.
MIDDLE EAST — ARAB WORLD
UNITED ARAB EMIRATES
Area: 77,700 sq km.
Population: 1,544,000 (1989 World Bank estimate).
Capital: Abu Dhabi.
Languages: Arabic (official), English (commercial); Farsi, Urdu and Hindi are also spoken.
Religion: Islam (96%)(16% Shi'a), Christianity and Hinduism (4%).
Armed forces: 44,000 (1990).
Currency: UAE dirham (US$1.00=Dh3.6655 as at Jan. 28, 1991).
Major international affiliations: NAM; ICO; Arab League; OPEC; OAPEC; GCC.
POLITICAL SYSTEM
The United Arab Emirates, former British-protected Trucial States, which achieved independence in 1971, is made up of seven emirates (Abu Dhabi, Dubai, Sharjah, Ras al-Khaimah (acceded 1972), Fujairah, Umm al-Qaiwain, Ajman).
Overall authority is vested in the Supreme Council of the seven emirate rulers (each of whom is an absolute monarch in his own state).
Decisions of the Council require the approval of at least five of the rulers, including those of Abu Dhabi and Dubai.
The President and Vice-President are elected by the Supreme Council from among its members, and the Prime Minister and Federal Council of Ministers are appointed by the President and responsible to the Supreme Council.
The 40-member Federal National Council, appointed by the emirates, considers legislative proposals from the Council of Ministers.
Political parties are not allowed.
Main government leaders
President: Shaikh Zaid bin Sultan al-Nahayan (the ruler of Abu Dhabi).
Prime Minister:Shaikh Maktoum bin Rashid al-Maktoum [for death of predecessor see p. 37794].
Other principal ministers: Sultan bin Zaid al-Nahayan (Deputy Prime Minister); Yusuf bin Umayr bin Yusuf (Petroleum and Mineral Resources); Rashid Abdullah an-Nu'aymi (Foreign Affairs); Maj. Gen. Hamoudah bin Ali al-Dhairi (Interior); Shaikh Hamdan bin Rashid al-Maktoum (Finance and Industry).
Cabinet changes in 1990
A reshuffle was carried out in November [see p. 37874].
1990 OVERVIEW
Iraq's invasion of Kuwait led to the abandonment by the UAE of a traditional policy of neutrality and to a welcome for the deployment of the military forces of the US-led coalition in the region.
Iraq had accused the UAE, along with Kuwait, of undermining international oil prices by exceeding its agreed OPEC quota of 1,100,000 barrels per day (bpd), producing an average of 1,800,000 bpd in the first eight months of the year [see p. 37631].
The Gulf crisis had an immediate negative effect on the economy, reversing the strong growth of the first eight months in all sectors, denting local business confidence, causing the cancellation of large-scale development projects and provoking the flight abroad of capital estimated at 20 per cent of all bank deposits.
The new government appointed in November [see p. 37874]was reported to be anxious to see a quick and decisive victory over Iraq in order that this trend should be reversed.
Partial economic recovery was evident in December as the threat of direct Iraqi attacks receded.
Oil prices remained 35 per cent higher than at the same time the previous year, the prospect of increased trade with Saudi Arabia and Iran opened up and major development projects, such as the expansion of the Das Island gas liquefaction plant and Dubai's dhow wharfage scheme, recommenced.
The federal budget for 1990, supposed to come into effect on Jan. 1, 1990, was finally approved by the Cabinet on Dec. 10, 1990.
The federal budget deficit was forecast to fall to Dh667,000,000 in 1990, from Dh1,810 million in 1989.
Revenues were expected to reach Dh14,978 million, and expenditure Dh15,645 million.
MIDDLE EAST — ARAB WORLD
YEMEN
Area: 540,000 sq km.
Population: 11,207,000 (1989 World Bank estimate).
Capital: San'aa (political); Aden (economic and commercial).
Language: Arabic.
Religion: Islam (Sunni and Shia).
Armed forces: 66,000 (1990).
Currency:(North Yemeni) rial and (South Yemeni) dinar both legal currency throughout Yemen (US$1.00=12.0389 rials and 0.4605 dinars as at Jan. 28, 1991).
Major international affiliations.
ACC; NAM; Arab League; ICO.
POLITICAL SYSTEM
The Republic of Yemen was founded on May 22, 1990, by the unification of the Yemen Arab Republic (North Yemen) and the People's Democratic Republic of Yemen (South Yemen), when Lt.-Gen.
Ali Abdullah Saleh, outgoing President of North Yemen, assumed the presidency of the new Republic; Ali Salim al-Bid, secretary-general of the Yemen Socialist Party in former South Yemen, assumed the vice-presidency.
A Cabinet was appointed to govern for a transitional period of 2@1/2 years.
The provisional unified parliament, the House of Representatives, comprised 159 deputies from the north, 111 from the south and 31 independents representing "nationalist forces" .
An Advisory Council with 45 members was also created.
Main government leaders
President: Lt.-Gen.
Ali Abdullah Saleh.
Vice-President: Ali Salim al-Bid.
Presidential Council: President Saleh; Vice-President al-Bid; Qadi Abdel-Karim al-Arashi; Abdel Aziz Abdel Ghani; Salim Salih Muhammad.
Prime Minister: Haider Abu Bakr al-Attas (former President of South Yemen).
Other principal ministers: Hasan Muhammad Makki (First Deputy Prime Minister); Brig. -Gen.
Mujahid Yahya Abu Shawarib (Deputy Prime Minister; Internal Affairs); Brig. -Gen.
Salih Ubayd Ahmed (Deputy Prime Minister; Security and Defence); Muhammad Haider Masdus (Deputy Prime Minister; Development of Manpower and Administrative Reform); Abdul Ali al-Karim al-Iryani (Foreign Affairs); Alawi Salah al-Salami (Finance); Col. Ghalib Motahar al-Qomesh (Interior and Security); Brig. -Gen.
Haytham Qasim Tahir (Defence).
Government changes in 1990
May: formation of unified Yemen Council of Ministers [see p. 37470].
Political parties
As many as 60 political parties were believed to have been legalized or freshly created during the 13 months following the publication in December 1989 of the draft joint constitution for a unified Yemen.
The Yemen Socialist Party (Ali Salim al-Bid s. -g.), which had been the dominant political power in South Yemen prior to unification, remained a force in the unified Republic.
Amongst the newly legalized or newly created parties were: the Democratic Unionist Party (supporters of exiled former South Yemen President Ali Nasser Mohammad); the National Democratic Front,(Aden-based main Northern opposition group); the Yemen Reform Group (formed in September 1990, calling for adherence to sharia (Islamic) law; among its leaders were members of the Advisory Council, including Shaihk Abdullah bin Hussain al-Ahmar, the powerful leader of the northern Hashid tribal confederation).
In addition, there was evidence of organization amongst pro-Syrian and pro-Iraqi Ba'ath activists.
Elections
General election due by November 1992.
1990 OVERVIEW
The unification of Yemen in May, six months earlier than had been expected, raised hopes of economic growth during the early 1990s.
The decision to legalize Northern and Southern opposition groupings and to allow them representation in the transitional parliament only served to increase the sense of optimism surrounding unification.
However, Iraq's invasion of Kuwait in August dealt a serious blow to unified Yemen's immediate prospects, and the country entered 1991 facing the possibility of economic deterioration, political and social unrest and regional isolation.
At the outbreak of the Gulf crisis Yemen's position came under particular scrutiny as currently the only Arab member of the UN Security Council.
At the vote on the imposition of sanctions against Iraq, Yemen abstained as it also did from the vote at the Arab League meeting which approved Arab military intervention in Saudi Arabia.
Yemen's close military and economic links with Iraq, and its ambivalent attitude at the outset of the crisis, led to a serious deterioration in its relations with neighbouring Saudi Arabia, which in September abolished privileges granted to Yemeni workers [see p. 37794].
By late November some 800,000 Yemeni workers had returned home from Saudi Arabia, with adverse consequences for Yemen's vital remittance income.
Unified Yemen's first budget was presented to the House of Representatives in December 1990.
Based on figures calculated for the united Yemen throughout 1990, the budget forecast a deficit reduction of some 27 per cent during 1991, with a 43 per cent increase in revenue and an increase in expenditure of only 10 per cent.
1991 1990 Revenue 35,218 24,704 Expenditure, 50,980 46,256
1991 budget (million rials)
of which: Defence 12,700
Investment and development projects 11,000
Education 8,300
Interest on foreign loans 2,400
Deficit 15,762 21,552 Source: Middle East Economic Digest.
Lost remittances 400 Undisbursed Kuwaiti development aid 397 Lost Kuwaiti and Iraqi oil supplies 259 Lost budget and project support from Iraq 145 Lost exports to Iraq and Kuwait 157 Lost budget and project support from Kuwait 28 Indirect costs (i.e. balance of payments difficulties, rising unemployment) 300 Total 1,686 
Projected losses resulting from Gulf crisis, 1990-91 (US$million)
Estimated debt figures
The Middle East Economic Digest of July 13 quoted a senior government official as stating that the total foreign debt of united Yemen stood at US$7,256 million as of March 1990, a figure substantially higher than earlier World Bank estimates.
Of this figure, US$4,366 million was Southern debt (mainly to China and Eastern Europe) and US$2,890 million Northern debt.
The report stated that the unified state's foreign debt was equivalent to around 110 per cent of its combined GNP, putting it on a par with Jordan and Morocco in terms of debt burden.
FOREIGN RELATIONS
Principal foreign relations events in 1990
April: restoration by USA of diplomatic relations with South Yemen prior to unification; August-September: reaction to Gulf crisis [pp. 37637; 37695]; October: expulsions of Yemeni workers from Saudi Arabia [see p. 37794]; November: vote against UN Security Council Resolution 678 authorizing use of force [see p. 37870]; December: assumption of chair of UN Security Council [see pp. 37870; 37927].
MIDDLE EAST — ARAB WORLD
GULF CO-OPERATION COUNCIL
The Gulf Co-operation Council (GCC) was founded in May 1981 [see p. 30982]with the aim of establishing co-ordination, integration and co-operation in economic, social and cultural affairs between member countries (Bahrain, Kuwait, Oman, Qatar, Saudi Arabia and the United Arab Emirates).
It holds regular ministerial meetings to co-ordinate different aspects of policy amongst the Gulf States, including in the defence and security fields where there is most controversy.
However, the Iraqi invasion of Kuwait in early August 1990 provoked only condemnatory statements from the GCC, and only after three weeks did GCC Defence Ministers meeting in Saudi Arabia formally agree to reinforce the Peninsular Shield Force, the organization's Saudi-based rapid deployment force.
GCC troops subsequently joined the United States-led multinational forces opposing Iraq.
The highest body of the GCC is the Supreme Council, comprising heads of state of member countries, which meets annually, most recently in Doha, the capital of Qatar, in December 1990 [see p. 37927-28].
The GCC secretariat, based in Riyadh, Saudi Arabia, is headed by a Secretary-General, currently Abdullah Yacoub Bishara (Kuwait).
MIDDLE EAST — ARAB WORLD
ARAB CO-OPERATION COUNCIL
The Arab Co-operation Council (ACC) was founded in February 1989 by Iraq, Egypt, Jordan and North Yemen.
The ACC aimed to achieve the gradual economic integration of its members; it was also believed that the four governments had signed a secret defence agreement promising mutual military assistance against any source of external aggression.
The Supreme Council, consisting of heads of state of member governments, met four times during 1989-90, but the organization effectively disintegrated in the aftermath of Iraq's invasion and annexation of Kuwait in August 1990 [see pp. 37631-41].
The fact that Egypt had swiftly joined the United States-led anti-Iraqi military coalition following the Iraqi action guaranteed that the ACC would not be revived in its previous form.
MIDDLE EAST — ARAB WORLD
ARAB LEAGUE
Membership: Algeria, Bahrain, Djibouti, Egypt, Iraq, Jordan, Kuwait, Lebanon, Libya, Mauritania, Morocco, Oman, Palestine, Qatar, Saudi Arabia, Somalia, Sudan, Syria, Tunisia, UAE, Yemen.
The Council, the supreme organ of the Arab League, consists of a representative from each member.
The General Secretariat carries out the decisions of the Council and provides financial and administrative services for the personnel of the League.
The Secretary-General is appointed by the Council by a two-thirds majority of the member states for a five-year term.
The Arab League was founded in March 1945 with the aim of strengthening the close ties between sovereign Arab states in order to co-ordinate their policies and activities for the common good of the Arab world.
Membership was open to all Arab states including Palestine, which was considered to be an independent state.
Egypt was suspended in March 1979 (and the League headquarters transferred form Cairo to Tunis) following its 1979 peace accord with Israel, but it was readmitted to membership in May 1989 [see p. 36669].
A unanimous March 1990 decision to return the headquarters of the League from Tunis to Cairo [see p. 37334]led, however, to a serious dispute in September when it was decided to speed up the transfer, which was largely completed by the end of October [see p. 37726].
Emergency summits were held in May in Baghdad [see p. 37472-73]and in August in Cairo, when the continued existence of the League in its existing format, was cast into serious doubt following divisions over Iraq's invasion of Kuwait [see p. 37635].
The Secretary-General, Chedli Klibi [for whose re-appointment in March 1989 for a third term see p. 36537], resigned in September after Saudi criticism of his handling of League reaction to the invasion; Assad al Assad was named as Acting Secretary-General [see p. 37726].