

AMERICAS — CARIBBEAN
EL SALVADOR
Peace accord
President Alfredo Cristiani, his aides and leaders of the Farabundo Martí Liberation Front (FMLN) guerrillas reached agreement in New York on Sept. 25 on a broad plan which offered the possibility of a permanent ceasefire and an eventual end to the 11-year civil war.
The eight-point accord followed 18 months of UN-sponsored peace talks, ending in 10 days of intensive negotiation in New York.
Both sides expressed satisfaction with the result, and UN Secretary-General Javier Pérez de Cuéllar stated that "the Gordian knot has been untied" .
Diplomatic efforts within the UN from the United States, the Soviet Union and Latin American countries—in particular from Mexico, Colombia and Venezuela—supported by Spain, had reportedly added a sense of urgency to the talks.
There remained doubts over implementing the accord, particularly because right-wing factions in the military and the wealthy ruling oligarchy had not been party to the talks, and because hardline elements within the FMLN might not accept the dropping of a previous key demand that either the army be disbanded or its ranks be reduced and the remainder merged into those of the guerrillas.
The whole agreement was dependent on the introduction of a permanent ceasefire, and more detailed talks were scheduled to take place on Oct. 12 in Mexico.
Meanwhile the army, despite the FMLN's truce offer of Sept. 14, was still engaged in a long push against guerrilla strongholds, and a major FMLN counter-offensive was not ruled out.
Central elements of New York agreement
1.
The eventual dissolution of such right-wing paramilitary security bodies as the Treasury Police and National Guard, and the formation, under international supervision, of a new civilian police force which former FMLN guerrillas would be allowed to join.
2.
A "purge" of the armed forces by an ad hoc committee, including two members from the military.
3.
The creation of a National Commission for the Consolidation of Peace (COPAZ), made up of one representative from each of the political parties or coalitions in the Legislative Assembly, and two each from the government, armed forces and FMLN, charged with the task of supervising the implementation of all future accords, including ceasefires and changes in the armed forces; its work to be supervised byrepresentatives from the Roman Catholic Church and the UN Observers for El Salvador (Onusal).
4.
An agrarian reform programme to make further land available, and respect for the current land ownership of FMLN sympathizers.
5.
The creation of a government, business and trade union forum to resolve socio-economic problems.
Conviction of murderers of Jesuits
Col. Guillermo Alfredo Benavides was found guilty on Sept. 28 of ordering the murders of six Jesuit priests, their housekeeper and her daughter in November 1989 [see pp. 37037-38; 37181; 37957].
Lt. Yusshy Mendoza was found guilty of the murder of the housekeeper's daughter.
Five soldiers and two other lieutenants from the elite US-trained Atlacatl battalion were judged only to have obeyed orders and were acquitted.
Another soldier had reportedly fled the country.
The judge had 30 days to pass sentence.
Jesuit leaders said, however, that those on trial had been "scapegoats" and that the search had to continue for those high up in the military who had masterminded the operation.
The verdict followed a three-day jury trial in a civilian court which was seen as a test of the ability of the judicial system to end the effective immunity of the armed forces from human rights charges.
This was the first time that a member of the military had been tried and found guilty of a human rights violation in 11 years of civil war marked by accusations of government-sanctioned torture, kidnapping and murder.
The US Congress had made prosecution of the case a condition for continued US military aid.
EUROPE
SOVIET UNION
Changes in state structure
The fifth extraordinary Congress of People's Deputies met on Sept. 2-6 to discuss the situation in the country after the failure of the coup in August, and the need for changes to the Constitution and the system of government.
The Congress passed by 1,699 votes to 24 with 49 abstentions a document arising from a statement by the presidents of 10 republics (Russian Federation (RSFSR), Ukraine, Byelorussia, Kazakhstan, Uzbekistan, Kirghizia, Tajikistan, Turkmenia, Armenia and Azerbaidjan) and the USSR President Mikhail Gorbachev (the three Baltic republics and Georgia and Moldava having refused to participate).
This document stated that the coup had created "an historic opportunity of accelerating the radical transformations and renewing the country" .
It called for the signing of a treaty on a "Union of Sovereign States" , adherence to which would be determined by the individual republics.
Republics which did not wish to join the Union would hold talks with the USSR to resolve matters arising from independence (such as share of the national debt, armed forces, etc.).
The Congress debated a transitional structure for an interim government before the adoption of a new Constitution.
After heated debate and repeated votes, Gorbachev succeeded in pushing through the legislation, which effectively meant the deputies voting themselves out of office.
The new structures as finally adopted comprised three bodies—a State Council, a revised Supreme Soviet, and an interim Economic Committee.
The main trend was for greater powers for the republics, which were to join the new union on a voluntary basis, choosing the level of involvement which they wanted to have.
The new State Council would consist of the heads of republics prepared to sign the new union treaty, with the Union President taking the chair.
The post of vice-president was abolished—the former Vice-President, Gennady Yanayev, had been a member of the State Committee for the State of Emergency (SCSE) which had seized power during the coup.
Should the president be unable to carry out his duties, the State Council would elect a temporary president from among its members.
Its decisions would be mandatory, and its responsibilities would concern the direction of domestic and foreign policy.
The Congress of People's Deputies, from which the standing parliament—the Supreme Soviet—was elected, would be replaced by a new bicameral Supreme Soviet which would assume the Congress's right to alter the constitution.
The composition of the Supreme Soviet would follow closely the proposals set out in the draft Union Treaty [see pp. 38348-49], whose planned signature on Aug. 20 by five republics had been pre-empted by the coup: the Soviet of the Union would consist of deputies from union republics, elected according to existing quotas, subject to the consent of republican governments; the Soviet (Council) of the Republics would be the upper chamber, dealing with the organization of union bodies and foreign links, with power of veto over the Soviet of the Union, whose responsibilities would involve the rights and freedoms of citizens.
The Soviet of the Republics would have 20 deputies delegated from each republic's Supreme Soviet, and one from each autonomous republic or region within a republic's borders.
The RSFSR would have 52 deputies—20 from the its Supreme Soviet, 31 from autonomous regions and republics and one representing the nationalities without territorial recognition.
Each republic, however, would have one vote.
Republican constitutions had supremacy over laws adopted by the Supreme Soviet.
The third body of power was to be an Inter-republican Economic Committee, whose president would be nominated by the Union President, and whose members would be drawn from the republics.
Non-membership of the new Union would not preclude membership of the Economic Committee.
Changes in resolution
The original proposals for the interim state structures had been presented to the Congress on Sept. 2 by President Nursultan Nazarbayev of Kazakhstan.
They were the result of a meeting the previous day between Gorbachev and leaders of the 10 republics prepared to participate.
The presentation of the proposals departed from the agenda of the Congress, which, immediately they were announced, adjourned for delegations to discuss them.
The original proposals made no provision for a union body.
A Council of Representatives of People's Deputies, consisting of 20 representatives from each republic, would have been the interim parliamentary body; the proposals did envisage, however, a State Council and an Economic Committee as passed in the final resolution.
It took a day of debate additional to the agreed three-day sitting for the amended proposals to be passed, clause by clause.
A disputed paragraph regarding representation in the Soviet of the Republics was passed with the required two-thirds majority at the fourth vote, after a minor adjustment.
The deputies were to keep their privileges and pay until the end of their five-year term of office, in 1994.
A clause was dropped from the proposals which would have deemed "inexpedient" the calling of a Congress of People's Deputies during the transition to a new constitution.
The draft law as a whole was passed by 1,682 votes to 43 with 63 abstentions.
Declaration of human rights
The Congress finished its work with the adoption in principle, by 1,723 votes to four with 13 abstentions, of a statement on human rights and freedoms which, according to Le Monde of Sept. 7, would place the individual above the collective for the first time in Soviet history, if implemented in legislation by the new Supreme Soviet.
A clause giving the right to travel freely and choose the place of residence within the country would mean the abolition of the residence permit (propiska), which closed some cities to new inhabitants and without which housing, ration cards (where applicable) and work were unobtainable.
Other clauses in the declaration, if applied, would mean the outlawing of former means of coercion such as forced labour, telephone tapping and the removal of citizenship, and would guarantee the right to own property.
Presidential council
On Sept. 21, Gorbachev set up a Political Consultative Council, to be subordinate to the USSR President.
On Sept. 25, TASS World Service announced its composition.
Vadim Bakatin—KGB chairman Yevgeny Velikhov—academician Nikolai Petrakov—director of market institute of USSR Academy of Sciences Gavriil Popov—mayor of Moscow Yuri Ryzhkov—Chair of USSR Supreme Soviet Committee for Science and Technology Anatoly Sobchak—mayor of St.Petersburg Eduard Shevardnadze—former USSR Foreign Minister Aleksandr Yakovlev—former adviser to Gorbachev Yegor Yakovlev—Chair of USSR State Broadcasting Committee.
Political Consultative Council
Changes in Foreign Ministry
On Sept. 16 it was announced that a council of republican foreign ministers would form the Soviet Union's supreme diplomatic body, whose responsibilities would include appointing ambassadors and determining foreign policy.
A meeting between the new Soviet Foreign Affairs Minister, Boris Pankin, and the Foreign Ministers of 11 republics (all except Georgia of the remaining 12, following the independence of the Baltic states) had also agreed to seek UN membership for each republic, while still preserving the status of the Soviet Union on the Security Council.
On Sept. 7 the Foreign Ministry collegium (leadership council) dissolved itself.
A newly elected collegium, it was announced on Sept. 16, included "competent people who think in a modern way and who have stood the tests of the crisis" , according to a spokesman.
It was also announced that ambassadors' postings would henceforth be for a maximum of five years, and that their appointments would be approved by the council of USSR and republican foreign ministers.
The news agency Interfax reported on Sept. 18 that all KGB officers had been withdrawn from the personnel directorate of the Foreign Ministry as a step to withdrawing KGB personnel from the Foreign Ministry's central apparatus.
Izvestiya reported on Sept. 26 that the Soviet ambassadors to France, the United Kingdom, Yugoslavia, Ireland, Sweden and Guinea-Bissau were to be retired.
New foreign intelligence service — KGB reforms
On Sept. 30 Gorbachev named Yevgeny Primakov as head of the foreign intelligence operations formerly conducted by the KGB (State Security Committee).
Primakov was a chief advisor to Gorbachev on Middle Eastern affairs, had been a central figure in Soviet diplomacy over the Gulf crisis, and, together with former Foreign Minister Eduard Shevardnadze, was seen by observers as one of the architects of the "new thinking" in Soviet foreign policy.
The foreign intelligence operations were now to be conducted by a new and as yet unnamed state agency separate from the KGB (although Primakov was also named first deputy chair of the KGB), and would concentrate on national security and on monitoring the international drugs trade and terrorism.
The former head of foreign intelligence, Lt.-Gen.
Leonid Shebarshin, resigned on Sept. 20, but would, Primakov said at a press conference on Oct. 2, be assisting the work of the new foreign intelligence service.
The failed coup of August had led to fundamental reforms of the KGB [see p. 38372]and the appointment of Vadim Bakatin to replace its former chair, Vladimir Kryuchkov, who had been arrested for his part in the coup.
The Third Directorate of the KGB, responsible for defence of the Soviet Constitution, was closed down on Bakatin's orders on Sept. 24.
Baker visit — Contacts with other Western leaders
During a visit to the Soviet Union which began on Sept. 10 and incorporated attendance at the Conference on Security and Co-operation in Europe (CSCE) human rights session in Moscow [see p. 38458], US Secretary of State James Baker held talks with Gorbachev, Pankin and Bakatin, with the RSFSR President Boris Yeltsin and its Foreign Minister Andrey Kozyrev, and with the Soviet Defence Minister Marshal Yevgeny Shaposhnikov and the Chief of General Staff of the USSR Armed Forces Gen. Vladimir Lobov.
[For agreement between Pankin and Baker on suspending military aid to the warring parties in Afghanistan see pp. 38437-38; for Soviet re-evaluation of its military presence in Cuba see pp. 38430-31.]
Baker's visit represented the US government's first direct high-level contact with the Soviet and Russian leadership since the collapse of the August coup.
The US administration had reportedly now endorsed a positive evaluation of Yeltsin's role, with senior officials reported on Sept. 7/8 as saying that "Yeltsin worked with Gorbachev in a way which probably saved the Soviet Union from the potential for a tremendous amount of chaos" .
This represented a change from the noticeably cool US attitude towards Yeltsin in the immediate aftermath of the August coup, which had apparently been prompted in particular by his assumption of control of the armed forces [see p. 38371].
US President George Bush had enjoyed a personal rapport with Gorbachev and was believed to prefer dealing with one person, especially on nuclear issues.
Shaposhnikov confirmed on Sept. 13 that "the USSR's missile weaponry will continue to be under the control of the centre" .
(The US administration estimated that the vast majority of the Soviet Union's 27,000 nuclear warheads were deployed in Russia but that several thousand were in Byelorussia, Ukraine, and Kazakhstan.)
Baker went to St Petersburg on Sept. 13, where he held talks with mayor Anatoly Sobchak.
He visited the Baltic states on Sept. 14 [see pp. 38419-20], and Alma Ata, the capital of Kazakhstan, on Sept. 15.
UK Prime Minister John Major visited Moscow briefly on Sept. 1 (en route for Beijing—see p. 38435).
Immediately beforehand he had talks with Bush at the latter's holiday home in Kennebunkport, Maine, at which the two leaders agreed to strengthen modestly the aid programme endorsed in July at the G-7 summit [see p. 38322].
As well as meeting Gorbachev, Yeltsin and other leaders Major met with the Prime Ministers of Estonia, Latvia and Lithuania, and with Leyla Gordievsky, the wife of Oleg Gordievsky who defected in 1985 [see p. 34005].
(On Sept. 6 she flew to London with her two daughters and rejoined her husband.)
Other visitors during September included mayor of Paris Jacques Chirac (Sept. 2-3), French Economics Minister Pierre Bérégovoy (Sept. 6-7), French Defence Minister Pierre Joxe (Sept. 11-16), EC Commissioner Frans Andriessen (Sept. 11), and the foreign ministers of Belgium, Canada, Denmark and Spain.
Economy
Pending the formation of an Inter-republican Economic Committee [see above], whose proposed structure and functions were being worked out by Ivan Silayev, RSFSR Prime Minister, the functions of government in the economic sphere were being carried out by the interim Committee for the Management of the National Economy, also chaired by Silayev [see p. 38371].
According to the Financial Times of Sept. 19, the Economic Committee would replace the majority of ministries, which were functioning under their deputy ministers after the resignation of the whole Cabinet in August [ibid.].
Food situation.
The interim Committee was reported on Sept. 4 as having undertaken "urgent measures" to ensure the provision of food.
These included providing extra farm machinery and manpower, including 20,000 troops.
An emergency food committee was set up in Moscow on Sept. 7, because of the "catastrophic" situation of food supply in the city.
The harvest was reported on Sept. 19 as being 40,000,000 tonnes down on the amount at the same time in 1990.
Silayev stated in an interview on Sept. 9 that there would be no starvation in Russia in the coming winter.
Fuel stocks at power stations were at only 60 per cent of requirements.
Money supply.
A total of 57,300 million roubles had been issued by the State Bank in the first eight months of 1991.
The figure budgeted for the whole year had been 40,000 million roubles.
Despite there being twice as much currency in circulation as in 1990, the deputy chairman of Gosbank, the State Bank, warned that some enterprises might have difficulty paying wages because of cash shortages.
Plans for economic union
Proposals were put forward for managing the closely interdependent economies of the republics.
Because of the recent declarations of independence by the majority of republics there were fears that without an agreement on economic union the economy would collapse.
The Boston Consulting Group, advising the World Bank and the European Bank for Reconstruction and Development (EBRD) on the Soviet economy, warned that the republics were "so completely interdependent [that]…if it disintegrates into autarchy, production will go down by 50 per cent" .
Three plans had been put forward by economists, and the State Council, at a session on Sept. 16 attended by the presidents of 10 republics (ie. not Georgia or Moldava), adopted the Yavlinsky plan "as a basis" .
This plan, drawn up by Grigory Yavlinsky, a deputy chair of the interim Committee, envisaged common budgetary, monetary and fiscal policies between republics.
It also proposed central bodies with real power, including a central bank on the US federal reserve model, and the preservation of a common currency, while still allowing republics to introduce their own currencies, provided that they did not undermine the single currency.
A plan by Stanislav Shatalin proposed a loose union, possibly including other eastern European states, in which there would be three levels of participation—full, associate and observer.
Adherence to a common currency would not be a prerequisite for joining the union.
A third proposal from Yevgeny Saburov, RSFSR Economics Minister and now with special responsibility for general economic issues on the interim Committee, envisaged gradual price liberalization, with resources traded between republics at "contract prices" set in accordance with world markets.
This would benefit the RSFSR, which was the main exporter of energy to other republics.
On Sept. 23, the State Council was reported as having passed a draft agreement on inter-republican economic relations, covering the powers of the new union bodies, setting up the union market and the introduction of national currencies.
Representatives from the Baltic states and all the Soviet republics except Kazakhstan and Turkmenia, plus representatives from Moscow and St Petersburg met in the Estonian capital, Tallinn, on Sept. 20 to discuss economic issues separate from any of the plans for economic union.
The republics
Russian Federation
At a meeting of the RSFSR Supreme Soviet on Sept. 20, deputies sharply criticized the republican government.
A motion declaring its moves to implement economic reform to be "unsatisfactory" was passed by 134 votes to 19, with five abstentions.
The Supreme Soviet also resolved that the President, Boris Yeltsin, should remove from office ministers who were failing to carry out the decisions of the republic's legislative bodies.
In addition, it was decided to hold a debate on decrees passed by Yeltsin since the coup [see p. 38371], with deputies objecting to the increase in his executive powers.
Yeltsin did not attend the session, which opened on Sept. 19.
He had reportedly been ill, and on Sept. 20 had begun his mediation attempt over Nagorny Karabakh [see below].
The resignation of Silayev as RSFSR Prime Minister was accepted by Yeltsin on Sept. 27.
Silayev gave as his reason his wish to be able to concentrate on the responsibilities of establishing the Inter-republican Economic Committee [see above]and chairing the interim Committee for Management of the National Economy.
A conflict of interests in Silayev's posts had appeared on Sept. 23, when the Committee for Management of the National Economy temporarily suspended Russian Federation decrees passed in August transferring union property in Russia to republican jurisdiction.
A compromise was reported on Sept. 26, which meant that decisions of the Committee would become valid only after approval by the Russian Council of Ministers.
Byelorussia/Byelarus
At an extraordinary session of its Supreme Soviet on Sept. 18, Byelorussia was renamed to become the Republic of Byelarus, and Stanislav Shushkevich was elected Chairman of the Supreme Soviet—de facto president of the republic—in succession to Nikolai Dementei [for whose resignation, after supporting the August coup, see p. 38373].
Shushkevich was elected by 214 votes out of a total of 312, after three rounds of voting in the Supreme Soviet, gaining 163 votes more than the other candidate, Leonid Kozik.
TASS described Shushkevich as "an active supporter of democratic change and an advocate of the soonest implementation of market relations and private property" .
Ukraine
On Aug. 31, the chairman of the Ukrainian Supreme Soviet, Leonid Kravchuk, banned the activity of the republican Communist Party, because of its support for the coup.
On Sept. 4 the communists in the Supreme Soviet, who before the coup had numbered 324 out of the 450 deputies, mustered only 50 votes in favour of lifting the ban, and the leader of the CP bloc, Oleksandr Moroz, announced that it was to be dissolved.
The Ukrainian KGB was dissolved on Sept. 20, to be replaced by a security service under the control of the republican government.
The yellow and blue republican flag of Ukraine was raised over the Supreme Soviet building in place of the Ukrainian Soviet flag, to the delight of demonstrators outside.
Leaders of deputies from the opposition nationalist organization, Rukh, did not carry out their threat to boycott the session of the Supreme Soviet in protest at Kravchuk's signing the transitional plan for the new state structure at the USSR Congress of People's Deputies on Sept. 2.
Ivan Drach, Rukh's leader in the Supreme Soviet, said that Kravchuk had "contradicted our Act of Independence" , signed on Aug. 24 [see p. 38373].
On Sept. 3, Gen. Konstantin Morozov was appointed republican Defence Minister, and border troops and interior ministry troops were transferred to republican control.
Russian television reported on Sept. 10 that Ukraine was planning to form a republican guard of 400,000 men.
At the session of the Ukrainian Supreme Soviet on Sept. 4, the parliamentary immunity of Stepan Khmara was reinstated.
He had been put on trial in May 1991, in what was seen as an attempt to weaken the nationalist opposition.
On Sept. 4, Viktor Shishkin was appointed Procurator General of Ukraine, in place of CP member, Mikhail Potebenko.
On Sept. 10, the Supreme Soviet passed laws to transfer union property on Ukrainian territory to republican ownership, and to protect foreign investment.
It was reported on Sept. 13 that a law on citizenship had been passed.
This would establish a single Ukrainian citizenship in place of the system of dual republican and Soviet nationality.
On Sept. 22-25, Kravchuk visited Canada, where there was a Ukrainian community numbering some 1,000,000.
A declaration was signed on future bilateral relations, committing Canada to recognising Ukrainian independence if the referendum on the issue, scheduled for Dec. 1, was positive.
Canada had opened a consulate in Kiev on Sept. 9.
Crimean independence.
The Supreme Soviet of the Crimean Autonomous Republic [see p. 38015]declared independence on Sept. 4, but confirmed the Crimea's status as part of Ukraine.
The population of 2,500,000 in the Crimea was ethnically 68 per cent Russian.
Moldava
Following Moldava's declaration of independence of Aug. 27, 1991 [see p. 38373], the Moldavan President, Mircea Snegur, on Sept. 4 took control of customs posts and border troops, since "with the independence declaration of Moldava and Ukraine, we no longer have any borders with the Soviet Union" .
(Romania had been the first country to recognise Moldavan independence, followed by Georgia and Lithuania.)
The Dnestr region, however, in the east of Moldava, with a population of 700,000 mainly Russian speakers, which had been a part of Ukraine before it was incorporated into the Moldavan territory annexed by Stalin from Romania in 1940, declared its wish to remain part of the Soviet Union.
The "Dnestr Soviet Republic" had declared its secession from Moldava on Sept. 2, 1990 [see p. 37723], and on Sept. 2, 1991, its Congress of People's Deputies adopted a constitution, confirmed as its flag the former flag of the Moldavian SSR (Moldava having adopted the flag of Romania) and decided to form its own armed forces.
Demonstrators in the capital, Tiraspol, demanded the release by Sept. 3 of the chairman of the Dnestr Supreme Soviet, Igor Smirnov, who had been arrested in Kiev on Aug. 29 by the Moldavan Interior Ministry for suspected support of the coup.
They threatened to cut off gas and electricity to Moldava, of which the Dnestr region supplied almost 80 per cent.
The Dnestr Supreme Soviet voted on Sept. 20, however, to lift a blockade of major railway junctions by women in Dnestr which was disrupting freight traffic and preventing Moldava fulfilling its economic contracts with Russia.
Demonstrators in Dnestr were also protesting against rumours of Moldava's "reunification" with Romania.
Negotiations between representatives of the Russian, Moldavan and Dnestr Supreme Soviets began on Sept. 29.
Georgia
Special troops belonging to the Georgian National Guard opened fire on Sept. 2 on 2,000 demonstrators in Tbilisi who were demanding the resignation of President Zviad Gamsakhurdia and of the Georgian Supreme Soviet.
Prime Minister Tenguiz Sigua had resigned on Aug. 18, the day before the Soviet August coup, when Gamsakhurdia dismissed Deputy Premier Otar Kviliataya and Foreign Minister Georgi Khoshtaria allegedly because of the government's failure to halt economic decline and a fall in living standards.
Gamsakhurdia had subsequently taken personal control of the Interior, Foreign and Justice ministries and of the republican KGB.
Reports of the number of wounded in the Sept. 2 demonstration ranged from four to 24.
Protests and counter-demonstrations continued, with reports of violence on Sept. 22.
On Soviet television on Sept. 4 Shevardnadze (a Georgian) called on Gamsakhurdia to "restore dialogue" with his opponents, but was accused the next day by Gamsakhurdia of being "an enemy of Georgia" , involved with Sigua and Khoshtaria in a "plot" organized by the "communist mafia" .
The chair of the Georgian Supreme Soviet, Akaky Asatiani, announced on Sept. 6 that Georgia had broken off all official relations with the Soviet Union.
Georgia left the State Council, whose Sept. 6 meeting it had attended as an observer, because of the Council's refusal to discuss Georgian independence, by contrast with its official recognition of the Baltic states [see p. 38419].
Soviet troops in Georgia were declared to be an "occupying force" , and the republic announced its refusal to consider signing even defence or economic treaties with the Soviet Union.
The new Prime Minister, Vissarion Gugushvili, banned the export of food, industrial goods, minerals and construction materials from Georgia from Sept. 5 to Jan. 1, 1992, following Gamsakhurdia's decree to that effect, reported on Aug. 21.
A US congressional delegation said on Sept. 8, after meeting both Gamsakhurdia and opposition leaders, that Georgia had to improve its record on human rights before it could expect to receive international recognition.
On Sept. 9 Gamsakhurdia announced the formation of a republican Defence Ministry (Dzhoni Pirtskhalaishvili being named Minister of Defence on Sept. 19), and ordered rebel elements of the Georgian National Guard to return to barracks.
The 15,000-member Georgian National Guard, set up in January 1991 [see p. 37971]in place of conscription in the Red Army, was reported to be split between Gamsakhurdia loyalists and a rebel faction.
Sigua was reported to have fled to the rebel headquarters in a Komsomol summer camp outside Tbilisi to avoid arrest.
During the August coup Gamsakhurdia had dismissed the guard's commander, Tengiz Kitovani (who became leader of the rebel element), and ordered the guard to disband.
He described this order (cancelled when the coup collapsed) variously as reorganization or saving the troops from the Red Army, but his opponents claimed that it was a step taken in collaboration with the coup leaders, and that his newly appointed Foreign Minister Murman Omanidze had held talks in Moscow with Yanayev beforehand.
Six deputies from the ruling Round Table bloc had proposed on Aug. 26 that the leadership's actions during the coup should be "assessed as unsatisfactory" .
The Georgian Supreme Soviet, called for Sept. 16, convened on Sept. 15, as an opposition demonstration had been called to coincide with its opening on Sept. 16.
The majority of the 64 communist deputies were expelled from the session, and 40 deputies walked out because of a vote to exclude television coverage.
On Sept. 19 a vote was split 89 to 89 over whether communist deputies were to be allowed to attend.
A 14-point programme was debated in an attempt to solve the situation in the republic.
The leader of the opposition National Democratic Party of Georgia (NDPG), Georgi Chanturia, was arrested at Tbilisi airport as he tried to leave for Moscow on Sept. 16, together with his wife Irina Sarishvili and another NDPG leader Vakhtang Talakhadze (who was released the following day).
Other arrests in September included opposition leaders Georgi Khaindrava and Yuram Chakvad.
On Sept. 18 an opposition demonstration surrounded the television building in Tbilisi, interrupting a televised appeal for support by Gamsakhurdia.
The television centre was occupied by the opposition on Sept. 21, but their attempts to broadcast were prevented by the government's cutting electricity supplies to the building, while Gamsakhurdia continued to broadcast from the Supreme Soviet building.
Georgian television had become virtually the only source of information since the presidium of the Supreme Soviet had closed down almost all Georgian language newspapers on Sept. 5 (allegedly because of a paper shortage) and Russian and Soviet television broadcasts were interrupted.
On Sept. 22 Gamsakhurdia met an opposition representative, Tedo Paatashvili, at the residence of the Patriarch of Georgia, Illya II.
According to opposition sources, Gamsakhurdia agreed to hold a televised emergency debate in the Supreme Soviet, to discuss fresh parliamentary elections, and the drafting of a new election law.
On Sept. 24, Gamsakhurdia declared a state of emergency—to come into force the following day—because "a military and civilian putsch is under way in the republic" .
The emergency provisions included universal — mobilization and the surrender of all illegal weapons, but did not ban demonstrations nor impose a curfew.
A National Security Council was set up under Gamsakhurdia's chairmanship.
On Sept. 25, Gamsakhurdia threatened to impose direct presidential rule, because of shooting incidents in Tbilisi on the night of Sept. 24-25 in which at least five people died.
On Sept. 29 there was an explosion outside the television centre.
Radio Moscow World Service quoted Gamsakhurdia as having cancelled talks with the opposition scheduled for Sept. 30, because "the opposition did not lay down arms" .
Armenia
A referendum on the independence of Armenia from the Soviet Union was held on Sept. 21.
In a 95.5 per cent turnout, 94.39 per cent voted in favour of secession and 0.46 per cent against.
The republic was declared an independent state on Sept. 23.
The President, Levon Ter Petrosyan, said that the republic would not observe the five-year transitional period as laid down in Soviet legislation on secession.
The Prime Minister, Vazgen Manukyan, resigned on Sept. 25 at the Supreme Soviet, complaining of slander.
He also withdrew from presidential elections due to be held on Oct. 16.
The Communist Party of Armenia voted at a congress on Sept. 7 to cease its activity.
Azerbaijan
Direct presidential elections on Sept. 8 endorsed the sole candidate, current president (chair of the Supreme Soviet), Ayaz Mutalibov, in a turnout cited by the republic's central electoral commission as 83.7 per cent, but estimated by the opposition National Democratic Front as no more than 25 per cent .
The leader of the small Social Democratic Party, Zardusht Ali Zade, had withdrawn as a presidential candidate on July 17, as the opposition sought to deny the elections any semblance of legitimacy.
Demonstrations of up to 100,000 people before the elections were accompanied by calls from the Azerbaijani People's Front for their boycott and for a general strike.
The election was banned in the Nakhichevan Autonomous Republic (an Azerbaijani enclave separated from Azerbaijan by Armenian land) by its Supreme Soviet which was headed by Geydar Aliyev, a former CPSU politburo member [see p. 36592]who had become a member of the Azerbaijani People's Front.
In Nagorny Karabakh, administratively part of Azerbaijan [see below], elections were not held in Armenian-populated areas.
Nagorny Karabakh agreement
On Sept. 24, Yeltsin and the Kazakh President Nursultan Nazarbayev achieved a ceasefire agreement between the republics of Azerbaidjan and Armenia over Nagorny Karabakh, where an estimated 800 people had died in inter-ethnic conflict since 1988.
On Sept. 2 the Nagorny Karabakh autonomous oblast (region) had declared itself the Nagorny Karabakh Republic, incorporating the adjacent Shaumyan district, in accordance with a joint decision of the local governing councils.
Yeltsin and Nazarbayev arranged separate meetings with the leaderships of Armenia and Azerbaijan on Sept. 21-22 before bringing together their presidents (Ter-Petrosyan and Mutalibov), and the leadership of Nagorny Karabakh, in the southern Russian town of Zheleznovodsk.
The ceasefire provided for the withdrawal and disarming of all armed groups by the end of 1991, excepting only the Soviet troops stationed there.
The RSFSR and Kazakhstan were to provide monitors and act as guarantors.
Local self-government was to be restored in Nagorny Karabakh by January 1992.
Hostages were to be freed and people returned to the villages from which they had been deported.
Delegations from Armenia and Azerbaidjan were to take part in talks "on a permanent basis" , beginning on Oct. 1, which would be brokered by the RSFSR and Kazakhstan.
Reports of continuing violence in the area cited figures of 15 dead and 20 wounded as of Sept. 26, including six Armenians killed in the Mardakert district, and a missile attack on the capital, Stepanakert, on Sept. 25.
Kazakhstan
The Kazakh Communist Party voted at an emergency congress on Sept. 8 to withdraw from the CPSU and become the independent Socialist Party of Kazakhstan (SPK).
The new party dissociated itself from the mistakes of its predecessor.
An executive committee was elected, and all other party committees disbanded.
Party members were to reregister voluntarily in the new party.
Tajikistan: Independence declaration — "Communist coup" 
On Sept. 9, Tajikistan became the 12th Soviet republic to declare independence (only the Russian Federation, Kazakhstan and Turkmenia having not done so).
Acting president Kadreddin Aslonov, appointed after the Aug. 31 resignation of Kakhar Makhkamov because of the coup [see p. 38373], issued on Sept. 22 a decree banning the activities of the Communist Party of Tajikistan (which on Sept. 21 had renamed itself the Socialist Party of Tajikistan) and nationalizing its property.
The mayor of Dushanbe, Maksud Ikramov, issued what proved to be a highly controversial decree on the same day allowing the removal of statues of Lenin.
The ban on communists, however, was overturned at a special session of the Supreme Soviet on Sept. 23, after which Aslonov resigned and the former Tajik Communist Party first secretary, Rakhman Nabiyev, was unanimously elected to replace him.
A state of emergency was introduced in the republic, to last until Jan. 1, 1992.
The opposition Union of Democratic Forces called for a campaign of protest and civil disobedience, condemning Nabiyev's election as "a reactionary communist coup" and demanding the lifting of the emergency regulations, the dissolution of the Supreme Soviet and popular presidential elections.
Thousands of people demonstrated in Dushanbe, confronting large crowds of pro-government demonstrators.
By Sept. 28-29 the Nabiyev government had conceded talks, attended by observers including the leader of the Democratic Party of Russia, Nikolai Travkin, and had agreed to key opposition demands, including suspending the communist party, nationalizing its property, lifting the state of emergency, and holding presidential elections on Oct. 27.
City name changes
The RSFSR Supreme Soviet ratified on Sept. 6 the decision to change the name of Leningrad back to the original St Petersburg (Russian Sankt Peterburg), as approved by referendum on June 12 [see p. 38273].
The city soviet of Sverdlovsk, where Yeltsin had been Communist Party first secretary until 1985, voted on Sept. 4 to return to the city its original name of Yekaterinburg, and reportedly requested approval from the RSFSR Supreme Soviet.
Renamed in 1918 in honour of central committee secretary Yasha Sverdlov, Yekaterinburg was famous as the place where Tsar Nikolai II and his family were executed.
Disbanding of Komsomol
The All-Union Lenin Young Communist League (VLKSM or Komsomol) held an extraordinary congress in Moscow on Sept. 27-28, when it approved an Aug. 23 proposal to disband [see p. 38372].
It would hand over its property to its constituent republican bodies to decide their fate independently.
Reappointment of Gubenko
The Minister of Culture, Nikolai Gubenko, who resigned in protest against the coup on Aug. 20, was reappointed by Gorbachev on Sept. 7.
Media developments
A division of the property of State Television and Radio (Gosteleradio), announced on Sept. 13, involved transferring to Russian television (launched in May—see p. 38206) the second all-union television channel and a part of the correspondents' network.
It was also announced that the RSFSR government had decided to merge together the Russian Information Agency and the Novosti news agency (which had been brought under RSFSR control after the failed coup—see p. 38372) as one agency headed by the former Novosti chief Andrei Vinogradov.
Yeltsin's decree of Aug. 22 suspending publication of six newspapers, including Pravda, for their support for the coup, was revoked on Sept. 13.
It was announced on Sept. 23 that Gorbachev had appointed Andrei Grachev as a presidential aide and head of the presidential press service.
EUROPE
BALTIC STATES
Independence of Lithuania, Estonia and Latvia
On Sept. 6 the State Council of the Soviet Union voted unanimously to recognize the independence of the republics of Lithuania, Latvia and Estonia.
The three states were admitted to the Conference and Security and Co-operation in Europe (CSCE) on Sept. 10 and to the United Nations on Sept. 17 [see p. 38458].
Lithuania first had been an independent state in mediaeval times, until the end of the 14th century.
All three republics had been independent between 1918-19 and August 1940 when Soviet power was established under the pretext of the 1939 Molotov-Ribbentrop pact [see pp. 4181; 4163].
Countries establishing diplomatic relations with the Baltic states before Sept. 6 included Iceland (the first to do so—see p. 37945), Austria, Belgium, Canada, Denmark, Finland, France, Germany, Hungary, Italy, Norway, Poland, Portugal, Romania, Spain, Sweden, Switzerland, the United Kingdom, and (on Sept. 2) the United States.
Of the Soviet republics [see pp. 38372-73], Georgia, the Ukraine and Moldova all recognized the independence of the Baltic states before Sept. 6.
The Soviet Union's recognition prompted a spate of recognitions, including that of China on Sept. 7.
On Sept. 6 the three Baltic Foreign Ministers, A. Saudargas (Lithuania), Janis Jurkans (Latvia) and Lennart Merri (Estonia), went to Brussels to present a request for associate membership of the European Communities (EC), which had already formally stated its recognition of them as independent states.
On Sept. 9 Frans Andriesson, the EC Commissioner responsible for external relations and trade policy and for co-operation with other European countries, held discussions in Tallinn, the Estonian capital, with ministers from all three Baltic states at which he declared that the EC was "prepared to enter into contractual relations…as soon as possible, but this must be done step by step" .
US Secretary of State James Baker briefly visited Tallinn, Riga and Vilnius (the three Baltic capitals) on Sept. 14 (on his way back via St Petersburg from the Moscow CSCE conference).
He announced a US$14,000,000 aid package to be distributed in equal parts between the three states and to be financed under the US budget for fiscal 1991 ending on Sept. 30.
He also pledged to unfreeze nearly $60,000,000 in assets belonging to the three countries which had been seized by the USA in June 1940.
Jacques Attali, president of the European Bank for Reconstruction and Development (EBRD), visited Tallinn on Sept. 24, when he announced that the EBRD was "in the process of finalizing membership for the Baltic states" .
Aid was especially needed for stabilization funds to bolster the convertibility of the three planned currencies.
Czechoslovakia signed trade agreements with the Baltic republics on Aug. 2-3, the first country to do so.
(By that time Czechoslovakia had already signed similar agreements with the Russian Federation, the Ukraine and Byelorussia.)
Economy
The three Baltic Prime Ministers, Gediminas Vagnorius (Lithuania), Ivars Godmanis (Latvia) and Edgar Savisaar (Estonia), meeting in Tallinn on Sept. 24, reached agreement on a customs union to allow free trade between the three states, and to guarantee equal rights for Baltic entrepreneurs and visa-free travel between the three states.
All three economies were dependent upon imports, especially oil and gas, from the rest of the Soviet Union.
Lithuania
The Lithuanian Republic was in March 1990 the first republic to declare its independence from the Soviet Union [see p. 37299-300].
Elections in February 1990 to the Supreme Soviet (subsequently renamed the Supreme Council) had resulted in a majority of seats going to the nationalist Sajudis movement [see pp. 37299-300].
In a referendum in February 1991, 90.47 per cent of voters favoured independence [see p. 38014], following Soviet military intervention in January when troops stormed the television centre in Vilnius, killing civilians [see pp. 37944-45].
Lithuania's highest legislative body was the 141-member Supreme Council—Auksiausiogi Taryba, which at its constituent session in March 1990 elected Vytautas Landsbergis to the post of chair (de facto President)[see p. 37299-300].
On Sept. 5, 1991, the parliament in Lithuania dissolved three local councils in Polish- and Russian-dominated areas for allegedly supporting the August coup in the USSR, and imposed direct rule from Vilnius, provoking widespread protests.
Lithuania had a 79.6 per cent Lithuanian population, with only 9.4 per cent Russians (and 7 per cent Poles), whereas Russian minorities comprised 33.8 per cent in Latvia and 30.3 per cent in Estonia.
Jewish groups also protested that some of the 35,000 people who had been pardoned by the Lithuanian authorities since 1988 were Nazi war criminals, prompting the government to announce that two of the cases would be reviewed.
Latvia
On May 4, 1990, the Latvian Supreme Soviet declared the independent Republic of Latvia—recognized internationally in 1920—to be de jure still in existence, and declared the sovereignty of Latvian over Soviet law [see p. 37460].
In a referendum in March 1991, 73.68 per cent of voters favoured independence [see p. 38978], which was declared on Aug. 21 [see p. 38372].
Legislative power was exercised by the Supreme Soviet (Augstaka Padome) of Latvia, elections to which were held in March-April 1990 [see p. 37322].
Of the 210 seats 128 were held by deputies belonging to the Latvian Popular Front [see p. 37461].
Anatolijs Gorbunovs was elected to the post of chair (de facto President) in May 1990 [ibid.].
(A 231-member Congress of Latvia—Latvijas Kongress—was also elected in April 1990 by citizens of pre-war Latvia and their descendants.
It acted as a pressure group but had less influence that its Estonian counterpart—see below.)
Estonia
In November 1989 the Estonian Supreme Soviet declared the republic to be "sovereign" , and USSR Supreme Soviet laws were to be effectively subject to approval by the Estonian Supreme Soviet [see p. 36486].
In March 1990 the newly elected Supreme Soviet inaugurated a period of transition to independence [see p. 37322], and in May five key articles of the independent republic's 1938 constitution were reinstated [see p. 37461].
Following a referendum on March 3, 1991, in which 77.83 per cent of voters favoured independence [see p. 38078], full independence from the Soviet Union was declared on Aug. 20 [see p. 38372].
The 105-member Ülemnoukogu (parliament) was the highest legislative body, which in March 1990 elected Arnold Rüütel as chair (de facto President—see p. 37322).
The majority of seats in the March 1990 elections [ibid.]went to groups supporting Estonian independence, principally the Estonian Popular Front (43 seats) and the Association for a Free Estonia (35 seats).
The remaining 27 seats were held by the International Movement, representing the Russian minority.
In addition candidates belonging to the Estonian Communist Party, which had voted for independence from the Soviet CP in March 1990 [see p. 37323]and were represented in all these groups, won 55 seats.
A Constitutional Assembly (Pohiseaduslik Assamblee) was formed by the parliament on Sept. 7, 1991.
It was led by Tonu Anton and intended to write a new constitution by Nov. 15 which would then be put to referendum.
Its 60 members were drawn equally from the Parliament and the Congress of Estonia, a 495-member body elected as a pressure group in March 1990 by citizens of pre-war Estonia and their descendants.
On Sept. 2 the government announced a three-stage programme to remove the vestiges of communist control and integrate Estonia politically and economically with the rest of Europe.
On Sept. 11 parliament approved a foreign investment law, which provided various incentives to foreign investors including a two-year tax exemption for companies with at least 30 per cent foreign capital and a three-year exemption where there was at least 50 per cent foreign capital.
On Sept. 12 Rein Otsason resigned as president of the Bank of Estonia amid allegations of fraud and incompetence, and was replaced on Sept. 23 by Siim Kallas.
EUROPE
YUGOSLAVIA
Intensification of civil war
By early September the civil war had escalated to the extent that Croatia had lost almost one-third of its territory to Serbian nationalist forces, with whom the Serb-dominated Yugoslav National Army (JNA) was now openly identified.
However, during September the army became increasingly weakened by desertions and the refusal of conscripts from Croatia, Slovenia, Macedonia and Bosnia-Hercegovina to enter the army.
Croatian separatist forces won back a degree of control by instigating a blockade of JNA barracks throughout the republic of Croatia, forcing the occupants to surrender with their tanks and equipment.
Another ceasefire brokered by the European Communities (EC) appeared to be holding for a time, as the Hague peace conference continued its efforts to find long-term solutions to the conflict, but the truce collapsed in early October.
Agreement on EC ceasefire — Consolidation of Serbian positions before peace conference
The EC peace proposals of Aug. 27 [see p. 38376]were endorsed by Croatia and finally also in principle by Serbia on Sept. 1.
All six Yugoslav republics, the (Croatian) President of the Collective Presidency Stjepan Mesic, and the (likewise Croatian) Federal Prime Minister Ante Markovic, signed two documents in Belgrade on Sept. 2, envisaging an immediate ceasefire.
The Sept. 2 agreement was reached through the mediation of the Netherlands Foreign Minister Hans Van den Broek.
It provided for the EC, the Conference on Security and Co-operation in Europe (CSCE) and representatives of all parties to the conflict to monitor the ceasefire.
It extended the EC's observer mission into Croatian territory and envisaged the withdrawal of the JNA, the Serbian guerrillas and Croatian National Guards out of each other 's range before returning to barracks or demobilizing.
EC Foreign Ministers met in The Hague on Sept. 3 and decided to hold the peace conference proposed on Aug. 27 as early as Sept. 7.
President Ramiz Alia of Albania on Sept. 2 called for the substantial body of ethnic Albanians in Yugoslavia to be represented at the peace conference.
The ceasefire broke down within hours, however, and the Croatian Defence Ministry called on the population to mobilize for a "very long defensive campaign" .
The heaviest fighting of the conflict so far ensued as Serbian nationalists intensified efforts to consolidate their positions before the peace conference began on Sept. 7.
Croatia was effectively split as eastern Slavonia and a stretch of the Zagreb-Belgrade motorway near Okucani came under Serbian control.
The first of up to 200 EC and CSCE ceasefire monitors arrived in Zagreb on Sept. 5, and the Dutch Foreign Minister's special envoy Henri Wijnaendts immediately began visiting the war zones.
At this stage, given the scale of the fighting, EC members were divided over whether the peace conference could go ahead, and Germany warned that it would unilaterally grant formal recognition to Croatia and Slovenia (both of which had declared independence on June 25) if fighting persisted.
Endorsement by CSCE of arms embargo — Arms allegations against South Africa
At its third emergency meeting on Yugoslavia in Prague on Sept. 3-4 the CSCE called for an embargo on weapons and war equipment against all parties in the conflict.
South Africa on Sept. 4 denied allegations by Uganda that its leading arms manufacturer Armscor had been supplying weapons to Croatia.
The Ugandan government had suspended five of its pilots for apparently carrying weapons on board a Ugandan-registered aircraft from Bophuthatswana to Zagreb, where they had been impounded by the Yugoslav authorities.
Peace conference
The peace conference opened in The Hague on Sept. 7 under the chairmanship of former NATO Secretary-General Lord Carrington.
An arbitration commission of eminent constitutional lawyers from France, Italy and Germany was appointed; they were subsequently joined by others from Belgium and Spain when Yugoslavia failed to agree on its own two appointees.
As well as the Foreign Ministers of the 12 EC nations and federal Foreign Minister Budimir Loncar, the conference was attended by Mesic, Markovic and the presidency representatives of all the republics.
The meeting, which was brief and marked by a violent verbal exchange between the Presidents of Croatia, Franjo Tudjman and of Serbia, Slobodan Milosevic, adopted a declaration before adjourning until Sept. 12.
The declaration established as a basis for negotiation that internal borders could not be changed by force, that the rights of minorities must be guaranteed, and that full account must be taken of "all legitimate concerns and aspirations" .
Any differences which could not be resolved through negotiation would be submitted to an arbitration commission.
Resignations from federal government
Two Croatian ministers, Barnimir Zekan (Finance) and Bozidar Marendic (Development), as well as the deputy Agriculture and Transport Ministers resigned from the federal government on Sept. 12, while on Sept. 13 Branjo Salaj, the Information Minister for Croatia, called on Croats to resign from all federal bodies.
Markovic announced on Sept. 9 that the government was to be reorganized.
Referendum in Macedonia — Anti-Albanian measures in Kosovo
In a referendum held on Sept. 8 in Macedonia 75 per cent of the registered electorate of 1,400,000 went to the polls; they were boycotted by many of the Albanians who made up 25 per cent of the republic's population.
Results showed that 95 per cent had voted in favour of a "sovereign and independent Macedonia with a right to enter a union of sovereign states of Yugoslavia" .
No immediate secession was envisaged, although this option was endorsed by the hardline nationalist Internal Macedonian Revolutionary Organization-Democratic Party for Macedonian National Unity, the biggest party in the Macedonian parliament.
On Sept, 19 the Prime Ministers of Bulgaria (which regarded Macedonians as Bulgars) and Greece held talks in Athens with Milosevic on the future of Macedonia.
In the autonomous Serbian province of Kosovo, where 6,000 Albanian teachers were being threatened with dismissal for refusal to comply with the Serbian curriculum, some 1,000 Albanian teachers demonstrating in the capital, Pristina, on Sept. 10 were dispersed by police.
The Serbian authorities were also preventing 350,000 Albanian pupils and students from re-entering school because they had followed an Albanian curriculum.
The JNA on Sept. 9 shot dead three Albanian border guards who had apparently crossed the border in error.
Cut-off of oil supply to Serbia — Spread of fighting to Bosnia — Second conference session
Croatia cut off oil supplies to Serbia on Sept. 7 by closing pipelines from the major Adriatic coast terminal, and ignored a federal order to reconnect the supply.
On Sept. 9 it imposed a night curfew in large parts of the republic.
On Sept. 11 fighting closed a bridge at Maslenica (on the edge of the Krajina region) which was central Croatia's only remaining link with most of its Adriatic coast, including the ports of Split and Zadar.
Osijek, Vinkovci and Pakrac in the east experienced bombardments of unprecedented severity during the night of Sept. 11-12, and Kostajnica (on the Croatia-Bosnia border 60 miles south of Zagreb) fell to Serbian forces on Sept. 12, bringing a section of Bosnia into the Serbian zone for the first time.
At this stage EC monitors admitted that their peace mission had failed.
They warned (after an army helicopter carrying Wijnaendts was fired on over Okucani on Sept. 11 and forced to land) that they would leave Yugoslavia if their safety could not be guaranteed.
Moslems in Bosnia on Sept. 9 detained Milan Martic, the "Defence Minister" of the (Serb) "Krajina Republic" , together with three JNA officers but Bosnia's Moslem President Alia Izetbegovic decided to release them to the federal authorities after Serbs threatened to attack the town.
Bosnia appealed to the EC on Sept. 10 to send observers.
Serbian nationalists took control of Serbian areas and on Sept. 12 declared another "autonomous province" on Bosnia's border with Montenegro; Izetbegovic called for the establishment of a six-mile demilitarized zone along the Una and Sava rivers to divide the republic off from Croatia.
Three "Serbian Autonomous Regions" were set up in Bosnia in mid-September.
Federal Defence Minister Col.-Gen.
Veljko Kadijevic on Sept. 12 rejected an order from Mesic (the nominal commander of the JNA) to withdraw troops to barracks within 48 hours and reiterated that the JNA would act only if ordered by the Presidency as a whole.
Mesic, who reiterated on Sept. 12 his intention to resign after the expiry on Oct. 7 of the EC moratorium, accused the army of staging what amounted to a military coup by ignoring his orders, saying that he would ask for foreign intervention and bring charges against army commanders unless the JNA halted its attacks on Croatian towns and withdrew.
On Sept. 13 he urged the UN to send in a peacekeeping force, and appealed to Germany to recognize Croatia unilaterally.
Croatian blockade of army bases — Escalation of war to Adriatic ports — Collapse of new ceasefire
Croatia on Sept. 15 cut off all supplies to 15 army bases, which subsequently surrendered, and extended the blockade throughout Croatia.
On Sept. 13 Croatians had also captured Maj.-Gen.
Milan Aksentijevic, the deputy commander of the fifth army district—which included Croatia—after forcing down his helicopter south of Zagreb.
In the ensuing retaliatory offensive, the first in southern Croatia, jet fighters and gunboats attacked the industrial Adriatic port of Ploce on Sept. 15, where Croatians had seized thousands of weapons from a naval base, and bombed the rail link between inland Croatia and the coast.
The naval blockade was extended to a total of seven ports including Split (where Croatian forces blockaded the naval base) and Dubrovnik.
A state of emergency was declared in Zagreb as jets buzzed the city.
Lord Carrington flew to Yugoslavia on Sept. 16 for talks with Milosevic, Tudjman and Kadijevic at Igalo (Montenegro) and, warning that Yugoslavia was only days away from "irretrievable civil war" , he succeeded in negotiating another ceasefire on Sept. 17, to come into effect at noon on the following day.
The agreement provided for the instant and simultaneous withdrawal of Croatian and JNA forces from battle zones, followed by the immediate withdrawal of the JNA to barracks and the demobilization of the National Guard.
Only hours later fighting spread to Zagreb with an air force attack on a suburb and a television tower and fighting around besieged barracks.
An EC observer was wounded in the leg on Sept. 18.
Luka Bebic, the Defence Minister of Croatia, resigned on Sept. 18 and was replaced by Gojko Susko, his deputy.
Ante Paradjik, vice-president and leader of the armed wing of the extreme right-wing Croatian Party of Rights (HOS) and a strong opponent of Tudjman, was shot dead by Croatian police at a road block on Sept. 21.
Hungarian involvement
Croatian radio on Sept. 16 accused Hungary of shooting down two Yugoslav air force jets after they drifted over Hungarian airspace.
Hungary, which placed its border on high alert, said that four jets had entered Hungary and that two had fired rockets back into Croatia, but denied shooting any down.
Subsequent violations of airspace and border incidents led Hungarian Prime Minister Jozsef Antall to offer on Sept. 19 to help the EC monitor its borders with Yugoslavia (where 340,000 ethnic Hungarians were settled, mostly in the autonomous Serbian province of Vojvodina).
Serbian militia on Sept. 16 occupied pumping stations along 600 km of the Adria oil pipeline which supplied one-third of Hungary's oil.
Third Hague session
At the third session of the peace conference in The Hague on Sept. 19, Serbia rejected any suggestion of the despatch of a peacekeeping force to Yugoslavia.
The idea of such a force operating in a buffer zone under the auspices of the Western European Union (WEU) had been endorsed at a meeting earlier in the day in Berlin between the German Chancellor Helmut Kohl and President François Mitterrand of France.
The United Kingdom opposed sending a peacekeeping force because it represented a long-term commitment but suggested an oil embargo.
After a meeting of EC Foreign Ministers and WEU Defence Ministers also on Sept. 19 a communiqué stated that "no military intervention is contemplated" but proposed that the WEU should explore ways of supporting the activities of EC monitors to make their contribution more effective.
A study by military experts was immediately set in motion.
Major army offensive — New bilateral ceasefire
With Mesic openly urging JNA soldiers and officers to desert, a large JNA armoured column set out from Belgrade on Sept. 19.
One section advanced into eastern Slavonia where the ensuing fighting around Osijek, Vinkovar and Vinkovci was of unprecedented violence.
Other sections moved to release blockaded army bases in Croatia and to mobilize bases in Bosnia-Hercegovina, where the movement of the armed column sparked off local clashes in protest.
Markovic for the first time on Sept. 19 accused Defence Minister Kadijevic and his deputy, Adml.
Stane Brovet, of openly siding with Serbia, and called on them to resign.
The JNA took control of Petrinja (50 km south of Zagreb) and other towns during heavy fighting on Sept. 21-22 as the French government requested an urgent meeting of the UN Security Council.
However, with the JNA on the verge of disintegrating as Serbian reservists in Croatia mutinied and went home, Tudjman and Kadijevic agreed on Sept. 22 to an "absolute and mutual ceasefire" as of 3 p.m. local time, pending negotiations on separating the two factions.
Gen. Kadijevic stated on the same day that "Yugoslavia as it existed until now has ceased to be" and that "the army is therefore taking certain decisions into its own hands" .
The ceasefire seemed to be holding on Sept. 23 as Croatia and the navy began to lift their respective blockades (although many barracks continued under siege).
Croatian forces then took advantage of the lull to begin moving heavy artillery, vehicles, armoured personnel carriers and tanks seized from army bases into combat positions, particularly around Vukovar and Novska (near where the motorway was cut).
From its strengthened position Croatia on Sept. 24 demanded the complete withdrawal of JNA units from the republic as a precondition for peace, and stated its refusal to recognize Serbian control of areas in Croatia.
The Serbian representative on the Collective State Presidency, Borisav Jovic, said that the army should pull back to those areas where it was acknowledged as "defending its own" .
Following cluster bombing raids Croatian authorities in Vinkovci on Sept. 25 gave JNA five days to leave for Serbia with their equipment, and Zagreb radio announced on Sept. 26 that the JNA had pulled out.
The JNA agreed to withdraw Montenegrin reservists from Mostar in Bosnia where they were causing friction with the local population.
UN Security Council meeting — Fourth session of peace conference
The UN Security Council, convened at the request of France on Sept. 25, adopted Resolution 713 sponsored by Belgium, France and the UK calling for a complete arms embargo on Yugoslavia and the immediate cessation of hostilities and requesting the Secretary-General, Javier Pérez de Cuéllar, to assist with mediation.
After the fourth session of the Hague peace conference on Sept. 26, attended by the Foreign Ministers of all the republics, Lord Carrington said that the ceasefire seemed to be holding sufficiently for the conference to carry on and to accelerate its work.
He warned that no economic aid could be forthcoming until a long-term constitutional solution had been found.
The conference set up three working groups to meet immediately, chaired by the European Commission, to study constitutional solutions, economic relations between the republics and the position of ethnic minorities.
AFRICA
SOUTH AFRICA
Constitutional proposals
On Sept. 4 President F. W de Klerk presented the constitutional proposals of the National Party (NP) to a federal party congress at Bloemfontein, saying that they demonstrated the NP's opposition to "domination of any kind" .
The African National Congress (ANC), however, asserted that they entrenched "minority privileges by ensuring that any majority party is powerless" .
Under the proposals the country would be divided into nine semi-autonomous regions, replacing the existing four provinces and 10 non-independent bantustans (homelands), thus ending the homelands policy pursued by the party since 1948.
The four nominally independent bantustans (Transkei, Venda, Ciskei and Bophuthatswana) would negotiate their relationship with South Africa itself.
A lower house of parliament would be elected by a system of proportional representation on the basis of universal non-racial adult franchise.
All parties gaining at least 10 per cent of electoral support in each of the nine regions would send an equal number of representatives to an upper house.
Executive power would be shared between the leading parties in a supreme council of three to five members.
The cabinet would be appointed by consensus in which the three biggest parties, irrespective of their proportion of the vote, would have parity of representation.
A two-tier voting system in local elections was put forward, giving more weight to property owners, almost all of whom were white.
The ANC rejected the plans as being specifically designed to deny power to the black majority.
It was particularly critical of the NP vision of a upper house (presented by the NP as a "house of minorities" ) with the power to veto legislation from a democratically elected lower chamber.
The NP plans received a mixed response from other political parties and organizations.
The Conservative Party (CP) described them as "a recipe for revolution" , whereas the Democratic Party said that the proposals included virtually everything it had called for.
The Pan-Africanist Congress (PAC) described the proposals as a "transferring of the struggle from race to class" .
Chief Mangosuthu Buthelezi, leader of the Inkatha Freedom Party, welcomed the principle of universal franchise.
Continuing violence
The multilateral peace accord drafted by the government, ANC and Inkatha [see p. 38376]was formally signed on Sept. 14 amid continuing violence.
The accord, which sought to end political violence, was agreed by 31 parties, including religious and business groups.
The initiative was not supported by the CP and white right-wing organizations.
Although the PAC and Azanian People's Organization (Azapo) refused to sign the accord they gave separate undertakings to work for peace.
In the week leading to the signing, more than 120 people were killed.
An incident on Sept. 8 in Thokoza, Johannesburg, in which Inkatha supporters were ambushed by unidentified attackers, left 23 people dead and sparked retaliatory attacks throughout Johannesburg's townships.
The ANC denied responsibility for the attack, and there was renewed suspicion about a "third force" deliberately inciting enmity among the black population.
With fresh violence breaking out in Natal and Cape Town the government on Sept. 9 declared four of Johannesburg's black townships "unrest areas" .
According to the police, however, there was a decline in the level of violence immediately following the signing of the accord.
Calls to disband MK
On Sept. 15 de Klerk repeated his demand for the dissolution of Umkhonto we Sizwe (MK), the ANC's armed wing.
The President said that the existence of MK was contrary to the spirit of the peace accord, a clause of which read: "No private armies shall be allowed or formed." 
The ANC for its part responded that it regarded the South African Defence Force (SADF) as the private army of the NP and called instead for the integration of MK and the SADF into a new national army.
The ANC also rejected the call made by de Klerk that the ANC become a political party, saying that such a transformation could not take place until a constitution was in place allowing the participation of blacks at all levels.
Introduction of VAT
A value added tax (VAT), replacing the general sales tax (GST), was introduced on Sept. 30, as thousands of protestors called for it to be abandoned in demonstrations throughout the country.
Although VAT was levied at a lower rate than GST—10 per cent compared with 13 per cent—it was applied to a wider range of goods.
Opposition to the imposition of VAT was led by the Co-ordinating Committee on VAT (CCVT), an alliance of 93 groups spearheaded by the Congress of South African Trades Unions (COSATU).
Death sentences for right-wing extremists
Two people who were members of the neo-fascist Afrikaner Resistance Movement (AWB) and of the Orde Boerevolk (OB) grouping received death sentences on Sept. 13 after they pleaded guilty to seven counts of murder and 27 of attempted murder.
They had fired on a bus packed with black commuters in October 1990.
In early September three members of the OB awaiting trial abandoned their hunger strikes after de Klerk refused to grant them political amnesty.
Nelson Mandela, the ANC president, intervened on their behalf on humanitarian as well as political grounds, linking their plight to that of the hundreds of ANC political prisoners who remained in prison.
Temporary ministerial changes
On Sept. 17 the Minister of Law and Order Hernus Kriel assumed the duties of the Minister of Justice, Kobie Coetsee, who had suffered a heart attack.
Coetsee's duties as Chair of the Ministers' Council in the House of Assembly were assumed by Amie Venter, Minister of Regional Development and State Expenditure.
Coetsee was expected to resume his duties after he had recuperated.
Foreign relations
On Sept. 16 the United Kingdom government announced an aid package to assist in the process of democratization.
It was to include public administration training courses and bursaries for black South Africans likely to become senior officials in the new political system.
Funding would also be provided for programmes to familiarize senior black leaders with British institutions of democratic government as well as to assist those involved in the signing of the peace accord.
An agreement providing for the duty free importation of Czechoslovakian goods was signed on Sept. 12.
France took steps to increase trade when Dominique Strauss-Kahn, Minister-Delegate for Trade and Industry, on Sept. 19 began the first ministerial visit to South Africa since 1975.
His visit coincided with the lifting of the last French economic sanctions.
On Sept. 24 Austria lifted most economic sanctions for a year, during which the dismantling of apartheid would be monitored.
On Sept. 18 Australian Prime Minister Bob Hawke cancelled a proposed visit to South Africa.
Hawke, whose visit was scheduled to take place in October to link in with the Commonwealth heads of government meeting in Harare, expressed concern over the slow pace of reform.
A similar decision was announced by Canadian Prime Minister Brian Mulroney on Sept. 19.
Eurobond issue
The government issued its first international bond since 1985 on Sept. 19.
The DM300,000,000 (US$180,000,000) five-year bond was launched by a group of banks led by Deutsche Bank.
Demand was so strong that after four hours of trading the issue was increased to DM400,000,000.
The End Loans to South Africa Campaign criticized the issue as a breach of sanctions.
AFRICA
ANGOLA
Temporary withdrawal of UNITA from CCPM
The National Union for the Total Independence of Angola (UNITA) suspended from Sept. 10 to 17 its participation in the Joint Political and Military Commission (CCPM) responsible for the implementation of the peace process agreed between the government and UNITA in May [see p. 38180].
UNITA accused the Popular Movement for the Liberation of Angola-Workers' Party (MPLA-PT) government of not fulfilling the agreement and listed seven conditions to be implemented before it would return to the CCPM.
These included speeding up the confinement of government troops and agreeing to an election timetable.
UNITA denied that its withdrawal from the CCPM was linked to recent successful diplomatic contacts between the government and Portugal and Brazil, or the forthcoming visit of President José Eduardo dos Santos to the United States.
The government, denying UNITA's accusations, gave details of the confinement of over 22,500 troops and claimed that proposals on the election process had been ready for approval on Sept. 10, but that UNITA had taken an "obstructionist position" .
On Sept. 17 UNITA rejoined the CCPM; in a statement on Sept. 14 its leader, Jonas Savimbi, had said that the move was "at the demand" of the USA.
Savimbi had earlier met with US Vice-President Dan Quayle in Côte d'Ivoire.
Return to capital of Savimbi
Savimbi returned to Luanda on Sept. 27 for the first time since the start of the 16-year civil war.
He was greeted by 5,000 UNITA supporters and was met at the airport by government representatives.
Visit by Dos Santos to USA
Dos Santos arrived in the USA on Sept. 15 on a visit during which he hoped to persuade Congress to review its aid to UNITA, as well as to begin establishing diplomatic relations through an "extension office" in Washington of the Angolan mission to the UN.
He met on Sept. 16 with US President George Bush who repeated his government's intention to recognize a government which emerged from free elections.
However, Bush warned that he was prepared to postpone an agreement for Angola to open a trade mission unless the MPLA-PT government allayed UNITA and US concerns about the fulfilment of the May peace accord.
Bush said that restrictions on trade and investment would continue until the elections, but offered humanitarian aid and direct financial assistance for the elections.
AFRICA
ZAIRE
Foreign intervention
On Sept. 24 France and Belgium (the former colonial power) sent troops to Kinshasa after rioting left 30 people dead.
Both countries insisted that their intervention was purely humanitarian, with the 450 French soldiers and 500 Belgian troops seeking to protect and evacuate the 4,000 French and 10,000 Belgian nationals in Zaïre.
The rioting began on Sept. 23 when soldiers occupied Kinshasa airport in protest at low pay.
They were joined by civilians angry about hyperinflation and the delays in the national conference [see p. 38323; 38378].
Although the presence of the foreign troops helped to restore calm, official sources said that 117 people had died by Sept. 25 and at least 1,500 had been injured.
The opposition reacted angrily to the intervention by French and Belgian troops, calling for their withdrawal and warning of more violence if they did anything more than evacuate their nationals.
The governments of France and Belgium had expressed concern earlier in the month after the police fired on protestors on Sept. 2.
According to opposition figures "dozens" of people were killed.
New Prime Minister
Following crisis meetings with opposition leaders on Sept. 28-29, the President announced the lifting of a curfew in force since Sept. 25, and said that the national conference, which had been again been suspended on Sept. 17, would reconvene on Oct. 1.
He also appointed Etienne Tshisekedi as Prime Minister, asking him to form a "crisis government" .
Tshisekedi, of the Democratic Union for Social Progress, had been offered the post in July but had refused it at that time [see pp. 38323-24].
It was not clear how the Prime Minister and President would share power.
Mobutu remained head of state, but Tshisekedi insisted that he would control the army and that no special area of power would be reserved for the President.
Any appointments made by Tshisekedi would need to be ratified by the national conference.
Suspension of aid
On Sept. 6 the International Monetary Fund (IMF) suspended Zaïre's eligibility for credit facilities, in view of its failure to pay the arrears on US$81,000,000 of outstanding loans.
On Sept. 17 the United States suspended all financial aid in response to human rights abuses and the absence of economic reform, a move which would cost Zaïre US$13,000,000 in development aid in the current year.
AFRICA
ZAMBIA
Election preparations
On Sept. 4 President Kenneth Kaunda announced the dissolution of the National Assembly, with elections to be held on Oct. 31.
Reacting to calls for the lifting of the 28-year-old state of emergency, a government spokesman confirmed that it would not be lifted before the elections.
This contradicted an earlier statement by former United States President Jimmy Carter, who headed a team of international observers monitoring the election process, that the emergency would be lifted on Sept. 30.
On Sept. 30, Kaunda reportedly accused foreign election observers of meddling in Zambian politics.
Suspension of aid
The International Monetary Fund (IMF) and the World Bank suspended aid to Zambia on Sept. 11, declaring it ineligible for further credit because of a failure to clear an estimated US$20,800,000 in debt arrears.
The suspension cast doubt on the prospect of larger-scale aid disbursements by Western donor countries.
The IMF had in April approved for Zambia a rights accumulation programme [see also p. 38433]for up to a maximum of SDR836,900,000 (US$1,138 million) over three years to end-March 1994.
AFRICA
RWANDA
OAU peace efforts
President Juvenal Habyarimana went to Gbadolite, Zaïre, on Sept. 7 for a summit meeting involving President Buyoya of Burundi, President Mobutu of Zaïre, and President Babangida of Nigeria, John Malecela, the Prime Minister of Tanzania, and Paul Semogerere, the Ugandan Foreign Affairs Minister, in a bid to secure a renewal of the March ceasefire agreement with the rebel Rwanda Patriotic Front (FPR)[see p. 38134].
The summit was held under the aegis of the Organization of African Unity, of which Babangida was current chair.
It issued a call for an immediate ceasefire, and restructured the existing ceasefire monitoring group under 15 Nigerian and 15 Zaïrean officers.
Talks between Rwandan government delegates and the FPR opened in Gbadolite on Sept. 17, with Mobutu as mediator.
Despite the peace efforts, however, several rebel ceasefire violations were reported by the Rwandan media.
AFRICA
KENYA
Growing pressure for political reform — Hurd's visit
One week before the United Kingdom's Foreign Secretary was due to arrive on an official two-day visit, leading dissident politicians belonging to a recently formed Forum for the Restoration of Democracy (FORD) announced on Sept. 4 their intention of holding a mass rally on Oct. 5.
Two days later, President Daniel arap Moi banned the rally, accusing opponents of colluding with foreigners and plotting violence.
FORD had been formed on Aug. 2 by six opposition leaders including former Vice-President Jaramogi Oginga Odinga, whose attempt in February to form a political party [see p. 37995]had been thwarted by the courts.
Several close associates of FORD's founders were said to have been arrested.
On Sept. 9 John Joseph Kamotho, secretary-general of the ruling Kenya African National Union (KANU), threatened to "de-register" the Law Society of Kenya, whose chairman, Paul Muite, had been criticized in the pro-government media for his calls for political reform since his appointment in March [see p. 38182].
The UK Foreign and Commonwealth Secretary, Douglas Hurd arrived in Kenya on Sept. 11.
Underlining the British government's commitment to link aid and democratic practices, he made a strong statement in favour of multiparty democracy, but appeared to hold back from criticism of Kenya's human rights record, saying at a press conference that "when you look at other countries in Africa, Kenya's record is good" .
Moi was reported on Sept. 18 to have ordered an inquiry following an announcement that Denmark was freezing aid because of alleged embezzlement of funds from development projects.
AFRICA
CENTRAL AFRICAN REPUBLIC
Delays in establishment of national conference
A coalition of opposition parties—the Democratic Movement for Renewal and Evolution in Africa—called on President André Kolingba to announce by Sept. 8 the holding of a national conference and to meet with opposition leaders.
Their demands followed the arrest of Aristide Sokambi, chair of a co-ordinating committee set up to convene a national conference.
According to the public prosecutor, he was arrested on Aug. 28 for a common law offence, while Sokambi's lawyer claimed that the action was an attempt to discredit him.
Although no announcement of a national conference was made, Kolingba met separately with opposition leaders on Sept. 14.
On Sept. 17 the same leaders met the Public Security Minister, Ismaila Nimaga, after which they agreed to suspend a rally planned for the following day.
Reduction in Bokassa's sentence
On Sept. 9 former Emperor Jean-Bedel Bokassa had his sentence reduced from life to 20 years' hard labour.
Condemned to death in 1987, his sentence had commuted to hard labour for life in 1988 [see p. 36266].
He was among 100 prisoners granted a remission of sentence to mark the 10th anniversary of Kolingba's taking office.
AFRICA
CONGO
Election delay warning
Ernest Kombo, speaker of the transitional legislature, the Higher Council of the Republic (CSR), warned on Sept. 14, two days before the opening of the CSR's session, that elections planned for the first half of 1992 might be postponed because a census of the electorate scheduled for mid-September had yet to take place.
He said that it was the responsibility of the government to propose a modification of the election calendar, adopted by the country's national conference in June [see p. 38277-78].
The Pan-African Union for Social Democracy called for the total rejection of any modification of the election timetable, while on Sept. 15 the National Alliance for Democracy (AND), a grouping of about 40 political parties, demanded that the 12-month transition period be respected and called for a reshuffle of André Milongo's transitional government.
Train crash
A week of national mourning was announced after more than 150 people were killed when a passenger train collided with a goods train near Dolisie on Sept. 6.
Jacques Okoko, the Transport Minister, later suggested that the crash might have been caused by saboteurs seeking to undermine the country's transition to democracy.
AFRICA
BURKINA
Calls for national conference
President Blaise Compaoré continued to reject demands for a national conference, proposing instead a national reconciliation forum.
The opposition Co-ordinating Committee of Democratic Forces (CFD) on Sept. 22 demanded the establishment by Sept. 25 of a preparatory committee for a national conference.
Following the government's failure to meet the deadline the CFD held a rally on Sept. 30 in Ouagadougou which ended in clashes with government supporters.
CDF spokesperson Herman Ouadraogo described the rally as "only the beginning" .
Cabinet changes
Compaoré had earlier sought to appease opposition figures when on July 26 he brought a number of them into the transitional government.
The reshuffle included the appointment as Minister for Agriculture of Hermann Yameogo, the son of former President Maurice Yameogo and leader of the Alliance for Democracy and Federation.
Election preparations
The dates for presidential and legislative elections were announced on Sept. 5.
Presidential elections would be held on Dec. 1 (with a second round on Dec. 15 if necessary) and legislative elections on Jan. 15, 1992.
On Sept. 14 Compaoré officially announced his candidacy for the presidential elections, having resigned from the army in accordance with the new Constitution which barred the military from office.
Two others announced their candidatures: Yameogo, who resigned from the transitional government at the end of August and Pierre-Clavier Damiba, a UN official.
AFRICA
LIBERIA
Renewed hostilities — Peace hopes
By Sept. 7 an invading force from Sierra Leone was said to have pushed deep into Liberian territory held by the rebel National Patriotic Front of Liberia (NPFL), amid reports of heavy fighting.
Charles Taylor, the NPFL leader, had claimed in an interview with the British Broadcasting Corporation on Sept. 3 that the force, then about to invade, was United States-supplied.
The invasion force comprised 3,000-5,000 heavily armed Liberians and Sierra Leonean troops, according to Taylor (whose own forces controlled most of Liberia outside Monrovia, the capital, and had themselves penetrated deep inside Sierra Leonean territory with the backing of local dissidents earlier in the year—see pp. 38181; 38278).
The involvement of Sierra Leonean troops was denied by President Joseph Momoh.
The main Liberian group in the attacking force was understood to consist of members of the Krahn tribe of Liberia's former President, Samuel Doe, who was murdered in September 1990 [see p. 37699].
The group, calling itself the United Liberation Movement of Liberia for Democracy (ULIMO), was also reportedly supported by members of the Libyan-trained Movement for Justice in Africa (MOJA), led by Boima Fahnbulleh.
The ULIMO force was reported to have taken part in fighting in recent months to repel Taylor's invading forces from Sierra Leone.
Peace talks — Agreement to disarm
Despite the ULIMO incursion into Liberia, peace talks went ahead in Yamoussoukro, the Côte d'Ivoire capital, on Sept. 16 and 17, involving the heads of state, or their representatives, of 10 West African countries.
The various Liberian factions agreed to be disarmed by a restructured ECOMOG (Economic Community of West African States Monitoring Group) force, to which new contingents from Senegal, and possibly from Côte d'Ivoire and Burkina Faso, were to be added.
The restructuring of the 7,000-strong ECOMOG appeared to remove Taylor's objection, as well as that of francophone member countries of ECOWAS, that it was Nigerian-dominated.
During July and August, Taylor had apparently refused to disarm his forces in compliance with an earlier peace agreement.
AFRICA
MALI
Election timetable
On Sept. 26, following the July-August national conference [see pp. 38324-25], the Minister of Territorial Administration, Maj. Moussa Diabate, announced a detailed election timetable as follows.
Dec. 1, 1991 constitutional referendumDec. 19, 1991 municipalDec. 22, 1991 legislative, first roundJan. 5, 1992 legislative, second round, presidential, first roundJan. 22, 1992 presidential, second round 
Swiss agreement to recover funds
The Swiss government agreed in September to help recover funds transferred into Swiss bank accounts by successive governments under former President Moussa Traoré; Swiss authorities estimated the funds to amount to US$1,000 million.
AFRICA
MAURITANIA
Recognition of political parties
By the end of September official recognition had been extended to a total of five political parties, whose creation had been legalized following changes to the Constitution in July.
The Rally for Democracy and National Unity (RDUN), recognized on Aug. 22, was headed by Ahmed Mokhtar Sidi Baba, a minister under Mauritania's first President, Ould Daddah (1960-78), who was also mayor of the town of Atar.
The Social Democratic Republican Party (PRDS), the party with closest links to President Moaouia Ould Sidi Taya, was led by Sid Ahmed Ould Baba, who had resigned as Minister of Interior, Posts and Communications in July.
The Mauritanian Renewal Party (PMR) was led by Moulay al-Hassan Ould Jeydid, described as an engineer and former mayor of the northern town of Zouerate, who accused the PRDS of using state facilities, claiming that several ministers had become officials of the PRDS while retaining their ministerial privileges.
The Socialist and Democratic Popular Union (led by Mohammed Mahmoud Ould Mah, a former mayor of Nouackchott) and the Democratic Justice Party were recognized on Sept. 29 and 30 respectively.
Killings of detainees — Amnesty
A report published by the human rights organization Amnesty International on Aug. 21 contained further claims that hundreds of people had been killed while under detention between November 1990 and March 1991 [for April report see p. 38135].
The report listed 339 people killed in "prisons, army barracks or police stations" , and stated that this represented an unprecedented level of repression against the black ethnic groups in the south of the country.
Those killed included army officers and government officials, and many others had been imprisoned without any kind of trial.
Over 140 people listed had been detained in a wave of arrests in Nouakchott and Nouadhibou beginning in November 1990.
President Taya had followed up a July 29 amnesty for state security and press law offenders with a further amnesty, announced on Aug. 18, for people who had been sentenced in their absence and had been in exile for over 15 years.
[For March and April amnesties see pp. 38085-86; 38135.]
AFRICA
NIGER
Dissolution of government
The national conference, emboldened by its suspension of the Constitution and cancellation of President Ali Saibou's executive powers during August [see p. 38379], voted on Sept. 10 to dissolve the government and to replace the army Chief of Staff, Col. Toumba Boubacar, and his deputy.
Six days earlier, Boubacar had denied before the conference that the army was planning a coup d'etat(having earlier threatened one—ibid.).
There had been speculation that soldiers alleged to have been involved in the Tchin-Tabaradene massacre of perhaps hundreds of Tuareg dissidents in May 1990 [see pp. 37703; 37811-12], now fearing justice, might launch a pre-emptive mutiny.
President Saibou denied on Sept. 7 that he had ordered the massacre.
The conference voted on Sept. 28 to establish a High Court of Justice with powers to try government officials including the President.
AFRICA
SENEGAL
Electoral changes
The National Assembly on Sept. 20 adopted a constitutional law making a number of changes to electoral procedures.
The voting age was lowered from 21 to 18 years.
The maximum presidential mandate was limited to two terms of seven years each (whereas previously the president could serve for an unlimited number of five-year terms).
A presidential candidate could win election on the first round only by gaining an absolute majority of the votes cast by at least one-quarter of registered voters; otherwise the election would be decided by a second-round run-off between the two candidates with most votes.
Independent presidential candidates would be able to stand, as well as those from political parties and coalitions.
The courts and tribunals were made responsible for ensuring the smooth running of electoral campaigns and equal treatment of candidates.
Presidential campaigns would last 21 days, and (unlike at present) presidential and legislative elections would not take place simultaneously.
AFRICA
TOGO
Transitional government
A transitional government led by Prime Minister Joseph Koukou Koffigoh held its first meeting on Sept. 10.
The government, named on Sept. 7, included Elias Kwassivi Kpetigo as Minister of Economy and Finance, Abdou Touré Tchiaka as Minister of Foreign Affairs and Co-operation and Kokouvi Masseme as Minister of Territorial Administration and Security.
On Sept. 26 Koffigoh announced the establishment of a Defence Council with himself as chair.
AFRICA
NIGERIA
Creation of new states
A decree creating nine new states and renaming three others was promulgated on Sept. 4.
The changes had been announced by President Ibrahim Babangida on Aug. 27, when he said that the decision to bring the number of states to 30 was based on "social justice, the principle of development and the principle of a balanced federation" .
The new states (with capitals) were: Osun State (Oshogbo); Delta State (Asaba); Taraba State (Jalingo); Jigawa State (Dutse); Yobe State (Damaturu); Kebbi State (Birnin-Kebbi); Abia State (Umuahia); Kogi State (Lokoja); and Anambra State (Awka).
The old Anambra State was renamed Enugu State with its capital at Enugu; Bendel became Edo State with Benin City as its capital; and Gongola became Adamawa State with Yola as the capital.
Elections for new state governors and legislatures were scheduled for Dec. 14.
The federal government undertook to finance the immediate infrastructural needs of the new states.
There was a mixed reaction to the creation of the new states.
In Hadejia Town in Jigawa State there were violent demonstrations by youths disappointed that Zamfara region had not become a state, and on Aug. 30 two people were killed in demonstrations in Gusau angered at the decision to create Kebbi State out of Sokoto State.
Elsewhere, however, in Abia and Taraba States for example, there were celebrations.
A further 47 new local government councils were created at the same time, bringing the total to 500.
Commitment to civilian rule
Babangida reaffirmed his government's commitment to civilian rule and denied that the creation of the new states would prolong the life of the military regime; speaking on Sept. 3 he said that he did not believe in the perpetuity of military rule.
Prince Bola Ajibola, the Minister of Justice and federal Attorney General, confirmed on Sept. 12 that power would be handed to a civilian administration on Oct. 1, 1992, as planned, in spite of adjustments to the interim timetable.
Sentences for religious rioters
At a special court sitting on Sept. 2-3 Mallam Yakubu Yahaya, a Shi'ite Moslem leader, and 65 members of his sect were convicted following religious rioting in April.
Yahaya, who was among 160 people arrested after riots in Katsina in northern Nigeria [see p. 38135-36], received an 18-month prison term, while his followers received terms of between six and nine months.
AFRICA
SIERRA LEONE
Multiparty democracy
Voting took place at the end of August in a national referendum to approve the change from single-party rule to a constitution allowing for the introduction of a multiparty system [see p. 38380].
A Sierra Leone Broadcasting Service announcement on Aug. 31 said that nearly 1,500,000 people had voted "yes" to the proposed constitutional changes; the radio further reported that almost 75 per cent of the country's 2,500,000 voters had participated.
In a speech on Sept. 3 formally accepting the constitutional changes, President Joseph Momoh said that a date for the registration of new political parties would be announced shortly.
On Sept. 14 it was reported that six political parties had combined to form a United Front of Political Movements (UNIFORM).
They were the National Action Party (NAP), the Sierra Leone People's Party (SLPP), the Democratic People's Party (DPP), the National Democratic Alliance (NDA), the National Democratic Party (NDP) and the Civic Development Education Movement (CDM).
Ten members of Momoh's ruling All-People's Congress (APC, which was due to hold its party conference during October) who had been suspended in July [see p. 38326]were reported on Sept. 20 to have been reinstated.
They included Abass Bundu, executive secretary of the regional grouping ECOWAS.
Cabinet reshuffle
President Momoh on Sept. 23 named a new 18-member Cabinet, retaining only seven members of the previous goverment.
Salia Jusu-Sheriff was replaced as First Vice-President by Gen. Abdulai Conteh, hitherto Attorney General and Justice Minister.
Abu Bakar Kamara, the Second Vice-President, was reported to have resigned for health reasons, being replaced by John Bandala Dauda, hitherto Minister of Trade.
A university professor, A. R. Dumbuya, was named Foreign Affairs Minister, and an executive Director at the World Bank, J. S. A. Funna, became Minister of the newly combined portfolios of Finance and of Economic Planning and Development.
AFRICA
ETHIOPIA
Eritrea: foreign relations — Food relief
At celebrations in Asmara on Sept. 1 to mark the 30th anniversary of the Eritrean people's armed struggle, the secretary-general of the provisional government of Eritrea, Issaias Afewerki, warned of "those Ethiopian forces who have started to mobilize and organize officially and clandestinely in the name of unity" and also of hostile foreign forces.
He also emphasized, however, the importance of "mutual co-operation" between Eritrea and the transitional government of Ethiopia.
At a Sept. 5 news conference Afewerki accused France, Egypt and Saudi Arabia of fostering "conflict on the borders and the blackmail we have been facing during the past three months" .
Ethiopian transitional government representative Lencho Leta told the rally in Asmara on Sept. 1 that a standing committee on Eritrea formed recently by Ethiopia's Council of Representatives was on a fact-finding mission in Eritrea "to facilitate a good interaction between the two peoples" .
Col. Salah al-Din Karrar, the Sudanese Revolutionary Command Council member responsible for transport and communications, told the rally that Sudan would "firmly and steadfastly" support the principle of Eritrean self-determination in all regional and international forums…
On Sept. 3 Afewerki received a United States congressional delegation, headed by Tony Hall, chairman of a select committee on hunger.
According to a report published in the New York Times of Aug. 13, US administration officials accused the Eritrean authorities of diverting food intended for the rest of Ethiopia.
The Eritrean provisional government responded, in a statement of Sept. 26, that transport problems beyond its control were creating the bottleneck of relief supplies in the port of Assab.
On Sept. 18 it was reported that in the previous week five truck drivers had been killed by armed groups, probably of the Afar clan, on the road from the port of Assab to Addis Ababa.
Relief effort in Harar region
In late August a UN food airlift had begun to the Harar region of eastern Ethiopia, where inter-tribal clashes were exacerbating difficulties in food distribution to Ethiopian villagers and Somali refugees.
A similar airlift had been begun by the Red Cross in June.
The UN relief authorities planned to use five aircraft to transport 10,000 tonnes of food a month.
In late August clashes between local Oromo fighters and forces supporting the Ethiopian People's Revolutionary Democratic Front (EPRDF) had been temporarily resolved through an agreement between the EPRDF and the Oromo Liberation Front (OLF) announced on Aug. 27.
After further clashes in mid-September near Dire Dawa and Harar town, the two organizations sent a joint delegation to attempt to reconcile the various groups.
[See also p. 38327.]
AFRICA
SUDAN
Reported SPLA split
Reports of a revolt within the southern rebel Sudanese People's Liberation Army (SPLA) against the leadership of Col. John Garang de Mabior met with a denial from Garang and other SPLA field commanders.
First reports of the split came in a statement published in Nairobi on Aug. 28 by three of the 13 SPLA field commanders—Riek Mashar Teny-Dhurgon, Lam Akol and Gordon Koang Chol.
The three announced that they had taken over the leadership of the SPLA and accused Garang, who had led the organization since its creation in 1983, of dictatorial behaviour.
According to foreign news reports the split was essentially over whether the south should secede; the dissident group favoured an independent black state, while Garang and his loyalists continued to support the goal of a united, secular Sudan.
There were suggestions that the Khartoum government might now be willing to contemplate secession for the south, eventually leading to some form of federation with the north.
Relief efforts
On the weekend Aug. 31-Sept. 1 the Sudanese government suspended permission for UN relief flights to fly food into rebel-held areas, although permission was renewed on Sept. 2.
On Sept. 10 UN Assistant Secretary-General James C. Jonah told a news conference in Nairobi that he apologized for statements made by several UN officials accusing the government of obstructing relief operations in the south.
At a meeting in Nairobi, the Kenyan capital, UN officials had agreed with Sudanese government and SPLA representatives on the transporting of relief supplies to the government-held town of Juba, 120 km north of the border with Uganda, by river barge.
There was also agreement on airdrops of food for refugees returning from Ethiopia in the Bakok area.
<N
AFRICA
SOMALIA
Conflict between USC factions
At least 300 people were killed, around 700 people were wounded and severe damage was caused by shelling in clashes in the capital Mogadishu on Sept. 5-7.
The UN withdrew its representation from the town after three of its employees were killed.
Automatic weapons and rockets mounted on jeeps were used in the fighting, which reportedly represented an attempt by the United Somali Congress (USC) chairman, Gen. Mohammed Farah Aydid, to challenge the leadership of the interim President of Somalia, Ali Mahdi Mohammed.
Whereas Farah Aydid was a member of the Habar Gedir sub-clan of the Hawiye tribe (which predominated in the USC), Mahdi Mohammed was from the Abgal sub-clan of the Hawiyes.
Mahdi Mohammed, quoted on Radio Mogadishu on Sept. 8, blamed the fighting on "self-styled leaders who…opposed the second Djibouti conference agreements [see pp. 38322; 38277]" .
According to the Indian Ocean Newsletter of Aug. 31, supporters of Farah Aydid had been excluded from the 32-member Hawiye-dominated Cabinet which had been confirmed in August.
A ceasefire, in operation from Sept. 10, was supervised by a USC reconciliation committee, which met in a Mogadishu hotel between Sept. 11 and Sept. 28.
On Sept. 28 the committee concluded by reminding the two leaders of their "heavy national responsibilities to avert the shedding of Moslem blood" .
The speedy formation of a "national force" to replace the various "fronts" was urged; any further disagreements were to be mediated by "the USC elders and intellectuals" .
Fighting south of Mogadishu
In the first week of September representatives in Nairobi, the Kenyan capital, of the Somali Patriotic Movement (SPM) called on the Organization of African Unity and the UN to intervene in fighting between SPM and USC forces around the southern port of Kismayu [for clashes in April 1991 see pp. 38136-37].
In the same week clashes were reported near the town of Baydhaba in eastern Gedo region between Somali Democratic Movement (SDM) fighters and supporters of ex-President Mohammed Siyad Barre (allegedly using weapons formerly the property of the Kenyan army).
AFRICA
MAURITIUS
General election
In a general election on Sept. 15, the ruling coalition government of Prime Minister Sir Aneerood Jugnauth won an overwhelming majority.
The Mouvement socialist mauricien (MSM), led by Jugnauth, and the Mouvement militant mauricien (MMM), led by Paul Bérenger, together won 57 of the 62 directly elected seats in the 70-member Legislative Assembly (compared with 47 seats at dissolution).
Serge Clair's Organization du Peuple Rodriguais (OPR), also a partner in the coalition, won two seats as before.
The three remaining seats were won by members of the opposition alliance of the Mauritius Labour Party (MLP) and the Parti Mauricien Social-Démocrate (PMSD) who had held 13 seats at sissolution; one of the successful opposition candidates was the alliance and MLP leader, Navin Ramgoolam.
When the new Assembly met for the first time on Sept. 24, seven opposition members refused to take their seats, claiming that the election had been rigged.
They were Ramgoolam, Arvin Boolell and Vasant Bunwaree, as well as four of the eight "best losers" to be allocated seats, Sir Gaëtan Duval (leader of the PMSD), Razack Peeroo, Siddick Chady and Clarel Malherbes.
The election, which was held a year ahead of schedule after Jugnauth dissolved the Legislative Assembly on Aug. 6, involved 10 parties which fielded 331 candidates.
Official figures showed that there was an 84.5 per cent turnout of the 682,000-strong electorate.
AFRICA
CHAD
On Sep.
24 the government disclosed that in the Tibesti region of northern Chad 49 people had been killed in various attacks on civilians since mid-August by forces loyal to former President Hissène Habré.
AFRICA
DJIBOUTI
Mohammed Moussa Ali Tourtour, leader of the opposition Movement for Unity and Democracy (MUD), was released on Sept. 7 after five months in prison [see p. 38183].
On Sept. 25 three gendarmes were arrested after 10 detainees had suffocated in an airless police cell the previous week.
AFRICA
GUINEA
On Sept. 15 René Alseny Gomez, Secretary-General to the Presidency, said that legislation on the adoption of democracy would be ready by Dec. 31, thus creating the conditions for the launch of the democratic process in the new year; he also said that although a two-party system was envisaged by the Transitional Committee for National Recovery, more parties could be created if "national conditions" required.
AFRICA
LESOTHO
The order restricting former the Chairman of the Military Council, Maj.-Gen.
Justin Metsing Lekhanya, to his house was revoked on Sept. 17.
AFRICA
MOZAMBIQUE
On Sept. 4 at the end of a two-day visit to Tehran by Foreign Minister Pascoal Mocumbi, it was announced that Mozambique would open an embassy in Tehran and that Iran would open one in Maputo "in the near future" .
AMERICAS
UNITED STATES
Democrat candidates for presidency
The field of candidates for the Democratic presidential nomination, hitherto consisting only of former Massachusetts senator Paul E. Tsongas and former mayor of Irvine, California, Larry Agran, grew substantially in September.
Five others either declared their candidacy or announced that they would soon do so: Edmund G. (Jerry) Brown Jr, Governor of California in 1975-83; Governor Bill Clinton of Arkansas; Senator Tom Harkin of Iowa; Senator Bob Kerrey of Nebraska, and Governor L. Douglas Wilder of Virginia.
None of the declared candidates was credited with much chance of winning the presidency; the incumbent (Republican) President George Bush was regarded by many as unbeatable, and this assessment was thought to have deterred other better-known Democrats from entering the race (although the Rev. Jesse Jackson had not yet ruled himself out).
The contest for the Democratic nomination was, however, expected to provide significant indications of the party's aspirations in the final decade of the 20th century.
Defeat in five of the last six presidential elections had convinced some Democrats that fresh ideas were needed, while others call for a more forceful and enthusiastic avowal of liberal policies.
Harkin, serving his second term as senator after five terms in the House of Representatives, was an unabashed liberal; a populist of working-class stock and thus able to appeal to the Democrats' traditional constituency, his abrasiveness could alienate middle-class voters.
Tracing his political lineage to the New Deal and Great Society, he stood for higher spending on domestic programmes.
As a supporter of balanced budgets, however, he insisted that this could be funded from defence cuts made possible by the "peace dividend" , rather than through deficits or higher taxes.
He had opposed the war against Iraq, and espoused an economic nationalism tinged with protectionism.
Kerrey, first-term senator and former governor, was best known as a Vietnam war hero who lost part of his right leg in combat.
He was generally perceived as a charismatic liberal, but an unconventional and inconsistent one.
Although a supporter of higher spending on education and health care, he had not made a strong record on these issues as senator.
His early opposition to the war against Iraq was not sustained in public.
The public enthusiasm of New York's governor, Mario L. Cuomo, for his candidacy suggested that Kerrey was acceptable to northern liberals, while his farm state background could give him some appeal in the South, and his war record, glamour and relative youth were also seen as advantages.
Clinton, although at only 45 the country's longest-serving governor (in 1979-81 and since 1983), was associated with the centre-right Progressive Policy Institute.
He stood for a move away from the traditional Democratic identification with "big government" and their vote-losing image as high taxers.
His main issue was the need to promote economic growth through free trade, free markets, less government spending, better education and a fair taxation system which outlawed market-distorting tax subsidies and investment shelters.
Oklahoma congressman Dave McCurdy, who was expected to declare his candidacy in the near future, shared much of Clinton's policy orientation, while also giving greater emphasis to the need for strong defence.
On the other hand Tsongas, another centrist sceptical of big government, espoused an industrial policy which distanced him from Clinton.
Wilder, the USA's first elected black governor [see p. 37035], was also a fiscal conservative, and had cut spending to balance Virginia's budget; however, he was liberal on social issues such as civil rights and abortion.
His candidacy was seen as suffering from factional conflicts in his home state.
Brown, whose iconoclastic pronouncements and ascetic personal style once earned him the nickname "Governor Moonbeam" , urged the importance of restoring democracy and honesty to the political process.
He, like Agran, was an enthusiastic environmentalist.
Congressional bill to extend unemployment benefits — Bush threat of veto
On Sept. 24 the Senate passed by 69 votes to 30 a one-year measure to extend unemployment benefits by seven, 13 or 20 weeks beyond the standard 26 weeks, depending on the rate of unemployment in each state.
A week earlier, the House of Representatives had passed by 283 to 125 votes almost identical legislation, but added an "automatic trigger" provision to ensure that the bill avoided the fate of its predecessor.
Congress had previously approved a benefit extension bill, at a cost estimated between US$5,000 million and $6,000 million, just prior to its August recess.
Although Bush signed this measure on Aug. 18, he effectively nullified it by refusing to declare the budget emergency required to permit additional spending.
The budget pact between the Republican administration and the Democrat-controlled Congress, agreed in October 1990 [see also p. 37765], required that new federal outlays be offset by increased revenues or spending cuts, unless the President declared an emergency.
The Office of Management and Budget defined emergency spending as "a necessary expenditure that is sudden, urgent and unforeseen, and is not permanent" ; to date, Bush had only made emergency declarations to aid Kurdish refugees in Iraq, to pay benefits for Gulf war veterans, and to bail out the savings and loan industry [see p. 38090].
On Sept. 25 Bush called the new bill "a bunch of garbage" and threatened to veto it on budgetary grounds.
The administration had nevertheless shifted its stance on the issue of the extension of benefits, recognizing that opinion polls were showing an adverse public response to Bush's economic stewardship.
Democrats had accused his "foreign policy presidency" of lacking interest in domestic issues, despite the prolonged recession which had pushed the number of unemployed above 8,000,000.
Having argued in August that benefit extensions were unnecessary because the recession was over, the administration now backed a proposal by the Senate minority leader, Bob Dole, to extend benefits by 10 weeks.
This effort to head off support for the more costly Democratic bill failed to prevent 13 Republican senators breaking ranks.
Senate's approval of bill to nullify ban on abortion counselling
The ban on abortion counselling and referral by federally funded family planning clinics, imposed in 1988 under President Ronald Reagan and maintained by Bush, came under congressional challenge as both House and Senate enacted human services appropriations bills containing a provision to block enforcement of the ban during fiscal 1992.
Passed on Sept. 12 the Senate appropriations bill, in contrast to the House's, also allowed the government, which was currently banned from financing abortions for poor women, to pay for them in cases of rape and incest.
There were also efforts within Congress to relax curbs on financing of international family planning efforts, and to allow military women to obtain abortions in US hospitals overseas.
Meanwhile, the Senate resolved its position regarding notification of abortion for minors, on which it had adopted two contradictory measures in July.
A compromise proposal by Republican Nancy L. Kassebaum of Kansas was approved by 92 votes to eight on Sept. 12.
This required physicians to notify parents within 48 hours of an abortion for a minor, and spelled out well-defined exceptions to this rule—notably medical emergencies, court approval of the minor's right to abortion and coverage of the issue by state laws.
These developments took place against a background of growing activism on the abortion issue in the country at large.
Pro-life and pro-choice groups continued protests in Wichita, Kansas, though on a smaller scale than in July and August [see p. 38383].
The anti-abortion group Operation Rescue also planned mass blockades of five abortion clinics in Iowa City, Iowa, on Sept. 14, but pro-choice supporters turned out in far greater numbers at the demonstrations, which were conducted peacefully.
Iran-contra scandal
Dropping of all charges against North
On Sept. 16 independent prosecutor Lawrence E. Walsh announced that all charges were being dropped against Oliver L. North, a National Security Council (NSC) aide to former President Ronald Reagan and a central figure in the Iran-contra affair.
North was originally found guilty in May 1989 on three charges of falsifying and destroying government documents, obstructing Congress, and taking an illegal gratuity [see p. 36649].
The District of Columbia Circuit Court of Appeals in July 1990 had overturned his conviction on the first charge and sent the other two convictions back to US District Court judge Gerhard A. Gesell, to determine whether testimony from any of the 67 witnesses at the original trial had been influenced—directly or indirectly—by information which North gave Congress under grant of limited immunity during four days of nationally televised interrogation in June 1987 [see p. 37605].
The prosecution finally dropped its charges when Robert McFarlane, National Security Adviser in 1983-85 and thus North's superior, who was brought before Gesell on Sept. 11 as a test case to decide whether proceedings should continue, declared that North's congressional testimony had a "very powerful impact" on him and "coloured" evidence that he gave at the original trial.
North's acquittal on this technicality put in doubt the outcome of the case against another Reagan administration official implicated in the Iran-contra scandal, John M. Poindexter (National Security Adviser in 1986), who was appealing on identical grounds against a six-month prison sentence handed down in June 1990 [see p. 37525].
It was also a serious blow to the credibility of the system of independent prosecution of federal officials, set up following the Watergate affair.
In particular, as Walsh emphasized in his public statement of Sept. 16, it highlighted the difficulties of reconciling the need for rapid exposure of government wrongdoing, which prompted congressional investigators to grant immunity from prosecution to key witnesses, with the aim of convicting those responsible for misdeeds.
Congressional Democrats were quick to defend their treatment of North.
Representative Lee H. Hamilton of Indiana, who co-chaired the congressional joint investigation of the Iran-contra affair, declared that those hearings, because they affected current US foreign policy, were more important than questions of individual criminal liability.
Nevertheless he predicted that Congress would be more cautious in granting immunity in future.
For their part Republicans were delighted with the outcome, and took the offensive against the Walsh investigations, whose costs had exceeded US$27 million without achieving a single conviction which was deemed watertight; Senate minority leader Robert Dole of Kansas issued a statement on Sept. 16 calling for the Iran-contra inquest to be closed.
Opening of Gates confirmation hearing
The Iran-contra scandal remained on the political agenda with the opening on Sept. 16 of the Senate intelligence committee's confirmation hearings on Robert M. Gates, whom Bush had nominated as Central Intelligence Agency (CIA) director (see p. 38327).
Indictment of Clair George
On Sept. 6 interest in the Iran-contra investigation was renewed when a federal grand jury indicted Clair E. George, former chief of CIA covert operations, on 10 felony accounts accusing him of lying to and obstructing congressional and judicial investigations of the Iran-contra affair.
In early September the CIA informed current employees that they would be permitted to contribute money to a legal defence fund, set up the previous month by a group of retired CIA officers to help pay lawyers' fees for beleaguered colleagues.
In addition to George, former Latin American division chief Jerry Gruner and former counterterrorism chief Duane "Dewey" Claridge would be beneficiaries.
Never before in the CIA's history had so many current and former intelligence operatives been under investigation, and the agency was further embarrassed by evidence on the monitoring of Sandinista government communications with seven Democratic congressmen who were critical of Reagan administration policy in Central America.
One of these was named was Representative David E. Bonior of Michigan, now the House majority chief whip, who issued a public statement accusing the CIA of using "KGB tactics" .
Beginning of Noriega trial
The drug trafficking case against Gen. Manuel Noriega of Panama in Miami opened on Sept. 16.
The pre-trial weeks saw intensive plea bargaining negotiations, the prosecution's determination to obtain a conviction against Noriega being suggested by the fact that all 15 of his co-defendants struck deals to plead guilty and provide information on his illegal activities, in return for a prosecution recommendation that they should receive lenient sentences.
Former Panamanian diplomat Ricardo Bilonick, a crucial witness who was allegedly Noriega's go-between with Colombia's Medellín drugs cartel, and who was arrested only two weeks before the trial began, pleaded guilty to a relatively minor racketeering charge on Aug. 29 without having to face more serious drug-trafficking charges.
On Aug. 28 Carlos Lehder Rivas, a former Medellín "drugs baron" currently serving a life sentence [see p. 36278], had agreed to testify against Noriega in return for a possible reduction of his prison sentence.
Six other convicted drug traffickers were reportedly paid "fees" totalling $1,500,000 for testimony against Noriega.
Prosecution attorneys argued that these plea bargains and inducements were little different from procedures followed to obtain convictions of other "kingpin" drugs traffickers, including Lehder himself in 1988.
However, a number of independent legal experts regarded the deals as unfair and exceptional.
When jury selection commenced on Sept. 5, the defence vainly made a last-minute effort to get the trial dismissed, alleging government breach of ethics because it had just learned that Noriega's former lawyer, Raymond Takiff, who had advised him to surrender to US authorities in January 1990, was at the time working secretly for federal authorities.
Nevertheless, Noriega's attorneys had previously won a significant victory: on Aug. 8 presiding US District Court judge William Hoeveler ruled against the Justice and State departments and the Central Intelligence Agency (CIA) that the defence should have access to classified government documents concerning the relationship between US intelligence agencies and the accused.
This would provide the basis for the defence to seek to prove during the trial that the US either knowingly tolerated or was complicit in Noriega's illegal activities.
In brief The White House announced on Sept. 5 that President Bush, 67, had stopped taking medication to regulate his heartbeat, which became erratic earlier in 1991 when stimulated by an overactive thyroid gland [see p. 38183].
He continued to take daily medication to prevent blood clots and replace the thyroid hormone lost after the gland was destroyed gradually by doses of radioactive iodine.
Bush, who was troubled by fatigue and weight loss during the summer, had resumed his routine of daily two-mile, 20-minute jogs and workouts, and undertook a much increased travel schedule in September.
On Sept. 27 former Washington D.C. mayor Marion Barry was resentenced to six months in prison for cocaine possession [see p. 38330], but would remain at liberty until federal authorities decided which penitentiary he should be sent to.
On Sept. 26 an appeals court had rejected the defence's plea to have trial judge Thomas P. Jackson removed from the case on grounds of bias.
In a Milwaukee court on Sept. 10 Jeffrey L. Dahmer pleaded not guilty to 15 murder charges.
The case, coinciding with the treatment of the subject of serial killings in a number of recent films, came to light when a man told Milwaukee police on July 22 that he had been threatened by Dahmer but then escaped from his apartment, where police later found numerous dismembered bodies.
Dahmer admitted to police that he had killed 17 people since 1978; however, his defence lawyer intended to enter an insanity plea if he was convicted, in a trial scheduled to begin in January 1992.
Should this be accepted, he would escape a mandatory life sentence for each murder and would be sent to a mental hospital, with the prospect of release if the trial judge were to accept a petition that he was no longer mentally ill nor a danger to the public.
AMERICAS
CANADA
Constitutional proposals — Strikes
The Progressive Conservative Party (PCP) government of Prime Minister Brian Mulroney on Sept. 24 presented a new 28-point constitutional reform package aimed at placating separatist tendencies in French-speaking Quebec, and designed to keep Quebec in the federation without alienating the other nine provinces.
The earlier Meech Lake constitutional plan which had collapsed in June 1990 [see pp. 37413; 37519-20; 37705-06]had been seen by English-speaking provinces, and Indian native peoples, to embody excessive concessions to Quebec.
The new proposals, subject to modification following public hearings across the country, would not require unanimous consent of the provinces but could be passed by seven of them, representing 50 per cent of the population.
Joe Clark, the Constitutional Affairs Minister announced, however, that he would table legislation within the next few months empowering the government, if necessary, to hold a national referendum on the final constitutional package, which would be the first to be held since that of 1942 on the issue of conscription.
The central points of the package were (i) the granting within 10 years of self-government to the country's Indian peoples [see p. 38384 for Ontario's recognition of Indian rights];(ii) the recognition of Quebec as a "distinct society" empowered to control such areas as employment training, immigration, cultural programmes, broadcasting and tourism but with the proviso that similar powers would be granted to other provinces;(iii) the creation of an elected senate;(iv) the prohibition from mid-1995 of any laws or practices which restricted the mobility of people, capital, services and goods across the country; and (v) greater regional representation on the board of the Bank of Canada.
Reaction to the proposals
Jean Chrétien, the leader of the main opposition Liberal Party of Canada, welcomed the proposals but stopped short of endorsing the whole package.
In Quebec, the secessionist Parti Québecois expressed immediate opposition, their leader Jacques Parizeau, describing the proposals as "the biggest power grab" by the government in half a century.
The province's Liberal Premier Robert Bourassa, however, expressed a readiness to negotiate his province's future in a renewed confederation within the government proposals, while emphasizing his determination not to bargain away any of the province's existing economic powers.
This echoed a national unease at lowering complicated inter-provincial trade barriers which would upset thousands of special interest groups throughout the country.
The Quebec government, however, warned the federal government and the English-speaking provinces that if they failed to come up with an acceptable constitutional solution, Quebec would proceed with its own independence referendum by October 1992.
Major strikes
Labour disputes, involving two of the public sector's most powerful unions, marked a challenge to the government's strategy of containing wage increases as a means of controlling inflation.
Over 70,000 members of the Public Service Alliance of Canada (PSAC) held a nine-day strike ending on Sept. 18 to oppose government plans to impose a pay freeze in the current year and to place a ceiling of 3 per cent on pay increases in each of the following two years.
The strike, the country's largest national stoppage, disrupted air services, halted surface traffic at borders, stopped grain shipments from prairie states and paralysed shipping and government services.
The government finally agreed to fresh negotiations and promised not to proceed with legislation on banning strikes for two years.
The 45,000-strong Canadian Union of Postal Workers (CUPW) began a "rotating" national strike in late August over wages, job security and the increased use of private postal suppliers who hired non-union casual labour.
Several temporary sorting offices set up by Canada Post were reportedly attacked and some burnt down.
The CUPW called off the strike on Sept. 8, accepting negotiations with a government appointed mediator.
Scandal over bribes for public contracts
An Ontario prosecutor on Sept. 16 withdrew charges of bribery and corruption against all but one of 13 prominent PCP members.
A former Public Works Minister, Roch LaSalle, remained to face the charges.
The accused had included three former ministers, the current Minister for Sport, three former ministerial aides, the current Speaker of the Senate, a retired senator and a former Premier of the province of Newfoundland.
Charges were also withdrawn against three senior police officers, including the Commissioner and Deputy-Commissioner of the Royal Canadian Mounted Police (RCMP).
Almost all were close associates of Mulroney.
The charges had been finally brought following the public campaign of Glen Kealey, himself an Ottawa developer, who became the country's most celebrated protestor and suffered ridicule for standing outside the parliament building in Ottawa for over two years in a crusade against alleged federal government corruption.
Kealey alleged that government ministers had operated a sophisticated system of "kickbacks" , gifts of money in return for the awarding of public contracts, and that the RCMP had known about and covered up such bribes.
Kealey claimed that a minister had demanded a "kickback" from him in return for the federal government taking a lease in a building which his company had built.
In a separate but related case, Senator Michel Cogger was charged on Sept. 12 with accepting bribes.
AMERICAS
HAITI
Military coup
Fr Jean-Bertrand Aristide, Haiti's first democratically elected President,[see pp. 37911-12]was deposed in a violent military coup on Sept. 30.
He had just returned from addressing the UN General Assembly in New York where he had given an assurance that democracy was now firmly rooted in Haiti.
The coup leader, Armed Forces C.-in-C.
Brig. -Gen.
Raoul Cedras, called for calm and promised that new elections would be held, without specifying a date.
He said that the army was an "unpolitical" body, keen to keep the "ship of state" afloat, and added that "after seven months of democracy the country is once again in the grip of the horror of uncertainty" .
The coup began with a late night mutiny at the Frères military training camp, east of the capital Port-au-Prince, where heavy fighting was reported.
This spread to a penitentiary where several opponents of Aristide were held, including Roger Lafontant, imprisoned for life in July for leading an abortive coup in January 1991 [see pp. 37955; 38332].
In response government supporters erected flaming barricades in the capital and attacked the property of MPs whom they accused of obstructing the government's current reform programme [see p. 38386].
All radio stations were closed down by the mutineers; several ministers, including the Prime Minister, were reported to have been arrested and others were seeking asylum in foreign embassies.
In all 26 people were reported to have been killed and 200 others wounded.
Among those killed was the prominent politician Sylvio Claude, leader of the Christian Democratic Party (PDCH) and consistent critic of Aristide, who was murdered in an apparent backlash by government supporters in the coastal town of Les Cayes, 160 km south-west of Port-au-Prince.
Soldiers fired on Aristide's home in the poor suburb of Plains de Cul-de-Sac, where he continued to live, killing his security chief before leading him away to army headquarters.
The ambassadors of Canada, France, the United States and Venezuela then successfully intervened and persuaded the coup leaders not to kill Aristide but to allow him to leave the country, in order to prevent widespread bloodshed.
Aristide left for exile by air late on Sept. 30 bound for the Venezuelan capital of Caracas.
Immediate international response
The United States government said in response to the coup that it would suspend some US$85,000,000 in military and economic aid; France also announced the cut-off of $38,000,000 in aid, and European Community aid of $150,000,000 was expected to be suspended.
The USA, France, Venezuela and Argentina denounced the coup and demanded Aristide's return to power, a demand echoed by the Organization of American States (OAS), despite the re-affirmation at its June assembly of its traditional position of non-intervention if proof was given by a new government that it had gained control of its internal affairs [see p. 38286].
Background to coup
The coup was nominally the work of young rebel soldiers of the Engin Lourd motorized unit, formed two years previously by the then ruler of the country, Gen. Prosper Avril.
They had warned Aristide in recent weeks to drop his plan to replace them with another motorized unit, which was Swiss trained and more loyal to him.
The restoration of the army's position of influence and autonomy was one of the six demands of the mutineers, which also included the replacement of Cedras, an Aristide appointment [see p. 38332]by a new Army C.-in- C.
This last demand gave rise to speculation about the level of the involvement of the army leadership in the organization of the coup.
Many analysts believed that Cedras and his colleagues had only taken charge in order to prevent themselves from being swept away by events, and some senior commanders had reportedly refused to join Cedras in the ruling junta.
Many sections of the army leadership were thought to be hostile towards Aristide, however, because, in response to United States pressure, he had begun to act to stop drug trafficking from which they were known to benefit.
Earlier departure of former provisional president
Former interim President Ertha Pascal Trouillot, who had been under house arrest following allegations of her involvement in the January 1991 coup attempt [see pp. 37955; 38145], left for Florida, USA, on Sept. 9.
Government supporters, who had wanted her to stand trial, staged a demonstration outside the US embassy on Sept. 9, blaming the USA for involvement in her departure.
AMERICAS
DOMINICAN REPUBLIC
Cabinet changes
In Cabinet changes announced in mid-September, Juan Manuel Taveras, a Minister without Portfolio, exchanged posts with Foreign Minister Joaquín Ricardo García.
Eduardo Estrella replaced Marcos Subero Sajuín as Public Works Minister and Martha Brown replaced Manuel Bello Abreu as Public Health and Social Welfare Minister.
IMF agreement
The IMF on Aug. 28 announced approval of an agreement reached in principle in July.
Advance publicity about the stringency of the terms had caused widespread social unrest [see p. 38386].
The agreement allowed for the use of IMF resources totalling 84,080,000 special drawing rights (about US$113,000,000).
Of this total up to SDR39,240,000 ($53,000,000) could be drawn over the following 19 months to support the government's 1991-92 economic austerity programme.
The remaining SDR44,840,000 ($60,000,000) was available immediately under the compensatory and contingency financing facility (CCFF) to cover the excess cost of oil imports and a shortfall in export earnings during the 12-month period which ended in March 1991.
The IMF-endorsed government austerity programme planned for sharp cutbacks in public spending and public-sector investment, coupled with tax increases, and increases in the price of public-sector goods and services.
AMERICAS
CUBA
Soviet announcement of withdrawal of troops
In response to the Sept. 11 announcement by the Soviet President Mikhail Gorbachev that 11,000 Soviet troops were to be withdrawn from Cuba, an editorial in the official Communist party newspaper Granma declared that the decision had been "unilateral" , had broken historical and legitimate bilateral accords and was the equivalent of giving a "green light" to the United States to carry out "aggressive plans against Cuba" .
The Soviet decision, delivered during a visit by the US Secretary of State James Baker to Moscow, was welcomed by the US government, but the USA nevertheless ruled out Soviet suggestions, and the Cuban demand, that the US naval base at Guantánamo on Cuba should now be evacuated to lower political tensions in the region.
A Soviet Vice-Minister for Foreign Affairs, Valeri Nikolaenko, who visited the Cuban capital Havana on Sept. 21-22, stated that agreement had been reached on the practical aspects of a staged withdrawal of a 3,000-strong Soviet training brigade and on a "specific time frame" for talks on further withdrawals.
He emphasized, however, that the reductions in Soviet military personnel, currently estimated by Western experts to total no more than 7,800, should not be utilized to compromise Cuba's security.
The Soviet military presence in Cuba was a symbol of Cold War superpower tensions which reached their height with the Cuban missile crisis in August-November 1962.
Although of doubtful military value to a self-sufficient Cuban army, Soviet troops were viewed by the Cuban government as a possible guarantee of Soviet support in the event of a US invasion.
Economic implications
Gorbachev also endorsed the comments of the Soviet Foreign Minister Boris Pankin, who stated on Sept. 5 that Soviet-Cuban relations had to be "de-ideologized" and, from now on, had to be based on free-trade terms rather than on previous military or political dogmas.
This signalled the eventual elimination of the estimated annual US$2,500 million effective Soviet subsidy to Cuba through the bartering of Soviet oil and grain in return for Cuban sugar and nickel exports overvalued by world market standards.
In anticipation of this, and at a time when the economy was already in grave crisis as a result of the US economic embargo, the collapse of trade with eastern Europe (currently down by an estimated 90 per cent) and poor sugar harvests, the Cuban government had been preparing the population for worse times ahead.
A special austerity programme had reduced the range of consumer goods and foodstuffs, with eggs and bread being rationed for the first time.
On Sept. 5 vegetable oil and liquid gas were added to the list and on Sept. 9, the sale of cigars and cigarettes was also rationed.
In addition, a "Special Period in Times of Peace" plan had already been put into effect to cope with dwindling supplies from the Soviet Union and eastern Europe, and an "Option Zero" of extreme economic cutbacks and food rationing was in preparation for the time when Soviet oil shipments finally ceased.
Soviet grain supplies were already at critically low levels.
New human rights organization
Eight illegal dissident organizations joined forces on Sept. 4 in a democratic opposition group intended to press for political and economic reforms.
The creation of the new organization, called the Cuban Democratic Convergence (Concertación Democrática Cubana—CDC), was announced by Gustavo Arcos Vergnes, leader of the Cuban Commission for Human Rights (CCDH) and Elizardo Sánchez Santacruz, leader of the Cuban Commission on Human Rights and National Reconciliation Committee (CDHRNC), both of whom had served prison sentences for alleged political crimes [see also p. 38186].
Both leaders denied an Interior Ministry claim that they were part of a US plot to organize opposition parties and were receiving "guidance from Spain and Venezuela" .
Col. Eduardo Delgado Rodriguez of the State Security Department (DSE) claimed to have intercepted a document written by Carlos Alberto Montaner, a Cuban journalist and leading opponent of the Cuban regime in exile in Spain, advising dissidents on the need to unite.
The government alleged that Montaner was an agent of the US Central Intelligence Agency (CIA).
Sánchez described the charges as part of the government's "usual intimidation policies" .
In August, the Washington-based Americas Watch human rights monitoring group reported "a stepped-up campaign of harassment and repression against the slightest stirrings of discontent" , including physical attacks on pro-democracy activists.
On Sept. 17 four dissidents were sentenced to prison terms of between 10 and 24 months for having participated in a demonstration on Sept. 6 outside the Ministry of National Security in Havana.
They had demanded the release of political prisoners and had reportedly been physically assaulted.
AMERICAS
WINDWARD ISLANDS
Political integration initiative
The four island states of Dominica, St Lucia, St Vincent and the Grenadines, and Grenada, which form the geographical grouping of the Windward Islands, took tentative steps towards political unity at a meeting of the Windward Islands Regional Constituency Assembly (RCA) held on Sept. 7-8 in Roseau, the capital of Dominica.
This was the first time that any part of the English-speaking Caribbean region had attempted political integration since the dissolution of the West Indies Federation in May 1962 [see p. 18813].
The 44 delegates, drawn from ruling and opposition parties and interest groups, agreed on the need for a United States-style constitution, with an executive president possibly elected by universal suffrage.
They also approved, in principle, the adoption of a two-chamber House of Assembly, with an upper house to be elected by proportional representation.
A compromise decision favoured a federal rather than a unitary type of state.
This reflected fears among the delegates that national identities would be impaired by integration and that the free movement of labour and unrestricted purchase of land could lead to economic imbalances between member states and, as a result, a loss of domestic political support.
Supporters of integration emphasized the benefits of pooled expertise, a joint diplomatic service and the need for a joint trade strategy to maintain market share, especially for their exports of bananas, in the trading blocs currently forming in the world, and particularly in dealings with the European Communities.
It was felt that the seven-member Organization of Eastern Caribbean States (OECS), embracing the three Leeward island states (Antigua and Barbuda, Montserrat, and St Kitts and Nevis) as well as the four Windwards, was more US-oriented and less capable of performing this new role.
AMERICAS
MEXICO
Final election results
The Federal Electoral Institute released in early September the final results which corrected preliminary estimates of the Aug. 18 mid-term congressional elections but which confirmed that the ruling Institutional Revolutionary Party (PRI) had won a huge majority of seats in the Chamber of Deputies, the lower house of the Congress [see p. 38385 for details of other simultaneous elections].
Opposition parties persisted with their accusations that there had been innumerable instances of ballot box rigging, intimidation of voters and the expulsion of opposition representatives at many polling stations.
A leading presidential aide was reported to have admitted that "irregularities" had occurred in some areas, which he attributed to "a political culture that is hard to eradicate" .
Amnesty International report
In a report published on Sept. 18, the human rights organization Amnesty International stated that it was time that the United States and the international community stopped "turning a blind eye to the flagrant human rights abuses committed by the Mexican government" .
Amnesty said that the torture of those detained by the army and police was a daily routine, and that it had received reports of more than 200 cases of torture over the past two years, but believed the true figure to be much higher.
Torture methods cited included beating, kicking, electric shocks, near-suffocation in water or with plastic bags and the forcing of a mixture of carbonated water and chili powder into victims' nostrils.
A report produced the previous week by the US-based human rights group, Americas Watch, made similar claims.
Death of diplomat
Alfonso García Robles, the veteran diplomat who won the Nobel Peace Prize in 1982 for the part he had played in UN disarmament negotiations [see p. 31831], died on Sept. 3, aged 80.
Party, Directvote, Proportional representation, Total PRI, 290, 30, 320 PAN, 10, 79, 89 PRD,-, 41, 41 PFCRN,-, 23, 23 PARM,-, 15, 15 PPS,-, 12, 12 National Action Party; PRD: Party of the Democratic Revolution; PFCRN: Cardenista National Reconstruction Party; PARM: Authentic Party of the Mexican Revolution; PPS: Popular Socialist Party.
Chamber of Deputies
AMERICAS
GUATEMALA
Establishment of diplomatic relations with Belize
In an unexpected announcement on Sept. 5, President Jorge Serrano announced that diplomatic relations had been established with neighbouring Belize, although the century-old Guatemalan claim over the territory of Belize, a former British colony granted its independence in September 1981, had not been formally withdrawn [see pp. 36999; 37957; 38228].
The dispute was now expected to go to international arbitration, although the Belize government of Prime Minister George Price emphasized that not "one inch" of national territory would be conceded and that there would be no foreseeable cuts in the size of the British forces stationed in the country.
Guatemala had acknowledged Belize's right to "self-determination" in August; in return the Belizean National Assembly had on Aug. 16 agreed to redefine its maritime boundaries, reducing them to a three-mile zone.
On Sept. 5 Belize also guaranteed Guatemala (i) permanent access to the Caribbean from the adjacent Guatemalan department of Petén;(ii) the use of port facilities, especially that of Big Creek for the export of bananas; and (iii) the right to participate in joint ventures such as oil exploration in Belize's maritime exclusive economic zone.
The Belizean opposition United Democratic Party (UDP) welcomed the recognition of the country's independence but expressed reservations about the economic implications of the Sept. 5 announcement.
Resignation of Foreign Minister
Serrano cancelled plans to attend Belize's 10th independence anniversary celebrations following the resignation, on Sept. 21, of Foreign Minister Alvaro Arzú Irigoyen who, like the rest of the Cabinet, had not been consulted on the announcement to recognize Belize.
Arzú had already gone on record as saying that Belizean independence would not be recognized, and members of Guatemala's National Congress claimed that Serrano's decision flouted Article 173 of the Constitution which stated that territorial decisions regarding Belize "must be subject to the ratification of Congress, following the consultation of the Guatemalan people" .
Serrano immediately assumed temporary responsibility for foreign affairs.
AMERICAS
NICARAGUA
Presidential veto
President Violeta Barrios de Chamorro announced on Sept. 11 that she had vetoed part of a draft property bill approved by the National Assembly on Aug. 23, which she claimed was unconstitutional.
She attacked the Assembly's president, Alfredo César, for publishing the text of the bill in Chamorro's own newspaper La Prensa, giving the impression that it was already law.
The bill in question, approved by disaffected hardliners in the ruling National Opposition Union (UNO) coalition, had rescinded Sandinista National Liberation Front (FSLN) land and property laws, described locally as la piñata (after cheap sweet dispensers) which before the change in government in April 1990 had legitimized the distribution of property to Sandinistas [see p. 38282].
The new bill allowed for the return of property worth US$11,600 or more to former owners.
Chamorro favoured a measured approach to the piñata issue and an "integral solution" , which would promote national reconciliation rather than further alienating the Sandinistas, whose 39 delegates had boycotted the National Assembly "indefinitely" in June over the affair [see ibid].
Her UNO opponents accused her of once again caving in to the Sandinistas.
Security issues — Establishment of national security commission — New Sandanista armed groups
The Interior Minister Carlos Hurtado held a meeting on Sept. 3 with the re-contras, the rearmed right-wing contra rebels.
The re-contra leader José Angel Morán Flores ( "Indomitable" ) repeated earlier demands for the dismissal of the former Sandinista leader and current Armed Forces C.-in-C.
Gen. Humberto Ortega Saavedra and for increased security in regions where former contras had demobilized.
He also demanded land and working capital promised to them by the government under a resettlement plan administered by the Organization of American States (OAS).
The re-contras claimed that 66 former contras had been killed during the year in continuing clashes with Sandinista army and police personnel who they wanted replaced by a police force which included ex-contras.
Encarnación Valdiva ( "the Tiger" ) reportedly replaced Morán as re-contra leader on Sept. 7 and called for fresh negotiations with the government.
The government had shown restraint in respect of the re-contras, who numbered several hundred, had mobilized in March in the mountains of the northern province of Jinotega, and had initiated attacks in June on rural settlements and on members of the security forces [see pp. 38282-83].
Hurtado called on the re-contras to surrender their weapons to an OAS committee.
He repeated the government's pledge to disarm civilians to further lower national tensions.
This pledge to disarm civilians had been formalized with the establishment of the broad-based National Security Commission, set up on Aug. 29 with its own armed 150-strong Special Disarmament Brigade.
The Brigade was designed to assist the civilian commission to coax people to surrender weapons, possibly in return for money payments.
An additional threat to national stability, Hurtado stated on Sept. 9, was the recent formation of armed Sandinista groups, known as the Dantos-91 ( "death to the revengers" ), the Revolutionary Action Movement, the Pedro Altamirano Sandinist Movement, the Property Self-Defence Group and the Armed Insurrectional Revolutionary Front.
Radio Sandino, in the capital Managua, claimed on Aug. 27 that Dantos-91 had been established to counter the military operations of the re-contras and to defend the Sandinista land laws.
AMERICAS
SURINAM
New President
Ronald Venetiaan, the candidate of the coalition New Front for Democracy and Development (NF), was elected President on Sept. 7, ending four months of uncertainty over the future government of the country.
Although the NF had won the May general election [see p. 38188]it did not have the necessary two-thirds of the seats in the National Assembly which would have automatically awarded its candidate the presidency.
Jules Ajohida was named Vice-President.
A new Cabinet was sworn in on Sept. 17, including Eddy Sedoc (Finance), Subhaas Mungra (Foreign Affairs), and two members of the Surinam Labour Party (SPA), Siegfried Gilds (Defence) and Reynold Simons (Labour).
Venetiaan, a former Education Minister, received 645 votes from the 817-member United People's Assembly summoned by the National Assembly, which in two ballots had been unable to decide on a president.
The previous interim Vice-President Jules Wijdenbosch of the National Democratic Party (NDP), who was supported by the army, won 120 votes and the remaining 52 votes went to Hans Prade of the Democratic Alternative"91 (DA-91).
Venetiaan stated his desire to reform the Constitution to reduce the involvement of the army in internal affairs.
He also suggested seeking technical and military assistance from abroad to deal with such problems as drug trafficking.
Army, police and customs personnel were known to have been involved in making the country a major trans-shipment point for Colombian drug cartels targeting European markets.
Venetiaan also said that he wanted to renegotiate bilateral links with the Netherlands, which had suspended the disbursement of its aid, and to restore Surinam's relations with Venezuela, broken off following the December 1990 military coup [see pp. 37912-13].
AMERICAS
COLOMBIA
Dismissal of security chief
President César Gaviria Trujillo on Sept. 5 dismissed Gen. Miguel Maza Marquez, 52, from his post as director of the Administrative Department of Security (DAS), the investigative police force.
Maza had gained a high reputation for leading the fight against "narco-terrorism" over the previous six years and he also claimed several successes in rescuing the kidnap victims of the drug cartels.
He had, however, been accused of failing to prevent the assassination of three presidential candidates [see pp. 36844; 37312; 37371-72].
His dismissal angered senior police chiefs who saw it as yet another concession from Gaviria to drug cartel chiefs, who had surrendered in return for reduced prison sentences [see pp. 37914; 37957-58; 38283].
Senior government officials confirmed that Gaviria was assembling his own team to ensure that the process of gathering evidence against and prosecuting the drug barons went smoothly.
Maza's replacement, Fernando Britto Ruiz, 36, a close personal friend of Gaviria and a lawyer with no previous law enforcement experience, promised to make the DAS more responsive to new forms of criminality.
Critics of the DAS claimed that his first task should be to root out the corruption within it and halt the systematic abuses of human rights by its police officers.
Strikes of judiciary workers
An estimated 30,000 judiciary workers began an indefinite strike on Sept. 27, demanding improved state protection against continued death threats to judges and magistrates.
A Supreme Court judge, Fabiola Borrero, from the western city of Cali, was shot dead on Sept. 22 by gunmen believed to be working for the Cali drug cartel.
Anti-terrorist law — Peace talks
An anti-terrorist law enacted on Sept. 26 threatened to upset the government's current peace talks with the Revolutionary Armed Forces of Colombia (FARC) and the National Liberation Army (ELN) guerrilla groups acting together as the Simón Bolívar National Guerrilla Co-ordinating Board (CNGSB).
The CNGSB claimed (although the government denied) that the law placed limitations on peaceful demonstrations and political activities.
The M-19 Democratic Alliance, a left-wing coalition led by the former guerrilla April 19 Movement (M-19), had also opposed the law.
A third round of peace talks had finally begun on Sept. 4, and after a two-day break were resumed on Sept. 18 in the Venezuelan capital Caracas [see pp. 38283; 38387 for previous peace rounds].
The CNGSB rejected the government's proposal that, prior to a definite peace agreement being reached, the guerrillas should assemble in 60 secure sites away from strategic economic facilities.
The CNGSB called instead for the establishment of 192 wider assembly areas, and for freedom of movement for all CNGSB members whether or not they were subject to arrest orders.
The government rejected this as being tantamount to handing over one-third of the country's municipalities to the guerrillas, and insisted that the armed forces had to be present in every part of the national territory.
In addition, the government insisted that until there was a ceasefire agreement, the current counterinsurgency operations would continue in every region where the guerrillas were active.
As a gesture of goodwill, the CNGSB had offered to suspend attacks on the national electricity grid and oil installations, without giving a guarantee that this included the strategic Canoño Limón-Puerto Coveñas pipeline.
ELN split
The ELN leadership confirmed on Sept. 20 that a Socialist Renewal Movement (CRS) within the ELN had set up its own organization.
Reasons cited for the split were "changes in the old socialist world" and "political readjustments" which had led the CRS to "stress different issues" .
Future political co-operation between the two was not ruled out.
AMERICAS
ECUADOR
Occupation of UK embassy
An occupation of the public areas of the embassy of the United Kingdom in the capital, Quito, on Sept. 4-5 by eight members of the dissident wing of the former guerrilla group Alfaro Vive, Carajo!
(AVC) ended peacefully after some 30 hours.
The militants were publicizing demands for political status to be conferred on their imprisoned leader Patricio Baquerizo whom they wanted released.
Baquerizo had been held in custody since May and, since Aug. 19, had been on hunger strike.
The government stated that Baquerizo faced trial on charges of "acting against the state's legal order" and therefore could not be released.
The dissident AVC wing, although it had decided to abandon the class struggle, still opposed the AVC majority who had accepted the government's offer of amnesty and had begun demobilization in February 1989 to join mainstream politics.
Attack on Supreme Court
In Quito, a building housing the Supreme Court was reported to have suffered severe damage in a dynamite attack on Sept. 7.
 "Dozens" of policemen had demonstrated the previous day against the judicial system, the media and immigrant Colombians.
The policemen were especially outraged by a Criminal Court ruling linking Gilberto Molina, a former police commander, and some of his officials with the murders of two teenagers, the sons of Colombian parents, who had disappeared in January 1988.
Molina had accused the media of orchestrating a campaign against him.
AMERICAS
PERU
Debt agreements
Important debt agreements ended the country's isolation from the international financial community and made it eligible for fresh multilateral agency loans.
IMF agreement
The International Monetary Fund (IMF), in recognition of the success of the government's stringent economic and fiscal and monetary policies, on Sept. 12 approved an accumulation of "rights" up to a maximum of 623,700,000 special drawing rights (about US$840,000,000), equivalent to the level of Peru's arrears to the IMF as of June 30, 1991.
Under its rights accumulation programme (this approach having been endorsed by the IMF Interim Committee in May 1990 and first applied to Zambia in April 1991), Peru could accumulate rights up to the equivalent of SDR207,900,000 (US$282,000,000) by December 1991.
The remaining rights would be phased over the next four quarters until December 1992.
The accumulated rights, earned on the basis of Peru's performance under its IMF-monitored adjustment programme, would then be encashed as the first disbursement under a successor IMF-supported programme.
Peru's status of "ineligibility" for future loans by the IMF [see p. 34606]was lifted following the finalization of a US$1,160 million balance-of-payments support package, to cover 1991 and 1992, arranged by a "support group" of friendly countries, headed by the United States and Japan.
Peru was expected to enter into a similar accumulation programme with the World Bank.
Paris Club agreement
An agreement rescheduling US$6,600 million in debt with the "Paris Club" of leading industrial creditor countries, falling due in 1991 and 1992, was announced on Sept. 17 and was described by President Alberto Keinya Fujimori as "fantastic and unprecedented" .
Public-sector loans were now to be repaid over 20 years and other loans over 15 years.
The net immediate effect was that Peru would pay nothing to the Paris Club for the rest of 1991 and that repayments for 1992 were cut to $300,000,000, less than half the expected figure.
Japan had imposed conditions preventing the Paris Club from offering multilateral debt forgiveness as for Poland and Egypt [see pp. 38107; 38209].
IDB agreement
The Inter-American Development Bank (IDB) granted a US$425,000,000 loan package on Sept. 18, primarily aimed to assist the sweeping external trade reforms decreed by the government over the previous year.
This was the largest loan granted by the IDB and its President Enrique Iglesias stated that it was a sign of the IDB's "great affection" and "admiration for the vigorous stabilization programme under way in Peru" .
US aid — Creation of Human Rights Committee
During his official week-long visit to the USA which began on Sept. 14, Fujimori was praised by President Bush for curbing human rights abuses and combating the "deadly scourge" of drugs.
Bush had still to convince the US Congress, however, to release the US$94,000,000 in economic and military aid which it had frozen in July because of doubts about the government's commitment to an anti-drug programme and because of persistent reports of gross human rights abuses by the military.
Bush asked Congress again, on Sept. 17, to disburse the aid.
Sensitive to international accusations of human rights abuses, the Interior Ministry announced on Sept. 19 that a National Human Rights Committee had been created to "supervise actions by political authorities, government officials and the national police" .
The Committee was to be headed by the Deputy Interior Minister, David Mejia Galindo, and its senior members included the director of the National Police, Adolfo Cuba y Escobedo.
AMERICAS
CHILE
Exhumation of bodies
Between Sept. 2 and Sept. 14 a total of 125 bodies were removed from plot 29 (Patio 29) in the general cemetery in Santiago.
All were thought to be victims of the fierce military repression which took place in the first three months following the military coup of September 1973.
The process of identification was expected to take several months but human rights groups were confident that it would provide evidence of indiscriminate killing.
Commenting on the finds in Patio 29 Gen. Augusto Pinochet Ugarte, the 1973 coup leader who had remained as C.-in -C. of the Army after the return to democratic rule in 1990, stated that he "congratulated the corpse hunters" and claimed that the burial of more than one body in the same grave showed "great economy" .
These remarks caused general public revulsion and were described by government officials as "cruel" and "offensive" , but there were no official moves for Pinochet to resign.
On the contrary, the government initiated legal proceedings in late September against Manuel Cabieses, the director of the left-wing magazine Punto Final, for violating the Security Law by insulting the head of the army—the magazine having described Pinochet as "shameless" and "sadistic" and depicted him in a photomontage blowing his nose with the Chilean flag.
Arrest of former secret police leaders
Gen. (retd) Manuel Contreras and Col. Pedro Espinozo, who had been respectively the head and the chief of operations of Pinochet's notorious DINA secret police, were detained on Sept. 23 by order of special judge Adolfo Bañados.
They were to stand trial on charges of planning the death in 1976 of Orlando Letelier, a former ambassador to the United States and then Minister in the government of President Salvador Allende, and of Letelier's secretary Ronnie Moffit [see pp. 28273; 34989; 36097; July 38334-35].
AMERICAS
ARGENTINA
Mid-term elections
In the second stage of gubernatorial, congressional and local elections held on Sept. 8, the ruling Justicialist Party (PJ—the Peronists) built on their success in the first stage in August [see p. 38388]by winning 10 of the 13 governorships being contested and gaining seven seats in the Chamber of Deputies, although this was still insufficient to give the PJ an outright majority.
Preliminary results of the election for thousands of local government posts also showed strong support for the Peronists.
The biggest PJ victory was the governorship of the key province of Buenos Aires, containing 7,600,000 voters (approximately 50 per cent of the total electorate).
Vice-President Eduardo Duhalde took 47 per cent of the vote, as against 20 per cent for the pre-poll favourite and veteran politician Juan Carlos Pugliese of the main opposition Radical Party (UCR).
Aldo Rico, a former lieutenant-colonel who led abortive military rebellions in 1987 and 1988 [see pp. 35560-61; 36203]and who claimed to be representing the "dispossessed" , came an unexpected third with only 10 per cent of the vote.
Other notable PJ successes were in hard fought campaigns for the governorships of the north-western provinces of Tucumán and Santa Fé, won, respectively, by a popular singer, Ramón "Palito" Ortega, and a former racing driver, Carlos Reutemann.
The UCR managed to retain control only of the federal capital of Buenos Aires, won by Fernando de la Rúa, and the western industrial province of Córdoba, won by Eduardo Angeloz, the UCR presidential candidate in 1989.
Both of these, notably, represented conservative tendencies within the UCR favourable to the government's current economic reform policies.
Jorge Sobisch of the centre-right Popular Neuquén Movement (MNP) defeated the PJ candidate to give the MNP its third consecutive victory in the southern province of Neuquén.
A third round of elections, to elect eight governors and the remaining 86 congressional seats being contested, was to be held on Oct. 27.
Vote of confidence
The election results were generally felt to represent popular support for the economic reform policies of the Economy Minister Domingo Cavallo.
In August, inflation had reduced to 1.5 per cent, the lowest figure in 17 years.
President Carlos Saúl Menem, whose popularity had waned in July due to financial scandals involving his relatives and political aides [see p. 38335], stated that he now had a national mandate to seek the widest political consensus to deepen the government's economic programme.
Political analysts also agreed that the result marked the eclipse of the traditional political right and centre, which had been obliged to endorse Menem's conservative economic policies, and marked the isolation of the Peronist left-wing and of other left-wing parties opposed to austerity measures.
A well-known Peronist dissident and Menem critic Saúl Ubaldini, the leader of the major CGT union confederation, failed to be elected as a deputy to Congress as did Alvaro Alsogaray, former minister and leader of the centre-right Union of the Democratic Centre (UCeDé).
Budget
A bill containing the national budget for 1992 was presented to the Congress on Sept. 13.
Total income was set at US$17,452 million and total expenditure at the equivalent of US$18,022 million, with a projected deficit of $569,000,000.
Domingo Cavallo, the Economy Minister, said that a 6.5 per cent increase in GDP was forecast for 1992, and inflation was expected to be "slightly more than one digit" ; he also promised that there would be no domestic or foreign loan applications involving an increase in the public debt.
Federal government resources would be $2,215 million more than 1991.
Military sentences
The Buenos Aires Federal Appeal Court on Sept. 3 imprisoned for an "indefinite term" the former colonel Mohamed Alí Seineldín, the instigator of the failed army mutiny on Dec. 3, 1990 [see p. 37913].
Fourteen other officers were also imprisoned, receiving sentences ranging from two to 25 years.
The officers had already been convicted by a military tribunal in January [see p. 37959]but the civilian court, which was required to confirm these sentences, showed itself to be more lenient.
The military tribunal had condemned six other officers to life imprisonment.
The Appeal Court also rejected the prosecution's claim that the mutineers had tried to mount a coup d'etat.
However, two officers found not guilty by the military tribunal were given sentences of two and three years.
AMERICAS
FALKLANDS(MALVINAS) ISLANDS
UK-Argentina accords
The United Kingdom and Argentina signed new accords on Sept. 25 substantially reducing military restrictions in the South Atlantic, imposed by the UK in the aftermath of the 1982 Falklands war.
These new agreements obliged both countries' navies and air forces (i) to give 14 days' advance warning, instead of the previous 25 days, of large military manoeuvres within 80 miles of the coasts of Argentina or of the Falklands Islands and other UK possessions in the south Atlantic; and (ii) to give 42 hours' notice for permission for combat vessels to approach within 15 miles of either coast, to be arranged by mutual agreement, instead of the previous 48 hours' notice to approach within 50 miles.
Argentine diplomats insisted that the accords did not in any way imply recognition of British sovereignty over the Falklands Islands.
AMERICAS
LATIN AMERICA
Chile-Mexico free trade accord
A free trade accord, the first to be agreed in Latin America, was signed on Sept. 22 by the Chilean and Mexican governments.
Its central focus was a joint commitment to abolish all non-tariff barriers between the two countries.
Starting in January 1992, 95 per cent of bilateral trade would carry a common tariff of 10 per cent, which would fall to zero over four years.
In addition, tariffs on a dozen "sensitive" items, including timber, meat, petrochemicals, polyester and nylon fibres, would be abolished at the end of six years.
Tariff reductions on a third group of commodities, not prominent in bilateral trade, including petrochemical derivatives, oilseeds, sugar and wheat, had yet to be negotiated.
Chile had already opened exploratory free trade talks with Venezuela [see p. 37774], but had declined to join the projected Mercosur South American common market [see p. 38096]until Brazil and Argentina had made further progress on economic reform.
AMERICAS
ANTIGUA and BARBUDA
John St Luce and Lester Bird Jr who had resigned in February and March respectively [see p. 38092]rejoined the Cabinet on Sept. 3 as, respectively, Minister of Information and Minister for Foreign Affairs and Planning.
AMERICAS
EL SALVADOR
Established diplomatic relations with Hungary at ambassadorial level on Sept. 27.
AMERICAS
GRENADA
Grenada resumed diplomatic relations with North Korea on Sept. 21.
AMERICAS
HONDURAS
The United States government on Sept. 26 forgave US$431,000,000 in official debt.
In a rebuff to President Rafael Leonardo Callejas, the National Assembly in mid-September named Orlando Lozano Martínez as the new President of the Supreme Court after forcing the resignation of Oswaldo Ramos Soto.
ASIA — PACIFIC
CHINA
Improved foreign relations
Visit of UK Prime Minister
The United Kingdom Prime Minister, John Major, was the first Western leader to visit China since the crushing of the pro-democracy demonstrations in Tiananmen Square in 1989 [see p. 36720]when he arrived in Beijing on Sept. 2 to sign an agreement on a new airport project for Hong Kong [see p. 38340; 38340].
Major and his Chinese counterpart, Li Peng, also made progress on setting up an independent court of appeal in Hong Kong, on the colony's right to negotiate trade investment agreements, and on agreement over land controlled by the UK military.
Major also met President Yang Shangkun and Chinese Communist Party general secretary Jiang Zemin.
Citing the "inevitable" global trend towards "more open and accountable government" exemplified by changes in the Soviet Union, Major raised human rights issues and presented a list of political prisoners.
He also stressed the importance of arms control and China's accession to the Nuclear Non-Proliferation Treaty (NPT)[see p. 38340].
The official news agency, Xinhua, said that the visit signalled a "new phase of bilateral ties" following "certain setbacks" over the past two years.
Visit of Italian Prime Minister
The Italian Prime Minister, Giulio Andreotti, visited Beijing on Sept. 15-20 for talks with Li Peng, Jiang Zemin and Yang Shangkun.
During the visit, which signalled the normalization of relations between the two countries, an agreement on space co-operation was signed.
Responding to concern expressed by Andreotti over human rights in China, Jiang Zemin said that China's record on feeding and clothing its population constituted observance of human rights, and was "a great contribution to world peace" .
Relations with Soviet Union
The Chinese deputy Foreign Minister, Tian Zengpei, arrived in Moscow on Sept. 16 following visits to Estonia, Latvia and Lithuania, where agreements had been signed establishing diplomatic relations, and acknowledging in all three cases that the PRC government was the only lawful government representing the whole of China.
Tian and a Soviet counterpart, Igor Rogachev, reaffirmed their commitment to developing "good-neighbourly and friendly relations" .
Progress on border issues was also discussed.
Commemoration by US representatives of Tiananmen Square massacre
Three US members of Congress visiting Peking on Sept. 2-4 were accused of "illegal activities" and of staging "a premeditated anti-Chinese farce" when they displayed a banner and laid flowers in Tiananmen Square on Sept. 4 to commemorate pro-democracy demonstrators killed in 1989 [see pp. 36720-22].
Nancy Pelosi, Ben Jones and John R. Miller in talks with Chinese officials raised human rights issues (including the imprisonment of dissidents), endorsing the US Congress's linking of human rights with the renewal of China's most-favoured-nation trading status [see p. 38339].
Ending of hunger strike by dissident — Release of Hong Kong businessman
It was reported on Sept. 15 that the imprisoned democracy movement activist, Chen Ziming, had agreed to give up his hunger strike, launched on Aug. 14 [see p. 38395], on hearing that his fellow dissident and colleague, Wang Juntao, also serving a 13-year sentence, had been moved to a prison hospital for treatment.
Wang was reported to be suffering from hepatitis.
Following an appeal made by Major during his visit, the Hong Kong businessman Luo Haixing was released from prison on Sept. 9 "on bail for medical treatment outside the country" .
Luo had served nearly two years of a five-year sentence on charges of trying to help Wang Juntao and Chen Ziming to escape from China after the 1989 massacre in Tiananmen Square.
Expulsion of British journalist
Andrew Higgins, correspondent for the British newspaper the Independent, was ordered on Sept. 13 to leave China within 48 hours.
In July Higgins had been accused of "compromising national security" in an article about a crackdown on nationalists in Nei Mongol province (Inner Mongolia), based on an internal party document which the Foreign Ministry claimed he had obtained "illegally" .
Economic report to NPC Standing Committee
In a report on Sept. 2 to the 21st meeting of the standing committee of the seventh National People's Congress, meeting on Aug. 27-Sept. 4, Vice-Premier Zou Jiahua noted improvements in economic performance [see p. 38340], but cited problems in stockpiling, "debt chains" between enterprises and poor returns from the state sector, leading to "comparatively big difficulties" for the state budget.
The State Council subsequently instituted a nationwide restructuring campaign, and set a Sept. 20 deadline for clearing debt arrears between enterprises.
Zou said that the summer floods [see p. 38339]had caused economic losses of over 80,000 million yuan (US$14,850 million), and grain losses of 10,000 million jin (5,000,000 tonnes).
A State Council meeting on Sept. 17 announced that 9,000 million yuan ($1,670 million) would be spent over the next five years on 18 key water conservation projects in the Huaihe River and Taihu Lake valleys, heavily populated and economically developed areas which had been seriously affected by flooding.
Zou's report called for greater control of investment in fixed assets, which had reportedly risen by 21 per cent in the first half of the year compared with the same period of 1990, so as to concentrate on priority projects including water conservation, agriculture, energy, transport, key raw materials, health and education.
It also called for the closure and reorganization of inefficient enterprises and a reduction in stockpiling.
ASIA — PACIFIC
VIETNAM
Visit of Foreign Minister to China
Nguyen Manh Cam, the new Vietnamese Foreign Minister [see p. 38390], visited Beijing on Sept. 9-14 for talks with Chinese leaders on ending the decade-long "abnormality of relations" .
The visit cleared the way for a summit meeting between the Communist Party leaders of the two countries.
Nguyen Manh Cam was the highest-ranking Vietnamese official to visit China since their 1979 border war, which followed Vietnam's invasion of Cambodia in 1978.
Commentators noted that the collapse of communist power in the Soviet Union, following the August coup attempt there [see pp. 38368-73], had hastened the two countries' moves towards normalization.
[See p. 38390 for August visit by Deputy Foreign Minister to Beijing.]
Crossing the Sino-Vietnamese border symbolically at "Friendship Pass" on Sept. 9, Nguyen Manh Cam then flew to Beijing.
His Chinese counterpart, Qian Qichen, described relations as having "gradually improved" following "difficulties and setbacks over the past 10 years" .
Li Peng, the Chinese Premier, told Nguyen Manh Cam on Sept. 11 that with the progress in the political settlement of the Cambodian issue [see pp. 38440-41], "the normalization of Sino-Vietnamese relations has been put on the agenda" .
Commentators said that the two sides were likely to pressure their respective Cambodian allies to ensure that a peace agreement was reached before fully normalizing ties.
A communiqué issued on Sept. 12 said: "The two sides maintained that the restoration of the neighbourly and friendly relations between the two countries of Vietnam and China was necessary." 
It noted unanimity on the need to take practical steps towards the restoration of exchanges and co-operation in the economic, trade, scientific, technological, transportation and cultural fields "in order to normalize Sino-Vietnamese relations gradually" .
The two sides had reached "an identical view" on the visit to China of "Vietnamese leaders within this year" .
On Cambodia, "the two sides were convinced that the improvement of Sino-Vietnamese relations could contribute to spurring a comprehensive political solution" .
Improved relations with Thailand
Arsa Sarasin, the Thai Foreign Minister, held talks with Nguyen Manh Cam and the Vietnamese Premier, Vo Van Kiet, during a visit to Hanoi and Ho Chi Minh City on Sept. 17-19 which he said aimed to "eliminate misunderstandings between the two countries and expand bilateral cooperation in the future" and to prepare for the "very early" visit to Thailand of Vo Van Kiet.
According to a joint communiqué issued on Sept. 18, a number of confidence-building measures were agreed including the release of detained Thai and Vietnamese fishermen and the granting of Thai citizenship to Vietnamese nationals who had fled to Thailand during the first Indo-China war.
Both sides also agreed to hold regular exchanges between their respective military leaderships, and to exchange military attachés.
An accord was signed on setting up a joint economic co-operation commission, and another agreement was initialled on investment promotion and protection.
Thailand offered to extend technical assistance to Vietnam, and put forward proposals on fisheries and energy co-operation.
Further talks on economic co-operation and trade expansion were held in Bangkok on Sept. 17 between the new Vietnamese Minister of Commerce, Le Van Triet, and Thai leaders.
Following the talks, Thailand agreed to lift its 10-year ban on the export of strategic goods to Vietnam, according to a Thai Foreign Ministry source.
New army Chief of General Staff
Gen. Dao Dinh Luyen, 64, Deputy Defence Minister, was appointed Chief of General Staff of the Vietnam People's Army, according to a communiqué on the Council of State session held on Sept. 9-10.
He replaced Gen. Doan Khue, who was appointed Defence Minister in August [see p. 38390].
Visit of US cardinal — Talks on oil exploration
Cardinal Bernard Law, Roman Catholic archbishop of Boston, visited Hanoi and Ho Chi Minh City on Aug. 28-Sept. 3.
Law, who celebrated Sunday mass in Hanoi's main cathedral, said that he would recommend that the United States lift its trade embargo on Vietnam.
The Financial Times of Sept. 10 reported that the US-based oil and gas group Mobil was holding preliminary talks with the state-run PetroVietnam on exploration possibilities in the South China Sea, but would not be able to proceed unless and until the US trade embargo against Vietnam was lifted.
ASIA — PACIFIC
HONG KONG
First elections to Legco
In the first direct elections to Hong Kong's parliament, the Legislative Council (Legco), held on Sept. 15, liberal democratic candidates won a sweeping victory, despite a turnout of only 39 per cent.
The leading liberal party, the United Democrats of Hong Kong (UDHK), led by Martin Lee and Szeto Wah, won 12 out of the 18 directly elected seats in the 56-member Legco.
Other parties allied to the democrats won three seats, and the remaining three seats were taken by independents.
Despite massive campaigning, none of the four candidates backed by China won a seat.
Commenting on the elections, the communist mainland-backed newspaper Ta Kung Pao of Sept. 16 said that "participation was not extensive and pluralistic enough" , and warned the election victors against "imposing" their political opinions on Hong Kong residents.
Calling the election a "success" , the United Kindgom Foreign and Commonwealth Secretary, Douglas Hurd, said on Sept. 16 that the UK would work for a progressive extension of democracy in Hong Kong, signalling that the UK might press China to revise the Basic Law under which the proportion of directly elected seats would gradually rise to half by 2007.
Martin Lee, an outspoken critic of China and a proponent of full democracy for the territory, had called for half the Legco seats to be directly elected by 1995.
Liberal democrats remained in a minority on the Legco, despite their success in the direct elections.
Candidates backed by the UDHK won only two seats in the indirect elections on Sept. 12 for the 21 Legco members representing "functional constituencies" (business, trade and social service groups).
The successful candidates largely represented business interests and called for closer ties with China.
The Governor, Sir David Wilson, on Sept. 21 announced his 17 direct appointments to the Legco.
Accepting only one of the UDHK'S 20 proposed candidates, he named principally those in favour of stability rather than faster democratization; however, none of his appointees were backed by China.
Sir David also rejected pressure from the UDHK for representation on the Executive Committee (Exco), Hong Kong's chief policy-making body.
Chinese officials were reported to have indicated to Sir David that the Chinese authorities would not welcome the appointment of Martin Lee or Szeto Wah to Exco.
Both men were active in the Hong Kong Alliance in Support of Democratic Movements in China, which the Chinese government had described as "subversive" .
Visit of UK Prime Minister
Following a visit to Beijing to sign an agreement on Hong Kong's airport project [see p. 38340], the UK Prime Minister, John Major, paid a one-day visit to Hong Kong on Sept. 6 during which he promised to intervene personally with Chinese leaders in the event of a dispute over the status of Hong Kong.
He also briefed Exco members on agreements reached including the establishment of an independent court of final appeal in Hong Kong.
Resignation of head of stock exchange
Francis Yuen, the controversial head of the Hong Kong stock exchange, announced his resignation on Sept. 6 with effect from Oct. 26, when he was to be succeeded by Paul Chow.
Appointed after the 1987 crash [see p. 35742]to reform the exchange, Yuen had frequently clashed with the Securities and Futures Commission [see p. 38395].
New head of Trade Council
It was announced on Sept. 19 that a senior Exco member, Dame Lydia Dunn, was stepping down as head of the Hong Kong Trade Development Council and would be succeeded on Oct. 1 by Victor K. Fung, chairman and chief executive officer of Prudential Asia Investments Ltd. <N
ASIA — PACIFIC
MONGOLIA
Ban on party membership for senior officials
Under a law adopted on Aug. 28 at a special meeting of the Little Hural (parliament), all senior officials, including the President, Vice-President, the chairman of the Little Hural, senior members of the armed forces and the judiciary, and journalists, were required to resign their membership of political parties as of Sept. 3.
It was reported that President Punsalmaagiyn Ochirbat had resigned from the ruling (communist) Mongolian People's Revolutionary Party on Sept. 10.
International conference on aid
The first international conference on aid to Mongolia, held in Tokyo on Sept. 5-6 and attended by delegations from 14 countries and five international organizations, agreed to grant $155,000,000 for emergency needs over the winter, which included food, medicines and spare parts.
Of this, Japan would provide $35,000,000 in loans and $26,000,000 in grant aid.
ASIA — PACIFIC
NORTH-SOUTHKOREA
Simultaneous UN entry
North and South Korea were separately admitted to the UN at the start of the General Assembly session in New York on Sept. 17 [see also p. 38458].
North Korea had decided in May to drop its former insistence on a single Korean seat, following South Korea's success in gaining assurances that the Soviet Union and China would withdraw their opposition to the South's entry into the UN.
A North Korean Foreign Ministry statement on Sept. 17 said: "In the situation in which the attempt to perpetuate and legalize the nation's and people's division by taking advantage of international leverage on entry into the UN has recently become clear, we have taken a decisive step to enter the UN in order to prevent such grave consequences arising," adding that North Korea had not changed its policy on reunification.
In his speech to the UN on Sept. 17, the South Korean Foreign Affairs Minister, Lee Sang Ock, called the simultaneous entry to the UN "a giant first step forward" towards eventual reunification through confidence-building dialogue and co-operation within the UN framework.
In the most positive response to date to South Korean calls for an inter-Korean summit meeting, a North Korean Deputy Foreign Minister, Kang SokChu told reporters in New York on Sept. 17 that President Kim Il Sung hoped to hold such a summit with President Roh Tae Woo, now that the two countries had been admitted to the UN and "recognized as legitimate governments by the international community" .
Roh's UN address — Call for new peace treaty
Addressing the UN General Assembly in New York on Sept. 24, Roh Tae Woo proposed a three-point plan for improving relations with the North, starting with replacing the 1953 "fragile armistice" with a permanent peace treaty.
Calling for the renunciation of the use of force, he also offered to discuss nuclear issues on the Korean peninsula as a whole.
(North Korea had refused to allow international inspection of its nuclear programme unless there was a similar inspection of US nuclear weapons in South Korea.)
Roh also indicated that the two Koreas' plans for reunification could be combined in a three-stage formula, starting with the South Korean plan based on a Korean community, and proceeding to a confederal republic of Koryo, as proposed by the North.
Commentators said that the conciliatory tone of the speech indicated that South Korea was hoping to speed up reunification talks before Kim Il Sung transferred power to his son, Kim ChongIl.
ASIA — PACIFIC
NORTH KOREA
Normalization talks with Japan
The fourth round of talks between North Korea and Japan on normalizing relations took place in Beijing on Aug. 31-Sept. 2, and ended with no apparent progress except agreement to meet again in November.
The North Korean chief negotiator, Chon InChoh and his Japanese counterpart, Noburo Nakahira, discussed the extent of North Korea's jurisdiction on the Korean peninsula, North Korea's application to join the UN, and high-level inter-Korean talks.
Chon criticized Nakahira's calls for North Korea to resume inter-Korean talks and to sign unconditionally a nuclear safeguards accord with the International Atomic Energy Agency, saying that this constituted interference in North Korean affairs and "artificial obstacles" to the normalization of relations.
On the issue of compensation for Japan's pre-1945 colonization of Korea, Nakahira rejected Chon's demands for financial compensation for property damages and deaths of Korean citizens.
The two countries, he said, had never been at war, although he acknowledged North Korea's right to seek property damages linked to Japan's colonial rule, provided that they were backed up by "objective evidence" .
The two sides also discussed the question of Japanese wives in North Korea, but reached no agreement on allowing home visits or welfare inspections.
Scheduled to begin on Aug. 30, the talks had been delayed due to North Korea's refusal, at an unofficial contact between foreign ministry officials prior to the talks, to respond to Japan's repeated call for information about a Japanese woman known as Li Un Hye, who had allegedly been kidnapped by North Korea to tutor the former North Korean agent convicted of the 1987 bombing of a South Korean passenger plane [see p. 35905].
The third round of talks, in May, had been halted over the same issue [see p. 38191].
Japan said that North Korea had agreed in July to investigate the case, a claim which North Korea denied.
It was eventually agreed that the issue of Li Un Hye would be dealt with separately from the normalization talks.
ASIA — PACIFIC
SOUTH KOREA
Merger of opposition parties
The opposition New Democratic Party, led by Kim Dae Jung, and the tiny Democratic Party, headed by Lee Ki Taek, merged on Sept. 10 to form the Democratic Party, to be headed jointly by the two leaders.
The new party's platform included democratic reform and reunification on the basis of democracy, a market economy and social welfare, and direct presidential elections.
The first substantial alliance of opposition forces since the introduction of democracy in 1987, the merger restored the former two-party structure after several years of regional political groupings.
It was expected to improve Kim's prospects in his bid for the presidency in the elections in late 1992 or early 1993, by expanding his area of support, traditionally based in south-western Cholla province, to include Lee's power base in Kyongsang in the south-east.
According to the Far Eastern Economic Review of Sept. 26, the merger represented a particular threat to Kim Young Sam, the former opposition leader who drew his support from Pusan port in Kyongsang, and who had taken his supporters into the merger which formed the ruling Democratic Liberal Party in February 1990.
Currently the DLP executive chairman, Kim Young Sam had been involved in struggles within the DLP over his candidacy for the presidential elections.
Student death — Protests
About 2,000 students at Seoul National University on Sept. 18 demonstrated in protest against the killing of a student by police during demonstrations on Sept. 17 [for earlier student protests see p. 38291].
ASIA — PACIFIC
AFGHANISTAN
US-Soviet agreement halting arms supplies
A United States-Soviet agreement discontinuing "weapons deliveries to all Afghan sides" by Jan. 1, 1992, was announced in Moscow on Sept. 13 by the Soviet Foreign Minister, Boris Pankin, and the US Secretary of State, James Baker.
(The Financial Times of Sept. 14 estimated that US aid to the mujaheddin totalled US$500,000,000 a year, with Soviet assistance to government forces amounting to at least US$400,000,000 annually.)
The agreement, which committed both parties to refrain from stepping up arms shipments during the next four months, also called on other arms suppliers, notably Pakistan and Saudi Arabia, to follow suit, stressing that any further assistance to Afghanistan should be purely humanitarian.
Endorsing moves towards a "a democratic process in Afghanistan" , the two sides urged the creation of a neutral body to organize elections with the UN.
On Sept. 15 President Najibullah welcomed the agreement and offered a ceasefire amidst reports of intense fighting around the town of Gardez, 100 km south of Kabul.
Groups loyal to Gulbuddin Hekmatyar, leader of the fundamentalist Hezb-i-Islami, were quoted by Le Monde of Sept. 15/16 as saying that they welcomed "the end of [foreign]interference" .
On Sept. 15 Pakistan also welcomed the agreement.
Saudi Arabian support for a negotiated settlement had been confirmed by the UN Secretary-General, Javier Péréz de Cuéllar, in Jeddah on Sept. 14.
The Saudi Press Agency (SPA) reported on Sept. 9 that a delegation led by King Fahd's special emissary, Abdullah bin Abd al-Muhsin al-Turki, had visited Afghanistan to reconcile differences between warring mujaheddin factions.
On Aug. 31 the head of the Saudi-backed fundamentalist Ahle Hadith group, Maulana Jamilur Rahman, had been killed by an Arab gunman in Bajaur Agency, Kunar province.
Renewed peace initiatives
Reports of fresh peace initiatives emerged in late September [for July UN peace plan see p. 38194; for July, August trilateral talks see pp. 38338-39; 38394].
On Sept. 25 Najibullah proposed the formation of "a national unity government" including, among others, current government ministers and representatives of mujaheddin groups based in Pakistan and Iran.
On Sept. 30 he called on the UN to supervise local elections.
Soviet Foreign Minister Pankin held talks, aimed at a settlement, in Moscow on Oct. 1 with a mujaheddin delegation led by the President of the Pakistan-based Afghan Interim Government (AIG), Seghbatullah Mujjaddedi 
Citizenship for ex-King
The government on Sept. 18 restored the citizenship, stripped in April 1978, of ex-King Zahir Shah and his family.
ASIA — PACIFIC
PAKISTAN
New Cabinet
President Ghulam Ishaq Khan on Sept. 10 swore in an expanded federal Cabinet.
Moves to enlarge the Cabinet had reportedly been prompted by Prime Minister Mian Nawaz Sharif's concern to placate critics within the ruling Islamic Democratic Alliance (IDA)[see p. 37855]who had complained of the lack of consultation.
On Sept. 29 the IDA expelled the small Hezb-i-Jihad group for associating with opposition parties.
Allegations of financial corruption
The government on Sept. 1 announced that a high-powered credit commission would investigate charges of the misappropriation of public funds by a network of Punjab-based credit co-operative societies.
The scandal, reportedly involving between Rs10,000 million (US$420,000,000) and Rs23,000 million (US$915,000,000), was believed to have ruined an estimated 2,600,000 depositors.
The political ramifications of the case were highlighted after it emerged that two of the four co-operatives implicated were owned by members of Sharif's ruling IDA and that substantial loans had been extended to a number of IDA politicians, including Sharif himself.
On Sept. 4 the leader of the Pakistan People's Party (PPP) and former Prime Minister, Benazir Bhutto, demanded that the government should compensate depositors within one month or risk nationwide political agitation.
Confirmation by Bhutto of nuclear weapons capability
Pakistan's nuclear weapons capability was confirmed by Bhutto on Aug. 31.
Addressing a press conference in Islamabad she said that "Pakistan has the information and the capability to build a nuclear bomb in the event of a threat from India" .
In October 1990 the USA had suspended military aid following fears that Pakistan had developed a nuclear weapon [see pp. 37764; 38289].
Visit to Iran by Ishaq Khan — Relations with China
President Khan visited Iran on Sept. 12-15 during which Pakistan and Iran concluded five agreements on economic co-operation.
China and Pakistan agreed in Islamabad on Sept. 9 to expand bilateral economic ties.
Pakistan Council of Ministers
*Mian Mohammad Nawaz Sharif Prime Minister; Foreign Affairs
*Sayed Ghaus Ali Shah Defence
*Shahzada Jam Mohammad Doshak Water and Power
**Choudhry Shujat Hussain Interior
**Sheikh Rashid Ahmad Industries and Culture Islam Nabi Production Sartaj Aziz Finance and Economic Affairs Ghulam Murtaza Khan Jatoi Communications Rana Chundar Singh Narcotics Control
**Hamid Nasir Chattha Planning and Development
*Elahi Bux Soomro Science and Technology
*Mohammad Aslam Khan Khattak Inter-provincial Co-ordination
*Maulana Abdus Sattar Khan Niazi Religious Affairs Nisar Ali Khan Petroleum and Natural Resources
*Mian Abdul Sattar Lalika Information and Broadcasting (vacant) Special Education and Social Welfare Sayed Tariq Mahmood Housing andConstruction Mohammad Ejaz-ul Haq Labour (vacant) Tourism Sayed Fakhar Imam Hussain Education Lt.-Gen. (retd.)
Abdul Majid Malik Food and Agriculture Malik Mohammad Naim Khan Commerce
**Sardar Yaqub Khan Nasir States and Frontier regions
*Anwar Saifullah Khan Environment and Urban Affairs
**Mir Hazar Khan Bijrani Defence Production
*Haji Ghulam Ahmad Billour Railways Sayed Tasnim Nawaz Gardezi Health Sardar Mehtab Ahmad Khan Abbasi Kashmir Affairs and Northern Areas
*Choudhary Abdul Ghafoor Law and Justice
**Chaudhary Amir Hussain Parliamentary and Youth Affairs
**New appointment.
*Altered portfolio.
There were in addition 18 ministers of state and two advisers to the Prime Minister with ministerial status.
ASIA — PACIFIC
INDIA
Internal political and economic developments
Approval of places of worship bill
On Sept. 10, the Lok Sabha (lower house of parliament) passed the Places of Worship (Special Provisions) Bill [see p. 38391]by an overwhelming voice vote after all amendments, except two moved by the government, were either negated or withdrawn.
The lengthy debate on the bill was marked by acrimonious exchanges and was adjourned once.
The Bharatiya Janata Party (BJP) together with the Shiv Sena conducted a walkout, with BJP leader L. K. Advani claiming that his party objected to the bill on the grounds that it would provoke increased violence.
The bill completed its passage through parliament on Sept. 12 when it was passed by the Rajya Sabha (upper house of parliament) following a five-hour discussion.
Rejection by JD of deal with Congress
The national executive of the Janata Dal (JD) on Sept. 7 rejected a proposal to co-operate more closely with the ruling Congress (I).
Strong opposition came from former socialists within the JD who argued that the idea was contrary to the party's founding principles [see p. 37004].
Rao's visit to Germany
On Sept. 5, the Prime Minister, P. V. Narasimha Rao, began a four-day visit to Germany, his first foreign trip since taking office in June.
This marked a significant departure from previous foreign policy priorities which traditionally had made the Soviet Union the first place to be visited by a new Prime Minister.
IMF loan agreement
On Sept. 12 the IMF announced two loans to India totalling US$2,835 million.
The executive Board approved drawings, equivalent to 468,9000,000 special drawing rights (about US $635 million), under its compensatory and contingency financing facility (CCFF) in order to make up for anticipated balance-of-payments deficits caused by higher oil prices and lower exports and Gulf remittances.
An 18-month $2,200 million standby credit was approved in principle, to be formally approved by the Board in October.
The conditions under which the loans were made committed India to seeking a further three-year extended fund facility (EFF) loan worth up to $5,000 million-$7,000 million and also to reducing its budget deficit to 5 per cent in 1991-92.
Western aid donors' meeting in Paris
On Sept. 20, following discussions in Paris, the World Bank's India consortium promised $6,700 million in aid to India to help with its balance of payments crisis and to support its economic reforms.
The package, worth 6 per cent more than the previous year's assistance, went a long way towards the $9,200 million required by India to meet an expected current-account deficit of $6,000 million and debt repayments of $3,200 million.
Reserve Bank of Indiaannual report
The 1990-91 annual report of the Reserve Bank of India (the central bank) named the main task of monetary policy in 1991-92 as the containment of inflation.
A tight monetary policy, the report indicated, could only be reversed once there had been a significant improvement in the country's balance of payments position and a slowdown in strong inflationary pressures.
While agricultural production was expected to increase, the rate of growth in the industrial sector looked set to be slower as a result of the combination of general import compression, credit restraint, reduced public expenditure and investment.
Overall the report considered that a gross domestic product (GDP) growth rate of 3 per cent in 1991-92 (compared with 5 per cent in 1990-91) would be a satisfactory achievement.
Kashmir
On Sept. 4 Khemlata Wakhloo, former Jammu and Kashmir Tourism Minister, was kidnapped with her husband by the pro-Pakistani organization, Hizbullah.
On Sept. 10, millions of Kashmir Moslems responded to the call issued by pro-Pakistani groups for an indefinite strike in protest at the alleged forcible entry of security forces on Sept. 9 into the shrine of Hazrat Bal and the molesting of worshippers.
Violence continued with the deaths of at least 50 people as the security forces stepped up their operations.
Postponement of electionsin Punjab
On Sept. 1 the Sikh Panthic conclave decided to boycott elections due in the Punjab later in the month in protest at alleged "state repression" .
On Sept. 17 the central government pushed through legislation postponing the polling set for Sept. 25 but promised that elections would take place at the earliest possible date.
ASIA — PACIFIC
BANGLADESH
Swearing-in of new Cabinet
A new Cabinet was sworn in under an amended Constitution by the acting President, Chief Justice Shehabuddin Ahmed, on Sept. 19.
On Sept. 15 a nation-wide referendum had overwhelmingly endorsed new constitutional provisions restoring a parliamentary form of government [see pp. 38289; 38394].
Of a turnout of 20,700,000 voters, 17,500,000—more than 84 per cent—had voted in favour.
The low turnout—one-third of the 62,300,000 eligible voters—was attributed to heavy rain and widespread flooding.
BNP victory in by-elections
The ruling Bangladesh Nationalist Party (BNP) secured an absolute majority in parliament, with 169 of the 330 seats, following by-elections held on Sept. 11 for seats vacated by MPs who had won more than one constituency each in the February general election.
BNP candidates won five out of 11 seats, the Jatiya Party winning four and the Awami League two.
US debt write-off
The United States on Sept. 21 forgave repayments on US loans to Bangladesh, under a bilateral debt relief agreement signed in Dhaka.
The agreement, the first concluded by the USA with an Asian country, was worth US$292,000,000 and cancelled all repayments up to July 1991.
Bangladesh Council of Ministers
*Begum Khaleda Zia (f) Prime Minister; Defence; Establishment; Cabinet Division Mirza Gholam Hafiz Law and Justice
**Zamiruddin Sirkar Education Maj.-Gen. (retd) Majedul Haq Agriculture, Irrigation, Flood Control and Water Resources A. S. M. Mustafizur Rahman Foreign Affairs
**Saifur Rahman Finance Abdul Salam Talukder Local Government, Rural Development and Cooperatives Col. (retd) Oli Ahmed Communications, Railways, Roads and Highways
**M.
K. Anwar Commerce
**Keramat Ali Posts and Telecommunications (vacant) Shipping Shamsul Islam Khan Industry Chowdhury Kamal Ibne Yusuf Health and Family Planning
**Tariqul Islam Social Welfare and Women's Affairs
**Mohammad Shamsul Islam Food
*Najmul Huda Information
*Abdul Matin Choudhry Home
**Khondaker Mosharraf Hossain Energy and Mineral Resources
**Rafiqul Islam Mian Works
**Abdul Mannan Bhuiyan Labour and Manpower
*Hannan Shah Jute
*Zahiruddin Khan Planning
**Abdullah al-Noman Environment and Forests; Fisheries and Livestock
*New appointment.
**Altered portfolios.
(f) denotes female.
There were in addition 23 ministers of state and three deputy ministers.
ASIA — PACIFIC
SRI LANKA
Successful offensive against LTTE
The Sri Lankan army carried out on Sept. 2-25 a further successful offensive against the Liberation Tigers of Tamil Eelam (LTTE) in the northern jungle area around Mullaittivu [see p. 38392 for major government victory at Elephant Pass in August], admitting a death toll of only 73 soldiers but claiming to have killed over 600 guerrillas.
Several guerrilla bases were captured, including, ultimately, the LTTE's Camp Michael battle headquarters.
The army had deployed some 5,000 troops with air and naval support, the objective being not only to clear the area of LTTE bases but also to cut off the Tigers' lines of communication southwards into Eastern Province.
Suspension of offensives — Parliamentary no confidence motion
The security forces reportedly suspended offensive operations on Sept. 27.
The (ethnic Tamil) Minister of Tourism and Rural Development, S. Thondaman, referring to a "last" government peace initiative, said on Sept. 26 that he had asked LTTE leader Velupillai Prabhakaran to specify a basis for the resumption of talks.
Some commentators suspected that this initiative was aimed at winning parliamentary support from militant Tamils; several of the 13 Tamil MPs grouped in the Eelavar Democratic Front (previously the Eelam Revolutionary Organization of Students—EROS) ended in late September the parliamentary boycott they had maintained since mid-1990 [see p. 37611].
Opposition parties led by the Sri Lanka Freedom Party (SLFP) tabled a no confidence motion, due for debate in October, over revelations that the security forces had been providing arms to the LTTE in late 1989.
President Ranasinghe Premadasa had reportedly admitted this at a meeting of the ruling United National Party (UNP) on Sept. 18.
The LTTE commented that his remarks "distort the truth of circumstances" .
In late 1989 the LTTE and the Sri Lankan security forces had both been fiercely hostile to the "Tamil National Army" , a coalition of Tamil militias initially formed in support of the Indian Peace-Keeping Force [see pp. 37126; 37185].
Meanwhile, the opposition and dissident UNP members had been effectively blocked in their attempt to impeach the President, launched in late August [see p. 38393].
With parliament prorogued until Sept. 24, Premadasa on Sept. 12 told the Speaker, Haniffa Mohamed, of the Attorney General's advice that the motion could not, on technical grounds, be tabled at the forthcoming session.
He also claimed, with the support of 116 loyal UNP MPs at a meeting on Sept. 2, that many of the signatures on the impeachment petition were obtained illegally or under false pretences.
(On Oct. 7 the Speaker announced that the impeachment motion was being dropped on the grounds of having insufficient valid signatures.)
Opponents loudly jeered and barracked Premadasa when he addressed the opening parliamentary session on Sept. 24, causing the state-run radio to suspend its live broadcast transmission.
Parliament approved on Sept. 25, in what had become a regular routine, the extension of the state of emergency for a further month.
Two Cabinet vacancies, caused by the late August resignations of the Education and Higher Education Minister Lalith Athulathmudali, a leading UNP dissident, and of Labour Minister G. N. Premachandra, remained unfilled, as did vacancies at Minister of State level.
Human rights report
Amnesty International, whose first permitted mission to Sri Lanka since 1982 had taken place in June, published on Sept. 10 a report criticizing the security forces for thousands of killings, and for routinely murdering suspected Tamil guerrillas "with an almost total sense of immunity" .
The report was also highly critical of the LTTE for the summary killing of Sinhalese, of Moslems and of Tamils suspected of "treason" , and for the massacre of a large number of police taken prisoner in June 1990 [see pp. 37529-30]; a mass grave containing the corpses of 35 police was found near Batticaloa on Sept. 9, the third such discovery in recent weeks.
Amnesty called on the government (which had recently set up a human rights task force and an inquiry into alleged atrocities) to admit the extent of abuses in the past, including its own role, in order to clear the atmosphere for a fresh approach on human rights observance.
ASIA — PACIFIC
MYANMA
Ministerial comments on political situation
Col. Tin U, second secretary of the ruling military junta, the State Law and Order Restoration Council (SLORC), reiterated on Sept. 8 that a constitution would be drawn up following investigations into violations of the elections law.
He said that in Myanma human rights meant security, food, clothing and shelter, non-disintegration of the country, and perpetuation of the country's sovereignty, which were "more important than so-called democratic rights" .
Tin U's remarks, made during a visit by a group of SLORC ministers to the northern city of Mandalay, included a warning of action against people "who attack SLORC and create instability and unrest just for the sake of getting power for their party" , including public servants who were "deceiving" the government by engaging in "political intrigue" .
He noted that "we cannot say for how long we will be in charge of the state administration" but that "it might be five years or 10" .
New Foreign Minister
U Ohn Gyaw was promoted from Vice-Minister to Minister of Foreign Affairs on Sept. 18, taking over the portfolio from SLORC Chairman and Prime Minister Gen. Saw Maung.
Parallel government's visit to UK
Brig. -Gen.
Khin Nyunt, first secretary of the SLORC, on Sept. 20 condemned "some major countries" for "unbecoming acts" in receiving a "parallel government" delegation led by Sein Win.
The parallel National Coalition Government of the Union of Burma had been set up principally by exiled members of the National League for Democracy, the main opposition party which had won a landslide victory in the May 1990 elections but had subsequently been prevented by the SLORC from taking power.
After a meeting on Sept. 13 in London with UK Foreign Office and Commonwealth officials Sein Win appealed to the West to put more pressure on the SLORC.
Amnesty human rights report
A report published on Sept. 10 by the human rights group, Amnesty International accused the Myanma army of routinely ill-treating and murdering members of the Karen, Mon and Indian ethnic minorities, who were forced to act as porters in campaigns against insurgents.
ASIA — PACIFIC
THAILAND
Seventh five-year plan
Thailand's seventh five-year development plan, for the 1992-96 period, was released by the National Economic and Social Development Board on Sept. 9.
The plan predicted an average annual growth in gross domestic product (GDP) of 8.2 per cent, compared with the 10.5 per cent achieved under the sixth five-year plan.
It also aimed for an overall increase of 73 per cent in GDP per capita, to reach 71,000 baht (US$2,750) by the end of 1996.
Private-sector consumption was predicted to grow by 5.7 per cent per year, with investment increasing by 8.8 per cent; government-sector consumption was predicted to rise by 3.3 per cent , and investment by 8.5 per cent .
The trade deficit was predicted to average 9.4 per cent of GDP, with the current-account deficit averaging 5.2 per cent per year.
Inflation, which averaged 4.7 per cent per year during the sixth five-year plan period, was projected at 5.6 per cent per year in 1992-96.
The plan gave priority to environmental issues, but also provided for land reform, improved education and administrative and financial decentralization.
However, it was criticized for continuing the country's economic expansion programme—risking further damage to the environment and an increase in the gap between rich and poor—and for not offering concrete solutions or even new policy initiatives to tackle the country's economic and social problems.
Prime Minister's visit to China
Prime Minister Anand Panyarachun visited China on Sept. 22-25 for talks on bilateral and international relations.
He was accompanied by the Foreign Minister, Arsa Sarasin; the Minister of Communications, Nukul Prachuabmoh, and the Minister of Commerce, Amaret Sila-on.
Anan said in a press conference that he was making "basically a goodwill visit" .
In his meeting with Anand on Sept. 22, Chinese Premier Li Peng said that relations between the two countries were very good and had not and would not be affected by domestic changes in the two countries.
He also expressed his appreciation for "the large amount of work" done by Anand and Arsa in developing Sino-Thai relations.
Li Peng told Anan that the progress in China's relations with Vietnam would not affect relations with Thailand or other South-East Asian nations.
ASIA — PACIFIC
CAMBODIA
SNC meeting in New York — Agreement over elections
A major obstacle to a comprehensive Cambodian peace agreement was lifted at a meeting of the all-party Supreme National Council (SNC) in New York on Sept. 19 [see p. 38389 for Aug. 26-29 SNC meeting in Pattaya, Thailand].
Under the chairmanship of Prince Norodom Sihanouk, the SNC agreed that UN-supervised regional elections in Cambodia's 20 provinces should be held on the basis of proportional representation.
This represented a major concession on the part of the State of Cambodia (SOC) delegation, led by Hun Sen, the SOC Premier, which had pressed for a first-past-the-post system.
The agreement was thought likely to give the Khmers Rouges representation in any future Cambodian government.
Commentators attributed much of the willingness to compromise to moves by China and Vietnam towards normalizing relations [see p. 38436].
Meeting with permanent UN Security Council members and PICC — Issue of communiqué
On Sept. 20 a meeting began between the SNC, the five permanent members of the UN Security Council, a representative of the UN Secretary-General and a representative of Indonesia, one of the co-chairs of the 19-country Paris International Conference on Cambodia (PICC).
Prince Sihanouk announced that he would hand over his power of final decision in the SNC to the UN Secretary-General's representative in cases when he was absent or unwilling to make a decision.
On Sept. 21, the participants were joined by representatives of PICC members, including Japan.
A joint communiqué issued on Sept. 21, welcoming the "final phase" of a search for a solution, noted the SNC's agreement on the electoral system, and said that the SNC had also agreed to provide the UN Secretariat with a detailed report on military forces in order to implement the partial demobilization agreed in Pattaya [see p. 38389].
All parties had agreed that the remaining 30 per cent of forces would eventually be either dismantled or absorbed into a Cambodian national army.
According to the communiqué, the UN was to dispatch 200 military observers to Cambodia before the return of the SNC to Phnom Penh in mid-November, in preparation for the establishment of the UN Transitional Authority in Cambodia (UNTAC).
The communiqué also called for the PICC to be reconvened before the signing of the final peace agreement on Oct. 31.
According to Hun Sen, only "detailed arrangements on military matters" remained to be worked out, although Khmer Rouge radio (Voice of the National Army of Demcratic Kampuchea—Vonadek) warned of "complicated and difficult problems" facing the implementation of the peace plan.
State of ceasefire — Rise in banditry
The SOC alleged further violations of the ceasefire, in force since May 1 [see pp. 38194-95; 38389].
A report on Sept. 27 claimed that opposition forces launched three attacks in Battambang on Sept. 22-23.
Ambushes, rocket attacks and troop and weapons movements were also reported.
Western press reports noted a rise in banditry around the refugee camps on the Thai border, leading to an indefinite suspension of UN aid shipments from Thailand into Cambodia from Sept. 21.
The reports said that the bandit groups were largely made up of demobilized soldiers.
Flooding
Floods in the southern provinces of Kompong Speu, Takeo, Kampot and Kandal which had begun in mid-August [see p. 38390]and were said to be the worst in 50 years, left 100 people dead and washed away houses, roads, bridges and railway lines, and by Sept. 4 were threatening Phnom Penh.
Le Monde of Sept. 6 said that an estimated 400,000 hectares of rice had been affected, adding that rice prices had more than tripled in a week.
The SOC government reported 28,500 cases of disease in Kompong Speu and 20,000 people facing starvation in Kandal.
SOC leaders including Hun Sen, and the Chairman of the National Assembly, Chea Sim, visited flood-affected areas in Kandal and Takeo to distribute relief.
The UN Disaster Relief Organization (UNDRO) provided US$1,000,000 in food aid; assistance was also received from Thailand, the Soviet Union and Vietnam ($50,000).
Suspension of private trading in gold
The SOC government suspended all private trading in gold and precious stones to stabilize the value of the riel which had fluctuated sharply in August, it was reported on Sept. 6.
The decision stipulated that gold traders must adhere to the state-set gold price, and deposit their earnings in the State Bank.
As at Sept. 30 US$1.00=799.087 riels.
Readmission of SOC to Mekong Committee
After an absence of 13 years, the SOC was readmitted to the International Interim Mekong Committee (comprising Laos, Vietnam and Thailand) at a special meeting in Bangkok, Thailand, on Aug. 30-Sept. 2.
ASIA — PACIFIC
MALAYSIA
Sarawak state elections
Elections to the enlarged 56-member Sarawak State Assembly were held on Sept. 27-28, eight months ahead of schedule.
The Parti Pesaka Bumiputra Bersatu (PBB) of Chief Minister Abdul Taib Mahmud, which had ruled the state for 10 years and formed part of the ruling National Front coalition at federal level, was returned to power for a further five-year term as the dominant member of the self-styled Bavisan Tiga (Front of Three) which altogether won 49 seats, of which the PPB had 27, the Sarawak United People's Party 16, and the Sarawak National Party six [for April 1987 elections see p. 35460].
This result represented a resounding defeat for the winner of the remaining seven seats, another National Front component party, the Parti Bansa Dayak Sarawak (PBDS) led by federal Minister of Public Works Leo Moggie anak Irok, which, as an opposition party in Sarawak, campaigned for the rights of the Dayak, Iban, Bidayuh and Orang Ulu ethnic minorities.
The election was fought over rural issues, particularly education, employment and the distribution of revenue from the state's timber industry.
Appointment of "triangle" team head
Tun Daim Zainuddin, who had resigned as Finance Minister on March 15, was appointed on Aug. 29 to a ministerial-level post as leader of the Malaysian delegation in talks on setting up a "northern growth triangle" with Indonesia and Thailand to develop economic relations between Malaysia's northern states, northern Sumatra and southern Thailand.
Approval of new airport plan
Prime Minister Datuk Seri Mahathir Mohamad announced on Sept. 3 that the planned new international airport in Sepang, Selangor, would go ahead.
When finished, it would be one of the largest in the region.
The cost had been estimated at M$20,000 million (US$7,000 million).
The existing international airport, at Subang outside Kuala Lumpur, could be converted to a domestic, cargo or military airport.
Head of state's visit to China
Sultan Azlan Muhibbuddin Shah, the Yang di-Pertuan Agong (paramount ruler) of Malaysia, made a week-long visit to China beginning on Sept. 6.
Chinese President Yang Shangkun said on Sept. 6 that he was very satisfied with relations between the two countries, which had developed rapidly, and welcomed Malaysian aid for flood victims in China [see pp. 38339-40].
Chinese Premier Li Peng on Sept. 8 expressed support for the East Asia Economic Grouping (EAEG) plan, proposed by Malaysia, saying that the planned grouping was vital in view of increasing economic protectionist practices.
ASIA — PACIFIC
SINGAPORE
Cabinet reshuffle
Prime Minister Goh Chok Tong announced a limited Cabinet reshuffle on Sept. 5, following the Aug. 31 general election [for which see p. 38397].
Health Minister Yeo Cheow Tong was given the additional post of acting Minister of Community Development, replacing Seet Ai Mee, the only minister to lose his seat in the general election.
Lee Yock Suan, the Labour Minister, was given the additional portfolio of Second Minister of Education.
Mah Bow Tan was confirmed as Minister for Communications, a post he had held on an acting basis since July.
Lim Boon Heng was appointed Senior Minister for Trade and Industry.
President's visits to China
President Wee Kim Wee made an eight-day state visit to China, beginning on Sept. 9, when he met President Yang Shangkun, who spoke of the necessity for China and Singapore to strengthen co-operation in handling international issues.
Chinese Premier Li Peng also held talks with Wee, and expressed his confidence that a peaceful settlement to the Cambodian issue would be reached.
ASIA — PACIFIC
PHILIPPINES
Senate rejection of US bases treaty
The 23-member Senate on Sept. 16 voted 12 to 11 against ratification of the Treaty of Friendship, Co-operation and Security agreed on Aug. 27 with the United States.
The treaty would have allowed the USA to continue using the Subic Bay naval base for 10 years in return for US$203 million in annual aid [see p. 38398].
Senators opposed to the treaty denounced it as US colonialism and as representing a violation of the Constitution, most notably in respect of the ban on the presence of nuclear weapons.
Rejection of the treaty was seen as tantamount to a declaration of independence from the USA.
Others opposed what they considered to be the "insultingly low" compensation package offered by the USA.
President Corazon Aquino had appealed to the Senate to ratify the agreement.
However, the Senate foreign relations committee on Sept. 9 voted against the treaty, after a week of hearings at which most speakers backed the bases, on the grounds that the end of the Cold War meant that US military bases in the Philippines were redundant and that it was a "one-sided, unequal agreement" .
Hopes that the committee's decision might force better terms from the USA were disappointed when US President Bush said that the US side was not prepared to renegotiate.
On Sept. 10 Aquino led a "people power" rally of 100,000-200,000 people to the Senate in an unsuccessful attempt to bring pressure on senators to change their minds.
Aquino's call for referendum — Non-eviction of US forces — Subsequent retraction
Facing the imminent rejection of the treaty, Aquino, who felt confident that "a great majority of our people want this treaty ratified" , called on Sept. 15 for a referendum to be held between December 1991 and March 1992.
A referendum was allowed under Philippine law to overturn legislation or to amend the Constitution if at least 3,000,000 signatures, amounting to 10 per cent of the 30,000,000 electorate, could be gathered in support of it.
Opponents of the treaty in the Senate questioned the legality of a referendum on this issue, as the Constitution stated that any extension of the US military presence had to be ratified in a treaty by two-thirds of the Senate.
US officials said that their forces would delay departure until after the referendum.
Following the Senate vote against ratification, Aquino on Sept. 17 withdrew an eviction notice closing down the US base at Subic Bay, issued in May 1990 [see p. 37458].
She did not immediately issue a new notice, an omission which in effect granted the USA the use of Subic Bay indefinitely under a 1947 military agreement, which the Philippine government said remained in force.
Aquino made it clear in an interview that a new one-year notice would not be issued until the government had held a referendum.
The legality of Aquino's decision was immediately questioned by members of the Senate and by four members of her Cabinet.
Senator Juan Ponce Enrile, leader of the Nacionalista Party, the main opposition party, called for her impeachment, saying that she had violated the Constitution by allowing US forces to stay without a treaty.
The Senate President, Jovito Salonga, warned that "we will further divide the nation and blood might flow" if the US forces stayed on.
Faced with this pressure Aquino met with supporters in the Senate and with Cabinet officials on Sept. 23 and announced that she would no longer press for a referendum, although she would not prevent others from doing so.
Instead she would try to arrange a formula for a smooth withdrawal of US forces without serious economic disruption.
The USA told the Philippine government on Sept. 24 that if agreement was not reached it wanted four years to withdraw its forces from Subic Bay.
A group of businessmen and politicians decided on Sept. 21 to carry on with the referendum proposal and on Sept. 26 began collecting signatures in favour of the referendum.
NDF ceasefire
The National Democratic Front (NDF), an alliance of 14 underground Marxist groups including the (Maoist) Communist Party of the Philippines-Marxist Leninist and its military arm, the New People's Army, announced a unilateral national ceasefire from midnight on Sept. 11.
The NDF had announced earlier that it would implement a ceasefire if the Senate took a clear stand to reject the new bases treaty.
The NDF called on the government and military to respond by implementing a ceasefire.
The Army Chief of Staff, Maj.-Gen.
Lisandro Abadia, said, however, that he did not believe that the rebels would implement a ceasefire and that army operations would continue.
It was reported on Sept. 28 that communist guerrillas had killed 30 people, including an army patrol, in co-ordinated attacks in the northern Philippines.
Charges against Marcos family
Imelda Marcos, widow of the former President Ferdinand Marcos who was overthrown in 1986, said on Sept. 3 that she would return to face trial in the Philippines if the government agreed that her husband's remains could eventually be reburied in his homeland.
The government on Sept. 18 filed corruption charges against Marcos, accusing her of coercing Central Bank officials into lending US$25,000,000 to a company in which her family had shares.
State prosecutors on Sept. 24 filed a further seven counts of tax evasion against her, claiming that she had failed to pay taxes amounting to US$205 million on her income for 1985-86 and on the estate left by her late husband.
Two separate counts of tax evasion were filed against their son and daughter.
On Sept. 23 the Philippines asked the USA to continue to prevent Marcos's corpse from being returned to the Philippines [see p. 38398].
ASIA — PACIFIC
VANUATU
Resignation of Prime Minister — Other Cabinet changes
Fr Walter Lini stood down as Prime Minister of Vanuatu on Sept. 6, following his defeat in a parliamentary vote of confidence.
He was replaced by a former close colleague turned bitter critic, Donald Kalpokas.
His removal from office came as the climax of a mounting campaign against his leadership from within his own Vanua'aku Pati (VP).
Lini, 48, had been Prime Minister since independence in 1980.
Representative of the country's anglophone majority (and confronted by a francophone opposition tacitly supported by successive French governments), Lini was regarded as a uniquely radical leader in a generally conservative region.
After a stroke in 1987, he had survived a coup attempt in 1988 mounted by a group within the VP [see pp. 35906; 36067; 36381].
He faced growing opposition, even among those who had been his closest supporters, particularly when he failed to honour an undertaking made in 1979 to his party supporters that he would relinquish office in 1990 after the first 10 years of independence.
Instead he undertook a series of dismissals of Cabinet ministers and other political luminaries in 1990 and 1991, retaining a wide range of portfolios himself.
In June 1991 he dismissed Kalpokas, who had been responsible for both Education and Foreign Affairs, and three others, including the Home Affairs Minister Iolu Abil.
Further dismissals followed in August, including Kalpokas' successors at Education and Foreign Affairs along with the Agriculture minister.
Kalpokas, widely regarded as one of the country's more able leaders, retained, however, his position as secretary-general of the VP and at a party congress was elected VP president in place of Lini on Aug. 7.
Lini attempted in vain to have the congress declared illegal by the country's Supreme Court.
Subsequently he found himself in conflict with the local media when he tried to prevent Radio Vanuatu from reporting the views of his opponents.
Lini had some initial success in manoeuvres to prevent a parliamentary contest, but the final confrontation took place on Sept 6 when 18 of the VP's 34 MPs voted against him; the no confidence motion was passed by 24 votes to 21.
Lini made known his intention to attempt a return to power in the national elections due before the end of 1991.
In the meantime Kalpokas appointed to his Cabinet several of the more prominent figures dismissed by Lini over the previous year, including Edward Natapei as Foreign Minister, Abbil as Home Affairs Minister and Sela Molisa as Finance Minister.
ASIA — PACIFIC
PACIFIC
Election of FSM and Marshall Islands to UN
The Federated States of Micronesia (FSM) and the Marshall Islands were elected as new members of the UN on Sept. 17 at the opening of the 46th session of the General Assembly [see also p. 38458].
Both had been part of the UN Trust Territory of the Pacific, established in 1947, until this was terminated for both the FSM and Marshall Islands in December 1990 [see p. 37920].
The FSM comprised more than 600 islands spread across 2,900 km, although only some 40 were of significant size and inhabited by a population of 100,000.
The Marshall Islands comprised 34 islands and 870 reefs and had a population of 43,355; between 1946 and 1962 the territory was used for testing US atomic and hydrogen bombs, involving the resettlement of the inhabitants of Bikini and Eniwetok Atolls.
ASIA — PACIFIC
BHUTAN
King Jigme Singye Wangchuck speaking in New Delhi on his arrival in India on Sept. 9 for a four-day official visit, said that he did not consider a monarchy to be the best system of government and that he had been working towards the greater democratization of his country.
On Sept. 10, the King and the Indian Prime Minister, P. V. Narasimha Rao, signed the first civil aviation agreement between Bhutan and India.
ASIA — PACIFIC
LAOS
During the nationwide extraordinary plenary session of the central committee of the Lao Front for National Construction (LFNC), held in Vientiane on Sept. 5-7, the former acting President Phoumi Vongvichit was replaced as chair of the LFNC central committee by Maisouk Saisompheng; the vice-chair, Bolang Boualapha, was replaced by Vongphet Saiken-Yachongtuoa.
The session reviewed the work carried out by the LFNC since its second congress and adopted a plan of action for 1991-92.
EUROPE
EUROPEAN COMMUNITIES
Progress on economic and monetary union
At an informal meeting in Apeldoorn, the Netherlands, on the weekend of Sept. 21-22 the 12 Finance Ministers of the European Communities (EC) together with their central bank presidents made progress in negotiations on economic and monetary union (EMU), agreeing that the decision on the start of "stage three" should be made by unanimous agreement of all 12 heads of state and government, rather than by majority decision.
Under the three-stage Delors plan originally presented in April 1989 [see p. 36598], "stage two" was expected to start in January 1994 [see pp. 37783 and 38296 for United Kingdom reservations]and a decision on "stage three" , involving creation of a European Central Bank and full currency union, was envisaged by 1997.
The ministers and presidents also agreed to set up a European Monetary Institute under "stage two" to co-ordinate the 12 national monetary policies.
Italy had opposed this, seeking instead the creation of an embryo central bank at this stage.
However, Italian Treasury Minister Guido Carli accepted a compromise assurance that the Institute would cease to exist as soon as the European central bank came into being (i.e. that it would not remain in existence thereafter as what the Financial Times of Sept. 23 characterized as "a semi-permanent home for" second division "countries outside the EMU" ).
On the issue of "convergence" , ministers accepted that the final stage of economic and monetary union should be restricted to those members who had met tough inflation, budgetary and monetary targets.
This had been the basic premise of a proposal made in late August by the Netherlands (holder of the presidency of the Council of Ministers in the second half of 1991) specifying four conditions for economic convergence:(i) a high degree of price stability, indicated by a level of inflation close to that of the best-performing state for a two-year period;(ii) a sustainable government financial position, indicated by budget deficits deemed not to be excessive;(iii) currency within the 2.5 per cent fluctuation margins of the exchange rate mechanism (ERM) of the European Monetary System for at least two years without devaluation against other member state's currency; and (iv) a close approximation of comparable interest rates to those member states with the best performance in terms of price stability.
However, Theo Waigel, the German Finance Minister, stressed that the criteria should not be applied mechanically, and that there should be "scope for political judgment" on whether a country was fit for full EMU.
The Netherlands plan had also envisaged that full EMU could start when only six of the 12 states were economically and politically ready (rather than seven or eight as proposed by others).
The European Commission had described this on Sept. 9 as a flawed step which would result in a "two-speed" Europe of rich and poor countries.
At the Apeldoorn meeting, ministers acknowledged the concerns expressed over this by Greece and other southern member states, and Netherlands Finance Minister Wim Kok conceded that a majority of the 12 was necessary.
Failure of Netherlands proposals on European political union
On Sept. 24 the Netherlands published its draft for a treaty on political union.
It called for more powers to be transferred to the European Commission and to the European Parliament, which would have the power to veto with a majority vote legislation proposed by the Council of Ministers.
The draft contained a preamble put forward by Luxembourg during its presidency in the first half of 1991 [see pp. 38295-97], which spoke of the EC's "federal" goal.
Although the draft reaffirmed the role of the North Atlantic Treaty Organization (NATO), it proposed that foreign affairs, security and home affairs would come within the ambit of EC institutions, unlike the earlier Luxembourg draft, which had proposed that such areas be subject to intergovernmental co-operation.
Certain aspects of EC legislation, including aid to developing countries, technology, and the environment would need approval by the European Parliament—described in the draft as "co-decision" .
The Commission would have increased powers, including for the first time the power to propose legislation in the highly-sensitive area of home affairs on such issues as the right of asylum, immigration and residency rights (hitherto discussed at an intergovernmental level in the "Trevi group" ).
Other EC policies, including on drugs and fraud, and judicial co-operation would continue to be matters for intergovernmental co-operation.
The Netherlands draft treaty maintained Luxembourg's proposals for an extension of EC powers in social affairs, health, and education, which would also be subject to majority voting.
The draft treaty drew strong criticism from most EC members; Denmark, Ireland, Portugal and the UK considered it too radical, while France and Italy regarded it as not sufficiently far-reaching.
Belgium, Germany and Spain supported the text, as did the European Commission.
A majority of 10 EC Foreign Ministers rejected the Netherlands draft at a meeting in Brussels on Sept. 30 and demanded the reinstatement of the earlier Luxembourg text.
Douglas Hurd, the UK Foreign Secretary, was particularly critical of the idea of extending majority voting in the Council of Ministers, and of allowing a greater legislative role for the European Parliament.
Hans Van den Broek, the Netherlands Foreign Minister, said that his government reluctantly accepted that it had failed to convince the majority, and would return to the Luxembourg draft.
Marked differences between the French and UK approach to the future of Europe had emerged after a meeting in Paris on Sept. 11 between French President François Mitterrand and UK Prime Minister John Major.
Mitterrand made clear his desire to see new treaties on political and monetary union concluded before the end of the year.
He also expressed doubts about the feasibility of a rapid integration of east European countries into the EC.
Major, however, indicated his interest in the idea of a two-speed economic system for the EC.
In a speech in Paris on Sept. 13 he said that admission of new members should be an explicit part of EC policy, mentioning Czechoslovakia, Hungary, Poland and the newly independent Baltic states.
Negotiations on association agreements with eastern Europe
A meeting in Brussels on Sept. 30 broke through an impasse in negotiations between the EC and Czechoslovakia, Hungary and Poland on association agreements with the EC.
Talks had been under way since February 1991 [see p. 38115], the principal difficulties being over improved access to EC markets for eastern European agricultural products and textiles.
On Sept. 6 France had blocked proposals to allow increased access for beef and other meat, but on Sept. 30 it was agreed that the three countries could increase meat sales by 10 per cent per year for the next five years, with the EC preventing any adverse impact on the internal market for its own produce by financing the sale of all this additional meat to the Soviet Union, Romania and Albania.
Import quota restrictions on textiles would be phased out within six years, provided that this set no precedent for wider negotiations under the General Agreement on Tariffs and Trade (GATT).
Poland had threatened on Sept. 9 to abandon its negotiations with the EC unless it was given extra access for food products.
[See also p. 38446.]
EUROPE
SWEDEN
General election defeat of Social Democrats
The Social Democratic Party (SAP), which had governed Sweden almost without interruption from 1932 to 1976 (alone or in coalition), and again for three consecutive terms since 1982, was narrowly defeated in a general election to the Riksdag on Sept. 15 [for 1988 general election see pp. 36357-58].
Outgoing Prime Minister Ingvar Carlsson announced the resignation of his government on Sept. 16.
It was confirmed on Oct. 1 that Carl Bildt had been nominated to form a minority four-party "bourgeois" coalition, as proposed by him on Sept. 24, comprising his own conservative Moderate Party (M), the Liberal Party (Fp) led by Bengt Westerberg, the Centre Party (C) led by Olof Johansson, and the Christian Democratic Community Party (KdS) led by Alf Svensson.
The coalition would control 170 of the 349 seats in the Riksdag.
Observers noted that the coalition might need the support of the New Democracy party, whose policies Bildt totally dismissed, if it was to control an effective majority.
New Democracy, the antics of whose leaders had encouraged much of the media to treat it as a joke, was led by Count Ian Wachtmeister and had been formed in late 1990 as a populist "party of discontent" , campaigning on a platform which featured an overtly anti-immigrant stance.
The Moderate Party and the Liberal Party had campaigned on a closely-aligned platform (the so-called "New Start for Sweden" plan), calling for tax cuts, curbs on government spending, privatization of state assets and greater choice in education and health.
The elections took place against the background of a serious deterioration in the country's economic situation.
Heavy commitments in the social security budget had driven government finances deeply into deficit, and industrial production had slumped as interest rates rose; manufacturing output was estimated to have fallen by 6 per cent in the eight months to August, and Sweden's normally low unemployment rate had climbed from 1.5 per cent in January 1990 to more than 3 per cent.
It was estimated that a third of the electorate had switched its vote in the 1991 elections, compared with only 20 per cent in 1988.
The results represented a success for the Moderates and for two parties who exceeded for the first time the statutory 4 per cent threshold for parliamentary representation—the Christian Democrats (whose only previous representation had been in 1985-88 when one of the Centre party's seats was allocated to Christian Democrat in an electoral pact), and the New Democracy Party.
Parties losing ground in the elections were the Social Democrats, the Liberals, the Centre Party, and most dramatically the environmentalist Green Party (MpG), which lost representation after falling below the minimum 4 per cent threshold.
Election of parliamentary Speaker
On Sept. 30 Ingegerd Troedsson (Moderate Party) was elected as the Speaker of the Riksdag (Sweden's second highest ranking official after the monarch), the first woman to be elected to the post, in a narrow victory over the incumbent Thage Peterson (Social Democrat).
Seats % of vote Seats % of vote 1991 1988 SAP 138 38.2 156 43.2 M 80 22.0 66 18.3 C 31 8.4 42 11.3 KdS 26 7.2 0 2.9 Fp 26 9.2 44 12.2 New Democracy 25 6.8 —
*Vp 16 4.5 16 5.6 MpG 0 3.4 20 5.5
*Left Party (formerly the Communist Party) led by LarsWerner.
EUROPE
NORWAY
Local elections — EC membership issue
The Labour Party government of Gro Harlem Brundtland received a severe setback in elections on Sept. 10 to Norway's county and municipal councils.
Labour's share of the vote fell from 35.9 per cent in 1987 to 30.5 per cent, a result widely seen as a popular rejection of the government's positive policies toward the European Communities (EC).
Opinion polls conducted immediately after the election showed 36 per cent against EC membership and only 32 per cent in favour.
The government had stated that it was considering making a formal application for membership, as Sweden had done in July.
Norway had negotiated terms for joining the EC in April 1972, but had withdrawn the application after a national referendum the following September [see pp. 25525-26].
The Centre Party and the Left Socialist Party, both of which campaigned in the local elections on a vigorously anti-EC platform, saw their support increase from 6.8 per cent to 12.1 per cent and from 5.8 per cent to 12.2 per cent respectively.
The Conservative Party lost ground, its vote falling from 23.7 per cent to 21.8 per cent, and it lost its control of the Oslo municipal council to an alliance of Labour and Socialist Left.
The Progress Party vote fell from 12.3 per cent to 7 per cent.
Voter turnout was down by 3.1 percentage points to 62.9 per cent.
EUROPE
FINLAND
1992 budget
The government submitted to parliament on Sept. 13 its draft budget for 1992, incorporating an austerity programme and planning to increase expenditure by only 0.5 per cent in real terms to FMk170,000 million (US$1.00=FMk4.0819 as at Sept. 16, 1991.)
The budget was based around a forecast of zero growth in gross domestic product (GDP) in 1992, after a 5 per cent GDP reduction in the severe recession in 1991.
[For May stabilization package see p. 38202.]
To cover the expected budget deficit, foreign borrowings of some FMk28,000 million would be necessary.
With unemployment up from 3 per cent at the beginning of 1991 to 9 per cent, expenditure on unemployment benefit would be markedly higher; the additional FMk7,000 million needed for this and higher health benefits would be financed out of cuts in other areas of social spending.
The balance-of-payments deficit was expected to fall by about a quarter to FMk18,000 million.
Decision against early EC membership application
Prime Minister Esko Aho announced on Sept. 16 after talks in Brussels at the European Commission that Finland would not seek entry into the European Communities (EC) before the beginning of 1992.
Before deciding on making an application, he said, Finland would wait for the results of negotiations under way between the European Free Trade Association (EFTA, of which Finland was one of the seven members) and the EC on a common European Economic Area (EEA)[see p. 38353].
Finland would also await developments in the EC's own current negotiations on monetary and political union.
Decision to end 1948 treaty with Soviet Union
Foreign Affairs Minister Paavo Väyrynen announced on Sept. 23, after discussions at the UN in New York with his Soviet counterpart Boris Pankin, that negotiations were to begin in October between Finland and the Soviet Union on a new treaty basis for their bilateral relations.
The Friendship, Co-operation and Mutual Assistance Treaty, first signed in 1948 [see p. 9228], bound Finland to a military defence pact and prevented it from joining any international organization whose members posed a military threat to the Soviet Union—a definition which had been taken to include the EC.
EUROPE
UNITED KINGDOM
Rioting in urban areas
There were riots in early September in several inner-city areas, the most serious being those on Tyneside—in North Shields and Newcastle.
On the Ely estate, Cardiff, crowds of up to 300 threw bricks and petrol bombs in disturbances lasting three nights from Aug. 30, sparked by a dispute between two shopkeepers.
In Birmingham on Sept. 2, shops in the Handsworth area were looted after a power cut, and some 200 riot police were sent to the area.
In North Shields on Sept. 9-10, hundreds of youths rioted in Meadow Well after the deaths of two young men who crashed a stolen car while being chased by police; shops, houses and a community centre were burned down [see p. 38404].
In the West End area of Newcastle upon Tyne on Sept. 11 up to 300 rioters burned down a public house and started more than 20 other fires.
Riot police in Oxford clashed with youths over three nights from Sept. 1 after a police crackdown on "hotting" —racing stolen cars through Blackbird Leys estate at high speed; a woman suffered severe stab wounds during clashes on Sept. 3.
The Archbishop of Canterbury, the Most Rev. George Carey, said on Sept. 19 that "human wrongdoing is inextricably linked to social deprivation, poverty, poor housing and illiteracy" and that the riots in Newcastle "occurred where people were socially deprived" .
His views were dismissed by the government, which portrayed the riots as merely criminal acts.
New Plaid Cymru president
Plaid Cymru (the Welsh National Party) on Sept. 24 named Dafydd Wigley, the MP for Caernarfon, as its new president, succeeding Dafydd Elis Thomas MP.
EUROPE
NORTHERN IRELAND
Killing of Sinn Féin councillor — Other security developments
Bernard O'Hagan, a councillor who represented Sinn Féin on the Magherafelt district council, County Londonderry, was shot dead there on Sept. 16.
The outlawed Loyalist group, the Ulster Freedom Fighters, said that it had carried out the shooting.
This was the fourth murder of a Sinn Féin member since May and the 59th killing in the province so far in 1991.
Netherlands ruling on extradition of Donna Maguire
The Netherlands Supreme Court ruled on Sept. 10 that Donna Maguire, an Irish national, should be extradited from the Netherlands to Germany, where she was wanted to face charges of involvement in bomb attacks and in the murder of a British army corporal in Hannover in 1989 [see p. 36820].
She had earlier been acquitted of involvement in the murder of two Australian tourists at Roermond in 1990 [see pp. 38157; 38356].
Referral to Court of Appeal of Judith Ward case
The UK Home Secretary, Kenneth Baker, announced on Sept. 17 that the case of Judith Ward, sentenced to life imprisonment at Wakefield Crown Court in 1974 for the IRA bombing of a coach carrying soldiers and their families on the M62 motorway in Yorkshire [see pp. 26873-74], would be referred to the Court of Appeal.
Baker said that he was referring the case after new examination of the forensic evidence given at Ward's trial by government scientists, who were also involved in the cases of the Guildford Four, the Maguire Seven and the Birmingham Six.
The convictions in those cases were overturned in October 1989, in June 1990 and in March 1991 respectively after the forensic tests were discredited (see pp. 36983; 37536; 38111).
EUROPE
FRANCE
Criticism of Mitterrand
President François Mitterrand came under attack both from the opposition and from within his own Socialist Party (PS) early in September for his ambivalent initial reaction to the Soviet coup against Mikhail Gorbachev (although he had swiftly reversed this impression in a television appearance two days later).
Critics claimed that he had consistently misjudged events in eastern Europe.
Alain Juppé, secretary-general of the Gaullist RPR, stated that Mitterrand "simply isn't up to it" ; his caution over the Soviet coup was, however, defended by Foreign Minister Roland Dumas and by the President of the European Commission Jacques Delors; Mitterrand himself held a press conference on Sept. 11 (only his sixth during his time in office) in a move to consolidate his authority.
At his press conference Mitterrand announced that private investors would be allowed to acquire minority stakes in state industries to finance industrial investment and employment programmes.
This had been foreshadowed by the Economy, Finance and Budget Minister Pierre Bérégovoy on Aug. 29 and by Prime Minister Edith Cresson on Sept. 1.
Cresson warned, however, that partial privatizations should not be used to ease the government's financial problems.
The PS had decided at the end of August to preserve a loose electoral accord with the Communist Party (PCF).
Approval of draft budget
The Cabinet on Sept. 18 approved the 1992 draft budget.
It provided for a 3.1 per cent increase in overall spending, to a total of F1,330,360 million, against a predicted inflation rate of 2.8 per cent(US$1.00=F5.6999 as at Sept. 16, 1991).
Expenditure on education would increase by 5.7 per cent, on the environment by 13 per cent , on research by 5.7 per cent and on defence by only 1 per cent .
Growth of 2.2 per cent(against a predicted 1.4 per cent for 1991) and a deficit of F89,500 million (1.26 per cent of gross domestic product) was predicted.
As a means of confronting unemployment (9.5 per cent of the workforce) the budget cut the tax on distributed company profits from 42 to 34 per cent, bringing it into line with that on retained profits.
The amount set aside for capital injections into state companies rose to F5,600 million.
Communist Party rejection of reformist criticisms
A meeting of the central committee of the Communist Party (PCF) on Sept. 3-5 failed to dislodge Georges Marchais, 71, the veteran general secretary (since 1972), and approved on Sept. 5 a report presented by André Lajoinie, the president of the PCF group inthe National Assembly, rejecting all criticisms from the reformist wing.
The meeting had been called by the party's political bureau, which on Aug. 27 had accused the extreme right of using events in the Soviet Union to relaunch an attack on the party.
This followed publication of a letter from nine reformist or refondateur members of the central committee, criticising Marchais' reaction to the Soviet coup attempt.
While condemning the Soviet coup, Marchais had described it as understandable in view of the failure of perestroika.
His critics, led by Charles Fiterman and including eight of the 26 Communist deputies in the National Assembly, accused him of "faulty analysis" , indicating that the PCF was "too attached to an outmoded version of the world and of social movements" , while others called for his removal.
A separate attack on Marchais was led by Philippe Herzog, Paul Boccara and Bernard Marx at the central committee meeting, where, however, Lajoinie's report was approved by 128 votes to 13, with one abstention.
Immigration issue
UDF leader and former President Valéry Giscard d'Estaing said in an interview in Le Figaro of Sept. 21 that immigration was turning into an "invasion" .
He called for a referendum on the limitation of French citizenship to Europeans and those of French blood (as opposed to those born on French territory, who could currently claim citizenship at 18).
His remarks were endorsed by the RPR leader Jacques Chirac, who himself had complained of the "noise and smell" of immigrants in a speech in Orléans in June (after which a complaint had been lodged with the Orléans prosecutor for incitement to racial hatred).
François Léotard of the UDF, however, strongly criticized Giscard's stance and called on Sept. 30 for a common European policy on immigration, including a formal institution in which European countries could discuss problems with each other and with North African countries.
The Cabinet on Sept. 23 adopted a draft law laying down heavy penalties for those employing illegal immigrants [see also p. 38354].
Aid to farmers
Some 200,000 French farmers, accompanied by politicians including Giscard d'Estaing, Chirac, Lajoinie, and the extreme-right National Front leader Jean-Marie Le Pen, held a massive demonstration in Paris on Sept. 29 against falling prices and the proposed further price reductions under the European common agricultural policy, echoing provincial demonstrations earlier in the month.
The government had, on Sept. 15, promised aid of F50,000,000 to help farmers over a difficult period.
Cresson told UK Prime Minister John Major during a visit to London on Sept. 24 that compensation would be paid to British farmers whose lamb consignments had been attacked in France, and that protection would be provided for British and Irish lorries.
Three British and Irish consignments had been attacked near Cherbourg on Sept. 21 in protest against meat imports.
EUROPE
SPAIN
Liberalization of financialsector — 1991 budget
Measures to liberalize the financial sector presented to Cortes (parliament) on Sept. 19 were described by Carlos Solchaga, the Minister of Economy and Finance, as signalling Spain's "irrevocable commitment" to European economic integration.
With the exception of the United Left (IU), all the opposition parties supported the bill.
It was planned to achieve total freedom of movement for capital by the end of 1992, with remaining exchange controls to be lifted one year earlier than anticipated.
Spaniards would be free to open accounts and borrow abroad.
Foreign financial instruments might be listed without restriction on the Spanish stock market, and companies seeking loans of over 1,550 million pesetas (about US$14,750,000) would no longer need to secure official permission.
Import tariffs would be lifted from 170 classes of products.
Throughout the summer Solchaga had been in fruitless negotiations for a "pact of progress" between the government and the two main unions—the socialist General Workers' Union (UGT) and the communist Workers' Commissions (CCOO).
According to the Financial Times of Oct. 3, the government was unaffected by the unco-operativeness of the unions, which were "being written out of Mr Solchaga's script" .
Having been overruled by the ruling Spanish Socialist Workers' Party (PSOE) hierarchy and the spending ministries on requested budget cuts, Solchaga had regained the initiative through these measures of financial and trade liberalization.
The budget for 1992 was presented to parliament on Sept. 30.
Income was set at 20,881,900 million ptas and expenditure at 23,497,200 million ptas; the resulting deficit was expected to represent 1.6 per cent of gross domestic product (GDP)(US$1.00=105.048 ptas as at Sept. 30, 1991).
Convictions in GAL trial
Two senior police officers were sentenced to prison terms of more than 110 years each after being found guilty of charges of murder, criminal association and the forging of documents in connection with an undercover operation in the 1980s against the Basque separatist group ETA.
Sub-commissioner José Amedo and Inspector Michel Domi nguez had participated in the recruitment of mercenaries for the Grupos Antiterroristas de Liberación (GAL), which were said to have been responsible for the assassination of 22 ETA leaders and alleged sympathizers in Basque areas of southern France between December 1983 and July 1986.
The two defendants were charged with responsibility for three assassinations and five attempted murders.
The trial had opened in Madrid on June 11, following judicial investigations in 1990 [see p. 37588].
On June 14 the court had heard a written testimony from Prime Minister Felipe González in which he denied any knowledge of the creation of the GAL.
Although evidence given in earlier hearings had suggested that on at least one occasion Ministry of the Interior "reserve funds" had been used for GAL-related activities, the trial judges in their 170-page verdict concluded that the group had not been part of "the apparatus of the state" .
Strikes by mineworkers and sherry producers
On Sept. 18 thousands of striking mineworkers and members of the CCOO and the SOMA-UGT set up barricades across roads and railways in the northern province of Asturias, protesting against plans announced the previous June which would entail the shedding of 6,000 jobs in the state mining company Hunosa by 1993.
The CCOO and the UGT joined with two smaller unions to organize a general strike on Sept. 23 in Jerez de la Frontera, Andalucía.
The strike was a show of solidarity with 3,500 workers in sherry production who had been on strike since the beginning of the month over pension rights.
It was estimated that 20 per cent of the grape harvest had been lost.
Restrictions on political asylum and legalization of illegal immigrants
In September the Ministry of Social Welfare announced that nationals of Romania, Czechoslovakia, Hungary, Bulgaria and Peru would no longer be eligible to receive funds and medical treatment as political refugees.
Poland had already, in the spring of 1991, joined the list of countries now considered by the Spanish immigration authorities to enjoy democratic political systems.
A report in El País of Sept. 13 claimed that the ministries concerned had set a ceiling of 100,000 on the numbers of illegal immigrants whom they were prepared to legalize within the current amnesty programme (which was to close on Dec. 10).
It had previously been estimated that the programme would allow 100,000-170,000 people who had arrived in Spain before May 15, 1991, to regularize their status.
EUROPE
GERMANY
Resignation of De Maizière as deputy CDU leader
Lothar de Maizière, Prime Minister of East Germany in March-October 1990, resigned on Sept. 6 as deputy leader of the Christian Democratic Union (CDU) and from all other party posts including chair of the Brandenburg CDU (as of Nov. 21); he announced on Sept. 11 that he would also relinquish his seat in the Bundestag (lower house of parliament) from Sept. 30.
His resignation followed persistent allegations that he had been an informer for the "Stasi" (the East German state security police) during 1981-88.
Similar allegations had caused his resignation from the Cabinet in December 1990 [see pp. 37828; 38109-10].
De Maizière was replaced as deputy leader on Sept. 23 by Angela Merkel, the (East German) Minister for Women and Youth Affairs in the federal government, who became the first woman in the CDU leadership.
At the same time Christine Lieberknecht, the Culture Minister for Thuringia, was appointed to the party presidium to replace Klaus Reichenbach (the CDU chair in Saxony) who resigned on Sept. 8.
Lieberknecht, Merkel, and Reinhard Gohner, who replaced de Maizière as chair of the CDU programme commission, all represented the younger generation of rising party leaders.
In other CDU changes at the same time Interior Minister Wolfgang Schäuble was appointed leader of the parliamentary party.
Faced with a sharp fall in support for the CDU in the former East German Länder, CDU general secretary Volker Rühe (with the tacit support of Federal Chancellor Helmut Kohl) had led the group within the party pressing for the replacement of de Maizière.
Rühe had argued that new leaders were needed who would mark a clear break with the past and would show full commitment to reform.
At a tumultuous meeting between Kohl and the east German party leaders on Aug. 30, de Maizière described Rühe's accusations as unacceptable and offered his resignation, which at that stage was rejected.
De Maizière, who had also accused the CDU on Aug. 27 of enriching itself to the tune of DM26,000,000 at the expense of the east German party (an allegation he later withdrew), on Sept. 11 accused Kohl and the CDU of deliberately discrediting him.
Other resignations
A string of resignations followed in the new German states on Sept. 12.
Hans-Jurgen Schulz, the FDP Economy Minister for Thuringia, resigned for health reasons and was replaced by Jurgen Bohn.
Karl-Heinz Kretschmer resigned as the (CDU) deputy Minister President of Brandenburg following accusations that he too had been involved with the Stasi, and two PDS deputies in the Saxony-Anhalt parliament, Gunter Scholz and Rolf Funda, resigned their seats for the same reason on the recommendation of the party.
The FDP chair in Brandenburg had resigned on Sept. 10 because of his former activities in the communist youth organization.
Shift to right in Bremen elections
In elections held on Sept. 29 to the city parliament in Bremen, with an electorate of about 500,000, the Social Democratic Party (SPD), which had held power in Bremen for the past 20 years, remained the largest party but lost its overall majority and almost 12 per cent of the vote.
The CDU increased its share of the vote by about 7 percentage points.
The extreme right-wing German People's Union (DVU), taking advantage of recent anti-foreigner disturbances to denounce "bogus asylum-seekers and criminal foreigners" , increased its representation to six seats [for 1987 elections see p. 35722].
Bremen elections
Percentage of votes Seats 1991 1987 1991 1987 SPD 38.8 50.5 41 54 CDU 30.7 23.4 32 25 Greens 11.4 10.2 11 10 FDP 9.5 10.0 10 10 DVU 6.2 3.4 6 1 
Resignation of Saxony Minister after attacks on foreigners
The Interior Minister of Saxony, Rudolf Krause, resigned on Sept. 29.
He had been criticized for failing to do enough to prevent a spate of serious attacks on foreign workers and asylum-seekers in the state, and had also been accused of working for the Stasi.
He was replaced by Heinz Eggert.
During a week of nightly attacks on foreigners in Saxony on Sept. 17-23, police had to evacuate some 250 people, mainly from Romania, Yugoslavia, Vietnam and African countries, when right-wing elements including skinheads and neo-Nazis besieged their hostel in the town of Hoyerswerda and pelted them with Molotov cocktails, steel balls and other missiles.
Similar incidents also took place in other Saxony towns and in western Germany at the end of September, and there were numerous arrests and injuries.
President Richard von Weizsäcker described the events as "frightening and disgraceful" and announced that he would visit one of the affected hostels.
During an emergency debate on the situation on Sept. 25 the Bundestag unanimously condemned the attacks.
Representatives of all parties subsequently met with Kohl on Sept. 27 but rejected CDU proposals to change the Constitution to reduce the numbers of people seeking asylum.
However, Schäuble said that any refugee who had arrived via a third country in which asylum could have been requested would be sent back, and that reciprocal expulsion arrangements with Poland and Czechoslovakia would be renegotiated to reduce the numbers of asylum-seekers.
The SPD pointed out that one-third of asylum-seekers came from Turkey and that strong pressure should be brought on the Turkish government to prevent this.
Arrest of Marcus Wolf — Cancellation of Mielke trial
The Austrian government on Sept. 16 rejected a request for political asylum from Markus Wolf, the former head of East German intelligence from 1958 to 1987 who had been in the Soviet Union for the past year and who was wanted in Germany on charges of espionage.
Wolf arrived in Vienna on Aug. 30 and was briefly detained.
After the ruling Wolf was given 14 days to appeal but gave himself up to German police at the Austrian border on Sept. 24.
It was announced on Aug. 26 that the trial of Erich Mielke, the former East German State Security Minister, for the murder of two policemen [see p. 38199]had been cancelled after psychiatric examinations showed that at 83 he was unfit to stand trial.
Demand for extradition of Honecker
After the failure of the August coup in the Soviet Union the German government on Aug. 28 demanded the extradition of former East German leader Erich Honecker from the Soviet Union to face charges that he had ordered East German border guards to shoot escaping citizens.
Merger of eastern citizens' movements
Three major citizens' movements from eastern Germany—Democracy Now, the Peace and Human Rights Initiative and parts of New Forum—merged in Potsdam on Sept. 21 to form Alliance 90 (the name under which these movements had contested elections in 1990).
All political organizations were required to bring their statutes in line with federal party laws within one year of unification in order to retain the right to take part in elections.
Visit by Mitterrand to new German states
French President François Mitterrand paid his first official visit to the new German states on Sept. 18-20 at the invitation of von Weizsäcker who accompanied him.
Mitterrand first went to Bonn for talks with Kohl, travelling on to Berlin and the states of Brandenburg, Saxony and Thuringia.
EUROPE
NETHERLANDS
1992 Budget — Protests over welfare reform
The government's proposed budget for 1992 was outlined as was traditional in a speech by Queen Beatrix to parliament in The Hague on Sept. 17.
Expenditure was projected at 204,500 million guilders, with income of 183,400 million guilders, leaving a deficit which represented 4.25 per cent of expected net national income in 1992.
(The 1991 deficit was expected to be 4.75 per cent of net national income.)
Economic conditions were described as deteriorating, and economic growth was expected to be only 1 per cent in 1992 (compared with 2.25 per cent in 1991).
A compromise agreement on a proposed reform of the state benefit system reached in August [see pp. 38401-02]led to a wave of protests culminating in strikes on Sept. 17.
Unions claimed that over 90,000 registered disabled people would be affected by the plan to limit disability benefit, after an initial six years on a salary-related scale, to 70 per cent of the national minimum wage.
EUROPE
SWITZERLAND
Sentencing of Kopp
Hans W. Kopp, the husband of former Justice Minister Elisabeth Kopp [for whose resignation in December 1988 see p. 36473], was sentenced on Sept. 3 by the Supreme Court of the Canton of Zürich to a one-year suspended sentence for fraud, forgery and the use of forgery.
His co-defendant, Rudolf Ernst, who was resident in New York, was sentenced in his absence to two years' imprisonment.
The two men were prosecuted in connection with the fraudulent bankruptcy of a finance company, Trans K-B, of which Kopp was president of the board of directors.
Abolition of death penalty
The government abolished the death penalty for wartime offences on Sept. 16, almost 50 years after it was abolished for civilian offenders.
Vote in favour of civilian service
The Nationalrat approved on Sept. 16 by 147 votes to 14 the introduction of a constitutional amendment to allow a civilian form of military service.
The approval in June of a referendum proposal abolishing prison sentences for conscientious objectors [see p. 38299]had paved the way for civilian service to become a legally permissible alternative to military service.
An initiative was now expected to amend to the relevant Article 18 of the federal constitution.
Repudiation of word "communism" by Swiss Party of Labour
The Swiss Party of Labour (PvdA) decided on Sept. 7 to strike out the word "communism" and remove all references to democratic centralism from its statutes.
With an almost unanimous vote at its 40th congress in Geneva, the party said that the word "communism" was being dropped because of all that had been done in its name.
EUROPE
AUSTRIA
Far-right gains in elections in Styria
In elections in the south-eastern province of Styria (Steiermark) on Sept. 22, the far-right opposition Freedom Party of Austria (Freiheitliche Partei Österreichs—FPÖ—whose leader, Jörg Haider, had in June been compelled to step down as governor of Carinthia—see p. 38298) made significant gains, increasing its support by more than 10 per cent to 14.6 per cent, compared with the last elections in 1986 [see p. 34695].
The centre-right Austrian People's Party (Österreichische Volkpartei—ÖVP) lost its absolute majority, receiving 46 per cent, a drop of 7 percentage points.
The Social Democratic Party of Austria (Sozialdemokratische Partei Österreichs—SPÖ) won 35 per cent of the vote, down by almost 3 per centage points.
EUROPE
ALBANIA
Economic reform proposals
Discussions in the Council of Ministers on Aug. 28-30 produced a draft announced on Sept. 1 for a package of economic and financial reforms, including the creation of a National Agency of Privatization to co-ordinate privatization plans and to encourage the growth of small businesses.
[For April privatization decree see p. 38160.]
The package would also give the central bank increased independence in monetary policy, and Albanians would be allowed to open hard-currency bank accounts and to receive remittances from abroad.
The draft proposals were to be discussed with the trade unions and opposition parties before being submitted to the People's Assembly.
It was announced on Sept. 1 that the Albanian lek would henceforth be linked to the European currency unit at an initial rate of ECU1=30 leks (US$1.00=25 leks).
A Foreign Investment Agency, supervised by the Ministry of Foreign Economic Relations and with the role of encouraging investment from abroad, began operation on Oct. 1.
On Sept. 14 regulations restricting imports and exports had been lifted,
except for certain products subject to quotas or special licences.
Grain shipments
The European Commission announced on Sept. 3 that it would buy 45,000 tonnes of surplus Hungarian wheat for transportation to Albania by rail in December.
The grain had been promised in July, but the limited capacity of Albanian ports had proved a problem.
It was estimated that the co-ordinated European Community and Italian relief efforts would keep Albania supplied with bread-making grain until the end of January 1992.
Albanian Foreign Ministry, Economic Ministry and banking officials met with their Italian counterparts and Italian industrialists on Sept. 11.
On Sept. 19, 500 Italian troops disembarked at Durres and food relief and trucks were unloaded.
Anti-communist demonstrations
On Sept. 14 tens of thousands of people holding "red national flags without the red star" attended a rally in Tirana's Skanderbeg Square.
Speakers from an opposition tripartite coalition of the Democratic, Social Democratic and Republican Parties and the Union of Independent Trade Unions of Albania (UITUA) called for an end to communist influence in the media and the Foreign Ministry, and for top party officials to be put on trial.
In the first major demonstration since the May-June strike [see pp. 38302-03]at least 5,000 people had gathered in Tirana's Dinamo Stadium on Aug. 25, when they were addressed on behalf of the opposition coalition by Azem Hajdari, a member of the Democratic Party (DP) executive committee.
He welcomed the return to power of Soviet President Gorbachev.
At another rally in Tirana on Aug. 31, Hajdari called for the removal of supporters of the ruling Socialist Party of Albania (SPA—formerly the Albanian Party of Labour—PLA), from key posts in the media, and for the dissolution of the secret police.
Rallies in Vlore on Sept. 2 and in Shkoder on Sept. 13 were organized by the DP in alliance with the other parties, and on Sept. 7 supporters of the three parties protested outside the Tirana headquarters of Albania Radio-TV, asking for the dismissal of "leading cadres" and an end to "Stalinist censorship" of news reports.
Two SPA officials were arrested on Aug. 31.
The senior of the two—former Deputy Prime Minister Manush Myftiu—had been among the nine politburo members expelled from the PLA in June 1991 [see also p. 38303].
Diplomatic relations with Vatican
Albania opened diplomatic relations with the Vatican on Sept. 7 [see also p. 38351].
On a visit to Italy on Sept. 11, Gramoz Pashko, Deputy Chair of the Council of Ministers and Economy Minister, met with Pope John Paul II and reportedly discussed the "intensification of religious activity" in Albania.
Around 10 per cent of Albania's population was estimated to be Catholic.
EUROPE
BULGARIA
Establishment of commission of inquiry
Bulgaria's Grand National Assembly decided on Sept. 2 to appoint a parliamentary commission of inquiry to study the conduct of Bulgarian politicians and state officials during the period of the August abortive coup in the Soviet Union.
The decision followed demands by the Union of Democratic Forces (UDF) and other opposition groups for a clarification of the position taken during the coup by the current Bulgarian government which was dominated by the Bulgarian Socialist Party (BSP).
The controversy stemmed from an equivocal statement on the coup by the BSP on Aug. 19, and the perception that the party had only taken a clear stand when the coup began to crumble.
It had been reported that BSP members of the government not only adopted a "wait-and-see" policy, but also, through contacts with the Soviet embassy in Sofia, had secretly supported the coup leaders.
These accusations were denied by the government, the BSP, and the Soviet ambassador, Viktor Sharapov, who at a press conference on Aug. 26 said that his only contacts with the government and the BSP had been official ones at which he had delivered the statement of the State Committee for the State of Emergency (the Soviet coup leaders) and Gorbachev's subsequent repudiation of it, and had discussed the forthcoming visit to Moscow of a Bulgarian economic mission.
(Sharapov was subsequently recalled to Moscow and, in common with many other Soviet ambassadors, dismissed from his post.)
The BSP's attitude to the coup was also criticized by anti-hardline factions within the party.
BSP leaders denied, however, that the party was in danger of splitting.
Former Prime Minister Andrei Lukanov resigned from the party's presidium at the end of August, and left for London in early September.
(According to some opposition-inspired reports he had fled the country and was in hiding, while according to others he was merely on a business trip.)
In the context of political campaigning for parliamentary elections to be held on Oct. 13, opposition groups called for the banning of the Bulgarian Communist Party and other hardline groups which did support the Soviet coup.
There were even some calls for the BSP itself to be banned.
Involvement of Bulgarian security in 1978 Markov murder
In an interview with Bulgarian Radio on Aug. 29 Gen. Leonid Katsamunski, head of the National Investigation Department (NID), stated that Bulgarian Special Services were involved in the "poisoned umbrella" murder of dissident writer Georgi Markov in London in 1978.
The evidence indicated, he said, that Bulgarian state security employees had been engaged in preparations for the assassination of Markov.
In connection with the investigation of the Markov murder the Prosecutor's Office of the Armed Forces was seeking the extradition from Moscow of Gen. Vladimir Todorov, the former chief of Bulgarian Foreign Intelligence, and was expected to seek information from KGB files on the Markov murder.
Closure of nuclear reactors
The first of the six Soviet-built reactors at the Kozloduy nuclear plant was switched off on Sept. 4, as had been announced in July following a highly critical safety report [see p. 38350].
Safety was to be improved and the reactors modernized rather than closed permanently.
A government report of Sept. 27 found that millions of litres of radioactive water were seeping out of leaky tanks at Kozloduy, which provided around 40 per cent of Bulgaria's electricity.
EUROPE
CZECHOSLOVAKIA
Resignation of Vales
Vaclav Vales, federal Deputy Prime Minister responsible for co-ordinating economic policy, resigned on Sept. 17.
President Vaclav Havel referred to a smear campaign against Vales, whose alleged associations with the former Communist secret police had been raised repeatedly by parliamentary deputies and journalists, although no concrete evidence had been published.
Proposal to ban Communist Party
The defence and security committees of the Federal Assembly decided on Sept. 4 to propose the banning of the Communist Party as part of a bill intended to eliminate communist influence.
The entire bill was not, however, adopted by the defence and security committees of the Chamber of the People, although there was agreement that the activities of the Communist Party should be banned.
On Sept. 9 the federal government agreed on the details of a bill on vetting which would ban officials, secret agents and members of the people's militias of the previous communist regime from state office.
This bill was subsequently to be discussed by the federal Parliament and, if enacted, would be valid until the end of 1996.
The proposed ban covered all elected or appointed positions in the state administration, the judiciary, the army and the media.
The Deputy Prime Minister responsible for legislative affairs, Pavel Rychetsky, maintained that the proposals were justified by the need to protect democracy.
The federal Ministry of the Interior announced on Sept. 6 that the World Federation of Trade Unions (WFTU), the International Union of Students (IUS) and the International Organization of Journalists (IOJ) —all closely associated with the former international communist system—would no longer be allowed to base their activities in Czechoslovakia.
Havel's call for referendum on republican independence
In his opening address to the autumn session of the Federal Assembly on Sept. 24, Havel called for a referendum to resolve the issue of separate Slovak sovereignty [see p. 38357].
He warned of the dangers of a split between the Czech and Slovak republics unless a federal structure governing the relationship between the two republics could be agreed.
Havel urged that a referendum should be held by December 1991, implying that he would resign if the issue remained unsolved.
He suggested to the Parliamentary deputies that Czech and Slovak citizens should be asked, in simple and clear terms, whether they wanted the democratic federation of two equal republics to survive.
On Sept. 23, the Slovak National Party had put forward a motion in the Slovak Parliament to declare Slovakian sovereignty.
The motion failed to gain a majority in the face of the opposition of the ruling Christian Democratic Party.
Leading Slovak politicians, including Vladimir Meciar, the former Slovak Prime Minister and the leader of the Movement for a Democratic Slovakia, launched an initiative called "For a Free Slovakia" [for Meciar's proposal for a "grand coalition" of Slovak political parties, see p. 38381].
This new campaign advocated that Slovakia should become a sovereign republic with its own constitution, free to negotiate an alliance with a sovereign Czech republic.
President Havel warned that legal chaos would result from a one-sided, unconstitutional act by the Slovak Republic without a prior referendum.
EUROPE
HUNGARY
Treaty with France
A Hungarian-French treaty of friendship and concord signed on Sept. 11 laid down the terms of co-operation between the two countries on minority issues and on Hungary's desire for full membership of the European Communities (EC).
The treaty was signed in Paris by the Foreign Ministers of the two countries, Geza Jeszenszky and Roland Dumas.
Hungarian Prime Minister Jozsef Antall was also in Paris, intending to raise the issue of a recent French veto on an increase in Hungarian, Czechoslovak and Polish meat exports to the EC.
Kupa's by-election victory
Finance Minister Mihaly Kupa won a National Assembly seat in a by-election on Sept. 15, when he secured 56.7 per cent of the vote in the second round, running as an independent with the support of Antall's Hungarian Democratic Forum.
The seat had been held since the 1990 general election by Miklós Németh, Hungary's last Prime Minister under the transitional communist regime in 1988-90, who had left for a new career as vice-president of the European Bank for Reconstruction and Development.
EUROPE
POLAND
Budget crisis — Government resignation offer
On Sept. 2 Poland's Solidarity-dominated Cabinet proposed legislation to give the government power to rule by decree until after the Oct. 27 elections, bypassing parliament on economic and other policy areas, except human rights and fundamental state institutions.
On Sept. 14, however, the bill failed by 19 votes to win the two-thirds majority necessary to become law.
Prime Minister Jan Krzysztof Bielecki said that the government would stay in office to ensure that the state continued to function until elections on Oct. 27.
Bielecki had offered the resignation of the government on Aug. 30 after a clash with the Sejm (lower house of parliament) over the government's economic programme.
Plans to cut public spending by 14.5 per cent to combat a higher than expected budget deficit were criticized by former communist deputies, who demanded the government's dismissal, calling on Bielecki to act merely as caretaker Prime Minister until the elections.
The Sejm rejected Bielecki's resignation offer on Aug. 31, effectively passing a vote of confidence in the government, but rejected a resolution proposed by one of the Solidarity groups for government by decree, and made it clear that budget cuts would not be passed.
Government income had fallen by 21.5 per cent because of low tax payments from privatized businesses, the collapse of the Soviet market for Polish goods and the Polish recession.
Unemployment stood at 9.8 per cent, industrial output was down and a 1990 hard-currency trade surplus of nearly US$4,000 million was expected to turn into a $1,000 million deficit in 1991.
The proposed budget cuts would have affected housing subsidies, pensions, family payments and civil service pay.
On Sept. 27 parliament finally approved an amended budget which provided for a budget deficit of 26,000,000 million zloty, compared with the 24,300,000 million zloty provisionally agreed with the International Monetary Fund (IMF) in August.
The minimum for spending was set at 244,000,000 million zloty—7,000,000 million zloty less than originally envisaged, and it was anticipated that revenues could drop by 10,000,000 zloty past the originally projected 227,000,000 zloty.
(US$1.00=10,953 zloty as at Sept. 30, 1991.)
Arrest of former head of central bank
Grzegorz Wojtowicz, the former president of the National Bank of Poland, was charged on Sept. 23 with gross mismanagement in connection a banking scandal involving a private company known as Art-B.
The firm had been accused of illegally moving money around banks to earn interest from several accounts at once.
In August Wojtowicz had been dismissed from his post and five people, including senior officials of state banks, had been arrested; following the Art-B scandal the Sejm approved laws to tighten the central bank's powers of supervision.
The Sejm rejected President Lech Walesa's nominee for the post of central bank president, Marek Dabrowski on Sept. 13, and acting president Andrzej Topinski remained in charge [see pp. 38399; 38351-2].
Foreign relations
Poland and the Russian Federation signed a trade agreement on Sept. 4 to bridge the gap caused by a sharp fall in exports to the Soviet Union, formerly Poland's main customer until the two countries began trading in hard currency in January and the Soviet side was unable to pay for most of its purchases.
Poland's recession was largely blamed on the collapse of the Soviet market.
It was agreed that barter deals, hard currency, national currencies and other means would be used to settle accounts between Russia and Poland.
Poland and the Ukraine agreed on Sept. 8 to establish diplomatic relations in the near future.
EUROPE
ROMANIA
Resignation of Roman
Petre Roman resigned as Prime Minister on Sept. 26, amidst three days of demonstrations and riots in Bucharest by thousands of striking miners from the Jiu Valley coalfield.
Four people were reported killed and hundreds wounded in violent street battles between miners and security forces.
On Sept. 27 the Romanian parliament building was ransacked.
The action which forced the resignation of Roman and his National Salvation Front (NSF) government began on Sept. 23, when 52,000 miners went on strike in the Jiu Valley, protesting over soaring inflation, cuts in their living standards and, more generally, the government's austerity programme.
On Sept. 24 the miners rejected the government's offer to negotiate their demands.
On Sept. 25 several thousand miners hijacked trains and forced them to take them to Bucharest, where armed with clubs and other weapons, they demanded the resignation of Roman and of President Ion Iliescu.
Following Roman's resignation (or the handing in of his mandate, as he put it) on Sept. 26, and conciliation discussions between Iliescu and miners' leader Miron Cosma, the miners began to withdraw from Bucharest on Sept. 27.
On Oct. 1 it was announced that the President had given Theodor Stolojan, formerly the Finance Minister [see p. 38207], the responsibility of forming a new broad-based coalition government.
Stolojan, proposed by Roman as his successor, had in March 1991 tendered his resignation (which Roman had then asked him to withdraw—see p. 38163) in protest at the NSF's failure to implement more radical price liberalisation measures.
With the economic situation deteriorating rapidly, the NSF and its opponents were engaged in political manoeuvering in the run-up to the general election in 1992.
Meanwhile the country was in the throes of a year-long wave of strikes and protests against the government's measures to introduce a more free-market economic system and to privatize state-owned industries.
Government economic policies had led to an erosion of the previously relatively privileged economic position of the miners, who, as recently as June 1990, had been mobilized successfully on the streets of Bucharest as an intimidating force behind Iliescu's government and against opposition demonstrators [see p. 37545].
The response to the miners' action, both in Romania and abroad, was generally one of condemnation, although the opposition and some observers also emphasised the government's responsibility for creating a situation in which such riots could occur.
Claims by the NSF that the riots were part of an attempted neo-communist coup were widely discounted.
In the aftermath of the failed August coup in the Soviet Union there had been numerous demands and demonstrations in support of a ban on communist activities in Romania.
The government resisted this pressure, on the grounds that administrative action against the remaining communists in Romania would not help the country's transition to a fully-fledged democracy.
[For rebirth of communist party as Socialist Labour Party in November 1990 see p. 37866; for its August 1991 congress see p. 38401.]
It was announced in Bucharest on Sept. 30 that a US$300,000,000 World Bank loan to Romania had been postponed because of the miners' riots.
Support for independence of Moldava
On Sept. 3 the Romanian parliament adopted a resolution supporting the Aug. 27 declaration of independence by the former Soviet Republic of Moldava [with which Romania established diplomatic links on Aug. 29—see p. 38373], and calling for its wider international recognition.
Roman had talks with Moldavan President Mircea Snegur and Prime Minister Valery Muravshi on Sept. 7, while Iliescu reaffirmed Romania's support for Moldova in a radio broadcast on Sept. 11.
Later in the month Iliescu was reported to have expressed a readiness for Romanian-Moldavan unification.
In his Sept. 11 radio broadcast Iliescu also strongly condemned proposals said to be emanating from a joint Hungarian-Polish-Czechoslovakian working group for the economic integration of Transylvania (home of Romania's ethnic Hungarian minority) into an economic space to be created by the three countries.
EUROPE
CYPRUS
Failure to convene conference
In the early part of September there were still hopes for a UN-sponsored peace conference as Oscar Camilion, UN special representative for Cyprus, visited Ankara, Athens and Nicosia in an attempt to bring together the four parties to the dispute: the Greek and Turkish governments and the Greek-Cypriot and Turkish-Cypriot communities [see also pp. 38402-03].
In the absence of a basic level of agreement on issues, however, it was not considered worthwhile to bring delegates together at the conference table.
On Sept. 11 the Greek Prime Minister Konstantinos Mitsotakis discussed the Cyprus problem with Mesut Yilmaz, the Turkish Prime Minister, a fellow-participant at a Paris meeting of the European Democratic Union (an organization of European Conservative parties).
They agreed to establish a working group to formulate an accord of "neighbourliness, friendship and co-operation" .
On Sept. 17 the Assembly of the Turkish Republic of Northern Cyprus (TRNC)(recognized only by Turkey) unanimously adopted a resolution welcoming the proposal for a quadripartite conference.
The resolution reiterated a proposal for "direct negotiations between the leaders of the two communities" and stressed that "no concessions can be made on the principles of sovereignty, self-determination…[or]the existence of two separate peoples symbolizing the founding partnership" .
Also on Sept. 17, in an address broadcast on Greek-Cypriot television, the President of Cyprus, Georgios Vassiliou, referred optimistically to "the great mobility in the Cyprus problem which became evident this summer" , but criticized the "negative position" adopted by Rauf Denktash, President of the Turkish-Cypriot Republic.
In the previous week the Cyprus problem had been discussed in depth by United States Secretary of State James Baker and Soviet Foreign Minister Boris Pankin.
According to Vassiliou, US President Bush had understood the symbolic significance of any solution to the Cyprus problem "especially at this period when we have such an exacerbation of ethnic passions worldwide, particularly in Europe" .
Release and reimprisonment of Sampson
On Sept. 6 the Cypriot Supreme Court ordered the release of Nicos Sampson, leader of the short-lived right-wing regime whose seizure of power in the 1974 coup had precipitated the Turkish invasion [see pp. 26661-66].
He had been serving a 20-year term in Nicosia's central prison.
On Sept. 26, however, he was reimprisoned.
On Aug. 26 Sampson had begun legal proceedings to secure an early release, arguing that 11 years in exile in France should count towards his sentence, which had been pronounced in 1976 [see p. 27980].
EUROPE
TURKEY
Withdrawal of multinational forces — Renewal of USA accord
After a Cabinet meeting on Sept. 21 it was announced that the mandate under which the multinational rapid reaction force was stationed in south-east Turkey was to be extended for a further 90 days from Sept. 30.
This extended period, however, applied only to airforce personnel and equipment.
Statements issued on Sept. 23 by the Turkish and United Kingdom authorities, and by the multinational force's United States commander Col. "Butch" Whitehead, emphasized the imminent withdrawal of the ground forces.
Since the 4,600-strong rapid reaction force had grouped in Turkey in July [see p. 38357], it had not been called on to intervene in northern Iraq.
It was stressed that sufficient air power would remain behind to protect the Iraqi Kurds.
The USA would boost its presence with F-111 fighter aircraft at the US/NATO Incirlik airbase, where UK and French fighter planes would also continue to be based.
The initial mandate for the stationing of multinational forces in Turkey had been granted by Turkey's National Assembly on Jan. 17, 1991, during the Gulf war [see p. 37936], while the Kurdish crisis of April had led to the deployment of further multinational ground forces from bases in Turkey.
On Sept. 17 it was announced that the defence and economic co-operation accord between the USA and Turkey had been extended for another year.
Signed in 1980 [see p. 30548], the accord defined the terms of operation of the Incirlik airbase and of 11 other US military bases and installations in Turkey [see pp. 36986; 37595].
Negotiations with PUK
A delegation of Iraqi Kurds, headed by Jalal Talabani of the Patriotic Union of Kurdistan (PUK), met with President Özal of Turkey on Sept. 17, when the provision by Turkey of food and medical aid for the Iraqi Kurds was discussed [for March 1991 meeting see p. 38116].
Iraqi payment for use of Turkishpipeline
The Sept. 19 UN resolution on oil sales by Iraq [see p. 38452]was to involve the reopening from mid-September of the 1,000-km twin pipelines (closed since August 1990) from Kirkuk, Iraq, to the Yumurtalik terminal in the Bay of Iskenderun, Turkey.
By Sept. 9 the UN Secretary-General, Javier Pérez de Cuéllar, had responded to Turkish objections by recommending that some additional Iraqi oil shipments should be permitted in order to allow Iraq to pay Turkey transport royalties (whether in cash or in kind) for use of the pipeline.
The Turkish authorities estimated that their charge to Iraq would be US$264,000,000; the UN was arguing for a lower figure.
Kidnappings and continuingviolence in south-east Turkey
Five foreigners kidnapped by a Turkish Kurdish group on Aug. 30 were released on Sept. 20.
They were three US citizens and one Australian who had been travelling together in a car, and one UK citizen who had been taken off a bus.
The kidnappings, which took place near the village of Elmali in Bingol province, were interpreted as a move by the Kurdish Workers' Party (PKK) to heighten its international profile.
On Sept. 1 the PKK leader Abdullah Ocalan said in an interview that tourists coming to Kurdistan without obtaining written permission from one of the PKK offices abroad would be putting their lives in danger.
[For other August kidnappings see p. 38403.]
In the two weeks to Sept. 5 the Turkish newspaper Cumhuriyet recorded the death of 43 people in continuing violence in the south-east: 27 PKK guerrillas, eight soldiers, five pro-government local militiamen and three civilians.
The Turkish military was reportedly increasingly frustrated by the continuing activity of the PKK, and on Sept. 20 the Foreign Ministry denied reports that a cross-border operation against PKK bases in Iran had been mounted in retaliation for a Sept. 10 attack on a border outpost in which seven Turkish soldiers were killed.
A joint border committee was to be established between the two countries to deal with any such incidents.
On Sept. 26 the Iraqi Deputy Prime Minister Tariq Aziz denied suggestions reportedly made by Özal that the Iraqi government was providing support to the PKK.
MIDDLE EAST — ARAB WORLD
IRAQ
Release of IAEA inspectors — UN resolution on oil sales
Iraq on Sept. 28 agreed to release a 44-member International Atomic Energy Agency (IAEA) team, detained on Sept. 23 and 24, which had refused to surrender files it claimed revealed "the administrative structure of Iraq's nuclear weapons programme" .
The decision came after the UN Security Council had accepted an Iraqi proposal offering to release the inspectors in exchange for a joint inventory of all confiscated documents.
Earlier, the government had ignored a UN deadline ordering the release of the IAEA inspectors along with all documents "they deem appropriate" by Sept. 24.
This latest incident, involving the sixth IAEA team which arrived in Iraq on Sept. 22, occurred when armed guards prevented some inspectors from leaving the premises of an office block in the centre of Baghdad, the capital, where, on Sept. 24, they claimed to have discovered evidence of an Iraqi uranium enrichment programme based on sophisticated centrifuge technology.
A fifth IAEA team which had arrived on Sept. 15 had reportedly attempted also to establish the extent of Iraq's centrifuge programme revealed by an IAEA inspection team in August [see p. 38407].
An IAEA spokesman, David Kyd, said in Vienna on Sept. 30 that the inspection team, which resumed its inspection of weapons sites on Sept. 29, had found "tangible evidence" of "Iraqi interest in a detonation system for a nuclear device" as well as documents identifying foreign companies which had supplied Iraq's nuclear programme.
Claims that the IAEA inspection team had found conclusive proof of a nuclear weapons programme were denied by the government, which accused the IAEA team of exceeding its authority and engaging in espionage.
On Sept. 24 the Deputy Prime Minister, Tariq Aziz, justified the detention of the team, saying that it had wrongfully seized personnel records.
Aziz also claimed that the team's leader, David Kay, was "a CIA officer" whose mission had "nothing to do with UN business" .
Subsequent reports on Oct. 1 said that the head of the UN-IAEA commission on Iraq [see pp. 38165; 38211], Rolf Ekeus, had "firmly instructed" the team to brief only the commission or the IAEA, after it emerged that Kay had passed information directly to the US administration while held in Baghdad.
Other weapons inspection issues
The crisis centring on the detention of UN inspectors had been preceded by mounting tension over Iraq's refusal to authorize the use of UN helicopters by weapons inspection teams.
On Sept. 13, UN missile inspectors abandoned their mission in Baghdad following the government's refusal to allow the use of UN helicopters without the presence of Iraqi "specialists" on board, saying that this constituted a violation of Iraqi sovereignty.
On Sept. 23 US President George Bush, in an address to the UN General Assembly, accused President Saddam Hussein of showing "contempt" for UN resolutions.
On Sept. 24 Bush warned that a "miscalculation" could inflict "more anguish" on the Iraqi people.
Bush's remarks came in the midst of renewed speculation about a possible US military attack against Iraq [see p. 38307], following a further Iraqi refusal to permit UN inspectors the use of German helicopters to conduct a fresh search for Scud missile sites.
A formal Iraqi undertaking not to interfere with helicopter inspections, issued to the UN Security Council on Sept. 24, appeared subsequently to have been withdrawn after the government informed the Security Council on Sept. 26 that it would not endorse such inspections until further discussions with the UN-IAEA commission.
Meanwhile, on Sept. 25, in what was seen as the start of a Western military build-up to force Iraqi compliance with UN resolutions, the US Defence Department ordered the despatch to Saudi Arabia of 1,380 troops equipped with 96 US Patriot missiles.
Elsewhere, UN officials reported progress on the destruction of Iraq's chemical and biological weapons stocks [see pp. 38406-07].
On Sept. 12 the UN-IAEA commission confirmed in New York that of the 46,000 chemical weapons found after the war [see pp. 38164; 38308; 38361], 8,000 had been destroyed, the latest destruction being supervised by two teams (the third and fourth sent since April) who undertook an inspection of the chemical weapons depot at Muthanna, near Samarra, 115 km north-west of Baghdad.
A second biological weapons inspection team, which arrived on Sept. 20, was expected to complete its mission in early October.
News reports emerged in September that the US 1st Mechanised Division had used earthmoving vehicles and ploughs mounted on tanks with which to bury thousands of Iraqi soldiers, dead and alive, in their trenches along some 110 km on the front line.
Iraq pressed for an ICRC investigation by the International Committee of the Red Cross (ICRC) into these reports, which it regarded as evidence of US war crimes.
UN resolution approving oil sale plan
The UN Security Council on Sept. 19 adopted by 13 votes to one (Cuba) with one abstention (Yemen) Resolution 712 implementing a plan submitted by the UN Secretary-General, Javier Pérez de Cuéllar, which outlined the mechanism for the sale of Iraqi oil to the value of US$1,600 million approved earlier in August.
While the Council refused to accept Pérez de Cuéllar's recommendation to allow Iraq to sell a further US$800 million of oil to avert the imminent food and health crisis foreseen by UN aid agencies [see pp. 38361], it left open the possibility of further increases.
Six United Kingdom aid agencies issued an urgent appeal on Sept. 21 calling for the ceiling of Iraqi oil exports to be raised to US$2,500 million, claiming that the country's food and medical situation was "near collapse" .
Meanwhile, reports on Sept. 20 said that a Harvard University medical team which had recently returned from Iraq had found that the number of child deaths due to malnutrition and disease had trebled since the imposition of sanctions.
Dismissal of Prime Minister
Sa'adoun Hammadi was dismissed and replaced as Prime Minister by the Deputy Prime Minister, Muhammad Hamzah al-Zubaydi, on Sept. 13.
The Iraqi News Agency (INA) reported that Hammadi had also been dropped as a member of the Revolutionary Command Council (RCC) after failing to be re-elected to the party's regional command.
Hammadi, a Shia, who had been appointed Prime Minister in March [see p. 38083], was reported to have favoured greater political liberalization and a closer adherence to UN resolutions to end Iraq's international isolation.
According to the Middle East International of Sept 27, his dismissal came after he chose publicly to express his views during the Ba'ath Party's 10th regional congress held on Sept. 12-13.
Other reports, citing Saddam Hussein's reference on Sept. 16 to the government's "lack of serious action" , claimed that Hammadi's dismissal had stemmed from his failure to tackle the country's economic problems.
On Sept. 9 the government had introduced tough new measures designed to curb escalating food prices.
According to the Middle East Times of Sept. 24-30, the country's annual inflation rate was running at around 700 per cent.
Introduction of political parties law
Saddam Hussein on Sept. 3 formally approved a law legalizing opposition parties and ostensibly ending 23 years of one-party rule (since the 1968 coup).
The new law, proposed in early July [see p. 38361], which imposed a ban on parties based on "apostasy, sectarianism, racism, regionalism or anti-Arabism" , also barred all but the Ba'ath Party from operating in the armed forces and security services.
No party was permitted to accept funds from abroad.
Stressing that recent moves towards political reform were not to be construed as Western-style democracy, Saddam Hussein warned on Sept. 16 that anyone pursuing Western models "would not be allowed…to take any post in leadership" .
Renewed clashes in Kurdistan
Heavy fighting involving Kurdish pesh mergas (guerrillas) and government troops was reported in early September in parts of northern Iraq.
[See also p. 38451 for fighting between Kurds and Turkish forces.]
Kurdish parties had agreed on Aug. 30 to suspend further talks with the Iraqi government pending "clarification" on parts of the autonomy agreement [see also p. 38407].
In Geneva, the head of the UN Inter-Agency Humanitarian Programme for Iraq and Kuwait, Prince Sadruddin Aga Khan [see pp. 38128; 38211], appealed on Sept. 9 for restraint, saying that "serious clashes" had occurred around Kuysanjag, Kirkuk and Taqtaq.
MIDDLE EAST — ARAB WORLD
MIDDLE EAST PEACE PROCESS
Delay in approval of US loan guarantees to Israel
The intense diplomatic activity of July and August continued into September, as United States Secretary of State James Baker worked to convene a Middle East peace conference scheduled for October.
[His (seventh) visit to the region, and meetings on Sept. 16-20, will be covered in a subsequent report dealing with the lead-up to the conference.]
Attention focused in part on the (ultimately successful) efforts of the Bush administration to delay approval of US loan guarantees to Israel.
Also under discussion were the wording of the US State Department memorandum of understanding and "letters of assurances" which would define for the various parties the procedure of the peace conference, the terms of participation and US policy towards it.
On Sept. 6 President Bush called on the US Congress, which had reconvened on Sept. 2, to delay for 120 days its approval of fresh loan guarantees to Israel, on the grounds that their approval would harm prospects for a peace conference.
He said that if necessary he would use his presidential veto.
His stand was interpreted as an attempt to use economic leverage to force a halt to Jewish settlement building in the Israeli-occupied territories, at least for the duration of the peace conference.
The loan guarantees in question would enable Israel to borrow US$10,000 million from commercial banks over five years, at lower interest rates and for longer terms than would otherwise be possible.
This sum had first been mentioned in January 1991 as the amount necessary to fund the absorption of Soviet immigrants in Israel, and in February a smaller US loan guarantee to fund the housing of immigrants had only been approved after the Israeli authorities had undertaken not to use the funds in the occupied territories [see p. 38023-24].
The US administration was concerned that in the summer of 1991 Housing Minister Ariel Sharon had continued with the construction of housing for Israeli citizens in the occupied territories [see pp. 38213, 38358-59].
There was also concern among US officials that the funding would encourage Israel to continue to postpone steps to liberalize the economy [see p. 38453].
After Bush's Sept. 6 appeal to Congress, the Israeli ambassador in Washington, Zalman Shoval, presented a formal request for the loan guarantees.
If the request were to be included in a foreign aid appropriations bill already going through the Senate, it could secure approval by Sept. 30 (the end of the 1991 fiscal year).
The request had reportedly been postponed once already at the urging of the Bush administration, in April 1991.
In a speech on Sept. 8 Shamir reiterated his rejection of the US administration's linkage of loan guarantees with the peace conference, saying that the loan guarantees were a separate humanitarian issue.
The Israeli government had undertaken not to use the funds in the occupied territories, but Shamir also now declared that "the momentum of increasing immigration goes hand in hand with the momentum of settlement" .
According to Finance Minister Itzhak Moda'i, cited in the Washington Post of Sept. 8, the money raised through the loan guarantees would be used largely for job creation programmes for new immigrants.
At a news conference on Sept. 12 held to coincide with an emergency meeting of pro-Israel lobby groups in Washington, Bush said that he had "worn out the telephone" in lobbying Republican senators for their support in securing a delay which he regarded as crucial to the peace process, but that he was "up against some powerful political forces" .
As officials and the news media in various Arab countries welcomed Bush's stand on the issue, the Israeli media reacted strongly on Sept. 13, at least one newspaper quoting a comment by a US pro-Israel lobbyist that Bush's remarks bordered on the anti-semitic—a charge which was repeated in a meeting of the Israeli Cabinet on Sept. 15 by right-winger Rehavam Ze'evi of Moledet.
At the end of September Israel's loan guarantee request remained pending in both houses of Congress.
According to the Jerusalem Post of Sept. 28, pro-Israel lobbyists said that 62 senators had undertaken to endorse the guarantees in the event of a vote.
This was five short of the two-thirds majority needed to override Bush's threatened presidential veto.
On Oct. 9 the US Senate leaders officially announced their co-operation with Bush's call for a 120-day delay in introducing the necessary bill.
Challenge to UN resolution on Zionism
On Sept. 23 Bush said in his address to the UN General Assembly that the equation of Zionism with racism was "to reject Israel itself" , and that if the UN were to be viewed as a peacemaking body, the 1975 UN resolution on the subject [see p. 27487]should be repealed.
Zionism was, he said, "not a policy, but the idea that lead to the creation of a home for the Jewish people, to the state of Israel" .
On Sept. 21 UN Secretary-General Javier Pérez de Cuéllar had publicized his dissatisfaction with the relegation of the UN to observer status at the proposed peace conference.
Soviet diplomatic involvement
On Sept. 13 Bush met Boris Pankin, the Soviet Foreign Minister, in Moscow.
They discussed the wording of the memoranda to be offered to Palestinians and Israelis respectively inviting their attendance at the conference, which the Soviet Union was to co-sponsor.
On a visit to Tunis which concluded on Sept. 20, the Soviet Deputy Minister of Foreign Affairs Aleksandr Belonogov met PLO chairman Yassir Arafat three times.
Belonogov later said that he had sought to promote "mutual understanding" between the USA and Palestinian representatives over the wording of the memorandum.
Although the special Soviet envoy to the Middle East Yevgeny Primakov visited the region in mid-September, his priority had been the discussion of economic issues.
On Sept. 20 he said that prospects for an October peace conference were still uncertain, although the USA was "for the first time bringing pressure to bear on Israel" .
He explained that he had sought new loans and investment by the Gulf states in the Soviet Union, and the expansion of trade (in the case of Iran and Turkey).
Arab League meeting
An Arab League ministerial meeting held in Cairo on Sept. 10-12 was attended by 18 foreign ministers.
It resolved to form a committee composed of representatives of Syria, Egypt, Jordan, Lebanon and Palestine, to meet before the peace conference, and "to co-ordinate the positions of these countries on the Arab-Israeli conflict and the Palestine question" .
The meeting also discussed the modification of some of the terms of the Arab League boycott on companies dealing with Israel.
MIDDLE EAST — ARAB WORLD
ISRAEL
Budget for 1992
In the draft budget for 1992 which was approved by the Cabinet on Sept. 4 spending on defence was set to rise by 6 per cent, bringing it to 14,800 million shekels (US$4,770 million).
The budget deficit would increase to 6.3 per cent of gross domestic product (GDP), with overall expenditure set at 79,100 million shekels (US$34,070 million).
[For 1991 budget see p. 38065.]
All ministries except the Defence Ministry would have to achieve a 3 per cent cut in operating expenses, and old-age pensions in the national insurance scheme would be reduced.
Cuts in social welfare and education included reduced subsidies for children's day-care centres.
The budget, which was subject to a Knesset vote later in the year and which assumed US Congressional approval of fresh loan guarantees [see p. 37749]had been drawn up contrary to recommendations by Finance Minister Itzhak Moda'i for a US$470 million cut in the military budget.
The military, and Defence Minister Moshe Arens, had argued that national survival depended on the development of the Arrow missile system [see p. 38310], a superior radar system, and other projects.
According to the Washington Post of Sept. 8, there was increasing US concern over the Israeli government's hesitancy in liberalizing the economy, and over the continuing high level of public spending on housing and job creation necessary to encourage settlement in new areas [see also pp. 38213; 38359].
 "Economists and even some American Jewish leaders contend" , the paper commented, "that massive, unconditional financing for Israeli immigration now might simply help the government avoid needed economic reforms." 
The draft budget cut by 15,000 units the plans for public housing construction in 1992, but the Housing Ministry on Sept. 7 publicized details of a major housing construction plan for 1992 which would see the creation of a new belt of housing around Jerusalem and 12 new Jewish towns inside Israel, along the border with the West Bank.
The approval by the parliamentary Finance Committee on Sept. 20 of US$6.5 million of investments for industrial and infrastructure development in the occupied territories (including the Golan Heights) prompted protests by the opposition United Workers' Party (Mapam).
On Sept. 24 Prime Minister Itzhak Shamir and Housing and Construction Minister Ariel Sharon attended the official opening of the settlement at Tzur Yigal, 50 meters west of Israel's pre-1967 border with Jordan.
Trade liberalization package — Partial privatization of IC
New customs duties for imports introduced on Sept. 1 had the effect of replacing most of Israel's non-tariff barriers with higher import tariffs (which would decrease annually over coming years).
Most of the new tariffs would be between 20 and 40 per cent in the first year, with a 75 per cent duty on imported clothing.
Restrictions on agricultural imports remained in place.
At the beginning of September approval was given for the part sale of Israel Chemicals (IC), the most profitable state enterprise with the eventual goal of reducing the state's holding in the company to 28 per cent.
A committee composed of Shamir and two other Cabinet ministers decided that initially a 25 per cent stake in the company would be sold.
A "strategic partner" would then be sought to buy a 15 per cent stake.
Visit by Romanian President
On a visit to Israel on Sept. 2-5, President Ion Iliescu of Romania assured Shamir that the Romanian government would work to counter manifestations of anti-semitism in Romania.
He was also reported to have said that Romania would downgrade its ties with the PLO.
An agreement on mutual protection of investments and two agreements on economic co-operation were signed.
This was the first visit by a Romanian head of state to Israel.
MIDDLE EAST — ARAB WORLD
PALESTINIAN AFFAIRS
PNC meeting
The 20th session of the Palestine National Council (PNC), the Palestinian parliament-in-exile, was held at the Club des Pins in Algiers on Sept. 23-28 [for 19th session on Nov. 12-15, 1988, see p. 36438].
On the agenda were the issue of Palestinian participation in the proposed Middle East peace conference [see also p. 38452], and the election of a new executive committee and central council for the Palestine Liberation Organization (PLO).
Israel refused to allow 180 Palestinian delegates from the occupied territories to attend the council meeting, threatening legal measures against them if they did so.
This was in spite of the PLO executive committee's requests to the five permanent members of the United Nations Security Council to put pressure on Israel to allow the delegates from the occupied territories to attend.
Resolution welcoming peace conference
After a series of heated debates the PNC session ended with a resolution which welcomed "the calls by US President Bush and Soviet President Gorbachev to convene a conference to settle the conflict in the Middle East" and the positions taken by the European Communities and the Non-aligned Movement.
The PNC reiterated its support for the peace plan it had approved in 1988 [see p. 36438], which was based on UN Security Council Resolutions 242 and 338, and the guaranteeing of the legitimate national rights of the Palestinian people.
The PNC declared that the "success of efforts" to convene the peace conference depended on progress towards achieving a number of objectives: the application of UN Resolutions 242 and 338 to ensure an Israeli withdrawal from the occupied territories, including Jerusalem, and the acceptance of the principle of the exchange of land for peace; the end of Israeli settlements in the occupied territories; the right of the PLO to form its own delegation to the peace conference from "inside and outside the homeland, including Jerusalem" ; and the achievement of a comprehensive solution which had international legitimacy.
A spokesman for Israeli Prime Minister Itzhak Shamir said that he did not see "any change or sign of moderation" in the PNC resolutions and that the PLO "was not party to the political process and we will not negotiate with it" .
Election of PLO executive committee
At the end of the session the PNC elected the PLO's new executive committee, increasing the number of members from 14 to 18.
Mahmoud Abul Abbas, leader of the Palestine Liberation Front, was not re-elected (he had earlier announced that he would not nominate himself for membership), following the recommendation of a special committee set up to investigate his abortive seaborne raid against Israel in May 1990 [see pp. 37443-44].
This raid had prompted the USA to suspend its dialogue with the PLO [see pp. 37547-48], and it was hoped that this dialogue would now be resumed.
Non-participation of Hamas and PNSF
Although PLO chairman Yassir Arafat had made strenuous efforts to ensure a consensus within the organization in advance of the PNC meeting, neither Hamas nor the Damascus-based Palestine National Salvation Front (PNSF) and its affiliated organizations attended the Algiers session, while representatives of Islamic Jihad attended only in an independent capacity.
Ibrahim Ghawshah, official spokesman of Hamas, rejected the PNC resolutions and said that it would "confront" the peace conference by escalating the uprising in the occupied territories, and would co-ordinate with Islamic movements to pressure Arab leaders not to attend.
Khalid al-Fahum, leader of the PNSF and former speaker of the PNC also rejected the PNC resolutions, saying that its stance was not representative of all Palestinians.
This view was echoed by the Popular Front for the Liberation of Palestine-General Command (PFLP-GC).
DFLP split
The Democratic Front for the Liberation of Palestine (DFLP), the second largest group in the PLO, split into two separate wings on Sept 13.
Yassir Abd Rabbuh, deputy secretary-general of the DFLP until his dismissal in April [see p. 38167], was elected secretary-general of the new more moderate, non-marxist wing, which was close to Arafat's Fatah movement.
Rabbuh, who was the DFLP representative on the PLO executive committee, said that he was dropping all links with Nayef Hawatmeh's Damascus-based DFLP.
Intifada — Extension of Bir Zeit closure
A general strike, called in the occupied territories on Sept. 9 to mark the 47th month of the intifada, was well supported.
Two Palestinians were shot dead by Israeli army patrols on the West Bank and a man and woman were killed in Gaza allegedly for collaboration with the Israeli authorities.
A further six Arabs were killed for collaboration in mid-September, and Israeli soldiers killed two Arabs during clashes on the West Bank on Sept. 25.
Israeli Defence Minister Moshe Arens ordered the reopening on Sept. 4 of the Islamic University in Gaza, one of six closed by Israel at the start of the intifada in 1987, as "part of a continuing policy by the government to open all universities" .
All except Bir Zeit (on the West Bank) had now opened or were preparing to open, but Bir Zeit had been informed at the end of August that its closure would be extended by three months for failing to ensure that its campus would not be used as a centre for anti-Israeli activity.
MIDDLE EAST — ARAB WORLD
LEBANON
Negotiations on hostages
Diplomatic negotiations to end the hostage crisis, launched in August by UN Secretary-General Javier Pérez de Cuéllar [see p. 38405], achieved some successes with the Israeli-backed South Lebanon Army (SLA) releasing 51 Arab prisoners on Sept. 11; the body of a kidnapped Israeli serviceman was returned on the same day, and British hostage Jackie Mann was freed in Beirut on Sept. 24.
Release of Arab prisoners and hostage negotiations
The SLA's release of 51 Arab prisoners from the al-Khiam prison in the southern Lebanon "security zone" on Sept. 11 coincided with Israel handing over the bodies of nine members of the pro-Iranian radical Shia Hezbollah organization, and followed the receipt by Israel of information about two of its servicemen missing since 1986.
The Damascus-based Democratic Front for the Liberation of Palestine (DFLB) on Sept. 11 shipped to Israel, via the International Committee of the Red Cross in Vienna, the body of a Druze sergeant in the Israeli army, Samir Assad, kidnapped near Sidon in 1983.
Israel announced that it would allow in return Ali Abu Hilal, a Palestinian activist expelled from the Israeli-occupied West Bank in 1986, to return to the territory.
Speaking on Sept. 11 Hussein Musavi, a member of the ruling council of Hezbollah, predicted further releases.
Progress in the hostage exchange deal had been held up, since the release in August of Edward Tracey [see p. 38405], by Israel's refusal to make unilateral gestures without receiving information on seven Israeli servicemen listed as missing in action.
Uri Lubrani, Israel's chief negotiator, confirmed that further information about the missing Israelis would be met by the release of more prisoners and bodies.
When asked whether a general hostage settlement was close Pérez de Cuéllar said in Tehran that "I am moving in that direction" .
On Sept. 12 the Revolutionary Justice Organization (RJO) in Beirut made its first formal announcement that it was holding British hostage Jackie Mann, kidnapped in Beirut in May 1989 [see p. 36671], while Islamic Jihad issued a statement welcoming the releases and accompanied by a photograph of United States hostage, Terry Anderson.
US Assistant Secretary of State for Middle Eastern affairs John Kelly held talks on the hostages and other issues in Beirut on Sept. 14-15 with President Elias Hrawi, Prime Minister Umar Karami and National Assembly president Hussain al-Hussaini.
The Kuwait newspaper, Sawr al-Kuwait, reported that a secret meeting took place on Sept. 14 between Kelly and the head of the Iranian Foreign Ministry's Middle East department, Mohammed Kazem Assadi Khonsari, who was reported to have held talks with Lebanese politicians as well as with the kidnappers.
The Lebanese Foreign and Expatriate Affairs Minister, Faris Buwayz, visited Iran on Sept. 14-17 to discuss the hostages.
Release of Mann
The RJO released Mann, 77, in Beirut on Sept. 24; he was taken to Damascus and then flown to the UK.
In a statement the RJO said that it had decided to free Mann because of the "immense efforts" of the UN Secretary-General, and that his release would "be the prelude for the next stage to speed up the closure of the file of the prisoners and the hostages" .
Mann's release had been expected on Sept. 18 when the Iranian news agency IRNA office in Beirut had predicted that he would be free "within hours" .
On Sept. 19 the RJO announced that it was freezing his release because Israel had reneged on a pledge to release 80 Arab detainees in the earlier transfer—20 more than the 51 prisoners and nine bodies which were handed over.
The RJO also reiterated once again that the release of Sheikh Abdel-Karim Obeid was still a "priority" [see p. 38405].
Western diplomats in Beirut believed that the delay was due to an internal dispute among the kidnap groups, or with their radical supporters in Iran, over the political value of each hostage, as well as concern among the kidnappers about their personal protection from future prosecution.
Ministerial resignations — Security pact with Syria
The Shia Amal leader Nabi Berri resigned on Aug. 31 as Minister of State and the (Shia) Housing and Co-operatives Minister Mohammed Baydun also left the government over the decision to send an official delegation to Libya to mark the opening of "the great man-made river" [see p. 38409].
Berri announced his decision while addressing a rally to commemorate the 13th anniversary of the disappearance in Libya of Amal's founder, Imam Moussa Sadr.
Sending the delegation to Libya, Berri said, was an affront to the memory of the Imam, for whose disappearance Amal blamed the Libyan authorities.
Berri also criticized the government for excessive secrecy and nepotism.
Gen. Michel Aoun, the rebel Maronite leader who was granted asylum in France on Aug. 29 [see p. 38405], also criticized the government, in his case "because they turned over their country to Syria" .
Interviewed in the Beirut newspaper An Nahar on Sept. 1, Aoun called Lebanon's leaders "marionettes who should be tried for high treason" ; the French magazine Paris Match on Sept. 7 quoted him as saying that the Syrians would only last a year and that he was the future saviour of Lebanon.
The French government announced that it would take the strongest measures to ensure that Aoun met the conditions attached to his asylum, which included refraining from making public statements on political issues.
Minister of National Defence Michel al-Murr and the Minister of the Interior Maj.-Gen.
Sami al-Khatib signed an agreement with Syria on Sept. 1, which included a security pact between the two countries, as well as plans jointly to combat the drugs trade in eastern Lebanon.
UNIFIL casualties
One Palestinian guerrilla and one Swedish member of the nine-nation UN Interim Force in Lebanon (UNIFIL) were killed, and five UN soldiers were wounded in an incident involving the Israeli-backed South Lebanon Army (SLA) on Sept. 13.
According to a UN spokesman the SLA opened fire (which the SLA described as self-defence) during negotiations to free a group of 14 unarmed Swedish and French members of UNIFIL who were being held hostage by three Palestinian guerrillas.
The two surviving Palestinians were both captured; they were part of a group, originally six in number, who had landed in two rubber dinghies at Naquarah after an Israeli naval patrol boat had diverted their intended attack on Israel.
Three of them had been detained by UNIFIL, but the other three had seized the 14 hostages.
A spokesman for the mainstream al-Fatah movement of the Palestine Liberation Organization (PLO) denied the Israeli claim that the six guerrillas were affiliated to al-Fatah.
In a separate incident on Sept. 14 a Nepalese member of UNIFIL was killed and another wounded in a clash with an armed group near the village of Yatar.
MIDDLE EAST — ARAB WORLD
SYRIA
Foreign Minister's visit to Germany
The Minister of Foreign Affairs, Farooq ash-Shar", visited Germany on Sept. 16-17 for talks with his German counterpart Hans-Dietrich Genscher.
Reports in the Western media claimed that the visit was linked to wider negotiations aimed at achieving a comprehensive settlement of the hostage crisis [see p. 38454].
However, in an official joint statement Shar "and Genscher stated only that they had discussed" the situation in the Middle East, the state of the Middle East peace process and bilateral questions".
There was some speculation that the kidnap groups in Lebanon were trying to add the Lebanese Hamadei brothers to the list of those who might included in an arrangement for a staged release of Western, Israeli and Palestinian hostages and prisoners.
In April 1988 Abbas Ali Hamadei had been sentenced to 13 years imprisonment in Germany for complicity in the kidnapping of two German citizens in Beirut in 1987 [see p. 36046].
His brother, Mohammed Ali Hamadei, had been sentenced to life imprisonment in Germany in May 1989 for his role in the hijacking of a United States Trans World Airlines aircraft in 1985 [see p. 36666].
Two German aid workers, Thomas Kemptner and Heinrich Strubig, had been held hostage in Lebanon since 1989.
MIDDLE EAST — ARAB WORLD
IRAN
Visit by UN Secretary-General
The UN Secretary-General, Javier Pérez de Cuéllar, held talks in Tehran with President Ali Akbar Hashemi Rafsanjani and Foreign Minister Ali Akbar Vellayati on Sept. 10-13, primarily on the implementation of UN Resolution 598 ending the 1980-88 Iran-Iraq war [see pp. 35600; 36568-70], but reportedly also covering terms for the release of Western hostages still held in Lebanon.
Pérez de Cuéllar's mission followed the release on Aug. 2 of a UN report assessing damage resulting from the Iran-Iraq war [see pp. 38309; 38408].
It was expected to lead to the appointment of an impartial body to determine responsibility for the conflict.
In late August Iraqi and Iranian officials had held talks in Teheran in an effort to resolve outstanding issues relating to the return of Iranian prisoners of war [see pp. 37727; 37873], officially estimated by Iran to total some 5,000, and the return of between 50 and 150 Iraqi aircraft flown to Iran during the Gulf War [see p. 37942].
Hopes of securing the release of Western hostages with the help of Iranian mediation resurfaced after Rafsanjani was quoted on Sept. 12 as saying that Iran would "do whatever is possible" to help Pérez de Cuéllar negotiate an end to the hostage crisis.
Pérez de Cuéllar, in turn, maintained on the same occasion that he was "very encouraged, because it is a further step" .
Reports that the Israeli serviceman Ron Arad was being held in Teheran were denied by Deputy Foreign Minister Ali Mohammad Besharati on Sept. 24.
On Sept. 25, in the first official comment on the affair, Vellayati in New York denied the allegations currently gaining wide currency in the United States that Iran had negotiated with campaign officials of the Republican party to delay the release of the US diplomatic hostages on the eve of the 1980 presidential elections [see pp. 38327-28].
A US federal grand jury on Sept. 4 indicted two military contractors, based in Florida and in Japan, on charges of illegally selling spare parts for fighter aircraft to Iran.
Visit by Soviet envoy
Soviet President Mikhail Gorbachev's special envoy Yevgeny Primakov held talks with Rafsanjani and Vellayati during a visit on Sept. 17-18.
Tehran Radio reported that the talks had centred on the resolution of the Afghan problem and on recent trilateral meetings in Islamabad and Teheran [see pp. 38338-39; 38394].
Reports continued of tacit Iranian support for the Soviet Moslem republics [see p. 38409].
On Sept. 3 the Supreme National Security Council (SNSC) said that it was ready to assist Soviet republics in whatever way it could.
The Independent of Sept. 19 suggested that a recent Iranian proposal for a Moslem "new world order" had encompassed independent Soviet Moslem republics.
Indictment of Bakhtiar murder suspect
Massoud Hendi, an Iranian businessman, was charged in Paris on Sept. 21 with complicity in the murder there on Aug. 6 of former Iranian Prime Minister Shahpour Bakhtiar [see p. 38409].
It was reported on Sept. 6 that three Iranians had been arrested on similar charges in Istanbul.
An agreement to increase contacts aimed at resolving the financial dispute between Iran and France [see p. 37929]was confirmed on Sept. 27 following a meeting in New York between Vellayati and his French counterpart, Roland Dumas.
Human rights conference
Delegates including Western human rights activists and diplomats attended a human rights conference in Tehran on Sept. 9-12, which was described by some commentators as an indication of the Iranian government's desire to end its international isolation.
[For recent concern expressed by the UN Human Rights Commission over Iran's human rights record see p. 37929.]
Eight opposition politicians were sentenced on Sept. 23 to prison terms of up to three years on charges of "acting as a fifth column" during the Iran-Iraq war.
MIDDLE EAST — ARAB WORLD
KUWAIT
Defence pact with USA
The Defence Minister, Shaikh Ali Sabah as Salim as Sabah, and United States Defence Secretary Dick Cheney, meeting in Washington on Sept. 19, signed a 10-year defence agreement providing for an unspecified stockpile of US military equipment in Kuwait, the use of Kuwaiti ports by US troops, and joint training exercises.
The pact, regarded as a possible prelude to a wider security arrangement between the USA and the member states of the Gulf Co-Operation Council (GCC), ended weeks of speculation about Kuwait's efforts to secure Western military guarantees to underwrite its security [see pp. 38364; 38407].
On Aug. 27 the USA had announced that 1,500 US troops would remain in Kuwait for another few months.
All 3,700 US forces currently remaining in Kuwait had been due to leave in September, and the US announcement thus revived reports of the Kuwaiti government's continuing interest in securing a Western military presence in the country [see p. 38407].
When the 10-year defence agreement was initialled on Sept. 4, a US Defence Department spokesman was quoted in the Washington Post of Sept. 6 as saying that it did "not in any way open the door for permanent military bases in Kuwait" .
On Sept 18 Libya's President, Col. Moamer al Kadhafi denounced the accord which, he said, would "heighten feelings of hostility towards the USA" .
Iran's Supreme National Security Council (SNSC) on Sept. 21 expressed concern over the pact and said that it would seek "explanations from Kuwait on the contents of the agreement" .
On Sept. 24 Iraq formally requested the Arab League to expel Kuwait for concluding an agreement which, it claimed, was in violation of the Arab League Charter.
Renewed allegations of human rights violations
A report by the US-based human rights organization Middle East Watch on Sept. 11 accused the "highest levels of the Kuwaiti government" of complicity in murder, torture, unlawful detention and deportation in its "quest…to restructure Kuwaiti society in a fashion deemed more reliable politically" [see p. 38166].
The report, which highlighted the "disturbing unwillingness" of the US administration to protest against Kuwait's continued violation of human rights, also described the recent trials of alleged collaborators [see pp. 38212; 38308-09]as "charades" , characterized by confessions extracted under duress.
On Sept. 11 the government announced that nine Kuwaiti members of the former Iraqi-backed regime would not be tried as collaborators.
Latest estimates of Gulf war damages
According to the Middle East Times of Sept. 30, government estimates which put the damage to Kuwait of the Gulf war at between US$50,000 million and US$100,000 million [see p. 38166]had been scaled down to US$20,000 million.
Damage to the industrial sector as a result of the Gulf war was calculated on Sept. 2 by the Minister of Commerce and Industry, Abdullah Hassan Jaralla as totalling KD25,000 million (US$85,800 million); that inflicted on the oil sector, estimated by the Oil Minister Hamud Abdullah al Raqaba on Sept. 19, at around US$75,000 million.
A report on Sept. 19 said that the World Health Organization (WHO) expected death rates in Kuwait resulting from oil fire pollution to increase by 10 per cent in 1992 [see pp. 38119; 38166].
The US Export-Import Bank (Eximbank) on Sept. 20 signed an agreement with the government to finance up to US$2,000 million of US exports.
Foreign visits by Amir
The Amir of Kuwait, Shaikh Jabir al Ahmad al Jabir as Sabah visited Saudi Arabia, Oman, the UAE, Qatar, Egypt and Syria between Sept. 3 and Sept. 19.
Report on alleged Bubiyan incursion
A report by the United Nations Iraq-Kuwait Observation Mission (UNIKOM), released on Sept. 4, found no evidence to substantiate Kuwaiti allegations of an Iraqi military incursion on the island of Bubiyan [see p. 38407].
MIDDLE EAST — ARAB WORLD
GCC
Foreign Ministers' meeting
The Ministerial Council composed of Foreign Ministers from the six-member Gulf Co-operation Council (GCC) held its 40th session in Jeddah, Saudi Arabia, on Sept. 14-15.
A statement issued after the meeting condemned Iraq for delaying the release of Kuwaiti prisoners and expressed satisfaction at the "level of co-ordination" between parties to the Damascus Declaration on regional defence.
Ministers also affirmed their "eagerness to find a common basis for constructive co-operation between the GCC member countries and the Islamic Republic of Iran" .
Tension between the GCC and Iran had reportedly been fuelled by Iran's increasing isolation from regional security arrangements.
The Omani Minister of State for Foreign Affairs, Yusuf al-Alawi Abdullah, had visited Iran on Sept. 12-13 for talks with senior leaders including President Hashemi Ali Akbar Rafsanjani, and on Sept. 28 the GCC Foreign Ministers met Iranian Foreign Minister Ali Akbar Vellayati in New York, after which the GCC Secretary-General, Abdullah Yacoub Bishara of Kuwait, referred to "very hopeful" prospects of co-operation.
The GCC Finance Ministers met in Riyadh, Saudi Arabia, on Sept. 10-11, and the Oil Ministers in Jeddah on Sept. 21.
MIDDLE EAST — ARAB WORLD
ALGERIA
Lifting of state of seige
On Sept. 22 the President's office announced that the state of seige in force since June 5 [see p. 38312]would be lifted on Sept. 29.
The next day Interior Minister Abdellatif Rahal explained that a bill to be introduced shortly in the National Assembly would allow the government when necessary "to have recourse to the armed forces to help the security forces to keep order" .
A second bill would impose further (unspecified) conditions on the organizers of demonstrations, and border controls would be intensified [see also below].
Hunger strike by fundamentalist leaders — Arrest of Hachani
Eight leaders of the opposition fundamentalist Islamic Salvation Front (FIS) held at Blida military prison, including Abassi Madani and Ali Belhadj, went on hunger strike on Sept. 8.
Two days later Belhadj was hospitalized, to be followed shortly by Madani, but on Sept. 19 both were reported to have ended the strike.
The hunger strikers' demands were:(i) equal treatment of all Algerians before the law (they were ordered to be tried by military courts, whilst other detainees involved in the FIS strike of May-June were not);(ii) the creation of a commission to investigate the events of the army crackdown of June;(iii) freedom for the FIS prisoners to consult with the organization's executive bodies; and (iv) political prisoner status.
Abdelkader Hachani was arrested on Sept. 27.
He was the last prominent member of Madani's more radical faction of the FIS to be arrested.
FLN opposition to tax proposal — Devaluation of dinar
National Liberation Front (FLN) deputies in the National Assembly voted successfully on Aug. 26 to amend a tax proposal which had been introduced by the non-party transitional government in compliance with International Monetary Fund (IMF) recommendations [see p. 38312].
Acting, according to Middle East International of Aug. 30, "almost like a real parliament" , the Assembly voted to amend legislation for a new sales tax by exempting from it all food and medical products, paper for schools and journals and certain other products.
The tax, part of an emergency budget for 1991, was originally intended as a way of reducing subsidies on a wide range of consumer prices, to give the government some scope to cut import taxes on raw and semi-finished goods for industry.
FLN deputies, elected in 1987 when Algeria was effectively a single-party state, were concerned about voters' reactions to resulting price rises.
The dinar was devalued by 22 per cent on Sept. 29, as a counter-inflationary measure (US$1.00=AD21.112 as at Oct. 7, 1991).
The IMF was understood to have urged such a devaluation, when Algerian representatives visited Washington earlier in the month.
Tension on border with Mali
Instability in Mali sent at least 15,000 Tuareg refugees fleeing into the southern Algerian departments of Tamanrasset, Adrar and Illizi.
On Aug. 29 the Interior Minister Rahal told French radio that he was concerned that armed forces personnel among the refugees intended to establish bases from which to attack Malian forces.
On Sept. 2 it was announced that Algeria would once again attempt to find a "lasting political solution" to the Tuareg question through diplomatic discussions with its neighbours.
Previous negotiations had resulted in the Tamanrasset agreement of January 1991 [see p. 37947], but the implementation of this agreement had been complicated by the change of regime in Mali in March [see pp. 38083-84].
As the Algerian media reported extreme insecurity among the inhabitants of some southern towns, and some newspapers speculated about hidden French or Libyan involvement in the situation, the government claimed that it was unnecessary to send military reinforcements to the region.
Prime Minister Sid-Ahmed Ghozali warned on Sept. 5 that the Tuareg issue was open to internal political exploitation, adding: "The army is where it should be." 
Visit by Vellayati
Iranian Foreign Affairs Minister Ali Akbar Vellayati visited Algiers on Sept. 1-2.
He had discussions with Ghozali, Foreign Minister Lakhdar Brahimi and President Chadli Benjedid, when he was reported by the Iranian media to have urged the administration to attempt to solve "with understanding" its problems with Algerian pan-Islamists.
MIDDLE EAST — ARAB WORLD
TUNISIA
Uncovering of alleged fundamentalist conspiracy
The government claimed on Sept. 7 to have thwarted another armed conspiracy by Moslem fundamentalists of the Nahda movement [for May coup plot allegations see pp. 38215; 38363].
The story of a plot had been leaked to various newspapers, and on Sept. 19 the authorities put on public display various small firearms, improvised grenades, loudhailers, photocopying equipment and other items which they claimed were being used to make weapons.
According to Middle East International of Sept. 27, news of the coup attempt was "greeted with scepticism both by Western diplomats and indeed by the population itself" .
Arrests followed the discovery, which, it was noted, provided the authorities with a reason to maintain a presence on university campuses as students returned to classes after the summer break.
MIDDLE EAST — ARAB WORLD
WESTERN SAHARA
Ceasefire — Arrival of UN mission
A ceasefire came into effect as planned on Sept. 6, in spite of accusations and counter-accusations by the Polisario Front and the Moroccan government about renewed military activity in the area in the preceding three days.
Polisario announced that its forces had begun to relocate in the assembly areas allocated to them for the period of the ceasefire.
There were already 240 UN observers in place in 10 regions of the territory.
Armed UN units, so far comprising 100 troops from the United States, Canada, Poland, France and Switzerland, under the command of Canadian Maj.-Gen.
Armand Roy, were to be deployed in 10 observation posts on both sides of the "walls of sand" which Morocco had built since 1981 to enclose the two-thirds of the Western Sahara which was under its control.
A referendum, in which Western Saharans were to vote for integration into Morocco or independence under Polisario, was still scheduled for Jan. 26, 1992.
Johannes Manz, director of the UN Mission for the Referendum in Western Sahara (Minurso) operation, reached Al-Ayoun, the Western Saharan capital, on Sept. 21.
In both the government and the opposition press in Morocco, the situation in the Western Sahara was meanwhile becoming increasingly a focus for nationalist commentary.
The Moroccan news media reacted unfavourably to a resolution passed at the Sept. 9-13 session of the European Parliament for a delegation to be sent to observe the ceasefire.
On 26 Sept.
King Hassan went to Washington on a state visit, when it was expected that he would discuss the question of a revised voting list for the Western Sahara.
Reports alleging second "Green March" 
Algerian radio reported that, according a Sept. 28 "Saharan Information Ministry" statement, 30,000 Moroccans had, unnoted by foreign observers, crossed into the north of the territory and converged on Al-Ayoun.
The influx of people evoked the "Green March" of 1975, when several hundred thousand Moroccans had crossed into the Western Sahara in an effort to legitimize Moroccan claims on the territory.
According to Spanish press reports, the most recent migrants, who joined around 7,500 Moroccans already living there, were photographed and given voter registration forms by Moroccan officials and then provided with shelter.
MIDDLE EAST — ARAB WORLD
AMU
Casablanca summit
The Arab Maghreb Union (AMU) summit, held in Casablanca, Morocco, on Sept. 15-16, managed to avoid discord on the subjects of Western Sahara and plans for a Middle East peace conference.
The meeting was attended by the heads of state of Mauritania, Morocco, Algeria and Tunisia, while Libya was represented by the "Libyan number two" Maj. Abdel Salem Jalloud.
Although King Hassan of Morocco had hoped to muster support on the issue of the Western Sahara, the meeting concluded that it was a matter to be dealt with by the United Nations [see also above, this page].
After a general discussion of the planned Middle East peace conference [see p. 38452], support for the national rights of the Palestinians was reaffirmed and Israel's intransigence and continuation of its settlement policy condemned.
The summit called for the lifting of the blockade on Iraq, for the ending of European Community (EC) sanctions against Libya, and for the revitalization of the Arab League.
The problems of the Maghrebian population of Europe were also mentioned in the final communiqué; the Council of Foreign Ministers was instructed to explore ways to "protect the rights of that community and ensure its dignity" .
MIDDLE EAST — ARAB WORLD
JORDAN
Interior Minister Jawdat al-Subul announced on Sept. 11 that most of the 99 members of the Prophet Mohammad Army arrested in July and August were to be released as an act of mercy, but that 18 were to stand trial in connection with a car bomb explosion which had injured a policeman; the group was also suspected of planning to kidnap one of King Hussein's sons, and to conduct a campaign of bombings and assassinations in an attempt to force the King to oppose the United States-Soviet sponsored Middle East peace process.
MIDDLE EAST — ARAB WORLD
QATAR
The first phase of production, expected to yield 22,667,000 cubic metres of gas per day, began on Sept. 3 the North Field (off the north-east coast of Qatar)— the world's largest known gas field.
INTERNATIONAL
DISARMAMENT
US offer on tactical and strategic nuclear weapons
In what was hailed as a major initiative, US President George Bush on Sept. 27 announced proposals aimed at substantially reducing US air-, land- and sea-based nuclear weapons.
In a nationally televised speech, Bush said that developments in the Soviet Union had made it possible for the United States unilaterally to "take steps to make the world a less dangerous place than ever before in the nuclear age" .
He called on the Soviet Union to join with the United States in taking advantage of this "historic opportunity" .
Inviting the Soviet Union to enter into negotiations on the elimination of all intercontinental ballistic missiles with multiple warheads, Bush declared that he was lifting the alert status of all long-range Minuteman II missiles, scheduled for eventual deactivation under the recently concluded Strategic Arms Reduction Treaty (START)[see p. 38320].
Bush also announced that he was ordering the immediate lifting of the alert status of all strategic bombers and had directed their weapons to be put in storage.
In a move reportedly designed to persuade the Soviet Union to abandon its rail-mounted mobile intercontinental missile system, the SS-24, Bush said that the USA had given up plans to develop mobile versions of the MX and Midgetman missiles and that a programme to build the short-range attack missile (SRAM) had also been cancelled.
Signalling his willingness to make key concessions, Bush also hinted that the USA would drop its resistance to formal negotiated restrictions on the deployment of sea-launched cruise missiles (SLBMs) —naval versions of the Tomahawk cruise missile scrapped under the 1987 Intermediate Nuclear Forces (INF) treaty [see pp. 35601-03]—in which the USA enjoyed a numerical and technical advantage [see pp. 38255; 38320].
Reaffirming his administration's commitment to a streamlined nuclear force, Bush announced that he was placing all strategic nuclear forces under a single commander.
Despite the sweeping nature of Bush's proposals, which went beyond the 30 per cent cut in strategic nuclear weapons agreed under START [see p. 38320], only a small proportion of the US nuclear arsenal was expected to be affected, with the "triad" of ground-launched missiles, submarine-based weapons, and long-range bombers remaining intact.
US nuclear forces in Europe were also unlikely to be affected, with plans unchanged for the deployment of 500 tactical air-to-surface missiles (TASMs) by the end of the 1990s.
The much-criticised B-2 stealth bomber programme, estimated to cost US$865,000,000 for each plane [see p. 38184], and the Seawolf submarine programme, were also likely to go ahead; the impact on the ballistic missile force, besides the Minuteman II, was uncertain.
The long-term financial savings generated by the cuts were expected to be modest.
Soviet and European reactions
Bush's unilateral offer met with wide, if sometimes, cautious approval.
Soviet President Mikhail Gorbachev said on Sept. 28 that it demonstrated "the commitment of the US administration and President Bush personally to the process of nuclear disarmament" , but added that it was "still premature to assess the whole scope of these proposals" especially as they pertained to cuts elsewhere in Europe.
On Sept. 29 Soviet Foreign Minister Boris Pankin said in New York that the Soviet Union would seek to match Bush's proposals by "reciprocal actions" .
The UK Prime Minister, John Major, who welcomed the Bush initiative on Sept. 27, stressed that the UK would retain an "adequate conventional and nuclear weapons" force to ensure peace in Europe.
On Sept. 28 the United Kingdom announced that it was scrapping its short-range battlefield nuclear weapons but would continue with plans to arm the Navy with the multi-warhead Trident D-5 submarine-launched missile.
President François Mitterrand of France, while praising the Bush plan on Sept. 28, also declared that France would not abolish its nuclear weapons.
Welcoming Bush's proposals on Sept. 28 as "a decision of historic dimensions" , the German Chancellor Helmut Kohl noted that they implied the removal of all short-range missiles from Germany.
Reports in late August said that Germany had increased pressure on its western allies to agree to a ban on short-range nuclear weapons and was locked in conflict with France over its refusal to cancel the Hades short-range nuclear missile programme.
China on Sept. 29 welcomed Bush's proposals but gave no details of plans for its strategic arsenal of 12 intercontinental and 60 medium-range nuclear missiles.
Biological arms control conference
Experts from 118 signatory countries met in Geneva on Sept. 9-27 for the third review conference of the 1972 Biological Weapons Convention [see p. 25237-39].
Although initial reports had suggested that delegates were divided over key issues pertaining to site inspections and verification, the meeting agreed to strengthen measures to enforce the treaty and delegated a working group to study the feasibility of monitoring mechanisms.
On Sept. 5 the Guardian had reported, on the basis of US sources, that as many as 11 countries—Iraq, Syria, Egypt, Libya, Israel, the Soviet Union, China, North Korea, Vietnam, Laos and possibly Taiwan—had violated the 1972 Convention.
Argentina, Brazil and Chile formally agreed in Mendoza, Argentina, on Sept. 5 to ban chemical and biological weapons.
Resumption of CFE and "Open Skies" talks
Discussions aimed at the reduction of military manpower under the Treaty on Conventional Forces in Europe (CFE) signed in November 1990 [see p. 37838], known as the CFE-1A talks, resumed in Vienna on Sept. 5 after being adjourned in March following a formal suspension in February [see pp. 38027; 38122; 38217; 38314].
The third round of "Open Skies" talks began in Vienna on Sept. 9 after being suspended in Budapest in May 1990 [see p. 38255].
Hungary on Sept. 17 ratified the CFE treaty [for Czechoslovak ratification see p. 38365].
Inspections under CFE
Soviet military inspectors, acting for the first time under the CFE Treaty, completed inspections of French and UK military sites (the latter in Germany) on Sept. 20 and 21 [for Soviet inspections under INF treaty see p. 38217].
INTERNATIONAL
CSCE
Human rights conference
The third Conference on the Human Dimension [see pp. 37550-51]of the Conference on Security and Co-operation in Europe (CSCE) opened in Moscow on Sept. 10.
The proceedings, the ministerial phase of which, held on Sept. 10-12, was attended by Foreign Ministers from the 35 participating countries of the CSCE, were due to continue until Oct. 4 in conjunction with parallel events organized by non-governmental bodies.
Among the ministers' first acts on the opening day of the conference was the admission to the CSCE (announced and welcomed by Soviet Foreign Minister Boris Pankin) of the Baltic states of Estonia, Latvia and Lithuania, bringing total membership to 38.
Welcoming delegates to the conference on Sept. 10, Soviet President Mikhail Gorbachev said that "despite everyday hardships [in the Soviet Union]liberty has become the supreme value" .
Calling for greater western assistance, Gorbachev warned that the vision of a united Europe which had animated the CSCE would not survive the imposition of "an economic curtain…[dividing]the continent into the rich and the poor" .
Concern about the escalating crisis in Yugoslavia prompted some Western Foreign Ministers to call for broader powers for the CSCE to intervene in internal conflicts.
German Foreign Minister Hans Dietrich Genscher told the conference on Sept. 10 that Germany favoured the creation of a UN-style CSCE peace-keeping force with the power to intervene in countries suspected of violating human rights "even if their governments do not agree to this" .
Although reports indicated that there continued to be widespread resistance to any dilution of the CSCE's unanimity rule [see p. 38314; 38366], questions about its merits resurfaced after the United Kingdom Foreign and Commonwealth Secretary Douglas Hurd on Sept. 10 urged the conference to seek ways of strengthening the CSCE's mechanisms for the protection of human rights, adding that the UK was "certainly in favour of moving beyond the present situation where everything happens by consensus" .
On Sept. 9 a Soviet Deputy Foreign Minister, Vladimir Petrovsky, had signalled the Soviet Union's willingness to drop its opposition to the suspension of the unanimity rule, maintaining that foreign concern over human rights issues did not constitute interference in domestic affairs.
Albania's President, Ramiz Alia on Sept. 17 signed the Charter of Paris [see p. 37838]in Paris.
On Sept. 16 he had signed the 1975 Helsinki Final Act [see pp. 27301-09]in Helsinki.
INTERNATIONAL
UNITED NATIONS
Opening of 46th General Assembly session
The 46th session of the UN General Assembly opened in New York on Sept. 17 under the presidency of Saudi Arabia's permanent representative at the UN, Samir Shihabi.
The Assembly elected as new members the former Soviet republics of Estonia, Latvia and Lithuania, the Democratic People's Republic of Korea (North Korea), the Republic of Korea (South Korea), the Federated States of Micronesia (FSM) and the Marshall Islands, bringing total UN membership to 166 [see also pp. 38419; 38437; 38442].
Proceedings were expected to be dominated by the question of a successor to Javier Pérez de Cuéllar, whose second five-year term as UN Secretary-General was due to expire at the end of 1991.
In his address on Sept. 23, US President George Bush called for the repeal of the 1975 UN resolution equating Zionism with racism [see pp. 27487-89].
On Sept. 24, the Soviet Foreign Minister, Boris Pankin, supported Bush's call, describing the 1975 resolution as "obnoxious" .
The French Foreign Minister, Roland Dumas, called on Sept. 24 for a new international code giving minorities the right to seek humanitarian assistance.
INTERNATIONAL
NON-ALIGNED MOVEMENT
10th Ministerial Conference in Accra
The 10th Ministerial Conference of the Non-aligned Movement (NAM) was held in the Ghanaian capital Accra on Sept. 2-7, chaired by Ghanaian President Jerry Rawlings.
A total of 97 countriessent delegations to the conference.
The conference (a triennial meeting scheduled between NAM summits) took place in the context of the effective ending of the "Cold War" , the issue which had been the immediate stimulus for the original formation of the Non-aligned Movement in 1961.
At the inaugural session on Sept. 4 Rawlings asserted, however, that the emerging "New World Order" was in fact merely a continuation of the familiar superpower monopoly, in that the 4,000 million people in the developing countries were still being crushed and undermined by the economic interests of the developed world.
During the debates there was criticism from Egypt of the movement's failure to intervene in the crisis in Yugoslavia (which was an influential founder member and current chair of the NAM).
Iran criticized the NAM's failure to take an active role in international disarmament talks.
The delegates voted on Sept. 5 against an Egyptian proposal to merge the organization with the UNCTAD "Group of 77" (developing countries), on the grounds that this would weaken its non-aligned status.
They also voted against a plan to change the organisation's name in the light of its changing role.
At the closing session of the ministerial meeting on Sept. 7 the delegates issued a statement affirming their commitment to the continuation of the movement, despite the ending of the Cold War.
Election of Mongolia — withdrawal of Argentina — election of 1992-95 chair
Mongolia was elected as the 103rd member of the organization on Sept. 4, and Guatemala and Honduras were granted observer status.
President Carlos Menem of Argentina announced on Sept. 19 that his country was to withdraw from the NAM because the movement "no longer had any reason to exist" .
Iraq demanded on Sept. 26 that Kuwait be expelled from the NAM because it had signed a defence agreement with the United States, a move which it claimed compromised Kuwait's neutrality.
Indonesia was elected to chair the NAM for the period from 1992 to 1995, and it was announced on Sept. 22 that the Indonesian capital Jakarta would host the 10th summit of the movement's heads of state in 1992, Nicaragua having withdrawn its application at the last moment.
INTERNATIONAL
IAEA
35th general conference
Delegates representing the member states of the International Atomic Energy Agency (IAEA) held their 35th general conference in Vienna on Sept. 16-21.
In a move sanctioning an earlier measure adopted in July by the IAEA's board of governors, the conference voted overwhelmingly to condemn Iraq for violating its IAEA safeguards agreement and for obstructing the implementation of UN resolutions aimed at eliminating its non-conventional weapons stocks.
In his opening address on Sept. 16, the IAEA's Director-General Hans Blix had called for more stringent measures to help detect illicit nuclear weapons programmes and recommended that national intelligence agencies share information with the IAEA on possible violations of nuclear non-proliferation accords.
The conference also resolved to express concern over the nuclear "threat" posed by Israel and to press for a nuclear-free zone in the Middle East.
South Africa on Sept. 16 signed an IAEA inspections accord allowing IAEA officials to complete an inventory of its nuclear installations.
In June South Africa had signalled its willingness to sign the Nuclear Non-Proliferation Treaty (NPT)[see p. 38314].
INTERNATIONAL
WORLD BANK
New President — 1991 report
Lewis T. Preston a United States merchant banker, on Sept. 1 replaced Barber Conable as President and chairman of the executive directors of the World Bank (International Bank for Reconstruction and Development—IBRD), and thus also of the International Finance Corporation (IFC) and International Development Association (IDA), for a five-year term.
The post, held by Conable since July 1986 [see p. 34904], was traditionally held by a US national.
Preston immediately inaugurated a series of structural reforms within the World Bank; on Sept. 18 he announced the replacement of a tier of senior vice-presidents with a three-member office of the president which he said would cultivate close and direct contacts with the 14 executive vice-presidents.
Presenting the World Bank's 1991 annual report on Sept. 22, Preston said that its total commitments (including those of the IDA) in the fiscal year 1991 (ending June 30, 1991) had risen to US$22,700 million, compared with $20,700 million in fiscal 1990.
He also said that in the current, 1992, fiscal year new lending would rise to $23,000-25,000 million, and that there was scope for considerable loans to the Soviet Union.
These remained unspecified, however, as the Soviet Union was still negotiating its membership of the International Monetary Fund (IMF) and the World Bank.
Of the Bank's new lending in fiscal 1991, $5,200 million had been to Latin America and the Caribbean, $3,400 million to Africa, $7,500 million to Asian countries, and $6,600 million to Europe, the Middle East and North Africa.
Gross lending for education had totalled $2,200 million, while funds for population, health and nutritional projects had been $1,570 million.
$1,500 million had been promised to countries disrupted by the Gulf crisis of late 1990 and early 1991, and a similar sum would go to the creation of the new Global Environment Facility, while the special programme of assistance for Africa had attracted $7,400 million in new pledges.
Observers noted, however, that the net lending total for fiscal 1991 was substantially smaller than the $22,700 million of new loans declared in the report, because of the amount of repayments falling due on earlier lending.
Net capital disbursements by the World Bank had totalled only $2,100 million, compared with $5,700 million in 1990.
Low-interest loans by the IDA, on the other hand, had shown an increase in net terms, from $3,600 million to $4,300 million.
Nevertheless, taking World Bank and IDA figures together, and including interest payments by borrowing countries, it was calculated that during fiscal 1991 developing countries had paid back $1,677 million more than they received.
African countries had received $895 million in new net transfers, and Asian countries $470 million, but Latin American and Caribbean countries had made net repayments of $2,060 million and European, Middle Eastern and North African countries $982 million.
Reappointment of IMF Managing Director
Michel Camdessus, Managing Director of the International Monetary Fund (IMF) since January 1987 [see p. 34904], was reappointed on Sept. 30, with effect from Jan. 16, 1992, for a second five-year term on the unanimous vote of the board of executive directors.
INTERNATIONAL
OPEC
Raising of production ceiling
Oil Ministers from the Organization of Petroleum Exporting Countries (OPEC) met in Geneva on Sept. 24-25.
The 13-member cartel again failed to set firm quotas for individual members [see pp. 37641; 37930; 38122]but agreed to raise the collective output ceiling from 22,300,000 barrels per day (bpd) to 23,650,000 bpd for the fourth quarter of 1991.
Recent OPEC estimates had suggested that the demand for OPEC oil in the fourth quarter would exceed the present ceiling, rising to between 23,500,000 bpd and 24,500,000 bpd.
Meanwhile, the International Energy Agency (IEA) predicted on Sept. 3 that demand for OPEC oil in the first quarter of 1992 would reach 25,300,000 bpd.
Saudi Arabia's Oil Minister, Hisham Nazer, emphatically ruled out any cuts in Saudi output, declaring before the meeting that "nobody has to approve what Saudi Arabia produces" .
In June Saudi Arabia had successfully resisted moves aimed at restoring OPEC's US$21 per barrel reference price by cutting total production [see p. 38315].
The stated Saudi intention was to maintain current output at just over 8,000,000 bpd (well in excess of its 5,400,000 bpd quota) and to seek an increase in its allocation in the fourth quarter to 8,500,000 bpd.
INTERNATIONAL
COMECON
Following talks in Moscow on Sept. 9-10 representatives from member nations of the Council for Mutual Economic Assistance (CMEA or COMECON) failed to agree on the division of assets by Sept. 28 as scheduled [see p. 38315]; however, it was agreed in early October that this deadline should be extended to the end of November.
INTERNATIONAL
COMMODITIES
A meeting of the International Coffee Council was held in London on Sept. 27, but ended by voting only to renew the International Coffee Agreement for a further 12 months without either an export quota system (suspended in July 1989—see p. 36836) or price support mechanisms.
INTERNATIONAL
ENVIRONMENT
It was announced on Sept. 30 that the Exxon Corporation had reached final agreement with the Alaskan and US federal governments on a criminal fine of US$150,000,000 ($25,000,000 of which was suspended) and damage payments resulting from the Exxon Valdez oil spill of 1989.
INTERNATIONAL
ENVIRONMENT
The US administration on Sept. 19 announced a ban on the import of fish caught by means of "drift nets" ; the ban had effect immediately for South Pacific catches, and for all catches from July 1, 1992.
It followed a campaign by environmental groups, who blamed drift-netting for causing the unintended deaths of whales, dolphins and sea birds…
INTERNATIONAL
SPACE
The United States space shuttle Discovery deployed the US$740,000,000 Upper Atmospheric Research Satellite (UARS) to study the ozone layer during a seven-day mission which ended with a landing in California on Sept. 18.
INTERNATIONAL
WAR CRIMES
Klaus Barbie, 77, the Gestapo commander in Lyon in 1942-44, who was convicted of crimes against humanity and sentenced to life imprisonment by a French court in 1987 [see p. 35417], died in a prison hospital in Lyon on Sept. 25; he was cremated and his ashes were flown to Austria…
EUROPE
ALBANIA
Area: 27,393 sq km.
Population:(1990 UNFPA est.).
Capital: Tirana.
Language: Albanian (principal dialects Gheg and Tosk).
Religion: under communist regime officially atheism; large but undetermined number of adherents to Islam.
Armed forces: 48,000 (1990).
Currency: lek (US$1.00=6.2523 leks as at July 1, 1991).
Major international affiliations: CSCE.
POLITICAL SYSTEM
The Republic of Albania (known hitherto as the Socialist People's Republic of Albania) adopted a new interim Constitution on April 29, 1991.
The unicameral 250-member People's Assembly, directly elected for a four-year term, elects the President, who is banned from party office, and the Council of Ministers.
The majority of seats in the People's Assembly are held by members of the Socialist Party of Albania.
Main government leaders
President: Ramiz Alia.
Prime Minister: Ylli Bufi (SPA).
Other principal ministers: Muhamet Kapllani (AWP, Foreign Affairs); Perikli Teta (non-party, Defence); Gramoz Pashko (DP, Economy); Genci Ruli (DP, Finance); Jorgan Misja (non-party, Industry); Fatos Nano (AWP, Foreign Economic Relations).
Ministerial changes to June 1991
Changes since May were: Bufi, hitherto Minister of Nutrition, replaced Fatos Nano as Chair of Council of Ministers (Prime Minister); Pashko replaced Leontjev Cuci as Minister of the Economy and was also appointed Deputy Chair; Teta replaced Ndricim Karakacias Minister of Defence; Bajram Yzeiri replaced Hujredin Shyn as Minister of Public Order; Shefqet Muci replaced Fatmir Zaloshnja as Minister of Justice; Ruli replaced Anastas Angjeli as Minister of Finance; Misja replaced as Minister of Industry Vilson Ahmeti who replaced Bufi as Minister of Nutrition; Nano replaced Shane Korbeci as Minister of Foreign Economic Relations; Agim Mero replaced Gavrosh Pogace as Minister of Domestic Trade and Tourism; Fatos Bitincka replaced Kostandin Hoxha as Minister of Transport; Prec Zogaj replaced Mojkom Zeqo as Minister of Culture, Youth and Sports; Alfred Karamuko replaced Bujar Kolaneci as Chair of State Control Commission.
Ruling coalition
The "government of national stability" announced on June 12, 1991, included member of the Socialist Party of Albania (SPA—the renamed communist Albanian Party of Labour (PLA), Ramiz Alia first sec.); the Democratic Party (DP, Sali Berisha ch.); the Social Democratic Party; Republican Party (Sabri Grodo l.);
Agrarian Workers' Party (AWP).
Other political parties
Ecology Party.
Elections
Elections were held on March 31 and on April 7 and 14, 1991, when the ruling PLA won a two-thirds majority in the People's Assembly [see pp. 38106; 38160].
1990/91 OVERVIEW
By the latter part of 1990 Ramiz Alia's attempts to control unrest through concessions were visibly failing, each concession serving merely to encourage further demands [see pp. 37864-65].
While the contest was initially between reformist and hardline factions within the ruling PLA, it increasingly became a struggle against, as well as within the ruling party, culminating in widespread protests in December [see p. 37924].
Alia again made concessions, agreeing that more than one party could contest the forthcoming elections and so allowing the formation of Albania's first opposition party in 46 years, the Democratic party [ibid.].
The relaxation of one-party rule and the new climate of liberalization increased, resulting in the formation in December of an independent human rights monitoring group and the gradual release of political prisoners.
Unrest continued, however, culminating in a mass exodus of refugees to Italy in January and March 1991 [see pp. 37972; 38105].
The March 31 elections which returned the PLA to power with an outright majority [see p. 38160]did nothing to stem discontent.
Frustration over the PLA's victory and the serious economic situation led to anti-communist rioting and general strikes causing the government to resign on June 4 when it was replaced by a coalition "government of national stability" .
Economy
The government, acknowledging the dismal state of the economy, had meanwhile taken some steps to relax central control and on April 4 approved decrees allowing a small degree of private enterprise [see p. 38160].
Albania was badly affected by industrial unrest which exacerbated the critical food shortages.
In 1990 Albania had a trade deficit of US$200,000,000, a per capita annual income of $850 and over-employment of 30 per cent in the industrial sector.
In a bid to boost foreign trade and modernize the economy the government in November 1990 passed legislation allowing investment by foreign companies and joint ventures [see p. 37864].
The government also began negotiations seeking membership of the IMF (to which it acceded in October) and the World Bank and indicated its desire to join the European Communities.
Foreign relations
While internal change proceeded at an unprecedented pace, Alia also sought to open the country to wider foreign contacts.
Though relations with its neighbours Greece and Yugoslavia remained strained, considerable progress was made in strengthening bilateral relations with other countries.In July 1990 diplomatic relations with the Soviet Union were restored [see p. 37619]and the two countries subsequently agreed to renew direct trade relations.
Diplomatic relations were restored on March 15, 1991, with the United States [see p. 38106], and on May 29 with the United Kingdom [see p. 38303]; on June 20 diplomatic relations were established with the European Communities [ibid.].
Albania also made friendly overtures to China, in August 1990 receiving Chinese Deputy Foreign Minister, Tian Zengpei, the first such visit since the late 1970s.
The then Foreign Minister, Reis Malile, said afterwards that Albanian-Chinese relations had developed "non-stop" , and expressed the wish that Albania should expand relations with China, both politically and economically.
EUROPE
ANDORRA
Area: 467 sq km.Population: 50,000 (1989 World Bank est.).
Capital: Andorra la Vella.
Languages: Catalan (official); French and Spanish.
Religion: Christianity (majority Roman Catholic).
Currency: French franc and Spanish peseta (US$1.00=F6.1702=113.994 ptas as at July 1, 1991)
POLITICAL SYSTEM
The President of France and the Bishop of Urgel (in Spain) respectively hold joint sovereignty over the Co-principality of Andorra and are represented by the Veguer de França and the Veguer Episcopal.
There is also a permanent delegation for Andorran affairs in the Co-principality, headed respectively by the prefect of the Départment of Pyrenées-Orientales in France and a vicar-general from the Urgel diocese in Spain.
The 28-member General Council of the Valleys, elected for a four-year term, appoints an Executive Council since reforms in 1981 introduced a separation between the executive and legislative arms of government.
Main government leaders
Co-Prince (President of France): François Mitterrand.
Co-Prince (Bishop of Urgel): Joan Martí Alanis.
Permanent French Delegate: Joan Keller.
Permanent Episcopal Delegate: Maj. Ramon Vilardell Mitjaneta.
Veguer de França: Enric Benoit de Coignac.
Veguer Episcopal: Francesc Badia-Batalla.
President of the Executive Council: Oscar Ribas Reig.
Political parties
Andorra remains the only European country in which political parties are technically illegal, although elected representatives belong to different political persuasions.
Elections
A general election was held in December 1989 and a new President of the Executive Council was sworn in January 1990.
1990/91 OVERVIEW
In a move designed to bring Andorra more into line with western European democratic states, the General Council unanimously agreed on June 18, 1990, to set up a commission, comprising representatives of the Co-princes and of the Council, to draft a written constitution.
[For approval of law on individual rights in April 1989, see p.37592.]
On Feb. 15, 1991, the General Council elected Albert Gélabert as its syndic-général (president) in succession to Josep Maria Beal Benedico, who had held the post since December 1989 [see p. 37198].
EUROPE
AUSTRIA
Area: 83,857 sq km.
Population: 7,600,000 (1990 UNFPA est.).
Capital: Vienna.
Languages: German (99%); Croat and Slovene.
Religion: Christianity (about 89% Roman Catholic, 6% Protestant).
Armed forces: 42,500 (1990).
Currency: schilling (US$1.00=Sch12.7832 as at July 1, 1991).
Major international affiliations: BIS; Council of Europe; CSCE; EBRD; EFTA; European Space Agency; Hexagonale grouping; OECD.
POLITICAL SYSTEM
The Republic of Austria was established in May 1955.
The Federal President (Bundespräsident-head of state) is elected by universal suffrage for a six-year term which can be renewed only once.
The President's functions are primarily ceremonial but include the appointment of the Federal Chancellor (Bundeskanzler-head of government) and, at the Chancellor's recommendation, the other members of the government.
Legislative power is vested in the bicameral Federal Assembly (Bundesversammlung) consisting of a 183-member National Council (Nationalrat—lower house) and a 63-member Federal Council (Bundesrat—upper house).
Main government leaders
Federal President: Kurt Waldheim.
Federal Chancellor: Franz Vranitzky (SPÖ).
Other principal ministers: Josef Riegler (ÖVP—Vice-Chancellor; Federalism; Administrative Reform in the Federal Chancellery); Aloïs Mock (ÖVP—Foreign Affairs); Wolfgang Schüssel (ÖVP—Economic Affairs); Ferdinand Lacina (SPÖ—Finance); Franz Löschnak (SPÖ—Interior); Nikolaus Michalek (independent—Justice); Werner Fasslabend (ÖVP—Defence).
Changes to Council of Ministers to June 1991
In December 1990 Vranitzky formed a new coalition government [see p. 37926; for previous Council of Ministers see p. 37688].
Ruth Feldgrill-Zankell was appointed Minister of the Environment, Youth and Family Affairs in March 1991 [see p. 38020].
Ruling coalition
Sozialdemokratische Partei Österreichs (SPÖ—Social Democratic Party of Austria, Franz Vranitzky ch.); Österreichische Volkspartei (ÖVP—Austrian People's Party, Erhard Busek pres. —see pp. 38298-99).
Other political parties
The two other parties represented in parliament are the Freiheitliche Partei Österreichs (FPÖ—Liberal Party of Austria, Jörg Haider ch.) and Die Grüne Alternative (Green Alternative, Johannes Vogenhuber l.).
Elections
A general election was held on Oct. 7, 1990 [see p. 37785], and presidential elections in 1986 [see pp. 34690-92].
Next general election due not later than 1994; next presidential elections due 1992.
1990/91 OVERVIEW
The most significant political event of the 12 months to June 1991 was the October 1990 general election in which the SPÖ retained its position as the largest single party, the ÖVP registered its worst result since 1945, and the main beneficiary was the FPÖ [see p. 37785].
The SPÖ, rejecting the possibility of a coalition with the FPÖ, eventually re-formed a coalition with the ÖVP in December [see p. 37926].
Support nevertheless remained strong for the FPÖ, which was led by the charismatic Haider and benefited from anti-immigrant sentiment [see below].
The party nearly doubled its support to 21.5 per cent in communal elections in Carinthia on March 10, 1991.
Even though Haider was forced to resign as governor of Carinthia in June 1991 [see p. 38298]he remained party leader.
Former SPÖ politicians were implicated in two major scandals:(i) the Noricum affair [for charges brought in September 1990 against former Chancellor Fred Sinowatz and February 1991 verdict following trial beginning April 1990 see pp. 37721; 38020]; and (ii) the Lucona affair [see p. 38110 for March 1991 verdict after 14-month trial].
Sinowatz's committal on charges of perjury in September 1990 [see p. 37721], which was upheld in April 1991 [see p. 38164], had repercussions in Burgenland where premature elections were held in June 1991 [see p. 38299].
The opening of East European borders led to a massive influx of those seeking work and political asylum and to the introduction in March 1990 of visa requirements for Romanians, Bulgarians and Turks [see also p. 37969].
The Guardian of June 14, 1990, reported a warning from the Vienna-based International Helsinki Federation accusing the government of back-tracking on its immigration commitments and of pursuing "an extremely restrictive policy" .
On Nov. 13, 1990, the government announced that 7,000 Romanians whose asylum applications had been turned down and who had neither shelter nor work would be returned to Romania (while another 3,000 had found work and would be allowed to remain).
However, public opposition from the Roman Catholic Church in particular and objections from Austrian Airlines to transporting the refugees led the government to announce in early December that it would attempt to find jobs for the Romanians rather than deport them.
Economy
A report by the Organization for Economic Co-operation and Development (OECD) published in April 1991 estimated that the growth of gross domestic product (GDP) in Austria would fall from 4.6 per cent in 1990 to around 3 per cent in both 1991 and 1992 as a result of a fall in domestic demand.
It predicted that inflation would rise from 3.3 per cent in 1990 to 4.3 per cent in 1991 before falling to 3.8 per cent by 1992.
It also forecast that in 1991 the effect of higher oil prices would be largely offset by the positive impact of strong demand in Germany.
Despite a successful reduction of the budget deficit [see p. 38020 for 1991 budget], the report cautioned that "much of the progress so far has resulted from buoyant economic activity rather than from structural reforms in the economy" and argued in favour of further deregulation of the economy.
In July 1990 Maria Schaumayer, a former ÖVP member of the Viennese provincial parliament, was appointed president of Österreichische Nationalbank, the Austrian central bank.
She was the first woman to head a European central bank.
Foreign relations
The collapse of communism in eastern Europe led the Austrian government to reassess its traditional foreign policy role as a bridge between East and West.
One month after German unification in October 1990 it notified signatories to the 1955 State Treaty guaranteeing Austria's "perpetual neutrality" that certain clauses were no longer applicable [see p. 37867].
The neutrality question was a key element in the "essentially positive" response in July 1991 of the Commission of the European Communities to Austria's application two years earlier for EC membership [see pp. 38353; 36822].
Austria, which chaired the European Free Trade Area (EFTA) Council of Ministers for the first half of 1991, continued to press for agreement with the EC on a common European economic area (EEA)[see pp. 38353; 38307], which Economic Affairs Minister Schüssel described in January 1991 as "an important interim step…along the path to full [EC]membership" .
The Gulf crisis also raised questions about Austria's neutrality.
In early September 1990 the government allowed United States troops and supplies in unarmed planes to overfly Austrian territory en route for the Gulf.
On Jan. 17, 1991, the Nationalrat approved by a large majority legal changes to allow allied planes to overfly Austrian territory, even in case of war, if they were fulfilling UN Security Council resolutions under Chapter VII of the UN Charter (as was the case in the Gulf).
[See p. 37759 for Waldheim's visit to Iraq on Aug. 25, 1990, when he returned with over 80 Austrian detainees.]
Troops were sent to Austria's southern border at the time of Slovenia's and Croatia's declarations of independence on June 28 [see pp. 38274-75].
In subsequent fighting between Yugoslav federal troops and Slovenian soldiers Defence Minister Fasslabend alleged repeated violations of Austrian airspace by Yugoslav federal military aircraft.
On July 30 the Defence Ministry announced a decision in principle to purchase anti-aircraft missile systems for the first time.
After five weeks the Austrian federal troops, which numbered as many as 7,500 at their peak, left the border area in early August.
EUROPE
BALTIC STATES
The independence of the Republics of Estonia, Latvia and Lithuania was recognised by the Soviet Union on Sept. 6, 1991, and the three Baltic states were admitted to the UN on Sept. 17 [see p. 38419-20 for information on their political systems].
Estonia Latvia Lithuania Area (sq km. ia): 45,100 64,589 65,200 Capital: Tallinn Riga Vilnius Population (1989 census): 1,573,000 2,681,000 3,690,000 Official language: Estonian (since 1989) Latvian (since 1988) Lithuanian (since 1988) Proposed currency: kroon lat litas 
BASIC DATA, BALTIC STATES
Composition of population
The population of Estonia was 61.5 per cent Estonian and 30.3 per cent Russian, the remainder comprising Ukrainians, Byelorussians and Finns (1989 census).
The Latvian population was 51.8 per cent Latvian and 33.8 per cent Russian (the highest proportion of Russians in any of the Baltic states), the remainder being Byelorussians, Poles and Ukrainians (1989 census).
Lithuanians accounted for 79.6 per cent of the population, the highest percentage of titular nationality of all the Baltic states.
Russians comprised 9.4 per cent, Poles 7.0 per cent and the remainder were Byelorussians, Ukrainians, Jews, Latvians, and Germans (1989 census).
Economy
Estonia was 30 per cent forested and 20 per cent marshland, and its agriculture was chiefly meat and dairy production.
Although rich in oil shale and peat Estonia was heavily dependent on imports of oil and gas and had a 1988 trade deficit of 748,000,000 roubles or 11 per cent of the total cross border trade.
Despite a paucity of raw materials Latvia was, along with Russia, the richest Soviet republic in terms of income per capita.
The electronics, telecommunications, automobile and household goods industries were particular highly developed, and in 1988 provided 58 per cent of all Soviet mopeds, 56 per cent of telephones and 48 per cent of milking machines.
Latvia was nevertheless heavily dependent on oil and gas imports.
The port of Ventspils lay at the end of a pipeline which brought Siberian oil for export, providing one-third of Soviet hard-currency income.
In 1988 it had a trade deficit of 695,000,000 roubles representing 6.6 per cent of total crossborder trade.
Lithuania depended on imports (primarily from the Soviet Union) for 27 per cent of its goods and raw materials (especially petroleum, gas, metals and machines), and exported 24 per cent of its production.
In 1988 it had a trade deficit totalling some 1,500 million roubles representing 11.4 per cent of total crossborder trade.
The largest industrial concerns were electronics, computer assembly, artificial fertilizers, machinery, metalworking and textiles.
Agriculture, primarily meat and dairy farming, contributed one-third of the national income, according to information from the German Federal Institute for Eastern Economic and International Studies in Cologne.
On Sept. 13, 1991, the Bank of France announced that it was returning to the Baltic states between two and three tonnes of gold which had been deposited in 1932-36.
Nearly 14 tonnes of gold deposited in the United Kingdom had been sold under a February 1967 Soviet-UK agreement to pay compensation to UK citizens for property which had been lost during the Soviet annexation of the Baltic states [see p. 21882].
About three tonnes of gold deposited in Sweden had been handed over to the Soviet Union when it recognised the Soviet annexation of the Baltic states in 1941.
Fate of communist parties in Baltic states
The Communist Party was banned in Estonia from Aug. 24, 1991 [see p. 38373].
The Latvian Communist Party, which had voted in April 1990 to remain part of the Soviet CP, was banned from Aug. 23, 1991, and its hardline chairman, Alfred Rubiks, arrested [see p. 38373].
The Lithuanian Communist Party declared its independence from the Soviet CP in December 1989, and renamed itself the Lithuanian Democratic Labour Party (DLP) in December 1990 [see p. 37921], but was banned on Aug. 23, 1991 [see p. 38373].
Defence
In talks with leaders from the Baltic states on Sept. 10 the Soviet Defence Minister, Marshal Yevgeny Shaposhnikov, maintained that Soviet troops would not be able to leave until after 1994 because of the problem of housing troops in the Soviet Union.
There were an estimated 150,000-200,000 Soviet troops in Latvia, 90,000 in Lithuania, and 40,000 in Estonia.
In a decree issued on Sept. 21 Soviet President Gorbachev freed citizens of the Baltic states from their Soviet military obligations.
The Estonian parliament voted on Sept. 3, 1991, to re-establish the Estonian army, with mandatory military service; the Latvian parliament followed suit on Sept. 10.
EUROPE
BELGIUM
Area: 30,519 sq km.
Population: 9,800,000 (1990 UNFPA est.).
Capital: Brussels.
Languages: Flemish spoken in north (Flanders), French spoken in south (Wallonia)(both official); small German-speaking minority in east.
Religion: Christianity (majority Roman Catholic).
Armed forces: 92,000 (1990).
Currency: Belgian franc (US$1.00=BF37.3374 as at July 1, 1991).
Major international affiliations: BIS; BLEU; Benelux Economic Union; COCOM; Council of Europe; CSCE; EBRD; EC; European Space Agency; NATO; OECD; WEU.
POLITICAL SYSTEM
The Kingdom of Belgium seceded from the Netherlands in 1830, its Constitution being based on that established in 1831.
The constitutional monarch, as head of state, has limited powers (including the appointment of formateurs to negotiate the formation of new governments), but serves as a unifying influence in a linguistically divided country.
The legislature comprises a 212-member Chamber of Deputies elected by a system of proportional representation for a four-year term, and a 182-member Senate, to which 106 senators are directly elected.
Main government leaders
King of the Belgians: Baudouin.
Prime Minister: Wilfried Martens (CVP).
Other principal ministers: Philippe Moureaux (PS, Deputy Prime Minister; Brussels Region; Institutional Reform; National Education (Francophone); Willy Claes (SP, Deputy Prime Minister; Economic Affairs and Planning; National Education (Flemish); Jean-Luc Dehaene (CVP), Deputy Prime Minister; Communications; Institutional Reform; Melchior Wathelet (PSC), Deputy Prime Minister; Justice and the Middle Classes; Wivina De Meester-Demeyer (CVP, Budget and Scientific Policy); Mark Eyskens (CVP, Foreign Affairs); Philippe Maystadt (PSC, Finance); Guy Coëme (PS, National Defence); Louis Tobback (SP, Interior, Modernization of Public Services and National Scientific and Cultural Institutions).
Cabinet changes to September 1991
Hugo Schiltz, Deputy Prime Minister and Minister of Budget and Scientific Policy, and André Greens, Minister for Co-operation and Development, resigned in September 1991 when the Volksunie withdrew from the coalition.
There were no other ministerial-level changes to the Cabinet.
Ruling parties
Christelijke Volkspartij (CVP—Christian People's Party, from Flanders, Wilfried Martens l., Herman Van Rompuy pres.);
Parti social chrétien (PSC—Christian Social Party, from Wallonia, Gérard Deprez pres.);
Socialistische Partij (SP—Socialist Party, from Flanders, Frank Vandenbroucke pres.);
Parti socialiste (PS—Socialist Party from Wallonia, Guy Spitaels ch.);
Volksunie (VU—Flemish nationalist People's Union, Jaak Gabriels ch.).
At the end of September 1991 Volksunie withdrew from the coalition after a dispute over arms sales to Saudi Arabia.
Other political parties
Partij voor Vrijheid en Vooruitgang (PVV—Freedom and Progress Party, in Flanders, Guy Verhofstadt pres.);
Parti réformateur libéral (PRL—Liberal Reform Party in Wallonia, Antoine Duquesne pres.);
Agalev or Anders Gaan Leven (Agalev—Live Differently, in Flanders, Johan Malcorps pres.);
Parti écologiste (Ecolo—Ecologist Party in Wallonia, Paul Lannoye ldr.);
Front démocratique des francophones (FDF—Democratic Front of Francophones, in Brussels, Georges Clerfayt pres.);
Vlaams Blok (Flemish Bloc, Karel Dillen ch.).
Elections
The last general election was held on Dec. 13, 1987; an early election has been called for Nov. 24, 1991.
1990/91 OVERVIEW
The Martens government succeeded by early 1989 in winning parliamentary approval for the first two stages of a three-stage constitutional reform [see p. 36774], but by mid-1991 it had been unable to win agreement on the third stage.
The reform was designed to reduce the linguistic tensions in Belgium, which had brought down the previous Martens coalition in 1987 [see pp. 34892; 35489].
The third stage included provisions for:(i) direct elections to the Flemish and Walloon regional assemblies;(ii) reform of the national parliament and especially the Senate which effectively duplicated the work of the Chamber of Deputies without acting as counterweight to it; and (iii) defining the foreign policy prerogatives of the regions of Brussels, Flanders and Wallonia.
Central government would thus retain responsibility primarily for defence and some foreign policy issues.
During the latter half of 1990 intercommunal and linguistic tensions were again raised by a long-running teachers' strike which from September severely disrupted both state and private schools in French-speaking Wallonia, where teachers were demanding pay increases in line with those paid in (more prosperous) Flanders.
The regional authorities in Wallonia, which were responsible for policy but dependent upon allocations (based upon the number of pupils) from central government, were unable to pay for such increases.
The conflict was only resolved in late November when Spitaels and Deprez, leaders of the PS and PSC respectively, signed a declaration promising to ensure the financing of the measures decided, which provided for a monthly salary increase of BF2,000 from April 1991 and a further rise of 4 per cent from October 1992.
Parliament on June 12, 1991, approved a constitutional amendment to allow female members of the royal family to succeed to the throne, thus overturning the male-only succession which had been in place since Belgian independence.
The monarch would nevertheless continue to be known as King, regardless of gender.
Economy
The strong economic performance of 1989, when gross domestic product (GDP) grew in real terms by 4.5 per cent, continued into the first half of 1990 but began to slow down thereafter; GDP growth for the year was only 3.5 per cent .
The slow-down in domestic demand was partly offset by an increase in exports to Germany and an ABECOR report in February 1991 described Belgium's "recent economic performance" as "a remarkable achievement" .
However, inflation rose from 3.1 per cent in 1989 to 3.5 per cent in 1990 (partly as a result of increased oil prices because of the Gulf crisis).
Unemployment, which fell from 9.3 per cent in 1989 to 8.8 per cent in 1990, also began to increase again in a country still suffering from long-term unemployment and labour immobility.
The state of public finances remained the "greatest source of concern" , and stabilization of the debt-to-GDP ratio had only been achieved by "unexpectedly buoyant economic growth" .
Interest payments accounted for 28.1 per cent of 1990 spending (as against 23.6 per cent in 1980) and tax revenues had failed to keep pace with income growth.
Consequently in February 1991 the Cabinet was, as in previous years, obliged to find expenditure cuts or increased revenue amounting to BF50,000 million to keep the budget deficit within its target of BF346,000 million.
The OECD reported on Sept. 18, 1990, that the volume of Belgium's aid increased in 1989 after a marked fall in 1988.
Net official development assistance (ODA) increased by 21 per cent in real terms to US$703 million, increasing from 0.39 per cent of GNP to 0.46 per cent.
Security and defence
According to an announcement of June 19, 1990, Jan Van den Nest, a court clerk, had been arrested and charged with spying for the Soviet Union.
On Dec. 24, 1990, the Cabinet approved a restructuring of the army over five years which would reduce military service progressively from 12 to eight months and personnel from 82,000 to 66,000; forces in Germany would be reduced from the current 22,000 to 3,500 by the end of 1995.
Controversy surrounded the release in January 1991 of four Belgian hostages in Lebanon [see p. 37977], when it emerged that Walid Khaled, the spokesperson in Lebanon of the extremist Revolutionary Council of Fatah (RCF) who had helped negotiate their release, had been granted a three-month tourist visa on Jan. 11, one day before the hostages' release and at a time of great international tension because of the Gulf crisis.
On Jan. 16 Khaled was arrested by police, who found him walking in Brussels, but was released on instruction from the Foreign Ministry and expelled from the country on Jan. 23.
Three Foreign Ministry officials resigned but the government survived a no confidence vote on Jan. 31.
On June 27 the liberal opposition failed to win sufficient support to set up a parliamentary inquiry.
EUROPE
BULGARIA
Area: 110,994 sq.km; Population: 8,989,000 (end 1990).
Capital: Sofia.
Languages: Bulgarian (official), Turkish spoken by around 10% of population.
Religion: Christianity (Bulgarian Orthodox Church); Islam practised by Turkish and Pomak minorities.
Armed Forces: 129,000 (1989).
Currency: lev (plural leva)(US$1.000=19.2037 leva as at July 1, 1991).
Major international affiliations: BIS, CSCE, EBRD.
POLITICAL SYSTEM
The Republic of Bulgaria was proclaimed on Nov. 15, 1990, having previously been designated a People's Republic.
Legislative authority is exercised by the unicameral 400-member Grand National Assembly, elected for a maximum five-year term by universal adult suffrage.
Until July 1991 the Assembly elected the President and the Council of Ministers.
A new Constitution came into effect on July 13, 1991, defining Bulgaria as a republic with a parliamentary form of government and with a directly elected president [see p. 38350].
Main government leaders
Head of State and President: Zhelyu Zhelev.
Vice-President: Col.-Gen.
Atanas Semerdzhiev.
Chair of the Council of Ministers (Prime Minister): Dimitur Popov (unaffiliated).
Other principal ministers: Dimitur Ludzhev (UDF—Deputy Chair); Aleksandur Tomov (BSP—Deputy Chair); Viktor Vulkov (BZNS—Deputy Chair; Minister of Foreign Affairs); Ivan Kostov (UDF—Finance); Col.-Gen.
Yordan Mutafchiev (BSP—Defence); Khristo Danov (unaffiliated—Internal Affairs).
Government changes to August 1991
Demonstrations and a general strike against its proposals for economic reform forced the resignation of Andrei Lukanov's predominately BSP government on Nov. 29, 1990.
A transitional coalition government led by Popov and comprising the BSP, the UDF, the BZNS and independents replaced it on Dec. 20 [see pp. 37865; 37923].
Ruling coalition
Bulgarian Socialist Party (BSP—the renamed Bulgarian Communist Party since April 3, 1990, Aleksandur Lilov ch. of supreme council); Bulgarian Agrarian People's Union (BANU or BZNS—Viktor Vulkov ch.);
Union of Democratic Forces (UDF—an alliance of opposition groups and movements—Filip Dimitrov ch. of co-ord. council).
Other political parties
Bulgarian Social Democratic Party (BSDP—Ivan Velikov ch.).
Elections
The BSP won an outright majority in the National Assembly in a general election on June 10 and 17, 1990 (the country's first free multiparty election since 1946)[see p. 37543].
Zhelev, leader of the UDF, was elected President by the National Assembly on Aug. 1, 1990.
A general election under the new Constitution is scheduled for Oct. 13, 1991.
1990/91 OVERVIEW
With the election of the former UDF leader, Zhelev, as President in August 1990 and the formation of a coalition government headed by a non-party political Prime Minister (Dimitur Popov) in December [see p. 37923], Bulgarian domestic politics entered a period of relative stability.
New Constitution
Work on a new constitution began shortly after the June 1990 elections, but political differences within the parliamentary drafting commission delayed consideration of it for several months.
However, on May 29, 1991, the draft constitution was given its first reading by the Grand National Assembly.
The debates in the GNA were, at times, stormy (including walk-outs and hunger strikes by some UDF MPs), but the new Constitution was signed on July 9 [see p. 38350].
Decline of BSP
Throughout the year there were signs of the political decline of the BSP (former Bulgarian Communist Party).
In mid-1990 the BSP reported a membership of 1,000,000; a year later membership was down to approximately 500,000.
In January, April and May 1991, opinion polls recorded BSP electoral support as 25-26 per cent, a significant decline from the nearly 50 per cent of the vote which the party received in the June 1990 elections.
UDF support in the polls ranged from 32 per cent to 36 per cent(about 38 per cent in the 1990 elections).
UDF split
The first sign of an impending split in the UDF came in May 1991, when 39 of its 144 MPs walked out of parliament demanding a dissolution and new elections in July; however, 100 UDF MPs opposed the protest and its demands.
At the UDF's third conference on May 19 a majority of delegates supported the walkout and demanded that UDF MPs should support further such protests if the demand for new elections were not met, and this radical position was reaffirmed at a further UDF national conference held in June.
Nevertheless, political and tactical differences among UDF MPs remained evident, particularly during the period of opposition protests in connection with the adoption of the new Constitution in mid-July [see p. 38350].
Foreign relations
Dec. 26, 1990: signature of Bulgarian-Soviet trade agreement providing for the delivery of 5,000,000 tonnes of Soviet oil (with a possibility of a further 1,500,000 tonnes) in exchange for Bulgarian goods.
Jan. 11-13, 1991: visit to Sofia by Greek Prime Minister Konstantinos Mitsotakis and Foreign Minister Antonis Samaras.
April 20: statement by Popov and Yugoslavian Foreign Minister Budimir Loncar in Sofia that the two states had no territorial claims in the Balkans.
April 22: signature of Bulgarian-United States trade treaty.
April 30: visit by Prime Minister Popov to NATO headquarters and statement that Bulgaria would not sign a security treaty with the Soviet Union which that precluded it from joining other alliances.
June 3: US President Bush extended US trade benefits to Bulgaria for a further year.
June 18: Israeli President Chaim Herzog addressed the Grand National Assembly, the first such address by a foreign head of state.
June 26: reaffirmation of Bulgaria's support for the maintenance of Yugoslavia's territorial integrity.
June 26: statement deploring a speech by Romanian Foreign Minister Adrian Nastase in which he made reference to Romania's loss of the southern Dobrudja to Bulgaria in 1940 [see p. 4207].
On July 31 the Grand National Assembly passed a bill refusing to extend the 1967 Bulgarian-Soviet Friendship Treaty beyond August 1992 when it was due to expire.
Economy
1990 figures were given as follows: net material product—down by 11 per cent; inflation (consumer prices) –184 per cent ; foreign debt—US$11,000 million; exports—$2,500 million; imports—$3,200 million; unemployment—100,000.
The Grand National Assembly on Jan. 31 endorsed the coalition government's programme of economic reforms [see p. 38017].
The re-presented programme was buttressed by the inclusion of opposition members in the Cabinet, by a political agreement between the BSP and opposition parties on a transition to democracy signed on Jan. 3 and by a government-employers-trade unions agreement on preserving social peace signed on Jan. 8.
The first stage of the economic reform programme was implemented on Feb. 1, when price subsidies on many basic goods and utilities were removed.
This was followed by a series of decrees and laws on (i) private land ownership;(ii) the privatization of small businesses;(iii) the decentralization of state companies;(iv) foreign investment;(v) competition; and (vi) forming co-operatives.
However, by August 1991 proposals for general privatization measures had yet to be agreed by parliament.
As part of the economic reform programme, agreement was reached with the IMF on a stabilization fund which could reach $2,000 million, on the rescheduling of Bulgarian debt repayments to Western countries, and on a $250 million loan from the World Bank.
In spring 1991 the lev was floated.
The IMF on Feb. 25, 1991, approved a drawing by Bulgaria equivalent to SDR60,600,000 (about US$87,000,000) under the IMF's compensatory and contingency financing facility (CCFF) to help meet an increase in the cost of oil imports anticipated in 1991.
An additional disbursement under the CCFF, which on present assumptions would be SDR32,600,000 (about $47,000,000), would be made available later, provided relevant conditions were met.
On March 15 the IMF approved a standby credit, authorizing drawings up to SDR279 million (about $394 million) over the next 12 months to support the Government's economic reform programme.
Output during the first 6 months of 1991 was down 22.6 per cent on the same period in 1990.
Compared with the first five months of 1990, exports dropped from $3,050 million to $1,460 million, and imports from US$4,110 million to US$1,590 million.
Unemployment in mid-1991 was reported to be over 200,000 and forecast to rise sharply by the end of the year.
However, monthly inflation, which had reached 123 per cent in February, was down to 5 per cent by May-June.
EUROPE
CYPRUS
Area: 9,251 sq km(incl.
Turkish occupied region).
Population: 700,000 (1990).
Capital: Nicosia.
Languages: Greek (80%); Turkish (most of the remainder).
Religion: Most Greeks are Orthodox Christians (Greek Orthodox Church of Cyprus); most Turks are Moslems.
Armed forces: 10,400 (Turkish republic of Northern Cyprus 4,000)(1990).
Currency: Cyprus pound (US$1.00=C£0.4891 as at July 1, 1991).
Major international affiliations: Council of Europe; CSCE; EBRD; NAM.
POLITICAL SYSTEM
The Republic of Cyprus was established in 1960.
Since the Turkish invasion of 1974 the north-east of the island has been under Turkish occupation.
Turkish Cypriots declared their own state, the Turkish Republic of Northern Cyprus (TRNC), in November 1983.
Other than Turkey, no country has recognised the TRNC, which comprises about 40 per cent of the island's area.
The government of the Republic of Cyprus claims jurisdiction over the whole of the island and is internationally recognized.
Provisions in the Constitution for Turkish Cypriot participation in government have been in abeyance since intercommunal fighting in 1963.
The Constitution provides for an executive President who is directly elected by universal suffrage for a five-year term, and who appoints and presides over a Council of Ministers.
Legislative power is vested in the unicameral House of Representatives, which has 80 seats, 24 of which are nominally reserved for Turkish Cypriots but are not filled.
It is elected for a five-year term by a system of proportional representation.
The Turkish Republic of Northern Cyprus has an executive President who is elected by universal suffrage every five years and who presides over a Cabinet.
Legislative authority is vested in a 50-member unicameral parliament, which is similarly elected by universal suffrage for a five-year term.
Main government leaders
President: Georgios Vasiliou.
Principal ministers: Georgios Iacovou (Foreign Affairs); Georgios Syrimis (Finance); Christodoulos Veniamin (Interior); Andreas Aloneftis (Defence).
Cabinet changes
None in year to June 1991 [for complete Cabinet list see p. 37516].
Ruling party
President Vassiliou was elected as an independent, and his administration is nominally a non-party one.
Political parties
Demokratikos Synagermos (DESY—Democratic Rally, right-wing, Glafkos Clerides pres.);
Anorthotiko Komma Ergazomenou Laou (AKEL—Progressive Party of the Working People, communist, Demetris Christofias sec. -gen.);
Demokratiko Komma (DEKO—Democratic Party, centre-right, Spyros Kyprianou pres.);
Sosialitiko Komma-Ethniki Demokratikon Enosi Kyprou (SK-EDEK—Socialist Party-National Democratic Union of Cyprus, socialist, Vassos Lysarides pres.);
Ananeotiko Demokratiko Sosialistiko Kinima (ADESOK—Democratic Socialist Renewal Movement, reformist communist, Pavlos Dinghlis pres.);
Komma Phileftheron (Liberal Party, Nicos Rolandis pres.).
Elections
President Vassiliou was elected on February 14, 1988, in succession to Spyros Kyprianou [see pp. 35849-50].
Rauf Denktash was re-elected President of the TRNC in April 1990 [see p. 37389].
Elections for the 56 Greek-Cypriot members of the Cyprus House of Representatives were held on May 18, 1991, when the DESY narrowly defeated the AKEL [see pp. 38208-09].
1990/91 OVERVIEW
Deadlock in UN-sponsored efforts to end the partition of Cyprus continued in 1990.
In July an announcement by the Turkish authorities of their intention to settle the deserted Greek town of Varossi (in the Turkish-occupied zone) heightened tension, as did the decision to settle ethnic Turkish Moslem refugees from Bulgaria in other Turkish-occupied towns.
In October 1990 a proposed customs union and a protocol to end passport restrictions between Turkey and northern Cyprus was denounced by the Cyprus government as further proof of the gradual annexation of northern Cyprus by Turkey.
Opposition Turkish Cypriot parties also objected to the plans on similar grounds.
These measures were declared partly in response to the Cypriot government's submission on July 4, 1990, of a formal application for full membership of the European Communities (EC)[see p. 37625].
Although progress on the application was not expected until after the creation of the single European market at the end of 1992, the Cyprus government introduced measures to modernize the island's tax system and impose a value added tax (VAT).
Other measures announced to prepare for EC membership included the establishment of a university, the creation of a national health scheme, and the elimination of import permits on some 30,000 categories of goods.
Throughout the Gulf crisis, the Cyprus government consistently sought to draw parallels between Iraq's invasion of Kuwait and the Turkish invasion of the island in 1974.
It expressed the hope that the concern for the implementation of UN resolutions would lead to increased pressure on Turkey to comply with resolutions calling for an end to the occupation.
Following Iraq's defeat in February 1991 there was intensified diplomatic activity by the EC, UN and United States on the Cyprus problem.
In March Foreign Minister Iacovou met the US Secretary of State James Baker in Washington.
In April Baker received Denktash, despite protests from the Cypriot government that such a meeting would be exploited by the Turkish Cypriot leader.
State Department officials sought to play down the significance of the visit and insisted that the USA recognized only one state in Cyprus.
Denktash, it was stressed, was received as leader of the Turkish Cypriot community in Cyprus, and not as "President" of the Turkish Republic of Northern Cyprus.
In May Vassiliou met President Bush in Washington to discuss the Cyprus problem, and by the end of June the USA was actively working towards convening a conference later in the year.
A letter from Baker to the then Turkish Foreign Minister Ahmet Alptemocin was leaked in the Turkish press and was shown to urge "flexibility" and "a more conciliatory attitude" on the Turkish side.
Economy
In the Greek-Cypriot controlled area the growth of the economy in 1991 was expected to be 4.5 per cent, unemployment 2 per cent and inflation 4.5 per cent .
Tourism to Cyprus in 1990/91 suffered as a result of the Gulf war.
In the Turkish occupied region, the reduction in tourist traffic aggravated an economic crisis begun by the collapse in the latter part of 1990 of a London-based conglomerate, Polly Peck International, and the preferment of fraud charges in the United Kingdom against its Turkish Cypriot chairman, Asil Nadir, who had been described by Denktash as the "economic commander" in the Turkish-occupied area.
Nadir's fruit-packaging and tourism interests accounted for one-third of the region's GNP.
EUROPE
CZECHOSLOVAKIA
Area: 127,905 sq km.
Population: 15,700,000 (1990 UNFPA est.).
Capital: Prague.
LanguageS: Czech and Slovak (both official).
Religion: Christianity—around 70% Roman Catholic, 15% Protestant.
Armed forces: 198,200 (1990).
Currency: koruna (US$1.00=kcs31.4117 as at July 1, 1991).
Major international affiliations: BIS, Council of Europe, CSCE, BRD, Hexagonale Group.
POLITICAL SYSTEM
The Czech and Slovak Federative Republic (known until March 1990 as the Czechoslovak Socialist Republic) consists of the Czech and Slovak Republics, each of which has its own government.
At the federal level the highest organ of state authority is the bicameral Federal Assembly, comprising the Chamber of the People (101 seats for the Czech Lands and 49 seats for Slovakia), and the Chamber of Nations (75 seats for each republic), to which deputies are elected by universal adult suffrage.
The Federal Assembly elects the President of the Republic, who in turn appoints the Federal Government.
Main government leaders
President: Vaclav Havel.
Prime Minister: Marian Calfa (PAV).
Prime Minister of the Republic of the Czech Lands: Petr Pithart; Prime Minister of the Republic of Slovakia: Jan Carnogursky.
Other principal ministers: Pavel Rychetsky (CM, Deputy Premier, responsible for legislative affairs); Jozef Miklosko (CDM, Deputy Premier, responsible for human rights sphere); Jiri Dienstbier (CM, Deputy Premier, Minister of Foreign Affairs); Vaclav Klaus (CDP, Finance); Jan Langos (PAV, Interior).
Ministerial changes to June 1991
Gen. Miroslav Vacek was dismissed in October 1990 as federal Minister of National Defence and replaced by Lubos Pobrovsky [see p. 37791].
Bedrich Moldan was dismissed on Jan. 24, 1991, as Czech Environment Minister and replaced on Feb. 20 by Ivan Dejmal[see p. 38018].
Vladimir Meciar was on April 23 replaced as Slovak Prime Minister by Jan Carnogursky [see p. 38161].
Vaclav Vales (Deputy Premier, responsible for economic reform) resigned on Sept. 17 [see p. 38449].
Ruling coalition
Civic Forum split in February 1991 into two parties: Civic Democratic Party (CDP, Vaclav Klaus l.) and Civic Movement (CM, Jiri Dienstbier, l.);
Public Against Violence (VPN or PAV, Marian Calfa, l.);
Christian and Democratic Union/Christian Democratic Movement (CDM, Jan Carnogursky l.).
Other political parties
Communist Party of Czechoslovakia (CPCz, Vasil Mohorita, ch.);
Slovak National Party (SNP, Vitazoslav Moric, ch.);
Czechoslovak People's Party (CPP, Josef Lux, ch.).
Movement for Democratic Slovakia (Vladimir Meciar l.).
Elections
Presidential and legislative elections were held respectively in December 1989 and June 1990 [see pp. 37107; 37542].
Local elections were held in Czech Lands and Slovakia in November 1990 [see p. 37865].
Elections to the Federal Assembly are due by June 1992; the Federal Assembly will then elect the President.
1990/91 OVERVIEW
The dismantling of the Communist system, which had been the immediate priority of the new government elected in June 1990 [see pp. 37542-43], was followed by the framing of a new constitution regulating the relationship between the federal government and the two constituent republics.
A constitutional arrangement on the division of powers, approved on Dec. 12 by the Federal Assembly, transferred considerable legislative and executive power from the centre to the two republics [see p. 37922].
New constitution discussions
On Jan. 9, 1991, the Federal Assembly approved a bill of rights which codified the democratic rights of speech, assembly and association [see p. 37974].
The bill was intended to provide the legal basis for a new constitution, the framework of which was finally agreed by leaders of the main political groupings in March 1991 [see p. 38107].
The draft constitution confirmed the federal nature of Czechoslovakia, based on a joint and voluntary declaration of co-existence between the two republics, and declared that the republics would exercise all the powers not explicitly given to the federation.
However, these new proposals did not satisfy Slovak demands for a greater measure of autonomy.
Slovakia had already created its own foreign relations ministry in September 1990 and had legislated to make Slovak the republic's official language [see p. 37791].
Political groupings in Slovakia continued to state their preference for a formal state treaty (rather than a political declaration as embodied in the drafts), as the draft constitution was put out for consultation and amendment.
President Havel proposed in March 1991 that a referendum should be held to settle the issue of Slovak secession.
[For status of Moravia-Silesia see p. 38018.]
Party splits
On March 6, 1991, the then Prime Minister of Slovakia, Vladimir Meciar, announced the formation of a minority faction, Platform for a Democratic Slovakia, within the ruling Public Against Violence (PAV)[see p. 38106].
Its main aims were to press for a new constitution based on a formal state treaty and to slow the moves towards a market economy.
Meciar's views provoked an internal party dispute in which he was accused of intimidating political rivals and of making unnecessary and unconstitutional foreign trips.
The controversy led to his dismissal as Slovak Prime Minister in April 23 by the Slovak parliament and his replacement by First Deputy Prime Minister Carnogursky, leader of the Christian Democratic Movement [see p. 38161].
The split between Meciar's Platform for a Democratic Slovakia and PAV was formalized later in the same month.
In the Czech Lands, Civic Forum was similarly affected by growing dissension within its ranks, though the cause was the pace of economic reform rather than nationalist tendencies.
Klaus had been elected Civic Forum chair on Oct. 13, 1990 (see p. 37791).
He saw his election as a mandate to move Civic Forum to the right of the political spectrum and to proceed rapidly to a market economy.
Differences over the political future of Civic Forum deepened, and it was agreed in February 1991 [see p. 38017]that two separate political parties would emerge from the umbrella organization of Civic Forum: the Civic Democratic Party (Klaus' wing) and Civic Movement (consisting of many of President Havel's closest associates such as Dienstbier and Pithart).
The two factions agreed, however, to remain in coalition until the next general election.
The Communist Party continued to have a strong base in local government, although on Nov. 16, 1990, legislation was adopted by the Federal Assembly confiscating its assets [see p. 37865].
The Stani Bezpecnost (StB—State security) of the former communist government had been abolished on Feb. 1, 1990, and was replaced in September 1990 by the Federal Service for the Protection of the Constitution.
On March 22, 1991, a special parliamentary commission claimed that 10 current members of parliament had actively collaborated with the StB forces.
In June 1991 the government submitted a bill on screening for past collaboration with the StB [see pp. 38018; 38107; 38304].
Economy
A new national economic strategy took shape as the government introduced measures on price deregulation, denationalization and privatization.
The pace of trade liberalization accelerated with admission to the IMF and the World Bank in September 1990 and the granting of most-favoured-nation status by the United States on Nov. 9 [see p. 37866].
On Jan. 7, 1991, the IMF approved resources for Czechoslovakia totalling SDR1,250.8 million (about US$1,783 million), of which SDR619.5 million (about US$883 million) would be available over the next 14 months under a standby arrangement.
In addition, SDR147.5 million (about US$210 million) was attached to the standby arrangement by way of an external contingency mechanism under the Compensatory and Contingency Financing Facility (CCFF) relating to oil and gas.
On June 18 the IMF approved a further drawing under the CCFF equivalent to SDR83,530,000 (about US$110 million).
The freeing of prices on Jan. 1, 1991, led to an inflation rate of 30 per cent for the month [see p. 37974].
Moves towards privatization
Privatization was introduced in three stages:(i) the removal of obstacles to private enterprise including the returning to private owners of an estimated 70,000 shops and businesses which had been confiscated between 1955 and 1962;(ii) the auction of over 100,000 state-owned shops, restaurants and workshops beginning on Jan. 26, 1991 [see p. 37974];(iii) legislation with effect from April 1 allowing shares in state enterprises to be sold to local and foreign investors [see p. 38018].
One of the first major investors under this new legislation was the German motor manufacturers Volkswagen which invested DM9,600 million (US$5,690 million), and took an initial 25 per cent stake in Skoda, the Czechoslovak state-owned car manufacturer.
It was planned to expand the production of Skoda cars from 180,000 to 400,000 per year.
[For internal convertibility of the koruna resulting in a 14.3 per cent devaluation see p. 37974.]
The economic transition was made more difficult by the collapse of COMECON, the disintegration of trade with the Soviet Union and other Eastern European countries as a consequence of the switch to dollar trading from Jan. 1, 1991 [see p. 37979], the impact of the Gulf crisis and increased oil prices.
Gross national product fell 5.8 per cent in January-February 1991 compared with the same period in 1990.
Foreign relations
Leading Czechoslovak government figures travelled widely to forge new international agreements.
Since December 1989 President Havel as head of state had visited 23 countries and had officially received 140 foreign guests.
In February 1991 Czechoslovakia was admitted to the Council of Europe and continued to negotiate an association agreement with the European Communities as a prelude to full membership.
Prague was chosen on as the site of the permanent secretariat of the CSCE.
By June 1991 agreements to permit visa-free travel had been concluded with all western European countries except Portugal, Turkey and Cyprus.
Czechoslovakia also sought to create bilateral agreements with its immediate neighbours in central and eastern Europe, but a number of disputes continued to affect relationships.
The controversy over the continuing influx of Poles seeking cheaper Czechoslovak goods—and the difficulty of fixing an exchange rate between the koruna and the zloty—prevented visa requirements between the two countries from being lifted until July 1991.
Attempts to co-operate with Hungary were clouded by the failure to agree on the future of the Danube hydro-electric system [see p. 38161], and by problems over the treatment of national minorities on their respective territories.
Soviet troop withdrawals from Czechoslovak territory were completed in June 1991, but the bilateral treaty with the Soviet Union was delayed by the Soviet Union's initial insistence that Czechoslovakia should not conclude any treaties with a third party without consultation.
The Czechoslovak government faced a demand from Sudeten Germans for material compensation for their expulsion from Czechoslovakia after the Second World War.
There were also fears of a growing refugee problem.
Five refugee camps in 1990-91 handled 3,239 refugees, mainly from Romania and the Soviet Union, but also from Turkey and Arab countries, and plans were made to build more camps and to improve the quality of health and educational services for the refugees.
EUROPE
DENMARK
Area: 43,075 sq km.
Population: 5,146,000 (1991).
Capital: Copenhagen.
Religion: Christian (predominantly Evangelical Lutheran).
Armed forces: 31,700 (1990).
Currency: krone (US$1.00=DKr7.0201 as at July 1, 1991).
Major political affiliations: BIS, COCOM, Council of Europe, CSCE, EBRD, EC, ESA, NATO, Nordic Council, OECD.
POLITICAL SYSTEM
In the Kingdom of Denmark legislative authority is vested jointly in the monarch and in a unicameral parliament (Folketing), the 179 members of which are elected for a four-year term.
Although Denmark retains responsibility for the Faroe Islands in respect of foreign affairs, defence, the judiciary and the monetary system, the islands have their own government (Landsstyret or Landsstryrid) which is responsible for internal affairs, including fisheries.
There is a unicameral parliament (Lagting or Loegting) and two Faroese representatives sit in the Danish parliament.
The Prime Minister of the Faroe Islands is Jogvan Sundstein [for November 1990 Faroes election see p. 37868].
Greenland has been autonomous since May 1, 1979, and has a parliament (Landsting) and government (Landsstyre) with full executive authority, but it remains an integral part of the Kingdom of Denmark.
Two representatives are sent to the Danish parliament.
The Prime Minister of Greenland since the March 1991 election in Greenland [see p. 38113]has been Lars Emil Johansen.
Main government leaders
Queen: Margrethe II.
Prime Minister: Poul Schlüter (Con.).
Principal ministers: Uffe Ellemann-Jensen (Lib., Foreign Affairs); Henning Dyremose (Con., Finance); Anders Fogh Rasmussen (Lib., Economic Affairs); Knud Enggaard (Lib., Defence); Bertel Haarder (Lib., Education and Research); Hans Engell (Con., Justice); Thor Pedersen (Lib., Interior and Nordic Affairs); Laurits Ternaes (Lib., Agriculture); Kent Kirk (Con., Fisheries).
Cabinet changes to June 1991
A new Cabinet was appointed after the Dec. 12, 1990, general election, reflecting the change of coalition partners and comprising 10 Conservative and nine Liberal members [see p. 37925].
Ruling coalition
Det Konservative Folkeparti (Con. —Conservative People's Party, Poul Schlüter ch.) and Venstre (Lib. —Liberals, Uffe Ellemann-Jensen pres.).
Other political parties
Socialdemokratiet (SD—Social Democrats, Svend Auken, l.);
Det Radikale Ventre (Rad.
Lib. — Radical Liberals, Thorkild Moeller ch.);
Centrum Demokraterna (CD—Centre Democrats, Mimi Jakobsen l.);
Kritseligt Folkeparti (KrF—Christian People's Party, Jann Sjursen ch.);
Socialistisk Folkeparti (SF—Socialist People's Party, Gert Petersen ch.);
Fremskridtspartiet (FP—Progress Party, Johannes Sörensen ch. —for expulsion of Mogens Glistrup from parliamentary party in November 1990 see p. 37868); Pensionistpartiet (Pensioners' Party, formed in August 1990); Trivselspartiet (Growth Party, Mogens Glistrup l., formed after the November 1990 split within the Progress party—see above).
Elections
An early general election was held on Dec. 12, 1990 [see pp. 37924-25].
Next general election due by end 1994.
[For November 1990 election in the Faroes see p. 37868; for March 1991 election in Greenland see p. 38113.]
1990/91 OVERVIEW
Prime Minister Schlüter called the December 1990 elections earlier than would normally have been necessary in an attempt to obtain a firm mandate for far-reaching economic reforms.
However, his hold on power was weakened by the result and he eventually formed a minority coalition with the Liberals (Venstre).
A political scandal broke in mid-1991 over allegations that Schlüter had misled the parliament in 1989, when he had denied that immigration officials had broken the immigration laws by refusing entry to the families of Tamil workers from Sri Lanka who were already resident in the country.
A parliamentary inquiry eventually cleared him of the allegations in June, but investigations continued into the conduct of Erik Ninn Hansen, who had been Justice Minister at the time.
Economy
In order to secure sufficient parliamentary backing in February 1991 from the opposition Radical Liberals, Centre Democrats and Christian People's Party for the approval of the 1991 budget, Schlüter was forced to modify his plans for income tax cuts [see p. 38020].
By August 1991, however, the deficit had doubled because of rising unemployment and consequently falling income tax revenues, and the draft budget for 1992, presented by the government on Aug. 27, 1991, contained substantially reduced real expenditure [see p. 38402].
Although the economy was growing at around 2 per cent per annum, and although a fall in the value of the krone had brought the country's trade balance back into surplus, its industries continued to suffer a severe crisis of confidence.
In the agriculture industry attention centred, as in recent years, on environmental issues, particularly the removal of stockpiles of animal fertiliser from which nitrogen compounds were leaching into ground water and polluting the sea.
Despite generally poor prices for pigmeat, due in part to increased slaughtering in eastern Europe, the producer co-operatives announced in January 1991 a five-year plan to improve both the quality and the quantity of their output.
Foreign relations
Support for the European Communities (EC) was becoming generally stronger since the EC was seen as a means of integrating a united Germany into western Europe and maintaining the influence of the smaller countries.
Sweden's application in July 1991 for EC membership [see p. 38353]also eroded the position of those favouring a return to the European Free Trade Agreement (EFTA).
By mid-1991 Denmark was nearing agreement with Sweden on a long-standing plan to bridge the Öresund straits which divided the two countries [see p. 38402].
Denmark maintained particularly close relations with its eastern European trade partners during this period, holding a succession of high-level meetings with Czechoslovakia, Poland and the Soviet Union.
On Dec. 20, 1990, Denmark hosted a special meeting of the five Nordic Council members with the Foreign Ministers of Latvia, Estonia and Lithuania, and in late February and early March 1991 concluded co-operation agreements with Lithuania and Estonia respectively.
Reference article pp. 37674-75; November 1990 calling of general election, election in Faroes p. 37868; December election, coalition Cabinet pp. 37924-25; February 1991 budget p. 38020; March Greenland election p. 38113; August road and rail link with Sweden, 1992 budget p. 38402.
EUROPE
FINLAND
Area: 338,145 sq km(incl. inland water).
Population: 5,000,000 (UNFPA est. 1990).
Capital: Helsinki.
Languages: Finnish, Swedish (both official), Saame, or Lappish.
Religion: Christianity (89% Evangelical Lutheran Church of Finland).
Armed forces: 31,000 (1990).
Currency: markka (US$1.00=FM4.3109 as at July 1, 1991).
Major international affiliations: BIS; Council of Europe; CSCE; EBRD; EFTA; European Space Agency (associate); Nordic Council; OECD.
POLITICAL SYSTEM
The Constitution of the Republic of Finland provides for a parliamentary system of government as well as a presidency with considerable powers, particularly in the foreign policy sphere.
Elected for a six-year term by universal suffrage (or by a 301-member electoral college if no candidate obtains an absolute majority), the President appoints under a Prime Minister a Council of State whose members must enjoy the confidence of the 200-member parliament (Eduskunta), elected for a four-year term.
Main government leaders
President: Mauno Koivisto.
Prime Minister: Esko Aho (KESK).
Other principal ministers: Mauri Pekkarinen (KESK, Interior); Paavo Väyrynen (KESK, Foreign Affairs); Iiro Viinanen (KOK, Finance), Hannele Pokka (KESK, Justice); Elisabeth Rehn (SFP, Defence).
Changes to Council of Ministers to June 1991
The withdrawal on Aug. 4, 1990, of the SMP from the government of former Prime Minister Harri Holkeri resulted in a Cabinet as listed on p. 37662.
In April 1991 a new four-party centre-right coalition was sworn in following the March general election when the KESK became the largest single parliamentary party [see pp. 38112; 38158].
Ruling coalition
Keskusta Suomen (KESK—Centre Party, Esko Aho ch. since March 1991) is the largest party in a centre-right coalition with Kansallinen Kokoomus (KOK—National Coalition Party, Pertti Salolainen ch.),
Svenska Folkpartiet (SFP—Swedish People's Party, Ole Norrback ch.) and Suomen Kristilliinen Liitto (SKL—Finnish Christian League, Toimi Kankaanniemi ch.).
Other parties
Suomen Sosialidemokraattinen Puolue (SSDP—Finnish Social Democratic Party, Pertti Paasio ch.);
Suomen Maaseudun Puolue (SMP—Finnish Rural Party, Tina Mäkelä ch.);
Vihreät (The Greens, Pekka Sauri l.);
Vasemmistoliitto (VL—Left Wing Alliance, Claes Andersson ch.);
Liberaalinen Kansanpuolue (LKP—Liberal People's Party, Kaarina Koivistoinen ch.).
Elections
A general election was held on March 17, 1991 [see p. 38112], and presidential elections in 1988.
Next general election due 1995; next presidential election scheduled for early 1994.
1990/1991 OVERVIEW
The main political event of the year to June 1991 was the general election in March, in which the opposition KESK gained the largest number of seats (55 out of 200) and went on to form the first Finnish government in 25 years which did not include a left-wing party.
Ahti Karjalainen, who served as Prime Minister in 1962-63 [see p. 18775]and in 1970-71 [see p. 24111], and in various ministerial capacities including three terms as Foreign Minister between 1960 and 1975, died on Sept. 9, 1990, at the age of 67.
The Independent described him as "the closest assistant to President Urho Kekkonen when, in a world divided by the Cold War, Finland tried to establish its neutrality and develop friendly ties with the Soviet Union" .
He later served as deputy governor and then as governor of the Bank of Finland but was obliged to resign in 1983 [see p. 32218].
Economy
After three years of rapid expansion, economic growth in 1990 came to a virtual standstill [see also p. 38112].
Economic activity, which had begun to lessen in early 1990, contracted by 3 per cent in the final quarter of the year.
For 1990 as a whole real growth in gross domestic product (GDP) fell to zero from 5.2 per cent in 1989, largely as a result of a drastic fall in trade with the Soviet Union.
The immediate priority of the new Aho government was therefore an economic stabilization package announced in May [see p. 38202].
Foreign Relations
Finland's special relations with the Soviet Union and particularly its bilateral barter trading arrangement came into question during 1990 as a result of the political and economic upheavals in the Soviet Union.
From January 1991 trade between the two countries had to be paid in fully convertible currency so that by April the value of exports to the Soviet Union had fallen by almost 60 per cent compared with a year previously.
Relations with western Europe thus took on a high profile and Finland was among the EFTA countries seeking to negotiate with the European Communities (EC) a single European Economic Area [see pp. 38307; 38353; 38].
On Sept. 21, 1990, Paasio announced that his government considered that after the unification of Germany parts of the Paris Treaty (concluded in 1947 between Finland and the allied powers and limiting the country's sovereignty and defence forces—see pp. 8517-18) would no longer apply.
Obsolete articles included stipulations that Finnish ground forces could not exceed 34,400 persons and that Finnish forces could not acquire submarines, guided missiles or bombers.
Paasio also stated that "the reference to Germany as a possible aggressor contained in the [1948]Treaty of Friendship, Co-operation and Mutual Assistance between Finland and the Soviet Union [see p. 9228]reflects values…which no longer prevail" , although the essential content of the treaty "retains its significance" .
In September 1990 the government announced aid to eastern European countries totalling FM500,000,000 over a five-year period.
The programme would concentrate on reducing environmental damage and pollution, especially from Poland and the Soviet Union.
Foreign visits during the year included:(i) a state visit by the then United Kingdom Prime Minister Margaret Thatcher on Aug. 28-30, 1990;(ii) a visit by Koivisto to the USA on May 6-7, 1991, and (iii) his visit to Moscow in June 1991 [see p. 38307].
EUROPE
FRANCE
Area: 543,965 sq km.
Population: 56,100,000 (1990 UNPFA est.).
Capital: Paris.
Language: French (official).
Religion: Christianity (80% Roman Catholic); Moslem and Jewish communities.
Armed forces: some 461,250 (1990).
Currency: French franc (US$1.00=F6.1702 as at July 1, 1991).
Major international affiliations: BIS; COCOM; Council of Europe; CSCE; EBRD; EC; ESA; Group of Seven; NATO; OECD; WEU.
POLITICAL SYSTEM
Under its 1958 Constitution (revised in 1960, 1962, 1963, 1974 and 1976) executive power in the Fifth French Republic is vested in a President, who is directly elected for a seven-year term by an absolute majority of votes cast.
The country is governed by a Council of Ministers, led by a Prime Minister appointed by the President and responsible to the bicameral parliament, France's highest legislative body, comprising a 321-member Senate (upper house), a third of whose seats are renewed every three years in indirect elections, and a 577-seat National Assembly (lower house), elected for a five-year term by universal suffrage.
Apart from metropolitan France there are four overseas departments (French Guiana, Guadeloupe, Martinique and Réunion), two overseas collectivités territoriales (Mayotte and St Pierre and Miquelon) with a status between that of an overseas department and an overseas territory, and four overseas territories (French Polynesia, the French Southern and Antarctic Territories, New Caledonia and the Wallis and Futuna Islands) which have the least degree of autonomy.
[For reference article on Guadeloupe and Martinique see pp. 38231; for reference article on French Pacific territories see fourth reference supplement in 1991; for entry on Réunion and Mayotte see below.]
Main government leaders
President: François Mitterrand (PS).
Prime Minister: Edith Cresson (PS).
Ministers of State: Lionel Jospin (PS, National Education); Pierre Bérégovoy (PS, Economy, Finance and Budget); Roland Dumas (PS, Foreign Affairs); Jean-Pierre Soisson (France Unie, Civil Service and Administrative Modernization); Michel Delebarre (PS, Cities and Regional Planning).
Other ministers: Henri Nallet (PS, Keeper of the Seals, Justice); Pierre Joxe (PS, Defence); Philippe Marchand (PS, Interior); Jack Lang (PS, Culture and Communication, Government Spokesperson); Louis Mermaz (PS, Agriculture and Forestry); Jean-Louis Bianco (Social Affairs and Integration); Martine Aubry (f)(Labour, Employment and Vocational Training); Paul Quilès (PS, Equipment, Housing, Transport and Space Research); Edwige Avice (PS, Co-operation and Development); Louis Le Pensec (PS, Overseas Departments and Territories); Hubert Curien (PS, Research and Technology); Jean Poperon (PS, Relations with Parliament); Frédérique Bredin (PS, Youth and Sports); Brice Lalonde (Ecology Generation, Environment).
There are in addition 10 Ministers-Delegate and 16 secretaries of states [see also p. 38198].
Changes to Council of Ministers to June 1991
July 4, 1990: resignation of Olivier Stirn as Tourism Minister-Delegate and replacement by Jean-Michel Baylet (MRG); Oct. 2: reshuffle following resignation of Cresson as Minister-Delegate for European Affairs [see p. 37784]; Dec. 19: appointment of Delebarre as Minister of State for Towns and related changes [see p. 37925]; Jan. 29, 1991: resignation of Pierre Chevènement as Defence Minister and related changes [see p. 37941]; May 16: appointment of Cresson in place of Michel Rocard (Prime Minister since 1988) and of modified Council of Ministers [see pp. 38197-98].
Ruling coalition
Cresson's government was, like Rocard's, a minority government dominated by members of the Parti socialiste (PS—Socialist Party, Pierre Mauroy first sec.).
The other parties represented were from the France unie grouping, from either the Mouvement des radicaux de gauche (MRG—Left Radical Movement, Emile Zuccarelli pres.) or the Union pour la démocratie française (UDF—Union for French Democracy, Valéry Giscard d'Estaing ch.).
There were also a number of "technocratic" , non-party members.
(Parties affiliated to the UDF were the Parti républicain (PR—Republican Party, François Léotard l., Gérard Longuet pres.), the Centre des démocrats sociaux (CDS—Centre of Social Democrats, Pierre Méhaingerie pres.), the Parti social démocrate (PSD—Social Democratic Party, Max Lejeune pres.) and the Parti radical socialiste (Rad. —Radical Socialist Party, Yves Galland pres.)
Other political parties
Rassemblement pour la république (RPR—Rally for the Republic, Jacques Chirac pres.);
Parti communiste français (PCF—French Communist Party, Georges Marchais sec. -gen.);
Front national (FN—National Front, Jean-Marie Le Pen pres.);
Les verts (the Greens, Guy Cambot nat. sec.).
Elections
The last general election was in June 1988 and the last presidential election in May 1988.
Future elections are scheduled as follows: cantonal and regional elections in 1992; general election in 1993; cantonal and European elections in 1994; presidential and municipal elections in 1995.
1990/91 OVERVIEW
During the period to mid-1991 the socialist-led government first of Rocard and from May 1991 of Cresson pursued an active legislative programme.
Under Rocard in late 1990 measures were approved to restrict advertising for tobacco and alcohol, and to reform the social security system by introducing a new tax—the general social contribution (CSG)[see p. 37869].
Further legislation tabled in 1991 involved (i) major educational reforms (aimed according to the Financial Times of April 24, 1991, at "humanizing the gruelling baccalauréat school-leaving examination" to make it achievable for a larger proportion of pupils, by simplifying the syllabuses of the different baccalauréats, shortening and alleviating the school working week and modernizing teaching methods);(ii) steps to deal with France's growing urban problems [see below and pp. 38113-4; 38197-98; 38299];(iii) Corsica [see below]; and (iv) a new privatization policy [see p. 38156].
Attempts to approve electoral reform measures for the regional elections due in 1992 had, however, to be dropped under opposition pressure.
In June among the initial measures of Cresson's government were bills providing for (i) hospital reform (designed to tighten government regulations over private components of the national health system, approved by the National Assembly on its first reading on April 29, by the Senate on June 7 and finally by the National Assembly on June 19 and prompting protests by 60,000-100,000 people on June 11);(ii) tougher penalties for desecrating graves (approved on June 14 following the desecration of Jewish graves in Carpentras in May 1990—see p. 37468; for earlier legislation against racism see p. 37683); and (iii) restrictions on telephone tapping (the latter receiving the approval of the National Assembly on June 13 and of the Senate on June 25).
In addition a "law for the orientation of cities" (first tabled in March 1991—see pp. 38113-14) was approved on June 1 on its first reading by the National Assembly, with opposition parties voting against, except for the PCF which abstained.
Dubbed the "anti-ghetto" bill by Delebarre who introduced it, it suffered changes at the hands of opposition senators during its reading in the Senate on June 19-21, which weakened clauses obliging low-income housing to be included in private building developments, and extending state powers of compulsory purchase of land.
These changes were reversed on June 27 during the bill's second reading in the National Assembly.
The new Prime Minister's initial popularity soon fell.
Although she survived a no confidence motion on June 17 [see p. 38299], a BVA-Paris Match poll conducted on June 14-19 found that only 27 per cent of respondents had a "good opinion" of her (as opposed to 43 per cent a month previously).
At 20 per cent(49 per cent previously) "confidence" in the Prime Minister was also low.
After favourable opinion poll ratings during the Gulf crisis, Mitterrand's personal popularity was also in decline: 48 per cent of respondents (57 per cent previously) had a "good opinion" of the President while "confidence" in him dropped from 55 to 43 per cent.
Scandal concerning former socialist mayor
On Feb. 22, 1991, Jean-Michel Boucheron, mayor until 1988 of Angoulême in western France, was charged with corruption, complicity in written forgery in trade and employment, improper receipt of public funds and mismanagement.
Boucheron, who had been suspended from the PS at his own request in October 1990, claimed to have been acting in the interests of the party.
He was alleged to have diverted public funds through front companies to himself, his friends and the PS, leaving the municipality with creditors claiming a total of F1,200 million.
[See p. 38197 for Urba financing scandal affecting the PS and other parties.]
Right-wing political developments
Despite the creation in June 1990 of the right-wing Union for France (Union pour la France—UPF) a "confederation" of the UDF and the RPR [see pp. 37683-84], divisions and disagreements continued on the political right wing.
A UPF bureau of 15 UDF and 15 RPR members was elected in mid-September 1990.
The (Gaullist) RPR suffered resignations by leading members.
In mid-1990 Alain Carignon, the RPR mayor of Grenoble who was at odds with his party over policy, was suspended from the party and, according to Le Monde of Sept. 7, was intending to form his own Forum républicain (Republican Forum) to campaign on the centre ground.
The mayor of Lyon, Michel Noir, resigned his parliamentary seat on Dec. 6, 1990 [see p. 37925], followed by Michèle Barzach and Michel Dubernard.
Carignou, Noir and Barzach were all former ministers.
Noir, but not Barzach, was re-elected to the National Assembly in February 1991 [see pp. 38020-21].
RPR leader Chirac also had to contend with an unprecedented growth of new "currents" within the Gaullist movement and on July 11, 1991, was forced to lay down a code of good conduct to guide them.
Most conspicuous was the creation on March 13 of France Tomorrow (Demain la France), led by former ministers Charles Pasqua and Philippe Séguin.
Between the RPR and UDF debate centred around three key questions:(i) the issue of United States-style "primaries" to select joint right-wing candidates, especially for the 1995 presidential elections;(ii) the pace and nature of European integration, and (iii) policy towards the National Front (FN).
On the one hand opinion polls showed Chirac to be the right-winger most likely to be ahead on the first ballot of a presidential election, making the RPR anxious to win agreement on primaries.
On the other hand they indicated that former President Giscard d'Estaing (UDF) was likely to do better on the second ballot by taking centrist votes, with the result that, in late 1990, the UDF seemed less concerned to reach an agreement.
Nevertheless both parties agreed on April 10, 1991, to put forward common candidates for the 1992 regional and 1993 legislative elections, as well as a common platform for government [see p. 38156].
Eventually, on June 12, the RPR and the UDF also agreed that a joint presidential candidate would be selected by holding primaries [see p. 38299].
The June 1991 BVA—Paris Match poll [see above]suggested that the RPR-UDF alliance would win an absolute majority of parliamentary seats.
Europe prevailed as a divisive issue, with the UDF largely favouring a federalist system with common institutions and policies, and the RPR remaining more attached to a Europe of nation states.
Relations were further strained by the willingness of some (mainly UDF, southern-based politicians) to defend alliances with the FN, despite criticism from colleagues.
Further controversy surrounded Chirac's attempt to win over FN voters by protesting on June 19 against an "overdose" of immigrants in France [see p. 38299]and again in September surrounding comments by Giscard about an "invasion" of immigrants [see pp. 38445-46].
French Communist Party
In-fighting characterized the ailing PCF before, during and after the 29th party conference, which coincided with the party's 70th anniversary on Dec. 20, 1990.
Marchais (general secretary since 1972) managed to retain control despite the challenges of reformists within ( "refondateurs" ) and without ( "reconstructeurs" ).
In October a former Minister, Charles Fiterman, withdrew formally from conference preparations, complaining about lack of internal democracy.
Fiterman and fellow critics aspired to give the PCF a more modern face incorporating the lessons of perestroika ( "restructuring" ) and events throughout the communist world.
In the event, the PCF leadership conceded more internal debate, self criticism and even opposition within the party without fundamentally changing.
Further problems arose in April 1991, when reformists published their own manifesto for democracy and there were by-election losses.
[For September extraordinary conference see p. 38445.]
Le Monde of Dec. 15, 1990, also reported that the PCF-dominated trade union organization, the Confédération générale du travail (CGT) would from March 1991 lose its control of the trade union structure of the nationalized Renault vehicle manufacturing company for the first time since 1945.
National Front
The FN enjoyed mixed fortunes in 1990-91.
Immigration and urban unrest continued to be important mobilizing issues for the extreme right, and the June 1991 BVA-Paris Match poll [see above]put the FN share of the vote at 14 per cent(up four percentage points).
Le Pen's opposition to the Gulf war confused many supporters and provoked dissidence, notwithstanding his well publicized return from Baghdad on Nov. 22, 1990, with 70 freed French hostages [see also pp. 37758; 37871].
On March 7, 1991, a Nanterre tribunal fined Le Pen F10,000 for insulting the former Minister for Public Services Michel Durafour with an anti-Semitic remark [see also p. 37683], although on July 2 a Versailles court cleared Le Pen of "publicly insulting" Durafour [see p. 38354]; on March 18 a Versailles appeal court increased a nominal one franc fine imposed on Le Pen in May 1990 [see p. 37468]to F100,000 for describing the holocaust as a "detail of history" .
Opposition to the FN became more organized in late 1990, notably by former members including Bernard Tapie's Citizens' Forum (launched on Nov. 27).
Greens
In late 1990 the Green movement was divided on the question of confronting the FN.
A left-wing minority of the Greens wanted to avoid contributing towards FN electoral success by maintaining a Green candidate on the second ballot of elections.
The majority, however, favoured retention of former presidential candidate Antoine Waechter's autonomist ( "neither left nor right" ) line which precluded any electoral manoeuvres which might imply an acceptance of the electoral system currently in force or, indeed, a political preference.
In October 1990 Environment Minister Lalonde (a critic of the Greens and founder of the rival Ecology Generation) offered key positions to Greens in nascent environmental authorities but again Waechter's preference for non-acceptance prevailed.
Immigrant population
The superior council for integration (established after incidents in October-December 1989 involving three Moslem girls who insisted on wearing traditional headscarves to school—see p. 37134) reported in February 1991 that France's foreign population was 3,700,000, the same as in 1982.
This represented 6.8 per cent of the population, although 10,000,000 out of the total population of 56,100,000 were of recent foreign origin.
Corsica
Throughout 1990/91 Corsica continued to suffer from unrest, selective assassinations and divisions within Corsican nationalist groups [see pp. 37686; 37967-68].
Despite considerable opposition the government passed legislation between November 1990 and June 1991 to give more power to the Corsican Regional Assembly.
On April 12, the National Assembly approved a bill on Corsican status which recognized the notion of a distinct "Corsican people" as "part of the French people" , but this part of the bill was ruled unconstitutional by the Constitutional Council [see pp. 37967-68; 38156].
Economy — 1991 budget
On Sept. 13, 1990, Finance Minister Bérégovoy presented the 1991 budget, which was approved by parliament on Nov. 20 [see p. 37869]but revised in March 1991 to take into account Gulf war costs and the slowdown in the economy [see p. 38113].
Budget priorities included education, research and development, the environment, foreign affairs (including aid to eastern Europe), employment and training, justice and security, and culture (including the new French Library in Paris).
Corporation tax and top value added tax (VAT) rates were reduced, but wealth tax was increased.
On May 29 Bérégovoy announced measures to cut a further F17,000 million of expenditure in 1991 and on June 12 the Council of Ministers agreed to increase employee social security contributions by 0.9 per centage points in order to reduce a F25,000 million deficit in the health service budget.
Economic performance
For the first time in nearly four years, gross domestic product (GDP) fell in the last quarter of 1990.
This was attributed to reduced export demand because of falling output in trading partner countries and the strength of the franc, and to a fall in domestic demand because of the Gulf crisis.
By mid-1991 INSEE, the government statistical institute, nevertheless predicted a moderate upturn by the end of the year, and on June 26 Bérégovoy declared himself "reasonably optimistic…because our economy is fundamentally healthy" .
In its annual report on the French economy published in early June 1991 the Organization for Economic Co-operation and Development (OECD) praised the government for the tenor and success of its macroeconomic policy while urging structural reform to make the economy more flexible, responsive and competitive.
The report predicted a 1.5 per cent growth rate for 1991, as compared with 2.8 per cent in 1990 and with initial government expectations of 2.0-2.7 per cent.
In particular, the report highlighted (i) the low inflation (which in June stood at an annualized rate of 3.3 per cent , lower, for the first time since 1973, than that in Germany—3.5 per cent in June);(ii) the successful containment of the adverse effect of 1990 oil price rises; and reduced public expenditure; and (iv) lower VAT and company taxes.
However, the report also singled out:(i) rising unemployment (which increased in June 1991 to 9.4 per cent compared with 9.0 per cent for 1990 as a whole);(ii) low business confidence;(iii) skills shortages in the labour force; and (iv) the national minimum wage (SMIC).
Nevertheless, in line with promises by Rocard, Cresson raised the SMIC on June 20 by 2.3 per cent to F5,522 gross monthly from July 1, a move calculated to benefit 2,000,000 people (12 per cent of the workforce).
The OECD reported on March 29, 1991, that net disbursements of French official development assistance (ODA) to independent countries rose in 1989 as compared with 1988 by 11.9 per cent in real terms to the equivalent of US$5,200 million and increased as a share of gross national product (GNP) from 0.50 per cent in 1988 to 0.54 per cent in 1989.
Industrial developments
With the economic slowdown both major and minor French companies were obliged to restructure and cut the workforce.
In October GCE and Fiat merged while Renault's share cross-holding with Volvo was accompanied with the prediction in November 1990 of 2,500 job losses in 1991 and a further 5,600 job losses in 1992.
Other companies undergoing similar difficulties included Thomson (electronics), Groupe Bull (computers), Rhône-Poulenc (chemicals, pharmaceuticals) and Air France [see also p. 38156].
The EC Commission approved on June 7, 1991, French government aid for the development of high definition television (HDTV).
However, on June 19 the government dropped its planned capital injection into Thomson after the Commission threatened to open investigations into its compliance with EC competition laws.
On July 9, despite Cresson's earlier comments on the dangers of Japanese companies infiltrating French industry, the government announced that the Japanese informatics concern NEC would be allowed to exchange its 15 per cent stake in Bull's US subsidiary, Bull HN, for a 4.7 per cent stake in the parent company, although the government would retain the right to call back the shares under certain conditions.
The decision was described by Le Monde of July 10 as Cresson's "first exercise in Realpolitik in industrial matters" since her appointment as Prime Minister, and by Bull's chairman as essential to the success of plans to return to profitability by the end of 1992.
On April 9, 1991, Michelin, the world's largest tyre company, announced that it would be cutting its French workforce by 4,900 by the end of 1992 as part of a 15 per cent overall reduction in its 130,000-strong world-wide workforce, which would also result in job losses of 2,230 in the United States, 2,000 in Spain, and 800 in the United Kingdom.
Industrial and social unrest
The Gulf crisis and economic recession prompted a fall in the number of individual working days lost through industrial action from 904,000 days in 1989 to 693,700 in 1990—the lowest level of industrial action since 1946 according to a Labour Ministry report of late June 1991.
Nevertheless air traffic controllers struck in July, August and December 1990, and took action in June 1991.
Magistrates, civil servants, transport workers, health service workers, dockers, taxi drivers, refuse collectors, miners, farmers and high school students were among other protesters.
On Nov. 27, 1990, following agricultural unrest over funding, imports and drought, Mitterrand promised "a big debate" on French agriculture, but protests continued during 1991 [see also p. 38446].
In mid- to late 1990, large demonstrations took place in Provence against the proposed extension of France's high speed train (TGV) lines through areas of natural beauty.
French prisoners also protested in July 1990 at overcrowding and specifically at Mitterrand's decision on July 27, 1990, to release Anis Naccache (as well as four others connected with his case), who had in 1982 been sentenced to life imprisonment for the attempted murder in 1980 of the former Iranian Prime Minister Shapour Bakhtiar][see pp. 30631-32; for links with Lebanese hostage issue see p. 36632; for August 1991 murder of Bachtiar see p. 38409].
Defence
In the context of a programme to modernize France's policy of nuclear deterrence the Independent of Oct. 24, 1990, reported that the French government appeared to be "leaning towards the phasing-out of its ground-based long-range nuclear missiles" , which would "imply a commitment to developing a new long-range air-to-ground missiles possibly in collaboration with Britain, to equip the planned new Rafale combat aircraft" .
A Senate report published in late April 1991 on defence policy after the Gulf war nevertheless called for defence expenditure to be increased from 3.37 per cent of GDP to 3.8 per cent.
At a Franco-German summit on Sept. 18, 1990, immediately before German unification, France confirmed that it would reduce the 46,000 French troops stationed in Germany to 26,000 within two years [see p. 37718].
On Oct. 17 the 4,200-strong Franco-German joint brigade (agreed in principle in November 1987—see p. 35665) was formally constituted at a ceremony in Malmsheim, near Stuttgart [see p. 37212 for its October establishment at partial strength].
On June 3, 1991, France announced that it would sign the 1968 Nuclear Non-Proliferation Treaty (NPT)[see p. 38314].
At the 1991 annual military parade on July 14 Mitterrand proposed a reduction of compulsory national service from 12 to 10 months as from 1992.
An assizes court in Paris on June 15, 1990, sentenced Rolf Dobbertin, a German-born nuclear physicist who had worked for the French National Council for Scientific Research (CNRS), to 12 years' imprisonment for espionage for East Germany during the 10 years to January 1979 [see p. 29786 for his arrest in 1979 and p. 33867 for his release in 1983].
Foreign policy
Foreign affairs during this period were dominated by the Gulf crisis.
Popular opposition in December 1990 to war in the Gulf, the 3,000,000-strong Islamic community in France and France's longstanding involvement in the Middle East, were behind President Mitterrand's 11th-hour attempts in January to achieve a negotiated settlement with Iraq—an arms client and, provisionally, an ally [see pp. 37934-35].
The National Assembly, however, on Jan. 16 approved the use of force to liberate Kuwait [see p. 37941]and after the outbreak of war under UN auspices the government's support of the US-led coalition won widespread public and party support (except from the PCF—ibid.).
Although the PS generally backed Mitterrand's prosecution of the war, two notable exceptions were the former Foreign Minister (PS), Claude Cheysson, and the Defence Minister, Jean-Pierre Chevènement who resigned on Jan. 29 [ibid; see also p. 38299].
France's permitting the USA to use French air space and refuelling facilities, and accepting nominal US leadership of the 10,000 French troops involved was considered significant but France continued to equate the Iraqi occupation of Kuwait with that of the occupied territories by Israel.
Superpower relations
France developed good relations with both the USA and the Soviet Union in 1990-91, drawing upon the shared experience of Gulf crisis management and anxious to assist the Soviet Union in its socio-economic difficulties.
In August 1990, Dumas visited Moscow; in October Gorbachev's visit to Rambouillet resulted in the signature of a friendship and co-operation treaty and a new assistance agreement [see pp. 37758; 37789]; and in May 1991 Mitterrand travelled to Moscow [see p. 38198].
On March 13, Mitterrand met with President Bush in Martinique [see also p. 38117].
RÉUNION
Area: 2,512 sq km.
Population: 600,000 (1990 UNPFA est.).
Capital: Saint-Denis.
Language: French (official).
Religion: Christianity (majority) and Islam.
Currency: French franc.
Major international affiliations: In January 1986 France was admitted to the Indian Ocean Commission (IOC) because of its sovereignty over Réunion.
Political system
Réunion is an overseas department of France [see also above]; the government is represented by an appointed prefect.
The 44-member General Council and 45-member Regional Council are elected for six-year terms by universal suffrage.
Five directly elected deputies are sent to the National Assembly in Paris and three indirectly elected members to the Senate.
Main government leaders
Prefect: Daniel Constantin; President of the General Council: Eric Boyer; President of the Regional Council: Pierre Lagourgue; President of the Economic and Social Committee: Tony Manglou.
Political parties
A coalition of the Gaullist RPR and centrist UDF holds 18 of the 45 seats in the Regional Council.
The second largest party is the Parti communiste réunionnais (PCR), with 13 seats.
Réunion is represented in the French National Assembly by two PCR deputies, and by one each from the RPR, the UDF and France-Réunion-Avenir (FRA).
Elections
The last elections to the Regional Council were held in March 1986, and to the General Council in September and October 1988.
MAYOTTE
Area: 376 sq km.Population: 67,167 (1985 census).
Capital: Dzaoudzi.
Language: French (official).
Religion: Islam.
Currency: French franc.
Mayotte, part of the Comoro archipelago, is administered by France and has been a collectivité territoriale since December 1976 [see also above]; it has its own 17-member elected General Council, sends one deputy to the National Assembly in Paris and one member to the senate.
The island is claimed by Comoros, which officially represents it at the UN.
However, Mayotte's main political grouping, the Mouvement populaire mahorais, demands full departmental status within France.
A referendum to determine the future of the island has been postponed indefinitely.
Immigration from Comoros has caused tensions on Mayotte.
EUROPE
GERMANY
Area: 357,000 sq km.
Population: 77,500,000 (1990 UNFPA est.).
Capital: Berlin.
Language: German.
Religion: Christianity (Protestantism and Roman Catholicism).
Armed forces: 469,000 (West Germany), 137,700 (East Germany) in 1990 [for planned reductions after unification see pp. 37659; 37829].
Currency: Deutsche Mark (US$1.00=DM1.8219 as at July 1, 1991).
Major international affiliations: BIS; COCOM; Council of Europe; CSCE; EBRD; EC; European Space Agency; G-7; NATO; OECD; WEU.
POLITICAL SYSTEM
The Federal Republic of Germany was constituted in 1949 from the three western zones of occupied Germany; on Oct. 3, 1990, it was joined by the territory of the former German Democratic Republic (created in 1949 from the Soviet-occupied eastern zone) and by Berlin (previously under four-power administration).
Under the 1949 Basic Law the Federal Republic is a "democratic and social federal state" whose organs are:(i) the Bundestag (lower house of parliament) elected for a four-year term in universal, direct, free and secret elections;(ii) the Bundesrat (upper house), now comprising 65 members of the governments of the Republic's 16 Länder (states);(iii) the Federal President (Bundespräsident) elected for a five-year term by the Federal Assembly (Bundesversammlung), comprising the members of the Bundestag and an equal number of delegates nominated by the Länder parliaments;(iv) the Federal Government (Bundesregierung) consisting of the Federal Chancellor (Bundeskanzler—elected by the Bundestag on the proposal of the Federal President), together with his or her ministers; and (v) the Federal Constitutional Court (Bundesverfassungsgericht), whose judges are elected by the Bundestag and Bundesrat to serve 12-year non-renewable terms.
Main government leaders
President: Richard von Weizsäcker, since 1984.
Federal Chancellor: Helmut Kohl, since 1982.
Other principal ministers: Hans-Dietrich Genscher (FDP, Foreign Affairs); Theo Waigel (CSU, Finance); Jürgen Möllemann (FDP, Economy); Wolfgang Schäuble (CDU, Interior); Gerhard Stoltenberg (CDU, Defence); Klaus Kinkel (independent, Justice); Ignaz Kiechle (CSU, Agriculture); Rudolf Seiters (CDU, Head of Chancellery).
Changes to Council of Ministers to June 1991
October 1990: addition of five new Cabinet members at unification [see p. 37762]; December: resignations of Helmut Haussmann as Economics Minister and Lothar de Maizière as Minister without Portfolio [see p. 37905]; January 1991: formation of new Cabinet after December all-German general election [see p. 37966].
Ruling coalition
Christlich Demokratische Union (CDU—Christian Democratic Union, Kohl ch., Angela Merkel deputy ch., Volker Ruhe sec. -gen.);
Christlich-Soziale Union (CSU—Christian Social Union, Waigel ch.);
Freie Demokratische Partei (FDP—Free Democratic Party, Otto Graf Lambsdorff ch.)[see p. 37761].
Coalition in power in West Germany since October 1982.
Other political parties
Sozialdemokratische Partei Deutschlands (SPD—Social Democratic Party, Björn Engholm ch. —see p. 38199); Partei des Demokratischen Sozialismus (PDS—Party of Democratic Socialism, formerly East German ruling communist party under the name of Sozialistische Einheitspartei Deutschlands (SED—Socialist Unity Party of Germany), Gregor Gysi ch.);
Die Grünen (the Greens, Christine Weiske and Ludger Volmer spokespeople); Die Republikaner (the Republicans, Franz Schönhuber l.);
Die Grauen (the Greys, party for senior citizens—see pp. 37676-77—Trude Umruh l.).
Elections
Von Weizsäcker was elected President in 1984 and re-elected in 1989.
First all-German general election to the Bundestag held in December 1990 [see pp. 37904-05].
Next Bundestag election due 1994; presidential election due 1994.
1990/91 OVERVIEW
July 1990: introduction of economic and monetary union [see p. 37660].
August: signing of unification treaty [see pp. 37661; 37832-33].
September: signing of "Two-plus-four" treaty on international aspects of unification [see pp. 37717-8].
October: unification of Germany [see p. 37761].
December: all-German general election [see pp. 37904-5].
January 1991: re-formation of Kohl coalition government [see p. 37966].
April: demonstrations in eastern Germany protesting against unemployment [see p. 38155].
June: Bundestag vote in favour of Berlin as future seat of parliament [see p. 38298]; July: Bundesrat vote to remain in Bonn for time being [see p. 38354].
In a period dominated by the processes of, and adjustment to, unification, the implementation of the state treaties instituting economic and monetary union (July 1, 1990) and the unification of the two German states (Oct. 3, 1990) were the most significant events.
The all-German election (Dec. 2, 1990) returned the ruling CDU/CSU/FDP coalition.
The process of unification led the established parties to merge their east and west German organizations: the FDP in August [see p. 37661], the SPD in September [see p. 37718], and the CDU on Oct. 1 [see p. 37761], shortly before unification.
The decision of the West German Greens not to merge with the East German Greens before the all-German election resulted in the loss of their own representation in the Bundestag.
Land elections
The result of the Bundestag election, which had been an affirmation of unification rather than an orthodox contest between the governing parties and the opposition, was not a good guide to subsequent Land election results.
In Hesse in January 1991 the CDU-FDP coalition was replaced by an SPD-Green coalition [see pp. 37966; 38156]; in the Rhineland-Palatinate in April the CDU was excluded from government and an SPD-FDP coalition was formed [see pp. 38155-56; 38199], and in Hamburg in June the SPD obtained an absolute majority of city-council seats [see p. 38297].
These successes for the SPD and the Greens were due in large measure to declining public confidence in Kohl's leadership, especially after tax increases to meet the costs of unification became inevitable despite election promises by Kohl that they would not be necessary [see pp. 37904; 38297; 38109].
[For October 1990 Land elections in Brandenburg, Mecklenburg-Western Pomerania, Saxony, Saxony-Anhalt, Thuringia and Bavaria see pp. 37762-63; for December Berlin elections see p. 37905.]
Parliamentary and constitutional developments
In February 1991 the Bundestag agreed to grant modified "group status" to the PDS and the Alliance "90/Greens (elected in eastern German Länder), even though these parties had not won sufficient seats in the December election to qualify for status as a" parliamentary group".
This meant that these parties had equivalent subsidies from the Bundestag (for staffing, etc.), but only restricted procedural rights, as compared with larger party groups.
As a result of a decision of the conference of Ministers President of the Länder held in Munich in December 1990, the Bundesrat on March 1, 1991, decided to create its own commission on constitutional reform, to consider constitutional changes as required by Article 5 of the treaty of unification [see p. 37832].
Party changes
The refusal of Oskar Lafontaine, the defeated SPD candidate for chancellor in the Bundestag elections, to become chair either of the SPD parliamentary group or of the party itself resulted at a congress in Bremen in May in the choice of Engholm (Minister President in Schleswig-Holstein) as party chair [see pp. 37905; 38199].
Karl-Heinz Blessing, formerly an official of the IG Metall trade union, became federal business manager.
The Greens in June 1991 chose a new collective leadership, confirming the more pragmatic stance of the party following its Bundestag election disappointment, after Jutta Ditfurth led a breakaway group of radical ecologists and feminists [see p. 38199].
Preparations were being made in June to establish a youth organization for the Greens, intended to counteract the erosion of support for the party among the younger voters.
CSU fears that its views were being neglected within the ruling coalition led to suggestions that the CSU should link with the German Social Union (DSU) in eastern Germany.
A meeting on May 8 between CDU and CSU leaders Kohl and Waigel produced an agreement which allayed CSU concerns.
Internal party difficulties
The CDU Minister President of Baden-Württemberg, Lothar Späth, resigned in January 1991 because of allegations that he had improperly accepted favours from businessmen [see p. 37966].
Rita Süssmuth, president of the Bundestag, was the subject in March of a parliamentary investigation concerning allegations that her husband had used her official Mercedes improperly.
The party treasurer, Walther Leisler Kiep, was fined in May for tax avoidance relating to donations from industry to the CDU [see p. 38199].
The most serious party issue concerned the property and finances of the PDS.
In addition to the issue of whether the PDS should retain any of the property or wealth acquired during the 40 years in which (as the SED) it had controlled the state apparatus and the economy of East Germany, there were scandals in October 1990 arising from attempts by party officials to transfer money illegally to foreign bank accounts [see pp. 37826; 38199].
The CDU and FDP, as legal successors to the former "block parties" which had been ancillary to the SED, declared that they would transfer assets belonging to those East German parties to the Treuhand trustee agency.
Legal and accounting problems delayed completion of those transfers.
The independent commission established by the government to investigate and audit funds and property of former East German parties and political groups had been hindered in its work by shortage of staff and lack of co-operation from the affected organizations.
In an interim report on its work in May, the commission complained that not one of the parties or mass organizations of what was East Germany had as yet provided a completed accounting of its property holdings as at October 1989.
On June 28 Treuhand announced that it had taken control of PDS landed property, and frozen all its bank accounts, restricting the party's freedom to spend money from those accounts without Treuhand permission.
Membership of the PDS was reported to have declined from 2,400,000 in 1989 to 250,000 in May 1991.
In February, Gysi threatened legal action against the Land of Bavaria when the Bavarian government put the party under surveillance on the grounds that it might be dangerous to the Constitution.
Neither the federal government, nor the governments of other Länder, followed Bavaria's example.
Declining support for government
Opinion polls in 1991 indicated a substantial decline in support for parties of the governing coalition (especially among eastern German respondents), a reduction in support for Kohl as Chancellor, and a growing feeling of anxiety and resentment among eastern Germans, a large majority of whom said that they were made to feel that they were "second-class citizens" in unified Germany.
At a meeting on April 12, Chancellor Kohl and the then leader of the SPD, Hans-Jochen Vogel, agreed to establish cross-party working groups to discuss issues relating to the new Länder, especially unemployment and property ownership issues [see p. 38155].
Security — Role of armed forces
Following unification, the Bundeswehr (federal German armed forces) assumed responsibility for the troops, equipment, supplies and sites of the National People's Army (NVA—the East German armed forces)[see p. 37761].
In November 1990 the Ministry of Defence announced that not all of the 500,000-strong personnel of the NVA could be absorbed by the Bundeswehr, and that little of the large stock of weapons and munitions could be of use to the Bundeswehr.
NVA barracks and training areas were being handed over to the government for civilian use as rapidly as possible.
The Bundeswehrkommando Ost (set up in October 1990 to supervise the merging of the two German armed forces—see p. 37761) ceased operations on July 1, 1991.
In July 1990 the government had announced that the period of national service would be reduced from 15 months to 12 months, retrospective to Oct. 1, 1989.
The period of substitute civilian service would be reduced from 20 months to 15 months.
The outbreak of the Gulf war in January 1991 produced a considerable rise in the number of conscripts seeking conscientious-objector status, including some who were already members of the armed forces [see pp. 37941; 37989; 38199-200].
Constitutional restrictions on deployment of German troops beyond the NATO area were criticized by Kohl, who in March pressed for constitutional changes to allow German troops to join international military operations [but see p. 38199 for SPD congress vote on issue].
The issue aroused great public controversy, as did the financial and material contributions made by the German government to the allied coalition for prosecution of the Gulf war.
The admission by the government on March 1 of the extent of illegal exports of arms and ancillary equipment to Iraq (valued at about DM1,000 million) and the initiation on March 12 of criminal proceedings against persons involved in exporting poison gas to Iraq further heightened controversy [see also pp. 38020; 38298].
Espionage
Throughout the year to June 1991 there were revelations about highly placed West German officials who had spied for East Germany.
The arrest in October 1990 of Klaus Kuron, a senior West German intelligence officer accused of working for the East German State Security Service (Stasi)[see p. 37828], resulted in the arrests of many others accused of spying [see p. 37828].
Hagen Blau, a diplomat, was sentenced on Nov. 15, 1990, to six years in prison for spying for East Germany since 1960.
Several East German politicians were affected by accusations that they had acted as Stasi informants, including most notably de Maizière [see pp. 37905; pp. 38109-10; 37718; 38446-47].
Rehabilitation of victims of SED regime
In May Justice Minister Kinkel announced that priority was to be given to the rehabilitation and compensation of victims of the SED regime, ahead of pursuing those accused of committing crimes or of assessing compensation claims of those who had been dispossessed of property by the regime.
There were an estimated 100,000 petitions for rehabilitation.
Crime rates
Crime rates in eastern Germany, affected by the decline in strength of police forces and by social changes since unification, increased by about 30 per cent, with robbery and traffic offences showing the largest increases.
There was a sharp increase in acts of violence by youths, especially football hooligans, and in neo-Nazi and racist attacks, particularly in Dresden, Leipzig and Berlin [see pp. 38164; 38298].
Attempts to bring former East German leaders to trial
Attempts were made to bring Erich Honecker, the former East German party and government leader, to trial on charges of giving the "shoot-to-kill" order to guards preventing illegal border-crossings, but the Soviet Union, where Honecker and his wife were, refused to hand him over to the German authorities [see pp. 37828-29; 38110; for June sentencing of Harry Tisch see pp. 37967; 38298].
Violence in West Germany
There were several major acts of political violence in West Germany.
On July 27, 1990, an unsuccessful car-bomb attack, for which responsibility was claimed by the extremist Red Army Faction (RAF), was made against State Secretary Hans Neusel, a leading Interior Ministry adviser on terrorism.
A number of Jewish cemeteries were vandalized during the summer in Baden-Württemberg, and in December in Berlin.
On Oct. 12 Interior Minister Schäuble was shot and severely disabled by a mentally deranged assailant [see pp. 37763; 38199].
Adelheid Streidel, who attempted to kill Lafontaine at a political meeting on April 25, 1990 [see p. 37388], was declared on Nov. 5 unfit to stand trial and detained in a psychiatric clinic.
In April 1991 Detlev Rohwedder, head of the Treuhand agency, was assassinated [see p. 38155], and in June a Berlin government official was killed by a letter bomb [see p. 38298].
Three leading RAF members were arrested in mid-1990 and brought to trial: Werner Lotze [see p. 37967]; Susanne Albrecht [see p. 38298]; and Henning Beer [see pp. 38298; 38354].
Michael Kühnen, a prominent extreme right-wing political leader [see p. 36530], was arrested on April 9, 1991, and charged with the leadership of a prohibited right-wing organization.
He died in hospital of AIDS on April 25.
1990 report on extremist groups
Presenting the 1990 report of the federal Office for the Protection of the Constitution (BfV) on Aug. 15, 1991, Schäuble said that there could be around 15,000 neo-Nazis in eastern Germany.
Membership of extreme left-wing organizations was estimated to have fallen from 41,000 in 1989 to 29,500 in 1990, largely because of the collapse of the (western) German Communist Party (DKP) after the fall of the East German regime.
Membership of extreme right-wing organizations fell from 35,900 to 32,300.
The report estimated that there were still 400 active communist agents in sensitive positions in Germany.
Economy
After the introduction of economic and monetary union on July 1, 1990, the economies of western and eastern Germany followed sharply divergent paths.
This divergence was especially marked in terms of unemployment.
In western Germany unemployment rates fell, as did the number of vacancies notified.
In eastern Germany, on the other hand, unemployment rose steadily, as did the numbers officially on short-time working (many of whom were effectively unemployed).
In December 1990 unemployment rates were 6.8 per cent in western Germany, and 7.3 per cent in eastern Germany.
By June unemployment in western Germany had fallen to 5.3 per cent or 593,000 (the lowest figure for over 10 years), but in eastern Germany it had risen to 9.5 per cent(842,504).
In addition, about 300,000 eastern German workers were commuting to jobs in western Germany, and 108,000 had emigrated to western Germany in the first five months of 1991—most of them younger, skilled workers [see also pp. 37761; 38109; 38354].
Unemployment in eastern Germany was caused mainly by the closure by the Treuhand agency of unprofitable industrial plants, including some of the most famous east German enterprises [see p. 38155].
The last Trabant car was produced in April 1991 while the Buna chemical works in Halle and Carl-Zeiss Jena (the optics business) were among operations either closed or subject to severe reductions of scale [see also p. 38155 for other companies affected].
It was estimated that, in the second half of 1990, the gross national product (GNP) of the former East Germany was only 8.3 per cent of western Germany's GNP (although the population was over one-quarter, and its land area nearly half that of western Germany).
The metal-workers' union (IG Metall) negotiated a settlement which would guarantee parity of basic wages in the metal industry for eastern and western Germany by 1994, on the grounds that this was essential to retain skilled workers in eastern Germany.
Eastern German workers in other industries attempted by strikes and protests to protect their jobs and increase their wage levels: railway workers in November 1990 [see p. 37867], postal workers in January 1991 [see p. 37966], and ship-yard workers in Baltic ports in February.
Federal measures to alleviate the economic crisis in eastern Germany included FDP attempts to create a low-taxation zone to encourage investment [see p. 37966], and a "joint programme for eastern regeneration" approved in March 1991 [see p. 38109].
However, investment in eastern Germany was hampered by uncertainties concerning land and property ownership [see pp. 38109; 38156].
In November 1990 Treuhand stated that half of all land and property had claims entered against it by former owners.
Infrastructure problems also held back investment.
In November Minister of Posts and Telecommunications Christian Schwarz-Schilling announced an increase in investment for the eastern German telephone service from DM5,000 million to DM6,800 million for 1991.
By the end of May 1991 Treuhand had disposed of 18,500 of the 23,000 businesses for which it had assumed responsibility in July 1990 [for criticism in April 1991 of Treuhand policy see p. 38155].
The German economy as a whole experienced strains associated with unification.
Inflation increased in western Germany, reaching 3.3 per cent in October 1990 (the highest for seven years) and 3.5 per cent in June 1991.
In comparison, the index for eastern Germany—including price-controlled goods—was below the level for 1989 for the final quarter of 1990 at 98.5, but reached 107.0 for the first quarter of 1991 (1989=100).
Germany's trading position deteriorated steadily: in March 1991 the current-account deficit was a record DM3,500 million.
In April there was the first deficit on the visible trade account for 10 years; for the first four months of 1991 the deficit was DM12,000 million (compared with a surplus for 1990 as a whole of DM77,000 million).
The revised 1991 budget, which had been presented in March 1991 [see p. 38109]was approved by the Bundestag in June.
The then president of the Bundesbank, Karl-Otto Pöhl [for whose retirement, announced in May 1991 and effective from July 31, see pp. 38199; 38401, repeatedly warned the government that there was a need to offset increased expenditure in some parts of the public sector by making reductions in expenditure in other parts, and that higher public-sector borrowing would increase interest rates to dangerous levels [see pp. 38198-99].
These warnings were echoed in the report on April 29 from the "five wise men" (economists mandated to produce periodic reports on the state of the German economy).
In a report published in July 1991 the OECD found that "the economies of the old federal Länder…have exhibited a remarkably high degree of resilience and strength, combining faster growth with maintenance of low inflation, while the five new Länder have gone through a period of severe adjustment, involving in its initial stage heavy output and employment losses" .
In May 1991 a new high-speed train service on the Hamburg-Munich route was introduced.
Running in part over newly constructed lines, it aimed to attract road and domestic air travellers by reducing journey times by up to one-half.
The investment in the new service was DM5,500 million.
Expansion of the routes was expected over the next decade.
Principal foreign relations events
September 1990: "Two-plus-four" treaty signed; German-Soviet bilateral treaties initialled; Franco-German summit [see pp. 37717-18]; November: Gorbachev visit [see p. 37867]; German-Polish border treaty signed [ibid.];
Brandt mission to Iraq to secure release of hostages [see p. 37871]; appeal for aid to the Soviet Union, particularly foodstuffs; January 1991: Soviet-German shipping pact signed (Jan. 7), giving each other 's ships equal status with their own ships in ports, and creating an adjudicatory institution to decide on disputes; resolution approved by Bundestag (on Jan. 14) condemning actions of Soviet troops in Lithuania; March: Genscher visit to Soviet Union [see p. 38110]; EC Commission announcement of provision of DM6,200 million over three years for reconstruction projects in eastern Germany; May: Franco-German summit [see p. 38198]; Kohl visit to USA [see p. 38199-200]; June: good-neighbourliness treaty with Poland signed [see p. 38306]; July: Kohl visit to Soviet Union and question of Soviet troop withdrawals from Germany [see p. 38354].
Following unification a reassessment by both Germany and its neighbours of the country's foreign policy role was necessary.
Kohl was keen to assert his government's commitment to further European integration and to the successful conclusion of the EC's intergovernmental conferences on economic and monetary union and on political union which opened in December 1990 [see p. 37905-06].
Even as German unification was taking place the Gulf crisis raised questions of a potential German military role outside NATO's area of operations [see above].
On Aug. 20, 1990, the government coalition and SPD agreed not to send Bundeswehr troops to the Gulf region and instead Germany made only monetary contributions to the war effort [see pp. 37640; 37694; 37697; 37718; 38109].
The issue was raised again during Kohl's visit to the United States in May 1991 [see pp. 38199-200].
In February it was announced that 147,950 Volga Germans had migrated from the Soviet Union to Germany in 1990.
There were fears that up to 1,000,000 could seek to migrate if the Soviet economy worsened.
Volga Germans had automatic rights of entry and citizenship under German law.
[For numbers of asylum seekers in Germany in January 1991 see p. 37969.]
Ratification of treaties concerning external aspects of German unification
 "Two-plus-four" treaty — signed in September 1990 [see pp. 37717-18; 37834]— ratified by Germany and USA in October [see p. 37762], by UK in November [see p. 37867], by France in December [see p. 38110]and by Soviet Union in March 1991 [ibid.].
German-Soviet good-neighbourliness treaty-initialled in September 1990 [see pp. 37718; 37835]and signed in November 1990 [see p. 37867]-ratified by German Bundestag on April 25 and by Soviet Union on March 4.
German-Soviet economic co-operation treaty-initialled in September 1990 [see p. 37718]and signed in November [see p. 37867]-ratified by German Bundestag on April 25 and by Soviet Union on March 4.
German-Soviet treaty on Soviet troop withdrawal- initialled in September 1990 [see p. 37718]and signed in October [see p. 37762]-ratified by Soviet Union in April 1991 [see p. 38110]and by German Bundestag in November 1990.
German-Soviet treaty on status of Soviet troops in Germany- initialled in September 1990 [see p. 37718]and signed in October [see p. 37762]-ratified by Soviet Union in April 1991 [see p. 38110]and by German Bundestag in November 1990.
German-Polish border treaty- signed in November [see p. 37867]-ratified by German Bundestag on Oc. 17, 1991, and by Polish Sejm, on Oct. 18, 1991.
EUROPE
GIBRALTAR
Area: 5.5 sq km.Population: 30,000 (1989 World Bank est.).
Language: English.
Religion: Christianity (majority Roman Catholic); Islam and Judaism.
Armed forces:(see below).
Currency: Gibraltar pound (at par with pound sterling—US $=G; £0.6191 as at July 1, 1991).
POLITICAL SYSTEM
Sovereignty over the strategically important peninsula of Gibraltar was granted under the 1713 Treaty of Utrecht to the United Kingdom, which accords it the status of a Crown Colony; UK sovereignty is disputed by Spain.
Gibraltar has a UK-appointed Governor with executive authority, a Gibraltar Council under a Chief Minister, and a House of Assembly comprising a Speaker (appointed by the Governor), two ex-officio members and 15 elected members serving a four-year term.
Main government leaders
Governor: Sir Derek Reffell.
Chief Minister: José (Joe) Bossano.
Ruling party
Gibraltar Socialist Labour Party (GSLP, Joe Bossano l.)
Other political parties
Gibraltar Labour Party-Association for the Advancement of Civil Rights (GLP-AACR, Adolfo Canepa l.).
Elections
In a general election on March 24, 1988 [see p. 36040], the GSLP won eight of the elective seats and the GLP-AACR the remaining seven.
Bossano accordingly replaced Canepa as Chief Minister; Canepa had taken over three months earlier, following the resignation of Sir Joshua Hassan [see p. 35794].
1990/91 OVERVIEW
Negotiations between the UK and Spain over the political future of Gibraltar continued intermittently.
Chief Minister Bossano declined to participate, reportedly expecting that increased political integration within the European Communities (EC) would eventually guarantee local autonomy.
Gibraltar was discussed in talks between the UK Foreign and Commonwealth Secretary Douglas Hurd and the Spanish Foreign Minister Francisco Fernández Ordóñez in London on Feb. 12, 1991, and again during Spanish Prime Minister Felipe González Márquez's visit to London in May 1991 [see p. 38201].
The refusal of the Gibraltarians to allow joint operation with Spain of Gibraltar's airport (within the terms of a 1987 Anglo-Spanish agreement) continued to be a source of contention, as were Gibraltar's role as an offshore financial centre and the alleged laxity of its customs controls.
The withdrawal of the last UK army regiment to be stationed in Gibraltar began officially on March 18, 1991.
Responsibility for the land defence of Gibraltar was assumed by the locally raised Gibraltar regiment; units of the British navy and air force continued to maintain a presence.
EUROPE
GREECE
Area: 131,957 sq km.
Population: 10,000,000 (1990 UNFPA est.).
Capital: Athens.
Language: Greek.
Religion: Christianity (majority Greek Orthodox Church).
Armed forces: 162,500 (1990).
Currency: drachma (US$1.00=198.991 drachmae as at July 1, 1991).
Major international affiliations: BIS; COCOM; Council of Europe; CSCE; EBRD; EC; NATO; OECD.
POLITICAL SYSTEM
Under the 1975 Constitution Greece, or the Hellenic Republic, is a parliamentary democracy with a President as head of state (with, since 1986, largely ceremonial functions) who is elected by parliament for a five-year term.
The President appoints the Prime Minister and, on the latter's recommendation, the other members of the government.
The unicameral 300-member parliament (Vouli) is elected for a four-year term by universal suffrage under a system of proportional representation.
Main government leaders
President: Konstantinos Karamanlis.
Prime Minister: Konstantinos Mitsotakis.
Other principal ministers: Tzannis Tzannetakis (Deputy Prime Minister; Culture); Athanassios Kanellopoulos (Deputy Prime Minister; Justice); Sotirios Kouvelas (Interior); Antonis Samaras (Foreign Affairs); Yannis Paliokrassas (Finance); Yannis Varvitsiotis (Defence).
Cabinet changes to June 1991
Economy and Tourism Minister Georgios Souflias left the government on Sept. 15, 1990; on Oct. 1 Prime Minister Mitsotakis assumed the Economy portfolio, while Efthymios Christodoulou became Deputy Economy Minister [see p. 37721].
Souflias returned to the Cabinet as Minister for National Education and Religious Affairs following the January 1991 resignation of Vassilis Kondoyannopoulos [see p. 37968].
Ruling party
Nea Demokratia (ND—New Democracy, Konstantinos Mitsotakis l.)
Other political parties
Panellinion Sosialistikon Kinema (Pasok—Panhellenic Socialist Movement, Andreas Papandreou l.);
Synaspsimos (Left Alliance, also called Coalition of the Left and Progressive Forces, Maria Damanaki pres.) is an alliance between Kommunistiko Komma Ellados-Exoteriko (KKE-External—Communist Party of Greece, Aleka Papariga gen. sec.), which dominates the alliance, and Elleniki Aristera (EAR—Greek Left Party, Leonidas Kyrkos sec. -gen.);
Komma Dimokratikis Ananeosis (DIANA—Democratic Renewal, Kostis Stefanopoulos l.).
Elections
In the third general election within a year, held on April 8, 1990, New Democracy won 150 of the 300 seats in parliament [see p. 37388].
On May 4, 1990, Karamanlis was elected President.
1990/91 OVERVIEW
Changes to electoral law
The April 1990 general election had left the ND dependent for its single-seat majority on the support of the sole DIANA deputy Theodoros Katsikis [incorrectly named as Kostis Stefanopoulos on p. 37388]who in July joined the ND.
On Nov. 9 parliament approved an amendment to the electoral law: the simple proportional representation system introduced by the Pasok government in March 1989 was replaced by a system of reinforced proportional representation, which stipulated a threshold of 3 per cent of votes nationally for any party to secure parliamentary representation.
The left-wing opposition was unhappy with a provision of the new law which would work against electoral alliances in the third stage of the distribution of seats [for 1989 system see p. 36738].
Another general election was not due until May 1994, and with the amended law perceived as likely to benefit the ND, the opposition had less incentive to press for an early election.
Neither Pasok nor Synaspismos seemed capable of capitalizing on the unpopularity of the government's austerity measures, and the ND did better than expected in the municipal elections of October 1990 [see p. 37785].
Papandreou, 71, was unanimously re-elected as leader of Pasok at a party congress on Sept. 23, 1990.
He continued in his refusal to offer a defence in his trial on charges of corruption, which opened in March 1991 and was expected to continue through most of the year [see pp. 38157-58].
Human rights
In May 1991 a delegation of members of the European Parliament was refused access to a military prison where the majority of Greece's 420 conscripts refusing military service were being held.
In February 1991 a reference in the United States State Department's annual human rights report to an alleged "pattern of economic and social discrimination against the Moslem minority in western Thrace" provoked protests from the Greek government.
The report also recognized the existence of a Macedonian minority in northern Greece—something which the Greek government had not done.
Economy
The period 1990/91 was characterized by mounting anxiety among other EC governments over Greece's faltering economic performance.
Greece had joined the EC in 1981 and hoped to enter the European monetary system (EMS) by 1995.
In 1989, however, Greece had replaced Portugal as the poorest EC country in terms of GNP per capita.
Its current-account deficit was a major cause of concern, increasing in 1990 to US$3,600 million (a 40 per cent increase compared with 1989).
On May 31, 1990, the new ND government presented a "transitional" budget, which forecast a 29.8 per cent rise in state spending, with some sharp rises in consumer taxes and utility charges providing 39.9 per cent more revenue for central government than in 1989.
Adjustment programme and OECD report
A "medium-term adjustment programme 1991-93" was presented in its final form at the end of February 1991.
The public-sector borrowing requirement (PSBR) was forecast to decline in 1991 to 13 per cent of GDP and to reach 3 per cent by 1993 (a target which some observers dismissed as optimistic), and it was hoped to reduce year-on-year consumer price inflation to 7 per cent by the end of the same year.
Slower growth in wages would produce a cut of about 4 per cent in real terms.
A major EC loan which had been under negotiation for some months [see p. 37968]was approved on Feb. 25, 1991, but was conditional on the implementation of economic measures corresponding to those outlined in the adjustment programme.
The Organization for Economic Co-operation and Development (OECD) survey of Greece published in June 1991 criticized management of public enterprises and banks, and noted that "traditionally macro-economic policies in Greece are strongly influenced by the electoral cycle, but this has become more pronounced in the 1980s" .
In recent years the size of Greece's foreign debt had become a significant factor in its economic problems, as EC transfers and loans were no longer able to cover widening deficits.
Total foreign debt now represented nearly two-fifths of Greece's gross domestic product (GDP) —four times more than in the late 1970s.
Inflation, wages and employment
In 1990 consumer-price inflation averaged 20 per cent and real wages fell.
Unemployment for 1990/91 was officially just below 8 per cent, although labour representatives claimed in February 1991 that the true unemployment figure was between 12 and 15 per cent .
In agriculture, which still occupied 27 per cent of the workforce, underemployment was estimated to be high.
The increase in the labour supply was slow; in 1989 a decrease in population was recorded.
Industrial action
On June 6, 1990, there was a 24-hour nationwide strike to protest against the latest austerity measures.
The major unions involved were the General Confederation of Greek Workers (GSEE) and the Federation of Civil Servants' Unions (Adedy).
On June 18 over 7,000 Greek doctors struck over pay.
Members of the secondary school teachers' union (LOME) went on strike in July 1990 in support of a 15 per cent salary increase and improved training and conditions [see also September 1990 strikes and July austerity measures p. 37721].
On Dec. 5, 1990, more than 1,000,000 workers went on strike for 48 hours in protest at a proposed law allowing the dismissal of workers participating in strikes judged to be illegal.
On May 30, 1991, a 24-hour general strike called by GSEE for improved wages and conditions affected many services.
Privatization
In May 1990 the privatization of 28 heavily indebted industrial companies was announced; another 21 would be liquidated and 200 industrial companies controlled by Greek banks would be sold or liquidated at the next stage of privatization.
By June 1991, however, still only seven of the 28 companies had been sold and eight others were in liquidation.
In the months following the ND election victory in April 1990 there was a boom in the Greek stock market, which was hailed as one of the world's most promising "emerging markets" .
By June 1990 124 companies were listed.
Exports and tourism
Merchandise exports had stagnated since 1988, as Greece lost some of its share of foreign markets in manufactured goods.
In 1990 the visible trade gap widened by 34.8 per cent to a record US$12,290 million.
The Greek authorities protested when in January 1991 the US government warned its nationals against travelling to Greece for fear of Gulf-related incidents.
There had been a record 9,300,000 tourist arrivals in 1990.
Foreign relations
Gulf war, relations with Turkey
Greece contributed a frigate to the coalition forces in the Gulf war and participated in the trade embargo against Iraq [see pp. 37935; 37942].
In the aftermath of the war the government was said to be concerned over Turkey's increasingly prominent international role.
In July 1990 there had been tension with Turkey as Greece contemplated extending its territorial waters from six to 12 miles.
Oil-drilling rights, aircraft control in Aegean air space and a continuing Greek veto on a package of EC economic aid to Turkey continued to be sources of friction between the two countries.
Yugoslavia and Albania
Tension over the slavophone Macedonian minority in northern Greece culminated in June 1990 in Yugoslav Macedonians blocking the Greek-Yugoslav border, accusing the Greek government of being "selective" in issuing visas.
Yugoslav Macedonians had also been flown back from Athens under a new regulation demanding that they should possess US$1,000 on entry to Greece.
The two governments on June 18 agreed regulations on visa and foreign exchange requirements for travellers.
Escalating instability in Yugoslavia from June 1991 created additional uncertainty in Greek-Yugoslav relations,
The number of would-be immigrants crossing into Greece from Albania rose to thousands in December 1990 and January 1991, and the Greek government tightened border controls.
By late February 17,000 Albanians were reported to have sought political refuge in Greece [see p. 37746; for January 1991 refugee exodus to Greece see pp. 37746; 37972].
EUROPE
HUNGARY
Area: 93,033 sq km.
Population: 10,600,000 (1990 UNFPA est.).
Capital: Budapest.
Language: Hungarian (official).
Religion: Christianity (predominantly Roman Catholic).
Armed forces: 94,000 (1990).
Currency: forint (US$1.00=F78.1146 as at July 1, 1991).
Major international affiliations: BIS, Council of Europe, CSCE, EBRD, Hexagonale.
POLITICAL SYSTEM
Hungary, declared a People's Republic in 1949, was on Oct. 23, 1989, proclaimed the Hungarian Republic.
The proclamation followed approval on Oct. 20-27 by the highest state body, the unicameral National Assembly (Orzággyülés), elected for a five-year term, of a new transitional constitution and electoral law which introduced a multiparty democratic system (hitherto the sole legal party had been the Hungarian Socialist Worker's Party, reorganised at the beginning of October as the Hungarian Socialist Party).
Main Government Leaders
President: Arpad Goncz, since August 1990.
Prime Minister: Jozsef Antall (HDF), since May 1990.
Other principal ministers: Geza Jeszenszky (MDF, Foreign); Lajos Für (MDF, Defence); Peter Boross (unaffiliated, Interior); Gyula Kiss (Smallholders, Labour Affairs); Mihaly Kupa (unaffiliated, Finance).
Ministerial Changes to June 1991
December 1990: Cabinet reshuffle, including appointment of Kupa as Finance Minister and Boross as Interior Minister [see p. 37922].
January 1991: Further reshuffle [see p. 37974-75].
Ruling parties
Coalition led by the centre-right Hungarian Democratic Forum (MDF, Jozsef Antall, pres.), with the Independent Smallholders' Party (FKgP; Ferenc Nagy, Jozsef Torgyan co-ch.) and the Christian Democratic People's Party (CDPP, Lásló Surján ch.).
Other political parties
Alliance of Free Democrats (SzDSz, János Kis ch.);
Federation of Young Democrats (FIDESz, Victor Orban l.);
Green Party (Károly Szita, Ivan Gyulay, György Ilosvay co-ch.);
Hungarian People's Party (Gyula Fekete ch.);
Hungarian Socialist Party (MSzP, Gyula Horn, ch.);
Hungarian Socialist Workers' Party (MSzMP, Gyula Thürmer ch.);
Social Democratic Party of Hungary (MSzDP, Anna Petrasovits, ch.).
Elections
Last general election held in March, April 1990 [see pp. 37325-26; 37380].
Local government elections held in October 1990, producing setback for ruling coalition parties [see p. 37790].
1990/91 OVERVIEW
The first major demonstration against the three-party ruling coalition which had come to power in April 1990 [see p. 37380]erupted in September 1990.
University students were particularly angered by the government's refusal to meet their demands for a minimum monthly grant in line with the country's average wage.
They also pressed for a purge of supporters of the former communist regime on the university campuses and for increased student participation in university faculty councils.
Though the students' demands were supported by the SzDSz, the FIDESz and the MSzP, the government maintained that no further funds were available, due to the country's financial problems.
Popular discontent subsequently resulted in the government's loss of support in the October local government election results and the taxi-drivers' strike at the end of the same month [see p. 37791].
The government had attempted to regain public support when it honoured the martyrs of the 1956 Hungarian uprising against Communist rule, also in October.
Six-party talks — New party
In early April 1991 the FIDESz suggested six-party co-ordinating talks, outside a parliamentary context, to discuss the country's major political questions.
The "talks of experts" , involving the CDPP, FIDESz, the MDF, the FKgP, the MSzP, and the SzDSz, were held in late April and during May.
Imre Pozsgay and Zoltan Biro launched the National Democratic Federation on May 17, 1991.
Pozsgay, the first senior Communist party official to admit publicly that the 1956 uprising was a popular revolt, had resigned from the Hungarian Socialist party in November 1990 because he no longer felt that any existing political party totally reflected his views.
The main aim of the Federation was to restore national values and attract back into active public life the Hungarian population which, it was claimed, was suffering a crisis of confidence.
Return of Church property
In March 1991 the Országgyülés approved a bill which settled the right of the Roman Catholic Church to its former premises.
All Church properties such as schools, hospitals and cultural establishments, converted into state property by the communist regime, were to be returned over a period of 10 years.
Minority rights
National and ethnic minorities continued to assert their interests.
In January 1991 Hungarian minority groups—including Croats, Romanians, Slovaks, Slovenes and Gypsies—set up a round table to seek guarantees of their rights as minorities.
On Jan. 30 the human rights, minority and religious affairs committee of the National Assembly approved the distribution of the equivalent of US$200 million to the various minority groups to assist in the running of their organizations and unions.
The government announced in May 1991 that it would submit a bill in the second half of the year to deal with the problems of national and ethnic minorities.
Security
September 1990: Leaders of Communist international security service put on trial.
October 1990: Nationwide operation against foreigners staying in Hungary without residence permits.
February 1991: New agreement and co-operation between Hungarian and Polish secret services.
May 1991: Resignation of Mihaly Boeti, Deputy Defence Secretary, over defence differences.
Economy
The government's ambitious reforms aiming at the revitalization of the national economy and the introduction of a fully operating free-market mechanism, outlined by Antall in May 1990 [see p. 37465], incorporated privatization, together with efforts to increase exports, to enter the world economy and to attract foreign investment.
The privatization programme, which had begun with the opening in June 1990 of the stock exchange [see p. 37620], was framed in legislation approved in September [see p. 37724]and was the responsibility of the State Property Agency (SPA), which was accused of bureaucracy and delaying tactics caused by an insistence on competitive bidding.
In December 1990, tenders were invited for a consultancy in the privatization of eight of the twenty flagship state companies.
The actual sales were expected to begin in the second half of 1991.
According to the government's privatization strategy, by 1994 the proportion of state assets should be reduced to below 50 per cent, with foreign ownership reaching 25 per cent .
Some strategic industries, including the extraction of oil and natural gas, power generation and arms trade would remain in state control.
The growth of new small private businesses during the year ending June 1991 exceeded all expectations, paying an average wage of 1,000-1,500 forints per month.
So-called "spontaneous privatization" , initiated by company managers, although vetoed by the State Property Agency, was also increasing, as was the role of "investor-initiated privatization" .
1991 budget
The 1991 budget, passed on Dec. 30, 1990, projected a deficit of nearly 79,000 million forint, with expenditure held back to 931,690 million forint [see p. 37922].
Rise in poverty and unemployment
In 1990 gross national product (GNP) contracted by an estimated 5 per cent and was expected to fall a further 3-4 per cent in 1991.
Inflation rose in 1990 to 30 per cent, increasing during the first half of 1991 to 36 per cent , fuelled by price liberalization.
Unemployment climbed by 30 per cent in January 1991 and was expected to double to nearly 300,000 by the end of 1991.
The rising level of poverty first affected ethnic minorities, leading to migration of whole families to Budapest and other big cities, and a rise in homelessness.
Social policy was still not fully worked out so that emergency measures, including the setting-up of free street kitchens and shelters and the introduction of food, accommodation and energy vouchers for those in need, attempted to deal with the worsening situation.
Foreign investment
Half of all foreign investment in eastern Europe reportedly went to Hungary in 1990, amounting to an estimated sum of between $750 million and $1,000 million; another $1,000 million were expected in 1991.
The deepest penetration was in newspapers and sugar-refining.
Important investments during the twelve months to June 1991 included a joint venture between US General Motors and Raba, involving a $200 million capital injection, and between Japanese Suzuki and Autoconcern, finalized in April 1991, representing a $150 million investment.
Collapse of eastern European market — Foreign loans
Trade with the former Council for Mutual Economic Aid (CMEA or COMECON) countries fell by 28 per cent in 1990 due to the introduction of dollar accounting in January 1991 [see p. 37979]and the uneven pace of economic restructuring.
The Hungarian government issued a warning in February 1991 that all agreements and contracts with the Soviet Union were at companies' own risk and that no government loans would be available.
Trade with European Community (EC) countries, on the other hand, was expected to rise to a 40 per cent share of Hungarian trade in 1991.
Hungary's $21,000 million foreign debt was the highest per capita in eastern Europe.
Hungary was receiving loans from the World Bank, the IMF and the EC to support its market-oriented economic reforms.
On Feb. 20, 1991, the IMF approved a three-year extended arrangement totalling SDR1,114 million (about US$1,600 million), with SDR ($) being made available in 1991.
In return, Hungary had agreed to hold its 1991 budget deficit at 78,000 million forints ($1,130 million) and to limit its current-account deficit to $1,200 million.
Foreign relations
September 1990: 10-year bilateral treaty signed with Italy on economic, industrial and technical co-operation.
Bilateral agreement with Germany on co-operation over nuclear safety and the prevention of radiation.
November 1990: Council of Europe approved Hungary's application for membership (see p. 37870).
December 1990: Visit of European Community's Foreign Relations Commissioner, Frans Andriessen, to open EC mission in Budapest and to discuss associate membership of the EC, expected to take effect from Jan. 1, 1992.
April 1991: Fourth round of talks between EC and Hungary.
May 1991: Confirmation by Soviet Chief of Staff that last Soviet troops would leave Hungary by June 30, 1991.
EUROPE
EUROPE
ICELAND
Area: 102,820 sq km.
Population: 256,000 (1991).
Capital: Reykyavík.
Language: Icelandic.
Religion: Christianity (predominantly Protestant).
Armed forces: None.
Currency: Icelandic krona (US$1.00=63.3145 kroner as at July 1, 1991).
Major international affiliations: BIS; Council of Europe; CSCE; EBRD; EFTA; NATO; Nordic Council; OECD.
POLITICAL SYSTEM
The Republic of Iceland was formed in June 1944, when the Union linking the island with the Kingdom of Denmark was dissolved.
A President is elected every four years by universal adult suffrage and appoints a Prime Minister and Cabinet, who exercise effective executive authority.
The legislature is the 63-member bicameral Althing (parliament), also elected by universal adult suffrage by a system of proportional representation for a four-year term, the upper house of which consists of one-third of the Althing's members, elected at a joint sitting, while the lower house comprises the remaining two-thirds.
Main government leaders
President: Vigdís Finnbogadóttir.
Prime Minister: Davíd Oddson (IP); also Minister at the Statistical Bureau of Iceland.
Other principal ministers: Jón Baldvin Hannibalsson (SDP, Foreign Minister); Fridrik Sophusson (IP, Finance); Thorsteinn Pálsson (IP, Fisheries, Justice and Ecclesiastical Affairs).
Cabinet changes to June 1991
Davíd Oddsson's centre-right Cabinet replaced that of Steingrímur Hermannsson following the April 1991 general election [see p. 38158].
Ruling coalition
Sjálfstaedisflokkurinn (Independence Party—IP, Davíd Oddsson ch.);
Althyduflokkurinn (Social Democratic Party—SDP, Jón Baldvin Hannibalsson ch.)[see p. 38158].
Other political parties
Framsóknarflokkurinn (Progressive Party—PP, Steingrímur Hermannsson ch.);
Althydubandalag (People's Alliance—PA, Olafur Ragnar Grímsson ch.);
Samtök um Kvennalista (Women's Alliance—WA, with collective leadership); Borgaraflokkurinn (Citizens' Party—CP, Julius Sólnes).
Elections
A general election was held on April 20, 1991 [see p. 38158].
Finbogadóttir was re-elected President for a third four-year term in June 1988 [see p. 36107]and announced in June 1991 her intention to seek election in 1992 for a further four-year term.
1990/91 OVERVIEW
The economy responded well to the austerity policies of 1988-1990, and was expected to grow by 2 per cent in 1991, while the inflation rate dropped to 8.5 per cent, compared with 21.1 per cent in 1989 and an average 34 per cent annually between 1982 and 1989.
A policy of gradual economic diversification away from fishing helped to stabilize the situation, and the construction of a major aluminium smelter was started in April 1991; the relatively low level of unemployment (about 1.5 per cent) was nevertheless expected to rise.
The 1991 election was fought largely on the issue of tax reform, with Pálsson's Independence Party favouring a general reduction of rates of taxation which Hermannsson's Progressive Party dismissed as "irresponsible" .
Negotiations between the European Free Trade Area (EFTA) and the European Communities (EC) on a common European Economic Area (EEA) were soured by Iceland's attempts to restrict fishing within its waters [see pp. 38307; 38353].
However, after the general election the new government ended in May Iceland's boycott of the negotiations, at which it had previously been represented in an observer capacity only.
The new government also favoured closer relations with the United States, which maintained NATO naval bases in Iceland.
Reflecting the Nordic countries' close relations with the Baltic states Iceland on Aug. 26, 1991, became the first country formally to establish diplomatic relations with Estonia, Latvia and Lithuania [see p. 37945].
EUROPE
IRELAND
Area: 70,283 sq km.
Population: 3,700,000 (1990 UNFPA est.).
Capital: Dublin.
Languages: Irish (official first language, but use is limited); English.
Religion: Christianity (95% Roman Catholic, 5% Protestant).
Armed forces: 13,000 (1990).
Currency: punt (US$1.00=I£0.6552 as at July 1, 1991).
Major international affiliations: BIS; Council of Europe; CSCE; EBRD; EC; ESA; OECD.
POLITICAL SYSTEM
Under its 1937 Constitution the Republic of Ireland is "a sovereign, independent democratic state" with a President (Uachtarán na hÉireann) elected for a seven-year term by direct vote.
The President is advised by a Council of State and holds specific constitutional powers.
The National Parliament (Oireachtas) consists of the President and two Houses: a 166-member House of Representatives (Dáil Éireann), elected for a five-year term by universal adult suffrage on the basis of proportional representation by means of a single transferable vote, and a 60-member Senate (Seanad Éireann).
A Cabinet led by the Prime Minister (Taoiseach) exercises executive authority and is responsible to the Dáil.
Main government leaders
President (Uachtarán na hÉireann): Mary Robinson.
Prime Minister (Taoiseach): Charles Haughey (also responsible for Irish-Speaking Affairs (Gaeltacht).
Other principal ministers: John Patrick Wilson (Deputy Prime Minister (Tanaiste), The Marine); Gerard Collins (Foreign Affairs); Albert Reynolds (Finance); Brendan Daly (Defence); Michael O'Kennedy (Agriculture and Food); Desmond O'Malley (Industry and Commerce); Ray Burke (Justice and Communications).
Cabinet changes to June 1991
In November 1990 Wilson was appointed Deputy Prime Minister and in February 1991 Daly was appointed Defence Minister [see p. 38020], both of which portfolios had previously been held by Brian Lenihan, who was dismissed in October 1990 [see p. 37868].
Ruling coalition
Fianna Fáil (Republican Party, Charles Haughey l., Jim Tunney ch.);
Progressive Democrats (Desmond O'Malley l.).
Other political parties
Fine Gael (United Ireland Party, John Bruton l. since November 1990—see p. 37868); Labour Party (Dick Spring l.);
Pairtí na nOibrí (Workers' Party, Prionsias de Rossa l.);
Democratic Socialist Party (DSP, Jim Kemmy pres.
Comhaoltás Glas (Green Alliance, Roger Garland is the only Green MP); Sinn Féin(Gerry Adams pres.).
Elections
An early general election was held in June 1989 after which Fianna Fáil was obliged to form a coalition government with the Progressive Democrats.
Robinson was elected President on Nov. 7, 1990, and took office on Dec. 3 [see p. 37868].
1990/91 OVERVIEW
The election in November 1990 of Mary Robinson as President, the first woman to be elected to the post, represented a watershed in Irish politics since it "forced the country's leadership to take a fresh look at Irish society" (Financial Times of Dec. 18, 1990).
On Feb. 28, 1991, Haughey announced that "outdated" family planning laws would be changed after an appeal court increased by £100 the fine imposed in May 1990 [see p. 37585]on the Irish Family Planning Association (IFPA) for selling condoms in a record store in Dublin.
On April 16 the Cabinet approved the introduction of a bill reducing the age at which individuals could be sold condoms from 18 to 17, and allowing contraceptives to be sold in pubs, discos and supermarkets as well as by chemists and doctors.
Economy
In a report published on May 22, 1991, the Organization for Economic Co-operation and Development (OECD) noted that "the remarkable improvement in Irish economic performance…continued in 1989 and 1990, helped by a favourable external environment" .
Gross national product (GNP) grew by an average of just under 5 per cent in 1989 and 1990, while the annual rate of inflation fell to below 3 per cent by the end of 1990.
However the report also stated that the economy was "entering a critical stage in which the pace of the expansion [had]begun to slacken" ; both the United Kingdom (Ireland's most important trading partner) and the United States were in recession, and prospects for agriculture were being affected by budgetary constraints within the European Communities (EC).
Growth in GNP was expected to slow to 2.2 per cent in 1991 and, although inflation might continue to decline, unemployment (which had fallen from over 17 per cent in 1985-87 to 14 per cent in 1990) was expected to remain above the European average.
The report described the three-year "programme for economic and social progress" agreed in January 1991 between the government, employers, trade unions and farmers [see p. 37967], as indicating "renewed commitment" to medium-term macroeconomic policies rather than "short-term activism" .
The programme replaced a "programme for national recovery" which had expired in December 1990.
Goodman International
In August 1990 the sanctions imposed on Iraq as a result of the Gulf crisis triggered a major debt crisis at Goodman International, the Irish conglomerate controlled by Larry Goodman which was Europe's largest meat processing concern, accounting for around 40 per cent of Ireland's cattle processing industry.
The company was owed I£180 million for supplies exported to Iraq since 1986, and according to an announcement by O'Malley on Aug. 28, 1990, the group owed over I£450 million to 33 banks.
On the same day, in order to allow a rescue operation, the Dáil approved measures temporarily protecting the company from its creditors and in late January 1991 the Dublin High Court approved a rescue package worked out by the group's creditors to restructure its debt, which had by then reached I£512 million.
On June 21, 1991, a full judicial inquiry was opened into "allegations regarding illegal activities, fraud and malpractice in, and in connection with, the beef processing industry" .
The previous month a British television programme had alleged that Goodman International had indulged in widespread abuse of the EC subsidy system for beef exports.
Foreign relations
During 1990-91 the question of Irish neutrality came under discussion both in connection with the possible extension of EC competence to cover defence issues [see p. 38022]and during the Gulf crisis, after the government announcement on Jan. 14, 1991, that it would allow US planes to refuel at Shannon airport en route for the Gulf [see p. 37942].
Foreign Minister Collins paid an official visit to the Soviet Union on July 20-23, 1991, during which three bilateral agreements were signed improving political consultation and developing cultural, economic, industrial and scientific co-operation.
EUROPE
ITALY
Area: 301,277 sq km.
Population: 57,100,000 (1990 UNFPA est.).
Capital: Rome.
Language: Italian.
Religion: Christianity (90 per cent Roman Catholic).
Armed forces: 389,600 (1990).
Currency: lira (US$1.00=L1,354.18 as at July 1, 1991).
Major international affiliations: BIS; COCOM; Council of Europe; EBRD; EC; European Space Agency; G-7; Hexagonale group; NATO; OECD; WEU.
POLITICAL SYSTEM
The Italian Republic has a bicameral Parliament elected for a five-year term (subject to dissolution) by universal suffrage, using proportional representation.
It comprises a Senate, with 315 senators elected on a regional basis and seven life senators, and a 630-member Chamber of Deputies.
The head of state is the President of the Republic, elected for a seven-year term by an electoral college made up of both Houses of Parliament and 58 regional representatives.
The President appoints the President of the Council (Prime Minister) and, on the latter's recommendation, the other members of the Council of Ministers.
Main government leaders
President: Francesco Cossiga.
Prime Minister: Giulio Andreotti, since July 1989 [see p. 36821].
Other principal ministers: Claudio Martelli (US, Deputy Prime Minister; Justice); Gianni De Michelis (US, Foreign Affairs); Vincenzo Scotti (DC, Interior); Guido Carli (DC, Treasury); Paolo Cirino Pomicino (DC, Budget); Salvatore (Rino) Formica (US, Finance); Virginio Rognoni (DC, Defence).
Changes to Council of Ministers to June 1991
A new government was formed, again under Andreotti, in April 1991 [see p. 38157; for previous changes since May 1990 see pp. 37624; 37785-86; 38021].
Two ministers had recently died in office: Franco Piga (63), the Minister for State Participation (first appointed as non-party Minister of Industry in Fanfani's April 1987 caretaker administration—see p. 35587), had died suddenly in December 1990 [see p. 38021].
The DC Minister of Labour, Carlo Donat Cattin (71), died in March 1991.
A veteran politician, he had been Minister of Labour also during the "hot autumn" of 1969 [see p. 23941].
Ruling coalition
The governing coalition comprised the Partito della Democrazia Cristiana (DC—Christian Democratic Party, Arnaldo Forlani sec. -gen.); the Unità Socialista (US—Socialist Unity party, formerly PSI—Italian Socialist Party, Bettino Craxi l.); the Partito Socialista Democratico Italiano (PSDI—Italian Democratic Socialist Party, Antonio Cariglia l.); the Partito Liberale Italiano (PLI—Italian Liberal Party, Renato Altissimo l.); and (until its withdrawal on April 15, 1991) the Partito Repubblicano Italiano (PRI—Italian Republican Party, Giorgio La Malfa l.)
Other political parties
Partito Democratico della Sinistra (PSD—Democratic Party of the Left, formerly PCI—Italian Communist Party, Achille Occhetto l.);
Movimento Sociale Italiano-Destra Nazionale (MSI-DN—Italian Social Movement-National Right, Pino Rauti, sec. -gen.);
Federazione Nazionale per Le Liste Verdi (Green Party); Partito Radicale (PR—Radical Party, Marco Pannella, Domenico Modugna pres.);
Democrazia Proletaria (DP—Proletarian Democracy); Südtiroler Volkspartei (SVP—South Tyrol People's Party, Roland Riz pres.).
Elections
Cossiga was elected President of the Republic in June 1985 in succession to Sandro Pertini [see p. 33788].
The last general election was held in June 1987 [see p. 35586].
Parliamentary and presidential elections were due by June 1992.
1990/91 OVERVIEW
Alessandro Natta, who had been secretary of the PCI from June 1984 to June 1988 (when he had been succeeded by Achille Occhetto—see p. 35989), announced his retirement from active political life in May 1990.
He had opposed the radical change of direction effected by Occhetto and the proposed change of the name of the party.
In November 1990 Ciriaco De Mita resumed the post of president of the DC, from which he had resigned in February [see p. 37262].
His move signalled some healing of a serious rift in the party, which had deepened in July during the passage of legislation on the media, when five ministers belonging to De Mita's left-wing faction of the party had resigned from the government [see p. 37624].
This "corrente sinistra" within the party fostered a certain antipathy towards the US members of the government coalition and had found areas of agreement with the PSD on some policy issues.
The reconciliation was confirmed in April 1991, when Andreotti included five left-wing DC members in his new Cabinet.
A new political force emerged in late 1990 as a result of disagreements over policy and coalition alliances in Sicily.
Calling itself La Rete (the Network), the movement focused on what was seen as a crucial nationwide fight against the Mafia and organized crime.
Among the prime movers of La Rete, was Leoluca Orlando, who as DC mayor of Palermo had taken vigorous measures against the Mafia, but had alienated his own party hierarchy by refusing to work with the PSI and forming instead an alliance with the PCI and Greens.
His close association with the Society of Jesus (Jesuits) also rendered him suspect to more secular DC politicians.
Ousted early in 1990 through the efforts of the centre-right of the DC [see p. 37262], Orlando had achieved an unprecedentedly high personal vote in the regional elections of May 1990 [see p. 37469].
The DC nevertheless refused to confirm him as mayor, preferring a less charismatic politician, Domenico Lo Vasco.
[For La Rete performance in the June 1991 regional elections in Sicily see p. 38300.]
In April 1991 Silvius Magnago, leader of the SVP since 1957 and president from 1988 [see also p. 36432], retired from that position and was succeeded by Riz, a senator.
Legislation
Legislation on drugs, which had been passed by the Senate in December 1989 [see p. 37508], was approved by the Chamber of Deputies in May 1990 with only minor amendments, which were finally accepted by the Senate in June.
While it had previously been legal to possess a small quantity of drugs for personal use, the new law prohibited possession altogether.
Particular provisions were made for first offenders and for the treatment and rehabilitation of addicts.
Following the passage of new immigration legislation in the previous February [see p. 37507], visa requirements were introduced from July 1990 for visitors from north African countries.
The step brought Italy into line with the majority of other member states of the EC.
Similar requirements were also introduced for Turkish visitors.
Death of Malagodi
Giovanni Malagodi (86), secretary-general of the PLI from 1954 to 1972 and Treasury Minister in 1972-73 [see p. 25390], died in April 1991.
Security
In June 1990 nine members of the Red Brigades (Brigate Rosse—BR) were sentenced to life imprisonment for the murder in April 1988 of DC senator Roberto Ruffili [see p. 35989].
The murder was said to have been masterminded by Fabio Ravalli.
In March 1991 the MSI-DN deputy Massimo Abbatangelo was sentenced by a Florence court to life imprisonment in connection with the bombing of the Naples-Milan express in December 1984 [see p. 33792].
The Bologna appeal court in April 1991 quashed the convictions of Mario Tuti and Luciano Franci, who had been given life sentences in December 1986 [see p. 34956]in connection with the 1974 bombing of the Italicus express [see p. 26820].
Anti-Mafia developments
The trial commenced in late May 1990 of 35 defendants accused of fraudulent bankruptcy and other offences arising out of the collapse in August 1982 of the Banco Ambrosiano [see p. 32083].
Among the defendants was Licio Gelli, former grand master of the Italian P-2 masonic lodge [see also pp. 31045-46], who had been extradited from Switzerland in February 1988 after surrendering to the authorities there [see p. 35591-92].
Domenico Sica, the High Commissioner responsible for co-ordinating the fight against the Mafia, delivered a lengthy report to the Constitutional Commission of the Chamber of Deputies in June 1990, in which he gave a precise assessment of the scale of the problem represented by the Mafia.
Throughout the country, Sica estimated that over 16,000 individuals and approximately 800 businesses had connections with the Mafia.
Furthermore, Sica believed that the direction of organized crime was in the hands of no more than 17 men whose names were known to the authorities, and that if those individuals could be convicted the Mafia would collapse.
A report from Confesercenti, the Italian confederation of small shopkeepers, in April 1991 estimated that the Mafia collected around L30,000,000 million (approximately US$22,000 million) annually in protection money from the retail sector of the economy alone.
Economy
State enterprises
The temporary special commissioner of the state railway system (Ferrovie dello Stato—FFSS), Mario Schimberni, resigned unexpectedly at the end of May 1990.
Appointed in November 1988 [see pp. 37095-96], Schimberni had had disagreements during his period of tenure with the DC Transport Minister, Carlo Bernini, over future management strategy [see p. 37510], particularly over whether the FFSS should be reconstituted as a joint stock company with the government as majority shareholder.
Schimberni had, however, succeeded in substantially reducing the workforce through the early retirement of approximately 30,000 workers.
Lorenzo Necci, formerly president of Enimont [see below], was appointed in June as Schimberni's successor.
The "Amato law" on the regulation of the banking sector, which had been passed by the Chamber of Deputies in March 1990 [see p. 37509], was approved by the Senate in July.
Replacing legislation which had not altered significantly since 1936, the new law opened the way for publicly owned banks (approximately 80 per cent of the sector) to become joint stock companies.
A minimum state participation of 51 per cent was nevertheless retained in the legislation, although provision was made for majority private ownership in exceptional circumstances, subject to approval by the Cabinet and the central bank.
After a brief existence marked by acrimonious disputes between the principal partners, the private/public sector chemicals industry joint venture, Enimont, was brought wholly into state ownership at the end of November 1990.
Enimont had been created in January 1989 with 40 per cent public ownership (through the state energy company Ente Nazionale Idrocarburi—ENI—National Hydrocarbons Agency), 40 per cent owned by the industrial group Montedison, and 20 per cent traded on the stock market.
Despite the ambition of Montedison chief executive, Raul Gardini, to take over Enimont, the proposed cost per share of L1,650 proved to be unattractive and, in the event, ENI was obliged to pay that price to buy out Montedison and the other shareholders.
The total cost to ENI was L4,200,000 million (approximately US$3,000 million), of which the Montedison share was L2,800,000 million.
Industrial relations
Differences over pay bargaining in manufacturing industries between the three main trade union confederations and Confindustria, the body which represented private-sector employers, led to a call for a general strike to be held on July 11, 1990, just after the completion of the World Cup football competition.
The strike was averted a few days before the scheduled date, after Confindustria, yielding to pressure from the government as well as from the unions, agreed to resume pay negotiations in the sectors concerned, and from June 1, 1991, to enter into negotiations on a new wage bargaining and indexation system.
Another threat of a general strike was made in December, but was lifted after agreement was reached on cuts in hours in the engineering industry with effect from October 1993.
In June 1990, legislation had been passed restricting the right to strike in the public services.
The law, which was the first in post-war Italy to restrict the right to strike, required public service employees to give a minimum number of days' notice of intended strikes and to guarantee essential services.
May 1990 mini-budget
In May 1990, the Andreotti government adopted a package of measures intended to prevent the public sector exceeding by a significant margin the targeted budget deficit of L133,000,000 million (approximately US$98,000 million)[see p. 37509].
The measures were intended to increase government income by L5,050,000 million and to reduce expenditure by L6,700,000 million.
New medium-term targets aimed at progressively reducing the public-sector deficit over the following three years were also adopted.
The net adjustment of L11,750,000 million was expected to restrict the deficit for the full year to L135,600,000 million, representing 10.7 per cent of gross domestic product (GDP), slightly higher than the original budget figure.
Without the adjustment, it had been estimated that the budget deficit would have exceeded L147,000,000 million, which was the level predicted by the International Monetary Fund (IMF) in criticisms made at the time of the adoption of the 1990 budget in December 1989 [see p. 37509].
1990 economic figures
At the end of 1990, the actual budget deficit for the year was put at L141,000,000 million (approximately US$104,000 million) and the total outstanding public debt, at L1,310,000,000 million (approximately US$967,000 million), had overtaken GDP.
Year-on-year inflation stood at 6.4 per cent, compared with 6.5 per cent at the previous year end.
The trade balance showed a deficit of L14,104,000 million (approximately US$10,400 million) compared with L17,075,000 million in 1989, with exports valued at L203,618,000 million and imports at L217,722,000 million.
1991 budget
The 1991 budget, approved by Parliament in December 1990, was one of the most austere since the establishment of the Republic in 1948 [for 1990 budget see p. 37509].
Through a combination of expenditure cuts, tax changes and asset sales amounting in total to L48,000,000 million, the budget aimed at a surplus before interest payments of L8,100,000 million, thereby achieving a deficit after interest payments of L132,000,000 million (approximately US$97,500 million), representing 9.3 per cent of GDP.
This compared with the latest forecast for the 1990 deficit of L140,000,000 million, representing 10.8 per cent of GDP.
The OECD however suggested that inflation and interest rates might be higher than predicted by the Italian government and forecast that the 1991 deficit would be nearer 9.5 per cent of GDP than 9.3 per cent.
A major tax innovation included in the budget was the introduction of capital gains tax on stock market dealing.
First imposed by decree in late September, the new tax provoked strong protests from brokers and caused confusion owing to its complexity, with the result that there was a fall in trading volumes on Italian exchanges.
After discussions with traders significant modifications to tax rates and procedures were agreed and a new law was finally approved in February 1991.
In commenting on the 1991 budget shortly before its final acceptance, the IMF was less critical than in the previous year [see p. 37509], but stressed that the following year would be crucial if Italy were to be capable of participating fully in European economic and monetary union.
May 1991 mini-budget
The government agreed a mid-year package of economic measures in May 1991.
The package made a net adjustment of L14,200,000 million (approximately US$10,500 million), including some increased indirect taxes and cuts in public expenditure, in order to keep to the budgeted deficit for 1991 of L132,000,000 million.
Foreign relations
April 1990: Foreign Minister De Michelis visited Moscow for talks with his then Soviet counterpart Eduard Shevardnadze.
May: Marshall Dmitry Yazov was the first Soviet Defence Minister to visit Rome.
June: Soviet naval visit to Taranto; over 200 British World Cup football fans deported after violence in Rimini.
July: Andreotti visited Moscow for talks with Soviet President Gorbachev, mainly on bilateral trade, economic aid and German unification.
August: Inaugural summit in Venice of the Pentagonale grouping of countries (Austria, Czechoslavakia, Hungary, Italy, Yugoslavia—later known as the Hexagonale grouping with the accession of Poland) to discuss issues of mutual interest.
September: Andreotti visited Bonn for talks with Chancellor Helmut Kohl on German reunification, the single European market and the Gulf crisis; De Michelis visited Moscow.
October: Italian-German summit in Venice attended by Kohl and Andreotti, each with seven ministerial colleagues; Cossiga made three-day state visit to the UK.
December: Cossiga made two-day visit to Berlin.
February 1991: Iranian Foreign Minister Ali Akbar Vellayati visited Rome.
March: De Michelis visited Washington and Syria.
US air base in Italy
Work began in January 1991 on the construction at Crotone in Calabria, southern Italy, of the air base intended for the United States F-16 fighter-bombers which were being withdrawn from Spain.
The air base had been the subject of controversy both in Italy [see p. 36434]and in the USA, where Congress had only agreed to vote funds after the beginning of the Gulf crisis.
Because the new base would not be ready for five years, the F-16s were to be based temporarily in other NATO countries after leaving Spain.
The air base was expected to be an important source of employment in the Crotone area, a depressed part of the Mezzogiorno.
EUROPE
LIECHTENSTEIN
Area: 160 sq km.Population: 28,877 (1990).
Capital: Vaduz.
Languages: German (official); Alemannish dialect.
Religion: Christianity (about 87 per cent Roman Catholic).
Armed forces: No standing army since 1868; citizens under 60 liable to military service in emergency.
Currency: Swiss franc (US$1.00=SFr1.565 as at July 1, 1991).
Major international affiliations: CSCE; Council of Europe; EBRD; EFTA (from May 5, 1991).
POLITICAL SYSTEM
The Principality of Liechtenstein is a constitutional and hereditary monarchy.
Under its 1921 Constitution it has a government appointed by the Prince on the proposal of the 25-seat Landtag (parliament), which is elected for a four-year term by universal adult sufferage.
Prince Hans Adam has ruled since the death of his father Prince Franz Josef II in November 1989.
Main government leaders
Prince: Hans Adam von und zu Liechtenstein II.
Head of Government: Hans Brunhart (VU, also responsible for Foreign Relations; Education; Construction).
Other principal ministers: Herbert Wille (FBP, Deputy Head of Government; Interior; Justice; Agriculture; Environmental Protection; Culture and Sport); René Ritter (VU, Economy); Peter Wolff (VU, Health; Welfare); Wilfried Büchel (FBP, Transportation).
Changes to Council of Ministers
None in twelve months to June 1991.
Ruling parties
The Vaterländische Union (VU—Patriotic Union, Otto Hasler ch., Ernst Hasler sec.) and the Fortschrittliche Bürgerpartei (FBP—Progressive Citizens' Party, Emanuel Vogt ch., Marlen Frick sec.) have ruled in coalition since 1938.
Other parties
Freie Liste (FL—Free List).
Elections
Elections were last held in March 1989 [see p. 36532].
1990/91 OVERVIEW
Liechtenstein's economic performance during 1990 was less strong in the second half of the year but by the end of the year the number of jobs had nevertheless grown to 19,905, an increase of 3.2 per cent as compared with 1989.
Of these posts 40 per cent were filled by Liechtensteiners, the remainder being taken either by foreigners living in Liechtenstein or by employees commuting from Switzerland and Austria.
Unemployment was 0.2 per cent in 1990.
Liechtenstein was elected to membership of the UN in September [see p. 37731], and joined the European Free Trade Area (EFTA) in May 1991 [see p. 38209].
In a speech on Aug. 15, 1991, Prince Hans Adam maintained, however, that it was not practicable for his small principality to become a full member of the European Communities.
Visitors to Liechtenstein included Dimitur Popov, Chair of the Bulgarian Council of Ministers, on June 24, 1991, and the Dalai Lama, the exiled Tibetan leader, on Aug. 17, 1991.
EUROPE
LUXEMBOURG
Area: 2,586 sq km.
Population: 400,000 (1990).
Capital: Luxembourg-Ville.
Language: Letzeburgish (official); French (administrative); German (written language of commerce and press).
Religion: Christianity (95 per cent Roman Catholic).
Armed forces: 800 (1990).
Currency: Luxembourg franc (at par with Belgian franc, which is also official currency—US$1.00=LF37.3374 as at July 1, 1991).
Major international affiliations: BIS; Belgo-Luxembourg Economic Union (BLEU); Benelux Economic Union; COCOM; Council of Europe; CSCE; EBRD; EC; NATO; OECD; WEU.
POLITICAL SYSTEM
The Grand Duchy of Luxembourg is a constitutional monarchy in which the Grand Duke exercises executive power through a Council of Ministers (which he chooses) led by the President of the Government (Prime Minister).
There is also a Council of State, nominated by the Grand Duke, comprising 21 members, which acts as the supreme administrative tribunal and has some legislative functions.
Primary legislative authority is exercised by the 60-member unicameral Chamber of Deputies, elected every five years.
Main government leaders
Head of state: Jean, Grand Duke of Luxembourg.
Prime Minister: Jacques Santer (PCS, also responsible for Treasury; Culture).
Other principal ministers: Jacques Poos (POSL, Deputy Prime Minister; Foreign Affairs; Security Services; Foreign Trade; Aid and Development); Jean Spautz (PCS, Interior; Public Housing; Urbanism); Jean-Claude Juncker (PCS, Finance; Labour; Budget); Robert Goebbels (POSL, Economy; Public Works; Transport).
Cabinet changes
No changes to Council of Ministers to June 1991.
Ruling coalition
Chreschtlech-Sozial Vollekspartei or Parti chrétien social (CSV or PCS—Christian Social People's Party, Jean Spautz pres.) and Letzeburger Sozialistesch Arbeiterpartei or Parti ouvrier socialiste Luxembourgeois (LSAP or POSL—Luxembourg Socialist Workers' Party, Ben Fayot pres., Raymond Becker gen. -sec.).
Other political parties
Parti démocratique (PD—Democratic Party, Colette Flesch pres., Henri Grethen sec. -gen.);
Déi Gréng Alternative (Green Alternative, collective leadership); Gréng Lescht Ekologesch Initiativ (Green List Ecological Initiative, collective leadership); Comité d'Action pour le 5/6 (Five-sixths Action Committee); Kommunistesch Partei vu Letzeburg or Parti communiste Luxembourgeois (KPL or PCL—Luxembourg Communist Party, René Urbany l.)
Elections
The last general election was in June 1989 when the Christian Social Party and the Socialists, which had governed in coalition since July 1984, were returned to power [see pp. 36739-40].
The next election is due by mid-1994.
1990/91 OVERVIEW
An OECD report in December 1990 said: "The macroeconomic performance of the Luxembourg economy continues to be impressive.
In 1989 activity once again expanded more rapidly than elsewhere in the EC [gross domestic product rising to 6.2 per cent], unemployment [at 1.4 per cent ]fell to its lowest level in five years, inflation remained fairly restrained [consumer prices rose by 3.4 per cent ], the state budget notched up a small favourable balance, and the currency account registered yet another enormous surplus [of LF58,400 million]."
The report found that the "authorities have wisely used the recent years of affluence to cut tax rates, pay off what limited debt they had, replenish budgetary reserves and increase public investment in order to provide an efficient economic infrastructure" .
However, by mid-1991 the OECD reported that the economy had "decelerated sharply in 1990" and that real growth had been cut to 2.6 per cent.
It found that "industrial production actually declined, as the steel sector, beset by falling world demand and heightened competition from abroad, was one of the weakest spots of the economy" (although it continued to account for 7-8 per cent of GDP).
This "cooling-off period" would, however, ease the Grand Duchy's labour market shortages, which needed to use cross-border workers to fill the bulk of new jobs.
Santer visited the Soviet Union on Oct. 21-24, 1990, shortly before the Grand Duchy took over the presidency of the European Community Council for the first half of 1991.
EUROPE
MALTA
Area: 316 sq km.
Population: 400,000 (1990 UNFPA est.).
Capital: Valletta Languages: Maltese and English (official); Italian widely spoken.
Religion: Christianity (Roman Catholic).
Armed forces: 1,500 (1990).
Currency: Maltese Lira (US$1.00=M£0.3455 as at July 1, 1991).
Major international affiliations:Council of Europe; CSCE; EBRD; NAM.
POLITICAL SYSTEM
The Republic of Malta became an independent member of the Commonwealth in 1964.
It has a 65-member House of Representatives which is elected for a five-year term (subject to dissolution) by direct universal adult suffrage under a system of proportional representation.
Should a party polling a majority of votes fail to gain a majority of seats in the House, extra seats are allocated until a majority of one seat is achieved.
The house elects the President of the Republic for a five-year term.
The President appoints the Prime Minister and, on his advice, the other members of the government.
Main government leaders
President: Vincent Tabone.
Prime Minister: Edward Fenech-Adami.
Other principal ministers: Guido De Marco (Deputy Prime Minister; Foreign Affairs; Justice); Ugo Mifsud-Bonnici (Education; Interior); George Bonello Du Puis (Finance); John Dalli (Economic Affairs).
Cabinet changes
None in year to June 1991 [for Cabinet list see p. 37511].
Ruling party
The Partit Nazzjonalista (PN—Nationalist Party, Christian Democrat, Edward Fenech-Adami l.).
Other political parties
The main opposition party is the Partit tal-Haddiema (Malta Labour Party—MLP, socialist, Karmen Mifsud-Bonnici l.)
Other parties include: Alternizza Demokratika (AD—Democratic Alternative, Wenzu Mintoff l.);
Partit Demokratiko Malti (PDM—Malta Democratic Party, centre, Lino Briguglio l.);
Partit Komunista Malti (PKM—Malta Communist Party, communist, Anthony Vassallo l.).
Elections
Vincent Tabone was elected President in April 1989 (see p. 36599).
In a general election on May 9, 1987, the Nationalist Party narrowly defeated the Labour Party which had governed in Malta for the previous 16 years.
Parliamentary elections are next due in 1992.
1990/91 OVERVIEW
The government of Fenech-Adami, while continuing traditional commercial relations with China, Libya, and the Soviet Union, formally applied in July 1990 for full membership of the European Communities (EC)[see p. 37625].
Although a decision on the application was not expected until after the completion of the single internal market in December 1992, the Maltese government announced that it was preparing to become an EC member within the next five years.
The opposition Labour Party expressed fears that EC membership could damage Malta's economy and might lead to an unacceptable loss of independence and sovereignty.
The government continued with its plans to reorganize the island's economy on a free-market basis.
In 1990-91 progress was made towards establishing a stock exchange in Valletta, expanding the free-port and drydock facilities, improving telecommunications services, and denationalizing the banking sector.
The public sector nevertheless still accounted for up to 40 per cent of gross national product (GNP), and employed 44 per cent of the nation's workforce.
Concern with an overheating economy and an inflation rate unofficially estimated at between 3 and 7.5 per cent led in December 1990 to the signing of an agreement between government, unions and employers to regulate industrial relations and incomes policy.
Figures for the first quarter of 1991 showed a 7 per cent increase in gross domestic product (GDP) as compared with the same period in 1990; 42 per cent of this increase was accounted for by the manufacturing sector.
There were fears that an extended war in the Gulf would add to Malta's economic problems by raising oil prices and by reducing the tourist trade (which accounted for 27 per cent of GNP and employed one-third of the workforce).
In the event, tourist arrivals in January-March 1991 were down only 3 per cent compared with the same period in 1990.
The Gulf crisis did, however, prompt debate on Malta's foreign policy.
While the government broadly supported the United Statesled coalition and the use of force to reverse the Iraqi invasion of Kuwait, the opposition Labour Party was questioned US intentions in the area and argued for pressure to be exerted on Iraq through an intensification of economic sanctions.
Reference article pp. 37510-11; July 1990 EC membership application p. 37625; Malta connection with Lockerbie aircrash investigation pp. 37897-98.
EUROPE
MONACO
Area: 1.95 sq .Population: 27,063 (at 1982 census).
Capital: Monaco-Ville.
Language: French (official), Monégasque, Italian and English.
Religion: Christianity (Roman Catholic).
Currency: French franc (US$1.00=F6.1702 as at July 1, 1991).
POLITICAL SYSTEM
The Principality of Monaco has been under French protection since 1861.
The Prince, as head of state, nominates the Minister of State from a list of three French diplomats submitted by the French government.
As head of the Council of Government the Minister of State exercises executive power under the Prince, while legislative authority resides with the 18-member National Council, elected every five years by universal suffrage.
Main government leaders
Head of state: Rainier III, Prince.
Minister of State: Jacques Dupont.
Other principal ministers: Denis Ravera (Chief of Cabinet); Michel Eon (Interior); Jean Pastorelli (Finance and Economics); Bernard Fautrier (Public Works and Social Affairs).
Government changes to June 1991
Dupont replaced Jean Ausseil as Minister of State in April 1991.
Political parties
Monaco has no political parties as such, but in national and municipal elections candidates adhere to different lists, including the Union national et démocratique (UND); the Action communale (AC); the Mouvement d'union Démocratique (MUD); and the Evolution communale (EC).
Elections
The most recent elections to the National Council in January 1988 were won by members of the UND list [see p. 36161].
In elections for the mayor and communal council for the town of Monaco in February and March 1991 Jean-Louis Médecin (mayor since 1971 and a member of the AC list) was replaced by Anne-Marie Campora, who headed the EC list.
1990/91 OVERVIEW
Monaco's economy continued to rely heavily on tourism, banking and real estate.
It also had a manufacturing sector producing chemicals, pharmaceuticals, cosmetics, electronics and precision tools.
A labour shortage forced it to depend on migrant labour, principally from Italy and France.
The financial and commercial integration of the European Communities (EC) would affect Monaco indirectly through the bilateral accords which regulated its customs and monetary union with France.
The tax status of companies registered in Monaco, and of residents who were EC nationals, would have to be revised and reduced receipts from value added tax (VAT) were expected.
EUROPE
NETHERLANDS
Area: 33,937 sq km.
Population: 15,000,000 (1990 UNFPA est.).
Capital: Amsterdam; seat of government: The Hague.
Language: Dutch.
Religion: Christianity (62%—36%Roman Catholic, 26% Protestant); most of the rest do not profess a religion.
Armed forces: 102,600 (1990).
Currency: guilder or florin (US$1.00=Fl2.051 as at July 1, 1991).
Major international affiliations: BIS; Benelux Economic Union; COCOM; Council of Europe; CSCE; EBRD; EC; ESA; NATO; OECD; WEU.
POLITICAL SYSTEM
The Kingdom of the Netherlands (comprising the Netherlands in Europe, the Netherlands Antilles, and Aruba—see p. 38236) is a constitutional monarchy whose three parts nominally enjoy full autonomy.
The monarch retains largely formal prerogatives, exercising executive authority through the Council of Ministers.
Bills may be proposed by the Crown (advised by a Council of State) and the 150-member Second Chamber (Tweede Kamer) of the bicameral parliament (Staten-Generaal), while the 75-member First Chamber (Eerste Kamer) can approve or reject, but not amend, such bills.
Both houses are elected for a four-year term, the Second Chamber directly, by proportional representation, the First Chamber the directly elected members of the provincial councils.
Main government leaders
Head of state: Beatrix, Queen of the Netherlands.
Prime Minister: Ruud Lubbers (CDA, also responsible for General Affairs).
Other principal ministers: Wim Kok (PvdA, Deputy Prime Minister and Minister of Finance); Ien Dales (PvdA, Home Affairs); Hans van den Broek (CDA, Foreign Affairs); Relus ter Beek (PvdA, Defence); Koos Andriessen (CDA, Economic Affairs); Ernst Hirsch Ballin (CDA, Justice; Netherlands Antilles and Aruba).
Cabinet changes to June 1991
On Sept. 27, 1990, Piet Bukman (CDA) replaced Gerrit Braks as Minister of Agriculture and Fisheries after Braks resigned in connection with reports that the Netherlands had consistently landed fish catches above its national quota under the common fisheries policy of the European Communities (EC).
Ruling coalition
Christen Democratisch Appel (CDA—Christian Democratic Appeal, Ruud Lubbers l., Eelco Brinkmann parliamentary l.);
Partij van der Arbeid (PvdA—Labour Party, Wim Kok l., Thijs Wöltgens parliamentary l.).
Other political parties
Volkspartij voor Vrijheid en Democratie (VVD—People's Party for Freedom and Democracy, Frits Bolkestein parliamentary l.);
Democraten 66 (D66—Democrats 66, Hans van Mierlo parliamentary l.);
Groen Links (Green Left, Ria Beckers l., formed 1991 with the dissolution of the Radical Political Party, the Pacifist Socialist Party, the Communist Party of the Netherlands [see also below]and the Evangelical People's Party, which had campaigned in alliance in the last general election); Staatkundig Gereformeerde Partij (SGP—Political Reformed Party, Bas van der Vlies parliamentary l.);
Gereformeerd Politiek Verbond (GPV—Reformed Political Association, Gert Schutte parliamentary l.);
Reformatorische Politieke Federatie (RPF—Reformational Political Federation, Meindert Leerling parliamentary l.);
Centrum-Democraten (CD—Centre Democrats, Hans Janmaat ch.).
Elections
The last general election was held on Sept. 6, 1989 [see p. 36900]; the next general election is due by September 1993.
1990/91 OVERVIEW
The centre-left coalition in power since late 1989 struggled during the 12 months to 1991 to maintain its joint commitments (i) to reduce the government budget deficit from 5.25 per cent of net national income (NNI—gross national product (GNP) minus consumption of fixed capital) in 1990 to 3.25 per cent by 1994, and (ii) to maintain the country's highly developed social welfare system.
Particular controversy surrounded the disability scheme, known as WAO, under which 900,000 people (or more than twice the number of unemployed), who were classified as too disabled to work, received 70 per cent of their last salary until they qualified for receipt of the state pension at 65.
Expenditure under the scheme accounted for 7 per cent of gross domestic product (GDP).
Economy
The 1991 draft budget presented to parliament on Sept. 18, 1990, showed a reduced overall deficit but included substantial funds to underpin the incomes policy which linked public-sector wages to private-sector pay, as well as extra resources for public transport and environmental protection.
By contrast defence expenditure was cut, chiefly by reducing national service from 14 months to 12.
Overall expenditure was set at Fl197,000 million and income at Fl175,000 million, leaving a financing deficit equivalent to 4.75 per cent of NNI, as against one of 5.25 per cent projected for 1990.
However, by February 1991, this deficit was shown to be rising rather than falling and the government introduced austerity measures [see p. 38113].
The OECD in its report published in July 1991 said that economic growth had slowed in 1990 to 3.5 per cent compared with growth of 4 per cent in 1989.
The recession in other European countries was tempered in the Netherlands by strong exports to newly unified Germany, the Netherlands' largest trading partner, which accounted for 27.6 per cent of exports in 1990.
Higher wage claims led to unit labour costs in manufacturing increasing for the first time since 1987, while consumer price inflation increased from an annual rate of 2.1 per cent in 1989 to one of 2.5 per cent in 1990.
Despite an overall fall in the rate of unemployment from 7.4 per cent in 1989 to 6.5 per cent in 1990, a number of major companies undertook fundamental restructuring.
On Oct. 12, 1990, the Netherlands airline KLM announced a restructuring plan to save Fl400,000 over the next three years, involving 500 job losses by the end of 1992.
On Oct. 25 Philips, the troubled multinational electronics company based in Eindhoven, announced that it would be cutting between 35,000 and 45,000 jobs from its 285,700-strong workforce by December 1991, in addition to 9,000 jobs cut in July 1990 from its European computer and components businesses.
On Feb. 26, 1991, the Anglo-Dutch food and cleaning products company, Unilever, announced that it would be cutting 5,500 jobs from a total workforce of 110,000 over the next three years.
The Financial Times of Feb. 6, 1991, reported that the government was to increase exports of natural gas by a further 200,000 million cubic metres over the next 20 years.
The move, which was made possible partly because of new estimates of the reserves available in the vast Groningen gas field, was calculated to increase government revenue by up to Fl40,000 million, although this would mainly be after 2000.
In 1990 the Netherlands exported nearly 35,000 million cubic metres of gas, making it the world's second largest exporter of gas after the Soviet Union.
Revenue from gas exports for 1991 was expected to be Fl8,300 million, representing 5 per cent of total state revenue.
Environmental issues
In June 1990 the Lubbers government presented to parliament a revised National Environmental Plan replacing that which had brought down Lubbers' previous centre-right coalition [see pp. 36666-67; 36900].
The new plan focused on reducing carbon dioxide emissions by cutting energy consumption.
The Guardian of Aug. 2 reported that the government was to provide a further Fl650 million for energy conservation in addition to the Fl1,000 million already allocated annually for the programme.
Fl100 million would also be provided to improve environmental management by local and provincial authorities.
On Aug. 28, 1990, the then Agriculture Minister, Braks, announced a programme—described as the strictest in the world—designed to halve by 2000 the use of pesticides by the country's intensive agricultural industry.
As part of a programme to reduce dependence on fossil fuels, central government and the seven provinces signed an agreement on Feb. 6, 1991, providing for the construction of 2,000-3,000 windmills, which would generate 1,000 megawatts of electricity by the end of the century.
Political parties
The Communist Party of the Netherlands (Communistische Partij van Nederland—CPN) voted at a party congress on June 15-16, 1991, formally to dissolve itself and to join the left-wing alliance Groen Links.
Security
On March 8, 1991, Defence Minister ter Beek announced a 10-year plan to reorganize the military which would cut the size of the armed forces but improve their mobility and flexibility.
He said that "while the security situation in Europe has drastically improved, outside Europe the risk of crises and armed conflicts has grown" .
The 120,000-strong army would be cut by 40,000, the number of army tanks halved, an air-mobile brigade would be formed, and the number of transport aircraft increased.
Formation of the brigade, which would be rapidly transportable by helicopter, was approved in principle by parliament on June 10.
[For cuts in number of Dutch troops in Germany announced in January 1990 see p. 37225.]
According to an announcement on July 16, 1990, two diplomats at the Czechoslovak embassy in The Hague had been expelled for espionage, one at the beginning of the year and the other in June.
They had allegedly sought to obtain Western military secrets and confidential information on the December 1989 Soviet-US Malta summit.
EUROPE
NORWAY
Area: 323,878 sq km.
Population: 4,200,000 (1990).
Capital: Oslo.
Language: Norwegian (official).
Religion: Christian (predominantly Protestant).
Armed forces: 34,100 (1990).
Currency: krone (US$1.00=7.0773 kroner as at July 1, 1991).
Major international affiliations: BIS; COCOM; Council of Europe; CSCE; EBRD; EFTA; ESA; NATO; Nordic Council; OECD.
POLITICAL SYSTEM
The Kingdom of Norway is a constitutional monarchy in which the monarch exercises authority through a Council of State (Cabinet), appointed by the monarch in accordance with the will of the 165-member parliament (Storting), which is elected for a fixed four-year term.
Main government leaders
King: Harald V.
Prime Minister: Gro Harlem Brundtland.
Other principal ministers: Thorvald Stoltenberg (Foreign Affairs); Sigbjoern Johnsen (Finance); Finn Kristensen (Petroleum and Energy); Johan Joergen Holst (Defence); Kari Gjesteby (Justice)[see p. 37868 for full list].
Changes to Council of State to mid-1991
The minority liberal-conservative coalition government in power since October 1989 broke up in October 1990 and was replaced by a minority Labour government in November [see p. 37868].
Nine of the 19 members of the new Council of State were women.
Ruling party
Det Norske Arbeiderparti (DNA—Norwegian Labour Party, Brundtland ch.).
Other parties
Hoeyre (Conservative Party, Kaci Kullmann Five ch. —see p. 38164); Senterpartiet (Sp—Centre Party, Anne Enger Lahnstein ch. —ibid.);
Fremskrittspartiet (Frp—Progress Party, Carl Hagen ch.);
Sosialistisk Venstreparti (SV—Socialist Left Party, Erik Solheim ch.);
Kristelig Folkeparti (KrF—Christian People's Party, Kjell Magne Bondevik ch.).
Elections
The last general election was held in September 1989 [see p. 36901].
The next is scheduled for September 1993.
1990/91 OVERVIEW
The question of Norway's relations with the European Communities (EC) again became a controversial political issue.
Having voted narrowly against EC membership in a 1972 referendum, the country remained divided both on the question of possible membership, and on the negotiations, under way since early 1990, to establish an European Economic Area (EEA) between the European Free Trade Association (EFTA) and the EC [see pp. 38158; 38307; 38353].
The collapse of Jan Syse's liberal-conservative coalition in October 1990, after barely a year in power, was the result of disagreements between the three coalition partners (Hoeyre<RO, the KF and the Centre Party) on these issues.
Hoeyre and the KF favoured closer co-operation with the EC and eventual membership, but the Centre Party, supported by many farmers, wished to retain the agricultural sector's high level of protection and subsidy.
The Centre Party also insisted that Norwegian laws limiting foreign ownership of property and businesses be retained, in the face of EC demands that they be lifted.
King Harald, who succeeded to the throne on his father's death in Jan. 17, 1991, and was sworn in on Jan. 21 [see p. 37967], was blessed in a service held at the Nidaros cathedral in Trondheim on June 23.
The ceremony was the closest Norwegian equivalent to a coronation, a ceremony abolished in 1908.
On May 29, 1990, the Storting had approved a constitutional amendment to allow female members of the royal family to succeed to the throne as well as males.
The law only applied to those born after 1990, with the result that Harald's son, Prince Haakon Magnus, remained heir to the throne even though he was younger than his sister, Princess Märtha Louise.
Economy
The annual survey on the Norwegian economy published in early March 1991 by the Organization for Economic Co-operation and Development (OECD) reported that inflation, then at an annual rate of 4.5 per cent, was "below the rates prevailing in most trading partner countries" , and that there was a current-account surplus for the third year in succession after several years of difficult adjustment following the mid-1980s fall in oil prices.
In 1989 the current account had registered a surplus (of US$210,000,000) for the first time since 1985; in 1990 the surplus was around $3,400 million.
However, the report stressed the long-term need to diversify mainland industries and to reduce dependence on oil, which was currently increasing.
If oil prices fell back to those prevalent before the Gulf crisis, the report reckoned that the current account surplus would be wiped out.
It welcomed the October 1990 linking of the krone to the European currency unit (ECU)[see p. 37782], as offering "the possibility of longer-term stabilization and efficiency gains for the economy" .
Barents Sea dispute
Soviet President Gorbachev and Brundtland announced in Oslo on June 5, 1991, that agreement had been reached in principle on the status of three-quarters of the 176,000 sq km disputed area of the Barents Sea, where Norway and the Soviet Union had both declared 200-mile exclusive economic zones in 1976 [see pp. 34114; 33544; 32816; 28907-08].
EUROPE
POLAND
Area: 312,683 sq km(including inland water).
Population: 38,400,000 (1990 UNFPA est.).
Capital: Warsaw.
Language: Polish (official).
Religion: Christianity (95% Roman Catholic; numerous other denominations, the largest being the Polish Autocephalous Orthodox Church); small Moslem and Jewish minorities.
Armed forces: 312,800 (1990).
Currency: zloty (US$1.00=Zl11,569 as at July 1, 1991).
Major international affiliations: BIS; CSCE; EBRD; Hexagonale group.
POLITICAL SYSTEM
The Polish Republic was proclaimed in December 1989, its name replacing that of the Polish People's Republic, adopted in 1947.
The bicameral National Assembly, elected in semi-democratic elections in 1989, comprises the 460-seat Sejm and the 100 seat Senate (the upper house).
Popular elections for the executive President, who serves for a maximum of two consecutive five-year terms, were held for the first time in December 1990.
The Council of Ministers is appointed by the Prime Minister (himself appointed by the President) on the President's request.
The country's 49 provinces are under appointed governors, and the 2,348 elected local councils are independent of central government in local administration.
Main government leaders
President: Lech Walesa.
Prime Minister: Jan Krzysztof Bielecki.
Other principal ministers: Leszek Balcerowicz (Deputy Premier; Finance); Vice-Adml.
Piotr Kolodziejczyk (National Defence); Henryk Majewski (Internal Affairs); Krzystof Skubiszewski (Foreign Affairs); Jaroslaw Kaczynski (Head of President's Chancellery); Lech Kaczynski (Minister of State for Defence and National Security).
Changes to Council of Ministers to June 1991
All but one (Marcin Swiecicki, Minister of Foreign Economic Co-operation) of the ministers who had belonged to the former ruling Polish United Workers' Party (PUWP) were replaced by Solidarity or Solidarity coalition party members by November 1990 [see pp. 37621; 37841; for new government after presidential elections see pp. 37922; 37974].
Ruling party
Porozumienie Centrum (PC—Centre Alliance, Jaroslaw Kaczynski l.).
Other political parties
Main opposition: coalition Unia Demokratyczna (Democratic Union, Tadeusz Mazowiecki l.), formed by the Ruch Obywatelski-Akcja Demokratyczna (ROAD—Citizens' Movement-Democratic Action, Zbigniew Bujak l.), the Democratic Union and the Democratic Right Forum in May 1991.
Other parties: Konfederacja Polski Niepodleglej (KPN—Confederation for an Independent Poland, Leszek Moczulski l.);
Kongres Liberalno-Demokratyczny (KLD—Liberal Democratic Congress, Donald Tusk l.);
Konserwatywno-Liberalna Partia Polityczna (Conservative-Liberal Party, Slawomir Jaruga l.);
Party X (Stanislaw Tyminski l.)[see p. 38108]; Polska Partia Socjalistyczna (PPS—Polish Socialist Party, Jan Jozef Lipski ch.);
Polska Unia Socjaldemokratyczna (PUSD—Polish Social Democratic Union, Tadeusz Fiszbach ch.);
Polskie Stronnictwo Ludowe (PSL—Polish Peasant Party, Roman Bartoszcze pres.);
Polskie Stronnictwo Ludowe-Solidarnosc (PSL-S—Polish Peasant Party-Solidarity, Josef Slisz l.);
Socjal Demokracja Rzeczypospolitej Polskiej (SDRP—Social Democracy of the Republic of Poland, Aleksander Kwasniewski, gen. sec.);
Stronnictwo Demokratyczne (SD—Democratic Party, Aleksander Mackiewicz, ch.);
Zjednoczenie Chrzescijansko-Narodowe (ZChN—Christian National Union, Wieslaw Chrzanowski, pres.)
Elections
Elections to the Sejm were held in June 1989 [see pp. 36722-24]; presidential elections were held in November/December 1990 [see pp. 37840; 37921]; local elections were held in May 1990 [see p. 37464].
1990/91 OVERVIEW
The major political event of 1990 was the presidential election called on Sept. 27, 1990 [see p. 37724], and finally won by Lech Walesa on Dec. 9.
Prime Minister Mazowiecki had wanted the elections to be held after democratic parliamentary elections and the adoption of a new constitution, while Walesa supporters from Solidarity, Centre Alliance, demanded that Walesa be elected President by the National Assembly.
In the event direct elections were held.
During June 1991 Walesa came into conflict over the new electoral law with the Sejm, which was still dominated by ex-communist deputies (in the 1989 elections 65 per cent of seats had been guaranteed to PUWP (communist) members—see p. 36723).
Walesa also claimed to be prepared to govern the country by force because legislation was not being implemented by the Sejm [see p. 38305].
Religion
The Roman Catholic Church remained a strong political influence [for papal visit in June 1991 see p. 38306].
A bill was announced on Aug. 4, 1990, agreed between the government and the Church, to introduce religious education (based on the Roman Catholic catechism) into schools, although with voluntary attendance and "in the spirit of ecumenism" .
It was confirmed by the Constitutional Tribunal on Jan. 30, 1991, after much discussion, including opposition from the Orthodox Church and secular associations.
However, an anti-abortion bill backed by the Roman Catholic Church was halted in May [see p. 38207].
The Roman Catholic Church lent its influence to a campaign against anti-Semitism, which had increased noticeably during the presidential elections, with a pastoral letter which was read out on Jan. 20, 1991.
On his return from the United States, where he had attended the World Jewish Congress, Walesa announced on March 27 the formation of a 21-member council for Polish-Jewish relations.
This was seen by some as an attempt to improve his image abroad after remarks which he had made during the presidential election campaign to the effect that he was "untainted" with Jewishness.
Media
After Walesa's election measures which included permitting private broadcasting stations to operate were taken to free the media from state control.
Marian Terlecki, a Solidarity activist, who was appointed head of the Television and Radio Committee in January 1991, immediately announced the dissolution of the Committee, which had been "a powerful propaganda tool" in the communist period.
He also ordered that information from the official news agency PAP should be double-checked before being broadcast.
In February the second television news service, Obserwator, was suspended on Terlecki's orders, leading to accusations by the opposition that Walesa was trying to reintroduce censorship [see also p. 37733].
Crime
The crime rate rose by 61 per cent in 1990 as compared with 1989, including a 176 per cent rise in burglaries and a 34 per cent rise in murder.
In the first half of 1991 the homicide rate rose by 62 per cent, allegedly largely because of the newly opened borders, which meant also that Poland became a target for drug trafficking.
The police were short of 15,000 men and of one-quarter of their equipment needs.
Historical reassessment
A government-commissioned study published on July 17, 1990, conceded that 1,500,000 people, 90 per cent of them Jewish, had died at Auschwitz (Oswiecim) concentration camp under Nazi rule, revising previous assessments that 4,000,000 people had died at the camp.
The study estimated that of the revised total 300,000 were Polish Jews and 145,000 were Polish non-Jews.
More mass graves of Polish officers shot by the NKVD, in addition to those at Katyn [see p. 37383], were found in September at Ivano-Frankovsk (formerly Stanislawow) and in July 1991 at Kharkov.
An inquiry into the murder of Fr Jerzy Popieluszko in 1984 [see p. 33292]was opened on July 24, 1990, after the newspaper Gazeta Wyborcza on July 13 published a letter written in 1986 from his murderer, Grzegorz Piotroski, to the then Minister of Internal Affairs Gen. Kiszczak claiming that ministry officials were involved in this and other murders.
In July 1990 the Sejm declared that "the actions of [then Prime Minister and PUWP politburo member]Mieczyslaw Rakowski's government [in 1988-1989]had led to a fundamental aggravation of the crisis of Poland's economy" .
An inquiry into the killing of over 50 striking workers in Gdansk in December 1970 led in December 1990 to the arrest of three generals and five colonels, and in the same month it was announced that investigations were being held into the introduction of martial law in 1981.
Economy
Inflation, which fell back from an annual rate of 79 per cent in January 1990 to 1.7 per cent in August, was at 4 to 5 per cent a month for the rest of the year, partly because of oil price rises due to the Gulf war.
Prices of electricity and gas rose at the beginning of 1991, increasing retail prices by 12.7 per cent overall.
Industrial output fell by 4.5 per cent in the first quarter of 1991 compared with the same period in 1990, falling in the engineering sector by 14.2 per cent but rising in the food industry by 13 per cent.
Wages rose by 2 per cent for every 1 per cent increase in productivity according to figures for February, and unemployment rose in March by 63,000 to a total of 1,322,000 at the end of the month.
The fall in production and tight wage controls led to a fall in living standards, and personal consumption was estimated to have fallen by 33 per cent between January and September 1990.
Foreign trade concentrated on hard-currency countries after the virtual collapse of the Soviet market.
In the first quarter of 1991 exports to former Eastern bloc countries fell by 79.1 per cent and imports from them by 67.3 per cent, whereas exports to hard-currency areas rose by 28.5 per cent and imports from them by 100 per cent after a 58 per cent devaluation in the zloty in January 1990 to a rate of US$1.00=Zl9,500, and further devaluation in May 1991 to $1.00=Zl11,100 [see p. 38208].
By January 1991, by government decree, all hard-currency shops changed to using the zloty.
It was announced in February that since the adoption of the law on joint ventures in January 1989 [see p. 37012]2,799 permits had been issued for foreign companies, which had contributed US$374,000,000 in initial capital.
To increase foreign investment the government in March 1991 announced that foreign firms would be permitted to repatriate all profits, but that only firms investing more than $2,800,000 would be permitted to retain the three-year tax exemption previously enjoyed by all foreign firms.
At the end of 1990 foreign debt totalled $46,100 million, and during that year debt repayment was only $700,000,000, intended to cover only new debts, compared with the total repayments due of $46,100 million.
Strikes
Economic hardship led to strikes in November 1990 [see p. 37841], and warning strikes in the rail and shipyard industries in January 1991.
In February state farm workers, teachers and transport workers staged strikes, and May saw a wave of strikes mainly in the transport and mining industries (copper being one of Poland's most profitable export sectors)[for Solidarity day of action see p. 38208].
Farmers staged protests, including on April 15 dumping several hundred kilogrammes of butter in the Agriculture Ministry, because imports of subsidized food from western Europe were causing difficulties in marketing Polish produce.
They demanded minimum procurement prices and tariffs on EC imports as well as subsidies for Polish farms.
Foreign relations
Poland's "Eastern Policy" , debated in the Sejm on Sept. 7, 1990, declared that the withdrawal of Soviet troops from Poland had to be settled and relations defined with the "centres of sovereign republican authorities" in the Soviet Union.
During a visit to the Soviet Union on Oct. 12-16 by Foreign Minister Skubiszewski "historic" treaties of good-neighbourliness were signed with the Russian Federation and Ukraine—the first to be signed by Soviet republics without USSR intervention.
Ukraine and Poland denied any territorial disputes, despite much of eastern Poland having been incorporated into the Soviet Republic of the Ukraine under the Nazi-Soviet pact of 1939 [see pp. 3749-50].
Poland tended towards neutrality in foreign policy.
In November 1990, cuts of almost 50 per cent to the Polish army were announced, after which conscripts would serve for 12 months (cut from 18 months), with some serving in the police force.
Poland withdrew from the Warsaw Pact in January 1991 [see p. 37979]at the same time as Czechoslovakia (with which an agreement on military co-operation was signed on Feb. 27) and Hungary, and announced on Aug. 10 the establishment of formal diplomatic contacts with NATO.
Poland's first friendship treaty with a Western country was signed with France on April 11, 1991 [see p. 38162].
Diplomatic relations with South Africa were restored on May 15 after a 45-year break.
An important friendship treaty was signed with Germany on June 17 [see p. 38306; for initial German reluctance to ratify the Oder-Neisse border see p. 37303].
EUROPE
PORTUGAL
Area: 92,072 sq km(incl. inland water).
Population: 10,300,000 (UNFPA est.).
Capital: Lisbon.
Language: Portuguese.
Religion: Christianity (Roman Catholic).
Armed forces: 68,000 (1990).
Currency: escudo (US$1.00=Esc157.377 as at July 1, 1991).
Major international affiliations: EC, NATO, OECD.
POLITICAL SYSTEM
The Republic of Portugal, declared in 1910, experienced a series of coups and authoritarian regimes in subsequent decades.
In April 1974 the government of Marcello Caetano was overthrown by a group of army officers with a leftist agenda, and in 1976 a new democratic Constitution was introduced.
According to the provisions of this Constitution (with revisions made in 1982 and 1989) the head of state is the President, elected by universal suffrage for a five-year term.
The President appoints the Prime Minister and, on the latter's recommendation, the other members of the Council of Ministers.
Legislative authority is vested in the unicameral 250-member Assembly of the Republic, elected by universal suffrage for up to four years under a system of proportional representation.
Main government leaders
President: Mário Alberto Nobre Lopes Soares.
Prime Minister: Aníbal Cavaco Silva.
Other principal ministers: Fernando Nogueira (Minister of State; Justice); Joao de Deus Pinheiro (Foreign Affairs); Carlos Brito (Defence); Miguel Beleza (Finance); Manuel Pereira (Interior).
Changes to Council of Ministers to June 1991.
None.
Ruling party
Partido Social Democrata (PSD—Social Democratic Party, Aníbal Cavaco Silva l.)
Other parties
Partido Socialista (PS—Socialist Party, Jorge Sampaio sec. -gen.);
Partido do Centro Democrático Social (CDS—Democratic Social Centre, Diogo Freitas do Amaral pres.);
Partido Renovador Democrático (PRD—Democratic Renewal Party); Partido Comunista Português (PCP—Portuguese Communist Party, Alvaro Barrei-Rinhas Cunhal sec. -gen.);
Uniao Democrática Popular (UDP—Popular Democratic Union, Mário Tomé l.);
Os Verdes (The Greens, Maria Santos l.).
Elections
In a general election on July 19, 1987 [see pp. 35388-90], the PSD, which under Cavaco Silva had been ruling as a minority administration, was returned to parliament as the first government since 1974 to command an absolute majority.
It also became the first government since 1974 to serve a full four-year term; a general election was due in October 1991.
In the presidential elections of January 1991, Soares was elected President for a second five-year term [see p. 37968].
1990/91 OVERVIEW
The PSD's decision to support the candidacy of Soares (PS) in the 1991 presidential elections [see p. 37590]underlined similarities of policy between the PSD and the PS.
The PSD was criticized for not making full use of PS compliance and of its own parliamentary majority to introduce wider social and economic reform.
The PCP, meanwhile, faced internal divisions and defections over developments in eastern Europe.
In July 1990 the formation of a Party of National Solidarity (PSN), headed by Cardoso Ribeiro and claiming a membership of 7,000 was reported.
Trial of Azores secessionist
On March 12, 1991, José de Almeida, the leader of the illegal separatist Azores Liberation Front, was acquitted of charges of treason.
The judge ruled that there was no evidence that he had incited members of the group to violence.
Economy
The government's economic policy was determined largely by the demands of Portugal's membership since 1986 of the European Communities (EC).
Membership had brought several years of sustained economic growth, with a high level of foreign investment.
The rapid expansion of the domestic market helped to fuel inflation, which reached 13.4 per cent in 1990.
As an oil importer Portugal suffered several months of economic uncertainty during the Gulf crisis of late 1990-early 1991.
One of the main strands of the government's preparation for the single European market by December 1992 was its large-scale privatization programme, launched in 1989 [see pp. 37590-91].
The sale of the remaining shares in the Banco Português do Atlántico, the country's largest commercial bank, took place in December.
The programme was suspended in January 1991 because of the Gulf crisis, but in February legislation allowing for the 100 per cent privatization (previously restricted to 49 per cent) of companies in key sectors secured Parliamentary approval.
Privatizations announced or implemented in the following four months included those of banks, newspapers, a shipping company and a brewery [see also p. 38209].
Monetary policy and 1991 budget
In September 1990 the Central Bank announced the introduction with effect from Oct. 1 of a new exchange-rate policy under which the escudo would be linked to a basket of five European currencies (German, Spanish, French, UK and Italian) rather than to those of 13 major trading partners as previously.
The objective was to curb recent influxes of foreign capital and to bring the escudo closer into line with the major EC currencies.
On Oct. 10 the bank's governor, José Tavares Moreira, announced that Portugal would not enter the ERM until it was clear that inflation was in decline; it was understood that a level of around 7-8 per cent would be acceptable.
The 1991 budget (adopted by the Assembly on Dec. 12, 1990) envisaged a growth rate of 3.5 per cent(against an average of 4.3 per cent for the previous five years), inflation at 11 per cent , and a budget deficit of 673,700 million escudos.
This last figure represented a fall in the deficit from 7.5 to 6.5 per cent of gross domestic product (GDP); the proceeds from privatization for the year were forecast at 2.5 per cent of GDP, and as a result of tax reforms direct tax revenues were expected to rise by about 22 per cent over 1990.
Economic and social pact
In an effort to meet its 1991 inflation target, the government in October 1990 concluded with the UGT (General Workers' Union) and the Employers' Association a pact for the following year: average wage increases would be below 13.4 per cent; the working week would be reduced from 48 to 44 hours; the minimum monthly wage for industrial and farm workers would rise by 15 per cent , as would most pension and social security payments; labour disputes were to be resolved through negotiation rather than industrial action.
Foreign relations
Portugal lodged a complaint with the International Court of Justice on Feb. 22, 1991, against Australia with regard to a treaty between Australia and Indonesia covering the division of oil resources in the Timor Gap (near the former Portuguese colony of East Timor)[see also p. 37578].
[See also January 1991 US access to Azores air base p. 37968; May 1991 Pinochet visit p. 38188].
EUROPE
ROMANIA
Area: 229,027 sq km.
Population: 23,300,000 (1990 UNFPA est.).
Capital: Bucharest.
Language: Romanian (official); Hungarian, German, and other languages spoken by minorities.
Religion: Christianity (85% Romanian Orthodox Church).
Armed forces: 163,000 (1990).
Currency: leu (plural lei)(US$1.00=62.8359 lei as at July 1, 1991).
Major international affiliations: BIS; CSCE; EBRD.
POLITICAL SYSTEM
Romania was from 1947 until late 1989 a Socialist Republic, and the Romanian Communist Party (RCP) the only legal political party.
The regime was overthrown by a popular uprising on Dec. 22, 1989.
A National Salvation Front (NSF) took power, its Council, represented by an Executive Bureau, assuming legislative authority, while executive responsibility was given to a new provisional Council of Ministers.
The NSF was reorganized as a political party, dominated by former RCP members.
Legislative power was transferred in May 1990 to a new bicameral Parliament comprising a 396-seat National Assembly (including nine seats distributed among nominated members of the national minorities) and a 119-seat Senate.
Main government leaders
President: Ion Iliescu.
Prime Minister: Petre Roman.
Other principal ministers
Anton Vatasescu (Minister of State responsible for Industry and Commerce); Dan Mircea Popescu (Minister of State responsible for Quality of Life and Social Security); Eugen Dijmarescu (Minister of State; Minister of Economy and Finance); Adrian Severin (Deputy Premier; Minister for Reform and Relations with Parliament); Adrian Nastase (Foreign Affairs); Gen. Nicolae Constantin Spiroiu (National Defence); Doru Viorel Ursu (Interior).
Cabinet changes to June 1991
For extensive government reshuffle in April 1991 see p. 38207.
Ruling party
National Salvation Front (NSF, Ion Aurel Stoica exec. ch.).
Other political parties
Christian Democratic National Peasants' Party (Corneliu Coposu pres.);
National Liberal Party (Radu Campeanu ch.);
Hungarian Democratic Union of Romania (HDUR, Geza Domokos pres.);
Romanian Socialist Democratic Party (Marian Circiumar pres.);
Romanian Social Democratic Party (Sergiu Cunescu exec. pres.);
Romanian Ecological Movement (Toma George Maiorescu ch.);
Romanian Ecological Party (Otto Weber ch.);
Romanian Unity Alliance (AUR); Agrarian Democratic Party (Valeriu Pescaru l.);
Centrist Democratic Group.
All these parties won representation in the National Assembly in May 1990.
Civic Alliance (Marian Munteanu first chair) is extra-parliamentary, but decided in July 1991 to become a political party [see below].
Elections
In the multiparty general election held on May 20, 1990, the NSF gained 66 per cent of the vote; Iliescu, President of the NSF Council Executive Bureau, won the separate presidential elections on the same day with 85 per cent of the vote.
1990/91 OVERVIEW
Strikes and Protests
The implementation of the first stage of the government's price legislation programme in November and December 1990 led to a wave of anti-government strikes and protest action, including demonstrations in Timisoara which began on Dec. 16, the first anniversary of the uprising which led to Ceausescu's downfall [see pp. 37866; 37922].
The protests were supported nationwide by strikes and demonstrations continuing into the new year [see pp. 37973; 38018].
April and May 1991 saw a series of rallies across the country organized by Civic Alliance in support of demands for the resignation of Iliescu and the government, and on May 16 there was a protest strike by 800,000 Romanian farm and food industry workers in support of demands for higher wages.
There were strikes in June by railway workers, employees of the giant Faur engineering factory, taxi drivers, teachers, doctors and other medical personnel.
A general strike, however, organized on June 19 by the National Confederation Union, attracted little support.
Opposition party activities
Civic Alliance, a coalition of extra-parliamentary opposition groups, played a major role in the anti-government strikes and protests, and in July 1991 Civic Alliance decided to transform itself into a political party.
Parliamentary opposition groups were also active in the anti-government protests, but their focus was on political regrouping following their defeat in the May 1990 elections, parliamentary opposition to government policies and political manoeuvring in response to NSF proposals to involve them in a government coalition.
In parliament, opposition party tactics were to capitalize on popular discontent with government economic policy by opposing specific measures, such as price increases, on the grounds that they were either inopportune or part of a generally faulty government economic strategy.
In August 1990 opposition parties set up a Democratic Antitotalitarian Forum, in February 1991 a National Convention of the Extra Parliamentary Opposition was set up, and in May 1991 a National Convention for the Establishment of Democracy was created.
NSF coalition proposals
During the period December 1990 to June 1991 there were a number of contacts and negotiations between the NSF and the opposition parties about the formation of a national unity or coalition government, initiated by the NSF either directly or via Iliescu.
Behind these approaches, according to observers, lay a government desire that the opposition should share in the political burden of popular protest against economic liberalization measures.
It was also thought that NSF coalition proposals might have been connected to rifts within its own movement between conservatives and reformers.
However, formal discussions begun in May 1991 broke down in June when the NSF refused to concede the main opposition demand for Roman to be replaced by a "neutral" Prime Minister.
There were also substantial differences over the composition of the new government in terms of the allocation of ministerial posts.
The government also attempted to broaden its political base by other means: in the April 1991 Cabinet reshuffle some non-NSF ministers were appointed [see p. 38207].
Economy
Developments in the economy were dominated by the government's policy of price liberalization [see pp. 37866; 38162-63].
The effect of this policy on the cost of living was evident from a report in August 1991 by the National Statistical Commission that consumer prices had risen by 144 per cent since October 1990.
Unemployment was predicted to increase to 700,000 by the end of 1991.
Energy shortages at the beginning of the year had resulted in large-scale lay-offs of government employees and workers in large enterprises [see p. 38018].
Government estimates at the end of 1990 were that the cost of the Gulf crisis to the Romanian economy was at least US$3,500 million.
In April 1991 the leu was devalued by 72 per cent, legislation was passed opening the way to direct foreign investment, and an IMF loan of US$748,000,000 was announced [see p. 38163].
In June a government bill to privatize 30 per cent of Romania's state-owned companies ran into opposition both within Parliament and from independent trade unions, but it became law on Aug. 14 [see p. 38400].
Foreign affairs
The major event in Romanian foreign policy was the conclusion of a treaty of co-operation, good neighbourliness and friendship with the Soviet Union, signed by Iliescu and Soviet President Gorbachev on April 5 during the course of the former's visit to Moscow.
The treaty, the first of its kind between the Soviet Union and one of its former East European allies in the Warsaw Pact, committed the two sides to non-aggression and to consultation and co-operation over security matters.
It was silent with regard to Soviet Moldavia (which largely consisted of the former Romanian provinces of Bessarabia and North Bukovina annexed by the Soviet Union in 1940), but stipulated respect for existing borders [see also p. 38306].
The NSF's response to opposition criticism of the treaty on this issue depended on the argument that to raise the Moldavian question would open up other territorial issues, such as possible Hungarian claims to Transylvania.
The government also supported Soviet proposals for the creation of an eastern European replacement for the Warsaw Pact.
On Jan. 30, 1991, Roman had talks in Paris with President Mitterrand of France.
On April 18-19 Mitterrand visited Bucharest [see p. 38163], and on July 17-19 Roman visited Paris again, when it was reported that the French government had guaranteed loans to the value of US$200,000,000 to French firms investing in Romania.
A formal application for associate membership of the European Communities (EC) was lodged by Foreign Minister Nastase on a visit to Brussels on Feb. 13, and supported by France and Italy; a Romanian-Italian co-operation pact was signed on July 23.
In January 1991 Roman visited Strasbourg for talks on Romanian membership of the Council of Europe.
In February Nastase met NATO Secretary-general Manfred Wörner to discuss Romanian association with NATO.
In April Roman met United States Secretary of State James Baker in Washington and Iliescu attended a London ceremony to inaugurate the European Bank for Reconstruction and Development (EBRD).
In June the government stated that Romania had no territorial claims on Yugoslavia.
In July Romania participated in talks with the Soviet Union, Bulgaria and Turkey on Black Sea co-operation [see p. 38352].
EUROPE
SAN MARINO
Area: 60.5 sq.
km.
Population: 22,682 (1988).
Capital: San Marino.
Language: Italian.
Religion: Christianity (Roman Catholic).
Armed forces: there are combined Voluntary Forces and provision for mass conscription in an emergency.
Currency: Italian lira (US$1.00=L1354.18 as at July 1, 1991).
POLITICAL SYSTEM
In the Republic of San Marino legislative power is vested in a 60-member Grand and General Council elected every five years with universal adult suffrage by proportional representation.
Two of its members are elected every six months to act as Captains-Regent (head of state), and, with a Congress of State, to exercise executive power.
Main government leaders
Captains-Regent: Domenico Bernardini I Claudio Podeschi I.
Other principal ministers: Gabriele Gatti (Secretary of State for Foreign and Political Affairs); Clara Boscaglia (Secretary of State for Finance and Budget); Alvaro Selva (Secretary of State for Internal Affairs, Civil Protection and Justice); Giuseppe Amici (Deputy for Industry and Handicrafts).
Ruling coalition
Partito Democratico Christiano Sammarinese (PDC—Christian Democratic Party, Rosolino Martelli l.);
Partito Democratico Progressista (PDP—Democratic Progressive Party, until March 1990 the Partito Comunista Sammarinese, Gilberto Ghiotti sec. -gen.).
Other political parties
Partito Socialista Sammarinese (PSS—San Marino Socialist Party, Remy Giacomini, Emma Rossi l.).
Elections
A coalition government of the Communist Party (later renamed the Democratic Progressive Party) and the Christian Democratic Party, formed in July 1986, was returned to power in a general election on May 29, 1988 [see p. 36231].
1990/91 OVERVIEW
Tourism remained the largest source of revenue in San Marino, contributing around 60 per cent to the gross domestic product (GDP).
Just over 43 per cent of the labour force was employed in manufacturing and construction in 1990, with 2.5 per cent working in agriculture.
Italy remained the most important trading partner and supplier of energy and raw materials to the landlocked state.
EUROPE
SOVIET UNION
Area: 22,402,200 sq km.
Population: 288,600,000 (1990 UNFPA est.).
Capital: Moscow.
Languages: Russian (first language for over 50%) plus 112 other recognised languages.
Religion: Christianity (60,000,000 Russian Orthodox, 21,000,000 other), Islam (45,000,000) and Judaism (500,000).
Armed Forces: 3,500,000 (end 1990 est.).
Currency: rouble (US$1.00=0.614 roubles as of July 1, 1991—official commercial rate).
Major international affiliations: EBRD, CSCE.
POLITICAL SYSTEM (as of Aug. 18, 1991)
The Union of Soviet Socialist Republics was first established as a federated state in 1922, eventually evolving to a 15-republic federation.
At the end of 1988 a series of amendments to the 1977 "Brezhnev Constitution" were adopted which established a 2,250-member Congress of People's Deputies as the USSR's supreme representative body.
This body met for the first time in May 1989 and elected from its members the bicameral 542-member Supreme Soviet—the working constitutional body responsible for all legislative and administrative matters—consisting of the Soviet of the Union and the Soviet of Nationalities.
In December 1990 the already extensive presidential powers were greatly expanded with the creation of a new state leadership structure.
The President nominated a Vice-President, who was to succeed the President should the latter be unable to complete a five-year term of office.
The Council of Ministers was abolished and replaced by a Cabinet reporting directly to the President.
Also created was a Presidential Security Council, responsible for ensuring the "external and internal security of the country and its indissoluble unity" .
The previously consultative Federation Council was upgraded to an executive body, comprising the Presidents of the Union Republics and of the Autonomous Republics, and responsible for co-ordinating the work of the central and republican governments.
The USSR's central federal structure of legislative and executive bodies—Congress of People's Deputies, Supreme Soviet and government organs—was paralleled by a similar set of institutions at the republic level.
In March 1990 the Congress of People's Deputies abolished the Communist Party of the Soviet Union (CPSU) 's constitutionally guaranteed monopoly of political power (enshrined in Article 6 of the 1977 Constitution).
At a CPSU congress in early July 1990 a reorganization of the party's leading bodies confirmed the curtailment of their role in national political decision-making [see pp. 37299; 37616].
Main government leaders
President: *Mikhail Gorbachev (also general secretary of CPSU until Aug. 24, 1991—see p. 38371).
Vice-President: *Gennady Yanaev.
Prime Minister and Cabinet Chair: *Valentin Pavlov.
Other principal ministers: *Aleksander Bessmertnykh (Foreign Minister); *Dmitry Yazov (Defence); *Boris Pugo (Internal Affairs)
First Deputy Prime Ministers: Vladimir Shcherbakov (Economics and Forecasting); Vitaly Doguzhiyev (General Affairs); Vladimir Velichko.
Members of the Security Council: indicated with asterisk above, and also comprising Vladimir Kryuchkov (chairman of KGB); Yevgeny Primakov (Gorbachev's special adviser and envoy); Vadim Bakatin (former Minister of Internal Affairs).
Presidents of the Union Republics (members of the Federation Council): Armenia: Levon Ter-Petrossyan; Azerbaijan: Ayaz Mutalibov; Byelorussia: Nikolai Dementei; Estonia: Arnold Rüütel; Georgia: Zviad Gamsakhurdia; Kazakhstan: Nursultan Nazarbayev; Kirghizia: Askar Akayev; Latvia: Anatolijs Gorbunovs; Lithuania: Vytautas Landsbergis; Moldavia: Mircea Snegur; Russian Federation: Boris Yeltsin; Tadjikistan: Kakhar Makhkamov; Turkmenia: Saparmurad Niyazov; Ukraine: Leonid Kravchuk; Uzbekistan: Islam Karimov.
Gorbachev, Yanayev and the presidents of the autonomous republics were also members of the Federation Council.
Chair of USSR Supreme Soviet: Anatolii Lukyanov
Notable government changes to end-June 1991
Vadim Bakatin was dismissed as Interior Minister on Dec. 2, 1990, and Pugo appointed in his place; Eduard Shevardnadze resigned on Dec. 20 as Foreign Minister and was replaced on Jan. 15, 1991, by Bessmertnykh; Yanaev was elected Vice-President by the USSR supreme Soviet on Dec. 27 [see pp. 37902-04].
Nikolai Ryzkhov suffered a heart attack on Dec. 25, and was replaced as Prime Minister by Pavlov on Jan. 14, 1991 [see p. 37970].
Ruling party as of end June 1991
Communist Party of the Soviet Union (CPSU, previously the sole legal party, Mikhail Gorbachev gen. sec. until Aug. 24, 1991).
Other political Parties
On October 9, 1990, legislation was passed allowing the formation of new political parties [see p. 37787].
On Feb. 27, 1991, Valentin Kuptsov, a secretary of the CPSU central committee, told a news conference that there were more than 500 political parties in the USSR, including 20 with a nationwide membership.
However, most of these were skeletal structures with very few members.
Apart from some nationalist organizations in the non-Russian republics, only the CPSU could be considered a solidly established political party (and even it was riven by numerous factions).
In 1990-1991 the CPSU lost 4,200,000 members, reducing the membership to 15,000,000.
Serious competitors to the CPSU included: Democratic Russia, a group organized around radical deputies in the Russian Federation parliament; Soyuz (Union), a group based on a bloc of both communist and non-communist conservative deputies in the USSR Congress of People's Deputies and the USSR Supreme Soviet; Democratic Reform Movement (DRM), established by Shevardnadze, Aleksander Yakovlev and other CPSU dissidents on July 1, 1991; Democratic Party of Communists of Russia established in July 1991, headed by Aleksander Rutskoi, the Vice-President of the Russian Federation, which split from the conservative Russian Communist Party; Russian Communist Party established in April 1990, in theory the RFSFR section of the CPSU but in practice a hardline outpost of organized opposition to Gorbachev and the radical forces.
Elections
The last nationwide elections were those to Republican parliaments and local councils in February and March 1990 [see p. 37321].
Presidential and mayoral elections: on May 26, 1991, Gamsakhurdia was elected President of Georgia with a majority of 86.5 per cent[see p. 38206]; on June 16 Yeltsin was elected President of the Russian Federation [see p. 38237], and Gavriil Popov and Anatoly Sobchak were elected mayors of Moscow and Leningrad respectively with comfortable majorities.
In an uncontested election on June 12, Mintimer Shaymiyev was elected President of the Tatarstan autonomous republic.
1990/1991 OVERVIEW
Domestic politics in the Soviet Union continued to be dominated by (i) the political struggle between conservatives/hardliners and reformers/radicals, both within the CPSU and in Soviet society generally;(ii) attempts to grapple with the country's economic crisis and to formulate a strategy for economic reforms; and (iii) the nationalist challenge to central Soviet rule.
Internal political struggles
July 1990: the 28th Congress of the CPSU, held on July 2-13 adopted a declaration on "humane democratic socialism" .
Gorbachev's success at the congress was marred, however, by Yelstin's announcement that he was leaving the party, and by the departure from the party around the same time of a number of other leading advocates of radical reform [see p. 37416-17].
Sept. 24: the Congress of People's Deputies voted Gorbachev emergency powers to rule by decree [see pp. 37721-22].
Dec. 20: in a statement to the Congress of People's Deputies Shevardnadze announced his resignation as Soviet Foreign Minister, warning of a drift to a new dictatorship and the danger of conservative forces bringing the policies of glasnost and perestroika to an end [see p. 37903].
Feb. 19, 1991: Yeltsin called on Gorbachev to resign and on Feb. 22 up to 400,000 people joined a pro-democracy rally outside the Kremlin called by the "Democratic Russia" group [see p. 38013].
March 28-April 5: at an extraordinary session of the RFSFR's Congress of People's Deputies Yeltsin defeated an attempt by conservatives to unseat him as Chairman.
The Congress subsequently agreed to grant Yeltsin emergency powers to deal with the crisis situation in the republic and set the date for the direct election of a President of Russia [see pp. 38130-31].
April 23: Gorbachev and the leaders of nine of the 15 union republics signed a declaration supporting the government's anti-crisis economic programme and agreeing the timetable for a new Union Treaty aimed at achieving stable relations between the centre and the republics [see p. 38129].
April 24-25: at a meeting of the plenum of the CPSU central committee, Gorbachev routed opponents calling for his resignation.
The plenum rejected demands for "extraordinary measures" (the reimposition of authoritarian Communist Party rule) and reaffirmed the party's commitment to a transition to a market-based economy [see p. 38131].
June 16: Yeltsin was elected President of Russia with 57.3 per cent of the vote.
The nearest of his five rivals was the conservative-backed former Soviet Prime Minister Nikolai Ryzkhov, who received 16.85 per cent of the vote.
Third place was taken by Vladimir Zhirinovsky, leader of the Liberal Democratic party, with 7.81 per cent of the vote, on a platform of extreme Russian nationalism and authoritarian populism, and the liberal Vadim Bakatin came last with 3.42 per cent[see p. 38273].
June 17: at a session of the USSR Supreme Soviet, Prime Minister Pavlov called for emergency powers on a par with those already exercised by Gorbachev to be given to him and his Cabinet in order to tackle effectively the country's economic and social crisis.
The call was supported by hardline delegates including, it was reported, Defence and Interior Ministers Yazov and Pugo, and KGB Chairman Kryuchkov.
After an intervention by Gorbachev, the call was rejected by the Supreme Soviet.
July 1: Nine leading Soviet reformers announced their intention to form the Democratic Reform Movement [see p. 38347].
Economic reforms
The politics of economic reform in the Soviet Union were dominated in 1990-1991 by the choice of strategy for making the transition from an administrative-command to a market-based economy, and by emergency measures to tackle the immediate economic crisis which verged on the catastrophic.
The political "battle of the economic plans" began in earnest on Aug. 30-31, 1990, when economist Stanislav Shatalin's radical proposals for a 500-day transition to a market economy were rejected by the Presidential and Federation Councils, and a new working group was ordered to reconcile the plan with a more moderate set of proposals put forward by then Soviet Prime Minister Ryzkhov [see pp. 37537-38; 37663; 37721-22; 37786].
On April 22, 1991, Ryzkhov's successor as Prime Minister, Pavlov, presented to the USSR Supreme Soviet an emergency anti-crisis programme designed to stabilize the economy by the end of the year and to speed up the transition to a market economy.
The programme was supported by the leaders of the nine republics who signed a pact with Gorbachev on April 23 [see above; p. 38129].
The conservative-radical battle of economic plans was resumed, however, in June in the context of Gorbachev's plea to the G-7 group of Western industrialized countries for substantial economic aid [see p. 38272].
Soviet economist Grigory Yavlinsky, revived the Shatalin plan for a more rapid transition to a market economy (this time proposing that it should be backed by Western aid of Marshall Plan proportions).
Pavlov, however, applied political pressure on President Gorbachev to support his strategy of a gradual, self-sufficient transition to a market economy.
The upshot was the presentation of a compromise "Gorbachev Plan" to the meeting of the G-7 leaders in July [see p. 38321].
In terms of short-term economic measures, the main thrust of government policy was to drain off from the economy excess money which was fuelling inflation, contributing to constant shortages and frustrating efforts at economic control.
On Jan. 22 Gorbachev issued a decree withdrawing Rbs50 and Rbs100 banknotes (the highest denominations) from circulation [see p. 37971 for details of permitted exchanges].
On April 2 higher prices, including the doubling, trebling and even quadrupling of the prices of many basic food stuffs, were introduced for many retail goods and transportation and communications services.
The price increases sparked off a series of protests and strikes across the Soviet Union, particularly in Byelorussia [see p. 38129-30].
These protests were added to a series of crippling miners' strikes which had begun in early March.
The miners' action, based on demands for higher wages, better conditions and changes in the national political leadership, only came to an end on May 10 when a decree was issued transferring the control of the mines in the Russian Federation to the RFSFR government [see p. 38204].
The nationalist challenge
Aug. 23, 1990: Armenia's Supreme Soviet declared independence [see p. 37664].
Feb. 9, 1991: Lithuanians voted in a referendum by 2,028,339 to 147,040 in favour of independence.
Approximately 400,000 eligible voters abstained from the poll and some 66,000 invalid votes were cast [see p. 38014].
March 3: Estonia and Latvia held referendums and recorded 79 per cent and 73 per cent respectively in favour of independence.
The turnout in both republics was over 80 per cent of eligible voters [see p. 38078].
March 31: in a referendum held in Georgia 99 per cent voted in favour of independence in a 90 per cent turnout, and on April 9 Georgia proclaimed its independence.
May 5: Yeltsin and Kryuchkov agreed to create a separate RFSFR section of the KGB [see p. 38206].
May 22: Ukraine announced that it would hold a referendum in September on the future of the republic.
June 25: Moldavia's President Snegur announced that the republic would hold a referendum on independence in the autumn.
The response of the Soviet government to these and other developments was threefold.
(1) It attempted to establish the legitimacy of the Union by a referendum held on March 17, 1991, on the preservation of the Soviet Union.
The result was 76 per cent in favour of the preservation of the Union as a "renewed federation of equal sovereign republics" .
The referendum was officially boycotted by six republics (Armenia, Estonia, Georgia, Latvia, Lithuania and Moldava—although voting took place in some districts of these republics), while Kazakhstan, the RFSFR, Ukraine and Uzbekistan voted on additional questions concerning each republic's status in the USSR [see pp. 38078-79 for referendum details].
(2) Central government started negotiations with the republics on a new Union Treaty.
The negotiations took place over the course of a year between autumn 1990 and summer 1991, and could be characterized as the centre progressively conceding to the demands of the republics for more independence.
The final text of the draft treaty, published at the end of June, embodied the concept of a Soviet confederation with power located in the individual republics, as opposed to a federation with a strong central government.
(3) Specific interventions in the affairs of republics.
These ranged from an economic blockade of Lithuania in April 1990 [see pp. 37360-62], and violent military intervention in the Baltics in January 1991 [see pp. 37944-45], through a continuing "battle of the laws" with the RFSFR, to efforts to mediate over or exploit inter-ethnic conflicts within and between seceding republics (such as the Armenia-Azerbaijan conflict over Nagorno-Karabakh and the South Ossetia dispute in Georgia—see p. 37971).
Noteworthy also during this period was the growing number of inter-republic contacts, treaties and agreements bypassing central control.
Economy
Economic indicators for 1990
Fall in GNP: 2 per cent; fall in national income: 4 per cent ; fall in industrial output (gross): 10 per cent ; fall in agricultural output (gross): 5 per cent ; fall in oil production: 6 per cent ; inflation (consumer prices): 70 per cent ; hard-currency current-account deficit: US$1,100 million; Foreign debt: over US$50,000 million; imports: Rbs71,000 million (down from Rbs72,000 million in 1989); exports: Rbs61,000 million (down from Rbs69,000 million in 1989).
Economic performance in 1991
All the indications were that by the end of 1991 the Soviet economy would have registered a severe, possibility catastrophic deterioration.
In April Prime Minister Pavlov announced that compared with the first quarter of 1990 there had been in the first quarter of 1991 a 10 per cent fall in national income, a 5 per cent fall in industrial output and a 13 per cent fall in agricultural output.
He predicted a 25 per cent fall in national income by the end of the year if drastic steps were not taken.
He also estimated that the Union-wide budget deficit would total Rbs200,000 million by the end of the year.
The union budget for 1991 had been set at Rbs250,000 million with provision for a Rbs26,000 million deficit [see p. 37970].
This figure was exceeded in the first quarter of the year alone when a Rbs31,000 million deficit was recorded.
Other indicators were equally poor.
The official statistics agency, Goskomstat, announced on April 19 that oil production had declined by 9 per cent during the first quarter of 1991 as compared with the same period in 1990, and in the first half of 1991 there was a 25 per cent fall in oil exports.
Foreign debt grew to US$62,000 million (with repayment of $30,000 million due in 1991-1992) while less than 30 per cent of Soviet mass-produced goods were estimated to meet world standards.
It was expected that the harvest reaching the shops would be only half that of 1990.
Consumer prices in the period January-March 1991 rose by 20-30 per cent in comparison with the same period in 1990, with much higher inflation expected later in the year as a result of the April official price increases.
Over 1,000,000 days' work were lost due to strikes in the first quarter of 1991, a figure exceeded in the second quarter under the combined impact of continuing miners' strikes and protest strikes against price increases.
The International Labour Organization estimated that within one to two years unemployment in the USSR could exceed 20,000,000.
On May 29 the USSR Supreme Soviet approved a new law on foreign investment which would permit 100 per cent foreign ownership of Soviet companies and facilitate the repatriation of profits in hard currency [see p. 38302].
There were in 1991 some 3,000 joint ventures with companies from 73 countries.
Foreign relations
Foreign relations were dominated by (i) efforts to mediate a peaceful resolution of the Gulf conflict [see pp. 37641; 37758; 37943; 37983];(ii) relations with the United States [see pp. 37518-19; 38320-21]; and (iii) a campaign for substantial Western economic aid to facilitate the reform and recovery of the Soviet economy [see pp. 38272; 38321].
Another major issue was the Soviet Union's part in German unification.
In talks between Gorbachev and West German Federal Chancellor Helmut Kohl on July 15-16, 1990, agreement was reached over a united Germany being free to join NATO [see p. 37659].
German aid to the Soviet Union, amounting to DM12,000 million (approximately US$7,600 million), towards resettling Soviet troops withdrawn from East Germany was described in September by West German Foreign Minister Hans-Dietrich Genscher as "the price of German unity" [see p. 37718].
A bilateral treaty between the Soviet Union and Germany on Good-neighbourliness, Partnership and Co-operation was initialled on Sept. 13, 1990 [see p. 37718; for text see p. 37835].
Other significant developments January-July 1991
January: Jan. 22: European Parliament voted to suspend US$1,500 million of food and technical aid in response to Soviet crackdown in the Baltic states; Jan. 22-23: Japanese Foreign Minister Taro Nakayama in Moscow for talks with Bessmertnykh and Gorbachev.
Bessmertnykh met with Baker and Bush in Washington for talks on the Gulf crisis, arms control and the forthcoming summit; agreed that summit scheduled for February would be postponed because of Gulf conflict.
February: Feb 14: recall of Soviet ambassador from Iceland in protest at Icelandic Parliament's decision to recognise Lithuania's independence; Feb. 15: Primakov in Tokyo for preparatory talks about Gorbachev's planned visit to Japan in April; Feb. 16; three European Community Foreign Ministers (Italy, Luxembourg, Netherlands) in Moscow for talks on EC-Soviet relations, the Gulf conflict and the situation in the Baltic states; Feb. 26: agreement with South Africa to renew diplomatic contacts (although not diplomatic relations).
March: March 5: United Kingdom Prime Minister John Major had talks in Moscow with Gorbachev on the Gulf conflict and the situation in the Baltic states; March 7: the RFSFR and Czechoslovakia signed a trade co-operation agreement; March 12: it was announced in Moscow that the withdrawal of the 50,000 troops stationed in Poland would begin in April, although the process would not be completed before 1994; March 14-16: following a tour of the Middle East, US Secretary of State James Baker visited Moscow for talks on the situation in the Gulf and the presentation of a six-point US plan for peace and stability in the Middle East; March 18-20: UK Foreign and Commonwealth Secretary Douglas Hurd visited both Kiev and Moscow for discussions on British-Soviet relations; March 22: Soviet-Romanian treaty of friendship and co-operation initialled in Moscow; March 28: Bessmertnykh held further talks in Tokyo in connection with Gorbachev's forthcoming visit.
April: April 1: Bessmertnykh discussed in Beijing measures to resolve Soviet-Chinese border disputes, and the reduction of troops on both sides of the border; April 4: Polish Prime Minister Jan Krzysztof Bielecki held talks with Gorbachev in Moscow on the withdrawal of Soviet forces from Poland, the internal situation in both countries, and prospects for co-operation; April 4: Romanian President Iliescu arrived in Moscow to sign the Soviet-Romanian Treaty; April 8-9: Bessmertnykh, visiting Belgrade, supported the preservation of Yugoslavia's territorial integrity; April 8: Viktor Komplektov named as new Soviet ambassador to the USA; April 9-10: Bessmertnykh had talks in Athens with Greek President Karamanlis and Foreign Minister Antonis Samaras and signed a treaty of friendship and co-operation; April 16-19: President Gorbachev visited Japan, the first visit by a Soviet leader, and had a number of (inconclusive) discussions with Japanese officials about the fate of the disputed Kurile Islands—the main obstacle to a significant increase in the amount of Japanese aid and credits to the USSR; April 17: as part of a $3,000 million aid package agreed earlier in the year, the South Korean Export-Import bank signed an agreement giving the Soviet Union $800 million worth of credits to purchase South Korean raw materials and consumer goods.
May: May 8-11; in a tour in support of Middle East peace talks, Bessmertnykh visited Damascus, Tel Aviv (the first trip to Israel by a Soviet Foreign Minister since the state was founded in 1948), Amman and Cairo; May 15-19: the general secretary of the Chinese Communist Party, Jiang Zemin, visited Moscow for talks on Sino-Soviet relations; May 15: Lev Voronin, a former deputy Chairman of the Soviet Council of Ministers, was appointed ambassador to the EC; May 27: the last Soviet troops on active duty in Czechoslovakia were withdrawn; May 28-31: Primakov was in Washington for talks with US leaders and World Bank and IMF officials to discuss Western aid.
June: June 1: Bessmertnykh and Baker announced in Lisbon agreement in principle on the resolution of disputes about the CFE treaty; June 5: President Gorbachev in Oslo accepted the 1990 Nobel Peace Prize and called for active and practical Western support for perestroika and glasnost; June 11: it was reported that Soviet-Cuban trade, halted because of Cuba's hard currency shortage, would be continued on a barter basis; June 11: it was reported that the rouble could become domestically convertible on Jan. 1, 1992; June 19-20: Jacques Delors, President of the European Commission, had two days of talks in Moscow on Soviet-EC co-operation; June 19: the last Soviet soldier left Hungary.
452,000 people emigrated from the Soviet Union in 1990, mostly to Israel and West Germany—double the number emigrating in 1989.
[For emigration law see p. 38206.]
EUROPE
SPAIN
Area: 504,782 sq km(incl. inland water).
Population: 39,200,000 (1990 UNFPA est.).
Capital: Madrid.
Languages: Castilian Spanish; Catalan(north-east); Basque (north) and Galician (north-west).
Religion: Christianity (Roman Catholic).
Armed forces: 274,500 (1990).
Currency: pesetas (US$1.00=113.994 ptas as of July 1, 1991).
WEU.
Major international affiliations: BIS, Cocom, Council of Europe, CSCE, EBRD, EC, ESA, NATO, OECD,
POLITICAL SYSTEM
The Kingdom of Spain is, under its 1978 Constitution, a parliamentary monarchy.
Legislative authority is vested in the bicameral parliament, the Cortes Generales, which comprises the 350-member Congress of Deputies, elected by proportional representation, and the 280-member directly elected Senate.
Both houses are elected by universal adult suffrage and for terms of no longer than four years.
The monarch appoints the President of the Government (Prime Minister) and, on the latter's recommendation, the Council of Ministers.
Spain is divided into 17 autonomous regions, each with its own elected legislative assembly, a Governing Council with executive and administrative functions, and a President of the Government (Prime Minister) elected by the assembly from among its members.
Main government leaders
Head of state: King Juan Carlos.
Prime Minister: Felipe González Márquez.
Other principal ministers: Narcís Serra Serra (Deputy Prime Minister); Julian García Vargas (Defence); José Luis Corcuero(Interior); Francisco Fernández Ordóñez (Foreign Affairs); Carlos Solchaga (Economy and Finance); Tomás de la Quadra Salcedo (Justice).
Cabinet changes to mid-1991
January 1991: resignation of Alfonso Guerra González [see p. 37968]; March: extensive Cabinet reshuffle including appointment of Serra as Guerra's replacement [see p. 38114].
Ruling Party
Partido Socialista Obrero Español (PSOE—Spanish Socialist Workers' Party, José María "Txiki" Benegas sec. -gen).
Other national parties
Partido Popular (PP—Popular Party, José María Aznar pres.);
Partido Comunista de España (PCE—Spanish Communist Party, Gerardo Iglesias l.);
Centro Democrático y Social (CDS—Democratic and Social Centre, Adolfo Suárez González l.).
Elections
The PSOE was returned to government in a general election on June 22, 1986 (see p. 34821), winning 184 seats in the Congress of Deputies.
The distribution of seats in the Congress following an early general election on Oct. 29, 1989 [see pp. 36983-84], was not finalized until early April 1990, when the PSOE was allocated 175—half the total number of seats.
González accordingly remained in power, his government winning a vote of confidence on April 5 [see pp. 37262-63; 37330; 37387].
Municipal and regional elections were held on May 26, 1991 [see p. 38201].
1990/91 OVERVIEW
After the 1989 elections tensions within the PSOE developed into a rift between the party itself and the government; the latter was accused of moving politically to the right and of becoming involved in corruption after nearly a decade of power.
Accusations of corruption made against Alfonso Guerra which eventually led to his resignation as Deputy Prime Minister in January 1991 [see pp. 37263; 37968].
The government was further embarrassed in April, when a supposedly private car-telephone conversation between Benegas, the PSOE secretary-general, and other party members was made public.
In it Benegas criticized Solchaga, the Finance Minister, for rejecting a party proposal to boost the party's electoral popularity by the introduction of a new house purchasing scheme; in addition Benegas was critical of Serra (who had replaced Guerra) and of the Prime Minister himself.
[For resignation in June of leading PSOE members accused of false accounting see p. 38300.]
The division within the PSOE between government and party had resulted in the formation on May 1, 1990, of a new party, Democracia Socialista (Social Democracy) under the leadership of a left-wing PSOE dissident, Ricardo García Damborenea.
Immediately prior to his announcement, García had been suspended from all party activity for two years by the PSOE leadership.
Developments in other political parties
The former Communist Party (PCE) leader Ignacio Gallego died on Nov. 23, 1990, at the age of 76.
He had been a founding member of the Socialist Youth Movement, and after fighting in the civil war he had been held in detention in (French) camps in Algeria, before moving to the Soviet Union.
In 1945 he went to live in France, where he became a member of the PCE central committee, returning to Spain in July 1976.
He resigned from the PCE in October 1983 and formed a new pro-Soviet party, the Partido Comunista de los Pueblos de España (Communist Party of the Peoples of Spain—PCPE; see p. 32806).
He rejoined the PCE in January 1989 when the PCPE merged with it [see p. 36776], and in the 1989 elections regained his parliamentary seat.
Another veteran communist politician, Santiago Carrillo, secretary-general of the PCE from 1960 to 1982, effectively retired when on Feb. 15, 1991, he signed an agreement providing for the integration into the PSOE of the small Partido de los Trabajadores de España (Spanish Workers' Party—PTE), which he had formed after his expulsion from the PCE leadership in 1985 [see pp. 34183-84; 35527].
Carrillo had opposed any idea of integration into the PSOE.
It was reported on Dec. 3, 1990, that the leader of the Moslem Community Group of Ceuta, Ahmed Subaire, had announced the formation of a new political group, Iniciativa por Ceuta (Initiative for Ceuta), which, he said, would participate in the forthcoming municipal elections.
According to Subaire the new party would serve Moslems in the enclave who for years had had to rely on other parties to include Moslem representatives among their candidates.
[For political situation in Ceuta see p. 35730.]
Military appointments
On May 23, 1990, four new chiefs of staff were appointed: Rear Adml.
Gonzalo Martii Granizo in place of Rear Adml.
Gonzalo Puigcerver (Chief of Defence Staff); Lt.-Gen.
Ramón Fernández Sequiros in place of Lt.-Gen.
Federico Michavila (Air Force Chief of Staff); Rear Adml.
Carlos Vila in place of Rear Adml.
Fernando Nardíz (Navy Chief of Staff); and Lt.-Gen.
Ramón Porgueres in place of Lt.-Gen.
Miguel Iniguez (Army Chief of Staff).
Release of 1981 coup plotter
Lt.-Gen.
Jaime Milans del Bosch y Ussía, who had led the abortive coup attempt of 1981, was released on June 30, 1990, after serving nine years of his 30-year sentence [see pp. 31765-66; 32804].
He had earlier refused to leave prison until all the other 15 people imprisoned on the same charge had been released.
In the event he left prison before Col. Antonio Tejero Molina, who had led the attack on the Cortes.
A plea for Tejero's release was on Feb. 20, 1991, rejected by the authorities on the grounds that he had not completed three quarters of his sentence.
The Madrid newspaper El País of Feb. 17 reported that evidence had been uncovered of a 1985 plot by army officers to murder the king and overthrow the elected government.
The plan had allegedly been to bomb the main parade stand at the celebrations of Armed Forces Day on June 1 at La Coruña, and then to blame the incident on the Basque separatist organization ETA [see below]and to organize a military coup in the aftermath.
The report gave no names of anyone said to be involved.
Seven people were arrested on July 30 in connection with the murder of the Herri Batasuna (HB-United People) deputy Josu Muguruza in November 1989 [see pp. 37050; 37587].
They included Ricardo Saenz de Inestrillas, the son of the military commander of the same name murdered by ETA in June 1986 [see p. 34825], and a Madrid police officer, Angel Duce Hernández.
It was announced on Jan. 11, 1991, that both of these two would stand trial for murder.
Violence in the Basque country
After a comparative lull in activity in early 1989 [see p. 37587]the Basque separatist organization Euskadi ta Askatasuna (ETA—Basque Homeland and Liberty) stepped up its campaign of violence when on Aug. 13, 1990, it announced that it had planted bombs, scheduled to explode within the next fortnight, on three railway lines out of Madrid.
One of them was detonated on Aug. 14 about 50 km north of the city of León; the line had already been closed by the railway authorities.
A car bomb exploded at a police station in Burgos on Aug. 17, severely injuring one person.
On June 13 ETA members had shot dead a retired army colonel, José Lasanta Martínez,(74) in the town of San Sebastián.
An ETA car bomb exploded in Sabadell, near Barcelona, on Dec. 8, killing six policemen and injuring eight other people.
Police subsequently announced that documentary evidence captured showed that this attack was part of ETA's campaign to disrupt the holding of the Olympic Games in Barcelona in 1992.
The murders were the first committed by ETA in Catalonia for three years, and took the 1990 toll of politically motivated killings to 30.
The Jan. 18, 1991, edition of El Pais printed a copy of a letter written by the ETA command, dated Oct. 26, 1990, and addressed to some 200 liberal professionals, demanding the payment of "revolutionary tax" of between 5,000,000 and 20 million pesetas.
[For ETA attacks in January, May and June 1991 see pp. 37968; 38300.)
Arrest and trial of ETA members
A leading member of the ETA command, Santiago Arróspide Sarasola "Santi-Potrosó" , was on July 4, 1990, sentenced by a French court to 10 years' imprisonment for belonging to a terrorist organization and for illegal possession of arms.
The Spanish authorities had earlier requested the extradition of Arróspide to face charges in connection with the bombing of a shopping centre in Barcelona in 1987 [see pp. 35851; 37588].
Another ETA member, Juan Carlos Arruti Azpitarte "Paterra" , was in July 1990 sentenced in Madrid to 26 years' imprisonment for terrorist offences including murder committed in 1979.
Two ETA members arrested in Anglet (France) in January 1990 [following the discovery of an arsenal there—see p. 37588], Carmelo García Merchán and Manuel Murua Alberdi, were on Sept. 8 flown to Spain by the French authorities to face a number of charges, including six assassinations committed since 1982.
The Spanish police made a major breakthrough against ETA following the arrest in Bayonne (France) on Nov. 17, 1990, of 26 ETA suspects, including Carmen Guisasola, the alleged leader of ETA's Vizcaya commando.
As a result of the information gained in this sweep a further four people were arrested in Guipuzcoa on Nov. 18-19, three in Madrid on Nov. 19, nine in Vizcaya and 13 in Navarre, seven of whom were later released.
Those detained in Navarre and said to be members of the Vizcaya commando included two leading members of the local branch of HB, Juan Carlos Pérez Ojuel and Rosa Mari Echave Díaz.
According to the authorities the commando had been responsible for a number of recent attacks in the province of Bilbao, which had claimed the lives of five people.
One of ETA's senior leaders, José Antonio Urrutikoetxea Bengoetxea "Josu Ternera" , was on Nov. 26 sentenced by a court in Paris to 10 years imprisonment for membership of a terrorist organization, and banned from residence in France for five years after his release.
This was only the second occasion on which a French court had given the maximum sentence for this offence (the first being for Arrospide—see above; for capture of Arrospide and Urrutikoetzea in France see pp. 36406; 37588).
Another ETA member, Henri Parot from Bayonne, was sentenced by a court in Madrid in mid-December to a total of 86 years' imprisonment for a range of charges including attempted murder and membership of a terrorist organization.
On March 5, 1991, he was given a further 27 years for the murder in January 1979 of Gen. Constantino Ortín Gil, a former military governor of Madrid [see p. 29454].
It was reported on Jan. 3, 1991, that two ETA members, José Antonio López Rúiz "Kubati" , and José Miguel Latasa Guetaria "Fermín" , had been sentenced to 47 and 26 years' imprisonment respectively for the murder in September 1986 of the amnestied ETA member María Dolores González Catarain "Yoyes" [see p. 34825; for earlier conviction of Fermin see p. 37588].
The Spanish authorities announced on Jan. 25, 1991, that they had dismantled an ETA commando responsible for six murders and 26 bomb attacks carried out between January 1988 and September 1990.
Two of those arrested, Fernando del Olmo Vega and Inmaculada Pacho Martín, who were said to have confessed to direct participation in the attacks, were captured on Jan. 20 and 21 respectively.
GRAPO hunger strike — Galician separatism
The hunger strike begun in November 1989 by imprisoned members of the extreme left Grupo de Resistencia Anti Fascista Primero de Octubre (GRAPO—see p. 37588) continued throughout 1990, although only about half of those who had started it were able to maintain it.
The prisoner who died in May [ibid.]was José Manuel Sevillano Martín, who had been sentenced to 24 years' imprisonment in 1986 on a number of charges including robbery with menaces, membership of an illegal armed group and illegal possession of arms.
(The previous GRAPO hunger striker to die was Juan José Crespo Galende in 1981—see p. 31369).
In the first attacks since the assassination of an army colonel in mid-June, GRAPO claimed responsibility for three bombings in Madrid on Sept. 6, 1990, which injured a dozen people, and for an attack on the PSC/PSOE headquarters in Barcelona on Sept. 10 [see p. 37719].
In November police in Madrid arrested the presumed head of GRAPO, Fernando Silva Sande, along with four other members, as they were allegedly preparing to kidnap a businessman.
The Ejercito Guerrilleiro de Pobo Galego Ceibe (EGPGC—Guerrilla Army of the Free Galician People) claimed responsibility for five bombings in the province of Pontevedra on Oct. 11, 1990.
A suspected EGPGC member, José Ignacio Villar Regueiro, was killed by a bomb which exploded at a discoteque in Santiago de Compostela on the same evening; apparently the bomb had accidentally been detonated by the sound equipment.
Two young women were also killed.
On Nov. 27 three EGPGC members, Ramón Pineiro Beiro, Eduardo Abad Lojo and Manuel Quintáns López, were convicted of attacks on banks in La Coruña in the autumn of 1988; at the time these attacks had been attributed to GRAPO [see p. 36777].
Economy
After four years of economic boom, 1990 saw a slowing down of the Spanish economy, as a result in part of the impact of the Gulf crisis on oil prices but due also to the government's restrictive monetary policy, which was designed to bring Spain's currency and rate of inflation more into line with those of other members of the European Communities (EC).
The Gulf crisis also contributed to a fall in revenue from tourism, which accounted for 9 per cent of gross domestic product (GDP); UK and US visitors in particular brought less income, although hoteliers also blamed the government for the damaging effect of a highly valued peseta and for not investing more heavily in tourist infrastructure, especially in improved coastal sewerage systems.
Figures released at the end of year showed a fall in hotel occupation of 18.1 per cent and in revenue of 8.5 per cent, resulting in an increase in the current-account deficit from 2.9 per cent of GDP in 1989 to 3.3 per cent in 1990 (instead of the targeted reduction of 2.5 per cent ).
One encouragement for the government was a reduction in unemployment, which fell to 16.3 per cent in June 1990 (its lowest level since June 1982), finishing the year at 15.6 per cent.
The 1991 budget, presented to parliament by Solchaga on Sept. 28, 1990, very much reflected anxiety over the Gulf crisis, as Spain depended on oil (mostly imported) for 59 per cent of its energy needs.
The minister did not introduce the anticipated stringent spending cuts, apparently under pressure from the PSOE, but said that the government would continue to use high interest rates to restrain domestic demand, which he expected to fall by 3.2 per cent in 1991 compared with 4.7 per cent in 1990.
The 1990 inflation target had to be revised from 5.7 per cent, and the final figure for the year was 6.5 per cent , compared with 6.9 per cent in 1989.
The government came increasingly into conflict with the two main trade union organizations in its efforts to achieve wage restraint [for relations between PSOE and UGT see p. 37869; for strikes in May 1991 see p. 38201].
In September the government announced a ceiling of 5.5 per cent for wage increases in 1991; according to the employers' organization, the Confederación Española de Organizaciones Empresariales (Spanish Confederation of Employers' Organizations—CEOE), wages rose by 9 per cent in 1990—well above the level of inflation.
In June 1991 the government introduced a draft Pact of Progress, which controversially sought to tie wage rises to productivity; a deadline for union agreement on the plan was set for the end of September [see p. 38114].
Monetary policy
Base interest rates reached their highest level when they were increased on Dec. 26 to 14.75 per cent.
In the first half of 1991, however, restrictions were progressively eased, starting with a lifting of credit controls by the central bank on Jan. 1.
With the end of the Gulf war and the release of inflation figures for February showing an annualized rate of 5.9 per cent, base rates were reduced to 13.5 per cent on March 15, and after the April figures showed that this rate of inflation had been maintained rates were further reduced to 12.75 per cent on May 16.
In another move designed to reduce upward pressure on the peseta the government on April 16 lifted its remaining controls on capital leaving the country, allowing Spanish residents to hold foreign currency accounts with banks licensed in Spain.
Energy policy
Under pressure from within the PSOE, the government continued its freeze on building nuclear power stations, and on April 30 an agreement was reached with Algeria to construct a US$1,300 million gas pipeline through Morocco and the Strait of Gibraltar; the line was due to come on stream in 1995.
On the same day two of Spain's leading private electricity companies (Iberduero SA and Hidroeléctrica Española SA) announced plans to merge to compete with the state-owned ENDESA (Empresa Nacional de Electricidad SA), in a move welcomed by the government which was aiming to reorganize the power industry and planned to introduce a new national energy plan by the end of July.
Banking mergers
In continuation of a process begun in 1988 [see p. 37589]two major bank mergers were announced in 1991 in order to streamline the country's banking sector in preparation for the single European market in 1992.
On May 3 the government gave its approval to the formation of the country's largest banking concern by all six state-owned or state-controlled banks under the name Corporación Bancaria de España SA; the new corporation would have assets of over $88,000 million and would control 11.7 per cent of the Spanish banking market.
A few days later, on May 14, the Banco Central and the Hispano-Americano joined to form the country's largest private bank with assets of $84,000 million (just outstripping the Banco Bilbao-Vizcaya formed in October 1988—ibid.).
Foreign relations
In late 1990 and early 1991 the Gulf crisis was one of the chief concerns of the government's foreign policy; it featured in particular in the routine summit between González and President Mitterrand of France, held in Paris on Nov. 13, and in the March 1991 tour undertaken by Foreign Minister, Fernández Ordóñez, who went to Washington to meet the US Secretary of State, James Baker, and then to Egypt and Israel, where he met both government and Palestinian representatives.
[For visits to Algeria, Libya, Mauritania, Morocco and Tunisia in February 1991 see p. 37989.]
Other intergovernmental contacts during the year included the visit to Spain of the then Polish Prime Minister, Tadeusz Mazowiecki, in September 1990; informal contacts between González and King Hassan of Morocco in Rabat on Aug. 19; the signing in Rabat on Nov. 15 by the Spanish and Moroccan Interior Ministers, Corcuero and Driss Basri respectively, of an agreement on flexible visa arrangements for Moroccan citizens wishing to visit Ceuta and Melilla; an official visit to China on Nov. 22-24 by Fernandez Ordoñez, returned by his Chinese counterpart, Qian Qichen, on Feb. 25-27, 1991, in which talks centred on bilateral trade and on the development of a new line of Spanish credit worth $450,000,000 for new mixed enterprises in China; and the visit of King Juan Carlos and Queen Sophia to Venezuela and Costa Rica on April 14-21.
EUROPE
SWEDEN
Area: 449,964 sq km.
Population: 8,400,000 Capital: Stockholm.
Language: Swedish (official).
Religion: Christian (95% Lutheran).
Armed forces: 64,500 (1990).
Currency: krona (US$1.00=6.5557 kronor as at July 1, 1991).
Major international affiliations: BIS; Council of Europe; CSCE; EBRD; EFTA; ESA; Nordic Council; OECD.
POLITICAL SYSTEM
The Kingdom of Sweden is a parliamentary democracy in which the monarch retains purely ceremonial functions as head of state and takes no active part in government.
A Cabinet led by a Prime Minister is responsible to a unicameral parliament (Riksdag) which is elected every three years.
Main government leaders in mid-1991
Head of state: Carl XVI Gustaf, King of Sweden.
Prime Minister: Ingvar Carlsson.
Other principal ministers: Odd Engstrom (Deputy Prime Minister; Minister with special responsibility for research); Sten Andersson (Foreign Affairs); Roine Carlsson (Defence); Allan Larsson (Finance); Laila Freivalds (Justice).
Cabinet changes to mid-1991
There were no changes between February 1990 and the elections of September 1991 [see pp. 38444; see also October News Digest for new Cabinet].
Ruling party
Sveriges Socialdemokratiska Arbetareparti (SAP—Swedish Social Democratic Labour Party, Carlsson ch.).
Other political parties
Moderata Samlingspartiet (M—Moderate Unity Party, Carl Bildt l., Per Unckel gen. sec.);
Folkpartiet (Fp—People's Party, also known as Liberal Party, Bengt Westerberg l., Peter Örn gen. sec.);
Centerpartiet (C—Centre Party, Olof Johansson l., Aake Pettersson sec.);
Vänsterpartiet (Vp—Left Party, Lars Werner ch. —see below); Miljöpartiet de Gröna (MpG—Ecology Party-the Greens, collective leadership); Kristdemokratiska Samhällspartiet (KdS—Christian Democratic Community Party, Alf Svensson pres.);
Ny Demokrati (ND—New Democracy Party, Count Ian Wachtmeister l.).
Elections
A general election was last held in September 1991 [see p. 38444].
Next general election due by September 1994.
1990/91 OVERVIEW
The latter half of 1990 was marked by a worsening economic situation and by attempts by the ruling SAP, which had governed from 1932 until 1976, either alone or in coalition and then since 1982, to reclaim the political initiative.
At their triennial congress on Sept. 15-21, 1990, delegates adopted a new party programme replacing that of 1975.
After much debate they agreed that the parliamentary group and the government should negotiate with those parties wishing to phase out nuclear energy by 2010 without being bound to close the first nuclear power station by 1995, the date envisaged by the 1988 legislation [see also p. 37197].
At the congress Carlsson declared that the emergence of a new security system in Europe based on the 1975 Helsinki accords meant that Sweden's neutrality no longer "bore the same heavy burden" , and the party began to come round to the view of both industry and the two major opposition parties (M and Fp) that Sweden should apply for membership of the European Communities (EC, which it did in July 1991—see p. 38353).
A populist "party of discontent" , New Democracy, was formed launched in February 1991.
Its programme called for tax cuts, reduced immigration, and the abolition of traffic wardens and was not taken seriously by many observers, although it went on to win parliamentary representation in the September 1991 general election [see p. 38444].
At a congress on May 26, 1990, the Left Party-Communists (Vänsterpartiet Kommunisterna—VpK) voted by 136 votes to 133 to drop the word communist from its name; it would henceforth be known as the Left Party.
Economy
The economy remained in serious difficulties throughout this period, and the government introduced spending cuts in late 1990 [see p. 37925]and an "austere" 1991 budget in January 1991 [see p. 37967].
Consumer prices rose by 10.4 per cent in 1990—the product of heavy wage demands in an economy characterized by labour shortages—unemployment, below 2 per cent since 1987, stood at 1.5 per cent in 1990, but was expected to rise to 2.8 per cent in 1991.
Despite earlier pessimistic predictions, gross domestic product (GDP) rose by 0.3 per cent in 1990, but was expected to fall by 1.9 per cent in 1991.
Swedish industry went through a period of instability, due partly to the loss of important export/import markets in eastern Europe and partly to labour difficulties.
The government's promise in its 1991 budget to abolish the restrictions on foreign ownership of Swedish shares had not been realized by mid-year.
Immigration — security
During 1990 immigration totalled 60,000, representing a fall of 9 per cent as compared with 1989—the first decline since 1983.
The largest group, totalling 18,100 immigrants, came from neighbouring Nordic countries, with those from Asia numbering 17,300.
Immigration from non-Nordic European countries (especially Yugoslavs, Poles and Romanians) increased by 1,500 to 13,100 people.
In mid-1990 there were a number of attacks on foreigners and refugee centres.
The International Herald Tribune of June 29 reported that the Swedish immigration board had turned down the asylum application of a Soviet Jew for the first time in memory and that immigration officials had announced on June 28 that Soviet Jews would no longer be granted asylum automatically.
On Dec. 20 the government announced that it was expelling two Palestinian brothers suspected of links with Sabri Khalil al Banna ( "Abu Nidal" ), the leader of the Fatah Revolutionary Council.
The two, who were not named, had been under surveillance since 1988 in the town of Umea, on the east coast, where they lived.
On Feb. 11, 1991, Swedish radio reports stated that several Soviet citizens including at least one diplomat were being asked to leave the country because of espionage "against Swedish defence and important parts of the defence industry" .
On Jan. 2 one Soviet diplomat at the Swedish embassy in Stockholm and two other Soviet citizens had been expelled for espionage.
On Jan. 3 Swedish radio also reported that three diplomats at the Chinese embassy in Stockholm had been expelled at the end of 1990 for spying on Chinese students living in Sweden, while China expelled a Swedish diplomat in retaliation.
On Feb. 15 the Swedish Foreign Ministry announced that four Iraqi diplomats accused of spying on refugees had also been ordered to leave the country.
EUROPE
SWITZERLAND
Area: 41,293 sq km.
Population: 6,600,000(1990).
Capital: Berne.
Languages: German (73.5%), French (20.1%), and Italian (4.5%)(all official); Raeto-Romansch (1%).
Religion: Christianity (Protestant and Roman Catholic).
Armed forces: 3,500 (regular) plus recruits (2 intakes of 18,000 each for 17 weeks only); reserves totalling 625,000 (1990).
Currency: Swiss franc (US$1.00=SFr1.565 as at July 1, 1991).
Major international affiliations: BIS; Council of Europe; CSCE; EBRD; EFTA; OECD.
POLITICAL SYSTEM
The Swiss Confederation has a republican, federal Constitution under which the 20 cantons and six half-cantons retain considerable power.
Legislative powers reside with the bicameral Federal Assembly (Bundesversammlung) comprising the 46-member Upper House (Ständerat) of representatives from the cantons and the 200-member Lower House (Nationalrat or National Council), which is elected for a four-year term.
Executive power lies with the Federal Council (Bundesrat) of seven members elected by the Federal Assembly, which also elects, each December for the succeeding year, two Federal Council members to be President and Vice-President (head and deputy head of state).
Main government leaders
President in 1991: Flavio Cotti (CVP/PDC, also responsible for Interior).
Vice-President in 1991: René Felber (SP/PS, also responsible for Political (Foreign) Affairs).
Other ministers: Otto Stich (SP/PS, Finance and Customs); Jean-Pascal Delamuraz (FDP/PRD, Public Economy); Adolf Ogi (SVP/UDC, Transport, Communications and Energy); Arnold Koller (CVP/PDC, Justice and Police); Kaspar Villiger (FDP/PRD, Military (Defence)).
Changes to Council of Ministers to mid-1991
The President and Vice-President for 1991 were elected in December 1990 [see p. 37967].
Ruling coalition since 1959
Christlichdemokratische Volkspartei der Schweiz/Parti démocrate-chrétien suisse (CVP/PDC—Christian Democratic People's Party, Eva Segmüller ch.);
Sozialdemokratische Partei der Schweiz/Parti socialiste suisse (SP/PS—Social Democratic Party of Switzerland, Peter Bodenmann pres.);
Freisinnig-Demokratische Partei der Schweiz/Parti radical-démocratique suisse (FDP/PRD—Radical Democratic Party of Switzerland, Franz Steinegger pres.);
Schweizerische Volkspartei/Parti suisse de l'Union Démocratique du Centre (SVP/UDC—Swiss People's Party, Hans Uhlmann pres.).
Other political parties
Grüne Partei der Schweiz/Parti écologiste suisse (GPS/PES—Green Party of Switzerland, Irene Gardiol pres.);
Liberale Partei der Schweiz/Parti libéral suisse (LPS/PLS—Liberal Party of Switzerland, Claude Bonnard pres.);
Landesring der Unabhängigen/Alliance des Indépendants (LdU/AdI—Alliance of Independents, Franz Jaeger pres.);
Grünes Bündnis/Alliance verte (Green Alliance, collective leadership); Schweizer Demokraten/Démocrates suisses (SD/DS—Swiss Democrats, formerly called Nationale Aktion für Volk und Heimat/Action nationale pour le peuple et la patrie) Rudolf Keller pres.);
Evangelische Volkspartei der Schweiz/Parti évangelique de la Suisse (EVP/PEV—Evangelical People's Party, Max Dünki pres.);
Autopartei/Parti Suisse des automobiliste (APS/PSA—Automobile Party, Jürg Scherrer]replaced Michael Dreher as pres. in October 1990); Partei der Arbeit der Schweiz/Parti suisse du travail (PdAS/PST—Workers' Party of Switzerland, Jean Spielmann pres. —see also pp. 38447-48).
Elections
A general election was last held in October 1987 [see pp. 35666-67]; the next was scheduled for October 1991.
1990/91 OVERVIEW
During 1991 the Swiss celebrated the 700th anniversary of the Confederation amid a growing identity crisis.
The Financial Times of June 10, 1991, described the Swiss as seeing "themselves as virtually powerless to prevent the [Swiss]model from disintegrating under external pressure" .
Superpower détente, the collapse of communism in eastern Europe and growing economic interdependence (especially as a result of the process of introducing a single market within the European Communities—EC) were "undermining Switzerland's centuries-old case for being treated as a Sonderfall, an exception" .
In negotiations between the EC and the European Free Trade Association (EFTA) on the formation of an 18-nation European economic area (EEA) a key stumbling block was the question of trans-Alpine road freight [see p. 38307].
Switzerland continued to maintain a 28-tonne weight limit on trucks on pollution grounds, despite EC pressure to introduce a 40-tonne limit.
The Nationalrat approved in March 1991 the construction of two rail tunnels through the Swiss Alps, which would take freight traffic off Swiss roads, but they would not be completed until 2015.
During the 12 months to mid-1991 the other key environmental issue was energy policy, on which referendums were held on Sept. 23, 1990 [see p. 37720].
In November 1990 the Federal Court ruled that women in the half-canton of Appenzell-Innerrhoden, the last bastion of male-only suffrage in Europe, should be granted the vote at cantonal and communal level [see p. 37867].
In June 1991 thousands of women went on a one-day strike in support of demands for equal pay and treatment in employment [see p. 38299].
In 1990 there were 35,836 applications for asylum, representing an increase of 47 per cent as compared with 1989, with those from India, Lebanon, Romania and Yugoslavia showing the greatest increases.
Of the 11,923 people whose applications were processed in 1990, 6,643 were given permission to remain in Switzerland and 883 were granted asylum status.
Around 100,000 asylum seekers and refugees were estimated to be living in Switzerland at the end of 1990, over half of them being people whose applications had not yet been processed.
Walter Renschler, 58, was elected president of the Swiss Trade Union Federation (Schweizerischer Gewerkschaftsbund—SGB) on Oct. 20, 1990, in place of Fritz Reimann, who had served for eight years.
On March 25, 1991, Mgr Marcel Lefebvre, the ultraconservative bishop who had been excommunicated from the Roman Catholic church in June 1988 for consecrating four followers as bishops [see p. 36442], died in Martigny, Switzerland at the age of 85.
Economy
1990 marked the eighth year of economic expansion since the 1982 recession, the economy showing real growth of 2.6 per cent as compared with the previous year.
However, economic activity began to slow in mid-1990 and stagnated in the fourth quarter.
Annual inflation in 1990 averaged 5.4 per cent and by June 1991 had risen to 6.6 per cent, the highest level since December 1981.
Unemployment, which stood at 0.6 per cent in 1990, reached 1.1 per cent(33,600) by April 1991.
A report by Barclays Bank economics department in August 1991 stated that "in structural terms the economy has to face the prospect of the single market in the EC and a further period of deregulation" .
In 1990 around 58 per cent of exports went to EC countries and 74 per cent of imports came from the EC, while the country's five EFTA partners accounted for only 7 per cent of trade.
Banking
New legislation against "money laundering" came into effect on Aug. 1, 1990, making complicity in the laundering of "dirty money" (essentially the proceeds of the international drugs trade) a criminal offence punishable by a prison sentence of up to five years, and compelling banks to identify the true owner of monies deposited with them.
On Nov. 14, 1990, Oliviero Tognoli, a 39-year-old Italian, was sentenced to 3, years imprisonment for repeated violation of the money laundering laws, having been charged with laundering US$4,500,000 from the "Pizza connection" [see p. 35504].
On Sept. 10 Delamuraz ordered Swiss banks to dismantle four price-fixing arrangements, which (i) covered the underwriting of Swiss franc bond issues for foreign borrowers;(ii) set brokerage fees charged on trading in securities on the stock exchanges;(iii) controlled charges for custodian business; and (iv) set minimum fees for documentary credits.
The decision completed the deregulation of finance proposed by the Swiss Cartel Commission in April 1989.
Furthermore, on May 3, 1991, the Federal Banking Commission announced that it was abolishing so-called "form B" accounts which had allowed clients to preserve anonymity by conducting their transactions through a lawyer, notary or trust administrator.
By Sept. 30 all banks had to secure a statement of the identity of the real owner of such accounts.
Anonymous accounts could still be held if they related to legal proceedings such as divorce or inheritance.
Security
A parliamentary commission investigating the activities of the security services within the Federal Military Department (EMD)(primarily P-26—which was set up at the time of the Cold War to provide resistance in case of invasion—and the extraordinary secret service P-27) presented its report on Nov. 23, 1990.
The report accused P-26, which was dismantled by the Bundesrat two days before the report was published, of a lack of legal basis, patchy supervision, and unclear definition of competencies.
The EMD also announced on Dec. 12 that it was dissolving P-27 after the weekly paper Weltwoche revealed the identity of its head.
In May 1991 Defence Minister Villiger announced plans to cut the reserves available to be mobilized from 600,000 to 400,000.
On Dec. 21, 1990, a Berne court gave a former East German citizen a 16-year suspended prison sentence for espionage on behalf of foreign states.
The 28-year-old man had entered Switzerland in April 1987 and been arrested in May 1990 after a tip-off by the West German intelligence services.
EUROPE
TURKEY
Area: 779,452 sq km.
Population: 55,900,000 (1990 UNFPA est.).
Capital: Ankara.
Language: Turkish (official); Kurdish (7%).
Religion: Islam.
Armed forces: 647,400 (1990).
Currency: Turkish lira (US$1.00=TL4,351.67 as at July 1, 1991).
Major international affiliations: BIS; COCOM; Council of Europe; CSCE; NATO; OECD.
POLITICAL SYSTEM
The Republic of Turkey was declared in 1922 after the abolition of the Sultanate.
Following a military coup in 1980, legislative and executive powers were assumed by a National Security Council (NSC) headed by Gen. Kenan Evren.
The NSC in 1982 ceded its powers to a Grand National Assembly, when a new Constitution was approved by the Assembly and by a referendum.
Legislative power is vested in the unicameral Assembly (enlarged in 1987 from 400 to 450 seats), which is elected by proportional representation for a five-year term.
Executive power is vested in the President, elected by the Assembly for a seven-year term.
Main government leaders
President: Turgut Özal.
Prime Minister: Mesut Yilmaz replaced Yildirim Akbulut on June 17, 1991.
Other principal ministers:Ekrem Pakdemirli (Deputy Prime Minister, Minister of State); Mustafa Kalemli (Interior); Safa Giray (Foreign Affairs); Adnan Kahveci (Finance and Customs); Sakir Seker (Justice); Barlas Dogu (Defence).
Changes to Council of Ministers to June 1991
The current government was appointed on June 23, 1991 [see p. 38301; for previous Cabinet see p. 37593; for changes of Defence and Foreign Ministers in October 1990 and February 1991 see pp. 37786; 38022].
Ruling party
Anatavan Partisi (ANAP—Motherland Party, Mesut Yilmaz chair).
Other political parties
Dogru Yol Partisi (DYP—True Path Party, Suleyman Demirel dep. ch.);
Sosyal Demokrat Halkci Parti (SHP—Social Democratic Populist Party, Erdal Inonu l.);
Demokratik Sol Parti (DSP—Democratic Left Party, Bulent Ecevit l.);
Demokratik Merkez Partisi (DMP—Democratic Centre Party, Bedrettin Dalan l.);
Refah Partisi (RP—Welfare Party—Islamic fundamentalist, Necmettin Erbakan ch.)
Elections
In the first general election to the Grand National Assembly, in November 1983, ANAP, led by Özal, won a decisive victory over the Nationalist Democracy Party, which was backed by the military.
On Nov. 29, 1987, ANAP was returned to power with an overwhelming majority, and on Oct. 31, 1989, Özal was elected by the Grand National Assembly to succeed Evren as President, taking office on Nov. 9.
1990/91 OVERVIEW
An early election, to be held on Oct. 20 and 27, 1991 was announced in the summer of 1991.
Although the ANAP administration, which held 292 seats in the 450-seat parliament, was not obliged to go to the polls until November 1992, the party was troubled by internal divisions and waning local electoral support.
An opinion poll in May showed ANAP to be supported by only 13 per cent of the electorate, trailing behind the three main opposition parties.
The continuing high level of inflation was reported to be one of the principal causes of public dissatisfaction with the party, which had been founded by Özal as a broad alliance in 1983.
The political activities of members of Özal's family, especially of his wife Semra Özal, had also received unfavourable publicity.
The Turkish alignment with the United States-led coalition in the Gulf war provided another domestic focus for criticism of Özal and the ANAP.
The DYP and the SHP both argued that the President had exceeded his constitutional powers in his policy-making; some Cabinet ministers claimed in February 1991 that they had not been kept informed of Özal's decision-making over coalition forces operating from Turkish bases.
The DSP led by Ecevit campaigned in May 1991 to have foreign troops removed from Turkish territory.
Islamic fundamentalism
The Islamic Welfare Party (RP) was reported in 1991 to command only 7 per cent of electoral support, and had no representation in the Grand National Assembly.
Özal's two younger brothers were members of the Islamic fundamentalist wing of the ANAP.
Proposed constitutional changes
There was debate in 1990-1991 over proposals for the modification of the 1982 Constitution, which was regarded as a legacy from the period of military rule.
On March 21, 1991, proposals that the President should be directly elected, that the voting age should be lowered from 21 to 18, and that the number of seats in the Grand National Assembly should be increased from 450 to 600 were presented by Özal, in spite of lack of support from some factions within the ANAP.
The DYP was reported to be ready to support the changes, while the SHP was opposed to the creation of a directly elected executive presidency.
Human Rights
Reports of the deaths of five people while detained by the police in January 1991 aroused the concern of the Helsinki Watch human rights group.
Official investigations followed in some cases.
In March representatives of the Office of the UN High Commissioner for Refugees were refused access to two Iranian political refugees who had been detained in Ankara and allegedly tortured.
Between August 1990 and February 1991, 76 people were arrested and prosecuted for offences related to anti-Gulf-war activities, which according to the Turkey Briefing newsletter included attending meetings and distributing literature.
The Turkish Human Rights Association claimed that in 1990 censorship of the press had been more severe than in any year since 1980; seven publications had their offices raided and 11 journalists and writers were arrested [see also below].
Security
Conflict between Islamic and secularist political traditions led to violence in 1990; three assassinations of leading secularists, including the president of the Turkish Law Foundation, Muammar Aksoy [see p. 37593], were presumed to have been committed by fundamentalists.
During the year there were over 20 political killings by left- and right-wing groups.
Turkish Kurds
Some 10,000,000 Kurds in south-eastern Turkey represented about half of the world's Kurdish population.
In January 1991 Özal antagonized conservative nationalist currents within the ANAP by easing restrictions on the use of the Kurdish language, hoping thereby to improve Turkey's minority rights record and to undercut support for the Kurdistan Workers' Party (PKK), which since 1984 had been waging a violent campaign in support of separatist demands.
Some sources put the number of people killed in the south-east since 1984 at over 3,000.
The region continued to have higher rates of unemployment and lower literacy and school completion rates than other parts of Turkey, and was noted for its archaic and uneven distribution of land ownership.
Local Kurdish village guards, paid by central government to protect villages from PKK attacks and controlled by local notables, now numbered some 25,000.
The SHP in 1990 criticized government policing tactics as sometimes taking on the "dimensions of a state terror" .
PKK leader Abdullah Ocalan told journalists in March 1991 of a challenge to his leadership from a PKK faction willing to accept regional autonomy rather than secession.
Ocalan was reported to remained strongly in disagreement with the demands for regional autonomy made by Iraqi Kurdish leaders Jalal Talabani and Mazoud Barzani [see p. 38407].
Economy
Gross national product (GNP) grew by 7.6 per cent in 1990, but a sharp drop to 3.5 per cent growth in 1991 was predicted in an Organization of Economic Co-operation and Development (OECD) report published in March 1991.
Agricultural production rose by 11 per cent in 1990 (about 45 per cent of Turkey's 17,000,000 workforce was employed in agriculture).
Manufacturing output increased by around 10 per cent, and manufactures now accounted for about 80 per cent of all exports (compared with about 33 per cent in 1980).
Nominal wages in 1990 repeated their 1989 rise of over 100 per cent.
With a 60 per cent increase in consumer prices reported, there were therefore substantial increases in real wages for many workers.
In August 1990 legal minimum wages were raised by an estimated real rate of 13 per cent for the year.
Official figures for the first quarter of 1991 showed industrial production declining by only 0.6 per cent compared with the same period of 1990—a lesser decline than might have been expected in view of the Gulf crisis.
Inflation remained a major problem however; although down from its 1988/89 peak, it hovered around the 60 per cent mark for most of 1990/91.
Both inflation and unemployment were expected to rise in 1991, and real wages possibly to reverse their rise of recent years, as sanctions continued against Iraq, the labour force continued its rapid growth rate, and government investment and public consumption slowed in response to budget consolidation measures.
The main cause of inflation was the overall public-sector budget deficit.
The public-sector borrowing requirement (PSBR) remained high, at 9.5 per cent of GNP in 1990; 4.5 per cent of the total PSBR was said to be accounted for by the deficits of inefficient public enterprises.
The current-account deficit for 1990 was US$2,610 million, with a similar level predicted for 1991.
In 1991 about US$4,000 million would be required to service Turkey's US$49,000 billion foreign debt.
Trade and tourism
The import liberalization measures of 1989/90 combined with an upswing in domestic demand to produce a strong growth of imports in 1990.
The lira depreciated sharply in the first months of 1991, however, falling 30 per cent against the US dollar between February and May.
This improved the price-competitiveness of Turkish exports, which in the first quarter of 1991 rose by 10 per cent over the previous year, with Germany continuing as their largest single-country market.
The biggest component of these exports was textiles; in March 1990 the USA had agreed to double Turkey's quota of textile imports, and in May 1991 the EC increased by 30 per cent the quota for Turkish textiles entering the European market, in which around 40 per cent of imports already came from Turkey.
In tourism, 1990 figures showed a 30 per cent increase in earnings over the previous year (in spite of the Gulf crisis occurring halfway through the season), bringing the annual total to some US$3,300 million.
Economic impact of Gulf war
By mid-1991 the government estimated total Turkish losses caused by the Gulf crisis at around US$6,200 million.
Over half the total of US$4,200 million of financial aid or soft loans promised from various sources in the aftermath of the Gulf war had by June 1991 reached the Turkish authorities.
In its 1990/91 survey of Turkey the OECD estimated that the loss of Iraqi and Kuwaiti markets for Turkish goods during the Gulf war and the trade embargo would lead to a 5 per cent fall in annual export earnings.
The conflict also had repercussions in reduced revenues from tourism, transport services and the oil pipeline from Iraq [see pp. 37641; 38301].
Industrial reform and foreign investment
The OECD survey examined the latest measures introduced by the Turkish government to encourage private investment in industry, regarded as crucial to the success of long-term economic restructuring.
Direct foreign capital investment did not increase as much as was desirable, especially in manufacturing, and the region's political instability was a negative factor.
In 1990 net foreign investment was US$789,000,000, and there were project approvals to the value US$1,800 million.
Typical areas of investment by foreigners were the motor industry, cement and tobacco production, and, increasingly, gold-mining.
Sales of public firms continued, the most important in the second half of 1990 being the sale of shares in Petkim, the state-owned petrochemical company, and in the national airline, Turk Hava Yollari.
In May 1991 privatization continued with the issues of shares for minority stakes in the Turkish Petroleum Refineries Corporation (Tupras) and refined products distributor Petrol Ofisi.
According to the OECD survey, the privatization programme involved little change in management or improvement in efficiency.
Other commentators noted that the government was unlikely in an election year to introduce reforms which would bring with them large numbers of redundancies.
Foreign relations
Five days after the Iraqi invasion of Kuwait in August 1990 Turkey had unequivocally placed itself in the anti-Iraq camp with a series of economic sanctions (including the blocking of the pipelines which were Iraq's principal route for the export of oil) which were to prove crucial, as Turkey was one of Iraq's major trading partners [see p. 37641].
Although Turkey avoided any direct participation in the war (and was not officially designated as a member of the coalition—see p. 37935), coalition forces were on Jan. 17, 1991, authorized by the Turkish government to use NATO bases in Turkey for bombing raids against Iraq.
There was some panic among the population living near the Iraqi border as civil defence procedures were perceived as inadequate in the event of Turkey being drawn into the war; there was a spontaneous exodus from the town of Silopi in January.
In April 1991 a further crisis arose with the massive exodus of Kurdish and other refugees from northern Iraq into south-eastern Turkey.
Turkey's insistence that the refugees should be confined to the border region influenced the USA and its allies in their adoption of the "safe haven" proposal—an idea of which Özal had been one of the earliest proponents [see p. 38127].
The Turkish military was reported to be concerned over the presence of foreign troops on Turkish territory, and also over the prospect of a Kurdish enclave in northern Iraq.
Relations with Iran
The government was said to be anxious that the Iraqi-Kurdish refugee crisis should not provide an opportunity for either Syria or Iran to extend its influence in the region.
In early May 1991 President Rafsanjani of Iran visited Turkey, after the two countries had signed a joint economic protocol on Feb. 27 which envisaged the construction of a natural gas pipeline from Iran to Europe via Turkey.
Relations with Soviet Union and Black Sea states
During Özal's visit to Soviet Union in March [see p. 38116]he initialled a new bilateral friendship and co-operation agreement; discussions also covered a new US$300,000,000 Turk Eximbank credit, the establishment of two joint banks, co-operation in telecommunications, and the promotion of Turkish agricultural products.
Turkish-Soviet trade had increased in 1990 to US$1,800 million.
Turkish officials made references to a projected special relationship with the 42,000,000 Turkic peoples in the Soviet Union (in Azerbaijan, Kazakhstan, Turkmenia and Uzbekistan), although in economic terms the states bordering on the Black Sea were of more immediate interest to Turkey.
Özal advocated the creation of a Black Sea Economic Prosperity Zone, to include republics of the Soviet Union, Bulgaria and Romania.
Turkey had in 1990 extended export credits to all three countries.
Relations with EC
Turkey's application for full membership of the European Communities (EC) remained deferred for consideration in 1993. Özal's proposal for a customs union with the EC by 1995 received EC endorsement in a formal communication issued in Brussels on June 6, 1990.
EUROPE
UNITED KINGDOM
Area: 244,103 sq km.
Population: 57,200,000 (1990 UNPFA est.).
Capital: London.
Language: English; Welsh spoken by about one-fifth of Welsh population.
Religion: Christianity (principally Church of England but also Roman Catholicism, Methodism, United Reformed Church and Baptism); Jewish, Moslem and Hindu minorities; Armed forces: 306,000 (1990).
Currency: pound sterling (US$1.00=£0.6191 as at July 1, 1991).
Major international affiliations: BIS; COCOM; Council of Europe; CSCE; EBRD; EC; ESA; Group of Seven; NATO; OECD; WEU.
POLITICAL SYSTEM
The United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland is a constitutional monarchy with a bicameral parliament.
The head of state is the hereditary monarch, all acts of parliament being made in his or her name.
The lower house of parliament (House of Commons) comprises 650 members elected directly on a constituency basis at intervals of not more than five years.
The upper house (House of Lords) is appointed on a partly hereditary and partly non-hereditary (life) basis and includes certain senior judges and 26 Church of England bishops; it currently comprises some 1,200 members.
The government is formed by the political party with majority support in the House of Commons; legislation requires approval by both houses before enactment.
The UK also includes the Crown Dependencies of the isle of Man and the Channel Islands, and is responsible for the British Dependent Territories of Anguilla, Bermuda, British Antarctic Territory, British Indian Ocean Territory, British Virgin Islands, Cayman Islands, Falkland Islands, Gibraltar, Hong Kong, Montserrat, Pitcairn Islands, St Helena and Dependencies, South Georgia and the South Sandwich Islands, and the Turks and Caicos Islands [see also pp. 38239-41; 38246; 3].
Main government leaders
Head of state: Queen Elizabeth II.
Prime Minister: John Major (also First Lord of the Treasury; Minister for the Civil Service).
Other principal ministers: John MacGregor (Lord President of the Council and Leader of the House of Commons); Douglas Hurd (Secretary of State for Foreign and Commonwealth Affairs); Norman Lamont (Chancellor of the Exchequer); Kenneth Baker (Home Secretary); Tom King (Secretary of State for Defence).
[See p. 37840 for full Cabinet list.]
Changes to Council of Ministers to June 1991
Margaret Thatcher was in November 1990 replaced as Prime Minister by Major with a consequent Cabinet reshuffle [see pp. 37839-40].
Peter Lilley replaced Nicholas Ridley as Trade and Industry Secretary in July 1990 [see p. 37623].
Political parties
Conservative Party (John Major l., Chris Patten ch.);
Labour Party (Neil Kinnock l., Lawrence Whitty gen. sec.);
Liberal Democrats (Paddy Ashdown, l., Charles Kennedy pres. since September 1990); Scottish National Party (SNP, Alex Salmond l. [see p. 37720]Winifred Ewing pres.);
Official Ulster Unionist Party (OUP, James Molyneaux l., Jim Wilson gen. sec.);
Democratic Unionist Party (DUP, Rev. Ian Paisley l., James McClure ch.);
Ulster Popular Unionist Party (UPUP, James Kilfedder, l.);
Social Democratic and Labour Party (SDLP, John Hume l., Patsy McGlone gen. sec.);
Paid Cymru (Welsh National Party, Dafydd Wigley pres.);
Sinn Féin(Gerry Adams pres.).
Elections
The last general election was held in June 1987 [see pp. 35256-88]; the next is due before July 1992.
1990-91 OVERVIEW
The most politically significant event in the year to mid-1991 was the replacement in November 1990 of Margaret Thatcher, who had been Prime Minister since 1979 and leader of the Conservative Party since 1975 by John Major [see pp. 37839-40].
Major promised to introduce a "classless society" and announced a review of the community charge (poll tax), which had been extremely unpopular with the electorate.
On July 22, 1991, the government published a Citizens' Charter intended to improve public services [see p. 38355].
On the issue of policy towards the European Communities (EC), which was a key factor in Thatcher's departure, the Conservatives remained seriously divided, with Major stating his wish to be "at the very heart of Europe" [see p. 38115]while many of his colleagues expressed outright opposition to any loss of national sovereignty in the ongoing negotiations within the EC on economic and monetary union and political union.
There was increasing speculation as to when Major would call a general election—due at the latest by July 1992.
At the time of the local elections in May 1991 [see p. 38200], for instance, four opinion polls gave Labour an average of 40.5 per cent of votes, Conservatives 41.5 per cent and Liberal Democrats 14 per cent but later polls fluctuated widely.
During the year to mid-1991 by-elections were held in Knowsley on Sept. 27, 1990 (held by Labour with an increased percentage over the Conservatives); in Eastbourne on Oct. 18,(won by the Liberal Democrats—see p. 37784); in Bootle and Bradford on Nov. 8, and in Paisley North and Paisley South on Nov. 29 (when Labour retained all four seats; in the Scottish constituencies the SNP advanced from fourth to second); in Ribble Valley on March 7, 1991 (won by the Liberal Democrats—see p. 38110); in Neath on April 4 (when Labour retained the seat despite a large swing to Plaid Cymru—see p. 38200); in Monmouth on May 16 (when Labour won the seat from the exports—$2,500); and in Liverpool Walton on July 4 (when Labour retained the seat and the Conservatives came fourth—see p. 38355).
The party strengths in the House of Commons after all these by-elections (excluding the Speaker and the Chairman and two Deputy Chairmen of Ways and Means) were: Conservatives 369, Labour 228, Liberal Democrats 21, OUP 9, SNP 5, social democrats 3 [see below], Plaid Cymru 3, SDLP 3, DUP 3, UPUP 1, and Sinn Féin 1 (although Adams had not taken up his seat as Sinn Féin MP).
Poll tax review
Michael Heseltine, the Environment Secretary, announced in March 1991 his review of the poll tax, which envisaged the introduction of a new local tax from April 1993 [see also pp. 38111; 38200].
On Jan. 17, 1991, Heseltine announced the local government finance arrangements for 1991/92, which provided for over £4,250 million more in extra support to local government than had already been granted in July 1990 for 1990-91 [see p. 37623]In the budget, presented on March 19 by the Chancellor of the Exchequer Norman Lamont, a"substantial switch was proposed from local to central taxation, amounting to £4,250 million in 1991/92, and the reducing net yield of local taxation to around £7,000 million [see p. 38110].
In July 1990, after lengthy legal proceedings, the House of Lords had ruled that the government had been within its rights in April in "charge-capping" 21 local authorities (i.e. setting reduced limits on their expenditure for 1990/91 and fixing maximum levels for their community charge).
For 1991/92 the government in April 1991 charge-capped 14 English local authorities (of which three were Conservative-controlled), this being upheld, in the case of eight local authorities which had challenged central government, by a vote in the Commons on May 21.
[For July 1991 imprisonment of MP for refusing to pay poll tax see p. 38355.]
Health — Education
Health, and to a lesser extent education, were key issues of political contention during the period to mid-1991 [see p. 38200].
Under the National Health Service (NHS) and Community Care Bill, which was enacted in June 1990 [see p. 37582], 57 hospital units in England became NHS trusts with effect from April 1, 1991.
The Labour Party was particularly critical of government policy in this area when it emerged after April 1 that Guys, the major London teaching hospital which had formed a trust with Lewisham, had made 600 redundancies and closed as many as 25 departments in a series of cost-cutting measures.
A Bradford trust, which included two hospitals, also announced 300 redundancies as part of a £7,000,000 economy package.
In May both the British Medical Association and the Royal College of Nursing called upon the government to suspend its planned formation of a second batch of trusts in 1992.
White Papers on education and training, and on higher education were presented on May 20, 1991.
The education and training White Paper confirmed plans announced on March 21 to bring further education and sixth-form colleges under central government control rather than under that of local education authorities.
It was planned that from April 1993 the colleges would receive a basic annual budget plus an amount related to the number of pupils enroled.
The higher education White Paper proposed abolishing the distinction between universities, polytechnics and other higher education establishments.
Major described the measures as marking "the latest stage in our drive to open up opportunities, to increase choice and raise standards in education and training" .
Other issues
The government published its White Paper on the Environment on Sept. 25, 1990 but it was widely criticized both by politicians and by environmentalists as merely reiterating measures already incorporated into the Environmental Protection Bill which was going through parliament and was enacted on Nov. 1, 1990.
Also on Nov. 1 the Broadcasting Bill, implementing the reform of British television and radio broadcasting as outlined in November 1988 [see p. 36503], came into effect.
The following day British Satellite Broadcasting (BSB—launched in April 1990) merged with its chief rival, Sky Television, which had been formed in February 1989 and was owned by the media magnate Rupert Murdoch, both companies having sustained substantial operating losses over the year.
The new company was to be called British Sky Broadcasting (BSkyB).
On Dec. 11, 1990, Major announced the allocation of a further £42,000,000 to haemophiliacs who had been infected with the AIDS virus as a result of treatment with contaminated blood products.
Party political developments — Trade unions
In early January 1991 Thatcher agreed to become honorary president of the Bruges Group, a group Conservative "Eurosceptic" backbenchers, established following her speech in Bruges in September 1988 [see p. 36491]and opposed to federalism in Europe.
On June 28 she announced that she would not seek re-election in the forthcoming general election.
On June 3, 1990, the national committee of the Social Democratic Party voted to suspend the party's constitution because it no longer had the membership or popular support to continue as a democratic national party.
The party, which had been formed in 1981, had won only three seats in the 1987 general election but a rump led by David Owen had refused to merge with the Liberals in January 1988 [see p. 36501], and had performed poorly in the local elections in May 1991.
The three MPs elected in 1987 continued to sit in the Commons as independent social democrats while on July 15 the national committee reversed its earlier decision to suspend the constitution.
On March 27, 1991, the Communist Party of Great Britain, which had voted at a congress on Dec. 9, 1990, to abandon the principles of Marxism-Leninism and the policy of democratic socialism, published a draft constitution for the party which was to be renamed the Democratic Left.
NUM funding controversy
In March 1990 allegations of irregularities were made concerning the origin and destination of funds received by the National Union of Mineworkers (NUM).
Some £2,000,000 was alleged to have been donated to, but not received by, British miners during their strike of 1984-85 [see pp. 33550-55].
On July 4, 1990, the Lightman report investigating the allegations was published.
It found that Arthur Scargill and Peter Heathfield, president and general secretary respectively of the NUM, had not used donations to miners to pay off their own home loans.
However, it found that funds donated by miners in East Germany, Hungary and the Soviet Union were highly likely to have contributed to a trust held on behalf of the NUM by the Miners' Trade Union International, a forerunner of the Paris-based International Miners' Organization (IMO—of which Scargill was president), and that the NUM had not received any benefit from this trust, although the IMO had received "substantial advantages" at the NUM's expense.
In September the NUM agreed to drop legal action in return for a donation from the IMO of £742,000.
On Dec. 10 the Serious Fraud Office confirmed that it would not be taking further action.
Economy
In a report published on Aug. 30, 1991, the Organization for Economic Co-operation and Development found that after the UK economy had entered "a sharp recession in the summer of 1990" , a "modest economic recovery" was "widely expected towards mid-year [1991]" .
Unemployment had by May 1991 risen sharply to 2,250,000 (600,000 more than in early 1990).
Inflation as measured by the retail price index was expected to drop from a year-on-year rate of almost 11 per cent in October 1990 to 5.8 per cent by May 1991, but "core inflation [was]likely to fall less rapidly" .
Nevertheless the survey described the government's decision in October 1990 to join the exchange rate mechanism (ERM) of the European Monetary System [see p. 37782]as "a powerful commitment to attaining low inflation" .
The government continued its privatization policy during this period, the largest sale being of the 12 regional electricity companies in December 1990.
This was followed by the sale of the electricity supply industry in England and Wales in March 1991 [see p. 38111], which was completed on May 30 with the issue of the prospectus for the flotation of the two Scottish electricity companies,[see p. 38300].
Written parliamentary replies on Jan. 18, Feb. 15 and June 28, 1990, stated that (i) net proceeds from privatization over the seven years from April 1983 amounted to some £26,000 million;(ii) net proceeds from privatization in 1989-90 were most recently estimated at £4,250 million, and (iii) approximately 11,000,000 people owned shares.
On May 28, 1991, the government announced a new transport initiative which would (i) bring to an end the monopoly of freight and passenger services on its own tracks in advance of an eventual privatization of British Rail;(ii) improve grants for the construction of freight distribution facilities;(iii) involve the private sector in more road construction; and (iv) relieve urban road congestion.
Channel Tunnel
The tunnelling phase of the Channel Tunnel linking England and France was completed on June 27, 1991, with the linking of the last of the three tunnels [for linking of north-bound rail tunnel in May 1991 see p. 38209].
Earlier funding difficulties [see p. 37583], had been eased in December 1990 with the successful raising of over £560,000,000 through a rights issue in Paris and London.
Defence — Security issues
The publication of a White Paper in July 1991 followed the government's July 25, 1990, "options for change" defence review, the first since the collapse of the communist regimes on eastern Europe.
Despite involvement of the UK forces in the Gulf war earlier in the year, the White Paper envisaged substantial armed forces cuts [see p. 38365].
On Feb. 5, 1991, Secretary of State for Defence King announced that the United States nuclear submarine base at Holy Loch was to be closed and that the US F-111 bombers would be withdrawn from the Upper Heyford and Lakenheath bases [see also p. 37704].
The last cruise missiles left the UK in March 1991 [see p. 38122].
The War Crimes Bill, which provided a legal framework for the prosecution of suspected war criminals and had been rejected by the House of Lords in June 1990 [see p. 37889], was reintroduced in March 1991 and again effectively rejected by the Lords on April 26.
However, the Bill was enacted on May 9 under provisions of the Parliament Acts 1991 and 1949 (whereby a bill could be passed directly for royal assent if it had been approved twice by the Commons but rejected both times by the Lords).
This was only the fourth time that this legislation had been invoked.
Foreign relations
Foreign relations during this period were dominated by the Gulf crisis, in which the UK government gave strong support to the US-led allied operation against Iraq [see pp. 37935; 37982-86].
In April 1991 Major put forward proposals for "safe havens" for the Kurds [see pp. 38127-28; 38154].
In Europe events were dominated by the question of greater integration, on which the UK generally favoured a loose arrangement which would include the European Free Trade Association (EFTA) and eastern European countries.
Diplomatic relations were resumed with Iran in September 1990 [see p. 37729]and with Syria in November 1990 [see p. 37873], reflecting the improvement in relations with countries neighbouring on Iraq as a result of the Gulf crisis.
Roger Cooper, who had been imprisoned in Iran since 1985, was released in April 1991 [see p. 38169].
By contrast Iraq announced its severance of diplomatic relations with the UK on Feb. 6, 1991 [for July 1990 release of Daphne Parish in Iraq see p. 37627].
Northern Ireland
Brooke initiative — Meetings of Anglo-Irish conference
During 1990-91 the Northern Ireland Secretary Peter Brooke sought to bring about the first all-party talks since 1975 on the future of the province [see pp. 37624; 37720; 37784; 37869; 38111-12; 38156-57].
Talks eventually opened in June 1991 [see pp. 38300-01]but broke down the following month [see p. 38356].
Meanwhile the Anglo-Irish Intergovernmental Conference (set up under the 1985 Anglo-Irish Agreement—see pp. 34070-73) held meetings on July 17, 1990 [see p. 37624], on Sept. 14 (when the Conference displayed some optimism towards solving the problem of determining the precise stage at which the Irish government could directly enter the all-party talks) and on Feb. 1, 1991.
The most significant meetings of the Conference were, however, held during April 1991.
On April 9 the Conference agreed that the next meeting would be held on April 26 following which formal devolution talks would begin and continue until the next planned meeting of the two sides on July 16 [see p. 38156].
Major paid his first visit as Prime Minister to Northern Ireland on Feb. 22, 1991.
Violence
Among the most violent incidents during 1990-91 were the July 1990 killing of Ian Gow [see p. 37623]; the September shooting of a former Gibraltar Governor [see p. 37720]; the October IRA "human bomb" attacks [see p. 37784]; the November rocket attack on the home of a Belfast High Court judge [see p. 37869]; the February 1991 IRA mortar attack on Downing Street and attacks on mainland railway stations [see pp. 38019-20]; and the March 1991 Craigavon killings [see p. 38112].
In addition sectarian killings resumed following the collapse of the Brooke initiative [see p. 38402]and in September a Sinn Féin councillor was shot dead, bringing the number of killings in 1991 in Northern Ireland to 59 [see p. 38445].
On June 19 the government released official security statistics for 1990.
There were 49 civilian deaths (as compared with 39 in 1989), 15 Army or Ulster Defence Regiment (UDR) deaths (14), and 12 Royal Ulster Constabulary (RUC) or RUC Reserve deaths (9).
There were 396 shooting incidents (406 in 1989), 167 explosions (224) with an estimated weight of 5,392 lb (12,114 lb); 120 bombs were neutralized (196) with an estimated weight of 15,328 lb (13,662 lb) and 438 armed robberies (541) in which £1,728,685 was stolen (£1,079,399).
A total of 380 people were charged with "terrorist-type offences" (433 in 1989).
Following the release of the "Guildford Four" in October 1989 [see p. 36983]a number of earlier convictions in connection with extremist attacks were overturned.
In March 1991 the "Birmingham Six" (convicted for the murder of 21 people in the 1974 bombing of two Birmingham public houses) were released [see p. 38111]; in June the 1976 convictions of the "Maguire Seven" in connection with the 1974 Guildford and Woolwich public house bombings were quashed [see p. 38301], and in September the case of Judith Ward, sentenced to life imprisonment in December 1974 for the bombing the previous February of a coach on a Yorkshire motorway, was referred to an Appeal Court [see p. 38445].
Terrorist cases brought to court during this period included (i) the March 1991 imprisonment in France of the Eksund crew for arms smuggling [see p. 38112]and the July 1991 imprisonment of the ship's master [see p. 38356];(ii) the sentencing in the Netherlands in April 1991 of one out of four people arrested in connection with the 1990 Roermond killings [see p. 38157]; the sentence was, however, overturned in July [see p. 38356], while another of the four was extradited to Germany in September [see p. 38445]; and (iii) the imprisonment in May 1991 of eight Sinn Féin members [see p. 38209].
The Commons and the Lords on March 16 and 18, 1991, respectively approved the continuance in force for a further 12 months of the provisions of the 1978 and 1987 Northern Ireland (Emergency Provisions) Acts [see p. 37584 for previous year's extensions].
The Northern Ireland (Emergency Provisions) Act 1991 (enacted on June 27, 1991) re-enacted the above and, in addition, provided for an extension of the power of seizure in relation to terrorist offences currently held by the police to the armed forces, and created a new offence of bypassing closed border crossing points.
Police and the armed forces would additionally be permitted to examine documents and other recorded data in situations where terrorist offences or their preparation were suspected.
EUROPE
YUGOSLAVIA
Area: 255,804 sq km.
Population: 23,800,000 (1990 UNFPA est.).
Capital: Belgrade.
Languages: Serbo-Croat, Macedonian and Slovene (all official).
Religion: Christianity (Orthodox and Roman Catholic); Islamic minority.
Armed forces: 180,000 (1990).
Currency: dinar (US$1.00=23.6013 dinars as at July 1, 1991).
Major international affiliations: BIS; CSCE; EBRD; NAM; Hexagonale group.
POLITICAL SYSTEM
The Socialist Federal Republic of Yugoslavia (comprising the republics of Bosnia-Hercegovina, Croatia, Macedonia, Montenegro, Serbia and Slovenia, and the autonomous provinces of Vojvodina and Kosovo-Metohija within Serbia) was established in 1945, and adopted its current name in 1963.
Croatia and Slovenia declared their independence in June 1991.
Under the 1974 Constitution the office of President of the Collective Presidency (head of state) rotates annually in fixed sequence among the members of the Collective State Presidency, to which one member is elected by each republic and province for a four-year term.
The bicameral Federal Assembly elects the Federal Executive Council (cabinet).
A multiparty system was set up in August 1990 under a law passed on July 25 after the collapse of the ruling League of Communists of Yugoslavia in January [see pp. 37172; 37622].
Main government leaders
President of the Collective State Presidency: Stjepan Mesic (Croatia).
Vice-President: Branko Kostic (Montenegro).
Presidents of the republics: Alija Izetbegovic (Bosnia-Hercegovina); Franjo Tudjman (Croatia);(Kosovo-Metohija—under direct Serbian rule); Kiro Gligorov (Macedonia); Momir Bulatovic (Montenegro); Slobodan Milosevic (Serbia); Milan Kucan (Slovenia);(Vojvodina—vacant).
Federal Prime Minister: Ante Markovic.
Other principal ministers: Budimir Loncar (Foreign Affairs); Col.-Gen.
Veljko Kadijevic (Defence); Branko Zekan (Finance); Namzi Mustafa (Trade); Stevan Santo (Energy and Industry).
Changes in leadership to June 1991
For appointments to Collective State Presidency in May 1990 see p. 37463; in Aug. 1990 see p. 37666; in Oct. 1990 see p. 37789; in Feb. 1991 see p. 38019; in June 1991 see p. 38275.
Ruling party
League of Communists-Movement for Yugoslavia (LC-MY—Communist Party of Yugoslavia, renamed in November 1990 and no longer the sole legal party, Dragan Atanasovski l.).
Other national parties
Alliance of Yugoslav Reform Forces (Ante Markovic l.);
Association for a Yugoslav Democratic Initiative.
Regional parties
Numerous new parties were formed in 1990/1991.
The following were among the more prominent: Hrvatski Demokratski Blok (HDB—Croat Democratic Bloc); Hrvatska Demokratska Zajednica (HDZ—Croatian Democratic Union, Slavko Degoricija pres.);
Demokratski Savez Kosovo (DSK—Democratic Alliance of Kosovo, Ibrahim Rugova ch.);
Democratic Opposition of Slovenia (DEMOS, Joze Pucnik l.);
Stranka Demokratskhi Reformi (Party of Democratic Reform—former League of Communists of Slovenia, Ciril Ribicic l.);
Internal Macedonian Revolutionary Organization-Democratic Party for Macedonian National Unity (VMRO-DPMNE, Ljupco Georgievski l.);
League of Communists of Montenegro; Stranka Demokratske Akcije (SDA—Party of Democratic Action, Bosnia-Hercegovina, Alija Izetbegovic l.);
Srpska Demokratska Partija (SDP—Serbian Democratic Party, Bosnia-Hercegovina, Radovan Karadzic l.);
Serbian Renaissance Movement (SPO, Vuk Draskovic l.);
Socijalisticka Partija Srbije (SPS—Socialist Party of Serbia, former League of Communists of Serbia merged with Socialist Alliance of the Working People, Petar Skundric l.).
Elections
Elections to all the Republic Assemblies were held in 1990: in April and early May in Slovenia and Croatia (where the communists were defeated—see p. 37381); in November and December in Serbia and Montenegro (where the Socialist Party—renamed communists—gained majorities), and in Macedonia and Bosnia-Hercegovina (where nationalists came to power—see pp. 37923-24).
1990/91 OVERVIEW
The main issue dominating the political agenda was the uneasy relationship between Yugoslavia's largest republic, Serbia, and the other republics, particularly Slovenia and Croatia [see pp. 37973-74; 38080-81].
After the elections in April and early May 1990 [see p. 37381]which returned non-communist governments to power in Croatia and Slovenia, constitutional questions were the central issue.
The Slovenian Assembly in July 1990 published a formal declaration claiming full sovereignty [see p. 37622], and in December a popular referendum showed a majority of 95 per cent in favour of the republic's withdrawal from the federation if, after six months, a satisfactory accommodation in relations between Serbia and Slovenia had not been reached.
In September Croatia followed suit.
At the heart of the dispute were two diametrically opposed views of a future Yugoslav state: the republics of Slovenia and Croatia wanted a loose association of sovereign states on a confederate model, while Serbia, backed by Montenegro, favoured a strong centralist system in which Serbia would dominate the political and economic agenda.
Bosnia-Hercegovina and Macedonia favoured a third option; a "community" of republics with a federal police force and army, a single currency and full monetary union, but with each member of the community also retaining its own army, and holding an equitable proportion of the federal offices and services.
The deteriorating federal-republican relations were exacerbated in May 1990 by the accession as President of the Collective State Presidency of Borisav Jovic of Serbia, a supporter of the Serbian President Slobodan Milosevic.
They reached crisis point in May 1991 when Serbia and Montenegro failed to endorse Mesic, a Croat, as the next President of the Collective State Presidency.
The six Presidents of the republics, meeting on June 6, attempted to break the constitutional deadlock and to start formal negotiations on a new basis for the country's institutions.
On June 26 Croatia and Slovenia declared their independence, a move which the Serbian-dominated federal government refused to recognize [see pp. 38274-75].
This precipitated fighting between rival ethnic groups, particularly between Serbs (and the Serb-dominated federal army—JNA) and Croats.
The HDZ government of Croatia had been building its own army: it had 35,000 police units of which 25,000 were in the reserves and 10,000 belong to special units.
A ceasefire was agreed in Slovenia in July and the JNA began to withdraw, but fighting continued in Croatia, despite several attempts by the European Communities (EC) to broker a further ceasefire.
[For further developments see pp. 38373-76; 38420-22.]
Croatia: More than 11 per cent of Croatia's population belonged to the Serbian minority, living mainly in Krajina, which remained economically underdeveloped and vulnerable to the influence of Milosevic and Serbian nationalists from the republic of Serbia.
Tension between the ruling HDZ and the Serbian minorities worsened when Milosevic, seeking to boost his popularity in Serbia, urged the Krajina Serbs to declare their autonomy from Croatia [see p. 37666].
Milan Babic, one of the leaders of the Serbs in Croatia, sought full integration with Serbia and announced Krajina to be an autonomous region under Serbian laws.
Hostility and suspicion between the two ethnic groups in Krajina escalated; Croatian President Tudjman and his right-wing following became more vocal and anti-Serb, and remained adamant that Croatia would not cede Krajina to Serbia.
Serbia: Opposition in Serbia to Milosevic's government, elected on Dec. 9, 1990, and a principal factor in the current crisis, was largely ineffectual.
It was divided between the ultra-nationalists led by Draskovic's renewal party, and centrists, led by the Democratic party [see pp. 38080-81].
Kosovo, where Albanians made up 90 per cent of the province's population of 2,000,000, remained a thorny issue.
Widespread riots in June 1990 led to the provincial parliament being dissolved by the Serbian Assembly, and the effective removal under Serbia's new constitution of the province's autonomy [see pp. 37621; 37725-26], after which Kosovo was controlled by the police.
In addition, repressive use was made of "temporary measures" in most enterprises, which outlawed strikes, put companies under the management of Serbian officials and forced workers to sign loyalty oaths to Serbia.
Economy
The federal government's main economic priority was to reduce inflation, which had reached 2,600 per cent by the end of 1989.
By the end of 1990 it stood at 121 per cent, and the aim of reducing this to less than 70 per cent in 1991 appeared to be succeeding as the inflation rate for the first five months of the year was 38.9 per cent , compared with 84.5 per cent in the corresponding period in 1990.
But attempts by Markovic to implement a tight monetary policy were undermined by the secret printing in January 1991 of dinars with a face value equivalent to US$1,600 million by the Serbian authorities; similar printings without federal authorization were also carried out by the Croatian, Macedonian and Montenegran authorities [see also pp. 37866-67].
Industrial output fell dramatically by 23 per cent in 1990, and by a further 19 per cent in the first four months of 1991.
Any hope of an improvement appeared unlikely in view of the reduction in the level of foreign investment caused by the unstable political situation.
The debt service ratio (as a percentage of GNP) averaged 19.3 per cent in 1990, and 20.7 per cent for the first quarter of 1991.
Foreign exchange reserves fell, with little hope of external financing or credits.
The government expected an overall current-account deficit of at least $1,500 million in 1991 as compared with a deficit of $2,300 million in 1990.
Yugoslavia was without a federal budget until June 1991, because Croatia and Slovenia could not agree on what percentage of the budget to allocate to the military, or on what contributions they should each make to the federal budget.
Federal expenditure was usually divided between defence (approximately 40 per cent); subsidies (approximately 50 per cent ) and state administration.
Strong opposition to the amount spent on the military came mainly from Slovenia and Croatia, which were also unwilling to subsidize the poorer southern republics by way of the federal budget.
Foreign relations
In August 1990 Loncar held talks with his West German counterpart, Hans-Dietrich Genscher, in Belgrade.
After a visit to Iran in October Franc Horvat, the federal Secretary for Foreign Economic Relations, said that Iran could well become Yugoslavia's most important trading partner among the developing countries.
In November Jovic, then President of the Collective State Presidency, visited South Korea and Japan to discuss bilateral economic co-operation and in the same month met Soviet President Gorbachev to discuss the internal development of both the Soviet Union and Yugoslavia, and the positive role of non-aligned Yugoslavia in relation to international politics.
On Nov. 19-21 Jovic attended the Conference on security and Co-operation in Europe (CSCE) Paris summit [see p. 37838].
In December a meeting was held in Brussels, Belgium, of the Council for Yugoslavia-EC co-operation, at which Foreign Minister Loncar met with his EC counterparts.
He expressed Yugoslavia's wish for closer economic ties with the EC, and was looking for further aid.
The events in Kosovo, however, cooled Yugoslav-EC relations and jeopardized aid [see also p. 38].
A Council of Europe delegation visited Yugoslavia in February 1991.
EUROPE
COUNCIL OF EUROPE
Full title: Council of Europe.
Date of foundation: May 5, 1949.
Status: Regional grouping aimed at co-ordinating legislation on economic, social, cultural, scientific and legal concerns.
Member countries: Austria, Belgium, Cyprus, Czechoslovakia [see below], Denmark, Finland, France, Germany, Greece, Hungary [see below], Iceland, Ireland, Italy, Liechtenstein, Luxembourg, Malta, Netherlands, Norway, Portugal, San Marino, Spain, Sweden, Switzerland, Turkey, United Kingdom.
Secretary-general: Catherine Lalumière.
With the collapse of communism in eastern Europe the Council of Europe found a new role during 1990/91 in assisting in the establishment of democratic and legally accountable political and economic systems in eastern Europe.
Hungary joined the Council on Nov. 6, 1990 [see p. 37870], as did Czechoslovakia on Feb. 21, 1991 [see p. 37969].
Poland, Romania and Yugoslavia had all applied for membership as of mid-1991, while Albania applied for observer status on June 25, 1991.
Lalumière, in an address to the Royal Institute for International Affairs in London on Feb. 28, 1991, said that she saw the Council of Europe as an important institutional link between western and eastern Europe, particularly in the field of human rights.
She said that the radical changes in eastern Europe had given the organization a new lease of life as a potential "pan-European forum of the democracies" .
The progressive inclusion of eastern Europeans in the Council of Europe was symbolized by the appointment in late April 1991 of a Hungarian lawyer, Andras Baka, 38, as the first eastern European judge at the European Court of Human Rights in Strasbourg.
The ninth protocol of the European Convention on Human Rights was opened for signature on Nov. 5, 1990.
It gave individuals whose petitions were upheld by the European Commission on Human Rights the automatic right to have their cases reviewed by the Court (this being hitherto the prerogative of either the commission or the state concerned); it would enter into force once ratified by 10 states.
[For seventh and eighth protocols see p. 37212.]
A Convention on Insider Trading which had been opened for signature in April 1989 entered into force on Oct. 1, 1991, with its ratification by Norway, Sweden and the UK.
EUROPE
EUROPEAN BANK FOR RECONSTRUCTION AND DEVELOPMENT
Full title: European Bank for Reconstruction and Development (EBRD).
Date of foundation: May 1990, inauguration April 1991.
Status: Bank assisting the economic reconstruction of central and eastern Europe.
Members: 39 member countries (Australia, Austria, Belgium, Bulgaria, Canada, Cyprus, Czechoslovakia, Denmark, Egypt, Finland, France, Germany, Greece, Hungary, Iceland, Ireland, Israel, Italy, Japan, South Korea, Liechtenstein, Luxembourg, Malta, Mexico, Morocco, Netherlands, New Zealand, Norway, Poland, Portugal, Romania, Soviet Union, Spain, Sweden, Switzerland, Turkey, United Kingdom, United States, Yugoslavia); Commission of the European Communities (EC); European Investment Bank (EIB).
President: Jacques Attali (France).
Originally proposed by French President Mitterrand and approved by the EC in late 1989 following the collapse of the communist regimes of eastern Europe [see pp. 37028; 37132], the EBRD was formally inaugurated in April 1991 [see p. 38155].
Among the prominent figures joining the EBRD's staff in early 1991 were, as a vice-president, Miklós Németh, Hungarian Prime Minister from November 1988 until May 1990, and as a department head Boris Fedorov, the Minister of Finance of the Russian Federation from June 1990 to January 1991.
[For June 1991 appointment of US first vice-president see p. 38307.]
On Oct. 24, 1990, Attali said that he did not expect the EBRD, which had capitalization of ECU10,000 million (US$12,400 million), to make a profit until 1992.
In June 1991 Poland received the first EBRD loan [see p. 38306].
The EBRD's first statement of its priorities and policies, issued on April 19, 1991 declared that the it would concentrate on developing "an entrepreneurial spirit at grass-roots level by helping the establishment of small enterprises" .
Initial priorities would be projects strengthening the infrastructure, privatization, reforming the financial sector, developing a productive and competitive private sector, restructuring industry, encouraging direct foreign investment and cleaning up the environment.
EUROPE
EUROPEAN COMMUNITIES
Full title: European Communities (EC) comprising the European Coal and Steel Community (ECSC—established by the Treaty of Paris signed in 1951 and effective since 1952), the European Economic Community (EEC—established by the Treaty of Rome signed in 1957) and the Euratom (the European Atomic Energy Community—set up in 1957).
Objective: regional co-operation.
Membership: from 1952 Belgium, France, West Germany (unified since October 1990), Italy, Luxembourg, Netherlands; since 1973 Denmark, Ireland, United Kingdom; since 1981 Greece; since 1986 Portugal, Spain.
Key institutions:(i) the Commission (which proposes legislation and implements the Treaties—for composition see pp. 36405-06);(ii) the Council (the key decision-making body, generally comprising the relevant government ministers but also meeting at head of state and government level as the European Council);(iii) the Parliament, directly elected every five years since 1979;(iv) the European Court of Justice;(v) the European Investment Bank [see p. 38023 for annual report];(vi) the European Court of Auditors; and (vii) the Economic and Social Committee (ECOSOC, an advisory body).
Currency: the European currency units (ECU) is the monetary unit of the EC (ECU1=US$1.13436 or £0.698712 as at July 1, 1991.)
1990/91 OVERVIEW
During 1990 developments within the EC were dominated by preparations for two intergovernmental conferences on economic and monetary union (EMU) and European political union (EPU), which opened in Dec. 15, 1990,[see p. 37905-06].
During the first half of 1991 progress was made on both fronts, although negotiations on EMU, based on the April 1989 Delors report outlining three stages leading to EMU [see p. 36598], were further advanced than those on political union.
It was intended that all parties should agree on two new treaties at the December 1991 European Council meeting at Maastricht, Netherlands, which would then require approval by member country parliaments before they entered into force.
The rotating presidency of the Council was held by Ireland for the first half of 1990, by Italy for the second half of 1990, and in 1991 it was held first by Luxembourg and then by the Netherlands.
During 1990 the European Council met in Dublin in April [see p. 37363-63]and June [see pp. 37520-21], and in Rome in October [see pp. 37782-83]and December [see pp. 37905-06].
During 1991 it met in Luxembourg in April [see pp. 38154-55]and in June [see pp. 38295-97]and was scheduled to meet in Maastricht in December.
 "Stage one" of EMU under the Delors plan began on July 1, 1990 [see p. 37625].
In contrast with other members the UK favoured introducing a 13th currency, the "hard ecu" , rather than supplanting existing national currencies with the ECU [see pp. 37521; 37969], and was left isolated in October 1990 in its opposition to a decision to start "stage two" on Jan. 1, 1994 [see p. 37783].
Nevertheless the UK did decide to join the exchange rate mechanism (ERM) of the European Monetary System (EMS) in October 1990 [see p. 37782].
Negotiations on political union centred on a draft treaty presented by Luxembourg in April 1991 [see p. 38154]and presented in redrafted form in June [see pp. 38295-96].
These drafts provided for foreign and defence policy and for issue of police and judicial co-operation to be decided at intergovernmental level outside the normal EC decision-making machinery.
More radical Dutch proposals to bring these policy areas under EC control were rejected by a majority of 10 EC Foreign Ministers in September [see p. 38443].
These developments took place against a backdrop of a wider Europe which was changing rapidly as a result of superpower détente and the collapse of communist regimes in eastern Europe.
German unification in October 1990 brought the territory of the former East Germany into the EC [see p. 37659].
The EC co-ordinated aid to eastern and central Europe from the Group of 24 leading industrialized countries [see p. 38115]and by the end of 1990 financial and food aid granted to Poland, Hungary, Bulgaria, Czechoslovakia, East Germany (before unification), Romania and Yugoslavia under the so-called "phare programme" totalled ECU500 million.
In April 1991 the EC was one of the founding members of the European Bank for Reconstruction and Development [see p. 38155].
There was increasing pressure from other European countries for access to EC markets if not membership of the EC [see below].
Progress towards single internal market
Meanwhile member countries sought to agree on measures to introduce a single internal market within the EC by Jan. 1, 1993, as agreed under the Single European Act which had been effective since July 1987 [see pp. 35534; 34107-08 for terms].
The Commission reported in June 1991 that 193 of the directives proposed on the single market had now been approved, and that only 89 measures remained.
This did not imply, however, that they had necessarily been approved either by the European Parliament or by the various national parliaments and the Commission complained that Italy had implemented fewer than half of them.
In advance of the introduction of the single internal market five member countries (Belgium, France, West Germany, Luxembourg and the Netherlands) in June 1990 signed the Schengen agreement on the abolition of mutual border controls [see p. 37535].
Italy signed the agreement in November 1990 [see p. 37870], as did Spain and Portugal in June 1991 [see p. 38297].
Taxation
Despite the many problems which still faced the proposal to introduce an EC-wide company charter, the Commission defused some of the more acrimonious disputes surrounding company taxation, when it agreed in April 1990 to drop plans for an EC-wide system of personal and corporation tax, in favour of a policy of co-ordinating the various existing systems.
On July 23, 1990, member government signed a convention on the elimination of double taxation in connection with the adjustment of profits of associated companies, when, for instance, two companies from different countries decided to merge.
On the question of harmonizing Europe's widely varying rates of value added tax (VAT), which had aroused disagreement in the past, the Council of Ministers agreed in December 1990 on a new system of collecting VAT with effect from 1992 [see p. 37925].
In June 1991 all EC members except the UK committed themselves to a minimum standard VAT rate of 15 per cent from January 1993 [see p. 38297].
The Commission announced in March 1991 a proposal to ban all advertising of tobacco products throughout the EC from 1993.
However, Denmark, Germany, the Netherlands and the UK, all of which derived substantial excise revenues from tobacco sales, objected to the ban and the Council of (Health) Ministers agreed in Luxembourg on June 6 to press for changes which would restrict publicity on a voluntary rather than a statutory basis.
In March 1990 the European Parliament had voted to restrict tobacco advertising to simple displays of the product packaging.
Transport
During 1990-91 the Commission continued to press for the introduction of its policy deregulating European air traffic routes.
On Dec. 5, 1990, the Commission put forward proposals to make it illegal for certain airlines to agree on standard fares or to distribute all available take-off and landing slots at a particular airport among themselves.
On Dec. 17 the Council of Ministers agreed in principle on measures regulating compensation to passengers for overbooking.
Further deregulation measures were drafted in June 1991 and intended to be implemented by January 1993.
Apart from establishing common criteria for the licensing of airlines and routes, they set out to guarantee an EC-wide right of cabotage (the carriage of one country's freight or passenger traffic by an airline from another country), to phase out capacity quotas at airports, and to end the preferential access arrangements accorded by some countries to their own domestic airlines.
Shipping freight cabotage was discussed by EC transport ministers in late December 1990, when they agreed to liberalize, with effect from 1993, all shipping except for oil tankers, very small coastal freighters, and ships which plied only between the harbours of a single country.
Road transport between Italy and northern EC countries was disrupted during 1990-91 by the ongoing border dispute with Austria, which complained that too many lorries were being allowed to cross its territory [see pp. 37783; 37689].
The dispute ended on June 3, however, when the two countries signed a three-year agreement under which each allowed the other a quota of 222,000 return trips per annum.
A similar deal was signed with Yugoslavia on June 24, allowing for the bilateral transit of 180,000 vehicles.
EC ministers continued to press Switzerland to raise above 28 tonnes its weight limit on lorries in transit [see also p. 38493].
On July 12, 1990, the European Court of Justice ordered the German government to suspend a road levy of up to DM9,000 which it had imposed since April on heavy trucks from other countries, on the grounds that it discriminated against other countries.
The government announced, however, that it would retain the tax on trucks from non-EC countries.
EC Transport Ministers on June 20-21, 1991, approved in principle a draft directive which required rail companies to prepare separate financial accounts for their track operations and their passenger-carrying services, as a preliminary measure to introducing competition by other services [see below for further competition measures].
Rail service providers would have an automatic right of access anywhere in the EC so that, for example , a UK-German rail link could not be prevented from using Dutch or Belgian tracks.
The Commission had adopted on Dec. 5, 1990, a set of outline proposals for a major new high-speed rail network, to be completed by 2025, involving the construction of 9,000 km of new track and the improvement of 15,000 km of existing track on 15 essential rail links.
EC Transport Ministers also agreed in principle on June 20-21, 1991, to introduce from 1996 a standardized driving test and driving licence for all EC member states.
They also agreed that standardized safety tests on all car over four years old should be introduced throughout the EC from 1994; Denmark, France, Ireland Italy, and Portugal would be allowed until 1998 to introduce the tests.
Competition
From September 1990 the Commission acquired greatly enhanced powers to examine and control mergers among larger companies [see p. 37719].
The move followed a spate of transnational mergers within the EC, in advance of the introduction of the single market.
The Commission published a report on competition policy on June 24, 1991, in which it said that the number of intra-EC mergers among larger companies had in 1990 for the first time exceeded that of purely national mergers.
At the same time, however, the numbers of EC companies sold to non-EC members had doubled, in part as a result of international anxieties about a protectionist "fortress Europe" after 1992.
The report also drew attention to the state aid being offered by some countries to larger industries, estimating that the total had reached ECU83,300 million in 1990, or 2.8 per cent of the EC's total economy.
Attention was focused particularly on France, where state aid to the Thomson and Bull electronics groups was under examination [see pp. 38156; 38472].
There was also concern about the UK government's alleged hostility to company takeovers by state-owned concerns—a policy which the Commission said discriminated against foreign companies, because more of them were state-owned than would be the case in the UK.
The question of the Commission's right to introduce legislation on the question of national monopolies had aroused deep resentment in some states, and France had complained to the European Court that it had broken EC law by imposing in 1988 an unconditional requirement that all governments should take action to remove these monopolies.
The Court, however, ruled on March 19, 1991, that the Commission had been within in its powers in invoking Article 90 of the Treaty of Rome, which allowed it to override government objections in such cases [see p. 36154].
Meanwhile the Commission also pursued its efforts to force the return of illicit state payments to industries.
Following the Commission's order of June 28, 1990, that the £42,900,000 in "sweeteners" paid to British Aerospace at the time of its purchase of the Rover motor group should be repaid, the UK government announced that it was suing British Aerospace for the return of the money, and Rover for another £1,500,000 [see pp. 37582-83].
In March 1991 the European Court obliged the Italian car manufacturer Alfa Romeo to repay some US$500,000,000 in state loans made during the mid-1980s shortly before it was sold to Fiat.
The Commission also examined UK complaints about the scale of subsidies made by France to the Renault motor group, in connection with a proposed joint venture with Saab-Scania of Sweden.
The Fr300,000,000 grant had covered almost a quarter of the venture's costs.
However, in late October 1990 it approved the proposed purchase by Air France of its two domestic counterparts in the French market, Air Inter and UTA [see also p. 38123].
Italy, which was alleged in a Commission document to have given ECU20,600 million in state aid to industry between 1986 and 1988, failed in October 1990 to force a reversal of the Commission's powers to curb state subsidies.
Germany (estimated to have spent ECU23,900 million) and France (ECU15,300 million) backed the Commission's position.
The Commission imposed fines on three chemicals companies on Dec. 19, 1990, for operating an illegal cartel in soda ash.
Solvay of Belgium, Imperial Chemical Industries of the UK and Chemische Fabrik Kalk GmbH of Germany were ordered to pay ECU48,000,000, the heaviest fines ever imposed in the EC.
The Commission voted on Nov. 26, 1990, to suspend the four-year-old subsidy system which had been available to EC shipbuilders to encourage them to compete against cheaper products from South Korea or Japan.
Social policy
The Social Charter, which had been adopted by 11 member countries in December 1989 [see p. 37132], continued to draw much criticism from the UK during this period, particularly with regard to the rights of employees to consultation in the workplace.
Despite the Commission's introduction in December 1990 of modified proposals on this issue no full agreement had been reached by mid-1991.
Most of the major provisions relating to the charter were in any case implemented only at the discretion of member governments.
Further concern centred on a proposal to award full employment rights to temporary or migrant workers working on temporary contract, of whom it was estimated that there were over 1,000,000 in April 1990.
Employers were concerned that huge costs would be incurred if the Social Charter's provisions were extended to temporary workers.
There was also disagreement over the proposal to improve benefits and entitlements for part-time workers, and the Commission was forced in June 1990 to postpone the idea of offering them the same rights, on a pro-rata basis, as their full-time counterparts.
Denmark, Germany and the UK had opposed the proposal.
The Commission also failed on June 26, 1991, to obtain agreement on its plan to introduce a statutory minimum of 14 weeks' fully paid maternity leave for pregnant women.
The European Court of Justice had ruled against a UK insurance company on May 17, 1990, when it declared that men and women should enjoy equal pension entitlements, and that there should be no difference in the retirement age for the two sexes.
[For European Court ruling in July 1991 on night work see p. 38353.]
Broadcasting
The European Commission continued during this period to pursue a resolution of the conflict over technical standards for high definition television (HDTV) broadcasting in the single market after 1993.
Adherents of the current PAL broadcasting standard, including the UK Sky Broadcasting Corporation, had clashed with the electronics manufacturers Philips and Thomson which had developed an improved system known as HD-MAC.
The Commission put forward a compromise on June 26, 1991, whereby all new services after 1993 would have to use the MAC standard, but any existing services could retain PAL if they wished, provided that they broadcast simultaneously in the HD-MAC standard.
Energy
A European Energy Charter, proposed by the Netherlands and supported by the UK, attracted considerable attention in early 1991, and a draft was approved by the Commission on Feb. 13.
The draft charter called for close co-operation between European countries, including the Soviet Union, aimed at improved fuel efficiency and greater mutual co-operation.
In October 1990 the Commission proposed a five-year plan to reduce overall EC energy consumption by 12 per cent, forcing vehicle owners and industries to comply with tight exhaust emission standards while spending up to ECU35,000,000 on improving production standards for domestic buildings and electrical appliances.
The Commission imposed a four-year supervision order in August 1990 against the West German company Advanced Nuclear Fuels GmbH for serious violations of safety regulations when it transported 130 kg of enriched uranium through Luxembourg in what purported to be empty containers.
This was the first sanction imposed by the Commission since the Euratom treaty had been signed in 1957.
Environment
At a meeting of EC Environment Ministers in Brussels on March 18, 1991, it was agreed to set tougher emission levels for carbon monoxide and nitrogen oxides emitted by heavy diesel lorries and buses.
The measures were intended to bring standards for heavy commercial vehicles into line with regulations governing car exhaust emissions, on which tougher standards had been agreed in principle in December 1990 and were approved in June 1991 [see p. 38297; for other environmental issues see pp. 37784; 38258].
Agriculture and fisheries
During this period the Commission sought to win agreement for fundamental reform of the EC's common agricultural policy (CAP), in part to restrict the growth of intervention stocks (or "food mountains" ) and in part as a result of pressure to reduce the EC's level of agricultural subsidy in the context of the "Uruguay round" of multilateral trade talks of the General Agreement on Tariffs and Trade (GATT), which ground to a halt in December 1990 [see p. 37930].
The Commission presented initial proposals in February 1991 [see pp. 38022-23]and revised proposals in July 1991 [see p. 38353].
However, no immediate agreement was reached by EC member governments and in France farmers were vociferous in defending their position [see pp. 38446.
EC Ministers agreed in December 1990 on measures to conserve white fish stocks in the North Sea [see p. 37925].
Meanwhile, long-running tensions between Spanish and other EC fishing boats broke into open dispute in April 1991, when Ireland accused a Spanish vessel of deliberately ramming an Irish vessel within the statutory 12-mile range of the Irish coastline reserved for Irish vessels.
Spain, which had about half of the EC's fishing fleet, was accused of taking an inequitable share of fish in Irish waters, of failing to regulate its fleets properly, and of repeated violations of EC catch quotas.
In July 1991 the European Court of Justice overruled UK legislation which had sought to keep UK fishing quotas for UK fishermen [see p. 38353].
Budget and fraud
The question of budgetary reform aroused considerable tensions between the member states during this period, with Spain and Portugal pressing other member countries to agree to direct more EC funds to its poorer members.
At the same time, however, Greece, Ireland, Portugal and Spain were threatening to exercise their veto on the question of European union if it meant increasing their own contributions to the EC budget.
In March 1991 the Commission estimated that budgetary fraud cost up to 10 per cent of the EC's total budget.
It had detected 1,190 cases of fraud in 1991, costing a total of ECU282,000,000, of which ECU137,000,000 related to the farm subsidy budget and ECU90,000,000 to customs and agricultural duty fraud.
Measures to counter fraud had accounted for ECU52,000,000 of the 1990 budget.
Two new pan-European data systems were intended to combat fraud, and the use of satellites to scan agricultural areas, already common in Greece and Italy, was to be extended.
Parliament and Commission
The issue of increased powers for the European Parliament, as a way of counter-balancing the existing "democratic deficit" within the EC, formed an integral part of discussions on political union during this period [see pp. 37363; 37521; 37905; 38022].
The first conference of European parliamentarians, from national legislatures of EC member states and from the European Parliament, took place in Rome on Nov. 27-30, 1990.
The 258 delegates, seated in political rather than national groups, adopted by a large majority a final declaration in favour of a federally based European union, with the EC playing a key role within the UN, the Conference on Security and Co-operation in Europe (CSCE) and NATO; relations with the Western European Union (WEU) would be redefined.
Work in both the European Parliament and the European Commission was disrupted in June and July 1991 by sporadic industrial action over pay levels for full-time employees.
Foreign relations
The capacity of EC member countries to present a united front on the world political stage was sorely tested over the Gulf crisis.
They were united in the implementation of sanctions against Iraq after the latter's invasion of Kuwait in August 1990, but differing positions began to emerge by the end of the year [see p. 37927; 37934]and the French government's 11-hour attempt to avoid conflict was made without consultation with its EC counterparts [see p. 37935].
The EC was more successful in presenting a united front over the Yugoslav crisis, but unable to resolve the conflict [see pp. 38274-75; 38373-76; 38420-22].
Relations with other European countries
The end of the Cold War in Europe prompted several European countries to seek EC membership.
Cyprus and Malta did so in July 1990 [see p. 37625], while Sweden in July 1991 became the second EFTA country (after Austria) to apply; an essentially positive opinion on Austria's application was issued, also in July, by the Commission [see p. 38353].
Other EFTA countries also began to consider the possibility of EC membership [see pp. 38158; 38444], which tended to undermine ongoing EC-EFTA negotiations on a common European economic area [see pp. 38307; 38353].
(Turkey's membership application on April 1987 had been shelved until at least 1993—see p. 37133—and Morocco's application had been rejected in October 1987—see p. 36245.
Andorra joined the EC customs union in July 1990—see p. 38353.)
Eastern European countries were likewise keen to join or at least to negotiate with the EC association agreements which would give them preferential access to EC markets.
Negotiations were opened with Czechoslovakia, Hungary and Poland in February 1991 [see pp. 38115; 38443-44].
The EC signed trade and economic co-operation agreements with Bulgaria and Czechoslovakia in May 1990 (effective from November) and with Romania in October [see p. 37783].
In June 1991 the EC and Albania established full diplomatic ties [see pp. 38303; 37385].
Relations with USA
Tension continued between the EC and the United States, which repeatedly accused the EC of unfair practices.
Particular concern surrounded US complaints over the EC subsidies being paid to the European Airbus project—a joint development by France, Germany, Spain and the UK.
Although the EC offered in August 1990 to abolish all support for projects involving aircraft of under 100 seats, and to reduce all other development aid by one-third, the US government threatened in mid-1991 to take the issue to the General Agreement on Tariffs and Trade (GATT).
On May 1, 1991, however, the USA suspended a ban on imports of European wines, which it had imposed in February 1990 because of the use in Europe of procymidone pesticides against fungus infestations.
In return, the EC undertook to phase out the pesticide over a five-year period.
The following day the EC agreed to end a ban on imports of US pigmeat which it had imposed on Oct 31, 1990, amid allegations that US hygiene standards were inadequate.
Relations with Japan
Relations with Japan were again soured by allegations of "dumping" of computer components, cars, foodstuffs and other products, as Japan's trade surplus with the EC continued to widen, reaching $6,310 million in April 1991 alone.
Immediately before a visit to Tokyo by Delors [see p. 38202], the Commission on May 11, 1991, imposed punitive duties of around 17 per cent on imported Japanese audio cassettes, which had not reduced their market share to 35 per cent as agreed in 1988.
There was also disagreement about Japan's alleged obstruction of foreign investment plans by European companies; Frans Andriessen, an EC Commission vice-president, complained on Feb. 2 that Japanese investment in the EC outweighed that of the EC in Japan by a factor of 60.
Relations with other countries
The Council of Ministers agreed on Dec. 18-19, 1990, on a new direction for its Mediterranean policy and allocated a total of ECU4,405 million for the period 1992-96.
Ministers also agreed guidelines for EC policy towards Latin America and Asia over the next decade; priorities were to be development aid for the poorest population groups and economic co-operation with areas with a strong growth potential.
Assistance totalling ECU2,750 million was approved in principle, of which 10 per cent was to be allocated for environmental programmes, particularly the protection of tropical forests.
The figure represented an increase of more than 70 per cent over the total amount of aid granted during the previous five years.
EUROPE
EFTA
Full title: European Free Trade Association.
Date of foundation: May 3, 1960.
Status: Regional grouping for free trade between member countries and for promotion of wider free trade co-operation.
Member countries: Austria, Finland, Iceland, Liechtenstein (a full member in its own right since May 22, 1991—see p. 38209), Norway, Sweden, Switzerland.
Secretary-General: Georg Reisch.
The annual heads of government meetings on June 13-14, 1990, in Gothenburg (Sweden) and on May 24, 1991, in Vienna (Austria) were dominated by (i) the negotiation of a European Economic Area (EEA) agreement with the European Communities (EC), a process which was to reach a conclusion in October 1991 and (ii) the development of a new relationship with the countries of central and eastern Europe.
Joint declarations signed in Gothenburg with Hungary, Poland and Czechoslovakia [see p. 37535], on co-operation and the gradual establishment of free trade areas, were followed up by work in the respective joint committees.
A meeting of the EFTA-Hungary joint committee on June 27-28, 1991, agreed on the aim of having a free trade agreement in force by January 1992, and on the need to proceed in parallel with EC-Hungary talks.
Negotiations on free trade were also initiated with Yugoslavia, even though the 1983 EFTA-Yugoslavia joint declaration had not specifically foreseen the possibility of a free trade area.
A US$100,000,000 EFTA development fund for Yugoslavia was established in April 1990 with the intention that it should begin operations, after ratification, in 1991.
EFTA and Turkey began exploratory talks in June 1990 on a free trade agreement, presenting their draft proposals respectively in September and November 1990.
In March 1991 EFTA agreed to a request to start free trade negotiations with Israel.
The rotating chairmanship of EFTA's governing body, the Council, passed from Sweden (January-June 1990) to Switzerland (July-December 1990), to Austria (January-June 1991) and then to Finland (from July 1991).
EFTA's 1990/91 budget was set at just over 29,000,000 Swiss francs (approximately US$23,000,000), with a supplementary budget of SFr3-4,000,000 in view of the secretariat's workload on negotiations with the EC.
For the 1991/92 financial year (July-June) the budget was increased to SFr46,000,000; the secretariat had increased in size from 80 to 130 officials over two years.
EUROPE
WEU
Full title: Western European Union.
Date of foundation: May 6, 1955, based on the Brussels Treaty of 1948; "reactivated" 1984.
Status: West European council for the co-ordination of regional defence policy, committed to working with the North Atlantic Treaty Organization (NATO).
Member countries: Belgium, France, Germany, Italy, Luxembourg, Netherlands, Portugal, Spain and the United Kingdom.
Secretary-General: Willem van Eekelen (Netherlands).
1990/91 OVERVIEW
The WEU spent much of the period from mid-1990 to mid-1991 in redefining its role and its aspirations in the light of the generally decreasing level of superpower tensions, and particularly in the light of the United States' plans to withdraw a large proportion of its troops from NATO bases in Europe.
Debate centred particularly on proposals that the WEU should intensify its links with the European Communities (EC), instead of acting primarily as the co-ordinating body for the European element of the NATO alliance.
However, early proposals [see pp. 37931; 38022]that the two bodies should align ran into stiff opposition from neutral Ireland, from the UK and from the Netherlands, which maintained that the EC was unsuited for a role in European defence policy.
The problem was still unresolved by mid-year [see pp. 38154-55; 38216.]
In October 1990 the WEU had come out strongly against a proposal by the EC Council of (Foreign) Ministers that the EC's Treaty of Rome should be amended to incorporate Article 5 of the Brussels Treaty establishing the WEU, so that the EC should effectively control the WEU.
However, by February 1991 the idea of bringing the WEU within the EC's orbit had gained the approval of WEU Secretary-General van Eekelen, and NATO Secretary-General Manfred Wörner (Germany) had also welcomed an increased EC involvement.
UK and Netherlands reservations about the viability of the proposed EC/WEU merger appeared to be vindicated in early 1991 by the EC Commission's failure to agree on any joint policy on the Gulf conflict (Germany and Denmark opposing all military involvement in the region), at a time when the forces despatched by the UK, France and Italy to support the US-led alliance against Iraq were making a visible and effective contribution to the restoration of Kuwait's sovereignty [see pp. 37934; 37941].
With the end of the Gulf war attention shifted by mid-1991 to the WEU's changing relationship with NATO itself.
NATO had proposed to create a new "rapid reaction force" in Europe, which it wanted to bear the responsibility for the front-line defence of the region, as the USA's own troop presence in Western Europe was wound down [see p. 38216].
However, several WEU member states, notably France, wanted to go further by creating a specifically European force within the WEU context but formally outside NATO.
France, which envisaged that it would lead the new force, had withdrawn from NATO's integrated command structure in 1966 [see p. 21601]and had since then pursued an effectively independent line on military issues.
The rapid reaction force issue was hotly debated at a meeting of the WEU Assembly in Paris on June 3-6, when the UK Foreign and Commonwealth Secretary Douglas Hurd launched a forceful defence of the WEU's links with NATO and stressed the importance of collaboration with the USA.
He again vigorously rejected the idea that a viable European defence policy could be achieved in an EC context, and discussions were effectively stalled.
As the changes in direction of WEU policy continued to develop, concerns were expressed over the future of various joint arms development projects which had been agreed within its general parameters.
In particular, Germany was thought to be considering withdrawing from the European jet fighter project, in which it was engaged with France and Italy, while the UK was seeking confirmation that development of a military helicopter by the UK manufacturer Westland and an Italian manufacturer would proceed as planned.
On the other hand, the prototype of a similar French/German helicopter, the Tiger, had undergone successful flight tests on April 29, 1991.
France, Italy, Spain and the UK had also agreed in January on the joint development of a new surface-to-air missile, codenamed Eurosam.
Development time was estimated at two years.
During March and April 1991 Denmark came under pressure from France to join the WEU, but while Poul Schlüter, the Prime Minister of a minority coalition, was known to be sympathetic to the idea, it was equally apparent that the largest party in parliament, the Social Democrats, would effectively rule out such a move.
It was also proposed that the WEU should move its secretariat from London to Brussels, in order to reinforce its links with the EC, but no decision was expected until the question of political union in the EC had taken a more definitive shape (the Maastricht summit of the EC's European Council being scheduled to agree on this in December 1991).
EUROPE
OTHER REGIONAL BODIES
The collapse of the communist regimes of eastern Europe prompted the formation of new regional groupings and alliances as well as giving a new lease of life to existing organizations which straddled the former east-west divide.
In August 1990 ministers from Austria, Czechoslovakia, Hungary, Italy and Yugoslavia held the inaugural session of the Pentagonale group [see pp. 37661-62], which had first been launched in November 1989 at the initiative of the Italian Foreign Minister Gianni De Michelis.
The group held further regular meetings including that in May 1991 [see p. 38209]and in July 1991 became the Hexagonale group with the admission of Poland [see p. 38358].
Overlapping the area covered by the Pentagonale countries was the Alpen-Adria grouping, established in 1978 and comprising five Austrian Länder (provinces), three of Hungary's western regions, four northern regions of Italy, Bavaria (Germany) and Croatia and Slovenia (both Yugoslavia).
It aimed to promote regional co-operation in the areas of tourism, energy, environment, transport, sport and culture; after a meeting in early July 1991 it also called on national governments to recognize the independence of Croatia and Slovenia.
In May 1990 the Danube countries (Donauländer), comprising regions through which the Danube flowed, established a working community (Arbeitsgemeinschaft) to promote co-operation and exchange of expertise.
The regions involved were Bavaria, four Austrian Länder, Bohemia and Slovakia, seven Hungarian counties, Serbia and Croatia (Yugoslavia), provinces in Bulgaria, the Romanian district of Giurgiu, and the Soviet Republic of Moldava.
At a conference in Athens in March 1990 government representatives from Albania, Bulgaria, Greece, Romania, Turkey and Yugoslavia agreed to strengthen economic and technological co-operation among the Balkan countries and held meetings regularly thereafter.
[For June 1991 Conference of Balkan Democratic Parties see p. 38307.]
The Black Sea countries (Bulgaria, Romania, the Soviet Union and Turkey, with Greece and Yugoslavia as observers) met in July 1991 to work out an economic co-operation agreement [see p. 38352].
In February 1991 Czechoslovak, Hungarian and Polish representatives met in Visegrad, near Budapest, to co-ordinate as a group their negotiations with the European Communities (EC—see also p. 38) and co-operate on economic and security issues.
In October they signed a co-operation treaty at a meeting in Krakow, Poland.
The Baltic Council (comprising Estonia, Latvia and Lithuania, first formed in 1934 and revived in May 1990—see p. 37462) sought to develop economic ties with the Nordic Council (founded in the early 1950s and comprising Denmark, Finland, Iceland, Norway and Sweden).
At a meeting in Tallinn, Estonia, the three Baltic Prime Ministers requested assistance from the Nordic Council in the establishment of a Baltic investment bank.
Estonia, Latvia and Lithuania joined the Economic Commission for Europe (ECE) on joining the UN in September 1991 [see p. 38419; for Israeli accession in mid-1991 see p. 38367].
Eureka research programme
At a conference in The Hague, the Netherlands, on June 18-19, 1990, over 120 new European research projects were launched to mark the fifth anniversary of the Eureka programme.
This brought the total number of projects to 470 and total spending to ECU8,200 million.
Eureka was launched in 1985 and included companies from the 12 EC countries as well as from Austria, Finland, Iceland, Norway, Sweden, Switzerland and Turkey [see pp. 33935-36; 35215-16].
Delegates agreed to open Eureka's project database to east European companies and research institutes, although funding would, as in other countries, have to come from their own resources or from the governments (which had so far provided less than 30 per cent of funding).
Of the existing 2,800 companies and institutes involved in Eureka projects 20 came from central and eastern Europe.