

EUROPE
SOVIET UNION/CIS
End of Soviet Union — Formation of CIS — Resignation of Gorbachev
The Soviet Union was on Dec. 21 replaced by a Commonwealth of Independent States (CIS), grouping 11 of the former constituent republics of the Union (but not Georgia) in a loose alliance, without central governing bodies.
The CIS was formally established at a meeting in Alma Ata, when assurances were given to the world community that single control would be maintained over the nuclear weapons on former Soviet territory, and that the treaty obligations of the Soviet Union would be respected by the newly independent states.
The Russian Federation took over many of the functions of the former Union.
The President of the Soviet Union, Mikhail Gorbachev, resigned on Dec. 25, to praise from world leaders for his achievements over six years in office.
Some observers believed that the new formation should not be viewed as a permanent body, but rather as a means for the republics to escape the central power exercised by the Soviet Union.
Disputes between CIS members became apparent immediately, especially over economic issues, and control of armed forces.
Events prior to formation of CIS
The Soviet Union was declared defunct on Dec. 8, when the leaders of the Slav republics of Byelarus, Russia, and Ukraine met near Minsk (Byelarus).
The Presidents of Russia and Ukraine, Boris Yeltsin and Leonid Kravchuk, and the Chair of the Supreme Soviet of Byelarus, Stanislav Shushkevich, issued a statement: "The USSR, as a subject of international law and a geopolitical reality, ceases to exist." 
They announced that the new body which they had established, the Commonwealth of Independent States (Sodruzhestvo Nyezavisimikh Gosudarstv), was open to all republics of the former Soviet Union, and to any other state which shared its aims.
The meeting in Minsk was described as intended to prevent the splitting apart of the Slav republics in the conditions of the Soviet Union's disintegration.
It followed the approval on Dec. 4 by the USSR Soviet of the Union (the lower house) of the draft Union Treaty, under negotiation since the failed coup in August [see pp. 38368-73].
As in November, Gorbachev warned of disaster if such a treaty (now intended to form a "Union of Sovereign States" — see p. 38581) binding the republics of the Soviet Union and confirming the relationship between the centre and the republics were not signed.
However, the Treaty's successful conclusion appeared increasingly unlikely after Dec. 1, when Ukraine's wish for independence was confirmed by a nine-tenths majority in a referendum, and its Supreme Soviet had subsequently voted on Dec. 6 not to ratify any Union Treaty [see below].
A meeting between Yeltsin and Gorbachev on Dec. 5 had concluded that a Treaty would be meaningless without Ukraine's participation.
Gorbachev described the Minsk declaration as an "illegal and dangerous" constitutional coup.
He attempted to use the union structures to guide developments, calling on Dec. 9 for a Congress of Peoples' Deputies to be convened to discuss the Minsk agreement.
The Kazakhstan President, Nursultan Nazarbayev, was also initially unenthusiastic over the exclusively Slav composition of the Commonwealth, and at a meeting on Dec. 9 between Nazarbayev, Gorbachev and Yeltsin, who was acting as the envoy of the Commonwealth, he said that Gorbachev was still needed as a central force.
The leaders of Kazakhstan and the Central Asian republics (Kirgizstan (formerly Kirghizia), Tajikistan, Turkmenistan (formerly Turkmenia), and Uzbekistan), met in Askhabad in Turkmenistan on Dec. 12 to discuss their reaction to the Minsk declaration.
They decided to become members of the CIS provided they were given the status of its co-founders.
This meeting followed the ratification on Dec. 10 and 12 of the CIS declaration by the original signatories' Supreme Soviets.
The Ukrainian Supreme Soviet made amendments to reinforce the republic's status as an independent state, including measures to strengthen border guarantees, to have its own armed forces and to bear responsibility for minorities within its borders.
Nationalist deputies in Byelarus were also putting forward demands, including requests for a republican currency, a share of Union gold and currency, and control of armed forces on Byelarussian territory.
Alma Ata meeting establishing CIS
On Dec. 21, in Alma Ata (Kazakhstan), the leaders of the republics who had met in Minsk and Askhabad were joined by those of Moldova and the trans-Caucasian republics of Azerbaijan and Armenia.
Georgia, the only other former Soviet republic (bar the Baltic states, which had become independent in September — see pp. 38419-20), sent observers, but internal power struggles (including the attempt to depose the Georgian President, Zviad Gamsakhurdia), prevented Georgia's participation.
The participants in the meeting signed the Dec. 8 protocol on the formation of the CIS.
They signed a declaration which (i) stated that the CIS was open to all former Soviet states and any other countries which shared its objectives;(ii) stated that strategic forces would remain under unified control;(iii) confirmed co-operation on a single economic space; and (iv) stated that member states of the CIS undertook to honour the international obligations of the former Soviet Union.
(The USSR Constitutional Committee had confirmed on Dec. 12 that obligations conferred by the Soviet Union's signature of international treaties applied to the republics which had left the Union, whether ratified by them or not.)
The meeting supported Russia's request to take over the Soviet Union's seat on the UN Security Council, and Russia, Ukraine and Byelarus, already UN members, pledged to support other member states' applications for full UN membership.
A joint measure on nuclear arms was agreed [see below].
It was made clear that the CIS was not considered a state or even a supranational grouping, and would therefore have no citizenship.
Gorbachev was not invited to attend the Alma Ata meeting, but sent a letter setting out his views on the new developments.
He advocated a co-ordinating body in the new structures, to prevent the process of dismemberment which was under way in the country.
He suggested as a name "The Commonwealth of European and Asian States" (Sodruzhestvo Yevropeiskikh i Asiatskhikh Gosudarstv), and proposed joint citizenship for its population — of the Commonwealth and of the relevant constituent states.
He emphasized the need for single command of strategic forces and for a common foreign policy, with the Commonwealth being recognized as a subject in international law.
The letter concluded with a request for a final session of the USSR Supreme Soviet in order to hand over power constitutionally, because "it is gross discontinuities, destructive revolutions and usurpations in the course of social development which are one of the reasons for the historic misfortunes of our peoples" .
Prior to the Alma Ata meeting, Kazakhstan's President Nazarbayev had expressed his preference for the name "Eurasian Commonwealth of Independent States" for the new body.
He appeared to conceive the Commonwealth as a tighter union than was envisaged by the Slav republics, and the purpose of the Alma Ata meeting as negotiating the new structure rather than formally including new members, as its original founders had appeared to suggest.
Abolition of Union structures
On Dec. 19 Yeltsin issued three decrees bringing under Russian Federation control all the ministries of the former USSR on Russian territory, except for the Ministry of Defence and the Ministry of Atomic Power and Industry.
The USSR Ministry of External Relations, established in November from the old Foreign Ministry [see p. 38581], was abolished and its property transferred to the Russian Foreign Ministry.
Embassies abroad thus came under Russian rather than Soviet jurisdiction.
The Russian Ministry of Security and Internal Affairs was established, comprising the former USSR Ministry of Internal Affairs, the Russian Federal Security Agency and those bodies which, as approved by the USSR Soviet of the Republics on Dec. 3, had replaced the Committee for State Security (KGB), abolished in October [see p. 38537]: the Inter-Republican Security Service and the Foreign Intelligence Service.
Viktor Barannikov, USSR Interior Minister, was appointed head of the new Russian Ministry.
The Economic Directorate of the Russian President's Administration transferred to its budget the personnel and funds (including hard currency) of the Kremlin, the USSR President's Administration and the Interstate Economic Committee — IEC, which was set up in November [see p. 38581].
The head of the IEC, Ivan Silayev, was sent to Brussels, as Russia's permanent representative to the European Communities (EC).
On Dec. 28 the Russian Constitutional Court demanded the suspension of the decree forming the new Russian Ministry of Security and Internal Affairs until the court could rule on its constitutionality.
On Dec. 27 All-Union Television and Radio became the Ostankino Russian State Television and Radio Company.
Yegor Yakovlev remained as its head.
Yeltsin announced at the meeting in Minsk on Dec. 30 that the first channel of Central Television would be given over to the Commonwealth, the second would be Russian, the third would be Moscow Television and the fourth would be an educational channel.
On Dec. 26 a joint session of the Soviet of the Republics and the Soviet of the Union issued a declaration on their own abolition; a meeting of Dec. 12 had been inquorate, boycotted by Russian, Byelarussian and Ukrainian deputies.
At the Dec. 26 meeting the deputies also released from their duties as of Jan. 2, 1992, the staff of the USSR Supreme Court, the judges of the Supreme Court of Arbitration, and the USSR Procurators' Office.
Five hundred deputies called for a session of the Congress of People's Deputies to formalize the dissolution of the Soviet Union, but the call was not heeded.
On Dec. 23 the USSR Committee for the Supervision of the Constitution had dissolved itself.
The eight heads of government of the republics forming the economic community, formed on Oct. 18 [see p. 38537], had postponed indefinitely their meeting due to open on Dec. 18 because of "the uncertainty of the political situation" .
The meeting had been due to clarify agreements in the Economic Community, prior to ratification by the constituent republics' Supreme Soviets.
Viktor Gerashchenko, chair of Gosbank, the USSR State Bank, resigned on Dec. 26.
Gorbachev's resignation
After days of speculation about his future following the collapse of any central authority in the former Soviet Union and following a decision at the Dec. 21 Alma Ata meeting to abolish the post of President, Mikhail Gorbachev announced his resignation on Dec. 25 in a speech on All-Union Television.
In his resignation speech, Gorbachev asserted that although he had been in favour of "the independence and self-determination of peoples and the sovereignty of republics" , he had also believed in "preserving the union state and the country's integrity" .
He was therefore resigning on principle.
He reviewed the changes made during his period as Soviet leader saying that "a totalitarian system which deprived the country of an opportunity to become wealthy and prosperous a long time ago has been liquidated" , and he expressed his hopes for the future: "Some mistakes could probably have been avoided, much been done better, but I am sure that sooner or later our shared efforts will achieve results." 
Yeltsin had said at a press conference after the Alma Ata meeting that "we do not want to follow the tradition which has taken shape since 1917 of burying each [former]head and leader of the state and subsequently reburying him or regarding him as a criminal" .
He said that the republican leaders had discussed at the meeting financial and other support for Gorbachev "in the period after his resignation" , and he and Gorbachev had a long meeting on Dec. 23 to discuss transition arrangements.
Setting up of CIS bodies
At a meeting in Minsk on Dec. 30 the co-ordinating bodies of the new Commonwealth were discussed.
Temporary agreements were signed setting up councils of heads of state and of heads of government.
The supreme body was the Council of Heads of State, which would take on the responsibility of legal succession from the dissolution of the Soviet Union.
The councils would normally meet in Minsk, the Council of Heads of State at least every six and the Council of Heads of Government at least every three months; both would have a rotating chairmanship.
Joint sittings were allowed, as was the creation of working bodies.
While the working language would be Russian the official languages would be the state languages of the participating states.
Economic reform
There was no concrete proposal made at the meeting in Minsk on Dec. 30 to settle economic issues affecting the member states of the CIS.
A protocol was signed, however, preserving economic ties into the first quarter of 1992 and with the aim of guaranteeing over that period deliveries of the equivalent of 70 per cent of first quarter deliveries in 1991.
Military arrangements
On resigning as President on Dec. 25, Gorbachev also resigned as Commander-in-Chief of the Armed Forces; the nuclear codes were handed over to Yeltsin.
At the meeting in Minsk on Dec. 30 agreement was reached on strategic forces, whereby the CIS states undertook the former Soviet Union's obligations in international treaties, and pledged to pursue a co-ordinated policy in the areas of disarmament and international security.
Decisions on the use of nuclear weapons would be made by the President of the Russian Federation in consultation with the leaders of the other republics in which nuclear weapons were stationed — Ukraine, Byelarus and Kazakhstan — and with the leaders of other members of the CIS.
Byelarus and Ukraine had stated at the Dec. 21 meeting that they wished to sign the 1968 Nuclear Non-Proliferation Treaty.
Nuclear forces in Ukraine would be dismantled by the end of 1994 (including tactical nuclear weapons by July 1992).
It was also agreed that conventional armed forces would come under a single armed forces command, though leaving an option for CIS member states to control their own armed forces — this was in response to demands from Moldova, Ukraine and Azerbaijan.
I. Kalinichenko was appointed Commander-in-Chief of border troops.
Settlement of the issues of border troops and conventional forces would take place following discussions over the subsequent two months, although it was recognized in the protocols that Ukraine was creating its own armed forces as of Jan. 3, 1992.
The borders of the former Soviet Union were currently guarded by the Committee for the Protection of State Borders with Joint Command of Border Troops, which had taken over the KGB's responsibility for border troops, as approved by the Soviet of the Republics at its meeting on Dec. 3.
On Gorbachev's resignation from the post on Dec. 25, the Soviet Defence Minister, Marshal Yevgeny Shaposhnikov became Commander-in-Chief.
He was asked at the Dec. 30 meeting to continue for the two months while new structures were elaborated.
It was also agreed on Dec. 30 that space research would be carried out jointly by CIS member states.
Yeltsin announced to the Russian Supreme Soviet on Dec. 25 that all forces of the Russian Security and Internal Affairs Ministry were to be withdrawn from the Caucasus.
The troops of the former USSR Interior Ministry were already being withdrawn from the disputed Armenian enclave of Nagorny Karabakh in Azerbaijan [see also p. 38582].
Sub-units of the regular army would remain on the border between the two republics, but would not contain Armenian troops.
There were reports of intensified fighting in Nagorny Karabakh during the latter part of December.
Republican representatives had met in Moscow to discuss future military structures on Dec. 20.
Defence Minister Shaposhnikov was pressing for unified command with a supreme commander in charge of all strategic and conventional forces, which would allow little room for republican armies.
However, Ukrainian President Leonid Kravchuk had signed a decree on Dec. 12 appointing himself commander of the estimated 1,200,000 Soviet troops in Ukraine, and on Dec. 17, following a vote in the republican Supreme Soviet, Azerbaijan's President Ayaz Mutalibov declared himself Commander-in-Chief of the "non-strategic" military forces stationed in Azerbaijan.
Yeltsin and Gorbachev had held separate meetings with military commanders on Dec. 11, apparently in an attempt to ensure armed forces support for the new Commonwealth.
After the closed meeting, military sources reported that Yeltsin had informed them of 90 per cent pay rises which he had ordered the previous week.
Gorbachev had apparently asked for the military to support him as Commander-in-Chief.
Gen. Vladimir Lobov was replaced as Chief of General Staff on Dec. 7, on his return from a visit to the United Kingdom, by the Commander of the Leningrad military district, Col.-Gen.
Viktor Samsonov.
Lobov's "state of health" was cited as the reason [for his appointment in August see p. 38371].
Baker's visit — International recognition
The United States Secretary of State, James Baker, arrived in Moscow on Dec. 15 for a previously arranged visit.
In the context of the rapid disintegration of Soviet structures, he was pressed by the individual republics for recognition of their independent status by the USA, especially as, following the Dec. 8 Commonwealth declaration, Baker had announced that "the Soviet Union as we know it no longer exists" .
In Moscow Baker first held talks with Yeltsin together with the Soviet Defence and Interior Ministers Shaposhnikov and Barannikov, Gorbachev, the then Foreign Minister Eduard Shevardnadze, and Russian government leaders.
He travelled to meet the leaderships of Kazakhstan, Kirgizstan, Ukraine and Byelarus.
In response to his requests for assurances on the safety of control over nuclear weapons, he was told that nuclear weapons remained under single control and that disarmament was continuing according to plan.
However, doubt arose over whether Kazakhstan was prepared to give up the nuclear weapons on its territory, as it had earlier stated and as Yeltsin was assuring it would.
Baker travelled from the former Soviet Union on Dec. 19 to Brussels, where he reported to the meeting there of North Atlantic Treaty Organization (NATO) Defence Ministers.
Though assuring them that Kazakhstan, Byelarus and Ukraine had undertaken to give up their nuclear weapons, he also warned of the danger of social unrest in the former Soviet Union.
NATO ministers promised humanitarian aid, and drew up guidelines for recognising the independence of the former Soviet republics.
German Foreign Minister Hans-Dietrich Genscher, in the context of meetings both of NATO and of the EC, was demanding swift recognition to avoid the creation of "uncertainties" .
International recognition of the former constituent republics of the Soviet Union, and of Russia as its legal successor, followed swiftly after the Alma Ata agreement.
The USA gave diplomatic recognition to Russia together with Ukraine, Armenia, Kazakhstan, Byelarus and Kirgizstan on Dec. 26.
It also recognized the independence of the remaining republics, but diplomatic recognition would be dependent on their meeting conditions of human rights and democracy.
On Dec. 25 the EC published a communiqué in which it considered Russia to be "exercising the rights and international obligations of the former Soviet Union" .
The following day the EC recognized Ukraine and Armenia as independent states, as they had offered written acceptance of the EC criteria for recognition.
These included respect for human and minority rights, not altering borders by force and observation of the treaties signed by the Soviet Union.
The EC meeting at Maastricht [see pp. 38657-59]had broken off discussions on economic and political union to seek assurances of security following the Dec. 8 Minsk agreement.
Norway had become the first NATO member to establish diplomatic relations with Russia, following moves by Bulgaria and Hungary.
Japan recognized all CIS members on Dec. 28.
China, which had sharply criticized Gorbachev after his resignation for having caused "political chaos, ethnic strife and economic crisis" , nevertheless on Dec. 27 recognized as independent states the members of the CIS.
Canada, which had recognized Ukrainian independence on Dec. 2 [see below], announced the establishment of diplomatic links with Ukraine and Russia, and recognition of the other nine members of the CIS [for recognition of central Asian republics by Moslem states see below p. 38657].
The Soviet Union's representative at the UN, Yuli Vorontsev, became Russia's representative on Dec. 24, after delivering a letter from Yeltsin to the Secretary-General informing UN members that the Soviet Union would henceforth be represented by Russia.
Foreign debt
As agreed with the Group of Seven (G-7) industrialized countries in November [see p. 38581], Vneshekonombank (the Soviet bank for foreign economic affairs), which came under Russian control in December [see p. 38581], ceased principal repayments on the Soviet Union's foreign debt from Dec. 5.
Talks with creditor Western commercial banks, co-ordinated by Deutsche Bank AG, reached an agreement on Dec. 17 to allow the Soviet Union a three-month delay on principal payments of its debts to banks.
The Russian Deputy Prime Minister in charge of economic policy, Yegor Gaidar, declared on Dec. 16 that Vneshekonombank was bankrupt.
Seven of the original 15 Soviet republics reached a partial agreement on Dec. 5 to divide the Soviet debt.
The two largest creditor republics, Russia and Ukraine, would take 61.34 per cent and 16.37 per cent of the debt respectively.
The republics
Russia: economic reform — Yeltsin's visit to Italy — Threatened resignation of Popov
Russia's privatization programme was outlined at a press conference on Dec. 30 by Gaidar.
Rapid privatization was intended to mitigate the anticipated steep price rises after price liberalization on Jan. 2, by introducing competition in the conditions of mainly monopoly production.
No ceiling was to be set on prices, except for essentials such as milk, bread, transport, communications and fuel, whose rise in price would be controlled by the government.
The privatization programme envisaged a two-stage sale within 1992 of small and medium-sized enterprises, shops, trading companies and uncompleted construction projects.
The privatization process for state farms, land and housing had not yet been regulated.
Restrictions were placed on the sale of various amenities and resources.
Foreigners would be allowed to take part in the privatization on equal terms with Russian citizens, in an attempt to encourage hard-currency investment.
Workers would be given shares of up to a quarter of the total in their enterprise.
Other measures were announced which it was hoped would enable the Russian government to balance its budget in the first quarter of 1992.
These included a value added tax of 28 per cent, a 32 per cent profit tax, and a 45 per cent tax on the profits of commodity brokers.
Enterprises would be required to sell a portion of their hard-currency profits to Russia's State Bank at the artificially low commercial rate.
Defence orders would be cut to at least half the 1991 rates, and state investment would be reduced by seven- or eight-fold.
A price-indexed minimum income was assured to protect the unemployed.
However, there were warnings of cash-flow problems, and it was announced that by April 1992 a 1,000 rouble note would be in circulation.
A 500 rouble note would come into circulation in the near future.
The Russian Supreme Soviet, meeting on Dec. 25, heard Yeltsin's report on the new Commonwealth structure.
It voted by 137 votes to two, with 14 abstentions, to change the republic's name from the Russian Soviet Federated Socialist Republic (RSFSR) to The Russian Federation (Russia).
On Dec. 27 Vice-President Aleksandr Rutskoi was removed from the chairmanship of five state committees which were then transferred to the jurisdiction of the government.
This followed increasing criticism by Rutskoi of the Russian government, especially of its economic policy.
In an interview with the Nezavisimaya gazeta of Dec. 18 he had said "there is no governing power and no democracy in Russia" .
Yeltsin made an official visit to Italy on Dec. 19-20, signing with the Italian Prime Minister Giulio Andreotti a joint declaration establishing the basis for the two countries' relationship.
The major results of the visit were in the economic sphere, including a deal on the conversion of military plants to civilian production and the unfreezing of US$6,000 million of credits to the Soviet Union from Italy, of which 80 per cent would go to Russia.
Italy also granted immediate food aid to Russia worth US$1,500 million.
It was agreed that the Italian conglomerate FIAT would take a 30 per cent share in the Volga Automotive Plant Association factory (VAZ) at Togliattigrad, the largest car-making plant in Russia [for 1966 Italian-Soviet agreement to construct plant see pp. 21404; 21566].
The mayor of Moscow, Gavriil Popov, threatened to resign on Dec. 10 over differences with the Moscow city council and the Russian Supreme Soviet over his programme of economic reform, particularly the proposed speed of privatization of housing and businesses within the city.
He repeated his threat at the constituent congress of the Democratic Reform Movement (DRM — see p. 38347) on Dec. 15.
After a meeting with Yeltsin on Dec. 26 he withdrew the threat.
Ukraine: Independence referendum and presidential elections — Economy
On Dec. 1 Ukraine held a referendum on the independence of the republic, in parallel with republican presidential elections.
The result was an overwhelming majority in favour of an independent Ukraine, even in predominantly Russian areas, such as Crimea and the east of the republic.
The chair of the Supreme Soviet, Leonid Kravchuk, was elected President.
Official results put the turnout at 84 per cent, of which 90.32 per cent had voted affirmatively to the question "do you confirm the proclamation [made on Aug. 24 — see p. 38373]of Ukraine's independence?" .
Kravchuk gained 61.59 per cent of the votes, beating six other candidates, including the Ukrainian nationalist, Vyacheslav Chornovil, who came second with 23 per cent.
The independence referendum had provoked warnings from Gorbachev that it would lead to a breakup of the Union and hence disaster.
The Romanian Parliament had issued objections on Nov. 28 to the referendum's being held in those Ukrainian territories which between 1918 and 1940 had been part of Romania, namely Northern Bukovina and Bessarabia, but which had been ceded to Ukraine under the terms of the Molotov-Ribentropp pact.
In a statement issued on Dec. 3 the Russian government recognized the independence of Ukraine.
Among the first countries to recognize Ukraine as an independent state were the former Soviet republics of Estonia, Latvia and Lithuania, other eastern European countries, Croatia, and Canada (which had a large Ukrainian minority).
A fundamental shift in US policy towards the Soviet Union was noted by observers prior to the referendum in reports that the USA would be prepared to recognize an independent Ukraine, provided that US concerns over arms and human rights were met.
On Dec. 6 the Ukrainian parliament voted not to sign any Union Treaty with the Soviet Union, following a declaration made the previous day that the 1922 Treaty creating the Soviet Union, and any further Soviet constitutional treaties, were null and void in relation to Ukraine.
The parliament also gave a final reading to the bill creating republican armed forces [see p. 38538].
Russia's economic reform programme [see above]was causing friction between it and the other republics.
Ukraine planned to introduce its own circulating coupons for food and essential goods purchases if Russia failed to deliver extra roubles to safeguard Ukraine against the freeing of consumer prices in Russia from Jan. 2 (a measure already delayed by two weeks).
On Dec. 27, Ukraine's Supreme Soviet passed a measure freeing prices from Jan. 2, in connection with Russia's economic policy, and the Ukrainian government discussed on Dec. 30 the measures to be taken to implement distribution of coupons from Jan. 10, in order "to protect Ukraine's consumer market" .
Moldova: presidential elections — violence
The incumbent, Mircea Snegur, was elected President of Moldova in popular elections on Dec. 8.
Two candidates had withdrawn from the contest, leaving him as sole contender.
Official results put the turnout at 82.88 per cent, of which 98.17 per cent had voted for Snegur.
Moldova had declared independence from the Soviet Union in August 1991 [see p. 38373].
The Moldovan Popular Front, which had backed Snegur, a former communist, was split over the issue of unification with Romania.
Snegur favoured a gradual approach, but part of the Popular Front, demanding immediate action, was calling for a boycott of the presidential elections.
On Dec. 1 in Kishinev (the capital), a National Council of Reunification was established, consisting of 28 Moldovan and 37 Romanian parliamentarians.
The presidential elections were partially boycotted in the predominantly Russian area of the Dnestr region, which had held its own presidential elections on Dec. 1, together with a referendum on independence for the region.
Igor Smirnov had been elected "president" , and 98 per cent of the 78 per cent turnout reportedly had voted for independence.
In southern Moldova, an Orthodox Turkic-speaking area (Gagauz), 85.1 per cent of the population had taken part in a vote on Dec. 1 which gave a 95.4 per cent majority for independence.
Concurrently, Stepan Topol was elected "president" of the Gagauz region.
On Dec. 11 Moldovan republican leaders had declared these referendums illegal.
Violence broke out on Dec. 13, when shooting between Moldovan Interior Ministry troops and ethnic Russian militia reportedly left five people dead in the town of Dubossary.
The armed forces withdrew on Dec. 16, following a meeting between Snegur and Smirnov.
The Moldovan leadership had claimed that the Soviet Army in the republic was supplying arms to "extremist elements" in Russian areas, and on Dec. 7 it had appealed to the UN for action.
Kazakhstan: elections — Name change
Nursultan Nazarbayev was elected unopposed as President of Kazakhstan by popular mandate on Dec. 1.
98.76 per cent of those eligible to vote had supported Nazarbayev, with 1.4 per cent voting against, according to the Central Electoral Commission.
Yerik Asanbayev, Nazarbayev's nominee, became Vice-President.
Nazarbayev was sworn in at a session of the republican Supreme Soviet on Dec. 10, at which the republic dropped the words "soviet socialist" from its title to become the Republic of Kazakhstan.
Abdildin was elected chair of the Supreme Soviet.
On Dec. 16 the Supreme Soviet passed a law declaring Kazakhstan's independence, which was recognized by Russia on the following day.
Uzbekistan: presidential elections
On Dec. 29 presidential elections were held in Uzbekistan and won by the incumbent President, Islam Karimov, reportedly with 86 per cent of the vote.
Muhamad Salikh, chair of the ErK democratic party, gained 12 per cent.
The opposition movement, Birlik, was banned from taking part, as it was not officially constituted as a political party.
In parallel, a referendum on independence was held, in which 98.2 per cent of those taking part voted in favour.
Karimov had visited Turkey on Dec. 16-19 and signed co-operation agreements.
Autonomous republics
The autonomous republics of Mari-El, Mordova and Yakutia, situated within the Russian Federation, held presidential elections during December.
These popular elections replaced the parliamentary election of the chair of the Supreme Soviet (hitherto de facto president).
In Mari-El, the incumbent, Vladislav Zotin, was elected on Dec. 15 by 59 per cent in the second round of voting, beating one other candidate.
In Mordova on Dec. 22 the Democratic Russia candidate, Vasily Guslyannikov, defeated the incumbent, Nikolai Biryukov.In Yakutia, the incumbent, Mikhail Nikolayev took over 70 per cent of the vote on Dec. 22.
On Dec. 28, Nagorny Karabakh (an autonomous region within Azerbaijan) held elections to a parliament, after proclaiming itself a republic.
Nagorny Karabakh demanded membership of the CIS, it was announced on Dec. 17.
[See also p. 38582.]
Tatarstan's Supreme Soviet also declared on Dec. 28 that the autonomous republic was joining the CIS with the status of co-founder.
The Supreme Soviet of South Ossetia (an autonomous region within Georgia) declared the region independent on Dec. 21, and confirmed the resolution on unification with Russia.
It also voted to establish a republican defence committee.
Visit by Iranian Foreign Minister to Central Asia — Moslem states' recognition of Central Asian republics
The Iranian Foreign Minister, Ali Akbar Vellayati, arrived in Moscow on Dec. 24 for a 10-day visit to the Moslem republics of the Soviet Union.
After talks in Moscow with Gorbachev, Yeltsin and Shevardnadze, Vellayati visited the republics of Kazkahstan, Kirgizstan, Tajikistan, Turkmenistan, Uzbekistan and Azerbaijan.
Memorandums of understanding were signed with all the republics, bar Uzbekistan, with which a document was to be signed at a later date.
The agreements mainly covered transport and communication links, including an agreement to link the autonomous republic of Nakhichevan with Azerbaijan through Iranian territory (Nakhichevan was separated from Azerbaijan within the CIS by Armenian territory).
Vellayati said that Iran's relations with the republics would be formulated "through Moscow" ; observers noted a rivalry for influence in the area between Iran and Turkey.
On Dec. 16 Turkey decided to recognize all the newly independent Soviet republics.
On Dec. 21, Afghanistan had recognized the independence of all the Moslem republics.
Pakistan, which had a short time before recognized Azerbaijan's independence, recognized the independence of the Central Asian republics and of the Russian Federation on Dec. 20, following a three-week visit to the Soviet Union by the Minister of State for the Economy which ended on Dec. 18.
EUROPE
EUROPEAN COMMUNITIES
Maastricht summit
The heads of state and government of the European Communities (EC) held a summit meeting in Maastricht, the Netherlands, on Dec. 9-10, to conclude the year-long parallel intergovernmental conferences on European political union (EPU) and economic and monetary union (EMU) which had opened in Rome in December 1990 [see p. 37905-06].
The 12 member country heads of government attending the Maastricht meeting had all been at the Rome summit and at Luxembourg in June 1991 [see pp. 38295-97].
The Maastricht summit ended with agreement early on Dec. 11 on a treaty framework for European union, incorporating the EPU and EMU agreements and setting a timetable for their implementation, and providing for a new security/defence dimension to EC co-operation.
At one stage these key agreements appeared jeopardized by the intransigence of the United Kingdom government over the inclusion of social policy in the union treaty.
However, early on Dec. 11, in what was described by the Financial Times of Dec. 12 as an "astonishing compromise" , EC leaders agreed that the entire chapter on social policy should be removed from the union treaty.
This tactic, described by the Dutch government as "positive opting out" by the Eleven, effectively left the decision on the social policy chapter as an intergovernmental accord to implement the 1989 Social Charter using EC institutions and machinery (as with the Schengen agreement on border controls — see pp. 38505; 38297).
A UK government official declared on Dec. 11: "If they decide to do something that we regard as excellent, we will do it too, if they so something terribly damaging, we will choose not to do it." 
The Eleven agreed to proceed by qualified majority vote on health and safety, working conditions, information and consultation of workers, equality at work between men and women, and integration of persons excluded from the labour market.
A unanimous vote would be necessary on social security and social protection of workers, protection of workers made redundant, representation, collective defence of workers and employers, conditions of employment for third-country nationals, and financial contributions for promoting jobs.
Pay, the right of association, the right to strike or the right to impose lockouts were not covered by the social agreement.
The German Federal Chancellor Helmut Kohl declared at the summit: "What we are doing now is irrevocable.
On the way to political union we are now crossing the Rubicon.
There is no going back."
Italian Foreign Minister Gianni De Michelis described the union treaty as a "victory for Europe" and "the most significant change in Europe since the adoption of the Treaty of Rome" (establishing the European Economic Community in 1957).
Acting Belgian Prime Minister Wilfried Martens said that the summit had produced "a concrete result" but that he had "other hopes for Europe" .
Political union
The text on political union as approved by EC leaders dropped from its preamble the word "federal" , used in earlier drafts including the most recent Dutch draft of Nov. 11.
The preamble instead described the treaty as marking "a new stage in the process of creating an ever closer union among the peoples of Europe" .
The principle of subsidiarity, whereby decisions were taken at as low a level as was feasible, was stressed.
A new article in the treaty declared that the EC would act "only if and in so far as the objectives of the proposed action cannot be sufficiently achieved by the member states" .
Speaking to the European Parliament (EP) after the summit Ruud Lubbers, Prime Minister of the Netherlands, said that the word federal had been dropped because it meant different things to different people.
The treaty on political union introduced new areas of EC competence, including the concept of "union citizenship" , and increased the powers of the EP.
However, common policies on foreign and security policy and on judicial affairs [see below]were to form separate "pillars" standing outside the normal EC decision-making machinery [see also pp. 38295-96].
The dangers of such intergovernmental co-operation were highlighted by Jacques Delors, President of the EC Commission, in a speech to the EP on Nov. 20.
He warned that "there is not one example of a grouping of nations which has survived on the basis of intergovernmental co-operation" .
He described a situation where external economic relations were managed by the EC and where foreign policy was controlled by member governments as leading to "organized schizophrenia" .
Economic and monetary union
The Maastricht agreement broadly followed the revised draft EMU treaty presented in late October [see pp. 38543-44].
The second stage of EMU, involving the creation of a European Monetary Institute (the precursor to the full European Central Bank), was to start on Jan. 1, 1994.
The European Council would decide by Dec. 31, 1996, whether the economies of a majority of states (seven of the 12 or six if the UK decided to opt out of stage three) met four key criteria.
If this were so then the European Council could decide by a qualified majority when to start stage three.
If no date had been fixed by the end of 1997 than the European System of Central Banks had to be established by July 1, 1998, and stage three would begin by Jan. 1, 1999, at the latest.
The four key criteria on economic convergence were (i) that inflation should be no more than 1.5 per cent above the average of the three best-performing member countries;(ii) that the government deficit should not exceed 3 per cent of gross domestic product (GDP) and the public debt should not exceed 60 per cent of GDP;(iii) that the currency should have remained within the 2.25 per cent fluctuation margins in the European Monetary System for at least two years; and (iv) that interest rates should not be more than 2 percentage points above the three best-performing states over the previous 12 months.
A special protocol allowed the UK to "opt out" of stage three rather than being locked into the process at this stage.
This clause, also proposed in October, had been the subject of a heated House of Commons debate on Nov. 20-21.
The motion, eventually approved by a clear majority of 101 votes, declared that it was "in Britain's interests to be at the heart of the European Community" but called on the UK government at Maastricht to pursue a policy which would avoid "the development of a federal Europe" and enable it "to exert the greatest influence on the economic evolution of the community while preserving the right of parliament to decide at a future date whether to adopt a single currency" .
During November former Prime Minister Margaret Thatcher had repeatedly called for a referendum before the UK agreed to join moves to introduce a single currency, and the debate further highlighted the divisions within the Conservative Party in its approach to Europe, although Thatcher after the summit reportedly professed herself to be impressed by Major's performance there.
Foreign and security policy
Opening provisions of the Treaty on European Union stated that the Union should assert its identity on the international scene "through the implementation of a common foreign and security policy which shall include the eventual framing of a common defence policy" .
General guidelines would be given by the European Council; the Council of Ministers would take such decisions unanimously but define matters where a qualified majority could be used.
The Western European Union (WEU) would become "the defence component of the Union" .
WEU Foreign Ministers, meeting in the margins of the summit, adopted a declaration which included commitments to (i) elaborate and implement decision and actions of the Union with defence implications;(ii) invite EC countries not then WEU members (i.e. Denmark and Greece — which were NATO members — and neutral Ireland) to join; and (iii) move the WEU headquarters from London to Brussels.
(At this time the EC was attempting to co-ordinate its position on the recognition of Croatia and Slovenia — see p. 38685 — and on Dec. 9 more than 10,000 people, primarily of Croat origin, held a rally in a Maastricht stadium calling on EC leaders to recognize Croatia.)
Judicial and home affairs
Judicial and home affairs co-operation (an intergovernmental pillar of the union treaty) was to cover asylum policy, the crossing of EC external borders, immigration policy, combating drug addiction, combating fraud, judicial co-operation in civil and criminal matters, and customs and police co-operation.
Regional issues
The union treaty also provided for the creation of a cohesion fund by Dec. 31, 1993, to finance environmental and transport infrastructure projects in member countries with a per capita GDP which was less than 90 per cent of the EC average.
A Committee of the Regions comprising representatives of regional and local authorities was also to be established; it would have 189 members, ranging from 24 for each of the larger member countries to six for Luxembourg.
Implementation of the treaty
The treaty was scheduled to be signed in February 1992, after which it would require ratification by the 12 national parliaments.
The European Parliament (EP) was only empowered to issue an opinion on them but
As regards the ratification process, both the Italian and Belgian parliaments had declared that their said that their vote would take account of the (non-binding) opinion of the European Parliament.
The vote of the Danish Folketing (unicameral parliament), as was made clear after its debate on Dec. 5, would be subject to confirmation in two referendums, as provided for in the Danish Constitution for matters affecting national sovereignty.
The first of these (on political union) was to be held during 1992 and the second, on monetary union, in 1996-97; a protocol to the treaty allowed for this Danish referendum before Denmark could be required to participate in stage three of EMU.
A referendum was also possible in Ireland.
monetary union.
June 1992: Lisbon summit to agree on future financing of EC.
Jan. 1, 1993: Single internal market due to be implemented.
Early 1993: Earliest likely date for start of negotiations with applicants for EC membership.
End 1993: Governments to decide unanimously whether to deal with asylum policy as a Community issue.
Jan. 1, 1994: Start of second stage of EMU including establishment of European Monetary Institute.
June 1994: Elections to EP.
1996: Intergovernmental conference to review foreign policy and defence.
Dec. 31, 1996: Deadline for decision on whether and when to move to stage three of EMU, if a majority of countries had achieved sufficient convergence of their economies; deadline for UK to notify the EC if it intends moving to stage three of EMU.
July 1, 1998: European Central Bank and European System of Central Banks to be set up if not already established.
1998: Expiry of Brussels Treaty establishing WEU.
Jan. 1, 1999: Latest date by which stage three of EMU to start and single currency to be introduced.
Timetable to European Union March 1992: Signature of treaties on political and economic and
Conclusions of the presidency
Extracts from the conclusions of the presidency are given below.
"Treaty on European union.
The intergovernmental conferences on political union and economic and monetary union, meeting at the level of heads of state and government, reached agreement on the draft treaty on European union based on the texts concerning political union and on the draft treaty text concerning economic and monetary union…
"The European Council notes that 11 member states desire to continue on the path laid down by the Social Charter in 1989 [see p. 37132].
To this end it has been agreed to annex to the Treaty a protocol concerning social policy which will commit the institutions of the Community to take and implement the necessary decisions while adapting the decision-making procedures for application by 11 member states.
"Enlargement.
The European Council recalls that the treaty on European union which the heads of state and government have now agreed, provides that any European state whose systems of government are founded on the principle of democracy may apply to become members of the Union.
"…
Negotiations on accession to the European Union on the basis of the treaty now agreed can start as soon as the Community has terminated its negotiations on own resources and related issues in 1992.
"Uruguay round.
The European Council notes that the trade liberalization negotiations have entered a conclusive stage.
It has been informed about the progress of the negotiations, both in Geneva as well as in the Transatlantic Summit, at The Hague on Nov. 9, 1991 [see pp. 38601-02].
"The European Council reiterates its firm commitment to a substantial, balanced and global package of results of the Uruguay Round by the end of the year…
Justice and home affairs.
On Free movement of persons, immigration and asylum the European Council "noted the reports on immigration and asylum drawn up…by the ministers responsible…[and]agreed on the programme of work and the timetables laid down" .
It "took note of" , and approved the recommendations in, the report by the Co-ordinators' Group on Free Movement of Persons.
"Europol.
The European Council agreed on the creation of a European police office (Europol), the initial function of which would be to organize the exchange of information on narcotic drugs at the level of the Community's 12 member states…
"Drugs.
The European Council took note of the report by the European Committee on the Fight Against Drugs.
It invited the institutions of the European Community to employ all means to ensure that the act setting up the European anti-drug monitoring body could be adopted before June 30, 1992.
 "In the context of the widest possible information on drug problems the European Council supported the organization, during the second half of 1992, of a European week to promote the prevention of drug use…" 
On foreign policy issues the European Council "expressed its preoccupation with the critical food supply situation in Moscow and St Petersburg" and agreed to "take concrete rapid steps to help the populations of these cities" .
On the Soviet Union, the European Council underlined "the necessity for a constructive dialogue among all parties concerned to ensure that the process of transformation of the Soviet Union, which has entered a crucial phase, continues in a peaceful, democratic and orderly manner" .
It welcomed "the fact that the three republics [Byelarus, Ukraine and Russia which had decided on Dec. 8 to form a commonwealth of independent states]engaged in this comprehensive process of change have declared that they mutually recognize and respect each other 's territorial integrity and the inviolability of the borders existing in the context of their Commonwealth" .
It also welcomed these republics' affirmation of "their readiness to respect the international commitments of the Soviet Union and to ensure single control of nuclear weapons on their territory" [see p. 38655].
The European Council declared that "at a moment when these Republics express democratically and peacefully their will to accede to full sovereignty, the Community and its member states wish to open with them, in a spirit of co-operation, a dialogue regarding the development of their mutual relationship" .
A declaration on the peace process in the Middle East attached "great significance to the Middle East peace conference in Madrid [see pp. 38594-95]" , which "should lead to a just and comprehensive solution to the Arab-Israeli conflict and the Palestinian question" .
It was "of vital importance that the momentum gained at Madrid is not dissipated on procedural matters" .
 "A halt to Israel's settlement activity in the Occupied Territories [was]an essential contribution to creating the stable environment which progress in the negotiations requires" , as was "renunciation of the Arab trade boycott" .
A declaration on racism and xenophobia noted "with concern that manifestations of racism and xenophobia are steadily growing in Europe, both in the member states of the Community and elsewhere" .
The European Council "considers it necessary that the governments and parliaments of the member states should act clearly and unambiguously to counter the growth of sentiments and manifestations of racism and xenophobia." 
Ministers and the Commission were asked "to increase their efforts to combat discrimination and xenophobia, and to strengthen the legal protection for third country nationals…" 
The European Council took "a most serious view of accusations against Libyan nationals" in connection with the 1988 and 1989 Lockerbie and UTI airliner bombings [see p. 38692]and noted and fully endorsed "the demands made of the Libyan authorities by the governments of France, the UK and the United States on Nov. 27" [see p. 38599].
ASIA — PACIFIC
NORTH-SOUTH KOREA
Signing of non-aggression accord — Mutual renunciation of nuclear weapons
The relations between North and South Korea improved more spectacularly during December than at any time since the Korean War with the signing of a historic non-aggression accord, and the negotiation of an agreement banning nuclear weapons from the Korean peninsula.
Although the two Korean states remained technically in a state of war (the hostilities having been ended in 1953 by an armistice but not a peace treaty), many commentators felt that the December agreements laid a realistic foundation for the negotiation of a full peace treaty.
Signing of Non-aggression accord
The accord, formally entitled the "Agreement on Reconciliation, Non-aggression, and Exchanges and Co-operation between the South and the North" , was signed on Dec. 13, by South Korean Prime Minister Chung Won Shik and his Northern counterpart Yon Hyong Muk.
It followed two days of intensive talks at the fifth round of inter-Korean Premiers' talks which had opened in Seoul on Dec. 10 [for fourth round see pp. 38529-30].
The accord contained 25 articles arranged under the three sub-headings listed below:
North-South reconciliation.
Each state agreed to recognise and respect the other, including their respective political and social systems.
Each pledged to desist from slander, vilification and acts of sabotage.
Both countries agreed to work towards a peace treaty to replace the 1953 armistice agreement [for which see pp. 13077-79].
It was also agreed to establish a North-South Liaison Office at the neutral village of Panmunjom (within the Demilitarized Zone separating the two states) within three months.
North-South non-aggression.
Both countries committed themselves not to attack or invade the other, and to resolve disputes through a process of dialogue.
It was agreed to create a joint military committee and to establish a direct telephone "hotline" between the two military commands.
Amongst the confidence-building measures to be discussed and promoted by the joint committee were the exchange of military information, prior notification of major troop movements, and arms reduction, including the removal of weapons of mass destruction.
North-South Co-operation and Exchange.
Both sides agreed to encourage economic discussion, including the joint development of resources, and participation in joint industrial and commercial ventures.
It was agreed to exchange information in various fields including science, culture, news and sport.
Both sides undertook to promote reunification measures including allowing inter-Korean travel, postal and telecommunications contacts.
Agreement to prohibit nuclear weapons from Korean peninsula
The main omission from the non-aggression accord concerned the issue of nuclear weapons.
Although these were obliquely referred to under the article dealing with confidence-building measures, the longstanding Northern demand that the South renounce the US nuclear weapons based on its soil was not addressed, nor was the more recent Western demand that North Korea allow international inspection of its nuclear facilities.
Shortly before signing the non-aggression accord, however, the two sides announced that they would hold a meeting at Panmunjom on Dec. 26, in order to discus the issue of nuclear weapons within the Korean peninsula.
The climate for an agreement on nuclear weapons had been improved by developments in the three months prior to December [see p. 38576].
US President George Bush had authorized the removal of US nuclear artillery shells and bombs in late September and mid-October respectively, although the timing of the withdrawal remained unclear.
This was followed by an announcement on Nov. 8 from South Korean President Roh Tae Woo renouncing the manufacture, possession, and use of nuclear or chemical weapons.
Roh called on North Korea to follow a similar course.
Pressure on North Korea was increased when it was announced in mid-November that concern over the North's nuclear programme was such that the ongoing process of the reduction of US troops based in South Korea was to be halted indefinitely.
On Nov. 25 the North Korean government declared that it would sign an agreement permitting international inspection of its nuclear facilities once the US had began withdrawing its nuclear weapons.
(Although North Korea had signed the Nuclear Non-Proliferation Treaty in 1985 — see p. 34269 —, it had failed in its obligation to sign an inspection accord within the following 18 months.)
Prime Minister Chung announced on Dec. 11 that all US atomic weapons had been removed from South Korean soil, and offered to open US military bases to inspection by the North on condition that the North permitted simultaneous inspection of its own nuclear facilities.
Following the signing of the non-aggression accord, President Roh stated in a televised speech that "there do not exist any nuclear weapons whatsoever anywhere in the Republic of Korea" .
He called upon the North to close its nuclear reprocessing and enrichment facilities and to submit its nuclear programme to international inspection.
The Panmunjom talks began on Dec. 26, and on Dec. 31 the two sides agreed a six-article document which was due to be signed by the Prime Ministers of North and South on Jan. 20, and to become effective from Feb. 18, 1992.
Under the terms of the agreement both countries committed themselves not to "test, manufacture, produce, accept, possess, store, deploy or use nuclear weapons" .
Both also banned the development of nuclear reprocessing and uranium enrichment facilities.
A joint committee was empowered to draw up a plan for mutual inspections.
Rumours of forthcoming Presidential summit — Appointment of Kim's son as supreme commander of army
During the fifth Premiers' talks there were strong rumours that arrangements had been discussed for a summit meeting between President Roh and his veteran North Korean counterpart, Kim Il Sung, early in 1992.
The rumours were reinforced in mid-December when Roh suggested that, as "a basic framework on inter-Korean relations had been set" , then "summit talks will be held earlier than had been expected" .
Evidence of the North Korean leader's continuing process of grooming his son, Kim Jong Il as successor, was also reinforced in December.
A plenary session of the central committee of the ruling Korean Workers' Party chaired by the elder Kim, on Dec. 24, elected Kim Jong Il to replace his father as Supreme Commander of the Korean People's Army.
AFRICA
ETHIOPIA
Decrees on regions and armed forces
Three decrees to establish (i) a system of local administration;(ii) defence and police forces; and (iii) conditions favourable for local elections (principally dealing with disarming of groups and individuals) were approved in draft form by the Council of Representatives on Dec. 6 and published on Dec. 7, 10 and 11.
A lengthy statement by the Council of Representatives on Dec. 13 explained how the flexibility allowed by the new system of local government might accommodate the complexity of relationships between ethnic and linguistic groups.
The country was to be divided into 14 "zones" or "regions" , with the towns of Addis Ababa and Harar each constituting one region.
In each region (with the exception of the two towns) up to 13 different "nationalities" were recognized.
Most of these were accorded the right to establish elected "national local administrations" for self-government, or to join with neighbouring nationalities to do this.
Central government would retain control of defence, foreign relations, economic policy and other specified fields.
In the event of armed conflicts between different nationalities, the national army "can act independently as mediator to ease the dispute even without being asked to do so by the administrations concerned" .
Organizations which were represented on the Council of Representatives and which had "armies" could apply to have their armed forces officially registered.
The soldiers would then be housed in barracks and funded by central government.
Resignation of Finance Minister — Economic programme for transitional period
The Finance Minister, Wolde Mariam Girma, was granted permission to resign on Dec. 3.
Alemayehu Daba became acting Finance Minister.
At a seminar on Nov. 11 Girma had told Finance Ministry officials that the extremely dark outlook for the Ethiopian economy, and the very large number of unemployed and displaced people facing starvation, made necessary an urgent improvement in tax collection mechanisms.
Government revenues for the financial year ending in November 1991 had shown a considerable reduction compared with the previous financial year.
Copies of the transitional government's broad economic programme, which had been under discussion by the Council of Representatives in October and November, became freely available to the public in early December.
Private, local and foreign investment in industry was to be encouraged.
The mining, energy, chemical and major metallurgical industries would remain under state control, although the possibility of joint ventures was contemplated.
The state would retain control of food imports, of major exports such as coffee and of the air, shipping and rail services.
Land would remain state-owned and might not be bought or sold, but inheritance rights over land would be guaranteed and peasants would be free to set their own prices for their produce.
Food and financial aid
On Dec. 17 Simon Mechale, the commissioner heading the government's Relief and Rehabilitation Commission, told representatives in Addis Ababa of UN agencies and donor countries that 1,280,000 tonnes of emergency food relief would be needed in 1992 to feed some 7,400,000 people.
Mechale said that civil conflict, drought and seed shortages had contributed to the poor harvests in 1991.
On Dec. 20 the UN's World Food Programme (WFP) announced from Rome that emergency food aid worth US$47,000,000 would shortly be sent to the Horn of Africa.
Priority would be given to the needs of Ethiopian and Somali refugees.
The World Bank had opened relations with the transitional government on Sept. 18, and on Nov. 29 the bank's representative in Addis Ababa, James Goering, had announced that Ethiopia was to receive US$500,000,000 in emergency funding.
Half of the sum would go towards the productive sector and the rest towards education, health and the repair of water supply systems.
In early October the UN Development Programme had announced that its assistance to Ethiopia, scheduled to end in December 1991, would be extended, and the United States announced an end to its freeze on economic aid to Ethiopia.
By mid-December Japan had allocated about US$5,300,000 of aid to be directed towards food production and the rehabilitation of ex-servicemen and war victims.
AFRICA
DJIBOUTI
Killings in Djibouti town — Arrest of FRUD representative
The authorities initially reported five people killed (including three policemen) and 26 wounded in an incident in Arhiba, a predominantly Afar district of the capital, in the early hours of Dec. 18.
Subsequent reports mentioned 30-40 people killed and 84 injured.
The government said that the deaths had occurred as paramilitary gendarmes were checking identity papers.
However, an Afar member of the Chamber of Deputies, Mohammed Issa Cheicko, claimed on Dec. 18 that 26 men and four women had been killed after police fired indiscriminately into a group of about 100 people whom they had arrested.
Some claimed that the operation had been a reprisal for losses suffered two days earlier by the army at the hands of guerrillas of the Front for the Restoration of Unity and Democracy (FRUD), as fighting continued around the government-held towns of Tadjoura and Obock; a five-day ceasefire, announced by the FRUD on Dec. 15 to allow for the deployment of French troops [see p. 38565], had collapsed the following day.
A spokesperson for the FRUD and former Minister of Health, Abbate Ebo Adou, had been arrested in Djibouti town on Dec. 17.
A member of the political bureau of the ruling Popular Rally for Progress (RPP), Mohammed Adabo Kabo, was dismissed on Dec. 23 after protesting at the killings, which had also prompted (on Dec. 18) an expression of "severe condemnation" from the French Foreign Ministry.
Declarations on democratization
On Dec. 19 President Hassan Gouled Aptidon referred to his Nov. 27 statement on democratization and declared that reform in accordance with "democracy, pluralism or multiparty politics" was possible.
Such reform would have to be approved by the Djiboutian people in a referendum to be held once the "armed bands operating in the north" had been "chased off national territory" .
On Dec. 30 the Foreign Minister, Moumin Bahdon Farah, said that legislative elections would be held in May 1992.
The French Minister-Delegate for Foreign Affairs, Alain Vivien, who had visited Djibouti on Dec. 26-28, was understood to have pressed for further progress towards a multiparty system.
Resignation of deputies
Seventeen Afar deputies walked out of the Chamber of Deputies on Dec. 23 and demanded talks between the government and the armed opposition.
Earlier in the month deputies had protested against reported killings and mistreatment of nomads by the army near Tadjoura.
Fourteen Afar deputies resigned from the RPP on Dec. 31, having criticized government leaders for "placing the defence of their privileges above the defence of the interests of the Djiboutian nation" and for continuing to insist that FRUD fighters were foreigners, not Djiboutian nationals.
AFRICA
SOMALIA
Heavy casualties in fighting
By the end of December up to 4,000 people had been killed and about 20,000 wounded in the chaotic fighting in Mogadishu which had continued, with only occasional interruptions, since Nov. 16.
Some 100,000 civilians had fled the city.
Somali elders and others had failed in their attempts to broker a ceasefire between forces supporting interim President Ali Mahdi Mohammed and those supporting Gen. Mohammed Farah Aydid.
Farah Aydid told a United States journalist in early December that it was his aim to "capture Mahdi" , whom he described in an International Herald Tribune report of Dec. 10 as more corrupt and dictatorial than former President Siyad Barre.
Teenagers under the influence of the locally produced khat narcotic plant were said to be responsible for much of the artillery fire.
Although there was no hospital in the northern part of the town, where forces loyal to Mahdi Mohammed were concentrated, a surgical team sent by the International Committee of the Red Cross (ICRC) began operating there in the first week of December.
A ship containing 800 tonnes of food, fuel and medicines sent by the ICRC had been waiting off Mogadishu's docks, unable to unload, since early November.
Some 45 relief workers were the only foreigners remaining in the city, and the UN had had no representation in Mogadishu for some months.
Appeals for an end to the fighting were made on Dec. 15 and 19 by Ahmed Esmat Abdel Meguid, the Arab League Secretary-General, by Salim Ahmed Salim, the OAU Secretary-General, on Dec. 17, and by UN Secretary-General Javier Pérez de Cuéllar on Dec. 28.
On Dec. 31 Salim announced that he had met with various Somali representatives in Addis Ababa, Djibouti and Nairobi.
AFRICA
KENYA
Moves to multiparty democracy — Cabinet changes
A special conference of the ruling Kenya African National Union (KANU) on Dec. 3 unanimously endorsed a proposal made by President Daniel arap Moi to repeal Section 2A of the Constitution, which stipulated that KANU was the only legal political party.
Enabling legislation was passed by the National Assembly on Dec. 10 and on Dec. 20 the amended Constitution recognizing the multiparty system came into effect.
Moi, who on Nov. 29 had said that "multipartyism is a luxury in Africa" , warned that although the number of parties would not be limited, tribal-based parties would not be registered, nor would any party be allowed to accept foreign funding.
Although Moi claimed that his decision to end single party rule was not due to external pressure, on Dec. 1 a statement from the United States embassy in Nairobi had made it clear that Kenya would not benefit fully from US aid unless the government curbed corruption and liberalized the political system.
The embassy said that US$28,000,000 of funds earmarked for the country for 1992 would be withheld until Kenya made political and economic changes [see p. 38563 for World Bank decision to withhold aid].
Establishment of opposition parties
The reintroduction of multiparty politics threw the opposition into a certain amount of disarray.
Within two days of the KANU conference decision the Forum for the Restoration of Democracy (FORD), a leading opposition group, appeared to have split, although on Dec. 31 FORD registered itself, with Martin Shikuku as its interim secretary-general and Oginga Odinga as its interim chair.
By Dec. 20 at least 16 political parties had been launched including a group calling itself FORD "A" .
Moi gave no indication of the date of a general election, but there was general expectation that polls would be held in the first half of 1992.
Opposition figures expressed concern that this timescale would not give newly emerging political parties sufficient time to establish themselves.
Odinga said on Dec. 18 that FORD needed at least six months to organize itself.
According to press reports on Dec. 15 the Most Rev. Manasses Kuria, the Archbishop of Kenya and Bishop of Nairobi, who was head of the Church of the Province of Kenya, warned KANU against calling a snap election aimed at taking advantage of the opposition.
He also reportedly called for the UN and the Commonwealth to send teams to observe the election process.
On Dec. 16, Joseph Kamotho, secretary-general of KANU, said that international observers would not be invited to forthcoming elections.
Cabinet changes
On Dec. 23 President Moi dismissed Peter Oloo Aringo, the recently appointed Minister of Manpower Development.
The move came as more than 50 KANU officials and members resigned to join FORD.
Until his removal Aringo had spearheaded a campaign to reform the party, calling for fresh grassroots elections, the adoption of secret balloting and for opposition parties to be given time to organize properly.
On Dec. 29 Aringo resigned as national chairman of KANU and from the party itself.
He called on Moi to resign and said that he intended to join FORD.
Aringo's departure from the government was followed by several ministerial resignations, most notably that of Mwai Kibaki, who resigned as Minister of Health on Dec. 26.
Kibaki was widely regarded as one of the most powerful government members; he had been in the Cabinet for over 20 years and had been Vice-President until 1988.
Other ministers to resign were Geoffrey Kariithi (Assistant Minister for Tourism and Wildlife) on Dec. 27; John Gachui (Assistant Agriculture Minister) on Dec. 28; and George Muhoho (Minister for Research, Science and Technology) and James Njema Karume (Assistant Minister for Co-operative Development) on Dec. 29.
The ministers gave as reasons for their resignations election rigging, mismanagement of the economy and an alleged cover-up of the murder in February 1990 of Foreign Minister Robert Ouko [see p. 37239].
On Dec. 29 Kibaki, together with John Keen, a former Assistant in the Office of the President, and Eliud Mwamunga, who had been dismissed as Minister of Works, Housing and Physical Planning in 1988 [see p. 36136]announced the launch on Jan. 2 of the Democratic Party.
Ouko trial
On Dec. 10 Jonah Anguka, a district commissioner, was charged with the murder of Foreign Minister Ouko.
Kiprono Nicholas K. Biwott, dismissed in November as Minister of Industry, and Hezekiah Oyugi, dismissed in October as Permanent Secretary in the Office of the President and chief of state security, were released on the same day because of lack of evidence.
The two had been arrested on Nov. 26 after being named as chief suspects in the investigation [see p. 38563].
IMF loan delay
On Dec. 23 the International Monetary Fund (IMF) announced that it was delaying disbursement of SDR45,230,000 (about US$64,675,000), the second instalment under its enhanced structural adjustment facility (ESAF), pending further discussion with the government about economic performance targets.
AFRICA
RWANDA
New government
On Dec. 30 Sylvestre Nsanzimana, appointed Prime Minister in October [see p. 38520], named a new transitional government.
Ministers were selected mainly from the ruling National Republican Movement for Democracy and Development (MRND — until June 1991 the National Revolutionary Movement for Development), with one from the Christian Democratic Party (PDC); both parties had announced their working programmes and had listed members.
Lt.-Col. Augustin Ndindiliyimana, with no party affiliation, remained in the Cabinet as Minister of Defence.
Sylvestre Nsanzimana (MRND) Prime Minister Casimir Bizimungu (MRND) Foreign Affairs James Gasana (MRND) Agriculture, Animal Husbandry and Environment Gaspard Ruhumuliza (PDC) Commerce, Industry and Artisanry
Rwandan Transitional Government
Lt.-Col. Augustin Bem Ndindiliyimana Defence Daniel Mbangura (MRND) Primary and Secondary Education Constantin Cyubahiro (MRND) Higher Education, Research and Culture Enoch Ruhigira (MRND) Finance Alexandre Muterahejuru (MRND) Civil Service Fidele Nkundabagenzi (MRND) Information, Government Spokesman Faustin Munyazesa (MRND) Interior and Communal Development Callixte Nzabonimana (MRND) Youth and Associated Movements Mathieu Ngirumpatse (MRND) Justice Augustin Ngirabatware (MRND) Planning and Co-Operation Jean-Baptiste Ndarihoranye (MRND) Health André Katabarwa (MRND) Transport and Communications Prosper Mugiraneza (MRND) Social Welfare André Ntagerura (MRND) Public Works and Energy
The Revolutionary Democratic Movement (MDR), the Democratic Socialist Party (PSD), the Liberal Party (PL) and the Rwandan Socialist Party (PSR) refused to be represented in the new government unless a Prime Minister was appointed from a party other than the MRND.
Nsanzimana commented that both would be offered representation in the government if they gave up this condition and expressed a willingness to participate.
AFRICA
BURUNDI
Crushing of rebellion
According to government figures issued on Dec. 1 more than 270 people were killed in several simultaneous attacks by rebels on Nov. 23 and in fighting over the succeeding days in the capital Bujumbura and in the north-western provinces of Cibitoke and Kayanza.
The violence prompted a first wave of mainly Hutu refugees to flee to Rwanda and to Zaïre.
The attacks coincided with an official visit by President Pierre Buyoya to France, and were widely reported to have been instigated by the exiled Palipehutu movement (Parti pour la libération du peuple Hutu).
On Dec. 4 Buyoya asserted that the "elements" involved in the attacks did not represent a specific ethnic group but were attempting to "stop the introduction of democracy" .
Africa Confidential of Dec. 20 reported that the "cautious democratization process" initiated by Buyoya "now appears caught between extremists from both the Tutsi and Hutu ethnic groups" .
On Jan. 3, 1992, the Burundi government stated that the number of deaths since the November uprising had risen to 551, while the Rwandan authorities said that the number of refugees there had risen to 10,000.
By contrast, a group representing European human rights organizations which had returned from a 12-day visit to Burundi, maintained the same day that at least 3,000 people had been killed in reprisals by the army and paramilitary groups after the rebellion.
Over 50,000 people had, it said, fled to Rwanda and Zaïre.
AFRICA
ZAIRE
Extension of President's mandate
In a national broadcast President Mobutu Sese Seko announced on Dec. 4 that he intended to stay in office beyond his seven-year mandate.
Mobutu said that presidential elections, which should have been held before the expiry of his term of office at midnight that day, had not taken place "for reasons beyond our control but inherent in the dynamics of the process of democratization" .
He added that he had "absolutely no intention of keeping [his]grip on the presidential seat" as he was a "convinced democrat" .
The opposition alliance, the Sacred Union, called for a strike on Dec. 5 to mark the theoretical end of the presidential mandate.
Resumption of national conference
The national conference, suspended since September, resumed on Dec. 11 after the Sacred Union threatened to call a strike if debate did not start.
The conference had been postponed at least twice since November reportedly for "logistical reasons" .
On Dec. 12 delegates elected the Most Rev. Monsengwo Pasinya, the Roman Catholic Archbishop of Kisangani and president of the Bishops' Conference, as president of the conference.
Monsengwo, an outspoken critic of Mobutu, received the support of two-thirds of delegates; in a speech to the conference he said that he aimed to help the people achieve reconciliation.
AFRICA
SOUTH AFRICA
Constitutional talks
The Convention for a Democratic South Africa (CODESA — see p. 38520) held its opening meeting in Johannesburg on Dec. 20-21, when delegations from the government and 18 other groups including the African National Congress (ANC) and the ruling National Party (NP) met to begin substantive negotiations for the establishment of a democratic constitution.
The Pan-Africanist Congress, which withdrew from a preparatory meeting in November [ibid.], refused to attend CODESA, denouncing it as a government "instrument of manipulation" .
Another significant absence was that of Chief Mangosuthu Buthelezi, leader of the mainly Zulu Inkatha Freedom Party, who withdrew from the Inkatha delegation because of the refusal of the CODESA steering committee to allow separate delegations for Inkatha and for the Zulu King Goodwill Zwelethini.
A "declaration of intent" , drawn up by the steering committee, was signed on Dec. 20.
The declaration specified that decisions at CODESA should be taken by "sufficient consensus" , ensuring that no deals were reached without the approval of the government or the ANC.
The agreement also gave CODESA the power to draft legislation.
While lacking the legal authority to transform CODESA's decisions into law, the government effectively undertook to use its large majority in Parliament to endorse CODESA resolutions, although State President F. W. de Klerk made it clear that CODESA would not automatically have law-making powers and that Parliament would have a veto.
The next CODESA meeting was expected to take place in March; it was agreed that the steering committee would meet monthly until a new constitution was in place.
ANC president Nelson Mandela indicated for the first time on Dec. 29 that the ANC would consider the possibility of guaranteeing white seats in a future parliament along the lines agreed under the 1979 Lancaster House settlement on Zimbabwean independence [see pp. 30165-75].
Cabinet changes
President De Klerk made several Cabinet changes on Dec. 4.
Derek Keys, chair of the mining corporation Gencor, was appointed Minister of Trade, Industry and Economic Co-ordination in a move seen as an effort to improve the credibility of his government's economic policies.
The other changes included the appointment of Gen. Magnus Malan, hitherto Minister of Housing and Works and of Water and Forest Affairs, as Head of the Ministers' Council in the House of Assembly.
Responsibility for Housing and Works was taken on by Adriaan Vlok, who retained his position as Minister of Correctional Services but relinquished the Ministry for the Budget to Org Marais.
Marais also continued to serve as Minister of Tourism, acquired the Administration portfolio from Piet Marais and relinquished the Trade and Industry portfolio.
Piet Marais was appointed Minister of Manpower and retained the Ministry of Education and Culture.
SACP conference
The eighth national congress of the South African Communist Party (SACP) was held near Johannesburg on Dec. 5-8.
The party's first legal congress inside South Africa since its banning in 1950 was attended by 413 delegates, representing 25,000 registered members.
On Dec. 6 Chris Hani was named as general secretary to succeed Joe Slovo.
Hani was also chief of staff of the ANC's military wing Umkhonto we Sizwe (Spear of the Nation — MK), a position confirmed at an MK conference in August [see also p. 38376].
Slovo received an unopposed nomination for the post of national chairman in succession to Dan Tloome.
On Dec. 7 delegates voted overwhelmingly to retain the party's name.
They also adopted a new manifesto expressing the party's support for Marxist-Leninist policies and committing the SACP to the process of negotiations.
Further Inkathagate revelations
Further press disclosures of covert government funding for Inkatha [see pp. 38318-19 for revelations in July]were made in the Weekly Mail of Dec. 13.
The South African Defence Force (SADF) was said to have spent R7,000,000 (about US$2,000,000) over three years to provide training for Inkatha members.
Those trained allegedly formed a death squad which directed its activity against pro-ANC activists.
The newspaper's further claim that the police funded an Inkatha rally in January 1991 was later confirmed officially.
De Klerk previously maintained that covert government support for the organization ended in March 1990.
The ANC said that the new revelations called into question the good faith of the government.
Investigation into violence
A team from the human rights organization Amnesty International arrived on Dec. 4 to begin a two-week investigation into political killings.
Their arrival coincided with another outbreak of factional violence in Natal in which 18 people were killed.
Whilst noting the developments in human rights since the unbanning of political organizations in February 1990, Amnesty expressed its concern at the number of killings in which security force members appeared to be directly implicated but where the security forces failed to take appropriate action.
Political prisoners issue
On Dec. 10 the ANC and other organizations launched a renewed campaign for the release of 350 political prisoners.
Although, the Ministry of Correctional Services claimed that all political prisoners had been released, at least three acknowledged political prisoners were freed in the days following the launch of the campaign.
Banning of cultural weapons
The Supreme Court on Dec. 13 banned "cultural weapons" , overturning a previous ruling in May that weapons such as ceremonial axes and spears be exempted on cultural grounds from the general prohibition on dangerous weapons [see p. 38178].
Foreign relations
The UN General Assembly voted on Dec. 13 to urge all countries to restore sporting, cultural, scientific and academic exchanges with South Africa because of the progress made towards ending apartheid.
The decision was welcomed by both Foreign Affairs Minister Roelof "Pik" Botha and by Mandela.
However, Mandela in an address to the General Assembly on Dec. 3 called for the maintenance of economic sanctions, arguing that they should only be lifted in phases corresponding to actual progress.
Full diplomatic relations with Poland were established on Dec. 18.
There were a number of indications of improving relations with the frontline states.
A delegation from the Ministry of Foreign Affairs arrived in Angola on Dec. 17 to begin talks on the establishment of diplomatic ties.
On Dec. 30 Botha announced that agreement had been reached with Botswana to establish reciprocal missions.
On Dec. 31 the Zambian Foreign Ministry confirmed that it was discussing the establishment of trade and diplomatic ties with South Africa.
AFRICA
CONGO
New Constitution
The Higher Council of the Republic (CSR — the transitional legislature) on Dec. 22 adopted a new Constitution, which replaced the former Marxist single-party regime with a multiparty political system.
It provided for an elected head of state who would appoint a Prime Minister from the party winning a majority in elections to a bicameral parliament comprising a National Assembly and Senate.
The President, who had to have a minimum of 15 years' professional political experience, would chair Cabinet meetings and would be Commander-in-Chief of the armed forces.
He would have a mandate for five years, renewable once, as would members of the National Assembly.
Senators had to be aged over 50 and would have a six-year mandate.
A referendum on the Constitution, postponed in November and in early December, was scheduled for January 1992, to be followed by local elections the same month, with legislative elections in March and presidential elections in May or June.
Legislation covering the conduct of elections, adopted at the same time, included the stipulation that presidential candidates had to pay a non-repayable deposit of CFA1,000,000 (US$3,700).
Expulsion of Zaïreans
At the end of November the Congolese government began the expulsion of thousands of Zaïrean citizens, many of whom had crossed the River Congo after anti-government rioting in Kinshasa, the Zaïrean capital, in September [see p. 38423].
On Dec. 7 the Zaïrean government asked for the action to be suspended and expressed its indignation over the manner in which its nationals had been expelled "in spite of the blood ties" between the two countries.
However, the Congolese government confirmed on Dec. 9 that expulsions would continue.
AFRICA
NIGERIA
State elections — Removal of ban on former politicians
The Dec. 14 elections for state governorships and state assemblies, the latest stage in Nigeria's transition to civilian rule, passed off peacefully.
The National Republic Convention (NRC), the more right-wing of the two political parties created by the military government in 1990, won 16 of the 30 state governorships and gained control of the assemblies in 13 states; its opponent, the Social Democratic Party (SDP) won control of 16 assemblies, including those in three states — Lagos, Katsina and Cross River — where the NRC won the gubernatorial poll.
(Elections were not held in Abuja, the new federal capital, pending the introduction of a new system of government for the territory).
The results were a setback for the SDP, which won most southern states in the local council elections of December 1990 but had since suffered from well-publicized internal feuding.
In addition to winning the governorships in Lagos and Cross River, the NRC also won both the assembly and gubernatorial polls in five south-eastern states.
Overall, observers commented that the results indicated a breakdown in Nigeria's regional divisions, with the NRC remaining strong in the north but also capturing most states in the south-east.
In terms of total votes, the NRC won 54.2 per cent of the vote in the gubernatorial elections, putting it in a strong position for the presidential elections due in 1992.
In a surprise move on Dec. 19, the government lifted the ban on former politicians taking part in the transition to democracy.
The ban, imposed in 1987 with the aim of creating a "new breed" of politician, had been strongly criticized by human rights groups.
The move affected several thousand former members of parliament and public officials, many of whom could be expected to take part in the presidential and legislative elections in 1992.
Only those convicted of criminal offences and President Ibrahim Babangida himself remain banned from standing in the elections.
However, the National Electoral Commission retained wide powers to ban potential candidates.
Eleven prominent former politicians, including six former state governors, detained in early December for contravening the ban, were released on Dec. 20.
Designation of Abuja as federal capital
Abuja formally became Nigeria's federal capital on Dec. 12, following a decree by Babangida.
The decision to transfer the capital from Lagos, in the south, to the new city of Abuja at a politically neutral site in central Nigeria was taken by the government of Gen. Murtala Muhammad in 1976 [see pp. 27835-36].
Babangida, who described the move as a symbol of national unity, moved to Abuja with his family and staff on Dec. 12.
AFRICA
GHANA
Delay in report of Consultative Assembly
The Consultative Assembly, set up to consider constitutional proposals for the establishment of the country's Fourth Republic, announced on Dec. 28 that its work would not be finished by the end of the year as originally intended.
The Assembly, which began its discussions in August [see pp. 38379-80], asked the government to extend its period of deliberation to the end of March 1992.
Arrest of opposition leader — Amnesty report
John Ndebugre, general secretary of the Movement for Freedom and Justice (MFJ), was arrested in early December on the orders of Flt. -Lt.
Jerry Rawlings, chair of the ruling Provisional National Defence Council (PNDC).
Ndebugre, a former PNDC Secretary for Agriculture dismissed in November 1984 [see p. 33828], was arrested for allegedly failing to rise promptly for the national anthem, and was reportedly beaten while in detention — he was later released on a court order but was immediately rearrested.
On Dec. 18 the human rights organization Amnesty International released a report which accused the PNDC government of using imprisonment to silence its political opponents.
The report said that at least 50 people were being held without charge in "preventive" detention, and further stated that many hundreds of people were being held without proper trial, among them at least 90 political prisoners who were tried by special courts, over half of whom had been sentenced to death.
Nana Akuoko Sarpong, Secretary for the Interior, denied the existence of any political prisoners, dismissing the Amnesty claims as part of a "propaganda war" against developing countries.
AFRICA
CAMEROON
Approval of electoral law
The National Assembly on Dec. 9 approved new electoral legislation.
In addition it formally approved the shortening of the current Assembly's term in anticipation of early legislative elections, scheduled for Feb. 16, 1992 [see p. 38518].
The main provisions of the new law were to reduce the voting age to 20 years and, more controversially, establish a single round of voting and forbid coalition groups from participating in the elections.
Opposition parties — which had called for two rounds of voting — claimed that the provisions were designed to give the advantage to the ruling Cameroon People's Democratic Movement (RDPC) over emerging opposition parties which had intended to join forces during the campaign.
Victorin Hameni Bieleu, a leading member of the opposition, said that many parties believed that the RDPC would take complete control of the Assembly as a result and predicted a boycott of the elections "if things continue like this" .
AFRICA
TOGO
Togo Cabinet
*Joseph Kokou Koffigoh Prime Minister, Defence
*Elias Kwassivi Kpetigo Economy and Finance
*Abdou Touré Tchiaka Foreign Affairs and Co-operation
*Aimé Tchaboure Gogue Planning and Territorial Development
*Joseph Yao Amefia Equipment and Mines
*Koffi Nkole Abotsi Rural Development Kouma Tordjo Kouame Justice and Keeper of the Seals Yao Komlanvi Territorial Administration and Security Kougblenou Dzaba Communications and Culture Kpandja Fare Environment Issa Affo Technical and Professional Training Were Gazoro (f) Social Welfare and National Solidarity Dzodzi Dali Human Rights Kokou Lucas Afantchao Tourism and Crafts, Small and Medium-Sized Enterprises Amede Atouma Minister-Delegate at the Prime Minister's Office for Togolese Armed Forces Jean Yaovi Degoune Minister-Delegate at the Prime Minister's Office for Relations with the High Council of the Republic Georges Kwao Aidam Secretary of State for Territorial Administration and Security in Charge of Elections
*Members of previous transitional government.
(f) denotes a woman.
Abduction of Prime Minister — New government
Prime Minister Joseph Kokou Koffigoh was seized by rebel soldiers on Dec. 3 after an attack on his residence in which at least 17 people were killed.
The action was the latest in a series of attempts by sections of the military to unseat the transitional government appointed by the national conference in August [see pp. 38379; 38518-19; 38562].
Koffigoh was reportedly taken by his captors to meet President Gnassingbe Eyadema; Eyadema, who had been stripped of his executive powers by the national conference, condemned the attack, although he had repeatedly supported the military's demands for a change of government.
The president's half-brother, Col. Donou Toi Gnassingbe, the commander of the presidential guard, was among those reported killed in the attack on the Prime Minister's residence.
Later, Koffigoh appeared on national television, saying that he had surrendered to avoid further bloodshed and announcing that he would form a government of national unity.
France, which in late November had sent 300 troops to neighbouring Benin, refused to intervene, despite calls from other west African states for it to do so.
French Foreign Minister Roland Dumas commented on Dec. 6 that France was "not supporting dictatorships but neither are we going to play around with expeditionary forces" .
He added that Côte d'Ivoire's President Houphouët-Boigny "was contacting other African heads of state to seek ways of saving the democratic process in Togo" .
At a press conference the following day, Koffigoh called for calm and for the restoration of state authority, saying that he had regained his freedom of movement and had returned to his residence.
He said that his television broadcast had not been written under physical pressure but "under the constraints of the situation" .
Consultations between the various parties on the composition of the proposed unity government took place during December, against a background of repeated demands from the armed forces for Koffigoh's replacement and the dissolution of the High Council of the Republic (provisional parliament).
Soldiers again briefly took over the national radio station on Dec. 15 to broadcast their demands.
Meanwhile, a general strike scheduled to begin on Dec. 16 was called off after assurances to the unions by Koffigoh that the decisions of the national conference would be respected.
Following a meeting on Dec. 24 attended by the President, Prime Minister, senior officers of the armed forces and the chairman of the HCR, Mgr.
Sanouko Kpodzro, it was announced that agreement had been reached on the composition of the new government.
On Dec. 29 the HCR met for the first time since the attempted coup and approved the new Cabinet, whose membership was announced the following day.
Several members of the previous transitional government were retained in key posts, including Elias Kwassivi Kpetigo as Minister of Economy and Finance and Abdou Touré Tchiaka as Minister of Foreign Affairs and Co-operation, but the Cabinet also included Eyadema aide Yao Komlanvi, the former Interior and Security Minister, as Minister of Territorial Administration and Security.
AFRICA
BURKINA
Re-election of Compaoré — Killing of opposition leader — Postponement of elections
Blaise Compaoré was re-elected President on Dec. 1, winning, as the sole candidate, over 90 per cent of the votes cast.
Turnout for the election was, however, only 28.28 per cent as voters supported the opposition's call for a boycott of the poll.
Opposition parties had withdrawn their candidates in October after the breakdown of tripartite talks and the lack of any prospect of a national conference [see p. 38518].
On Dec. 9 Clément Oumarou Ouedraogo, secretary-general of the Burkinabe Labour Party (PTB) and a leading member of the opposition Co-ordinating Committee of Democratic Forces (CFD) alliance [see p. 38424], was killed and his wife seriously injured in a grenade attack.
In a second incident on the same day Tall Moctar, of the Group of Revolutionary Democrats also part of the CFD, was critically wounded by unidentified gunmen.
Both men had played important roles in the boycott of the presidential election.
Attacks were attempted on the homes of several other opposition leaders.
The government condemned the attacks as the work of the enemies of democracy and on Dec. 12 announced the indefinite postponement of legislative elections, due on Jan. 9, 1992, "as a gesture of goodwill" .
On Dec. 14 Compaoré announced that a national reconciliation forum to consider democracy, human rights and development would be convened forthwith.
However, there were no reports of the opening of the forum by end of the year.
AFRICA
MALI
Tuareg peace negotiations — Cabinet reshuffle
A conference was held on Dec. 16-18 in Mopti, some 500 km north-west of the capital Bamako, with the aim of ending the rebellion of Tuaregs in the north of the country which had occurred in July [see p. 38325].
The meeting was chaired by Lt.-Col. Amadou Toumani Touré, the head of state and chair of the Transition Committee for the Salvation of the People (CTSP).
Also present were members of the CTSP and the Cabinet, foreign observers and members of the Unified Movements and Fronts of Azawad, representing the Tuaregs.
Although the meeting was originally planned as a preparatory session for a conference in Tombouctou on Dec. 27 [see p. 38563], at the end a memorandum was issued which stated that the Tuareg representatives had "accepted the principles of a negotiated settlement" .
Both sides agreed to stop all attacks; to establish an independent commission to examine the "violent acts and losses" suffered in the fighting; and to release all detainees.
As a result of the progress made, it was agreed to cancel the meeting in Tombouctu but to continue discussions on Jan. 16 in Algeria.
[Developments regarding the linked Tuareg rebellion in Niger will be covered in the January 1992 issue.]
Cabinet reshuffle
A cabinet reshuffle was announced on Dec. 27.
Amadou Modi Dial was made Minister of Justice and Keeper of the Seals.
His position as Minister in Charge of Relations with CTSP and Associations was taken over by Lt.-Col. Birama Sire Traore, who exchanged his portfolio of Secretary of State for Internal Security with Maj. Moussa Diabate, hitherto Minister of Territorial Administration.
New appointments were Jean Brire de l'Isle (Public Health, Social Welfare and Women's Promotion), Diadie Yacouba Danioko (Sports, Culture and Youth Promotion), and Bokum Mariam Suzanne Maiga (Secretary of State in Charge of Social Welfare and Women's Promotion).
AFRICA
GUINEA-BISSAU
Appointment of Prime Minister
President Joao Bernardo Vieira on Dec. 27 appointed Carlos Correia, hitherto Minister of State for Rural Development and Agriculture, to the revived post of Prime Minister; it had been abolished in 1984 following allegations of a government coup attempt [see pp. 32899-900].
In further changes, Joao Cruz Pinto took over the Justice portfolio from Vasco Cabral who was appointed in March [see p. 38085]; the Defence portfolio, formerly held by Vieira, was assumed by Samba Lamine Mane, while Manuel dos Santos was named Minister of Natural Resources and Industry to replace Filinto de Barros who became Finance Minister.
Vieira relinquished the Interior portfolio to Abubacar Balde and appointed Pedro Godinho Gomes as Minister of Civil Service and Labour to replace Mário Cabral, who took over ministerial responsibility for Rural Development and Agriculture.
Other changes included the appointment of Malam Bacai Sanha to replace Mussa Djassi as Minister of Information and Telecommunications.
Recognition of political parties
The Supreme Court on Dec. 27 legalized two new political parties, the Guinea-Bissau Resistance — Bassat Movement and the Social Democratic Front.
On Nov. 18 the Supreme Court had ended 17 years of one-party rule by legalizing the opposition Democratic Front.
The Democratic Party for Progress (PDP) was formed on Dec. 10 amidst reports that the United Social Democratic Party (PUSD) led by a former Prime Minister, Victor Saude Maria, had filed for recognition by the Supreme Court.
AFRICA
CHAD
Cabinet reshuffle — Creation of national commission
A list published on Dec. 12 detailed four ministers reshuffled to different ministries and seven other new appointments.
Col. Abbas Koty, hitherto Defence Minister, exchanged portfolios with Nadjita Beassoumal, thus becoming Minister of Transport and Public Works.
Ahmat Hassaballah Soubiane became Minister of the Interior, replacing Maldom Bada Abbas, who had been arrested in October [see p. 38519].
Ahmad Soungui, hitherto Foreign Minister, became Minister of Information and Culture, and the former Minister of Information, Culture and Tourism, Mahamat Saleh Ahmat replaced him at the Foreign Ministry.
A new Ministry of Tourism and Environment was created under Adoum Togoi.
Preparation for National Conference
On Dec. 25 a 79-member national commission was created to determine the composition and agenda of a National Conference which was scheduled for May 1992 as the next step in the democratization process.
Two days later 10 opposition parties and groups issued a joint statement in which they denounced what they described as the over-representation of the ruling Patriotic Salvation Movement (MPS) on the commission.
The groups, which included the Chadian National Liberation Front and the Rally of Chadian Nationalists, also claimed that the government intended to "ignore the non-political section of the nation, especially human rights organizations, women, young people and businessmen" .
AFRICA
SUDAN
Ceasefire between SPLA factions — Rafsanjani visit
Clashes which began in late November between rival factions of the southern rebel Sudanese People's Liberation Army (SPLA) caused numerous civilian casualties in and around the southern towns of Bor and Kongor (north of Juba).
On Dec. 18 the two groups ratified a 12-point peace plan negotiated through the mediation of the National Council of Churches in Kenya.
The faction of the SPLA opposed to the leadership of Col. John Garang and led by Lam Akol and Riek Mashar Teny-Durgon [see p. 38426]was now known as the Nasir group, after the eastern Sudanese town in which it was based.
An earlier ceasefire negotiated in Nairobi on Nov. 27 had broken down on Dec. 2.
A Sudanese army spokesman on Dec. 20 criticized what it said was the Kenyan government's support for "certain foreign circles and the colonialist churches" which he said were trying to bring together the divided rebel groups in the south and to persuade them to secede.
Shelling of Juba
Renewed SPLA shelling of the government-held town of Juba from Nov. 20 had caused 70 casualties by early December.
In the south of Darfur state, meanwhile, SPLA forces continued to oppose government forces, and government planes had reportedly bombed SPLA-held villages.
In the southern outskirts of Khartoum government troops on Dec. 22 killed 13 inhabitants of a shanty-town who were resisting its demolition.
The illegal settlement housed some 30,000 displaced people, mainly from the south of the country.
Sentencing of coup plotters
Ten army officers sentenced to death in connection with the coup attempt of the previous August [see p. 38380]had their sentences commuted to life imprisonment on Dec. 3.
Other defendants were either acquitted or sentenced to lesser terms of imprisonment.
The Sudanese news media reported that the Ana Sudan ( "I am Sudan" ) group had been implicated in the coup attempt.
Visit by Rafsanjani
A 157-member Iranian delegation headed by President Rafsanjani visited Sudan on Dec. 13-15.
Rafsanjani was accompanied by Foreign Minister Ali Akbar Vellayati, Commerce Minister Abdol-Hossein Vahaji and Defence and Armed Forces Logistics Minister Akbar Torkan.
A co-operation agreement covering areas which included oil, trade exchanges and the "training of technical cadres" was signed.
Rafsanjani told a press conference in Khartoum on Dec. 16 that his visit had allowed him to see a country "advancing towards Islamicization" .
He rejected Arab, United States and European press reports that up to 2,000 Iranian Revolutionary Guards stationed in desert camps in Sudan were training Sudanese military personnel.
The Arab press had also referred to a deal by which Iran was said to be funding the purchase by Sudan of Chinese weaponry worth US$300 million over two years.
AFRICA
MADAGASCAR
Formation of coalition
On Dec. 19 Prime Minister Guy Razanamasy announced the formation of a new broader-based coalition including members of the opposition Comité de forces vives.
The latter had at first supported an agreement signed on Oct. 29 establishing a transitionary state prior to the creation of a third republic, but had then refused to participate in the "unity government" formed by Razanamasy in November [see p. 38565].
In the new government the Comité de forces vives held 14 out of 36 portfolios including that of Deputy Prime Minister, which went to Alfred Ramangasoavina, a close supporter of opposition leader Albert Zafy (who remained outside the Cabinet), and the Finance and Education portfolios, which went to Evariste Marson and Fulgence Fanony.
The Defence, Foreign Affairs and Interior portfolios remained unchanged.
AFRICA
MAURITIUS
Declaration of republic
Following an announcement by the Prime Minister, Sir Aneerood Jugnauth, on Oct. 22 that Mauritius would break ties with the British crown [see p. 38520], the Legislative Assembly on Dec. 10 passed the Constitutional Amendment Bill, under which Mauritius, a constitutional monarchy since its independence in 1968, would become a republic within the Commonwealth on March 12, 1992.
The current Governor-General, Sir Veerasamy Ringadoo, would assume the functions of president for a transitional period, the duration of which was not fixed.
Under the terms of the bill the future president and vice-president would be elected for a five-year term by a simple majority of the Assembly.
Seven opposition members of the Assembly abstained from the vote, claiming that the new status strengthened the powers of the executive at the expense of the judiciary.
They also declared that the president of the republic should be elected by universal suffrage.
AFRICA
SEYCHELLES
Ending of one-party state
An extraordinary congress of the ruling Seychelles People's Progressive Front (SPPF) voted on Dec. 3 to legalize the activity of opposition parties within a multiparty system.
President France-Albert René, who seized power in a coup in 1977, had previously resisted pressure to end one-party rule on the grounds that the country could not afford a plural system.
However, the French and United Kingdom governments were thought to have linked any future aid to progress in democratization.
According to Danielle de St Jorre, Minister for Planning and External Affairs, after modifications to the Constitution political parties would be invited to register from the beginning of January 1992; party-based elections for a constituent commission were expected to be held in July.
The commission would draft a new constitution to be put to a referendum, and if it won popular support, multiparty presidential and legislative elections would be held before the end of the year.
Maxime Ferrari, chair of the opposition exile group Rally of the Seychelles People for Democracy, expressed concern at the slow pace of the proposed reform process.
He suggested that elections to the constituent commission be brought forward to March or April and be held under international supervision.
He also called on President René to demonstrate his commitment to reform by appointing three opposition members to his Cabinet within the next two months.
AFRICA
ANGOLA
The immediate devaluation of the currency by 50 per cent, with an initial base rate exchange of 180 new kwanzas to the United States dollar was announced on Dec. 27; the currency was previously devalued on Nov. 18.
AFRICA
CAPE VERDE
The ruling Movement for Democracy (MPD) won control of 10 of the 14 local councils in elections on Dec. 15, while the former sole legal party the African Party for the Independence of Cape Verde (PAICV) won control of three; the average turnout for the poll, the first multiparty local election, was 40 per cent.
AFRICA
UGANDA
Isaac Ojok, a Minister of Education under the Obote regime, was sentenced to death on Dec. 18, having been found guilty of plotting the downfall of the government of President Yoweri Museveni; Ojok, who was arrested in 1987, told the High Court that he joined the Holy Spirit guerrillas after being "stupefied by herbs" given to him by their leader Alice Lakwena [for whom see p. 35493].
AFRICA
ZAMBIA
In an effort to reduce the cost of its subsidy on cornmeal, averaging US$10,400,000 per month, the government doubled the price of the national staple on Dec. 13.
AMERICAS
UNITED STATES
Appointments to Cabinet and to presidential re-election campaign team
Resignation of Sununu
White House Chief of Staff John H. Sununu resigned on Dec. 3 (effective Dec. 15), following a lengthy campaign by leading Republicans and members of the Bush Cabinet for his removal.
In his resignation letter Sununu informed President George Bush that, owing to "distorted perceptions" , he had become a political liability and did not wish to jeopardize the President's chances of re-election in 1992.
Bush accepted the resignation "with reluctance, regret, and a sense of personal loss" , and announced that Sununu would remain as counsellor to the President with Cabinet rank until March 1992, in order to assist with the transition of responsibilities to his successor.
Sununu's abrasive and often arrogant personal style won him few friends during his three-year tenure at the White House.
During 1991 his position was undermined by a series of minor scandals concerning his use of government aircraft and cars for private business, a practice which earned him a public rebuke from Bush.
By late 1991, with Bush's popularity falling steadily, there was intense pressure for Sununu's replacement prior to the 1992 presidential election.
Announcement of new Chief of Staff, new Commerce Secretary and senior members of re-election campaign team
Bush named Transport Secretary Samuel K. Skinner as his new Chief of Staff on Dec. 5, and also took the opportunity to announce a new team to take responsibility for his re-election bid.
He also chose Commerce Secretary Robert Mosbacher as his re-election campaign's general chairman, naming Barbara Hackman Franklin on Dec. 26 as Mosbacher's successor as Commerce Secretary from Jan. 15, 1992.
Other members of the campaign team were: Robert M. Teeter, a leading pollster, who was appointed as chairman and chief political strategist; Frederic V. Malek became campaign manager; Mary Matalin, chief of staff of the Republican national committee and the only woman in the group, became the campaign's political director; Charles R. Black Jr and Richard N. Bond were named as senior advisers.
Skinner had a reputation for diplomacy, and was known to have maintained cordial links with Congress and with other sections of the administration.
His association with Bush dated back to 1980 when he managed his campaign for the Illinois primary against Ronald Reagan.
Although he lacked the impeccable conservative credentials of Sununu, it was generally believed that Skinner would be acceptable to the right wing of the Republican Party.
Skinner was also given responsibility for liaising closely with the troika at the apex of Bush's re-election campaign.
Mosbacher, 64, like Bush a native easterner who moved to Texas and made a personal fortune in oil and gas, had served as Bush's national finance chairman in 1988 and was once again expected to concentrate on financing the campaign.
Teeter, 52, was a leading member of Bush's 1988 campaign and was noted for his vast campaign experience and public opinion skills.
Malek, 54, who had held several senior government and Republican Party posts and was noted for his managerial skills, had been considered a strong candidate for White House Chief of Staff at the time of Sununu's appointment.
Franklin, 51, a member of seven corporate boards, was named in 1990 by the American Manufacturers' Association as one of the 50 most influential business people in the USA.
One of the first women to be awarded a master's degree in business administration from Harvard University, Franklin had served in the White House under President Richard Nixon.
If confirmed by the Senate, Franklin would become the third woman in the Cabinet, joining the Representative for Trade Negotiations Carla Hills and Labour Secretary Lynn Martin.
Developments in presidential election campaign
December saw several key developments within the presidential nomination campaigns of both the Democratic and Republican parties.
The persisting economic recession and the administration's lack of a clear domestic agenda continued to damage the standing of Bush, whose opinion poll ratings had fallen dramatically since the 80 per cent high which they had achieved in the immediate aftermath of the Gulf war.
At the beginning of December a Time-CNN poll gave his approval rating as 46 per cent, the first time throughout his entire presidency that it had fallen below 50 per cent .
A Washington Post-ABC News poll published on Dec. 17 confirmed this finding, giving Bush a 47 per cent approval rating.
The growing perception that Bush was vulnerable to defeat in November 1992 elections was apparent in both the new-found confidence of his potential Democrat rivals, and in the launching of challenges from the right wing of the Republican Party.
Declaration of David Duke as challenger for Republican nomination
Fresh from his defeat in the gubernatorial election in Louisiana in November [see p. 38566], David Duke on Dec. 4 announced his candidature for the Republican nomination.
Duke, 41, a member of the Louisiana House of Representatives and former leading figure within the Ku Klux Klan, stated that he would enter every Republican primary except the opening contest in New Hampshire on Feb. 18.
He also suggested that, should he fail to win the Republican nomination, he would consider contesting the presidential election as an independent.
Although unsuccessful in his 1990 Senate and 1991 gubernatorial campaigns, Duke had shown himself to be a skilled politician capable of mobilizing considerable support amongst the white working class.
In declaring his candidacy he reiterated his opposition to reverse discrimination, high taxation, crime, the welfare system and immigration, and his support for economic nationalism and a trade policy based upon reciprocity.
Although no commentator expected Duke to defeat Bush, many acknowledged that he might be able to generate sufficient support to embarrass the President.
This was particularly true in relation to many of the primaries immediately following the New Hampshire contest, which were due in Southern states where Duke's support was expected to be strongest.
These also tended to be "open" primaries, where any registered voter could participate, as opposed to "closed" contests where only registered party members were entitle to vote, another factor thought to favour Duke.
Although Duke had dismissed his past association with the racist Ku Klux Klan and neo-Nazi groups as a "youthful indiscretion" , as recently as 1988 he had contested the presidential elections as the nominee of the Populist Party — a known repository of neo-Nazis and former Klansmen — on an openly racist and anti-Semitic platform.
This controversial political lineage caused the Republican Party establishment to disown him, and in several states there were plans to attempt to prevent his name from appearing on the ballot papers.
White House spokesman Marlin Fitzwater reacted to Duke's candidacy by claiming that he represented "the worst of American politics" , and stood for "bigotry, racism and other qualities that have no place in American political life" .
Declaration of Patrick Buchanan
On Dec. 10 a third candidate entered the contest for the Republican nomination: Patrick J. Buchanan, a conservative commentator and former aide to Presidents Nixon and Reagan.
Outlining his "America First" platform, Buchanan stated his intention not merely to challenge Bush, but to transform the political debate surrounding his party's choice of nominee.
Whereas Duke's challenge was reminiscent of the four presidential bids between 1964 and 1976 by the racist Alabama governor George Wallace, Buchanan's campaign contained older resonances of the isolationist movement of the 1930s as championed by Charles Lindbergh.
As such, Buchanan's message represented a radical departure from the style of conservatism which had dominated the right of the Republican Party since the onset of the Cold War.
The essence of Buchanan's position was the belief that US conservatism was isolationist by nature, and that this stance had been abandoned after 1945 only in order to combat the menace of international communism.
With that threat having been neutralized, argued Buchanan, it was time to return to a form of nationalism based upon protectionism, minimal government, an avoidance of foreign entanglements, and a defence of the "Judeo-Christian values" which formed the basis of US culture and which were in danger of being "dumped onto some landfill called multiculturalism" .
Calling for a "new nationalism" which would put "America first" , Buchanan warned that the future challenge to the USA lay in western Europe and the Far East.
Consequently, he claimed, "all the institutions of the Cold war, from vast permanent US armies on foreign soil, to old alliances against communist enemies that no longer exist, to billions in foreign aid, must be re-examined" .
Despite his ferocious criticism of Bush's record as President, however, Buchanan went to great lengths to emphasize his respect for Bush's service in the Pacific War and his "graciousness, honour and integrity" .
The campaign would not be about personalities, he stressed, but about the stark choice between internationalism and nationalism.
Debate between contenders for Democratic nomination
The first national televised debate between the six declared candidates for the Democratic nomination was held on Dec. 15.
None of the six — Governor Bill Clinton of Arkansas; Senator Tom Harkin of Iowa; Senator Bob Kerrey of Nebraska; former Senator Paul Tsongas of Massachusetts; former Governor Gerry Brown of California, and Governor Douglas Wilder of Virginia — were nationally recognised figures, and all had laboured unsuccessfully to break away from the pack and establish a clear lead in the polls.
Prior to the debate Clinton had appeared to be marginally ahead of his rivals, having made some effective speeches and achieved 54 per cent support in a non-binding straw poll at the Florida Democratic convention.
Harkin, an old-style labour Democrat, had scored 31 per cent and Kerrey, a youthful Vietnam veteran whose campaign had not progressed as well as expected, had scored 10 per cent.
The debate, which was watched by 8,000,000 people, was characterized by ill-tempered sparring, with the contenders choosing to spend more time berating each other than attacking the record of President Bush.
While no clear winner emerged, most commentators agreed that Kerrey's performance was the most effective.
Although Kerrey's campaign was lifted by this success, on the following day it suffered a setback when it was revealed that a restaurant chain of which he was part-owner had been fined $64,000 for 116 violations of child protection laws.
Although no longer involved in detailed management of the business, Kerrey had frequently cited his experience gained from establishing his business as among his qualifications for the presidency.
Decision by Mario Cuomo not to contest Democratic nomination
The most significant absentee from the debate was the Governor of New York, Mario Cuomo.
A political heavyweight with far greater national name-recognition and fund-raising capacity than any of the six declared candidates, Cuomo was extpected to establish an immediate and sizable lead over his rivals if he were to announce his candidacy.
Nevertheless, he continued to prevaricate even as the Dec. 20 deadline for registering as a candidate for the New Hampshire contest approached, while indicating that he might yet join the contest for his party's presidential nomination if he could satisfactorily resolve the current impasse between himself and the state legislature over the budget.
On the afternoon of Dec. 20, only 90 minutes before the deadline, Cuomo ended 10 weeks of uncertainty by announcing that he would not enter the 1992 nomination contest.
Whilst suggesting that he had been keen to run, he explained his decision on the grounds that his obligation to the people of his state came before his personal ambition for the presidency.
He denounced the Republicans in the New York state legislature for bringing the state to the "brink of disaster" by blocking agreement on a plan to close an estimated $875 million gap in the current state budget and deal with a $3,600 million deficit for the coming year, but acknowledged that he could not contemplate campaigning in New Hampshire whilst his state faced such a crisis.
Mayoral elections
Mayoral run-off election in San Francisco
The liberal reputation of San Francisco was severely shaken by the defeat on Dec. 11 of its incumbent mayor, Art Agnos, at the hands of a right-wing opponent, Frank Jordan.
Although both candidates were Democrats, Jordan, a former chief of police, epitomized the opposition by white heterosexual conservatives towards what they perceived as the city's minority-dominated, pro-homosexual culture as symbolized by Agnos, a former social worker.
The position of Agnos had been undermined by a large budget deficit (much of it inherited), the effects of the country's economic recession and the legacy of the 1989 earthquake [see pp. 36970-71].
Polls suggested that the key election issue for voters, however, was the 8,000 or so homeless people estimated to be sleeping rough within the city.
Earlier in the year Jordan had called for the homeless to be set to work on a state-run farm.
Although he distanced himself from this view prior to the election, he campaigned strongly on the promise to "return safe and clean streets" .
The final result was close, with Jordan polling 52 per cent of the vote compared with 48 per cent for Agnos.
It was the first time the city had unseated an incumbent mayor since 1943.
Mayoral run-off election in Houston
A mayoral election was held on Dec. 7 in Houston, Texas, the fourth-largest city in the USA.
The election took the form of a non-partisan run-off contest between Bob Lanier, a moderate Democrat, and Sylvestor Turner, his more liberal opponent.
The two men entered the run-off having achieved 44 per cent and 35 per cent respectively of the votes cast in the election of Nov. 5.
The incumbent, Kathy Whitmire, had been eliminated after receiving 20 per cent of the vote.
Lanier, 66, was a wealthy white property developer who had never before run for public office.
Turner, 37, was a black graduate of Harvard law school who had served two terms in the state legislature.
The election was keenly contested — both candidates spent heavily on their campaigns — but there was little evidence of the use of negative campaigning and the city's rising crime rate remained the central campaign issue.
Although Houston had never elected a black mayor, the question of race was not a significant campaign factor, with Lanier campaigning strongly in black neighbourhoods and Turner receiving considerable white support, including that of Whitmire.
Lanier emerged as the winner after polling 53 per cent of the votes cast, compared with 47 per cent for Turner.
Although Turner made inroads into the white vote, it appeared that his failure to attract more than 37 per cent of the Hispanic vote resulted in his defeat.
Acquittal of William Kennedy Smith
After 10 days of testimony the trial of William Kennedy Smith ended on Dec. 12 with the defendant being found not guilty on the felony charge of sexual battery (the term for rape within the Florida criminal justice system) and a misdemeanour battery charge.
The six-member jury (composed of four women and two men) deliberated for 77 minutes before concluding in Smith's favour and thereby ending one of the most widely reported trials in US history.
The charges arose from a sexual encounter between Smith and Patricia Bowman in March 1991 [see p. 38139], which he claimed had been based upon mutual consent.
Although the women's identity remained shielded during the trial, she was named by several news organizations in the pre-trial period, and she chose to reveal her identity in an interview shortly after the verdict.
Most commentators attributed Smith's acquittal to inconsistencies in Bowman's evidence, to an ineffective performance by prosecutor Moria K. Lasch, and to the Dec. 2 ruling by Judge Mary E. Lupo to exclude the testimony of three other women who claimed that Smith had assaulted them during the 1980s.
Like the Clarence Thomas confirmation hearings [see pp. 38510-11], the Smith case encapsulated many salient features of the debate concerning the nature of sexual violence against women, and the wider contemporary issue of gender relations within US society.
This, together with live televised coverage and the sensationalist emphasis on the Kennedy family's involvement, meant that the case received massive public attention and generated opinions which were both vociferous and partisan.
Amongst those who gave evidence at the trial was Senator Edward Kennedy, Smith's uncle, who had initiated the drinking expedition which had led to Smith's encounter with Bowman.
Polls suggested that Kennedy's approval rating amongst his Massachusetts constituents had fallen so dramatically following the episode that he might fail to secure re-election in 1994.
Trial of Charles Keating
Charles Keating Jr, the multi-millionaire whose speculative activities and subsequent financial collapse came to epitomize the massive failure of the savings and loan industry, was convicted on 17 counts of securities fraud by a California Superior Court on Dec. 4.
He was acquitted on one count.
Due to be sentenced on Feb. 7, 1992, Keating faced a maximum penalty of 10 years' imprisonment and a fine of $250,000.
The 1989 collapse of Keating's California-based Lincoln Savings and Loan Association was the largest of the national thrift failures.
It was estimated to have cost the US taxpayer $2,600 million and led to charges of ethics violations against five members of the US Senate [see p. 38568].
In the first of what were likely to be several criminal prosecutions resulting from the collapse of the Lincoln, Keating was convicted of misleading small investors over the sale of junk bonds — high-risk, high-yield securities — in American Continental Corp., of which the Lincoln was a subsidiary.
A crowd of small investors who had lost money when the Lincoln had collapsed demonstrated outside the courtroom throughout the trial, and celebrated when the verdicts were announced.
Federal charges were filed against Keating on Dec. 12 when a federal grand jury in Los Angeles returned a 77-count indictment against him, his son, his son-in-law and two associates.
The charges included racketeering, conspiracy, bank fraud, securities fraud, misapplication of funds and interstate transportation of stolen property.
If convicted on all counts the defendants could face maximum prison sentences of 475-525 years, together with $17,000,000 in fines and the forfeiture of $265,000,000 worth of assets.
On the same day the Securities and Exchange Commission filed wide-ranging civil charges against Keating and several others.
In brief The US Army on Dec. 4 revealed that a US soldier serving in Germany had been sentenced to 34 years in prison after being convicted of spying for Iraq and Jordan during the Gulf War.
Albert Sombolay, who was arrested in March, was convicted in July of selling samples of chemical-weapon protection equipment and identification documents to a Jordanian intelligence officer.
The US Supreme Court on Dec. 12 struck down a New York state law which provided for the seizure of profits made by convicted criminals from publicizing their crimes.
The so-called "Son of Sam law" , which was passed in 1977 and which led to similar legislation in 34 other US states, was unanimously adjudged to contravene the country's constitutional guarantee of freedom of free speech.
President Bush signed into law on Dec. 18 a transport bill which allocated $119,000 million of federal funds to road construction over a six-year period, and $31,500 million to mass transit.
Sponsors of the bill estimated that it would create more than 1,000,000 new jobs and would preserve some 1,000,000 existing jobs.
AMERICAS
CANADA
Gun control legislation
On Dec. 5 the Senate approved, and royal assent was given to, a bill introducing tougher gun control measures.
[For December 1989 shooting of 14 women at Montreal University see p. 37120.]
The Act included provisions (i) raising the minimum age for gun ownership from 16 to 18;(ii) introducing a mandatory 28-day waiting period before an acquisition certificate was issued;(iii) prohibiting the possession of fully automatic firearms, sawn-off rifles, shotguns, firearm silencers and other weapons, and (iv) doubling the maximum prison sentence for illegal possession of a prohibited weapon to 10 years.
The bill had been introduced on May 30, 1991, and had been given final House of Commons approval on Nov. 7.
The Act (Bill C-17) followed a related Act (Bill C-6) which introduced tougher restrictions on the import, possession and export of automatic weapons.
This was introduced on May 23, 1991, given final approval by the House of Commons on June 19, and passed by the Senate and given royal assent on June 21.
Agreement to create territory of Nunavut
The country's largest aboriginal land claim settlement was agreed on Dec. 16 by the federal government of Canada and representatives of the native Inuit.
The agreement provided for the creation of a semi-autonomous Inuit territory amounting to approximately 2,000,000 sq km— some 20 per cent of Canada's total landmass.
The new territory, which was to be carved from the eastern reaches of the vast Northwest Territories and would stretch from the Manitoba border to the North Pole, was to be known as Nunavut, an Eskimo term meaning "our land" .
Under the terms of the agreement (reached in principle in May — see pp. 38221-22), the 17,000 Inuit in the region (who constituted some 80 per cent of the area's total population) would be granted the right to hunt, fish and trap within Nunavut.
They would also receive outright ownership of 350,000 sq km of the territory, and would control the mineral rights on 36,000 sq km.
The remainder of Nunavut would remain federal crown land, and the Inuit would be eligible to receive a portion of any future resource royalties.
The Inuit would also receive more than Can.
$580 million in compensation over a 14-year period.
In return the Inuit agreed to surrender their claim to the remainder of the western area of the Northwest Territories, which would be renamed.
The agreement was the fourth major aboriginal land claim settlement to have been negotiated in Canada.
In 1984 some 2,500 Inuit of the western Arctic were given title to 35,000 square miles; in March 1990 some 7,000 Indians in the Yukon reached agreement over 16,000 square miles, whilst in the following month some 13,000 Dene-Metis Indians agreed in principle to a settlement of 70,000 square miles of Arctic and sub-Arctic territory.
The Dene-Metis agreement later foundered upon the requirement that the natives surrender their aboriginal rights to other lands.
The 1991 agreement remained subject to the finalization of many details and to approval by a referendum within Nunavut scheduled for March 16, 1992.
If approved, it was anticipated that legislation would be passed before the end of 1992 to establish Nunavut with non-provincial status — including an elected territorial legislature and government — similar to that currently possessed by Yukon and the Northwest Territories.
AMERICAS
CUBA
Additional energy restrictions
The government on Dec. 22 announced further emergency measures to deal with the deepening energy crisis [see also p. 38431].
Television broadcasting was to be reduced, as were air conditioning, street lighting and floodlit sports events.
Urban transport would be reduced by 40 per cent and taxi services would be limited to taking people to hospital or to funerals.
Electricity supplies would be fixed and there would be cuts in supply if limits were exceeded.
To save industrial costs surplus labour would be relocated, predominantly to the agricultural sector; if this was not possible people would be kept at work but on 60 per cent of their former salary.
Prospect of cessation of Russian aid — Trade treaties with Russia and Ukraine
The emergency restrictions came in the wake of the failure in 1991 of the Soviet Union to fulfil 50 per cent of its export commitments, particulary vital oil shipments.
There were also fears that the Russian Federation would stop the Soviet practice of supplying oil at well below the world market price while buying Cuban sugar at well above international prices.
Such fears seemed to be confirmed following a visit on Dec. 21-26 to Moscow by Jorge Mas Canosa, leader of the Miami-based Cuban-American National Foundation (CANF), an organization of Cuban exiles in the United States.
Canosa met the Russian Foreign Minister, Andrei Kozyrev, and claimed on Dec. 27 that the Russian government intended to end Cuba's lifeline of economic subsidies and to speed up the withdrawal of Russian troops as part of its new policy towards Cuba.
However, Foreign Relations Minister Isidoro Malmierca Peoli, speaking in the Spanish capital Madrid on Dec. 28, stated that an agreement had been reached with the Russian Federation "during the last few days" on the exchange of sugar for oil.
Malmierca gave no details, but analysts interpreted the news as further evidence that President Fidel Castro Ruz retained significant influence among the inner circle of advisers to Russian President Yeltsin.
Malmierca also confirmed that trade negotiations with other members of the new Commonwealth of Independent States were proceeding and a three-year trade agreement was signed with the newly independent state of Ukraine in late December.
Popular assembly meeting
The National Assembly of People's Power, the nominal Cuban parliament, meeting for its ninth ordinary session on Dec. 26-27, approved the political reforms suggested by the fourth congress of the Cuban Communist Party (PCC) held in October [see pp. 38523-24].
Final ratification was not expected, however, until the meeting of the Assembly in August.
Chief among the reforms was a provision for the direct election of Assembly delegates.
A spokesman for the Assembly stated that it was hoped to hold elections by the end of 1992, but that they might have to be postponed for a few months given the parlous state of the country.
Addressing the conference Castro repeated his opposition to Western multiparty systems, describing them as the "grand instrument of imperialism" which fragmented and divided societies.
Arrest of dissident
Indamiro Restano, president of the illegal centre-left movement Manifesto of Harmony (Armonia) and a leader of the Cuban Democratic Coalition (CDC) comprising 11 dissident organizations, was arrested by secret police on Dec. 20 in the capital Havana.
AMERICAS
HAITI
Increased repression
Caribbean news agency reports, as well as news filtering into neighbouring Dominican Republic, confirmed that the army had initiated a new wave of repression on Dec. 15, to forestall the celebration of the first anniversary of free elections the following day.
Heavy calibre gunfire was reported in the capital Port-au-Prince and soldiers, supported by members of the Tontons Macoutes (the private army of the former Duvalier dictatorship), were reported to have moved into slum areas to quell further opposition to the military-backed government.
Broadcasts from a clandestine radio station named supporters of President Jean-Bertrand Aristide, who was deposed in a violent military coup on Sept. 30 [see pp. 38430; 38522-23], and called on the Tontons Macoutes to "eliminate them within 72 hours" .
Over 100 homes of Aristide supporters were burnt down in rural areas.
Only national radio and television stations controlled by the military were broadcasting news.
On Dec. 10 the independent station Radio Galaxy was reported to have been ransacked and its director Félix Lamy kidnapped by heavily armed individuals claiming to be members of the armed forces.
This followed Radio Galaxy's announcement that the Chief of Police, Maj. Joseph Michel François, an author of the September coup [see p. 38523], had been arrested after refusing to obey an order dismissing him from his post.
Killing of parliamentary deputy
Astrel Charles, an opposition parliamentary deputy, was reported on Dec. 18 by the Caribbean news agency Trans World Radio (Bonair) to have been shot dead by a rural official who had demanded that Charles end a meeting with his constituents.
Other deputies had also reportedly been threatened by supporters of the coup.
Search for compromise Prime Minster
The exiled Aristide held a meeting in the Venezuelan capital Caracas on Dec. 29 with the mayor of the capital, Port-au-Prince, Evans Paul, and six Haitian parliamentarians to discuss a new effort at national reconciliation in order to restore him to office.
The main purpose of the meeting was to persuade Aristide to endorse René Théodore, leader of the National Reconciliation Movement (MRN) and secretary-general of the Unified Party of Haitian Communists (PUCH), as compromise Prime Minister in place of the transitional Prime Minster Jean Jacques Honorat.
Théodore was one of two candidates proposed by the parliament, the other being the conservative Marc Bazin who had been comprehensively defeated by Aristide in the December 1990 presidential elections [see pp. 37911-12].
The result of the meeting remained in doubt.
It was widely felt that Théodore, a bitter critic of Aristide who wished severely to restrict his future powers, was not guaranteed to be acceptable to the army or business sectors which were not expected easily to drop their opposition to Aristide's return.
A two-day visit to Port-au-Prince by the special mission of the Organization of American States (OAS) on Dec. 6-7 had been intended to further negotiations deadlocked the previous month in the Colombian city of Cartagena [see p. 38569].
The mission's leader, Augusto Ramírez Ocampo, met with representatives of the parliament, the army and human rights groups as well as foreign ambassadors.
He announced afterwards that for the first time "active negotiations" had begun.
Dejean Belizaire, the president of the parliament, subsequently announced on Dec. 9 that Aristide's return depended on his accepting one of the national consensus candidates for Prime Minister.
Such a candidate had, among eight conditions, to be from a political party outside parliament but favourably disposed to the parliament, and to be able to "reassure the popular masses, the international sector, the industrial and commercial sector, the middle classes and the army" .
Aristide's choice, Victor Benoit, the secretary-general of the centre-left National Congress of Democratic Movements (KONAKOM), was rejected by the parliament along with, reportedly, 12 other candidates.
AMERICAS
PUERTO RICO
Referendum on relationship with USA
An estimated 2,000,000 people participated in a referendum on Puerto Rico's future relationship with the United States, held on Dec. 8.
The "no" voters rejected by 53 to 45 per cent the "yes" platform of proposals of Governor Rafael Hernández Colón and his ruling Popular Democratic Party (PPD) which sought to maintain the Island's autonomy.
The PPD platform included keeping Spanish as the official language, maintaining a distinct national and cultural identity and separate representation in international sporting events.
The opposition New Progressive Party (PNP) claimed that victory for the government would have strained relations with the USA and have led to the possible loss of student scholarships and federal food aid.
Analysts interpreted the vote, however, as indicating that the majority of the electorate tended to support the continuation of the present quasi-colonial "commonwealth" status with the USA rather than the radical options of either full US statehood, promoted by the PNP, or full independence championed by the Independence Party (PIP).
A plebiscite to resolve the matter was to be held at some future, unspecified, date.
AMERICAS
JAMAICA
New Jamaican Cabinet
Michael Manley Prime Minister
**Hugh Small Finance and Planning Seymour Mullings Agriculture
**Carlye Dunkley Production, Mining and Commerce
**Robert Pickersgill Public Utilities, Transport and Energy
*John Junor Tourism and Environment
**David Coore Foreign Affairs and Foreign Trade
*Burchell Whiteman Education and Culture Easton Douglas Health Portia Simpson Labour, Welfare and Sport Orville Ramtallie Construction Paul Robertson Public Service and Information
**Desmond Leakey Local Government, Youth andCommunity Development
**K.
D. Knight National Security and Justice
*New appointment.
**Altered portfolio.
Dismissal of Deputy Prime Minister
A political scandal which erupted in late December resulted in the removal from the Cabinet Percival Patterson, the Deputy Prime Minister and Minister of Finance and Planning, in a Cabinet reshuffle announced on Dec. 31.
Patterson, widely regarded as Manley's heir-apparent, had approved an import tax waiver for Shell Oil (West Indies) Ltd (an offshoot of Shell International, UK), at the request of Mining and Energy Minister Horace Clarke who was also forced to resign.
Application for the waiver had been made by Howard Hamilton, president of Shell Oil (WI) Ltd and a member of the national executive of the ruling People's National Party (PNP).
The scandal came at a time when the government was already riding low in the polls because of the social and economic effects of its economic deregulation policies [see p. 38524].
The entire Cabinet resigned to facilitate the re-shuffle and Prime Minister Michael Manley announced that the total number of ministers, ministers of state and parliamentary secretaries had been reduced from 39 to 28.
AMERICAS
TRINIDAD AND TOBAGO
New Trinidad and Tobago Cabinet
General election
The ruling National Alliance for Reconstruction (NAR) suffered a humiliating defeat in the general election held on Dec. 16.
Prime Minster Arthur Robinson, who survived a coup attempt in July 1990 [see pp. 37606-07]was one of only two NAR members of parliament to retain their seats, both in Tobago.
The main opposition party, the People's National Movement (PNM) led by Patrick Manning, won 21 of the 36 parliamentary seats and the United National Congress led by Basdeo Panday won the remaining 13 seats.
The election result, which reversed that of the December 1986 election when the PNM won only three seats to the NAR's 33 [see pp. 35194-95], represented an emphatic rejection of Robinson's handling of an economy heavily dependent on oil exports.
Falls in the price of oil had provoked the government four years previously to impose an austerity programme.
The subsequent devaluation of the currency, cuts in public-sector expenditure, employment and jobs, and the removal of the cost-of-living allowance for government workers were all factors in the erosion of public support.
Despite few policy differences between the two major parties, the PNM exploited widespread fears that in agreeing to the temporary residence of 100 Haitian refugees, Robinson was seeking to change the racial mix in a country where race relations had become a major political and social issue.
The PNM drew most of its support from urban Afro-Trinidadians while the NAR was supported mainly by Indo-Trinidadians communities in central Trinidad.
New Cabinet — Resignation of Robinson as NAR leader
Manning was sworn in as the new Prime Minster on Dec. 17 and on Dec. 20 the new Cabinet took office.
Robinson resigned as leader of the NAR the week after the election, having accepted responsibility for the defeat.
He had called the election three months before it was constitutionally due on the basis of favourable opinion polls.
Pardon issue
The Privy Council in London on Nov. 26 granted a right to an immediate hearing of the application by 116 black Moslems to the Trinidadian courts for their release from prison.
The Moslems, members of the Jamaat al Muslimeen militant sect, had staged an abortive coup in July 1990 during which they had taken Robinson hostage [see pp. 37606-07].
The Privy Council agreed that the presidential pardon given to the Moslems by the then acting President Emmanuelle Carter in exchange for Robinson's release remained valid.
Trinidadian government lawyers had argued that the pardon was given under duress and therefore was invalid.
AMERICAS
MEXICO
Delay in agreement on free-trade pact
A significant delay in the signing of the North American Free Trade Agreement (Nafta), to create a free trade area stretching from Canada to Mexico [see pp. 37849; 38140], was expected following talks at the US presidential retreat at Camp David on Dec. 14 between President Carlos Salinas de Gortari and United States President Bush.
Both leaders, who reiterated their political commitment to the trade pact, had disagreed on specifics, especially the opening up of Mexico's oil industry to US competition.
Both agreed that a draft outlining the main areas of agreement and disagreement should be drawn up by the end of January 1992 and the US Representative for Trade Negotiations Carla Hills cautioned that the USA had "no intention of substituting speed for substance" .
One apparent reason for the delay was the Bush adminstration's fear that to conclude a free-trade pact in mid-1992 as originally envisaged would be an electoral liability in the US presidential contest, opening Bush to attacks from protectionists that he was encouraging US companies to relocate to Mexico in search of cheap labour while unemployment continued to rise at home.
That the signing of Nafta was now thought to be unlikely until after the November 1992 US presidential elections was a serious political setback for Salinas, who had invested considerable political capital in reaching an accord.
During the week before the talks, shares on the Mexican stock exchange had fallen sharply on fears that Nafta would be postponed.
Legalization of church
The Chamber of Deputies on Dec. 18 approved by 460 votes to 22, constitutional amendments legalizing religious organizations, first proposed by Salinas in November [see p. 38569].
The decision ended 75 years of official antagonism towards the Roman Catholic Church.
The Senate was expected to endorse the decision by the end of the month.
Suspension of general — New customs officials
Gen. Alfredo Morán Acevedo, a senior army commander, was suspended from his duties on Dec. 7 pending investigation into the killing of seven anti-narcotic police agents by soldiers on Nov. 7 in Tlalixcoyán, in the state of Veracruz.
An official report by the National Human Rights Commission accused Morán of ignoring repeated requests from the local federal police to stop his soldiers firing at the agents who were trying to intercept an aircraft later discovered to be carrying some 360 kg of cocaine from Colombia to Mexico.
The drug traffickers escaped.
US and Mexican anti-drug officials suggested that the army was present to protect rather than to detain the drug shipment.
The government had previously seldom pursued drug trafficking charges against members of the military and the case generated friction within the army.
The issue was reported to be extremely important to Salinas, who had publicly pledged that he would root out corruption and defend human rights.
The simultaneous resignation of three officials in the office of the Attorney General was felt to be linked to the case.
The government ordered the dismissal of nearly all 3,000 of its customs inspectors in early December, replacing them with new recruits, in an effort to reduce bribery and corruption and improve efficiency.
AMERICAS
GUATEMALA
New Defence Minister — Military appointments
President Jorge Serranno Elías on Dec. 6 named Gen. José Domingo García Samayoa as the new Defence Minister replacing Gen. Luis Enrique Mendoza Garcia.
At the same time the Army Chief of Staff, Gen. Edgar Augusto Godoy Gaitán, was replaced by Brig. -Gen.
Jorge Roberto Perussina and Brig. -Gen.
Mario René Enríquez Morales was promoted to the vacant position of Army Deputy Chief of Staff.
The changes, although sudden, were not unexpected.
Among other publicized differences with Serranno, Mendoza had long criticized the ongoing peace negotiations between the government and the Guatemalan National Revolutionary Unity (URNG) guerrillas.
Hostility to the talks had led to divisions within the military itself, between those who supported moves towards national reconciliation and those who believed that the URNG should be denied a political platform.
The changes were interpreted as a hopeful sign that the currently stalemated peace talks would recommence [see pp. 37372; 37527; 37707; 38330 for previous rounds].
AMERICAS
EL SALVADOR
Negotiation of FMLN peace agreement with ceasefire
A definitive peace plan including a ceasefire to end the 12-year civil war was concluded late on Dec. 31, following intensive negotiations in New York between leading representatives of the government and of the Farabundo Martí National Liberation Front (FMLN) under the mediation of Alvaro de Soto, UN Secretary-General Javier Pérez de Cuéllar's personal representative.
Final negotiations on the technicalities of the peace agreement were scheduled to begin on Jan. 5 and to end not later than Jan. 10 — failing which the new UN Secretary-General would decide on a compromise formula — and the official peace agreement would be signed in Mexico on Jan. 16.
The peace plan provided for a UN-supervised ceasefire to be in force from Feb. 1 until Oct. 31, 1992, during which time all accords would be implemented and verified by the UN.
The FMLN would be legalized as a political party and its members reincorporated with broad guarantees into "civilian, political and institutional" life.
The size of the army would be substantially reduced (potentially by 50 per cent) by the end of 1993, civilian authority over the armed forces would be reinforced and human rights violators would be purged from the army with the help of a special civilian-military commission.
The National Guard, the Treasury Police, the Customs Police, some special battalions and all paramilitary groups would be dissolved and a new civilian national police force established to replace the present military-controlled force.
Other elements of the agreement included reforms of the judiciary and the electoral system, extensive human rights safeguards, economic and social issues including agrarian reforms, and the resettlement of peasants.
The agreement did not provide for a specific "quota of power" for the FMLN, an issue which had been a major sticking-point in negotiations.
The concluding rounds of the peace negotiations, which had been held sporadically over the past 20 months, began under UN auspices in Mexico on Nov. 25 following the declaration of a unilateral FMLN ceasefire on Nov. 16 and recommenced in New York on Dec. 16; Pérez de Cuéllar, whose term of office expired only a few minutes after the signature of the agreement, had made the issue of peace in El Salvador a personal crusade.
Final impetus was given to the talks by the presence of President Alfredo Cristiani in New York on Dec. 28-31 at the personal invitation of Pérez de Cuéllar, who gave assurances that the FMLN had given "confidential promises" regarding the peace process.
The final sessions of the talks were attended by a United States delegation.
On Dec. 12 an aircraft carrying two FMLN commanders to the peace negotiations was forced to land in Guatemala following an explosion on board, which occurred after a stopover in Honduras.
Civic and business groups in San Salvador organized a massive pro-government rally on Dec. 7 expressing support for the role of the army and calling for the demobilization of the FMLN.
Opposition parties, which refused to participate after the FMLN and the Permanent Committee for National Debate (CPDN) were prevented by riot police from joining the demonstration, described it as an attempt to prolong the war.
In mid-December Pérez de Cuéllar announced the formation of a "truth commission" to investigate human rights violations in El Salvador since 1980.
Its members would be Belisario Betancur Cuartas, Colombian President in 1982-86, Reinaldo Figueroa, a former Venezuelan Foreign Minister, and Thomas Burgenthal, a former president of the Inter-American Court of Human Rights.
AMERICAS
NICARAGUA
Debt reduction
The majority of "Paris Club" of Western creditor governments agreed on Dec. 18 to a debt-forgiveness arrangement which would erase half of the US$735 million of debt repayment due in the 18 months to March 1993.
The rest was to be re-scheduled over 23 years.
It was also agreed to review in three years' time the entire stock of debt to the Paris Club governments, estimated at the end of 1990 to comprise $5,700 million of the total external debt of $10,500 million.
The United States and Australian governments, however, refused to offer debt relief and would agree only to rescheduling over 25 years.
Amnesty
In a move reportedly designed to promote national reconciliation, democracy and peace, President Violeta Barrios de Chamorro issued a decree on Dec. 22 which granted a "broad and unconditional amnesty for political and related common crimes" committed by Nicaraguans since May 1990.
All prisoners benefiting from the amnesty were ordered to be released immediately.
AMERICAS
PANAMA
Abolition of army
The Legislative Assembly on Dec. 26 approved, by 50 votes to 10 with no abstentions, reforms to 58 articles of the Constitution.
The most important of these abolished the army which had in effect ruled the country from 1968 to 1989, created the office of ombudsman to protect the individual and social rights of citizens, and established the full autonomy of the Electoral Tribunal, guaranteeing it 0.7 per cent of current central government finances to enable it to operate effectively.
Demonstrations on US invasion anniversary
Thousands of people were reported to have demonstrated in Panama City, the capital, on Dec. 20 against the invasion two years before by United States troops [see pp. 37112-13].
The National Liberation Movement (MLN) claimed responsibility for the explosion of a bomb outside the US embassy which was reported to have caused no damage.
AMERICAS
CENTRAL AMERICA
Presidential summit
The Presidents of Costa Rica, El Salvador, Guatemala, Honduras, Nicaragua and Panama, with the Prime Minister of Belize as an observer, attended the 11th Central American presidential summit on Dec. 12-13 in Tegucigalpa, the capital of Honduras [for January 1991 10th summit see p. 37957].
The Secretary-General of the Organization of American States (OAS) and Taiwan's Foreign Minster were also present along with officials from the World Bank, the Inter-American Development Bank and the UN.
The closing "Tegucigalpa Declaration" emphasized the need to promote the region's economic and social development through a renewed integration plan.
It welcomed the recent installation of the Central American Integration Law Institute (INCADI), designed to provide legal machinery guaranteeing integration relations among the region's countries and co-operation between these countries and third parties.
It called on the international community to contribute technically and financially towards strengthening the Permanent Secretariat of the General Treaty of Central American Economic Integration (SIECA).
The importance of the forthcoming meeting in January 1992 between Central American countries and members of the Caribbean Community (CARICOM) was recognized.
The establishment of the Central American Parliament (Parlacén)[see p. 38528]was welcomed, as was the signing at the summit of the Protocol of Reforms to the Organization of Central American States (ODECA) Charter and the establishment of the System for Central American Integration to ensure that decisions reached at presidential meetings were implemented.
The Declaration also supported the current UN peace processes in El Salvador and Guatemala.
It strongly condemned the September coup in Haiti and supported efforts by the OAS to restore democracy and constitutional order [see pp. 38430; 38522-23; 38569; 38670].
Also reaffirmed was a commitment to protect the environment and to the creation of a new regional ecological order, support being expressed for the Costa Rican government's proposal calling on the UN to establish a Council of the Planet Earth during the UN Conference on Environment and Development in Brazil in 1992.
AMERICAS
GUYANA
Postponement of elections — Extension of state of emergency
The National Assembly, reportedly after three hours of heated debate, on Dec. 27 passed the Constitution Amendment No 4 Bill 1991 legalizing the November decision to postpone the general election beyond the constitutional deadline of Dec. 28 [see p. 38571].
Members also decided that the Assembly should be dissolved on or before Sept. 30, 1992.
The Assembly, dissolved on Sept. 28, had been recalled by the government of President Hugh Desmond Hoyte on Dec. 3 and had passed a bill restoring the seats of opposition members.
Despite opposition reservations, the Assembly had then passed a motion on Dec. 10 extending the state of emergency in the country, due to expire that evening, to June 10, 1992.
AMERICAS
COLOMBIA
Surrender of paramilitaries
In late November and early December following several weeks of negotiations with the government, more than 500 members of the anti-communist Magdalena Medio Self-Defence paramilitaries, led by Ariel Otero, began surrendering and handing in their arms in Puerto Boyacá, 200 km north of the capital, Bogotá.
For some 11 years they had acted for landowners and in the 1980s reportedly for the Medellín drug cartel, in the prosperous northern Magdalena Medio region of the Magdalena river valley, to combat left-wing guerrillas and attack and kill trade unionists who tried to organize campesinos (peasants) and workers in the area.
Ivan Dugue, a lawyer and spokesman for the group, stated that the surrender was unilateral and a contribution to the peace process taking place in the country.
He denied that the paramilitaries had been linked to the drug traffickers or had been responsible for the massacres of campesinos attributed to them.
The government refused the paramilitaries the political status which they requested, and offered them the same terms as those given to surrendering drug traffickers: a reduction of prison sentences in return for confessions to crimes.
On surrendering, the paramilitaries had admitted only to the illegal possession of arms and to having agreed to commit an offence.
AMERICAS
BOLIVIA
Bolivian municipal election results
Departmental and municipal elections
In municipal elections held on Dec.1, the ruling Patriotic Accord (AP) alliance of the left-wing Movement of the Revolutionary Left (MIR) and the right-wing Democratic Nationalist Alliance (ADN) won the largest percentage of the total vote but lost political control in three departments and some major cities.
Julio Mantilla Cuéllar of the populist Conscience of the Fatherland (CONDEPA) was elected mayor of the (administrative) capital, La Paz, winning 26.35 per cent of the vote to the AP candidate's 21.4 per cent.
The AP came only third in the neighbouring major city of El Alto, CONDEPA winning 34.10 per cent of the vote and the populist Civic Solidarity Union (UCS) winning 23.7 per cent.
The right-wing National Revolutionary Party (MNR) won its first departmental victories in two years by taking the departments of Cochabamba, Tarija and Santa Cruz and emphatically defeated the AP in the southern Andean city of Tarija, in the northern lowland city of Trinidad and in the country's second most populous city, Santa Cruz de la Sierra, in the eastern lowlands.
The UCS won the judicial capital, Sucre, and easily defeated the AP in the Andean cities of Oruro and Potosí and in total votes emerged as the country's third political force.
The AP won the major eastern city of Cochabamba and the Amazonian border town of Cobija.
Turnout was up by 400,000 (i.e. a drop by half in the level of abstentions) compared with the elections of 1989 [for which see p. 37487].
Various political analysts agreed that this was due to popular participation in the nationwide establishment of impartial electoral courts and clear rules for the running of elections.
Although in many areas votes were cast for individual candidates rather than the party which fielded them, analysis of the results showed that support for the AP had shifted markedly from urban to rural areas where government development plans and projects had made an impact.
The UCS lost ground in the eastern departments of Beni, Pando and Santa Cruz, only to improve dramatically its support in the Andes.
CONDEPA and the left-wing Free Bolivia Movement (MBL) suffered an overall loss in support.
The Left Revolutionary Front (FRI), with a minister in the Cabinet, supported the AP.
Arrest of suspected drug barons
Alejandro Guzman, known as Tito, and Ademar Lima Lobo, who were allegedly two of the country's most wanted drug traffickers, were arrested in a police and army drug raid, along with 54 others, on Dec. 9 in the eastern department of Beni.
Rafael "Ico" Rivero Vilavicencio had been captured in Beni on Nov. 27.
AMERICAS
PERU
Relations with Ecuador
While in Cartagena, Colombia, on Dec. 2-3 for the "Group of Rio" summit [see p. 38675], President Fujimori of Peru and President Borja of Ecuador met for the first time to discuss their longstanding border dispute [see p. 38526].
Borja had earlier responded positively to a letter of Nov. 24 from Fujimori proposing a "friendship, co-operation and integration" pact under the 1942 Rio de Janeiro protocol whose validity Ecuador refused to acknowledge.
The letter also proposed the completion of the demarcation of the disputed border, navigation rights for Ecuador on the Peruvian Amazon and its tributaries, a joint integration zone along the whole border and "confidence-building" measures including a meeting of military commanders in January.
AMERICAS
CHILE
Contraband arms scandal
In late December the government of President Patricio Aylwin Azócar was trying to avoid a direct confrontation with Army C.-in-C.
Gen. Augusto Pinochet Ugarte) and his generals, who had been accused by all parties in the Congress of violating the Constitution, misleading the government and gross interference in political affairs, over an illegal arms shipment to Croatia.
The 11-tonne arms shipment to Croatia, in crates marked "humanitarian aid" , had been intercepted in Hungary on Nov. 30.
Worth an estimated US$203,000, the shipment included rifles, grenades, ammunition and anti-tank rockets.
The operation, organized by the army's arms manufacturer FAMAE in violation of the UN Security Council embargo on arms to Yugoslavia, had been approved by the Ministry of Defence in the belief that the consignment was bound for Sri Lanka.
A congressional deputy, Jorge Schaulsohn, publicly expressed his lack of confidence in Pinochet to conduct a proper internal investigation within the army and FAMAE.
(Pinochet's son, already the subject of corruption investigations — see p. 37958 — was a director of FAMAE.)
Pinochet, in an angry public response to the accusations, stated that the army would respond each time it was attacked and would "ignore the Constitution and put an end to it" .
Later he retracted these comments which he attributed to pressure from the press.
The Aylwin government accepted the explanation and agreed that Pinochet's remarks had been "improvised and not well thought out" .
AMERICAS
ARGENTINA
Gubernatorial elections
The election for the governorship of the north western province of Catamarca, held on Dec. 1, was won by Arnoldo Castillo, the candidate of the Civic and Social Front (FCS), an opposition alliance made up of the Radical Party (UCR), dissidents of the ruling Justicialist Party (PJ-the Peronists) and other minority parties.
Castillo received 56 per cent of the vote to defeat Ramón Saadi, the former Peronist governor and candidate of the Movement of Popular Affirmation (MAP), who received 34 per cent.
Francisco Sotomayor of the PJ came third with 10 per cent, in contrast to the government's success in previous rounds of the extended mid-term elections [see pp. 38388; 38434; 38527].
Saadi, whose family dynasty had effectively run the province for over 40 years, had been dismissed as governor by President Carlos Saúl Menem in April 1991 and the province had been placed under a federal government trusteeship, following widespread evidence of official involvement in corruption and drug trafficking [see p. 38144].
The election for the governorship of Tierra del Fuego was held on the same day.
Juan Estabillo of the centre-right Fueguino Popular Movement (Mopof) received 43.4 per cent of the vote, Stebán Martínez of the PJ 41.1 per cent and Oscar Mazuchi of the UCR 7.8 per cent.
Estabillo was the winner of the run-off election held on Dec. 29, receiving 49.33 per cent of the vote to Martinez's 48.17 per cent.
Vice-presidency issue
Eduardo Menem, the brother of President and the PJ president of the Senate, on Dec. 5 successfully blocked moves by UCR legislators to elect a new Vice-President to succeed Eduardo Duhalde.
Duhalde had tendered his resignation with effect from Dec. 11, when he was to be sworn in as Governor of the province of Buenos Aires, a post which he had won in the Sept. 8 elections [see p. 38434].
President Menem, who was not obliged by the Constitution to call an election, was reported as saying that one was not necessary since his brother was Duhalde's "natural successor as established by the law" .
In the order of succession, the president of the Senate was empowered to substitute for the President during a temporary absence if the Vice-President was also absent.
Dismissal of SOMISA head
In late December Alberto Jorge Triaca, a former Labour Minister dropped from the Cabinet in a reshuffle in January 1991 [see p. 37959], was dismissed by Menem as the head of SOMISA, the country's largest steel mill, a post to which he had been appointed in May 1991.
Triaca's followed his indictment earlier in the month on charges of abuse of authority and fraud.
The charges included his acceptance of a commission following the completion of SOMISA's purchase, at well above market prices, of new offices which were then lavishly decorated at a time when the state company's workforce was being dramatically reduced in preparation for its privatization in 1992 [see p. 38527].
Triaca was replaced by Maria Julia Alsogaray, head of the federal government environment department, who supervised the privatization of the state telephone network Entel in 1990 [see p. 37773].
This was the most recent of several corruption scandals in 1991, involving ministers, presidential aides, and members of the family of Menem's estranged wife.
Despite government promises of firm action, no official had to date been convicted of corruption.
New Air force Chief of Staff
Commodore Jorge Alberto Goyogana replaced Commodore Juan Carlos Fernandez as Chief of Staff of the Air Force on Dec. 16.
Nuclear pact with Brazil
An agreement was signed by Menem and President Collor de Mello of Brazil in the Austrian capital, Vienna, on Dec. 13, opening all nuclear installations in both countries to reciprocal inspection under the auspices of the International Atomic Energy Agency.
Although neither country was a signatory to the 1968 Nuclear Non-Proliferation Treaty [see p. 38255], it was felt that the safeguards agreement, the culmination of a series of bilateral initiatives following the return of both countries to civilian government in the early 1980s, would prevent nuclear technology being used to manufacture weapons.
Fishing agreement with UK
Meeting together as joint members of the South Atlantic Fishing Commission in London on Dec. 5-6, officials from the Argentine and United Kingdom governments agreed to extend a commercial fishing ban around the Falkland (Malvinas) Islands for a further year until the end of 1992.
Both sides also agreed to co-operate to prevent illegal fishing in the area, and to a joint scientific research programme on deep-water fish species in the South Atlantic.
The issue of sovereignty over the Islands was not discussed [see also p. 38435].
AMERICAS
PARAGUAY
Constituent Assembly elections
The ruling Colorado Party (ANR-PC) achieved an unexpected and easy victory in the Dec. 1 Constituent Assembly elections.
The Colorados won 55.1 per cent of the total national vote and gained 123 seats in the new 198-seat Assembly.
The opposition Authentic Radical Liberal Party (PRLA) won 27 per cent of the vote and 57 Assembly seats, the Constitution For All (CPT) coalition 11 per cent and 16 seats, the Revolutionary Febrerista Party (PRF) 1.3 per cent and one seat and the Christian Democrat Party (PDC) 0.8 per cent and one seat.
Other minor parties accounted for 1.1 per cent of the vote and won no seats.
Only 51.7 per cent of the 1,440,000 registered voters reportedly participated.
Running a modern Western-style campaign promising "work" under the name "List 1" (Lista 1), the Colorados responded to the serious reverse which the party suffered in the May municipal elections when it lost control of the capital, Asunción, to the populist Asunción For All coalition (Apto)[see pp. 38189; 38285-86].
President Andrés Rodríguez and the military had subsequently compelled the party's internal factions to present a united front.
The failure of the CPT, Apto's successor, which had the endorsement of the activist wing of the Roman Catholic Church and of the leading CNT and CUT labour confederations, to emulate the May success was attributed to its failure effectively to mobilize its supporters, which in turn was felt to stem from its mistaken belief that the Colorados were a spent political force.
Such complacency was judged as the underlying cause of the poor performance of the other opposition parties, leading to the virtual political eclipse of the PRF and PDC.
Armed Forces Law — Military appointments
The Armed Forces Law, drafted by the military, was passed by the Congress on Nov. 20.
The law ensured the "autonomy" of the armed forces but expanded their existing responsibilities for sovereignty and national territorial integrity to involve them in civil defence and the restoration of internal order at the request of the head of the Senate.
Despite opposition protests, the law allowed members of the armed forces on active service to participate in political activity and prevented the Congress from passing laws affecting the military unless they had been previously approved by the executive.
The Colorado majority in the December elections was expected to guarantee that no changes would be made to the new law.
Under the terms of the Armed Forces Law, Rodríguez on Nov. 21 appointed Gen. Ramón Humberto Garcete, a former head of the First Army Corps, to the newly created post of C.-in-C. of the Army.
This was a controversial move, strengthening the position of the military.
Previously, the Constitution dictated that the President was head of the army.
Objections to Rodríguez's decision on military promotions and retirements (the latter including 14 generals) led to the dismissal and arrest of the Commander of the Air Force, Brig. -Gen.
José Cespedes Zarza [for whose appointment see p. 38573].
AMERICAS
LATIN AMERICA
Fifth Group of Rio summit
The Presidents of the "Group of Rio" countries, representing Argentina, Bolivia, Brazil, Chile, Colombia, Ecuador, Mexico, Paraguay, Peru, Uruguay and Venezuela, met in Cartagena, Colombia, for their fifth summit meeting on Dec. 2-3, which was also attended by President Calderón of Costa Rica, Jamaican Prime Minister Michael Manley and Joao Baena Soares, the Secretary-General of the Organization of American States (OAS).
The most contentious issue discussed was Latin America's attitude to Cuba following the change in its relationship with the former Soviet Union.
Opinion was divided between participants such as President Menem of Argentina (supported by Uruguay) who called for free elections in Cuba, and President Carlos Salinas de Gortari of Mexico who (together with Brazil, Colombia and Venezuela) was optimistic about forthcoming change after hosting two meetings with Cuba at Guadalajara and Cozumel during 1991.
A statement on Cuba expressed "profound concern" over the country's current situation and future and, reflecting a compromise, offered Latin America's help in achieving "justice, freedom, democracy, respect for human rights and free and open economic development" if President Fidel Castro introduced political, economic and social changes which would allow its reacceptance into the OAS.
In an allusion to the United States trade embargo against Cuba it added that "renewed dialogue between Cuba and the countries of the whole continent in a relaxed climate will allow changes to take place and will help to resolve current problems in accordance with international law" .
In a special statement on Haiti the summit called on the European Communities to help with the strict enforcement of the OAS economic embargo imposed after the coup in September [see p. 38430]until President Aristide was reinstated.
Other issues covered in the final declaration were regional trade and integration in the light of a gradual upturn in some Latin American countries' economic fortunes; the intensification of measures against drug-trafficking, production and use; Latin America's role in protecting the environment; and moves to protect the Indian population in parts of Brazil and Venezuela.
ASIA — PACIFIC
AUSTRALIA
New Australian Cabinet
*Paul Keating Prime Minister Brian Howe Health Housing and Community Services John Button Industry, Technology and Commerce Gareth Evans Foreign Affairs and Trade
*John Dawkins Treasurer
**Ralph Willis Finance Michael Duffy Attorney General
**Kim Beazley Employment, Education and Training
**Neal Blewett Social Security
**Graham Richardson Transport and Communications Robert Ray Defence Gerry Hand Immigration, Local Government and Ethnic Affairs
**Ros Kelly Arts, Sports, Environment and Territories Peter Cook Industrial Relations Nick Bolkus Administrative Services Simon Crean Primary Industry and Energy
**Alan Griffiths Resources and Tourism
**Bob Collins Shipping and Aviation Junior Ministers not in Cabinet
**Peter Staples Aged, Family Health Services Ben Humphreys Veterans' Affairs Ross Free Science and Technology
**David Bedall Small Business; Construction; and Customs
**John Kerin Trade and Overseas Development Michael Tate Justice and Consumer Affairs
**Peter Baldwin Higher Education; Employment Services Robert Tickner Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander Affairs
*David Simons Family Support; Local Government Bob Brown Land Transport
*Gordon Bilney Defence; Science; Personnel
*Wendy Fatin Arts; Territories; Status of Women
*New appointment.
**Altered responsibilities.
Replacement of Prime Minister
Paul Keating became Prime Minister of Australia on Dec. 19 after defeating Bob Hawke in a contest for the leadership of the ruling Australian Labor Party (ALP).
The result ended a protracted leadership struggle between the two men which had seen Hawke, 62, narrowly defeat a similar challenge from Keating, 47, in June [see p. 38294].
Background to leadership challenge
By late 1991 the Hawke government faced a number of severe difficulties.
Australia remained in the midst of economic recession with gross domestic product (GDP) continuing to contract and unemployment rising to more than 10 per cent of the labour force.
Hawke, already politically damaged by his mid-year struggle with Keating, also had his credibility undermined further by the collapse of his planned reform of the country's federal structure when the state Premiers withdrew from the planned federal-state talks due to be held in Canberra on Nov. 22.
Hawke's problems were compounded by the skill of John Hewson, the leader of the Liberal-National Party opposition coalition.
In early December Hewson unveiled an economic blueprint for national recovery which was favourably received by most political commentators.
The plan involved a 15 per cent consumption tax, extensive privatization of state enterprises, cuts in social welfare spending, the stimulation of investment and an end to the "cronyism" with which so many of the government's appointments had been tainted.
The unveiling of the plan coincided with opinion poll results which indicated that not only was the opposition running strongly ahead of the ALP, but that Hewson had opened a commanding lead over Hawke as the electorate's preferred choice as Prime Minister.
The combination of government decline and opposition resurgence increased disaffection within the parliamentary caucus of the ALP and heightened speculation that Keating would launch a second leadership challenge before the end of the year.
Cabinet reshuffle
On Dec. 6, in what was widely interpreted as a desperate attempt to revitalize his government, Hawke replaced Treasurer John Kerin with Ralph Willis, hitherto Finance Minister.
During his six months as Treasurer Kerin had frequently displayed a lack of ease in the post.
The immediate catalyst for his removal was an inept press conference on Dec. 5 in which he declared the recession to be abating, only hours before the publication of official figures which showed that GDP had declined 0.3 per cent in the three months to September, the sixth successive quarter for which it had been either static or negative.
The Cabinet reshuffle, effective from Dec. 9, saw Kim Beazley become Finance Minister, while his Transport and Communications portfolio was transferred to Kerin.
Hawke defended the changes on the grounds that Kerin had suffered a "loss of confidence" which had inhibited his presentation of economic strategy, but gave assurances that the basic economic policy of his administration would remain unchanged.
He also dismissed speculation that he would resign as ALP leader, suggesting that he had every intention of leading the party into the next election, constitutionally due by 1993.
Election of Keating as ALP leader
Pressure for Hawke to resign increased in mid-December, with several delegations of senior ALP figures informing him that he could no longer count on the support of a majority of the parliamentary caucus.
Hawke refused to stand down, however, claiming that he continued to command the support of the country at large and indicating that he would confront Keating in a leadership ballot.
Early on the morning of Dec. 19 Hawke announced that, at a meeting of the ALP caucus later that day, he would resign as leader and offer himself for immediate re-election to the post.
At the subsequent meeting, attended by 107 of the ALP's 110 MPs, Hawke was defeated by Keating by 56 votes to 51 in a secret ballot.
At a press conference after the vote, Hawke congratulated Keating on his victory and declared that "the fight is over" .
Speaking of his record four consecutive election victories he claimed that "the Australia of 1991 is a profoundly better place than the one in 1983 that I inherited: more tolerant, more compassionate, more competitive" .
His last official act as Prime Minister was to unveil an Aboriginal bark painting in Parliament House, Canberra.
A tearful Hawke called for continued efforts to achieve full reconciliation between Australians and the indigenous Aboriginal community.
Formation of new Cabinet
Keating began his premiership with an uncharacteristic apology.
He retracted his notorious 1990 suggestion that the current economic slump — the worst since the 1930s — was a recession "that Australia had to have" .
He also indicated that he would respect traditional ALP values and would seek to restore confidence in the country.
He promised that his new government would issue an economic statement early in 1992.
Although born into a working class Sydney family and involved in ALP politics since the age of 15, Keating had never attempted to portray himself as a man of the people.
He eschewed the "mateyness" of Hawke's style, and appeared to relish his reputation for aloofness and arrogance.
Self-educated in economics, Keating had become Treasurer following Hawke's first election victory in 1983, and had retained the post until his unsuccessful leadership challenge in mid-1991.
As Treasurer he had been responsible for the most sweeping economic reforms ever undertaken in Australia, including floating the dollar and deregulating the financial system.
Although widely admired by the right, he was unpopular with many traditional ALP supporters.
His intellectual grasp of issues and the vicious wit which he frequently deployed against opponents enhanced his political reputation but tended to engender respect rather than affection.
Keating announced a major reshuffle of the Cabinet on Dec. 27, which included the appointment as Treasurer of John Dawkins, one of Keating's most staunch supporters in his leadership struggle with Hawke.
ASIA — PACIFIC
NEW ZEALAND
Creation of Alliance party — Renewed tension with France
Launch of new coalition party
A new coalition of centrist, environmentalist and Maori parties, formed on Dec. 1, showed early signs that it could challenge the traditional two-party structure of New Zealand politics.
The new grouping, known as the Alliance, consisted of the Democratic Party (also known as the New Zealand Democratic Party, founded in 1953 as the New Zealand Social Credit Political League); the New Labour Party (NLP); the Green Party of Aotearoa (founded in 1972 as the New Zealand Values Party); and the New Zealand Self-Government Party (Manu Motuhake o Aotearoa), an organization designed to achieve greater political and economic autonomy for the country's 400,000 indigenous Maori population.
The only member of the House of Representatives representing the new party was Jim Anderton, leader and founder of the NLP in 1989.
Nevertheless, an opinion poll taken in the first week of December gave the Alliance 37 per cent support amongst the electorate, two points ahead of the opposition Labour Party and 10 points in front of the governing National Party.
The first electoral test of the new party was due on Feb. 15 in the by-election of Tamaki, a prosperous seaside suburb of Auckland, which was one of safest National seats in the country.
The by-election was precipitated by the resignation of veteran Nationalist representative and former Prime Minister, Sir Robert Muldoon.
Although in poor health since a heart operation in 1990, Muldoon had made it clear in announcing his resignation on Nov. 17 that the primary reason for ending his 31-year parliamentary career was his intense dissatisfaction with the policies of the National Party government [see p. 38580].
Since coming to office in late 1990, the National Party's standing in the polls had plummeted as the government reneged on its electoral pledges by initiating radical cuts in the country's welfare state.
Speculation that Prime Minister Jim Bolger might sacrifice the controversial architect of the cuts, Finance Minister Ruth Richardson, increased when, on Dec. 9, she admitted that the government would be unable to meet its election promise of achieving a balanced budget by 1993-94.
Renewed tension over Rainbow Warrior affair
The Bolger government was further discomfited by renewed tension with France over the Rainbow Warrior affair.
This followed the arrest in Switzerland of Gerald Andries, one of the French agents against whom a warrant remained outstanding in connection with the bombing of the Greenpeace ship in Auckland harbour in July 1985, which had caused the death of one of its crew [see p. 38480].
Notwithstanding intense pressure from Greenpeace to pursue the extradition of Andries, and overwhelming support for this course of action from public opinion surveys, the New Zealand government appeared reluctant to reignite the issue in the face of the intransigence of the French government.
This was particularly embarrassing for Bolger as he had been in the forefront of those who had castigated former Labour Prime Minister David Lange for bowing to French economic pressure by releasing Alain Mafart and Dominique Prieur, the two saboteurs who were tried and sentenced for the crime.
Minister of Justice Doug Graham announced on Dec. 17 that extradition proceedings would not be pursued against Andries, and that all outstanding warrants in connection with the crime would be cancelled.
Graham defended the decision on the grounds that Bolger and the French Prime Minister Michel Rocard had agreed during the latter's visit to New Zealand in April 1991 that the Rainbow Warrior affair was closed.
To renege upon this commitment, he suggested, would open New Zealand to possible international legal action and trade retaliation by France.
ASIA — PACIFIC
VANUATU
General election — New Prime Minister
In a general election on Dec. 2 the francophone Union of Moderate Parties (UMP) won 42 per cent of the total vote and secured 19 seats in the 46-member legislature.
Although short of an absolute majority, the UMP finished as the largest single party, owing to splits within the Vanua'aku Pati (VP) which had governed since independence.
Following his removal as party leader and Prime Minister in September 1991 [see p. 38442], Fr Walter Lini, Vanuatu's head of government since independence, left the VP and founded the Vanuatu National United Party (VNUP).
The VNUP and the VP — the latter led by Donald Kalpokas, Lini's successor as leader and Prime Minister — each won 10 seats.
The Melanesian Progressive Party (MPP), led by Barak Sope, won four seats.
One seat was won by the Fren Melanesien Party (a splinter group established when the UMP was formed from the old New Hebrides Federal Party in 1982), and the remaining two by independents.
In the two weeks following the election there were intensive discussions between the VP, the VNUP, and the MPP concerning the possibility of forming a coalition government.
Ultimately these foundered on the legacy of hostility between the various parties and between Lini, Sope and Kalpokas.
The UMP leader Maxime Carlot also held discussions with the three smaller parties, but the price demanded in Cabinet seats by both the VP and the MPP proved too high.
Ultimately the UMP reached a deal with the VNUP which was believed to have involved a promise by Lini that he would not seek a post in the new Cabinet.
When the new Parliament convened on Dec. 16, Carlot defeated Kalpokas in the election for Prime Minister by 31 votes to 15.
ASIA — PACIFIC
PHILIPPINES
Arraignment of Imelda Marcos — Serving of termination order on US naval base
Court appearance by Imelda Marcos
Imelda Marcos was arraigned in Manila on seven tax evasion charges on Dec. 9, arising from her alleged failure to pay income and estate taxes.
Her son, Ferdinand Marcos Jr, was charged with two counts of tax evasion.
Both of the defendants pleaded not guilty on all counts.
During the 30-minute court hearing, prosecutor Aurelio Trampe stated that he would seek the maximum five-year prison sentences on each of the charges.
The seven charges were amongst 80 criminal and civil counts filed against Imelda Marcos which were estimated to carry a cumulative prison sentence of more than 400 years.
After the hearing Marcos stated her belief in "divine justice" and claimed that "there is no place in the Philippines that will be jail for me" .
Notice of termination served on US naval base
The government on Dec. 27 announced that negotiations with the United States aimed at allowing the withdrawal of US forces from Subic Bay naval base to be phased over a three-year period had broken down.
Consequently, it was stated, a one-year "notice of termination" was being served on the USA on Dec. 31, requiring that the base be returned to Philippine control before the end of 1992.
The 24,000-hectare base was the last of the US military facilities in the Philippines.
Four smaller establishments had been recently returned, whilst the huge Clark Field air base — which was severely damaged by the June eruption of Mount Pinatubo volcano [see p. 38294]— was handed back in late November.
Although an agreement for an extension of the lease on Subic Bay was negotiated, it was rejected by the Philippine Senate in September [see pp. 38441-42].
Whilst accepting the decision of the Senate, the US and Philippine governments agreed that the closure of the base should be spread over three years in order to minimize the military and economic dislocation involved.
This agreement, however, foundered upon the failure of the two sides to agree upon the details of the plan, and upon the refusal of the USA to depart from its practice of neither confirming nor denying the presence of nuclear weapons on board its naval vessels.
Nuclear weapons were prohibited from the Philippines by the country's Constitution.
Despite the eviction order there remained considerable press speculation that the US government would seek to reopen the issue of Subic Bay's future with the new Philippine government which would emerge following the presidential elections of May 1992.
ASIA — PACIFIC
INDONESIA
Preliminary inquiry into East Timor massacre
A preliminary report by an Indonesian inquiry team into the November massacre in East Timor was unusually critical of the armed forces.
The National Investigation Commission (KPN), headed by Chief Justice Jaelani, had been established to investigate the massacre by Indonesian troops of pro-independence demonstrators in the Santa Cruz cemetery in Dili on Nov. 12 [see pp. 38579-80].
Jaelani presented his initial findings to President Suharto on Dec. 26.
Jaelani told Suharto that up to 50 people had died in the cemetery and a further 91 had been injured.
The armed forces had insisted that only 19 people had been killed in the incident.
Jaelani said that the troops had been responding to "chaos or riot" , but nevertheless some officers had been "emotional" and their actions were "beyond the limit of propriety" and "exceeded the limit of toleration" .
Gen. Try Sutrisno, the C.-in-C. of the Indonesian Armed Forces, said on Dec. 27 that he respected and supported the KPN's preliminary findings.
Jose Ramos Horta, a spokesman for Fretilin, the East Timor nationalist movement, dismissed the report as "a whitewash" during a visit to Australia on Dec. 27.
Dismissal of East Timor military chiefs
The official Antara news agency reported on Dec. 28 that President Suharto had dismissed the two main East Timor military commanders "as a follow-up of the Dili incident" .
The two men dismissed were Maj.-Gen Sintong Panjaitan, of the 9th Military Command, and Brig. -Gen.
Rudolf Samuel Warouw, of the East Timor Operational Command.
Oil exploration agreement with Australia
Indonesia and Australia signed an agreement on Dec. 12 granting 11 contracts for oil exploration in the Timor Gap, the jointly controlled area between Australia's Northern Territory and Timor [see p. 37124 for signing of Timor Gap agreement in December 1989].
Human rights groups in Australia criticized the timing of the signing of the agreement, which took place less than a month after the East Timor massacre.
ASIA — PACIFIC
JAPAN
Difficulties of Miyazawa government
Within two months of taking office, Prime Minister Kiichi Miyazawa was seriously damaged politically by a resurgence of speculation concerning his role in the Recruit-Cosmos share scandal.
The issue proved serious enough to force Miyazawa to abandon the government's controversial bill authorizing Self Defence Force personnel to join UN-sponsored peacekeeping operations overseas.
It also provided the impetus for the collapse of the unofficial working alliance between the ruling Liberal Democratic Party (LDP), the centrist Komeito Party and the Democratic Socialist Party (DSP).
Failure of Self Defence Forces bill
The government was desperate to pass the controversial Self Defence Forces bill before Dec. 10, the scheduled end of the current Diet session.
The LDP forced it through its committee stages in the House of Representatives — the Lower House of the Diet — on Nov. 27, thereby causing a brawl to erupt amongst legislators angry over what they saw as a flouting of established procedure.
The bill was approved by the House of Representatives — where the LDP had an overall majority — on Dec. 3, even though the DSP voted against it on the grounds that it provided insufficient legislative control over the dispatch of troops.
The bill was then sent to the House of Councillors — the Upper House — where, since the election of July 1989, the LDP had been largest single party but had lacked an overall majority.
Here it was fiercely opposed by the Social Democratic Party of Japan (SDPJ), the largest opposition party, and the Japanese Communist Party (JCP).
As part of the campaign against the measure opposition legislators led by SDPJ secretary-general Sadao Yamahana on Dec. 6 began raising awkward new questions about Miyazawa's role in the Recruit scandal.
Miyazawa had been forced to resign as Finance Minister in December 1988 [see p. 38558]after appearing to mislead the Diet over his involvement in a scandal which had involved numerous senior Japanese figures receiving cheap unlisted shares in Recruit-Cosmos, a real-estate company.
At the time of his resignation Miyazawa had stated that an aide, Tsuneo Hattori, had purchased the shares without informing him of the transaction.
New documents released in early December 1991, however, showed that another of his personal assistants, Masao Matsumoto, was also involved in share purchases.
In the light of this fresh revelation, the opposition demanded that Miyazawa, the two aides and other witnesses testify before the Diet under oath.
In what appeared to be an effort to avoid reopening an investigation into his role in the Recruit affair, Miyazawa sought to reach a deal with the opposition.
On Dec. 10 it was agreed to abandon the Self Defence Forces bill; in return, the opposition withdrew its insistence that Miyazawa and his aides testify, and agreed to an extension of the Diet session until Dec. 21 in order to allow sufficient time to pass a supplementary budget.
The deal deeply compromised Komeito which had steadfastly supported the LDP bill through its various stages.
The party — itself in disarray from scandals and factionalism — expressed its discontent over the deal by boycotting the vote to extend the Diet session, an act widely interpreted as indicating the dissolution of the party's alliance with the LDP.
The breakup of the LDP-Komeito-DSP alliance, an arrangement which had enabled the government to minimize the inconvenience of having lost its majority in the Upper House, led many commentators to predict difficult days ahead for the government, and to question whether Miyazawa would serve his full two-year term as LDP leader.
Confusion over apology for Pearl Harbour attack
The authority of the Prime Minister was also undermined during December by the confusion generated by demands that Japan should mark the 50th anniversary of its 1941 attack on the United States naval base at Pearl Harbour with a clear apology.
In the week leading up to the anniversary pro-US legislators made plans to pass a Diet resolution expressing regret for the action.
However, these ran into difficulty when, on Dec. 1, US President Bush ruled out the possibility of an American apology for having dropped atomic bombs on Hiroshima and Nagasaki in August 1945, an action which he defended as having "spared millions of American lives" .
The Japanese Foreign Minister Michio Watanabe on Dec. 3 stated that the Japanese government was not seeking any form of US apology.
He also expressed "deep remorse over the unbearable suffering and sorrow Japan inflicted" by its "reckless" decision to go to war with the USA.
He stated that the Diet would "definitely" approve a formal resolution expressing regret, and that this would constitute a "milestone" in Japan's acceptance of responsibility for the war.
Nevertheless, on Dec. 6 the planned Diet resolution was abandoned due to opposition from hardline nationalist legislators, mainly within the LDP.
On the same day, however, Chief Cabinet Secretary Koichi Kato issued a carefully worded statement on behalf of the government which claimed that it was in "deep reflection for having caused unbearable agony and sorrow to the peoples in parts of Asia and the Pacific in fighting started with the attack on Pearl Harbour" .
The confusion was heightened when, on the same day, Miyazawa told reporters that Japan had "inflicted an unbearable blow on the people of America and the Asian countries" , adding: "We feel deep remorse." 
His statement was considered to have gone sufficiently far towards an apology to have enraged many nationalists within his own party, without having satisfied those who demanded a clear-cut official apology as a key part of an acceptance of responsibility for initiating the Pacific War.
Resignation of Miyazawa aide in bribery scandal
A further source of embarrassment to the Prime Minister was the development of a bribery scandal involving one of his key supporters.
Fumio Abe resigned as secretary-general of the Miyazawa LDP faction on Dec. 12, amid allegations that he had received 100,000,000 yen (about US$780,000) in undeclared political donations from the Kyowa Corporation, a steel frame manufacturer which had gone bankrupt in November 1990, and several of whose executives were later charged with fraud.
According to press reports, Kyowa gave the funds to Abe in the hope of receiving his assistance to develop resort facilities in his constituency on the northern island of Hokkaido.
ASIA — PACIFIC
SOUTH KOREA
New South Korean Cabinet
Cabinet reshuffle
President Roh Tae Woo conducted his fourth Cabinet reshuffle of 1991 on Dec. 19.
He replaced seven ministers, most of whom were thought to be planning to stand as candidates in the legislative elections due in the first half of 1992.
ASIA — PACIFIC
CHINA
CCP plenum — Other internal developments
Party plenum — Document on agricultural policy
The eighth plenum of the 13th Chinese Communist Party (CCP) central committee was held in Beijing in late November [for seventh plenum held in December 1990 see p. 37917].
The plenum decided that the party's 14th congress would be held in the fourth quarter of 1992.
The session was largely concerned with agricultural policy.
In a speech to "non-party personages" in Beijing on Dec. 2 the CCP general secretary Jiang Zemin said that a document on agriculture approved by the plenum covered the following points:(i) the achievements of agriculture and rural work in the 1980s and the main tasks for the 1990s;(ii) stabilizing and improving the party's basic policies for rural work and continuing to deepen rural reforms;(iii) raising the overall agricultural production capability;(iv) carrying on socialist ideological education and strengthening building of spiritual civilization and the legal system in the rural areas; and (v) reinforcing the party's leadership on rural work.
Many commentators had anticipated that a number of high-level party appointments would be approved at the plenum, but in the event no such appointments were made.
The Far Eastern Economic Review of Dec. 12 reported that Zhu Rongji, the reformist Vice-Premier and former mayor of Shanghai, Zou Jiahua, the conservative Vice-Premier and Minister in charge of the State Planning Commission, and Yang Baibing, secretariat member, Central Military Commission secretary-general and younger brother of President Yang Shangkun, were all to have been promoted to the politburo.
However, the promotion was, according to the report, to be "an all-or-nothing package," and reformists had not been able to persuade conservatives to agree to Zhu's elevation.
A report in the Hong Kong magazine Tangtai of Dec. 15 claimed that the plenum had authorized Zhu Rongji to draft a plan for reinvigorating the economy.
The report also claimed that the plenum reviewed the case of the former party general secretary, Zhao Ziyang.
The plenum was informed of Zhao's mistakes, the principal one being that his political position had not been firm during the "1989 turmoil" .
Zhao was also accused of encouraging the spread of bourgeois liberalization and personal corruption.
NPC Standing Committee session — Adoption of resolution on NPT
The 23rd session of the Standing Committee of the seventh National People's Congress (NPC) was held in Beijing on Dec. 23-29.
The session adopted a resolution on signing the 1968 Nuclear Non-Proliferation Treaty (NPT).
The Chinese Premier, Li Peng, had announced China's intention "in principle" to sign the accord in August [see p. 38411].
Resolutions were also adopted which approved the UN Convention on the Rights of the Child [see pp. 37054; 37732]and the Sino-Lao border treaty [see p. 38532].
A law on adoption was approved (and subsequently signed by President Yang) and a law on the protection of the rights and interests of women was to be submitted to the full NPC in 1992.
Release of dissidents
Dai Qing, a dissident journalist detained by the authorities during the Nov. 15-17 visit to Beijing by US Secretary of State James Baker [see p. 38575], was allowed to leave China for the United State on Dec. 22.
Lau Shan-Ching, one of China's most renowned political prisoners, was released on Dec. 26 after serving his full 10-year sentence for "counter-revolutionary propaganda and incitement" .
New Chinese-designed nuclear power station — Delay in Daya Bay plant
The first nuclear power station of solely Chinese design and construction became operational on Dec. 15.
Qinshan station, in eastern Zhejiang province, had a generating capacity of 300 MW.
Officials announced on Dec. 15 that construction problems had forced a delay in the scheduled start-up of the Daya Bay nuclear power plant.
The plant, situated some 50 km from Hong Kong, would start operating in 1993, rather than 1992.
Sino-Soviet talks — Visit to Japan
The fifth round of Sino-Soviet talks on troop reductions and confidence-building measures along the common border [see also p. 38575]ended on Dec. 2.
According to a Tass news agency report the talks covered reductions in the component elements of the armed forces, geographical limits in the application of a general agreement and the exchange of initial data and monitoring.
The two sides agreed to hold the next round of talks in Beijing in the first half of 1992.
Chinese Vice-Premier Tian Jiyun visited Japan from Dec. 2-11, when he requested additional aid to help strengthen China's agricultural sector.
Tibet
Meeting between Dalai Lama and UK Prime Minister
The exiled Tibetan spiritual leader, His Holiness Tenzin Gyatso, the 14th Dalai Lama, held talks in London on Dec. 2 with John Major, in what was his first meeting with a United Kingdom Prime Minister [see p. 38097 for Dalai Lama's visit to the UK in March 1991].
British officials stressed that Major met the Dalai Lama "in his spiritual capacity as a man of peace" .
Commenting on the meeting, a Chinese Foreign Ministry spokesman said on Dec. 5 that the Dalai Lama was not merely a religious figure, but a "political exile, who has long been engaged in activities aimed at splitting China and disrupting national unity" .
The spokesman said that China was making representations to the UK over the meeting.
ASIA — PACIFIC
MONGOLIA
Split in MPRP — Banking scandal
It was announced on Dec. 2 that a new party had been created by a faction in the former communist ruling party, the Mongolian People's Revolutionary Party (MPRP).
The new party was to be called the Revival Party of Mongolia, and 300 MPRP members were said to have joined initially.
The Revival Party of Mongolia rejected the ideology of the MPRP, but would not refuse to co-operate with it.
Plans for a constituent congress were in progress.
A report by the TASS news agency on Dec. 11 spoke of the arrest of several senior Mongolian bank officials, including the president of Mongolbank and the director-general of the Mongolian Bank for Trade and Development.
The arrests were in connection with a financial scandal which, according to TASS, had lost Mongolia US$80,000,000.
ASIA — PACIFIC
TAIWAN
Taiwan election results
National Assembly elections
President Lee Teng-hui's plan to reform Taiwan's obsolete political system entered a crucial phase in December with elections to a new National Assembly.
The sole function of the newly elected Assembly would be to approve constitutional reforms at a special session due to be held in April 1992.
Prior to the election all 469 remaining "senior parliamentarians" (those elected to mainland Chinese seats in the late 1940s) officially retired; in addition a further 81 "senior" members of the Legislative Yuan and 15 "senior" members of the Control Yuan also retired, ahead of elections to both organs in December 1992.
The National Assembly elections were the first to be seriously contested by parties opposed to the ruling Kuomintang (KMT).
The main opposition party, the Democratic Progressive Party (DPP), openly campaigned for Taiwanese "independence" , defying stringent legal restrictions against such advocacy.
The issue dominated the campaign, prompting many commentators to characterize the election as a virtual referendum on the independence issue.
Results
The KMT won a resounding victory, gaining over 70 per cent of votes cast.
The DPP failed to gain the number of seats necessary seriously to oppose President Lee's constitutional reform programme in 1992-93.
A total of 667 candidates fielded by 17 political parties contested the 225 directly elected seats in the 325-member Assembly.
A further 100 seats were set aside for members to be appointed proportionally among political parties winning at least 5 per cent of the vote, including 20 reserved for overseas Chinese.
Voter turnout, at 68.3 per cent, was higher than had been expected, and the elections had proceeded smoothly with no violence.
New chief of staff
The Far Eastern Economic Review of Dec. 5 reported that Adml.
Liu Ho-chien had been appointed to replace Gen. Chen Hsin-ling as military chief of staff.
Liu had served as President Lee's strategy adviser, and his appointment would reportedly strengthen Lee's influence in the military.
Establishment of cross-straits association in Beijing
On Dec. 16 China established a non-governmental Association for Relations Across the Taiwan Straits (ARATS) to promote exchanges and co-operation between China and Taiwan.
Wang Daohan was elected president of the Association and Tang Shubei executive president.
Taiwan had established a similar organization, the Straits Exchange Foundation (SEF), in November 1990 [see p. 37859].
Chen Jung-chieh, the SEF deputy secretary general, sent a message of congratulations to Wang Daohan on Dec. 16.
ASIA — PACIFIC
HONG KONG
Legco vote against agreement on Court of Final Appeal
In an unprecedented move the Hong Kong Legislative Council (Legco) or parliament voted overwhelmingly on Dec. 4 to reject an agreement on the composition of Hong Kong's Court of Final Appeal — which in 1993 would replace the Privy Council in London — signed in September by the Sino-British Joint Liaison Group (JLG)[see p. 38531].
The motion, urging the United Kingdom and China to reconsider the agreement, was passed by 34 votes to 11, with four abstentions; nine members were absent.
The Chinese, UK and Hong Kong governments all subsequently indicated that they were not prepared to renegotiate the agreement.
The vote coincided with the 21st meeting of the JLG, which took place in Hong Kong on Dec. 3-5.
Legco by-election
Zachary Wong of the liberal political group Meeting Point was returned to the Legco in a Dec. 8 by-election.
The result was seen as a sign of continuing support for the liberal factions which had won a sweeping victory in elections to the Legco in September [see p. 38436].
Forced repatriation of Vietnamese refugees
A group of 28 Vietnamese refugees were forcibly repatriated from Hong Kong to Vietnam on Dec. 10.
The repatriation was the second since the signing of a forcible repatriation agreement between Vietnam, Hong Kong, the UK and the UN High Commissioner for Refugees (UNHCR) on Oct. 29 [see pp. 38531; 38576].
On Dec. 1 a group of 226 Vietnamese refugees returned to Vietnam from Hong Kong under the UNHCR Volunteer Repatriation Programme.
This brought the total number of volunteer repatriates in 1991 to 6,617.
Only seven Vietnamese refugees arrived in Hong Kong in November, the lowest monthly level in six years.
ASIA — PACIFIC
VIETNAM
Internal political, economic and security affairs
CPV central committee plenum
The second plenum of the seventh Communist Party of Vietnam (CPV) central committee was held from Nov. 25 to Dec. 4.
The plenum was the first to be held since the party's seventh congress in June [see pp. 38271-72].
In an attempt to reduce the country's crippling budget deficit the plenum agreed to abolish all subsidies to state enterprises.
However, there was disagreement over future policy towards the state enterprises, over a third of which were loss-making.
A Council of Ministers meeting in mid-November had debated the idea, fiercely opposed by conservatives within the party, of turning state enterprises into share-holding companies.
A compromise agreement was reached under which a small number of state enterprises would be transformed into share-holding companies on an experimental basis.
National Assembly session
The 10th session of the eighth National Assembly was held in Hanoi on Dec. 10-26 [see p. 38390 for ninth Assembly session held in July-August 1991].
In his opening address to the Assembly on Dec. 10 Premier Vo Van Kiet gave details of the performance of the economy in 1991.
The severe reduction in Soviet aid had led many commentators to predict that 1991 would be an extremely bad year for Vietnam.
However, Kiet told the Assembly that gross national product (GNP) had risen by 2.4 per cent.
Despite unfavourable weather, grain production had remained stable at around 21,700,000 tonnes, and 1,000,000 tonnes of rice had been exported.
The volume of industrial production had increased by 5.3 per cent.
Kiet said that the "planned export quota" of US$1,800 million had been fulfilled and that this marked "an outstanding step of progress in…balancing exports and imports" .
Despite the initially positive tone of his report Kiet conceded that the socio-economic situation was "still growing in a complicated way" .
Inflation remained high as did the budget deficit, overdue debts had "become prolonged" , and unemployment was increasing.
Corruption was "serious" , and smuggling, fraud and other social vices had not been checked.
Kiet went on to outline economic tasks for 1992.
Efforts had to be made to effect a "basic state budget adjustment" .
Towards this end subsidies for state enterprises would be abolished.
A series of uniform regulations would be promulgated to allow the central government to exert overall budget control.
The Assembly passed a law on civil aviation and amended existing legislation on export-import taxes.
Resolutions were passed approving socio-economic development tasks for 1992 and the 1991-95 period, the 1992 budget, tax reforms, the redrawing of administrative boundaries of the provinces of Thuan Hai, Hau Giang, Cuu Long and Ha Nam Ninh and an extension of the Assembly's term of office for three months.
Publication of draft constitution
A new draft constitution was published on Dec. 30 for public comment before being submitted to the National Assembly for approval in March 1992.
The draft represented a substantial revision of the 1980 Constitution.
Whilst reaffirming the leading role of the CPV, it significantly increased the powers of the National Assembly, the Prime Minister and President and the Council of State.
New and revised sections on the economic system formalized the free-market reforms implemented since the mid-1980s.
Imprisonment of Amnesty member — Release of political prisoners
On Nov. 29 Nguyen Dan Que, the sole Vietnamese member of the human rights organization Amnesty International, was sentenced to 20 years in prison, and Nguyen Van Thuan was sentenced to 10 years, when a Ho Chi Minh City court found them both guilty of distributing anti-government leaflets and of establishing an organization "aimed at overthrowing the revolutionary administration" .
The Vietnamese authorities announced on Dec. 2 that they had recently released two political prisoners, Le Thanh Que, a Roman Catholic priest, and Nguyen Chi Thien, a poet.
On the same day the authorities reportedly agreed to provide the International Committee of the Red Cross access to political prisoners held in re-education camps.
ASIA — PACIFIC
CAMBODIA
SNC meeting in Pattaya — Agreement on return of Khmer Rouge leaders — Return of Son Sann
A meeting of the multi-faction Supreme National Council (SNC) was held in Pattaya, Thailand, on Dec. 3.
The SNC was to have convened in Cambodia in late November, but the meeting was shifted to Thailand after the violent attack on Khmer Rouge leader Khieu Samphan on his attempted return from exile to Phnom Penh [see pp. 38573-74].
At the Pattaya meeting the Khmers Rouges demanded the deployment of an additional 800 UN peacekeeping troops in Phnom Penh to protect their delegation.
UN officials, however, had insisted that internal security was a Cambodian matter.
The factions agreed on a compromise under which the Khmer Rouge delegation would initially be based in the SNC's compound in Phnom Penh, a former government guest house which also served as quarters for some UN officials.
The State of Cambodia (SOC) government also agreed to investigate Khmer Rouge allegations that one of their delegation, Kun Tieng, had been abducted during the mob attack on Khieu Samphan in late November.
A Khmer Rouge delegation arrived in Phnom Penh on Dec. 17 for a meeting of the SNC secretariat.
The six-member secretariat had been formed to deal with the SNC's day-to-day administration.
The leading figure in the Khmer Rouge delegation which arrived in Phnom Penh on Dec. 17 was Chan Youran, Cambodian ambassador to China during the late 1970s.
Son Sann, leader of the Khmer People's National Liberation Front (KPNLF), returned to Phnom Penh on Dec. 15.
SNC meeting in Phnom Penh
The first meeting of the SNC in Phnom Penh took place on Dec. 30.
The meeting opened immediately after the second return to Phnom Penh, under heavy guard, of Khieu Samphan.
The other Khmer Rouge member of the SNC, Son Sen, did not return with Khieu Samphan.
The meeting was attended by representatives of the five permanent members of the UN Security Council and by leaders of the UN Advance Mission in Cambodia (UNAMIC).
The SNC agreed to issue an appeal to the UN Secretary-General proposing the quick dispatch of the first group of troops of the UN Transitional Authority in Cambodia (UNTAC).
Serious unrest in Phnom Penh
SOC troops opened fire on crowds of demonstrators in Phnom Penh on Dec. 21, killing at least three people and wounding a further 26.
Although a curfew was imposed throughout the city the next day crowds, including large numbers of students, still demonstrated in the city centre.
On Dec. 23 all universities and colleges in Phnom Penh were closed.
The violence was the culmination of days of unrest in Phnom Penh, including daily demonstrations against escalating corruption within the government and civil service.
On Dec. 20 the house of Ros Chhun, Minister of Transport and Communications, had been attacked by an angry mob.
He was dismissed later that day.
So Khun replaced him on Dec. 27.
An extraordinary session of the National Assembly was held in Phnom Penh on Dec. 27 to discuss the government's response to the unrest.
The Assembly passed legislation which required organizers of demonstrations to apply three days in advance for government approval.
On Dec. 22 Foreign Minister Hor Nam Hong announced that the unrest in Phnom Penh had forced a postponement of all visits by foreign dignitaries, including the Chinese and Vietnamese Foreign Ministers and Yassir Arafat, chair of the Palestine Liberation Organization (PLO).
Termination of Sihanoukist-SOC coalition
Prince Norodom Sihanouk, the SNC chair and the official Cambodian head of state, announced at a press conference on Dec. 5 that the political alliance between the Sihanoukist faction (Funcinpec, led by his son Prince Norodom Ranaridh) and the State of Cambodia (SOC) regime had been officially ended [see p. 38573 for establishment of "treaty of co-operation" in mid-November].
Sihanouk said that he had advised Ranariddh to abandon the alliance after opposition from the KPNLF and certain foreign parties, a possible reference to China.
Foreign affairs
Foreign visitors to Cambodia in December included Gareth Evans, the Australian Minister of Foreign Affairs; a delegation from the IMF and the Asian Development Bank; a Chinese business delegation; Eduardo Faleiro, Indian Minister of State for External Affairs; and a delegation from the human rights organization Amnesty International.
The Cambodian government announced on Dec. 5 its intention to establish an office in Phnom Penh to co-ordinate efforts at finding United States servicemen listed as missing in action.
Belgium re-established diplomatic relations with Cambodia on Dec. 12.
ASIA — PACIFIC
LAOS
Border co-operation agreement with Thailand
Laos and Thailand on Dec. 24 signed an agreement on general co-operation in maintaining peace and order along their border.
The agreement, which provided for the establishment of co-operation mechanisms for the maintenance of peace, was signed in Thailand by Gen. Suchinda Kraprayoon, the Thai Army C.-in-C. and a Vice-Chair of the ruling National Peace-Keeping Assembly, and Lt.-Gen.
Choummali Saignakong, the Lao National Defence Minister.
ASIA — PACIFIC
THAILAND
New Constitution — Other political developments — Relations with Japan and USA
Promulgation of new Constitution — Announcement of election date
The new Constitution, the country's 15th, came into effect on Dec. 9 after its signature by King Bhumibol Adulyadej.
The draft [see pp. 38578-79]had been passed in its third and final reading by the military-appointed National Legislative Assembly (NLA) on Dec. 7.
The Constitution stipulated that a general election must be held within 120 days, i.e. no later than April 8, 1992.
On Dec. 24 the interim Prime Minister, Anand Panyarachun, announced that an election would be held on March 22, 1992.
New election law — New political parties law
The NLA on Dec. 25 passed amendments to the 1979 Electoral Act, giving provincial governors and district officers an increased role in monitoring the next general election.
The amendments also increased the legal expense limit for each candidate to 1,000,000 baht (about US$42,000).
The NLA passed a new political parties law on Dec. 27, requiring political parties to state their assets every four months.
All parties contesting a general election would be required to field candidates for at least one-third of the 360 seats.
Any party which failed to win a seat in a general election would be automatically dissolved.
Formation of new political party
The Far Eastern Economic Review of Dec. 12 reported that some 80 former student leaders who were active in the pro-democracy movement in the 1970s had formed a new political party, Pracha Dhamma.
Although it was acknowledged by the party co-ordinator, Kriengkamol Laohapairojn, that the party would not be ready to contest the 1992 general election, the report stated that analysts believed that the party could be a potent political force in the future.
Seizure of Chatichai's assets
The Assets Verification Committee, set up in the aftermath of the February coup to examine allegations of high-level corruption, on Nov. 26 ordered the seizure of the assets of former Prime Minister Gen. Chatichai Choonhaven and his close aide Pitak Intrawitanunt.
Visit by Anand to Japan and USA
Anand visited Japan on Dec. 8-11 for talks with, amongst others, his Japanese counterpart, Kiichi Miyazawa.
Among the topics discussed was the situation in Indo-China and Burma.
Anand met US President Bush in Washington on Dec. 17, when they discussed economic relations and co-operation and the restoration of democracy in Thailand.
ASIA — PACIFIC
MYANMA
Continued suppression of opposition
Removal of Aung San Suu Kyi from NLD
Aung San Suu Kyi, the main opposition leader in Myanma, was expelled from her party, the National League for Democracy (NLD), at a central executive committee meeting held on Dec. 11.
The news was issued as a government Election Commission press release on Dec. 15 which claimed that she had been removed from the NLD because she was "indirectly receiving support from an organization from a foreign country" .
In April 1991 Aung San Suu Kyi, who had been under house arrest since July 1989, had been effectively removed as NLD general secretary [see p. 38151].
Aung San Suu Kyi's expulsion from the NLD, some two months after she had been awarded the Nobel Peace Prize, was the latest attempt by the ruling junta, the State Law and Order Restoration Council (SLORC), to undermine her position as the main symbol of opposition to military rule.
During December the military authorities annulled the status of at least 25 NLD members elected to the People's Assembly in May 1990.
On Dec. 6 the Democratic Party for New Society was deregistered as a political party.
Norwegian recognition of opposition government — Amnesty report
The Norwegian government in mid-December accorded de facto recognition to the opposition National Coalition Government of the Union of Burma (NCGUB, formed in December 1990 — see pp. 37915-16).
The Norwegian government donated some 2,000,000 kronor (US$320,000) to the NCGUB, whose leader, Sein Win, visited Norway for the presentation of the Nobel Peace Prize to Aung San Suu Kyi.
The human rights organization Amnesty International on Dec. 10 issued a report on Myanma listing some 200 people arrested in the country during the first seven months of 1991, nearly 40 of whom had been sentenced to long prison terms after "blatantly unfair" trials.
Report on Saw Maung
The Far Eastern Economic Review of Dec. 26 reported that SLORC members were "increasingly concerned" about the behaviour of SLORC Chair Gen. Saw Maung.
Citing sources in Yangon, the report claimed that Saw Maung had suffered a nervous breakdown in late November and that his behaviour had subsequently become "increasingly irrational and incoherent…with bouts of depression when he displays verbal and physical aggression" .
Student unrest
Students demonstrated in Yangon and other cities on Dec. 10, the day on which Aung San Suu Kyi's son collected the Nobel Peace Prize on her behalf in Oslo, Norway.
Troops quickly dispersed the students, but further unrest was reported the following day, prompting the authorities to close down the country's universities and colleges.
A bomb exploded in the railway station in Mandalay on Dec. 11, killing two people and wounding 18 others.
Border tension with Bangladesh
There were reports in December of rising tension between Myanma and Bangladesh.
The situation deteriorated on Dec. 21 when Myanman border guards fired on a Bangladesh Rifles camp near Ukhia Upazila on the Myanma-Bangladesh border, killing one soldier and wounding seven others.
According to some reports both countries then began massing troops in the region.
At the same time large numbers of Myanman Moslems started crossing into Bangladesh.
ASIA — PACIFIC
NEPAL
Visit to India by Koirala
Five major agreements covering trade, transit, border control, agriculture and cultural co-operation were signed by Prime Minister, Girja Prasad Koirala, during a visit to India on Dec. 5-10.
Preparatory ground for the visit which marked the steady improvement in links between the two countries after a 15-month period of strained relations [see pp. 37009; 37357; 37531], had been laid in October after a high-level Indo-Nepalese task force, meeting in Katmandu, reached "complete" agrement on the details of a trade and transit treaty.
Speaking shortly after his reception by Indian Prime Minister Narasimha Rao on Dec. 5, Koirala told a press conference that Nepal intended to maintain its neutrality and "will not interfere in the internal affairs of Bhutan" .
There had been reports in October of intensified repression in Bhutan of ethnic Nepalese activists [see p. 38534].
On Dec. 4 Koirala had been quoted in Katmandu as saying that Nepal would not allow its territory to be used as bases by activists from the Indian states of Punjab, Kashmir and Assam.
Cabinet reshuffle
Prime Minister Koirala reshuffled his Cabinet on Dec. 31, dismissing six government members reportedly loyal to dissident factions led by the leader of the Nepali Congress Party, Ganesh Man Singh and former Prime Minister K. P. Bhattarai.
Among those dismissed were Ram Hari Joshi who was replaced as Minister of Education and Culture by Govinda Raj Joshi; five Ministers of State, for Commerce, Industry, Forests, Communications and Water Resources, were also replaced.
Five-year plan
A five-year development plan calling for expenditure worth Rs190,000 million (US$4,400 million), of which more than 64 per cent was expected from the private sector, was announced by the government in mid-December.
Due to be launched in July 1992, the plan aimed to achieve annual growth in gross domestic product (GDP) of 5.1 per cent and to create 1,400,000 new jobs.
The plan's other goals included:(i) growth in agricultural output averaging 3.2 per cent;(ii) an increase in the national savings rate from 12.4 per cent to 16 per cent of GDP;(iii) a rise in government tax revenue from 8.5 per cent to 10.5 per cent of GDP and a cut in the budget deficit from 2 per cent to 1 per cent of GDP; and (iv) a cut in the population growth rate which at 2.1 per cent per year was one of the highest in Asia.
ASIA — PACIFIC
INDIA
Internal political developments
 "Unity March" 
A 14,000-km "unity march" — ekta yatra — led by the president of the right-wing Bharatiya Janata Party (BJP), Murli Manohar Joshi, began at Kanyakumari, the southernmost tip of India on Dec. 11.
The march, scheduled to end in the Kashmiri capital, Srinagar, on Jan. 26 (Republic Day), had reportedly been organized to express the BJP's opposition to the special constitutional status accorded to Kashmir and, in particular, to a clause prohibiting non-Kashmiris from owning land in the state.
Fears that the march would heighten communal tension had prompted Prime Minister P. V. Narasimha Rao to summon a special all-party meeting on Dec. 10 in a fruitless effort to persuade the BJP to call it off.
In September 1990 a similar procession led by the then BJP president, L. K. Advani, had ended in widespread communal violence [see p. 37774].
The latest march came amidst renewed signs of Hindu-Moslem hostility centring on the disputed mosque in Ayodhya, Uttar Pradesh, where the BJP state government formally took possession of 1.12 hectares of land around the shrine on Nov. 3 [see p. 38532].
In disturbances preceding the takeover, the former Prime Minister V. P. Singh had been briefly arrested near Ayodhya on Oct. 29 after protesting against moves to build a Hindu temple on the site.
A Supreme Court order issued on Nov. 15 directed the state government to maintain the status quo of all structures on the recently acquired land.
Appointment of Chief Justice
President Ramaswamy Venkataraman appointed Justice Madhukar Hiralal Kania as Chief Justice to replace Kamal Narain Singh, who retired on Dec. 12 after briefly assuming the post on Nov. 24.
Approval of Delhi assembly
A constitutional amendment endorsing the creation of a legislative assembly and council of ministers for Delhi was approved by Parliament on Dec. 20.
The amendment, which did not alter the Union Territory status of Delhi, also stipulated that laws enacted by the Delhi assembly would remain subject to those made by Parliament.
Bhopal court order — Liquor deaths
A court in Bhopal on Dec. 8 ordered the former chairman of the US-based Union Carbide Corp., Warren Anderson, and eight other executives to stand trial in connection with the 1984 Bhopal poison gas disaster [see pp. 33467-68].
In October a Supreme Court ruling had cleared the way for criminal charges to be brought against the company and its officials [see p. 38532].
On Dec. 3 workers in Bhopal staged a general strike to mark the seventh anniversary of the world's worst industrial disaster, in whose immediate aftermath at least 2,000 people died and 180,000 were treated for toxic symptoms.
On Dec. 31, 91 people died in Bombay after drinking poisoned liquor bought at a government-licensed liquor store.
Four people, including the owner of the shop, were subsequently arrested and charged with offences including murder.
In Delhi 185 people were reported on Nov. 5 to have died after consuming sura, a locally prepared medicine with a high alcohol content.
Janata Dal leadership changes
The opposition Janata Dal (JD) on Dec. 26 expelled Ajit Singh — one of its senior leaders and a former Industry Minister — on grounds of "anti-party activities" .
The expulsion, due to remain in force for six years, followed weeks of bitter political in-fighting during which Singh and his supporters were accused of having made unauthorized contacts with sections of Congress (I).
In September the party's national executive had rejected a proposal to co-operate more closely with Congress (I)[see p. 38438].
Economy
World Bank loan
A spokesman for the World Bank said in Washington on Dec. 6 that a US$500,000,000 structural adjustment loan for India had been approved to support reforms in the state-controlled economy; a further US$400,000,000 would be allocated in 1992 to help finance the streamlining of the public sector.
In September the Bank's Aid-to-India consortium had committed US$6,700 million to ease the country's balance of payments crisis and help encourage public-sector reforms [see p. 38439].
Announcement of austerity measures
The introduction of new austerity measures, including a 10 per cent reduction in senior civil service posts and sharp cuts in travel allowances for government officials, was announced by Prime Minister Rao on Dec. 24.
The announcement came amidst reports in mid-December which suggested that the government had responded positively to the recommendations of an officially commissioned report which proposed sweeping changes to the "over-regulated and over-administered" banking system.
Reports in November, quoting official statistics, indicated that the government's earllier stringent economic stabilization measures had succeeded in curbing year-on-year inflation which had fallen from 15.7 per cent in September to 13.4 per cent in mid-October.
Foreign exchange reserves had risen sharply, from Rs23,000 million (about US$890,000,000) in June to Rs60,000 million in October, largely due to increased lending by multilateral agencies.
Optimism about an economic upswing was clouded by signs of popular opposition to the government's liberalization measures, some of which were seen as a prelude to job losses in the public sector.
On Nov. 29 an estimated 15,000,000 public-sector employees disrupted transportation, banks and businesses in response to a call by opposition-backed trade unions for a 24-hour general strike in protest against the government's economic and fiscal reforms.
Political opposition intensified further on Dec. 29 after the government announced price rises of 20-30 per cent for food grains, including wheat and rice, in a move to check the growing budget deficit.
(In mid-December the government had approved the sale of minority stakes in 31 profitable public-sector enterprises to help raise Rs25,000 million (about $960,000,000) to cover its budget deficit).
States developments
Punjab
According to official statistics reported in the Guardian of Jan. 2, 1992, more than 14,469 people had died as a result of the Sikh separatist campaign in northern India since 1985.
In 1991 alone, 4,768 people died, among whom were 55 people aboard an ambushed passenger train travelling from Ludhiana to Ferozepur on Dec. 26.
On Dec. 2 police arrested a Sikh catering officer, Balwinder Singh Nigah, on charges of seeking to plant a bomb aboard an Air India flight bound for London on Dec. 1.
All-India Radio reported on Dec. 20 that two major factions of the Akali Dal — the Akali Dal Longowal and the Akali Dal Panthic — had merged to form a new party.
Assam
A spokesman for the United Liberation Front of Assam (ULFA) said on Dec. 18 that it had accepted a unilateral, indefinite ceasefire.
The announcement, which followed the release on Dec. 13 of six remaining hostages abducted in July 1991, was reported to be a prelude to formal talks between the ULFA and the government.
Uttar Pradesh
A group of JD parliamentarians headed by Kailash Nath Yadav, recently expelled from the party, formed the Janata Dal (A) on Dec. 5 after openly siding with the party's pro-Congress faction [see above].
Other states
Maoist guerrillas belonging to the People's War Group killed 16 bus passengers in a landmine explosion in Andhra Pradesh.
In Karnataka at least 16 people, mostly Tamils, were reported killed in violent incidents on Dec. 11-13 after the Cauvary [River]Water Dispute Tribunal ordered the state to allocate a significant amount of water annually to Tamil Nadu.
In Maharashtra a group of Shiv Sena members of the legislative assembly, led by Chhagan Bhujpal, announced on Dec. 10 that it had formed the Shiv Sena (B); on Dec. 21 Bhujpal was appointed a Cabinet minister in the state government.
The Chief Minister of Manipur, Raj Kumar Ranbir Singh, on Dec. 4 dismissed five members of his Cabinet.
On Dec. 26, 71 people were feared drowned after a river ferry capsized in bad weather 190 km north of Calcutta, in West Bengal.
Visit by Li Peng
The Chinese Premier Li Peng arrived in Delhi for talks with Indian leaders on Dec. 11-16.
The visit, the first by a Chinese Prime Minister in 31 years, marked a further stage in the thaw in bilateral relations which bagan with a visit to China by the late Indian Prime Minister, Rajiv Gandhi, in December 1988 [see p. 36381].
Regarded by analysts as a political and diplomatic triumph for China, the visit secured a formal undertaking by India to check the activities of its Tibetan refugees.
Three major agreements were also concluded covering principally the expansion of consular representation in Bombay and Shanghai, increase in cross-border trade (reportedly worth currently US$34,100,000 — for its resumption in February 1991 see p. 38006), and co-operation in space technology.
Outstanding differences on the border dispute between the two countries failed, however, to be resolved decisively.
Hopes of a settlement had emerged after Li was quoted, in an interview in Beijing on Dec. 4, as saying that China would seek "mutual accommodation" , and that "pending a resolution of the border issue, both sides should abide by the border lines under actual control" .
Subsequent reports claimed that Li's offer had effectively endorsed the status quo under which China retained control over the Aksai-Chin region in northern Kashmir, with India preserving sovereignty over the disputed state of Arunachal Pradesh.
In a joint communiqué issued on Dec. 16 both sides stressed that they would continue to work towards "a mutually acceptable solution to the boundary question" through meetings of joint working parties established in 1988 [see also pp. 37352; 38192].
Later that day, All-India Radio quoted Narasimha Rao as saying that "there has not been much progress on the border issue with China" .
On Tibet the communiqué noted that China had "expressed concern about the continued activities in India by some Tibetans against their motherland" , while India had reaffirmed that "Tibet is an autonomous region of China" .
In a gesture construed as a concession to China, the communiqué also stated that India "does not allow Tibetans to engage in anti-China political activities in India" .
On Dec. 11 the Indian government had ordered the arrest (overturned by the Supreme Court on Dec. 13) of more than 200 Tibetan demonstrators who clashed with police while protesting against Li's visit.
The move, reportedly aimed at assuaging Chinese fears about growing unrest among India's estimated 110,000 Tibetan exiles, came as their spiritual leader, His Holiness Tenzin Gyatso, the 14th Dalai Lama, gained increasing recognition from government leaders in the USA and the UK [see pp. 38097; 38190].
In an apparent concurrence of views on human rights, the two sides stated that "for the vast number of developing countries, the right to subsistence and development is a basic human right" .
Earlier, at a joint press conference on Dec. 13, Li had said that both India and China regarded human rights as primarily "the right to development" .
Agreeing with Li, Rao added that India found it hard to accept the Western concept of human rights "in its entirety" .
Unconfirmed reports said that other issues discussed and left unresolved were the question of the sale of Chinese missiles to Pakistan and Indian misgivings about recent proposals for a South Asian nuclear-free zone.
ASIA — PACIFIC
PAKISTAN
Anti-government protests — Bank privatization — Foreign relations
Opposition MPs interrupted a joint session of parliament on Dec. 19 claiming government involvement in the alleged gang-rape in Karachi on Nov. 27 of a close friend and political supporter of Benazir Bhutto, leader of the Pakistan People's Party (PPP).
At least 50 people were reported injured, some seriously, during simultaneous clashes with armed police outside the parliament building in the capital, Islamabad.
The latest incidents followed three weeks of nationwide unrest precipitated by the arrest on Nov. 27 of a reported 500-2,000 PPP supporters in Sind and by demonstrations calling for an independent inquiry into the alleged rape.
According to reports on Dec. 7, the victim of the alleged rape, Farhana Hayat, had named Irfanullah Marwat Khan, a close adviser to the Sind provincial government and a son-in-law of President Ghulam Ishaq Khan, as responsible for instigating the attack against her.
The allegations were denied by Marwat Khan who was quoted on Dec. 16 as saying that the "incident took place at [Benazir Bhutto's]behest" in retaliation for Hayat's "close intimacy" with Bhutto's husband, Asif Ali Zardari.
On Dec. 29 an official inquiry report by a Sind High Court judge ruled out any political motive in the assault and cleared Marwat Khan of complicity in the alleged incident.
Pressure on journalists — Other violence
In a separate development, reports emerged in early December that the government was exerting pressure, ranging from the threat of legal action to physical violence, on sections of the liberal English-language press.
On Dec. 12 the Punjab provincial government denied reports that it had recommended that remarks about Pakistan published in a book by a UK journalist should be punished by death.
At least 14 people were reported dead after violence erupted during polling in local elections in the Punjab on Dec. 29.
Bank privatization difficulties — Islamicization of economy
The government's plans to privatize public-sector banks [see p. 38533]suffered a setback after a poor response from prospective investors.
On Dec. 1 the chairman of the Privatization Commission acknowledged that the results had been "disappointing" but stressed that the government's privatization programme, including the sale of state-owned factories [see pp. 38533; 38577]was proceeding well.
The government's difficulties were compounded by separate developments relating to its pledge to Islamicize the economy.
On Dec. 12 the Far Eastern Economic Review reported that the government was under pressure from religious parties to eliminate bank interest (prohibited under Islamic law) after a federal Islamic court on Nov. 14 ordered 22 economic laws to be brought in line with Islamic injunctions by June 1992.
Foreign relations
A nuclear co-operation agreement with China was signed in Beijing on Dec. 31.
Both sides described the agreement as intended for "peaceful purposes" .
On Dec. 9 two bilateral agreements on space technology and technical co-operation had been signed in Beijing.
The secretary-general of the French Foreign Ministry, François Scheer, held talks, reportedly on joint nuclear projects, with officials in Islamabad on Dec. 18-19.
The United States Agency for International Development (USAID) announced on Dec. 3 that it would phase out aid by early 1995 due to continuing doubts about Pakistan's nuclear programme.
In October 1990 the USA had halted all economic and military aid to Pakistan after Congress failed to receive a presidential certification testifying that Pakistan was not developing nuclear weapons [see p. 37764].
Announcing the decision in Islamabad, the head of the local USAID office, James Norris, said that the agency would honour its commitment to allocate the remaining US$464,000,000 of a US$4,000 million aid package agreed in 1987, to allow projects to continue until 1994.
Prime Minister Mian Nawaz Sharif announced on Dec. 13 that Pakistan had decided to recognize the former Soviet Moslem republic of Azerbaijan.
The Vice-President of Russia, Aleksandr Rutskoi, Rheld talks with government ministers on bilateral co-operation in Islamabad on Dec. 20-22.
ASIA — PACIFIC
AFGHANISTAN
Release of Soviet POWs
The Afghan Interim Government (AIG) released four Soviet prisoners of war (POW)— one on Dec. 22 and a further three on Dec. 26 — following talks between the Russian Vice-President, Col. Aleksandr Rutskoi, and leaders in Iran, Pakistan and Afghanistan.
On Dec. 18 Rutskoi had met Iranian leaders to urge their government "to use its influence to secure the release of [Soviet]prisoners held by the Afghan mujaheddin" .
Subsequent talks between Rutskoi and Pakistan government ministers and Pakistan-based mujaheddin groups on Dec. 20-22 resulted in the release of one Soviet POW (later reported to be an Afghan soldier).
A joint statement issued on Dec. 23 after Rutskoi's meeting with Afghan government ministers said that the Russian Federation had expressed "pleasure and satisfaction" at Afghanistan's "continued efforts to secure the release of [Soviet]POWs" .
An AIG spokesman said on Dec. 26 that the last three of the four Soviet POWs had been released in accordance with an agreement concluded after Soviet-mujaheddin talks in November [see p. 38577].
ASIA — PACIFIC
SAARC
Annual summit
The sixth annual summit of the seven-country South Asian Association for Regional Co-Operation (SAARC) was held in Colombo on Dec. 21.
Plans to convene a meeting in November were postponed after King Jigme Singye Wangchuk of Bhutan stated his inability to attend [see p. 38580].
A joint declaration issued after the meeting committed member states "to suppress terrorism in the region" and highlighted the importance of human rights, stressing, however, that "civil and political rights on the one hand and economic and social rights on the other are interdependent" .
The statement committed member states to the creation of an inter-governmental group to seek agreement on trade liberalization among SAARC countries, and to a proposal made by Sri Lanka to establish a SAARC preferential trade agreement by 1997.
Member states also undertook to form an independent South Asian poverty alleviation committee "to conduct an in-depth study of diverse experiences" of the seven nation grouping.
The eighth summit was scheduled to be held in the Bangladeshi capital, Dhaka.
ASIA — PACIFIC
BANGLADESH
A Supreme Court ruling of Dec. 9 upheld the validity of the continued detention of the former President, Lt.-Gen (retd) Hussain Mohammad Ershad.
ASIA — PACIFIC
MALAYSIA
The Deputy Prime Minister, Encik Abdul Ghafar Baba, announced on Dec. 27 that he would head a newly formed Sabah National Front (Sabah Barisan Nasional)— consisting of the People's Justice Movement (Angkatan Keadilan Rakyat — Akar), the Liberal Democratic Party (LDP), the Malaysian Chinese Association (MCA), the United Malays National Organization (UMNO) and the United National Sabah Organization (USNO)— to oppose the Sabah United Party (Parti Bersatu Sabah) at the next state elections.
EUROPE
YUGOSLAVIA
Continuing civil war — recognition of republics' independence
The civil war in Yugoslavia continued throughout December, as the ceasefire brokered by the UN, which had come into force on Nov. 23, broke down.
During December the European Communities (EC) agreed in principle on recognizing the independence of the Yugoslav republics, and the UN Security Council decided to send UN monitors to Yugoslavia, as a preliminary stage to the possible introduction of a peacekeeping force.
The UN special envoy to Yugoslavia, Cyrus Vance, made his fourth visit to the country on Dec. 1-8.
His brief was to discuss the possibility of sending UN troops, although the fundamental condition for this was a firm ceasefire.
Despite some progress in the negotiations on deploying UN troops, including Croatia's acceptance of their being stationed in areas of current conflict in the republic, Vance reported to the UN that deployment could not go ahead until a ceasefire was observed.
However, progress was made, in co-operation with the EC monitors' team, on evacuating Yugoslav National Army (JNA) garrisons from Croatia where they had been blockaded by Croatian forces, as Croatia agreed to lift the remaining blockades on garrisons in Zagreb.
The UN Security Council voted unanimously at its meeting on Dec. 15 to send "a small group, including military personnel" to Yugoslavia, as monitors to prepare for the eventual deployment of peacekeeping troops.
It also strongly urged UN members to do nothing to exacerbate the situation, an admonition perceived as being directed at Germany, which was preparing to recognize the independence of Slovenia and Croatia.
The UN Secretary-General, Javier Pérez de Cuéllar, had sent a letter on Dec. 12 to the German government, expressing his concern over German intentions.
The Serbian government was threatening that recognition of Croatian independence would provoke increased attacks from Serbia.
On Dec. 25 the Yugoslav federal government called for the introduction of UN forces, and on Dec. 31, the Serbian-dominated rump Collective State Presidency approved the UN plan for peacekeeping forces.
EC peace conference — Setting out of conditions for independence
EC Foreign Ministers, meeting in Brussels on Dec. 2, decided to restore credit and trade agreements and to lift aid sanctions with respect to four out of the six Yugoslav republics; Serbia and Montenegro were excluded.
The sanctions had been imposed on Nov. 8 [see p. 38559]with the proviso that they be lifted against republics which could be shown not to be participating in aggression.
At the same time, however, the United States imposed sanctions on all Yugoslav republics (trade with the USA represented about 5 per cent of Yugoslavia's foreign earnings).
The EC peace conference on Yugoslavia reconvened in The Hague on Dec. 9 after a break of one month; an EC arbitration committee report that Yugoslavia was "legally in the process of dissolution" was rejected by the Yugoslav rump presidency.
EC Foreign Ministers, meeting on Dec. 16, voted after a 10-hour debate to extend recognition by Jan. 15 to republics which met certain conditions.
(It was hoped this would allow time for a UN settlement to be implemented.)
Following the decision, Lord Carrington, chair of the EC peace conference, met the Presidents of Slovenia and Croatia, Milan Kucan and Franjo Tudjman, at Graz in Austria on Dec. 18, and then flew to Belgrade for talks with Serbian leaders.
However, the Yugoslav Presidency and the Federal Assembly condemned the EC's proposals and on Dec. 27 the Presidency requested the UN to take control of the peace process.
The conditions agreed on Dec. 16, which were based on a set of guidelines elaborated by France for recognition of new states emerging in Europe, included (i) acceptance of the UN, Helsinki Act and Paris Charter commitments on the rule of law, democracy and human rights;(ii) guarantees of ethnic and minority rights;(iii) acceptance of the inviolability of frontiers;(iv) honouring disarmament and regional security commitments;(v) arbitration to decide a structure to replace the old state;(vi) acceptance of the draft agreement on Yugoslavia's future, elaborated by the EC peace conference [see p. 38559].
Four republics: Bosnia-Hercegovina, Croatia, Macedonia and Slovenia were reported to have requested recognition from the EC on Dec. 24.
Macedonia drafted constitutional changes on Dec. 26 to fit the EC conditions for recognition.
The government of Montenegro said on Dec. 23 that it would not be asking for EC recognition.
The ethnic Albanians of Kosovo asked for EC recognition of an independent Kosovo on Dec. 23.
On Dec. 23, Germany recognized the independence of Slovenia and Croatia and promised that diplomatic relations would be established on Jan. 15.
Germany was thus able to carry out its promise to recognize Slovenia and Croatia "before Christmas" .
The Slovenian and Croatian Presidents had received assurances on their visits to Germany (on Dec. 3 and 5 respectively), that Germany was ready to recognize their independence.
Germany had closed air and road links with Serbia on Dec. 4.
Internal developments
Resignations from federal government — Federal budget
The (Croatian) President of the Collective State Presidency, Stjepan Mesic, resigned on Dec. 5, saying "Yugoslavia no longer exists" .
The Croatian parliament, before which he announced his resignation, approved it unanimously, and backdated it to Oct. 8, when Croatia's independence declaration had come into effect [see p. 38513].
Mesic had been elected in June 1991 to the rotating Yugoslav presidency [see p. 38275].
On Dec. 29 he was elected chair of the Croatian ruling party, the Croatian Democratic Union (HDZ).
The federal Prime Minister, Ante Markovic, also a Croat, resigned on Dec. 20, in protest at what he called a "war budget" for 1992, in which he said that 81 per cent of the money was marked for the JNA [see also below].
Markovic had faced a no confidence vote on Nov. 15 [see p. 38559].
Federal Foreign Minister, Budimir Loncar, also subject of the no confidence vote, officially handed in his resignation on Dec. 11, and handed over his duties to his deputy, Milivoje Maksic.
On Dec. 13 Bosnia-Hercegovina's Assembly approved the non-attendance at Federal Presidency meetings of the republic's representative, Bogic Bogicevic.
The debate was boycotted by members of the Serbian Democratic Party (SDS).
Croatia and Slovenia had recalled their representatives from the Presidency and the representatives of Bosnia-Hercegovina and Macedonia had not attended since October [see p. 38513].
On Dec. 9 and 25 the Macedonian representative Vasil Turpovski announced his intention to leave the Presidency.
On Dec. 29, the Federal Assembly approved the 1992 budget, in which 76.6 per cent of expenditure was destined for the JNA.
Most of the revenue would come from credits from the National Bank of Yugoslavia, as republican contributions had fallen significantly.
The National Bank of Yugoslavia had replaced the dinar with a new dinar on Dec. 25.
Developments in republics
In Slovenia on Dec. 23, a new constitution was adopted by the republic's Assembly.
It was described as the "foundation of the republic's statehood" .
The ruling DEMOS coalition dissolved itself at a meeting on Dec. 30, and called for early elections in April or May 1992.
The government of Serbia resigned on Dec. 12.
Opposition parties were calling for fresh elections, and criticizing President Slobodan Milosevic for his handling of the military campaign.
The composition of a new government was announced on Dec. 23 by Radoman Bozovic, Prime Minister-designate.
It was reported on Dec. 27 that Serbia had introduced its own currency to replace the Yugoslav dinar.
On Dec. 4, the Assembly of Croatia unanimously approved a law on minorities, committing Croatia to accept all international conventions on human rights and granting cultural autonomy to ethnic communities within Croatia, once there was peace in the republic within its 1974 borders.
Croatia introduced its own currency, the Croatian dinar, from Dec. 23.
The leader of the HSP (Croatian Party of Rights), Dobroslav Paraga, was released on bail on Dec. 18 [for his arrest see p. 38559].
Two Serb enclaves in Croatia, the Serbian Autonomous Region of Krajina and the Autonomous Region of Slavonia, Baranja and Western Srem, proclaimed themselves the Serbian Republic of Krajina on Dec. 19.
The two enclaves did not share a common border, but together occupied about a third of Croatian territory and included 300,000 people.
Milan Babic was elected president.
The new "republic" was recognized by Serbia on the following day.
On Dec. 26, the representative to the Yugoslav Presidency of the Serbian province of Vojvodina announced the formation of a "third Yugoslavia" , comprising Serbia, Montenegro and the Serbian Krajina in Croatia.
Military campaign
JNA forces launched what appeared to be a new offensive against Croatia on Dec. 6, attacking Dubrovnik and Osijek, and resuming fighting in Karlovac and Sisak to the south of Zagreb.
Croatian industrial areas near Karlovac came under heavy bombardment from Dec. 27.
EC monitors reported the first use of Soviet-made ground to ground missiles on Dec. 30 south of Zagreb.
Croatia was successfully regaining villages in Western Slavonia, it was reported on Dec. 20, though 70 soldiers had been killed in one attempt to retake an area south of Zagreb.
An EC monitors' document, which was leaked to the Yugoslav press on Dec. 2, accused the JNA of "brutal aggression" and called on the EC to use force against it.
The document called the JNA "a cowardly army, fighting for no recognizable principle but largely, instinctively for its own status and survival" .
On Dec. 13, the Yugoslav Presidency extended by up to three months the length of service in the JNA.
EUROPE
POLAND
New government
Efforts to form a Polish government finally succeeded in December when the new Prime Minister, Jan Olszewski presented his coalition Cabinet to the Sejm (lower house of parliament).
The elections of Oct. 27 had produced a fragmented legislature, and the government of Prime Minister Jan Krzysztof Bielecki had continued in a caretaker capacity.
On Dec. 5, President Lech Walesa had nominated Olszewski, the leader of the five-party centre-right coalition in the Sejm, as Prime Minister.
(Bronislaw Geremek of the Democratic Union, whom he had asked on Nov. 8, had admitted failure on Nov. 13, and Walesa had been seeking since then to find another alternative to Olszewski — see p. 38586 — reportedly preferring the reappointment of Bielecki.)
The appointment of Olszewski, a lawyer who had defended dissidents during Communist rule, was approved by the Sejm on Dec. 6.
However, Walesa's remarks after the nomination criticizing Olszewski's economic programme and the resignation of two parties from the coalition led the new Prime Minister to tender his resignation on Dec. 17.
The Liberal Democratic Congress and the Confederation for an Independent Poland had pulled out of talks with Olszewski on the formation of a government because of differences over economic policy.
On Dec. 18 the Sejm rejected Olszewski's resignation by 214 votes to 132, with 73 abstentions, and the new Prime Minister presented his Cabinet to the Sejm on Dec. 21.
The Sejm approved the new Council of Ministers on Dec. 23 by 235 votes to 60, with 139 abstentions.
Opposition came mainly from former Communists, who as the Democratic Left Alliance were the second-largest party in the Sejm.
The coalition had been joined by the Peasants' Party and the Peasants' Alliance.
Olsziewski said that future government policy included negotiations with the trade unions on social protection during budget cut-backs which were to come.
He also warned that he would be requesting special powers for the Cabinet in order more speedily to implement economic measures, including privatizations, because, he said, state finances were in "a dire condition" .
Constitutional discussions
Walesa suffered two defeats in the Sejm during December.
His nomination for chair of the National Bank was rejected (the Bank had been without a chair since the scandal in August 1991, when the previous chair had been dismissed — see p. 38399).
More significantly, Walesa's proposals for constitutional change were withdrawn, after amendments had weakened them.
The changes were necessary, Walesa had said in a speech to the Sejm, to strengthen executive authority.
They would give the President the right to appoint and dismiss ministers, and to veto a parliamentary no confidence vote in the government, as well as allow a simple majority in the Sejm to be sufficient to approve legislation (instead of the current two-thirds majority).
The draft 17-point "mini-constitution" was put to the Sejm on Dec. 5, but Walesa withdrew it on Dec. 19 because, he said, the work of the Sejm extraordinary committee considering the draft "fails to meet my intentions" .
EUROPE
ALBANIA
New government — Scheduling of elections
Ylli Bufi resigned as Prime Minister on Dec. 6.
His coalition "national stability government" formed in June had collapsed with the expulsion on Dec. 1 of three Republican Party ministers and then the withdrawal of members of the main opposition Democratic Party (DP).
Vilson Ahmeti, a "non-party intellectual" and outgoing Nutrition Minister, was asked on Dec. 10 by President Ramiz Alia to be the new Prime Minister, the first time this post was offered to a non-communist.
(Bufi's party, the former ruling Party of Labour, had adopted the new name of Socialist Party of Albania (SPA) in June 1991 — see p. 38303.)
The government crisis, and a statement by Bufi that the country had food for only six days, had contributed to panic over food supplies, which were critically dependent on food aid arriving from Italy.
Food riots in Lac, 40 km north of Tirana, resulted in two deaths on Dec. 7, and in Fushe Arrez (east of Shkodër) on Dec. 9 the storming of a storehouse ended with a disastrous fire in which 38 died.
A crisis and wave of strikes had effectively paralysed the government for some weeks [see p. 38583].
A DP statement on Nov. 26 had listed key demands as the bringing forward of elections from May-June to February 1992, the resumption of trials of members of the security forces for the killing of pro-democracy demonstrators in Shkodër before the April elections, the removal of SPA members from key positions in Albanian Radio and Televison (RTV — ibid.), and the arrest of former communist leaders ( "blockmen" ) who were accused of abuse of power.
The DP leader Sali Berisha announced his party's withdrawal from the government on Dec. 4, claiming that Bufi was "attempting to create a neo-dictatorship by destabilizing the country in the hope of discrediting democracy" .
His announcement provoked a dispute within the DP, however, with Neritan Ceka resigning as DP deputy chairman and parliamentary leader, accusing Berisha of acting without a mandate, describing Bufi as a "devoted patriot" , and extolling the successes of his administration, which was, he said, "undoubtedly the best post-war government we have ever had" .
Ahmeti's new interim administration, consisting mainly of non-party technocrats in view of the failure of efforts to rebuild a broad coalition, was named on Dec. 14 and sworn in on Dec. 18.
It would administer the country pending the organization of fresh legislative elections.
On Dec. 21 President Alia accepted that the poll should be held on March 1, 1992.
Enver Hoxha's widow Nexhmije Hoxha, who had headed the Communist-dominated Democratic Front until December 1990, but who had subsequently been expelled from the party as it sought to rid itself of the hardline old guard, was arrested on Dec. 4 to stand trial for corruption, as was Rita Marko, a politburo member for 34 years until July 1990.
The dismissal of RTV directors was also announced, and the strike there ended on Dec. 9.
EUROPE
BULGARIA
Socialist Party congress — New leadership
The Bulgarian Socialist Party (BSP) held on Dec. 14-16 what it described as its 40th congress, and the second since the change of name from Bulgarian Communist Party in April 1990.
Zhan Videnov, 32, a parliamentary deputy from Plovdiv and graduate of the Moscow Institute of International Relations, was elected as party leader and chairman in place of Aleksandur Lilov: a new supreme council was also elected, which in turn elected its 11-member executive bureau on Dec. 19.
The results reflected the domination of the congress by those who saw the BSP as a "modern left socialist party" .
The nominee of the more reformist social democratic faction, Georgi Pirinski, not only lost the leadership to Videnov (who received 428 votes out of 608 on the second round after Lilov had withdrawn in his favour) but failed to gain a seat on the supreme council, as did former Prime Minister Andrei Lukanov.
After the congress the BSP confirmed its intention of appealing to the constitutional court against a recently enacted law on the confiscation of party property, one of the first measures brought in by the country's first wholly non-communist government formed in November [see pp. 38583-84].
EUROPE
CZECHOSLOVAKIA
Approval of 1992 budget
The 1992 federal budget, providing for income and expenditure of kcs134,700 million (US$4,800), was approved by the Federal Assembly on Dec. 21.
Introducing the budget the Finance Minister and Deputy Premier, Vaclav Klaus, said that the government considered the transformation of the economy to be proceeding "satisfactorily" on the whole, above all in comparison with the neighbouring communist states: inflation had been brought under control after the deregulation of prices early in 1991, the exchange rate of the koruna had been maintained, foreign trade had developed favourably, and foreign debt had increased only marginally.
There had been a fall in gross domestic product (GDP) in 1991 of between 12 and 14 per cent, greater than expected, but Klaus attributed this mainly to "external conditions" .
Official forecasts for 1992 predicted a fall in GDP of between 3 and 6 percent, and increase in unemployment by one-third, and inflation levels of between 13 and 15 per cent.
The government's aims according to Klaus would be to minimize the decline in economic growth, limit inflation, and stabilize the level of foreign debt.
The main focus of its economic plans would be further privatization, stimulation of exports and new business activities, and the creation of suitable conditions for agriculture and an influx of foreign capital.
In order to ease the adverse effects of the transformation, the budget provided for an increase in social expenditure, targeted more specifically at those in the greatest need.
Defence expenditure would be further reduced.
On Dec. 18 the Federal Assembly had approved the federal government's proposed distribution of revenues between the federal and republican authorities for 1992.
Under the agreement, 35 per cent of the state budget would be allocated to the federation, 41.5 per cent to the Czech Republic and 23.5 per cent to the Slovak Republic.
On Dec. 4 federal and republican leaders had also agreed a formula providing for a one-off subsidy of kcs5,000 million from the federation to the republics, consisting of kcs3,300 million for the Czech Republic and kcs1,700 million for the Slovak Republic.
To pay for the outlay the federal government would increase customs and import duties.
Calfa's visit to China and Pakistan
The Prime Minister, Marian Calfa, paid official visits to Pakistan and China on Dec. 1-4.
The delegation also included a Deputy Prime Minister, Pavel Rychetsky, the federal ministers of Foreign Trade, Labour and Social Affairs, and the Czech and Slovak minsters of industry.
The main purpose of the two visits was to expand economic co-operation and trade between Czechoslovakia and the two Asian countries.
In Beijing Calfa also raised the issue of respect for human rights.
EUROPE
HUNGARY
Treaties with Soviet Union, Russia and Ukraine
During a visit by the Prime Minister, Jozsef Antall, to Moscow on Dec. 6, Hungary signed a treaty of co-operation and goodneighbourly relations with the Soviet Union.
Both sides stressed that, unlike the agreements signed while both countries were under communist rule, the current treaty was one between equals.
A clause in the treaty explicitly described the Soviet invasion of Hungary in 1956 as unacceptable and unlawful.
Hungary and Russia signed a similar treaty on the same day and also established diplomatic relations.
Hungary also became the first country to establish full diplomatic relations with Ukraine on Dec. 7.
During a visit by Antall to Kiev the two countries signed a basic treaty of co-operation.
The Defence Minister, Lajos Fuer, signed an agreement on military co-operation with the Soviet Defence Minister, Marshal Yevgeny Shaposhnikov, on Dec. 18 in Moscow.
The five-year agreement provided for regular consultations between the two ministries and supreme military commands.
It also contained a clause which effectively provided for its continued validity should the Soviet Union be dissolved or reconstituted.
New national bank chair
Peter Akos Bod, hitherto the Minister of Industry and Commerce, was appointed governor of the National Bank on Dec. 6 in succession to Gyorgy Suranyi.
The latter had not been reappointed when the new banking law came into effect on Dec. 1 [see p. 38585].
Suranyi's effective dismissal was highly controversial.
He had been under attack from right-wing politicians for some time, in particular for signing an appeal by a wide range of opposition forces calling for greater democracy in Hungary.
A non-party technocrat, he had also pursued the tight monetary policy demanded by international financial institutions but criticized by government officials, including his successor.
The move was also seen as an attempt by the government to gain control over the National Bank, which under the new law would enjoy considerable nominal independence.
EUROPE
ROMANIA
Referendum on constitution
The new Constitution approved by Parliament in November [see p. 38586]was endorsed in a national referendum on Dec. 8.
The "yes" vote was recorded as 77.3 per cent of the 10,948,468 votes cast (a turnout of about two-thirds of all eligible voters), but with a large majority voting "no" in the Transylvanian counties of Harghita and Covasna, the main centres of ethnic Hungarian population, for whom no special minority or language rights were guaranteed.
The announcement of the result on Dec. 13 was greeted by President Ion Iliescu as "the crowning of the process unleashed by the Romanian revolution of December 1989" .
The Constitution, defining Romania as a "democratic and social state" and criticized by opposition parties as according too much power to the President, came into effect immediately.
Sentences over 1989 Timisoara massacres — Acquittal of former politburo members
A military court on Dec. 9 handed down sentences ranging from 15 to 24 years' imprisonment for "aggravated murder" (rather than the original charge of genocide) on eight out of 21 former communist officials and Securitate secret police accused of responsibility for the action against demonstrations in Timisoara in December 1989 and the killing of nearly 100 people.
The appeal court in Bucharest overturned on Dec. 12 the convictions on March 25 [see p. 38108]of 16 former communist politburo members for "favouring the criminal" (i.e. Ceausescu) over the actions to counter demonstrations in Timisoara and Bucharest, which had led to the overthrow of the communist regime in December 1989.
EUROPE
GERMANY
Resignation of Chancellery official over BND scandals — Honecker issue
On Dec. 3 Lutz Stavenhagen, 51, resigned as Minister of State in the Chancellery in charge of overseeing the espionage services and German policy on Europe.
He had been named in connection with two scandals concerning the Federal Intelligence Service (BND).
Stavenhagen was replaced by Bernd Schmidbauer, 52, parliamentary state secretary in the Environment Ministry.
Some months earlier it had been revealed that the BND had provided Alexander Schalck-Golodkowski, a former Secretary of State at the East German Foreign Trade Ministry, with a West German passport.
Schalck-Golodkowski had eventually fled to the West in December 1989 [see pp. 37107; 37172]and had since lived in what was described as a luxurious house close to BND headquarters outside the Bavarian city of Munich.
On Oct. 26 Stavenhagen was further criticized when a cargo shipment to Israel, which had been declared as farm machinery, was seized in Hamburg and found to contain east German weapons and military equipment.
It was later revealed that this was the 15th such shipment to Israel since October 1990 (the majority of which had been made under BND auspices).
The Financial Times of Dec. 4 wrote that it was "not so much" that he "did wrong" , as that he "denied knowledge of activities" he "should have known about" .
Honecker issue
Erich Honecker, the former East German leader who had fled to the Soviet Union in March [see p. 38110], sought refuge in the Chilean embassy in Moscow on Dec. 12.
The previous day the Russian government had announced that it would extradite him to Germany on Dec. 13 (where he faced criminal charges in connection with his regime's "shoot-to-kill" policy on escapees) if he did not leave Russia.
Both the North Korean and Cuban governments reportedly offered Honecker refuge but as of the end of the year he remained in the Chilean embassy.
German Justice Minister Klaus Kinkel had visited Moscow on Oct. 21-22 for talks with the Russian and Soviet governments and pressed for Honecker's extradition (although there was no extradition treaty between Germany and Russia).
The issue was also discussed during the visit by Federal Chancellor Helmut Kohl to Chile in October [see p. 38526].
Shortly before Russian President Yeltsin's visit to Germany in November [see p. 38590], the Russian Justice Minister Nikolay Feodorov had announced that Honecker's case was now under Russian as opposed to Soviet jurisdiction.
Espionage
On Dec. 19 Gabriele Gast, a former deputy head of the BND's Soviet department, was sentenced by a Munich court to six years and nine months in prison for espionage on behalf of the former East German security service (Stasi).
Karl-Heinz Schneider, her controlling officer and former lover, was given an 18-month suspended sentence for espionage.
CDU congress
At their annual party congress, held in Dresden on Dec. 15-17, the Christian Democratic Union (CDU) papered over divisions over how to tackle the question of party members' collaboration with the former communist regime in East Germany.
The "Dresden manifesto" , approved unanimously at the end of the conference,(i) stressed the importance of forging genuine unity between the two parts of the country; and (ii) called for an end to the constitutional ban on using German troops outside the NATO arena and for their use in UN peacekeeping forces or in a future European force.
Delegates formally elected Angela Merkel, 37 (the Federal Minister for Women's and Youth Affairs, who came from Mecklenburg-West Pomerania and joined the CDU in 1990), as the party's deputy chair.
She had replaced Lothar De Maizière following his resignation along with other party officials in September [see p. 38446].
By the time of the conference the CDU in the east was led by western politicians in Brandenburg (by Ulf Fink), Saxony-Anhalt (by Werner Münch) and in Saxony (by Minister President Kurt Biedenkopf, who was elected earlier in the month).
Formation of Bremen coalition
Following September elections in Bremen [see p. 38447], the Social Democratic Party (SPD) on Dec. 11 formed a coalition with the Free Democrats (FDP) and the Greens.
This was the second such "traffic-light coalition" (Ampelcoalition) to be set up at Land level in Germany, after that in Brandenburg [see p. 37762].
Klaus Wedemeier (SPD) remained mayor of Bremen.
Economy
With effect from Dec. 20 the Bundesbank raised the discount rate from 7.5 per cent to 8 per cent and the Lombard rate from 9.25 per cent to 9.75 per cent.
The move was intended to bolster the strength of the deutschmark and to stem inflation (running at an annualized rate of above 4 per cent, and in the Bundesbank's view likely to become higher as a result of possible high wage settlements in the current round of pay talks and the government's expansionary fiscal policy following unification).
[For last interest rate rise, in August 1991, see p. 3840.]
As a result rates were immediately raised in Austria, Belgium, Denmark and the Netherlands, while France, Italy and Spain also followed suit on Dec. 23.
In a television interview on Dec. 26 French Finance Minister Pierre Bérégovoy described the Bundesbank's action as indicative of a dangerous economic "egoism" .
EUROPE
UNITED KINGDOM
Court rulings on immigration cases
A High Court judge on Dec. 2 severely criticized alleged failings on the part of Home Secretary Kenneth Baker over the proposed deportation of an Indian Sikh dissident (Karamjit Singh Chahal) who had sought political asylum in the United Kingdom.
Baker undertook to review his decision.
Also on Dec. 2 Baker announced that he was appealing to the House of Lords against an Appeal Court ruling of Nov. 29 which had declared him personally in contempt of court over his decision in May to cancel the return flight to the UK of a deported Zaïrean citizen, although a High Court judge had ordered a stay on the latter's removal.
Baker had previously come under heavy attack in parliament over the escape from Brixton Prison in July of two suspected members of the Irish Republican Army [see p. 38356], over the introduction of legislation related to dangerous dogs, and over the outbreak of inner-city rioting in August-September [see p. 38445].
[For other recent Appeal Court rulings see pp. 38111; 38301; 38588; for introduction of legislation to tighten the administration of immigration rules and procedures see p. 38593.]
Aid for housing market
Announcements were made on Dec. 19 designed to revive the housing market, which was currently severely depressed due largely to persistently high mortgage interest rates (despite some reduction in the course of 1991) and the accompanying spate of repossessions.
Stamp duty on most house sales was effectively suspended for eight months; building societies and banks agreed to put up some £750-£1,000 million for rent-back or similar schemes to help mortgage payers who were in difficulties; and legislation was to be introduced to make possible the direct payment of mortgage interest by the government to lenders where borrowers were in receipt of(social security) income support.
Collapse of Maxwell media empire
The death in November of Robert Maxwell [see p. 38588]was followed by the collapse of his media empire.
In late November the debts of Maxwell Communication Corporation (MCC) were put at £1,400 million, those of Mirror Group Newspapers (MGN) at £360 million and those of Maxwell family companies (which owned a 68 per cent stake in MCC and a 51 per cent stake in MGN) at £800 million.
Attention centred on a £55,000,000 loan made in July 1991 by the Swiss Bank Corporation to a unit of Headington Investments, a company owned by the Maxwell family.
Collateral was reportedly never delivered in full on the loan and on Nov. 18 the Serious Fraud Office was asked to investigate the loan.
Trading in MCC and MGN shares was suspended on Dec. 2.
The following day Maxwell's sons, Ian and Kevin, resigned from the boards of MGN and MCC after it was revealed that an estimated £350 million was missing from the MGN pension fund and that another £126 million had been used to secure loans to Maxwell private companies.
On Dec. 6 Headington Investtments and another major Maxwell family company, Robert Maxwell Group, were placed in administration, throwing into doubt the future of the European and the New York Daily News newspapers.
On Dec. 16 MCC applied for bankruptcy protection under Chapter 11 of the United States code of bankruptcy law and on Dec. 20 the UK High Court placed MCC in administration.
A Spanish forensic inquiry published on Dec. 13 found that it was likely that Maxwell had fallen overboard accidentally, although other causes "cannot be firmly ruled out" .
As provided for under Spanish law, in cases where there was no indication of criminality in connection with the death, the Spanish judge recommended that the case be closed.
New head of MI5
It was announced on Dec. 16 that Stella Rimington, a deputy director-general of the security service MI5, had been appointed its director-general from February 1992 in succession to Sir Patrick Walker, whose identity, in accordance with established practice, had never been officially confirmed.
[For the Security Service Act 1989 which put MI5 on a statutory basis, see p. 37158.]
EUROPE
NORTHERN IRELAND
Fire-bomb attacks — Continued sectarian killings
During December fire bombs and bomb threats disrupted Christmas shopping and public transport in London and Belfast, and started warehouse fires in London and other cities.
Responsibility was claimed by the Irish Republican Army (IRA), which in a statement on Dec. 15 declared that "the economic cost of disruption to daily life in Britain will continue to rise as long as the British government and its army continues to occupy part of Ireland" .
Incendiary devices exploded in department stores or warehouses in London on Dec. 1, 2, 3 and 14, at the National Gallery in London on Dec. 15, and in Blackpool and Manchester on Dec. 8.
Public transport in London was seriously disrupted when train and underground stations had to be closed after explosions on Dec. 16 and 23.
In Northern Ireland sectarian killings continued.
Three Protestants and two Catholics were shot dead on the weekend of Dec. 21-22 alone.
On Dec. 12 a 900-kg bomb, described as one of largest ever used by the IRA, exploded outside a police station in Craigavon, injuring more than 60 people.
The IRA announced a 72-hour ceasefire from midnight on Dec. 23.
Anglo-Irish summit
At a meeting on Dec. 4 in Dublin United Kingdom Prime Minister John Major and his Irish counterpart Charles Haughey agreed to meet every six months, alternately in Dublin and London.
EUROPE
NETHERLANDS
Expulsion of Russian Jews
On Dec. 16 the Netherlands authorities expelled 43 Russian Jews and put them on an aeroplane to Israel after their applications for asylum were turned down; a further nine were expelled on Dec. 23.
Some 200 Russian Jews had come to the Netherlands from Israel via Hungary in mid-1991 and sought asylum on the grounds that they had been discriminated against when they arrived in Israel from the Soviet Union.
EUROPE
AUSTRIA
Asylum legislation
On Dec. 4 the Nationalrat (lower house of parliament) approved tougher asylum legislation.
It introduced a shortened review procedure for "unfounded" asylum applications — either from those whose identity and/or nationality could not be conclusively proved, or those from a country where there was deemed to be no danger of persecution.
In the first 11 months of 1991 there were 25,226 asylum applications (of which 7,197 came from Romania and 5,653 from Yugoslavia).
This represented the highest level since 1981 and compared with 23,000 for the whole of 1990 [see pp. 37969; 38464].
EUROPE
SWITZERLAND
President and Vice-President for 1992
On Dec. 4 a combined sitting of both houses of parliament (Bundesversammlung) elected René Felber (hitherto Vice-President) and Adolf Ogi as President and Vice-President respectively for 1991.
On the same day the current members of the Bundesrat (Cabinet — as listed on p. 38497) were confirmed in their posts; the October general election [see pp. 38542-43]saw no change in the ruling four-party coalition, in power since 1959.
EUROPE
SPAIN
Publication of ETA prisoners' conversation — PCE congress
There was speculation in December that the government was contemplating re-opening a dialogue with the Basque armed movement ETA after the Interior Ministry released to the press transcripts of two ETA prisoners' conversations in which they condemned the use of violence.
The telephone conversations recorded on Nov. 9 were between two prominent members of ETA held in Nanclares de Oca prison, Isidro Etxabe and Juan Antonio Urrutia, and their relatives.
Transcripts were published in the Spanish press on Dec. 2.
Commenting on the killing on Nov. 7 of a two-year-old child by an ETA car-bomb intended for his policeman father, Extabe described the ETA leadership as "four imbeciles" and said that such operations were turning Basque opinion as well as general opinion against ETA.
Government officials denied that it was intended to re-open the direct negotiations with ETA leaders which had been suspended, after talks in Algiers, in April 1989 [see pp. 36597; 36627-28].
Justice Minister Tomás de la Quadra Salcedo nevertheless on Dec. 2 welcomed the conversations as showing divisions within ETA ranks.
There were 525 ETA prisoners serving prison sentences thoughout Spain.
Under the policy of "re-insertion" introduced in the late 1980s some prisoners who renounced violence had been offered amnesties [see pp. 36628; 37587].
PCE congress
At the 13th congress of the Spanish Communist Party (PCE) in Madrid on Dec. 19-22 a key issue was the PCE's future as an independent party within the United Left (IU) alliance.
Julio Anguita was, as had been expected, re-elected as the secretary general of the PCE, a post he had held since 1988.
He gave his support to a motion, subsequently adopted, advocating that the IU should continue as a federation of independent parties.
This motion remained subject to further debate at a forthcoming third federal assembly of the IU, which was likely to be held in the spring of 1992.
Anguita had resigned as general co-ordinator of the IU on Nov. 27, after opposing some PCE members and members of other parties within the alliance who had argued that parties making up the IU should dissolve to form one party.
González"visit to Israel
During a visit to Israel on Dec. 2-3 Prime Minister Felipe González met with the Israeli Prime Minister Itzhak Shamir, with Labour Party leaders including the party president Shimon Peres, and with a group of Palestinian leaders including Faisal al-Husseini and a representative of the Islamic party Hamas.
His call for the Israeli government to "take the initiative for peace" was interpreted as an appeal for a freeze on Israeli settlements in the Occupied Territories.
Regularizations of immigrant status
Some 110,000 immigrants met the Dec. 10 deadline for applications to regularize their status as residents of Spain.
Those who had entered the country before May 15, 1991, were entitled to present documentation showing tthat hey either were employed or had a viable project to set up a business.
Almost half the applicants were from Morocco, followed by far smaller numbers from the Dominican Republic, Argentina and Senegal.
Reduction of military service
Compulsory military service in Spain was reduced from 12 to nine months from Jan. 1, 1992.
EUROPE
ITALY
Election plans
Prime Minister Giulio Andreotti on Dec. 1 announced that his four-party coalition government was planning for a general election in March or early April 1992.
Elections were due by May 1992 at the latest, the previous general election having been held in June 1987 [see p. 35586].
Presidential elections were due by July 1992.
President Francesco Cossiga, 63, who had been elected in July 1985, had made it clear that he would not be standing for re-election.
Criticism of Cossiga for heading the movement for constitutional reform in favour of an executive presidency had come not just from the opposition Democratic Party of the Left (PDS-formerly the Communist Party) but also from within the Christian Democratic (DC) party, notably from former Interior Minister Oscar Luigi Scalfaro, and from Ettore Gallo, who had retired as President of the Constitutional Court in July.
Strike by magistrates
About 80 per cent of the country's 6,800 magistrates staged a day-long strike on Dec. 3.
The strike was the latest stage in a dispute which dated from 1990, when Cossiga had first criticized the Higher Council of Magistates (CSM), of which he was titular president.
On Nov. 22 the CSM cancelled a meeting after Cossiga had failed to approve the meeting's agenda and had instead threatened to have the magistrates arrested if they went ahead with the session.
Cossiga was understood to regard left-wing sympathizers as being over-represented in the CSM and to view with disfavour proposed investigations into such politically sensitive subjects as the powers of the masonic lodges and arms sales to Libya.
On Nov. 25 the PDS under Achille Ochetto voted to demand Cossiga's impeachment for exceeding his consitutional powers in his dealings with the magistrates.
Cossiga had himself threatened to reveal details of the Italian communists' alleged past contacts with east European security services.
Communist Refoundation Party
The Communist Refoundation, which in February 1991 had split from the newly formed PDS [see pp. 38021; 38300], formally constituted itself as a political party on Dec. 15.
The secretary-general of the PRC (Partito della Rifondazione comunista) was Armando Cossutta.
The declared aim of the PRC to was to win at least 10 per cent of the seats in the forthcoming legislative elections and to "become what the PDS no longer is: a party of the masses" .
Cossutta told some 1,500 delegates meeting in Rome that the Soviet Communist Party had fallen due to its own errors, not because of any flaws in the ideals of the 1917 October revolution.
1992 budget
On the weekend of Dec. 28-29 the budget for 1992 received final approval in the Senate.
After weeks of intense inter-party debate, clauses relating to privatization had been omitted.
It was anticipated that these would be passed separately in coming weeks.
It was hoped to keep the public-sector deficit at a level of 10.5 per cent of gross domestic product (GDP), partly through cuts in public spending and through receipts from anticipated privatizations.
A tax amnesty would allow unpaid taxes since 1986 to be paid at 15-20 per cent of their original value.
It was hoped to reduce inflation, which was still running at over 6 per cent a year, to below 5 per cent, and to enforce a 4.5 per cent ceiling on public-sector wage increases.
This was the first time an Italian budget had been drawn up with the advice of European Community officials and approved by the EC Commission.
Targets set for budget deficits were intended, as part of a three-year economic convergence plan, to allow Italy to be part of the full currency union in 1997.
On Nov. 11, EC Finance Ministers had asked the Italian goverment to "stand ready to take additional prespecified measures" should projections prove to have been over-optimistic.
An International Monetary Fund (IMF) report given to Treasury Minister Guido Carli on Nov. 18 had expressed similar reservations on planned deficit reductions: "What is perceived as politically feasible still falls short of what is required." 
EUROPE
GREECE
KKE congress — 1992 budget — Expulsion of Albanians
The 14th congress of the Communist Party of Greece (KKE-Exterior), held in Athens on Dec. 18-22, re-elected Aleka Papariga as general secretary.
The session provided the opportunity for conservative currents within the party to reassert themselves, following the split in July when reformist members had shifted their allegiance to the Left Alliance [see pp. 38021; 38115; 38357].
In August the KKE had expressed support for the attempted coup against Soviet President Gorbachev, and Papariga now declared that the process of perestroika "which has been presented as the political restructuring of socialism, is in fact a most savage…restoration of capitalism" .
She criticized Greece's proposed membership of the West European Union (WEU) and said that the European Community was creating a "two-speed Europe" which would "further marginalize" Greece.
She rejected the possibility, for the time being, of any alliance with either the Left Alliance or the Panhellenic Socialist Movement (Pasok).
The congress was attended by 716 Greek delegates and 25 foreign delegations.
Recent opinion polls were reported to have given the party under 2 per cent of electoral support.
1992 budget
The budget for 1992 presented by the Finance Minister Yannis Paliokrassas on Nov. 29 planned for an intensification of the existing policy of economic austerity.
It was calculated that the measures contained in the 1992 budget would bring about a reduction of 3-4 per cent in the real incomes of many workers and pensioners, as anticipated increases in wages and in pensions were equivalent to half of the inflation rate (expected to be 12.5 per cent).
[See also p. 38592].
Government spending would rise by 9 per cent, and a net budget deficit equivalent to 7.6 per cent of Greece's gross domestic product was allowed for.
Expulsion of Albanians
On Dec. 13, Greek police were reported to have arrested 500 Albanians, most of whom were said to have entered the country illegally over the previous year as the situation of ethnic Greeks in Albania deteriorated.
A Dec. 21 announcement by the authorities that a new border police force was to be created and military patrols strengthened was followed by the deportation of thousands of Albanian nationals over the next week.
The Albanian Deputy Foreign Minister Mehill Marku denounced the deportations a "a flagrant violation of human rights and immigrants rights" and said that there had been no consultation with the Albanian authorities.
EUROPE
TURKEY
Extension of allied troop mandate
On Dec. 19 the Cabinet extended for a further six months from Dec. 31 the mandate of the multinational force deployed in the south and south-east of the country for the protection of Iraqi Kurds.
After the withdrawal of the ground forces of the "Provide Comfort" operation [see pp. 38357; 38450-51]the remaining forces, described in some reports as a 48-warplane deterrent force (backed up by a United States aircraft carrier in the eastern Mediterranean) were deployed at joint Turkish-United States air bases at Incirlik and Pirinclick.
Istanbul fire-bombing
The firebombing of an Istanbul department store on Dec. 25, in which 11 people died, was apparently carried out by Kurdish students in protest at the deaths the previous day of at least eight Kurds attending funerals in the south-east.
The owner of the store was the brother of the Emergency Regional Governor of Diyarbakir, Necati Cetinkaya.
The funerals of members of the Kurdistan Workers' Party (PKK) guerrilla movement had been the scene of demonstrations and clashes with troops.
Nine soldiers had also been killed in a PKK attack later on Dec. 24.
New NLP leader
An alignment known as the Democratic Movement Party, under the leadership of Alpaslan Turkes, on Dec. 27 merged with the Nationalist Labour Party (NLP).
Turkes' group had emerged among Grand National Assembly delegates returned in the October general election, and was reported to comprise 19 delegates.
On Dec. 19 Turkes was elected leader of the NLP in an uncontested election at the NLP's third congress.
EUROPE
EUROPE
Signature of European Energy Charter
On Dec. 17 in The Hague, 45 states and organizations signed the European Energy Charter (agreed in November 1991 — see p. 38602), described as "the key to unlocking the resources of the former Soviet bloc countries" in which 35-40 per cent of the world's gas, half its coal and half its petroleum were located.
A legally binding agreement to implement this 14-page political declaration was scheduled to be drawn up in the first half of 1992.
Signatories were the 12 countries of the European Communities (EC), Albania, Armenia, Australia, Austria, Azerbaijan, Byelarus, Bulgaria, Canada, Cyprus, Czechoslovakia, Finland, Georgia, Hungary, Iceland, Japan, Kazakhstan, Latvia, Liechtenstein, Malta, Norway, Poland, Romania, Russia, Sweden, Switzerland, Tadjikistan, Turkey, Ukraine, United States, Uzbekistan, Yugoslavia (the Belgrade government), the EC itself, and the recently formed Interstate Economic Committee of the (still at that stage existing) Soviet Union [see p. 38581].
Signatories specified that signature by the Soviet republics did not imply recognition of the latter as independent states.
Arrangements were being made for signature by Estonia, Kirghistan, Lithuania, Moldova and Turkmenistan.
EUROPE
EUROPEAN COMMUNITIES
Signature of agreements with Czechoslovakia, Hungary and Poland
The European Communities (EC) signed association agreements (initialled in November — see p. 38593) with Czechoslovakia, Hungary and Poland on Dec. 16 in Brussels.
On the same day EC foreign ministers agreed in principle to open negotiations on an association agreement with Romania.
Agreement on HDTV
On Dec. 19 EC research ministers unanimously agreed on the technical standards to be applied for high definition television (HDTV) broadcasting within the EC.
From January 1995 all new satellite television services would have to broadcast using an improved satellite transmission standard known as D2-Mac (an intermediate standard to HD-Mac — see p. 38506), although they could simultaneously broadcast in one of the existing standards (PAL or SECAM).
Existing services would be allowed to continue broadcasting to existing standards indefinitely.
Existing satellite television legislation was due to expire on Dec. 31; the new directive would come into effect from Jan. 1, 1992, and expire in 1998.
It was still necessary to organize the signing of a legally binding document by broadcasters and manufacturers; detailed financing proposals had still to be made by the Commission, which put likely EC expenditure at ECU1,000 million (US$1,340 million) over five years.
1992 fishing quotas
At a meeting of EC fisheries ministers on Dec. 17-18 to decide on fishing quotas for 1992, it was agreed to continue the fisheries protection including the measures introduced in 1991 [see p. 37925]under which North Sea fishing boats over 100 tonnes, more than 40 per cent of whose catch consisted of cod and haddock, to remain in port for eight consecutive days each month between Feb. 1 and Dec. 31, 1992.
Fishing crews were now given the alternative option of remaining in port for a total of 135 days during the same period.
There was, however, still no agreement on increasing net mesh size to help conserve stocks.
EUROPE
EFTA
Delay in initialling of agreement with EC
In a decision presented on Dec. 14 the Court of Justice of the European Communities (generally known as the European Court of Justice — ECJ) found that the judicial controls envisaged in the treaty establishing a common European Economic Area (EEA) which had been agreed in October [see pp. 38541-42]were incompatible with the judicial independence of European Community (EC) law.
The treaty envisaged the establishment of a joint legal body to regulate disputes concerning the EEA between the contracting parties — the 12-member EC and the seven-member European Free Trade Association (EFTA).
It was to comprise five ECJ and three EFTA judges.
The ECJ insisted upon its sole right to interpret EC law (as set out in the Treaty of Rome — see p. 15951) and said that there was a danger that the EEA court could pre-empt ECJ rulings.
An EC official said that it would be necessary to "negotiate again" and the initialling ceremony scheduled for Dec. 15 was postponed.
Free trade agreement with Turkey — Relations with eastern Europe
On Dec. 10 Turkey and the EFTA countries signed a free trade agreement, scheduled to enter into force on April 1, 1992, putting trade relations on the same preferential basis as those between Turkey and the EC.
On the same day joint declarations on co-operation were signed with Bulgaria, Estonia, Latvia, Lithuania and Romania.
These were similar to those signed with Czechoslovakia, Hungary and Poland in June 1990 [see p. 37535], which were expected to result in the signature of free trade agreements with EFTA in the first half of 1992.
EUROPE
VATICAN
On Nov. 28-Dec. 24 some 137 members of the Roman Catholic hierarchy in eastern and western Europe, together with representatives of Orthodox and Protestant churches, attended a Synod in Rome to discuss the role of the Roman Catholic Church in post-Communist Europe.
MIDDLE EAST — ARAB WORLD
ALGERIA
FIS election victory
Voting in the first round of Algeria's first multiparty elections on Dec. 26 produced an unexpectedly large win for the Islamic Salvation Front (FIS).
FIS deputies were elected to 188 of the 231 seats in which the there was an outright winner.
The official results announced on Dec. 30 made it apparent that the second round of voting scheduled for Jan. 16, 1992, would almost certainly produce a FIS government.
In the first round, the (predominantly Kabyle Berber) Socialist Forces Front (FFS) led by veteran politician Hocine Ait Ahmed won 25 seats in the 430-seat National Popular Assembly with less than 15 per cent of the vote.
It thus overtook the National Liberation Front (FLN), the ruling party since 1962, which won only 15 seats; it had won 23.5 per cent of the vote but many of its votes were cast in constituencies where the FLN lost narrowly to the FIS, which itself had won 47.5 per cent of the vote.
Independent candidates won three seats.
Two smaller Islamist parties, Hamas and Nahda, the secular Rally for Culture and Democracy (RCD) led by Said Saadi, and the Movement for Democracy in Algeria (MDA), the party of former President Ahmed Ben Bella, won no seats.
The second round planned for Jan. 16 would select deputies for the remaining 199 seats in which no candidate had won an absolute majority on Dec. 26.
Voters in these constituencies would choose between whichever two candidates had won the largest numbers of votes in the first round.
Voting patterns in these constituencies indicated that the FIS would have little difficulty in securing the additional 28 seats it needed for an absolute majority in the National Assembly.
A voter turnout of 59 per cent of some 13,300,000 registered voters was recorded for the Dec. 26 poll.
Final figures were that a total of 5,712 candidates had stood for election, of whom 1,021 were independents and the remainder represented one of the 59 different parties.
The FIS was the only party to offer a candidate in all 430 constituencies, although the FLN had put up a candidate in 429.
The FFS, the RCD and the MDA had presented 317, and 300 and 339 candidates respectively.
Fifty-seven candidates, equivalent to 1 per cent of the total, were women.
FIS decision to participate in elections
The FIS's consultative council (majlis ash-shoura) had announced on Dec. 14 that it would participate in the elections.
The decision was reported to have been reached after a long and tense debate in which a more moderate current, headed by the Imam Abdelkader al-Hachani, a mining engineer in his early thirties, argued in favour of participation as a necessary step towards the creation of an Islamic state.
On Dec. 5 Hachani announced that the FIS would not be organizing street demonstrations in the run-up to the elections, in order not to "draw the country into a spiral of confrontations, in which the only beneficiaries will be the enemies of the Islamic solution" .
Hachani's declarations after the elections
Hachani told the press on Dec. 28 and 29 that a FIS government would continue both to ask the President to call early presidential elections and to demand the release of imprisoned leaders.
He did not express, however, a commitment to the continuation of a multiparty system.
Hachani said, according to El País of Dec. 30, that certain parties "which do not have the right to exist" would be prohibited, and that the organization of political and social life along Islamic principles would take place without overstepping the mark of legality.
He pledged that a FIS government would respect international conventions entered into by Algeria and that "we shall work within the framework of the Constitution, which allows us to review it [the Constitution], should that be the people's demand" .
He said that if the FIS took power through the elections "the army will be required to respect the people's option and to defend it" , and stressed "the need for co-operation between all the sons of this Muslim people, in a climate of brotherhood…" .
Allegations of electoral fraud — FFS reaction
By Jan. 3 the Constitutional Council had received 341 appeals from various parties against the results of the Dec. 26 voting, on the grounds of alleged irregularities in 145 different constituencies.
Many of these complaints were understood to have been made against the actions of FIS members, although precise figures were not given.
Some complaints against FIS members had been lodged by the FFS, but the FFS leader, Ait Ahmed, said on Dec. 29 that "following the failure of some trends which claim to be democratic and opposition, the FIS is emerging as a democratic pillar whose…influence at national level cannot be doubted" .
He ruled out an alliance with either the FLN or the FIS for the second round.
Government and domestic reaction
In a pre-election press conference on Dec. 24, President Chadli Benjedid was understood to be referring to the FIS when he criticized those "who adopt violence as a method of political conduct" .
He had added that "the people must vote in large numbers, to bar the way to adventurist projects" .
Implicitly anticipating a relatively low FLN vote, he said he was "ready for co-habitation with other parties" in a coalition government.
Following the FIS victory, the FLN secretary-general Abdelhamid Mehri on Dec. 31 referred in general terms to the possibility of a "national coalition in the service of the people" between the FLN and others who "have, for sure, different political ideas" .
In the early hours of Dec. 28 the Prime Minister, Sid-Ahmed Ghozali, quoted in Le Monde of Dec. 28, described as "positive" the "total transparency of the voting" .
In what was apparently a reference to conservatives within the FLN, he had been highly critical of Algeria's "political class" in an interview in El País of Dec. 29.
He described it as "very backward" and claimed it had "not matured and through cowardice or through lack of experience keeps quiet when there is, for example, a violation of democracy" .
Press criticism inspired by certain currents within the FLN meanwhile accused the government of having played "Russian roulette" with the country's future by allowing the elections to take place at a time when an Islamist win likely.
Some commentators interpreted the FIS win as the result of protest vote by urban populations who were disillusioned by a worsening economic situation and by recent indications of corruption within the FLN.
Such voters were said to have been radicalized by the events of 1988 and by further civilian deaths at the hands of the army in Algiers in June 1991 [see p. 38312].
Pro-FIS rhetoric emanating from preachers in certain city mosques was said to have influenced an electorate that contained a relatively high proportion of young and illiterate voters.
National women's organizations were highly critical of FIS policy, especially with regard to the role of women and its advocated segregation of school students according to gender.
International reaction
News of the FIS victory was reportedly received with concern by the governments of neighbouring Tunisia and Morocco, and also by the Egyptian and Saudi Arabian governments.
Although the French news media reported the Islamist victory with some alarm, a French Foreign Ministry statement of Dec. 30 was cautious in tone, merely saying that "France will remain committed to strengthening its relations with Algeria" .
The Iranian Majlis on Dec. 29 addressed a letter of congratulation to the FIS, and on Jan.1 Ayatollah Ali Khamenei denounced what he described as a "hue and cry about the trampling of democracy in Algeria…after the Algerian people said yes to Islam" .
In Sudan, Revolutionary Command Council Chairman and head of state Omar al-Bashir on Dec. 31 also welcomed the FIS victory.
Guemar incident
On Nov. 29, three border police were killed after a group of about 40 armed men attacked a border post at Guemar, north of Al-Oued Souf and near the Tunisian border.
Three of the attackers subsequently died.
The Algerian media gave prominent coverage to the army's response to the incident, in which weapons were said to have been seized from the military by the armed group.
Although the authorities at first said the assailants were not directly linked with the FIS, in a television interview on Dec. 6 the Defence Minister, Maj.-Gen.
Khaled Nezzar said that all those arrested were FIS members or supporters.
The FIS denied any involvement.
On Dec. 9 the army located what was said to be "the last group" of those responsible for the Guemar attack, and four soldiers and 13 members of the group were killed in ensuing fighting.
News reports gave various names for the group, including the "Armed Islamic Movement" or the Takfir wal-Hijra organization.
Some reports named its leader as Tayeb al-Afghani (reputedly trained as a guerrilla in Afghanistan).
By Dec. 14 at least 26 people had been killed in army operations and 44 men were facing charges in connection with the Guemar attack at a military court in Ouargla.
MIDDLE EAST — ARAB WORLD
LIBYA
Continuing dispute over extradition
Libya continued to resist pressures from the governments of the United States, the United Kingdom and France for the extradition to the UK of two Libyans, Abdelbaset Ali Mohammed al-Megrahi and Al-Amin Khalifa Fhimah, to stand trial on charges related to the 1988 Lockerbie bombing.
On Dec. 5 the Arab League Council, after meeting in Cairo, issued a statement expressing "solidarity" with Libya, and calling for the avoidance of any military or economic action against Libya and for the setting up of a joint Arab League-UN committee "to study all the documents connected with the incident" .
The statement prompted on the following day a message from UK Foreign Secretary Douglas Hurd expressing surprise at its content.
On Dec. 7 Judge Ahmed Taher al-Zawi, who was directing the Libyan inquiry into the allegations, said that the two men were under house arrest.
Their imminent trial was confirmed by the Secretary for Foreign Affairs and International Co-operation Ibrahim Mohammad Bashari on Dec. 8; they faced the death penalty if convicted.
By that date the Libyan leader Col. Moamer al Kadhafi had also expressed, in an interview with an Egyptian newspaper, his readiness to accept the findings of an international inquiry which might be carried out under UN auspices.
Beshari said later that he was willing to send Libyan judges to Washington, London or Paris to discuss the case.
A visit to Libya in early December by Jim Swire, whose daughter had been killed in the Lockerbie bombing, was meanwhile condemned on Dec. 13 by US relatives of Lockerbie victims.
Swire had on his return handed over to Lord Fraser of Carmyllie, the Lord Advocate (Scotland's senior law officer), two sealed letters from al-Zawi.
On Dec. 26 the US administration renewed for six months the economic sanctions against Libya which had been imposed in January 1986.
MIDDLE EAST — ARAB WORLD
WESTERN SAHARA
Postponement of referendum
By the end of 1991 it was apparent that the referendum to determine the future of the Western Sahara, which had been scheduled for Jan. 26, would have to be postponed for at least nine months.
Controversy over who was entitled to vote in the referendum had begun in July 1991, when Morocco had appeared to have retracted its previous acceptance of the 1974 census as a basis [see also p. 38410].
In November there had already been press reports to the effect that UN Secretary-General Javier Pérez de Cuéllar had yielded to Moroccan arguments for a broadening of the criteria for inclusion on the list of voters.
The Independent of Nov. 15 had meanwhile published details of internal UN documents which seemed to suggest that a UN official had handed over to the Moroccan government information supplied in confidence by the Polisario Front.
Polisario claimed that military information had also been handed over to Morocco, and in a written submission to the UN on Dec. 11 alleged Moroccan violations of the ceasefire (in force since Sept. 6).
Morocco was also said by various sources to have prevented the full deployment of the UN Mission for the Referendum in Western Sahara (Minurso) personnel and the unloading of equipment for the mission in the port of Agadir.
Some 37,000 people were said to have entered the territory from Morocco since September.
Manz"resignation and Pérez de Cuéllar's report
The director of Minurso, Johannes Manz, resigned on Dec. 18, and on Dec. 20 Pérez de Cuéllar presented to the Security Council a report recommending a widening of the electoral base for the referendum.
Manz"resignation (with effect from Dec. 31) was officially announced to the Security Council on Dec. 20.
The UN official alluded to in the Independent was named in Le Monde of Dec. 21, in a report which also quoted Manz as saying that the UN had failed to take into account the complexity of Minurso's task and had allocated "neither enough money, nor enough time" .
Pérez de Cuéllar's report was widely regarded as having consequences advantageous to Morocco.
Any person whose father was born in the Western Sahara would be eligible for inclusion, as would any person who had been intermittently resident over the 12 years before the December 1974 census.
Oral testimony would be acceptable as proof of eligibility.
The report explicitly accepted the argument (advanced by the Moroccan government) that who those who had "fled from colonial domination" before the Spanish withdrawal from the territory in 1975 were entitled to vote.
Morocco had since July been demanding that the existing list of 73,487 names should be increased by a further 120,000.
The proposals made by Pérez de Cuéllar were likely to increase the list by 30-40,000 names.
Although it had the support of the United States and France, acceptance of the report was vetoed by five Security Council members, including Austria, China, Cuba and Zimbabwe.
A compromise resolution, Resolution 725, approved by the Security Council on Dec. 31, requested the incoming Secretary-General, Boutros Boutros Ghali, to produce a new report on voting criteria by the end of February.
Both the Moroccan government and Polisario welcomed Resolution 725.
Pérez de Cuéllar's report was criticized by Polisario and on Dec. 23 by the Organization of African Unity (OAU).
In a statement on Jan. 1 Polisario repeated its demand for the withdrawal of "Moroccan inhabitants" who had recently entered the territory.
MIDDLE EAST — ARAB WORLD
EGYPT
Ferry disaster
An Egyptian-registered ferry-boat, the Salem Express, sank some 9 km off the Egyptian Red Sea port of Safaga on Dec. 15.
Of some 660 passengers and crew, there were only 182 survivors.
Most of those drowned were trapped below deck.
The great majority were labourers and pilgrims returning to the south of Egypt from Jeddah, Saudi Arabia.
The ferry had reportedly sunk almost immediately on hitting coral reefs as it approached Safaga at around midnight.
Blasphemy prosecution
On Dec. 26 the Higher State Security Court in Cairo found novelist Alaa Hamid guilty of blasphemy for his authorship of A Distance in a Man's Mind, written in Arabic.
Hamid, 53, and his publisher, Mohammed Madbouli, were both sentenced to eight years in prison.
The book had been published in March 1990, and the case against Hamid had previously been dismissed by a civil court in May 1991.
It was not the first time that Islamist sympathizers had succeeded in having action taken against a literary work — this had happened in 1959 and especially since the late 1980s.
Hamid's prosecution caused protests in much of the Egyptian press, and there was particular disquiet due to the fact that the emergency laws introduced in 1981-82 had been resorted to, and that the Prime Minister had not used his prerogative to order a retrial or to reduce the sentence.
MIDDLE EAST — ARAB WORLD
MIDDLE EAST
Heads of delegations
Second phase of peace talks
US invitations to talks — Dispute over starting date
On Nov. 22 the United States issued invitations to Israel, Lebanon, Syria and a joint Jordanian-Palestinian delegation to attend the next phase of the Middle East peace talks in Washington on Dec. 4.
The first phase of the talks had taken place in Madrid between Oct. 30 and Nov. 3 when the Israelis and the Arabs had met around one table before breaking up into bilateral negotiations [see pp. 38594-95].
The USA had moved to send out the invitations only after the Israelis and the Arabs had failed to agree on a time and venue.
The Israeli Prime Minister, Itzhak Shamir, who was visiting Washington at the time the invitations were sent out, reacted angrily, stating that a Dec. 4 starting date did not allow enough time for Israel to prepare.
He said that the Israeli delegation would only be ready to begin negotiations on Dec. 9.
Commentators claimed that there were a number of reasons for Shamir's reaction.
He had reportedly been pressing for the USA to distance itself from the peace negotiations and he was therefore opposed to a Washington venue; he was also known to support a Middle Eastern venue to emphasize the regional, as opposed to the international, nature of the conflict.
Shamir was also opposed to the inclusion with the US invitations of a series of suggested topics for discussion.
In letters to the Israeli and Palestinian delegations it was suggested that the two sides should concentrate on a discussion of the practical details of Palestinian self-government in the West Bank and Gaza Strip.
Syria was asked to consider what it would give in return for Israeli withdrawal from the Golan Heights.
Jordan and Israel were urged to solve their border issues.
Lebanon and Israelis were invited to examine the problem of the control of the strategic town of Jezzine.
The Jordanian, Syrian and Lebanese delegations quickly accepted the US invitation.
The Palestinians, however, did not finally agree to attend until late on Dec. 2 in protest at the US refusal to allow Palestine Liberation Organization (PLO) members to enter Washington to serve as advisers.
In the event two ranking PLO figures were provided with visas, namely Akram Haniya, PLO Chair Yassir Arafat's chief liaison officer, and Taysir Arur, a prominent member of the Palestinian People's Party (formerly the Communist Party) and a PLO Central Council member.
Bilateral talks — Failure to convene Palestinian-Israeli meeting
All the Arab delegations were present in Washington on Dec. 4, but the Israeli delegation did not arrive until Dec. 9.
Bilateral negotiations finally opened in the offices of the US State Department on Dec. 10 and continued, with a break on Dec. 13-15, until Dec. 18 when they were adjourned until Jan. 7, 1992.
The talks ended with no progress having been achieved, no genuine meeting of the Israeli and the Jordanian/Palestinian delegations having taken place.
At the start of negotiations on Dec. 10 the Jordanian-Palestinian delegation claimed that Israel had agreed in Madrid to enter into "two track" negotiations.
They had envisaged that Israel would enter into separate talks with the Jordanian and Palestinian sections of the joint delegations.
Each section would have symbolic representation from the other section, but the effective outcome would have been face-to-face Israeli-Palestinian talks.
The Israeli delegation rejected such an interpretation and insisted that it would only negotiate with a joint Jordanian-Palestinian delegation.
The joint delegation might, however, be broken up into "sub-committees" to discuss specific topics.
In an attempt to resolve the dispute the heads of the Jordanian, Palestinian and Israeli delegations held daily discussions in a State Department corridor, and the Palestinian side called unsuccessfully upon the USA to intervene.
Commentators noted that, throughout the negotiations, the USA made a conscious effort to distance itself from the proceedings.
Bilateral talks did take place between Israel and Syria, and between Israel and Lebanon.
No side reported any specific progress, although the Israeli and Lebanese sides reported constructive dialogue, and Israel reportedly offered to sign a peace treaty with Lebanon.
The talks between Israel and Syria concentrated on the status of the Golan Heights and were believed to have taken place in an atmosphere of tension and hostility.
MIDDLE EAST — ARAB WORLD
PALESTINIAN AFFAIRS
Fourth anniversary of intifada
The intifada in the Israeli-occupied territories entered its fifth year on Dec. 10.
The Israeli authorities clamped curfews over large parts of the West Bank and Gaza Strip on Dec. 9.
Areas around Ramallah and el-Bireh had been under curfew since the killing of a settler at the beginning of the intifada [see pp. 35856-61].
Israeli soldiers opened fire on a crowd of Palestinians in the Gaza Strip on Dec. 18, wounding 30.
The action occurred after Palestinians had attempted to prevent the soldiers arresting three men who had been painting slogans on a wall.
Human rights reports
The Israeli human rights group Betselem issued a report on Dec. 8 which claimed that there had been a reduction in the number of casualties inflicted by the security forces in the occupied territories during 1990-91.
The report maintained that human rights continued to be violated in the territories, and cited house demolitions, deportations and collective restrictions.
The Palestine Human Rights Information Centre issued a report on Dec. 3 which detailed "the systematic use of electric shock torture" by the Israeli authorities in the occupied territories.
EC aid
In mid-November the European Communities (EC) announced a package of US$61,000,000 in emergency aid to Palestinian-managed development projects in the occupied territories.
The package was aimed specifically at tackling problems created by the Gulf war.
Money flowing into the territories from the Gulf nations and from remittances had fallen dramatically as a result of the war.
Visit to Asian states by Arafat
Yassir Arafat, Chair of the Palestine Liberation Organization (PLO), visited North Korea, China, Vietnam, Laos and Kazakhstan during December.
MIDDLE EAST — ARAB WORLD
ISRAEL
Settlements issue — Internal politics — Foreign relations
Movement of Jewish settlers into Silwan
On Dec. 12 a group of Jewish settlers moved into six houses in the Silwan sector of Arab East Jerusalem.
The action was highly controversial, occurring mid-way through the second phase of Middle East peace talks in Washington [see p. 38693].
The settlers entered the district with massive police support.
The police had earlier evicted an Arab family from one of the houses; the other five houses had been vacant.
The settlers had claimed legal ownership of the houses in October and had made efforts to move in to the Silwan sector at that time, but the police had prevented them from doing so after the Attorney General, Yosef Harish, had recommended that they be barred from the properties on security considerations.
The government objected, telling Harish that he had to base his judgements on purely legal grounds.
Harish then concluded on Dec. 11 that he could find nothing wrong with the settlers' claims of legal ownership of the properties.
In mid-December the settlers were forced to leave one of the houses in after a court ruled against the eviction of the Arab occupants.
On Dec. 20 the Peace Now movement organized a large demonstration in Silwan against the settlement.
The demonstration was attended by both Jews and Arabs.
Teddy Kollek, the mayor of Jerusalem, led another demonstration in Jerusalem against the Silwan settlement on Dec. 25.
Killing of West Bank settler — Approval of settlement civil guard plan
On Dec. 1 a Jewish settler was shot dead in an ambush near Ramallah and el-Bireh on the West Bank.
The whole area was immediately placed under curfew and restrictions were not relaxed until Dec. 15.
Groups of settlers drove through Ramallah on Dec. 9 attacking Palestinian cars and posting provocative leaflets throughout the town.
On Dec. 25 the Cabinet approved a plan to allow settlers to form armed civil guard units to perform police duties in the settlements.
Resignation of Agriculture Minister — Departure of Tsomet from coalition
Rafael Eitan resigned as Minister of Agriculture on Dec. 24 in protest at Likud's opposition to proposals for the direct election of the Prime Minister; the Likud central committee had voted by a large majority on Dec. 23 against the direct election of the Prime Minister.
On Dec. 29 Eitan's right-wing nationalist Tsomet Party formally withdrew from the ruling coalition.
Without Tsomet the coalition now held 64, as opposed to 66, seats in the 120-member Knesset.
Announcement by Sharon of candidature
On Dec. 18 Ariel Sharon, the hardline Housing and Contruction Minister, announced his intention to challenge his Likud colleague Itzhak Shamir for the post of Prime Minister at the next elections.
He made the announcement during a speech to his supporters in Tel Aviv during which he harshly attacked the government's decision to enter into talks with the Arab states.
Verdict in Kahane assassination
On Dec. 21 El Sayed Noseir was found not guilty of murdering Rabbi Meir Kahane in New York in November 1990 [see p. 37872].
The New York jury deliberated for four days before acquitting Noseir of Kahane's assassination.
Noseir's defence lawyer had claimed that Kahane, an ultra-militant Zionist leader, had been shot by one of his own supporters.
Following the verdict Binyamin Ze'ev Kahane, Kahane's son and a leader of his anti-Arab Kach party, vowed that Noseir would "not see a day without fear until his very last" .
Relations with former Soviet Union republics — Emigration of Soviet Jews
Foreign Affairs Minister David Levi announced in the Knesset on Dec.
Dec. 25 that Israel had decided to recognize all the republics in the Commonwealth of Independent States.
Levi noted that most of the republics had Jewish communities and said that Israel expected the republics to respect the communities' rights, including the right to free emigration.
On Dec. 26 Ukraine's Foreign Minister Anatoliy Zlenko, and the Israeli ambassador in Moscow, Arye Levin, exchanged notes on the establishment of diplomatic relations.
Israel became the fourth country, after Hungary, Lithuania and Bulgaria, with which Ukraine had established diplomatic relations.
Alexandr Bovin, the Soviet Union's first ambassador to Israel since relations were severed in 1967, presented his letter of accreditation to President Chaim Herzog on Dec. 23, informing Herzog that on Jan. 1, 1992, he would become the Russian, as opposed to the Soviet, ambassador in Israel.
It was reported in late December that some 142,000 Jews had emigrated from the Soviet Union to Israel during 1991, compared with the 400,000 expected by the government at the start of the year and the 185,000 who had emigrated in 1990.
Commenting on the decline, Simcha Dinitz, chair of the Jewish Agency, criticized the government for failing to implement adequate employment policies.
Some figures showed that as many as 40 per cent of Soviet immigrants were unemployed.
Despite the slowdown in emigration during 1991 Voice of Israel radio reported on Dec. 10 that Uri Gordon, director of the Jewish Agency, had predicted that 400,000 Soviet immigrants should be expected in 1992. to Egypt
Re-establishment of diplomatic relations with Zambia — Upgrading of relations with Turkey — Visit by minister
Israel and Zambia re-established diplomatic relations on Dec. 24.
Turkey announced on Dec. 19 that it had decided to raise the representation in Ankara of both Israel and Palestine to embassy status.
Turkey had previously maintained diplomatic relations at legation level with both Israel and Palestine.
Israel's Religious Affairs minister, Avner Shaki, visited Egypt in mid-December.
The ongoing Middle East peace negotiations were among a number of topics Shaki discussed with high-ranking Egyptian officials.
MIDDLE EAST — ARAB WORLD
LEBANON
Hostage releases — Other hostage developments
Three United states hostages were released in Beirut in early December.
The releases formed part of a comprehensive process of exchange of Western hostages, Arabs held by Israel and its militia ally the South Lebanon Army (SLA) and Israeli military personnel missing in Lebanon, which was being negotiated by the UN.
However, at the end of December — the deadline established by the UN for completion of the process — a full settlement of the hostage crisis had not been reached.
A breakthrough in the complex web of negotiation on the exchanges occurred in Syria in late November.
After a series of meetings with various parties in Damascus Giandomenico Picco, assistant for special assignments in the Executive Office of the UN Secretary-General and architect of the exchange plan, announced on Nov. 30 that "important progress" had been made.
On Dec. 1 the SLA released 25 Arab prisoners from the al-Khiam prison situated in Israel's self-declared "security zone" in southern Lebanon.
On the same day the Revolutionary Justice Organization (RJO), one of the three pro-Iranian cells still holding Western hostages, confirmed that a Western hostage, Joseph Cicippio, would shortly be released.
The RJO also confirmed that they had received a video tape from Israel of an interview carried out recently with Shaikh Abdel-Karim Obeid.
Shaikh Obeid, a Shia Moslem cleric and Hezbollah leader from southern Lebanon, had been abducted by Israeli commandos in July 1989 [see p. 36832].
The Lebanese groups had long demanded Shaikh Obeid's release from prison in Israel.
Release of last three US hostages
On Dec. 2 Cicippio, a United States national, was released in Beirut and, following the usual pattern, was quickly driven to Damascus.
The release of Cicippio, who had been abducted by the RJO in September 1986 [see p. 35023], coincided with the payment by the USA to Iran of US$278,000,000 in compensation for Iranian weapons impounded at the time of the 1979 Iranian revolution.
Alann Steen, a US national who had been kidnapped in January 1987 [see p. 35024], was released by the Islamic Jihad for the Liberation of Palestine on Dec. 3.
On Dec. 4 Terry Anderson, another US national, was released by Islamic Jihad.
Anderson had been kidnapped in March 1985 [see p. 33685]and was the longest-held Western hostage.
In a statement issued on Dec. 4 Islamic Jihad announced that they had decided to free Anderson without waiting for Israel to release any more Arab prisoners.
Lack of progress regarding German hostages and Israeli POWs
With the release of Anderson only two Western hostages remained in Lebanon, German aid workers Thomas Kemptner and Heinrich Strubig, who had both been kidnapped in May 1989 [see p. 36671].
Kemptner and Strubig were believed to be held by the Hamadei family, two members of which were serving prison sentences in Germany for terrorist related crimes.
On Dec. 26 a previously unknown group, the Strugglers for Freedom, released a video cassette of the two Germans, and in a message accompanying the video the group called for the release of the two Hamadei brothers.
The German government publicly rejected the possibility of complying with the kidnappers' demand.
The Iranian Deputy Foreign Minister, Mahmud Va'ezi, visited Bonn on Dec. 11-12 for discussions which centred on the hostage issue.
Another strand of the hostage crisis which remained deadlocked at the end of December was the issue of missing Israeli servicemen in Lebanon.
In early December there was some speculation that Shaikh Obeid would be exchanged for Israeli navigator Ron Arad, the only missing Israeli serviceman believed to be alive.
However, by the end of the month Israel had not even received confirmation that Arad was still alive.
Some reports in early December alleged that Arad was being held in Syria, having been handed over to the Syrian government by Hezbollah, although Hezbollah officially denied any knowledge of Arad.
Since the start of UN mediation in August Israel had received the remains of one of its servicemen and proof that two others were definitely dead.
In return Israel had freed 91 Lebanese prisoners and had returned nine bodies.
Release of remains of US hostages
Significant progress was made during December in recovering the bodies of Western hostages who had died or been killed during captivity.
The semi-embalmed remains of Col. William Higgins were discovered in Beirut's southern suburbs on Dec. 21 following an anonymous telephone call.
Higgins, a US Marine, had been abducted by the Organization of the Oppressed of the Earth in February 1988.
The group claimed to have executed him in July 1989 in retaliation for Israel's abduction of Sheihk Obeid.
The skull and some bones of William Buckley were released by Islamic Jihad on Dec. 27.
Buckley, the US CIA station chief in Lebanon, had been kidnapped in March 1984 by Islamic Jihad.
The group claimed to have executed him in October 1985 following Israel's air-raid on the PLO headquarters in Tunis.
With the release of Buckley's remains the bodies of only two Western hostages remained unaccounted for, Michel Seurat (France) who had died of cancer during captivity, and Alec Collett (UK) who was believed to have been executed by the Revolutionary Organization of Socialist Moslems in reprisal for the US bombing raid on Libya in April 1986.
MIDDLE EAST — ARAB WORLD
SYRIA
Confirmation of Assad for fourth-term
Hafez al-Assad's nomination for a fourth seven-year term as president was endorsed by 99.98 per cent of voters in a referendum held on Dec. 2.
In mid-November Assad, whose current constitutional term was due to end in March 1992, had been nominated as the sole candidate by the Ba'ath Party and the People's Assembly.
The referendum had been preceded by a series of mass pro-Assad demonstrations in Damascus, the capital, and other cities.
Release of Moslem fundamentalists
Syrian radio reported on Dec. 17 that Assad had pardoned 2,864 persons who had "carried out anti-state acts" .
The Independent of Dec. 21 reported that many of those pardoned were activists of the Syrian Moslem Brotherhood, which had conducted a guerrilla campaign against Assad's rule in the late 1970s and early 1980s.
According to the report the pardon indicated that Assad no longer viewed the Brotherhood to be a viable threat.
Estimates of the numbers of political prisoners in Syria varied, but according to some sources about 3,500 still remained in prison.
Among the most prominent of Syrian political prisoners was Noureddin al-Atasi, who had immediately preceded Assad as President and had been in prison since 1970.
New foreign debt estimate
The World Bank Debt Tables released in late 1991 included revised figures for Syria.
Total debt stock for 1990 was estimated at US$16,446 million, more than US$11,000 million higher than 1989 estimates.
The Middle East Economic Digest of Dec. 27 reported that the debts were understood to be owed mainly to the Soviet Union and east European states, and possibly Iran.
Postponement of visit by French Foreign Minister
French Foreign Minister Roland Dumas postponed a visit to Syria planned for mid-December, prompting Syrian criticism of France's Middle East policy.
Dumas claimed that the visit had been postponed because of scheduling problems.
However, there was press speculation that the postponement was related to the alleged presence in Damascus of a Nazi war criminal, Aloïs Brunner, whose extradition France was seeking from Syria.
MIDDLE EAST — ARAB WORLD
JORDAN
New session of Parliament — 1992 budget
The new session of the National Assembly opened on Dec. 1, and on Dec. 16 the government of Prime Minister Sharif Zaid Ibn Shaker survived a vote of no confidence in the House of Representatives (lower house) by 46 votes to 27.
Eighteen of the votes against came from among the 23 deputies representing the Moslem Brotherhood.
The speech outlining government policy at the opening of the parliamentary session was delivered by King Hussein himself — a move which was interpreted as underlining his support for the new government of Ibn Shaker.
The speech mentioned official financial support in the past year for "those institutions directly involved in combating unemployment and poverty" and for "the establishment of small projects for graduates" .
In 1992 structural reforms to limit spending would include reform of the civil service.
A Moslem Brotherhood deputy, Abdel-Latif Arabiyat, retained his post as Speaker of the House of Representatives.
This was understood to be the result of an agreement between the Cabinet and the Moslem Brotherhood by which the government would gain in exchange the co-operation of the Islamist opposition with some of its policies.
On Dec. 30 the budget for 1992 was approved, with 45 of the 80 deputies voting in favour.
The budget was part of a seven-year restructuring programme which had secured International Monetary Fund (IMF) approval in principle in October and which was outlined by Finance and Customs Minister Basil Jardaneh on Dec. 11 [see p. 38215 for May 1991 visit by IMF team].
The programme would allow Jordan to reschedule foreign debt of about US$7,000 million and secure fresh loans.
According to Middle East International of Dec. 27, the 1992 budget "reveals IMF sensitivity to the domestic situation…the suggestion of a cut in food subsidies has already inspired public protests" .
A 3 per cent growth in gross domestic product (GDP) was anticipated, compared with 1 per cent in 1991.
Pay increases for civil servants were allowed for, 6,000 new government jobs would be created, and capital expenditure would rise while government expenditure was to be boosted by a new consumption tax.
Sentencing of Islamists
Eight members of a group called The Prophet Mohammed's Army were sentenced to death on Nov. 25 by a special tribunal composed of three military judges for crimes "against state security" [see also p. 38457].
They had been accused of involvement in a number of attacks on targets connected with European and US interests in Amman in 1990-91.
Three other accused received life sentences, and nine received shorter sentences.
King Hussein and the Prime Minister had the right to commute the death sentences.
MIDDLE EAST — ARAB WORLD
IRAQ
Concern over effects of UN sanctions
Reports in December spoke of mounting concern over the effects of UN sanctions following government claims that up to 80,000 Iraqi children had died as a result of severe shortages in food and medicines.
The figures, submitted to the Arab League in Cairo on Dec. 17, were described as "realistic" by the United Nations Children's Fund (UNICEF) which on Dec. 19 confirmed that the shortage of polio vaccines had contributed to a significant increase in reported cases of polio among young children.
Health Ministry figures released on Nov. 26 had shown that more than 68,000 people, including 19,863 children, had died between Aug. 2, 1990 (the date of Iraq's invasion of Quwait), and September 1991 from a shortage of medicines.
The latest disclosures, which prompted fresh appeals for the lifting of the UN-imposed boycott, came as the United States State Department on Dec. 3 announced that sanctions would remain "in order to secure Iraq's compliance with the terms of the [Gulf war]ceasefire" .
A call by the Arab Economic Unity Council (AEUC) on Dec. 5, urging an end to the boycott was supported on Dec. 16 by India which expressed "serious concern over the non-availability of medicines and food in Iraq" .
Sudan, and reportedly Yemen, had also urged the lifting of sanctions while dissenting from a resolution calling for their extension passed by the Islamic Conference Organization (ICO) at its summit in Dakhar on Dec. 9 [see p. 38699].
On Dec. 26 the Iraqi News Agency (INA) quoted a UN Development Programme (UNDP) spokesman in Baghdad as saying that "the justifications for maintaining economic sanctions against Iraq no longer existed" .
The UN Security Council, which ended its fourth periodic review of sanctions on Dec. 20, decided not to recommend changes in its sanctions policy.
Earlier, in protests coinciding with the review, hundreds of Iraqis were reported on Dec. 2-22 to have demonstrated before UN local offices in Baghdad.
On Dec. 9 the National Assembly called on the US Congress to lift sanctions which it claimed would "kill millions of Iraqis" .
Meanwhile, hopes rose of a possible acceptance by Iraq of UN Security Council Resolution 706 permitting the sale of 1,600,000 million barrels per day (bpd) of oil to purchase urgently needed food and medicines [see pp. 38406; 38452]after the Oil Minister Usamah Abd al-Razzaq Hummadi al-Hithi was quoted by international news agencies on Dec. 23 and 24 as saying that Iraq would consider "an interim agreement" for oil sales in the range of US$2,400 million (previously requested by Iraq and international aid agencies)[see pp. 38361; 38452].
In a "clarification" issued on Dec. 25, however, Hithi stressed Iraq's opposition to Resolution 706 saying it "could not be applied" .
On Dec. 5 Iraq had rejected Resolution 706, saying that it would never accept the "colonial conditions" imposed by the resolution.
IAEA report on nuclear inspections
A report by the International Atomic Energy Agency (IAEA) assessing the findings of the seventh and eighth UN nuclear inspection teams which visited Iraq on Oct. 11-22 and Nov. 11-18 respectively, said that Iraq had established "a large, secure and highly successful procurement network" in support of its uranium-enrichment and weapons manufacturing operations.
The report, published on Dec. 11, noted that "the presence of application-specific fixtures" on much of the equipment suggested that foreign manufacturers who serviced Iraq's nuclear programme were probably aware of the intended use of the equipment.
Subsequent reports indicated that the IAEA in a separate classified report to the UN Secretary-General Javier Pérez de Cuéllar had identified around 12 companies, mostly German, which had directly or indirectly supplied Iraq with nuclear-weapons related material.
On Dec. 13 a German company, Leybold, confirmed that it had exported an electron beam welding machine (used in the assembly of centrifuge machines) to Iraq but denied knowledge of Iraq's nuclear programme.
(German companies were reported also to have supplied equipment for Iraq's Scud missile programme.)
On Dec. 12 a Swedish company, Brown Boveri, admitted that it had sold two presses used in the manufacture of nuclear weapons, to Iraq.
The US company Du Pont acknowledged the same day that it had exported to Iraq a special lubricant used for nuclear weapons but stressed that permission to do so had been granted by the US government in 1989.
On Nov. 29 the Soviet Union had denied that it was the source of highly enriched uranium, traces of which were discovered by the seventh UN nuclear inspection team at the Tuwaitha research complex near Baghdad.
Destruction of ballistic missiles
The head of a UN ballistics missiles team which visited Iraq on Dec. 2-9, Patrice Palanque, said in Baghdad on Dec. 9 that Iraq had destroyed all its declared ballistic missiles of mass destruction, including its "supergun" .
Chemical and biological weapons inspections
The UN-IAEA commission on Iraq [see pp. 38165; 38211]announced on Dec. 11 that the first combined chemical and biological weapons inspections team to Iraq had reported the discovery of chemical bomb-making equipment at a sugar factory in Mosul.
Internal political developments
Cabinet changes
In a move reportedly designed to appease Iraqi Kurds, President Saddam Hussein on Dec. 25 appointed the Minister for Labour and Social Affairs, Umid Midhat Mubarak, a Kurdish physician, to assume in addition the Health portfolio hitherto held by Abdel Salem Mohammed Saeed [for last round of Cabinet changes see p. 38598].
Meeting of opposition parties
Opposition groups (excluding Kurds) meeting in Damascus in late December rejected a plan to overthrow the government, saying that it needed redrafting "to ensure comprehensive acceptance" by all parties.
The plan, initiated by the head of the Iran-backed Supreme Assembly of the Islamic Revolution in Iraq (SAIRI), Ayatollah Seyyed Mohammad Baqr al-Hakim, and made public on Dec. 23, envisaged the "reactivation of a popular uprising in Iraq" with the help of "certain elements in the army" .
The USA was reported on Dec. 12 to have reviewed options in the event of a military coup in Iraq.
Easing of blockade in Kurdistan
There were reports in late December that the government had allowed limited supplies of fuel to enter Kurdistan after Kurdish leaders imposed a Dec. 23 deadline to end the two-month long economic blockade [see pp. 38548; 38598].
Reports in early December said that agreement to lift the boycott came after talks in Baghdad between government ministers and Kurdish leaders including the head of the Kurdish Democratic Party (KDP), Masoud Barzani, who met Saddam Hussein on Nov. 30.
In a series of subsequent, apparently conciliatory, gestures reported on Dec. 16, Kurdish leaders agreed to appoint an inquiry into the alleged massacre of 60 Iraqi soldiers in October [see p. 38548]after the government announced that it had lifted restrictions on the acquisition of property by Kurds in the oil-producing town of Kirkuk and issued a decree exempting Kurds from swearing allegiance to the ruling Ba'ath Party.
The UN High Commission for Refugees (UNHCR) stated on Dec. 5 that more than 200,000 Kurds had fled their homes since mid-November in anticipation of an imminent government attack [see p. 38598].
The government on Dec. 6 described the statement as "lies" .
The United Kingdom on Dec. 31 announced that it would provide a further £1,000,000 in aid to Kurdish refugees.
MIDDLE EAST — ARAB WORLD
IRAN
Arrests of opposition figures
Iranian television reported on Dec. 2 that over recent months some 300 people, said to belong to four different underground networks, had been arrested.
They were described as members of the monarchist opposition, of Savak (the secret police service under the pre-1979 regime) and of a Mujaheddin group.
Arrests were also reported of members of a major network of financial corruption involving the falsification of official documents.
Among a number of executions reported during December were the hanging of nine people on Dec. 7 in the town of Zahedan, south-east Iran, after being condemned by an Islamic court for having "disturbed the public order" in disturbances there in November.
Criticism of UN human rights envoy
Reynaldo Galindo Pohl, the special envoy of the UN's human rights commission arrived in Tehran at the head of an expert delegation on Dec. 7 [for Pohl's January 1991 visit and subsequent report see pp. 37200; 37929].
Deputy Foreign Minster Ali Mohammed Besharati responded to the visit by referring to what he described as the UN human rights commission's constant criticism of Iran, which he implied was politically motivated.
UN report on Iran-Iraq war
A UN report on the Iran-Iraq war published on Dec. 10 found that Iraq's invasion of Iran on Sept. 22, 1980, and its subsequent occupation of Iranian territory throughout the war had been unjustified and in breach of international law.
The report was produced by UN Secretary-General Javier Pérez de Cuéllar in compliance with a UN resolution of 1987 instructing him to enquire into where responsibility for the conflict lay.
Iraq had previously claimed that the war had begun with Iranian bombardments of Iraqi territory on Sept. 4, 1980.
Financial settlements with USA and France
On Dec. 2 the United States paid to Iran US$260,000,000 in compensation for military equipment withheld from Iran by the USA following the 1979 revolution.
A further US$18,000,000 was paid by the USA into a security account in The Hague from which payments could be made as arbitrated by the Iran-US Claims Tribunal.
Press reports noted that both sides denied that the Dec. 2 settlement, which had been under negotiation for 18 months, had any connection with the recent releases of US hostages in Lebanon.
Claims involving larger amounts of money but also arising out of US arms sales to Iran before 1979 remained pending.
A memorandum signed on Dec. 29 by Deputy Foreign Minister Mahmud Va'ezi and the director-general of the French Foreign Ministry Francois Scheer resolved a 12-year financial dispute between the two countries.
The origins of the complex dispute lay in a loan made in 1974 by Iran's pre-revolution government to the French Atomic Energy Commission.
Under the December agreement, the French government would repay $1,000 million to Iran, additional to the $630,000,000 it had already repaid.
Restrictions on co-operation in various commercial fields would be lifted.
In a parallel agreement three French nuclear power construction companies resolved their counter-claims against Iran for contracts broken in 1979 [see also p. 37929].
There remained unresolved issues in connection with the Iranian state's share in Eurodif (a uranium enrichment company) and Iran's request to be supplied nuclear fuel by that company.
Arrest of Bakhtiar murder suspect in Switzerland
The Swiss embassy in Tehran, which after November 1979 had also represented US interests in Iran, was closed on Dec. 29 in protest at restrictions and alleged harassment of Swiss diplomatic staff by Iranian officials, following the arrest of an Iranian in Switzerland.
On Dec. 23 the Swiss police in Berne had arrested Zeyal Sarhadi, a 25-year-old Iranian suspected of complicity in the murder of former Iranian Prime Minister Shapour Bakhtiar in Paris on Aug. 6 [see pp. 38409; 38455].
On Dec. 25 the Iranian government issued a vigorous protest against the arrest, which had been made on an Interpol warrant issued in Paris.
The embassy re-opened again on Jan. 5.
MIDDLE EAST — ARAB WORLD
KUWAIT
Planned security fence
Interior Minister Shaikh Ahmad Hammoud al Jabir as Sabah confirmed in a newspaper interview published on Dec. 26 that Kuwait was to build a security fence along the length of its 250-km border with Iraq.
Reports from earlier in the month said that the electrified fence would be part of an early warning system which would include mines, automatic machine guns and searchlights.
The fence, which it was estimated would cost over US$560 million to build, would have a secondary function of marking the border between the two countries.
On Dec. 3 Kuwait protested to the UN Security Council over Iraq's refusal to participate in the work of the UN Border Demarkation Committee's reconnaissance team, which had visited the demilitarized zone between Kuwait and Iraq at the end of November.
Kuwait also protested about Iraq's failure to release Kuwaitis and members of other nationalities who had been imprisoned since the Gulf crisis, or to allow Red Cross representatives to visit prisoners.
Revocation of Fatah official's citizenship
Khalid al-Hassan, a member of the central committee of Al-Fatah (the largest group within the Palestine Liberation Organization-PLO) and chairman of the Palestine National Council's foreign affairs committee, was reported on Dec. 19 to have been stripped of his Kuwaiti citizenship.
The Kuwaiti government said that some 80,000 Palestinians were still resident in Kuwait, out of a population of about 350,000 before the Iraqi invasion.
Officials of the International Committee of the Red Cross (ICRC) were reported on Dec. 28 to have said that Kuwait was delaying the return of up to 4,000 Bedoun (inhabitants of Kuwait without Iraqi citizenship) from Iraq.
Kuwait was said to be deporting 50-100 Bedoun through Safwan to Iraq every week.
MIDDLE EAST — ARAB WORLD
GCC
Summit
At the 12th annual summit of the Gulf Co-operation Council (GCC — Bahrein, Kuwait, Oman, Qatar, Saudi Arabia and the United Arab Emirates), held in Kuwait on Dec. 23-25, the GCC endorsed the Damascus Declaration of March 1991 [see pp. 38116-17]but introduced no concrete measures to establish an autonomous regional deterrent force.
In the final communiqué, issued on Dec. 25, of the meeting, which was attended by the heads of state of the six GCC countries, the GCC urged "the international community and the [UN]Security Council in particular to put more pressure on the Iraqi regime" for the implementation of UN resolutions.
The meeting approved the creation of a US$10,000 million development fund for Arab countries which had supported the coalition in the Gulf war and which had suffered economic damage from the war; Egypt and Syria were likely to be the main beneficiaries.
It was resolved to deposit the Damascus Declaration with the Arab League as an official document.
MIDDLE EAST — ARAB WORLD
BAHRAIN
Shaikh Abdellatif al-Mahmoud, a professor of Islamic Studies at Bahrein University, was detained on Dec. 14 on his return from a seminar in Kuwait in which he had criticized the systems of government in the six countries of the Gulf Co-operation Council.
MIDDLE EAST — ARAB WORLD
OMAN
In a Cabinet reshuffle on Dec. 10 Shaikh Hamoud bin Abdullah al-Harthy, hitherto Communications Minister, became Commerce and Industry Minister; there were important changes in the civil service.
MIDDLE EAST — ARAB WORLD
MOROCCO
Eight detainees at Oukacha prison in Casablanca, on hunger strike since Nov. 26, were on Dec. 25 granted their demands for political prisoner status, the right to family visits and the right to read newspapers; their families had been fasting in support at the offices of the Moroccan Union of Labour.
INTERNATIONAL
UNITED NATIONS
New Secretary-General
The General Assembly on Dec. 3 unanimously approved the appointment as Secretary-General of Egyptian Deputy Prime Minister, Boutros Boutros Ghali.
The sixth person to hold the post and the first from the African continent, he would succeed Javier Pérez de Cuéllar on Jan. 1, 1992.
On Nov. 21 the 15-member Security Council had recommended the approval of Boutros Ghali after electing him by 11 votes with four abstentions.
The decision followed months of intense lobbying fuelled by reports that black African countries were pressing for one of their candidates, notably the former Finance Minister of Zimbabwe, Bernard Chidzero, as the next UN Secretary-General.
Boutros Ghali, 69, who was also the first Arab to assume the post, acquired an international reputation as a key negotiator at the 1978 Camp David talks between Egypt and Israel, and as the architect of Egypt's policy towards sub-Saharan Africa.
While his Christian faith had prevented him from becoming Foreign Minister in Moslem-dominated Egypt, many Western diplomats regarded his marriage to an Egyptian Jew as a potential asset in promoting Arab-Israeli understanding.
Boutros Ghali's fluency in French, acquired as a student at the Sorbonne in Paris, was decisive in winning him the support of France which had reportedly threatened to veto a non-French-speaking candidate.
Although Boutros Ghali's appointment was internationally welcomed, Israel's Prime Minister, Itzhak Shamir said on Nov. 22 that it would further diminish Israel's standing in the UN.
Agreement on humanitarian aid co-ordinator
The General Assembly on Dec. 19 established the post of a UN Emergency Relief Co-ordinator, whose secretariat would be based on a strengthened Office of the UN Disaster Relief Co-ordinator and the consolidation of existing offices which dealt with complex emergencies.
A draft resolution, aimed at balancing governments' claims to sovereignty and the right of suffering people to receive assistance, called for a supreme UN co-ordinator to make humanitarian aid available, if need be, without a formal request by the concerned government though not without its consent.
The proposals, backed by Western countries, had reportedly been resisted by Third-World governments on grounds that they encouraged relief agencies to interfere in civil wars.
Prince Sadruddin Aga Khan was said on Dec. 11 to have resigned as head of the UN's Inter-Agency Humanitarian Programme for Iraq and Kuwait, reportedly in the hope of assuming overall charge of UN relief efforts.
Budget crisis
Total unpaid contributions approximating US$988,000,000 had brought the UN to "the brink of insolvency for a number of years" , according to a report by the outgoing UN Secretary-General, Pérez de Cuéllar.
The report, submitted to the General Assembly on Dec. 19, showed that only 64 of the UN's 159 members had paid their contributions, with the rest owing a total of US$525,000,000 to the general budget, and a further US$463,000,000 towards peace-keeping operations, excluding operations in Cambodia.
The United States was the largest debtor with total unpaid dues exceeding $485,000,000, followed by the Soviet Union which owed $172,000,000, and South Africa (a UN member without a seat in the General Assembly) which owed $61,500,000.
The report recommended the creation of a $1,000 million trust fund for peacekeeping operations; a US$50,000,000 start-up fund for new peacekeeping activities; the right to charge members interest on unpaid dues and authority to borrow commercially.
Prince Sadruddin announced in Geneva on Dec. 19 that Germany had made available the bulk of a $8,000,000 contribution to maintain a contingent of UN guards in northern Iraq.
Repeal of resolution condemning Zionism
The UN General Assembly on Dec. 16 adopted by 111 votes to 25, with 13 abstentions, a resolution repealing its 1975 resolution equating Zionism with racism [see pp. 27487-89].
The resolution was backed by the USA, most Western countries, the Soviet Union, India and Japan; Kuwait and Egypt broke Arab ranks and abstained, as did China.
Welcoming the vote on Dec. 16, Israel's President, Chaim Herzog, said that it had wiped out a "shameful blot upon [Israel's]good name" .
Resolution on arms sales
On Dec. 9 the General Assembly approved by 150 votes to none, with two abstentions (Iraq and Cuba), a resolution establishing a register of international arms sales [see also pp. 38365-66; 38553].
UK ratification of Child Rights Convention
The United Kingdom on Dec. 17 ratified the 1989 UN Convention on the Rights of the Child [see pp. 37054; 37732]but reserved the right to opt out of some of its provisions.
INTERNATIONAL
NATO
Defence and Foreign Ministers' meetings
Defence Ministers from the North Atlantic Treaty Organization (NATO) agreed at a meeting in Brussels on Dec. 12-13 to implement the recently endorsed "new strategic concept" [see p. 38600-01]by streamlining NAT0's senior military structure in line with post-Cold War force reductions.
Inviting eastern European countries to establish closer links, preferably in line with the newly formed "North Atlantic Co-operation Council" [see also pp. 38554; 38600], ministers offered to make available "experience and expertise" aimed at "the democratic control of military forces" in the former Communist bloc.
According to a communiqué, ministers agreed to reduce NATO's top command structure from three to two — Supreme Allied Command Europe (Saceur) and Supreme Allied Command Atlantic (Saclant)— thereby abolishing Allied Command Channel, traditionally under United Kingdom command.
(UK command was, however, to be guaranteed through control of NATO's new multinational core, the Rapid Reaction Force (RRF)— see p. 38216.)
Also abolished was NATO's Northern Army Group, forming part of Allied Forces Central Europe formerly deploying troops to defend West Germany's borders.
Restating the objectives of NATO's "new strategic concept" as designed to address new instabilities, ministers agreed to approve "additional politico-military guidelines for the flexible and effective employment of Allied forces" .
While welcoming moves by European leaders at Maastricht [see p. 38658]towards "the eventual framing of a common [European]defence policy" , the statement underlined NATO's "transatlantic links" and "the indivisibility of security of all [its]members" .
Foreign Ministers' meeting
In an unprecedented move extending NATO's activities to the humanitarian field, NATO Foreign Ministers agreed in Brussels on Dec. 19 to approve plans granting food aid to the Soviet Union and to "assist in the transportation and distribution of humanitarian assistance" .
The move which was expected to take effect immediately, followed a warning by US Secretary of State James Baker, recently returned from a tour of Russia, Byelarus, Ukraine and Kazakhstan, that the former Soviet republics faced the threat of an imminent social explosion as a result of food shortages.
Reflecting other concerns, notably the future of nuclear weapons stationed in the former Soviet republics, ministers called on Soviet and republican leaders to ensure "the safe, responsible and reliable control of nuclear weapons, and actively prevent proliferation of those weapons and other means of destruction" .
Earlier, Baker had told NATO ministers that he had been satisfactorily assured by the four republics which he had visited that they were prepared to place their nuclear weapons under one authority, with some republics expressing interest in becoming non-nuclear powers [see also p. 38655].
On Dec. 20 the North Atlantic Co-operation Council, consisting of the Foreign Ministers of NATO, the Soviet Union, eastern European states, Estonia, Latvia and Lithuania, held its inaugural session in Brussels.
A communiqué said that discussions had focused on "security and related issues" .
INTERNATIONAL
ICO
Sixth summit
The sixth heads of state summit of the Islamic Conference Organization (ICO) was held in Dakar on Dec. 9-11 under the chairmanship of President Abdou Diouf of Senegal.
Over half of the 45 heads of state or government, including King Fahd of Saudi Arabia and President Hosni Mubarak of Egypt, failed to attend the gathering and were represented instead by deputies.
Iraq boycotted the proceedings, claiming that it was "a theatre to peddle suspect US policies against Iraq" .
Azerbaijan, one of two Moslem republics of the former Soviet Union invited to send a delegation (the other being Kazakhastan), was elected a member, while Albania was admitted as an observer.
The conference, which ended a day earlier than planned, was reportedly marred by disagreements centring on perceptions of the Gulf war and the merits of Middle East peace talks currently in progress [see pp. 38594-95; 38693].
Reports spoke also of feelings of resentment among some black African leaders, including Diouf, who was quoted as saying after the summit that "we respect the Arabs more than they respect us" .
In a joint declaration issued on Dec. 11, member states "deplored the phenomenon of terrorism" and reiterated "the readiness of Moslem countries to co-operate with international efforts" aimed at its suppression.
The statement said that "international conventions should be respected and all disputes should be settled through dialogue" .
An Agence France-Presse (AFP) news agency report of Dec. 8 said that ICO Foreign Ministers who met for a preparatory session in Dakar on Dec. 5-9, had adopted a draft resolution expressing "full solidarity" with Libya in its confrontation with Western states over the Lockerbie affair [see p. 38599]and underlined their "concern over…the possible use of force" .
The declaration highlighted the importance of the current Middle East peace talks and reiterated support for the Palestinian intifada, adding that the liberation of Jerusalem "was the Islamic cause of this generation" .
The declaration deplored Iraq's non-compliance with UN resolutions following the Gulf war.
It "expressed anxiety over the violation of human rights in Kashmir" .
It also called for the "formation of a broad-based government in Afghanistan" (the ICO having recently appointed its own representative, Ibrahim Salih Bakr, to co-ordinate consultations with Afghan and other interested governments).
The chairman of the Palestine Liberation Organization (PLO), Yassir Arafat, had reportedly "stormed out" of the closing session on Dec. 11 after the Conference refused to endorse a PLO-backed motion to include a call for a jihad ( "holy war" ) in its resolution on the Palestine issue.
Among other initiatives taken at the summit was a decision by Saudi Arabia to forgive the debt owed to it by the poorest Islamic countries and to contribute US$10,000,000 to ease the ICO's budget deficit of US$49,000,000.
INTERNATIONAL
OECD
DAC meeting
The Development Assistance Committee (DAC) of the Organization for Economic Co-Operation and Development (OECD) held its annual meeting in Paris on Dec. 3-4.
Spain and Portugal were admitted as new members of the DAC, bringing the total number to 21.
In an unprecedented move the Committee agreed to serve notice to developing countries seeking assistance that all future allocations would depend on effective cuts in military expenditure.
Health officers meeting — Release of "Outlook" 
On Dec. 4 OECD environmental health officers agreed in Paris to adopt guidelines for chemical accident prevention.
The OECD's bi-annual economic report Outlook, released on Dec. 19, set growth in industrialized nations in the second half of 1991 at a mere 1 per cent annual rate; in July the OECD had forecast a 2.4 per cent annual growth for this period.
INTERNATIONAL
AVIATION
Collapse of Pan Am
The United States carrier Pan American World Airways (Pan Am) ceased operations on Dec. 4 after facing heavy financial losses; an estimated 10,000 of the airline's employees were reported to have been made redundant.
Hopes in immediately preceding months of improving Pan Am's financial prospects [see p. 38123]had faded after another US carrier, Delta Air Lines Inc, withdrew from a deal to contribute US$140,000,000 towards a reorganization plan.
Pan Am, the third US carrier to cease operations in 1991, was founded in 1927 and became known for expanding air routes to south America and pioneering US air travel to the Far East.
Air crashes
On Dec. 22, 26 people died after a German DC3 aircraft crashed near Heidelberg, Germany.
Eight German tourists were among nine people killed aboard a light aircraft which crashed at a wildlife reserve in Kenya on Dec. 27.
All 129 passengers aboard a Scandinavian Airlines System (SAS) survived after it crash-landed near Stockholm on Dec. 27.
INTERNATIONAL
CHOLERA EPIDEMIC
Since the beginning of the year 336,880 people in Latin America had become infected with cholera of whom 3,542 had died (including 2,681 in Peru), while in Africa 133,136 cases and 12,405 deaths (including 7,104 in Nigeria) had been recorded, according to figures released by the World Health Organization on Nov. 29.
INTERNATIONAL
COMMODITIES
Representatives from the International Coffee Organization (ICO) meeting in London on Dec. 4-6 failed to agree on reviving price support mechanisms.
INTERNATIONAL
ICJ
The UN Security Council, meeting concurrently with the General Assembly on Dec. 5, elected Prince Bola Ajibola (Nigeria) to replace the late Taslim Olawale Elias (Nigeria) as a member of the International Court of Justice (ICJ).
INTERNATIONAL
ICRC
On Dec. 12 Cornelio Sommaruga was re-elected President of the International Committee of the Red Cross; the 1991 ICRC budget deficit for 1991 stood at US$35,000,000.
INTERNATIONAL
INTERNATIONAL RED CROSS AND RED CRESCENT MOVEMENT
The 26th International Conference, due to have been held in Budapest on Nov. 29-Dec. 6, was postponed after members failed to agree on the participation of the Palestine Liberation Organization (PLO).
INTERNATIONAL
INTERNATIONAL PARTY ORGANIZATIONS
The executive committee of the Liberal International met in Warsaw on Nov. 30-Dec.1 for its first gathering in a former communist country.
INTERNATIONAL
OAPEC
The 47th ministerial conference of the Organization of Arab Petroleum Exporting Countries (OAPEC) was held in Cairo on Dec. 7.
INTERNATIONAL
UNICEF
The annual report of the United Nations Children's Fund (UNICEF), released on Dec. 19, showed that poor countries spent an average 12 per cent of their budgets on health and education, while rich countries allocated only 10 per cent of their aid to these sectors in the developing world.
INTERNATIONAL
WFP
Catherine Ann Bertini of the United States was appointed Executive Director of the World Food Programme (WFP) for a five-year term with effect from April 5, 1992.