

MIDDLE EAST — ARAB WORLD
LEBANON
Guerrilla clashes with Israeli forces — Killing of Musawi
Clashes in southern Lebanon between Hezbollah guerrillas, Israeli forces, and the Israeli-backed South Lebanon Army (SLA) intensified in February.
The Israeli Defence Forces (IDF), moving beyond their self-declared "security zone" in southern Lebanon, entered UN-patrolled areas with tanks and troops on Feb. 15 in a widening attempt to wipe out the forces of militant Shia guerrilla organizations.
The Hezbollah secretary-general, Sheikh Abbas Musawi, was killed when an Israeli helicopter gunship attacked his motorcade on Feb. 16.
Hezbollah and other guerrilla attacks in late January and early February — Israeli bombardments
On Jan. 26, according to reports by the Agence France-Presse (AFP) news agency, Israeli forces bombarded several villages in southern Lebanon, after a Hezbollah attack into the Israeli "security zone" in which one Israeli soldier was killed and another wounded.
The same day, one Israeli and three Islamic Resistance guerrillas were killed in clashes inside the "security zone" , in a gun battle near the village of Sribbine.
In retaliation Israeli forces and the SLA shelled several villages north of the "security zone" on Jan. 31.
The clashes followed the extension of the Lebanese army's presence into part of southern Lebanon and the corresponding reduction in the area of deployment of the UN Interim Force in Lebanon (UNIFIL)[see p. 38742].
On Feb. 8, in another gun battle near the village of Brasheet, three guerrillas were killed and one Israeli soldier was wounded; on Feb. 11, guerrillas launched rocket attacks on SLA positions.
The Israeli and SLA response in both cases involved the shelling of villages to the north.
Israeli air raids on Palestinian camps — Killing of Musawi and intensification of fighting in south
On the night of Feb. 16, the Israeli air force attacked what Israeli Defence Minister Moshe Arens called "terrorist targets belonging to Fatah" in southern Lebanon.
Arens accused Fatah of brutally killing three IDF soldiers in a military camp in northern Israel.
Israeli planes and helicopters shelled the Palestinian refugee camps of Ain-el-Hilweh near Sidon, and Rashidiyeh near the port of Tyre.
Four people were reported killed and 10 wounded.
Musawi was killed in a separate Israeli attack later the same day.
He, his wife, his son and five bodyguards died, and 11 others were reported wounded, when two helicopter gunships attacked his motorcade at Sharquiyya, 20 km from Tyre and 30 km from the Israeli border, firing five wire-guided missiles and setting his car ablaze.
Musawi, whom Arens said had been targeted because he headed "a murderous organization and had a lot of blood on his hands" , had just attended a Hezbollah rally in the village of Jibshit, the organization's stronghold.
In an apparently unsuccessful Israeli commando raid in December 1991, Israeli forces had abducted several people near Jibshit [see pp. 38741; 38742].
An estimated 50,000 Shias attended Musawi's funeral on Feb. 17 in the southern outskirts of Beirut, vowing revenge against Israel.
On Feb. 18 Sheikh Hasan Nasrallah was appointed successor to Musawi.
On Feb. 18 Hezbollah launched a wave of rocket and artillery attacks; 40 Katyusha rockets hit northern Israel, and another 25 landed in the "security zone" .
Israeli forces responded with artillery barrages, the exchanges continuing over the succeeding days.
Lebanese army units were also reportedly involved in the artillery exchanges.
Security sources said that 150 Lebanese army commandos in armoured vehicles arrived in the region to join 11,000 troops already there.
Radio Lebanon said on Feb. 18 that a "mass exodus" was taking place, following an ultimatum which it said had been issued to civilians by the SLA and Israel.
As clashes intensified and Israeli artillery showered their villages with shells, thousands of civilians streamed north from southern Lebanon on Feb. 20.
Israeli incursion into UNIFIL area — Subsequent rocket attacks into Israel
On Feb. 20 an Israeli force comprising some 350 soldiers, 36 Israeli tanks, 60 armoured troop carriers and 12 howitzers moved northwards from the "security zone" into an area of Lebanon patrolled by UNIFIL.
They used bulldozers to break the barriers set up by UNIFIL troops to protect the villages.
Members of the UNIFIL force tried to stop the Israelis from breaking through the barriers, and engaged into fist-fights and stone-throwing.
The villages of Yater and Kafra were seized by Israeli troops, and buildings were blown up and searched for rockets; 25 Lebanese and two Israelis were reported killed and four members of the Fijian contingent of UNIFIL were wounded, two of them seriously.
As many as 10,000 civilians were reported to have fled the area.
On Feb. 21, the Voice of Israel said that the Israeli army units which had attacked the villages of Kafra and Yatar had "completed their task" and were leaving Lebanese territory.
According to security sources 330 Israeli high explosive artillery rounds had landed in the area of the Israeli operation.
Within hours of the IDF departure Hezbollah militiamen returned to the villages, reportedly accompanied by members of what had hitherto been seen as their main rival within the Lebanese Shia population, the Syrian-backed Amal militia.
Guerrillas fired Katyusha rockets towards northern Israel, one of which crossed the border, killing a five-year-old girl.
In retaliation, Israel directed heavy artillery bombardments at villages north of the "security zone" , including areas from which Israeli tanks and troops had just withdrawn.
Lebanese guerrilla groups agreed to stop firing Katyusha rockets at Israel on Feb. 22 in a bid to avoid further Israeli retaliation.
Sources said that this decision was taken after an agreement between Hezbollah and Amal guerrillas, the Lebanese army, and Syrian forces.
The following day the guerrilla organizations withdrew 200 of their forces from southern Lebanon.
AFRICA
SOUTH AFRICA
Announcement of referendum
On Feb. 20 State President F. W. de Klerk called a "whites-only" referendum to renew his mandate for negotiating a political settlement with anti-apartheid organizations.
Taking what one commentator called "the biggest gamble ever taken by any prime minister or president" , de Klerk promised his own resignation and that of his government if the referendum showed a "no" majority.
The President was responding to the defeat on Feb. 19 of the ruling National Party (NP) in a by-election in Potchefstroom, in the western Transvaal, where the Conservative Party (CP), the official white opposition party, won a majority of 2,140, overturning the NP 1989 general election majority of 1,583.
The by-election had been billed by both the NP and the CP as a test of white opinion on constitutional change.
On Feb. 24 de Klerk announced the date of the referendum — March 17 — and the wording of the question to which voters would have to respond with a yes or a no: "Do you support continuation of the reform process which the State President began on Feb. 2, 1990 [see p. 37232], and which is aimed at a new constitution through negotiation?" 
The President asserted that the referendum would fulfil his pledge made to whites at the 1989 general election to seek their approval for major constitutional change.
He said that he would "regard a yes vote…as authority to enter into binding agreements in the negotiation process and to implement those binding agreements" .
Reactions to referendum announcement
The Democratic Party, the liberal opposition group in the white House of Assembly, declared that it would support a "yes" vote.
The CP was initially surprised by the rapid reaction of de Klerk to the by-election result, and some days passed before the party made a decision on participation in the referendum.
However, on Feb. 25 Andries Treurnicht, leader of the CP, announced that the party would be urging its supporters to vote "no" .
He acknowledged that the delay in his party's response was due to internal disagreements; the party executive was believed to have voted for a boycott of the referendum, but was reportedly overruled by a parliamentary caucus meeting.
Treurnicht rejected de Klerk's view that the referendum would be the final test of white attitudes to the reform process.
He stressed that the CP would continue to demand a whites-only general election, and that "this is not the end of the political war" ; the CP would recognize the referendum result "as the actual situation, but not for all eternity" .
He also announced that in its referendum campaign the CP would be working with the neo-fascist Afrikaner Resistance Movement (AWB) which had reversed its plans for a boycott of the vote.
The African National Congress (ANC), in a joint statement with the South African Communist Party (SACP) and the Congress of South African Trade Unions (COSATU), said that the referendum announcement reflected the "crisis of the apartheid establishment" , and called for the defence of the negotiation process.
In a separate statement on Feb. 27 the ANC secretary-general Cyril Ramaphosa called on whites to vote "yes" .
The referendum was welcomed by the Zulu Inkatha Freedom Party, but was completely rejected by the Pan-Africanist Congress (PAC) and the Azanian People's Organization (AZAPO).
ANC constitutional proposals
On Feb. 24 the ANC announced its revised constitutional proposals at the Convention for a Democratic South Africa (CODESA).
The proposals indicated a growing convergence with the government, with apparent agreement on giving a constitution-drafting role to an elected interim administration (called a "transitional government" by the government and a "constituent assembly" by the ANC — see pp. 38704-05 for details of government proposals).
The ANC proposals envisaged a two-phase transition to a post-apartheid democracy and were supported by the SACP.
During Phase One an all-party interim government council would be appointed by CODESA by the third quarter of 1992.
Its task would be limited to ensuring free and fair multiracial elections to a constitution-making body (a constituent assembly).
It would sit for a limited period, probably less than six months, and would take over responsibility for those areas of state operation essential for impartial elections including the security forces, a limited budgetary role, the state-owned media and the conduct of the elections themselves.
Phase Two would begin with the election of the constituent assembly, replacing the existing tri-cameral parliament from which blacks were excluded.
The assembly, in which all parties receiving more than 5 per cent of the vote would have seats on a proportional basis, would thus act as both a constitution-making body and as a legislative assembly.
Decisions on a new constitution would have to be reached by a two-thirds majority of the assembly, whilst in other matters it would act by consensus.
The assembly would also appoint an interim cabinet.
The terms for both the constituent assembly and the interim cabinet would be a maximum of 12 months, after which election would be held under a new constitution.
Under the proposals this would take place in early 1994.
ANC economic plans
Statements by ANC president Nelson Mandela appeared to signal a shift from his organization's commitment to large-scale nationalization.
Speaking at the World Economic Forum in Davos, Switzerland, on Feb. 2, Mandela said that the private sector would play a central and critical role in generating wealth in South Africa; he envisaged a mixed economy with a public sector "perhaps no different from such countries as Germany, France and Italy" .
Later, in an interview in the Financial Times of Feb. 8 he spoke of a "fundamental review" of the ANC's stance on the nationalization of key industries and went on to urge foreign companies to visit South Africa to investigate investment opportunities.
Mandela also indicated that any future ANC government would honour debts incurred by the de Klerk regime.
This appeared to contradict a statement issued by the ANC's Johannesburg headquarters on Feb. 5.
Goldstone commission
On Feb. 7 the Goldstone Commission of Inquiry into the Prevention of Violence and Intimidation, established in October 1991 and chaired by Appeals Court Judge Richard Goldstone, published an interim report on an investigation into the killing of 19 people by Inkatha supporters at Mooi River, near Durban, in December 1991.
In the report members of the police were accused of acting illegally and it was suggested that they were biased in favour of Inkatha.
It called for urgent steps to be taken to ensure impartial policing and demanded that the police enforce legislation to stop the carrying of spears and other "cultural" weapons by Inkatha supporters.
Earlier, following requests made by both the government and ANC [see p. 38705], the commission began to investigate allegations of state complicity in the township violence.
From Feb. 4 it heard considerable evidence confirming the existence of a "third force" involving members of the security forces who had provoked township violence.
Attacks on white teachers
The education authorities withdrew more than 30 white teachers from schools in Kathlehong, a township south of Johannesburg, on Feb. 1.
The move followed a series of attacks on white teachers by a group of pro-PAC black youths calling themselves the Revolutionary Watchdogs.
Dismissal of Coloured cabinet
President de Klerk on Feb. 3 replaced the six-member cabinet in charge of Coloured affairs with members of his own National Party, following a vote of no confidence in the Labour Party, which had controlled the Cabinet.
Former Labour Party member Jac Rabie was appointed as its head.
Foreign relations
De Klerk arrived in the United Kingdom on Feb. 1 at the start of a 10-day European tour.
Following a meeting with the UK Prime Minister, John Major, he travelled on to Switzerland where he attended the World Economic Forum in Davos.
He later visited France, Hungary, Czechoslovakia and Poland.
Relations at ambassadorial level were established by Bulgaria on Feb. 1.
On Feb. 28 South African Foreign Affairs Minister Roelof "Pik" Botha signed an agreement with his Russian counterpart Andrei Kozyrev establishing full diplomatic relations.
The move was condemned by the SACP as "counter-productive and premature" .
On Feb. 10 the Tanzanian government announced the lifting of some sanctions, including those on air links and visits, over the course of the year.
On Feb. 23 a Swedish parliamentary delegation returning from a two-week visit to South Africa recommended the maintenance of Swedish economic sanctions until the outcome of the referendum was known.
AFRICA
ZIMBABWE
Support for economic restructuring
The IMF on Jan. 27 approved an extended arrangement, authorizing drawings of up to the equivalent of SDR343,800,000 (about US$484,000,000) over the next three years in support of the government's economic and financial reform programme.
Zimbabwe, which was classified as a low-income country by the IMF in 1991, had begun a five-year economic structural adjustment programme in 1991, involving the tightening of fiscal and monetary policies, the reduction of the budget deficit, the maintenance of an appropriate exchange rate and the major liberalization of external trade, domestic prices, investment and labour regulations and financial markets.
The cost of the programme had exceeded government expectations, and the new funds, repayable over 10 years with a five-year grace period, were granted to help cover the period 1992-94.
A World Bank-supported consultative group, meeting in Paris on Feb. 18-19, agreed to provide resources of almost US$1,000 million for 1992.
Half the funds were to be disbursed rapidly to support the balance of payments.
While both the IMF and the World Bank donor countries appeared satisfied with the progress of budgetary and monetary reforms, they indicated that increased efforts should be made to restructure the public services and parastatal bodies.
A condition of the IMF loan was unofficially reported to be a 25 per cent reduction in public staff levels.
Finance Minister Bernard Chidzero said that the government intended to cut over 5,000 public posts.
Land Acquisition Bill
On Feb. 27 the government tabled in parliament the long-expected Land Acquisition Bill allowing for the compulsory purchase of 5,500,000 hectares of predominantly white-owned land.
In 1981 (i.e. on independence) the government had promised to resettle 162,000 black families by 1985, but by February 1992 fewer than 60,000 such families had been resettled.
At this time, some 7,000,000 people, almost all of them black, lived on 16,400,000 hectares of "communal" farmland, whereas 4,500 commercial farmers, almost all of them white, owned 11,500,000 hectares (almost one-third of the country) of prime agricultural land.
Under the terms of the bill, a six-member committee would decide on the value of the land and there would be no right to appeal if the price was considered unfair.
Landowners' anger at the bill was exacerbated by the proposal that payment for properties would be made over five years in local currency.
The Zimbabwe dollar fell by 47 per cent against the dollar in 1991 and the annual inflation rate was about 30 per cent.
Death of Sally Mugabe
Sally Mugabe, 59, the wife of President Robert Mugabe since 1961, died on Jan. 27 after a long illness.
Ghanaian-born, she was a member of the ruling Zimbabwe Africa National Union central committee and politburo, and was her husband's closest political adviser.
AFRICA
ZAMBIA
Request for debt write-off
On a two-day visit to the United Kingdom on Feb. 13-14, President Frederick Chiluba sought UK backing for his government's appeal to creditors to reschedule or write off its US$8,000 million external debt.
On Feb. 14 Chiluba and UK Prime Minister John Major signed agreements rescheduling Zambia's 1992 debt obligations to the UK and releasing £10,000,000 balance-of-payments support which had been suspended pending the implementation of economic reforms.
Major also stated that Zambia would be eligible for debt relief under the "Trinidad terms" [see p. 37892].
(Major had told the Commonwealth heads of government conference in Harare in October 1991 that the UK was prepared unilaterally to implement these terms, which envisaged writing off two-thirds of the export credits owed by the world's poorest countries — see p. 38552.)
1992 budget
In the first budget of the Movement for Multiparty Democracy government on Jan. 31, Finance Minister Emmanuel Kasonde reiterated the government's commitment to economic reform as he attempted to boost exports and reduce state expenditure.
Exchange controls were liberalized and the kwacha was devalued by 27 per cent, with a new base rate of US$1.00=K125 as at Feb. 1.
Kasonde said that as long as the economy was dependent upon copper sales, the country would continue to devalue the currency "to keep its books in order" .
He made substantial tax cuts, reducing the top rate of individual tax from 50 to 30 per cent and corporate tax from 45 to 40 per cent.
He also abolished duty-free shops, a move expected to earn the government K150,000,000 annually.
Kasonde predicted that inflation, which ran at 118 per cent in 1991, would be reduced and indicated that government subsidies on various commodities, which accounted for 25 per cent of state expenditure, would be further reduced and ultimately ended [see also p. 38666].
On Feb. 4 Kasonde announced that Zambia had paid US$50,000,000 of arrears to the World Bank, allowing it to draw US$71,000,000 from a US$80,000,000 tranche of a World Bank loan suspended when the previous government defaulted on arrears payments in September 1991 [see p. 38423].
AFRICA
ANGOLA
Agreement on electoral arrangements
On Feb. 1 the government and the rebel Union for the Total Independence of Angola (UNITA) began talks on the recommendations of the multiparty conference held in Luanda on Jan. 14-26 which UNITA had not attended [see pp. 38705-06].
Consensus was reached on several issues including the right of all citizens, of whom an estimated 3,000,000 lived abroad, to vote.
The two sides also agreed that elections scheduled for the second half of September 1992 would be conducted on a basis of proportional representation and that the post-election regime would be "semi-presidential" , with the president serving a five-year mandate, renewable for three terms.
The constitutional assembly would have a four-year life.
Registration of political parties
UNITA and the Angolan Democratic Forum (FDA) applied to the Supreme Court for registration as political parties on Feb. 10.
The FDA complied with the legislation regarding the registration of parties and submitted the necessary 3,000 signatures.
UNITA officials, however, said that the presentation of signatures was not required under the terms of the May 1991 peace agreement [see p. 38180].
The decision of the Supreme Court had not been announced by the end of February.
The application for registration by UNITA coincided with press reports, quoting US State Department and congressional sources, that US covert aid for UNITA would be discontinued before the elections.
AFRICA
ZAIRE
Shooting of protesters
According to the Zaïre Human Rights League 30 people were killed and over 100 injured when troops opened fire on thousands of peaceful protesters in Kinshasa on Feb. 16.
The government put the death toll at 17.
The pro-democracy demonstration, which was led by radical Roman Catholic priests without the support of Cardinal Frédéric Etsou-Nzabi-Bamungwabi, the Archbishop of Kinshasa, had been banned by the government on Feb. 15.
The protesters, many of whom were holding prayer books and candles, called for the resumption of the national conference which had been suspended in January [see p. 38706].
Government officials described the demonstration as "illegal and provocative" and the work of "a few priests who are intent on politics and subversion" .
The killings were strongly condemned by foreign governments, notably those of Belgium, France and the USA, whose ambassadors urged President Mobutu Sese Seko to reconvene the national conference.
The US State Department, while reaffirming its support for Mobutu remaining in power during the period of transition to democracy, also accused him of undermining the reform process and warned against further military attacks on peaceful protesters.
National conference
The Kinshasa demonstration followed calls from the opposition alliance, the Sacred Union, for popular protest in support of the national conference as it rejected proposals for its replacement outlined by Prime Minister Jean Nguza Karl-I-Bond.
Speaking on Feb. 3 the Prime Minister questioned the possibility of the conference's success, saying that it was "too costly in its current form" ; he claimed that the country would be better served by a "national round table" with a limited number of delegates who would draft a new constitution and set an election timetable [see also p. 38706].
A strike call by the Sacred Union on Feb. 3 was taken up by workers across the country.
By mid-February food stocks were said to be running low; according to local reports, soldiers were sent to Matadi, the country's main port, to unload ships and transport goods to the capital.
On Feb. 24 Monsengwo Pasinya, president of the national conference, indicated that Nguza had abandoned the round table idea but was still expected to demand a reduction in the number of delegates to the conference.
AFRICA
RWANDA
Prospect of unity government
Radio Rwanda reported on Feb. 24 that the formation of a national unity government, in which a number of opposition parties would be represented, was expected "very soon" .
According to the report, a commission in charge of the negotiations with political parties, chaired by Finance Minister Enoch Ruhigira, was focusing its discussions on the distribution of Cabinet posts, including that of prime minister, between political parties.
The question of whether a national conference should be held was reportedly also under discussion.
The report followed a meeting on Feb. 11 between the President, Maj.-Gen.
Juvénal Habyarimana, and officials of all recognized political parties at which it was agreed to recommence talks on the creation of a multiparty transitional government.
Earlier, the Christian Democratic Party (PDC), a partner in the coalition government formed in December 1991 [see p. 38662], decided to remain within the government.
The PDC had previously threatened to leave the administration on Jan. 31 if the government was not opened to other political parties, and party officials described the change of stance as a gesture of goodwill in response to continuing negotiations.
AFRICA
CONGO
Postponement of referendum — New timetable
The Higher Council of the Republic (CSR — the transitional legislature) voted on Feb. 11 to postpone the referendum on the constitution scheduled for Feb. 16.
The referendum, first scheduled for November 1991, had already been postponed several times [see pp. 38227; 38424; 38565; 38663].
The most recent postponement followed the discovery of irregularities in voters' lists and was supported by opposition groups.
On Feb. 12 the CSR approved an amended election timetable [see p. 38277 for timetable set by national conference].
The referendum was now set for March 15, to be followed on March 29 by local elections.
Legislative elections would take place in two rounds on April 21 and May 2 and the presidential poll was expected to take place in June.
The CSR also announced that the voters' register would be checked immediately.
AFRICA
BURKINA
National Reconciliation Forum — Cabinet changes
On Feb. 20 President Blaise Compaore suspended indefinitely the National Reconciliation Forum on democracy, human rights and development which had begun meeting in Ouagadougou on Feb. 11 [for January preliminary discussions see p. 38709].
Proceedings were halted after the forum's interim executive committee chaired by Seraphin Rwamba failed to agree with the President on the live radio coverage of deliberations, which Compaore opposed.
On Feb. 26 Compaore announced a major Cabinet reshuffle.
The most notable of the new appointments was that of Hermann Yameogo, leader of the opposition Alliance for Democracy and Federation, as Minister of State.
Yameogo had been appointed Minister of Agriculture in July 1991, but had resigned from the government in August [see p. 38424].
Roch Christian Kabore, hitherto Minister in charge of special duties with the Presidency, was also named Minister of State.
Other changes included the appointment of Antoine Raogo Sawadogo as Minister of Territorial Administration, replacing Jean-Léonard Compaore.
AFRICA
COTE D'IVOIRE
Abidjan riot
More than 100 people were arrested in Abidjan, on Feb. 18 as a 20,000-strong demonstration degenerated into a riot of unprecedented violence.
The march was part of a protest campaign organized by the Front populaire ivorien (FPI) against President Félix Houphouët-Boigny's refusal to take action against his armed forces Chief of Staff, Gen. Robert Gueï.
The report of an official inquiry, published in January, had said that Gueï was responsible for a violent raid on a student hostel in May 1991 [see pp. 38278-79]and had specifically called for his immediate punishment.
Three days of student-initiated demonstrations on Feb. 4-6 led to confrontations between the military and students, the temporary closure of the University of Abidjan and the arrest of more than 100 student activists including Martial Ahipeaud, secretary-general of the banned Fédération étudiantine et scolaire de Côte d'Ivoire.
The violence in Abidjan started, according to local reports, when a group of youths broke away from the body of the march and attacked the court where Ahipeaud was due to stand trial.
The security forces responded rapidly, using tear gas and batons.
Western diplomats who witnessed the violence said that they saw security force members place explosives in the car belonging to Laurent Gbagbo, the FPI leader, and set it on fire.
Amongst those reportedly arrested were Gbagbo, Francis Wodie, leader of the Parti ivorien travailliste, and René Degní Segui of the Ligue ivorien des droits des hommes.
They faced prosecution under a presidential ordinance, passed hurriedly on Feb. 17, which made organizers of demonstrations criminally and civilly liable for their supporters' actions.
Prime Minister Alassane Ouattara said that Gbagbo and the other leaders had been "caught red-handed during the destruction" , although there were no witnesses to support this claim.
There was, however, some speculation by FPI members that the march had been infiltrated by government supporters.
At Gbagbo's trial, which began on Feb. 27, lawyers called for all charges against him and 19 other defendants to be dropped "to prove to the world that the rule of law exists and that Côte d'Ivoire is not a police state" .
On Feb. 27, however, Ahipeaud and three other student leaders were each sentenced to three years' imprisonment and fined 500,000 francs CFA (about US$1,800).
AFRICA
THE GAMBIA
Date for elections
The President, Sir Dawda Kairaba Jawara, announced on Feb. 14 that presidential and legislative elections would be held on April 29, 11 days before the expiry of his current term of office.
The announcement was followed by the dissolution of the House of Representatives on Feb. 17.
In December 1991 had Jawara announced that he was stepping down as President, a position which he had held since independence.
However, he reversed his decision in response to pressure from the ruling People's Progressive Party.
AFRICA
EQUATORIAL GUINEA
Arrest of opposition members
Several senior members of opposition groups were arrested during February.
The leader of the Convergence for Social Democracy (CDS), Placido Miko, was arrested as he tried to pass a copy of the opposition newspaper La Verdad to a traveller to Spain.
Other CDS members to be arrested and held in the capital, Malabo, were José Antonio Dorronsoro, a former planning official, José Luis Nvumba, former director-general of the Ministry of Justice, Arsenio Bacale and Celestino Molongua.
According to Spanish radio reports, they were accused of insulting and slandering the head of state and maintaining subversive correspondence.
On Feb. 25 Spanish radio also reported the arrest in the mainland port of Bata of four opposition members on drug-related offences.
The arrests aroused the "concern" of the Spanish government.
Speaking on Feb. 12 the Spanish Foreign Minister Francisco Fernández Ordóñez warned that whilst his country would not withhold aid of a humanitarian nature, the extension of aid in other areas would be dependent on further democratization.
AFRICA
GUINEA
Cabinet changes
President Lansana Conte announced a major government reshuffle on Feb. 6.
The changes, which included six new members, reduced the number of full ministers from 23 to 16 and the number of secretaries of state from five to one.
Among those dismissed from the Cabinet were several senior military officers as well as all the so-called Guinéens de l'extérieur, a group of exiles who returned in 1984 after the death of President Ahmed Sekou Touré.
Guinea Cabinet
**Maj.
Ibrahima Sylla Foreign Affairs and Co-operation Maj. Abdourahmane Diallo Minister at the Presidency in charge of National Defence
**René Alseny Gomez Interior and Security
*Soriba Kaba Planning and Finance
*Salifou Sylla Justice and Keeper of the Seals
*Ibrahima Sory Sow Agriculture and Animal Resources
*Toumani Dakoum Sako Natural Resources, Energy and Environment
**Maj.
Ibrahima Diallo Territorial Development
*Charles Pascal Tollo Higher Education and Vocational Training
*Aicha Bah Diallo (f) Higher Education and Vocational Training
**Madigbe Fofana Public Health and Social Affairs
*Capt.
Jean-Claude Fassou Communication
*Assifat Dorank Youth, Culture, Arts and Sports
*René Loua Fassou Administrative Reform, Civil Service and Labour
*Mamadou Boyé Barry Industry, Small- and Medium-sized Enterprises
*Nantenin Camara Commerce, Transport and Tourism
*Makale Kamara (f) Secretary of State at the Ministry of Public Health in charge of the Promotion of Women and Children
*New appointment.
**Altered responsibilities.
Women are denoted by (f).
AFRICA
LIBERIA
Vice-presidency offer to Taylor
In his annual message to the Interim Legislative Assembly on Jan. 31, interim President Amos Sawyer offered to Charles Taylor, leader of the rebel National Patriotic Front of Liberia (NPFL), the post of vice-president in the interim government.
The offer was conditional on the disarmament of the NPFL and on its assembly at specified camps as outlined in the Yammoussoukro agreement of October 1991 [see p. 38518].
Sawyer also offered the NPFL several key Cabinet positions as well as a number of seats in the Interim Legislative Assembly.
He called on the NPFL to co-operate with the government in addressing a number of national issues including the rehabilitation of young combatants and the repatriation and resettlement of more than 600,000 refugees.
He also appealed to the rebels to assist in the remodelling of the Armed Forces of Liberia under the guidance of the regional peace-keeping force ECOMOG (Economic Community of West African States Monitoring Group).
Taylor's response to the offer had not been published by the end of February.
AFRICA
MALI
First round of legislative elections
The first round of multiparty legislative elections postponed from Jan. 26 [see p. 38709]took place on Feb. 23.
It was marked by boycott by the majority of political parties and a poor turnout.
Early results indicated a strong showing by the Alliance for Democracy in Mali (ADEMA), the most successful of the parties in the municipal elections in January [see p. 38708].
The new date for the first round had been announced on Feb. 4, when new provisional dates were also given for the second round (March 8) and the two rounds of the presidential elections (March 22 and April 5).
The new timetable prolonged the transition period for a second time [see p. 38563 for first extension]despite the government's insistence in January that the transition would end on March 26 as planned [see p. 38709].
On Feb. 10, 15 of the 23 parties which had contested the municipal elections had said that they would not participate in the legislative elections.
They called for the cancellation of the new timetable, declaring that the conditions for "reliable and open" elections could not be implemented by Feb. 23.
AFRICA
NIGER
Border closure
The Ministry of the Interior ordered the indefinite closure of the Assamaka border post to foreign tourists as of Feb. 1.
Assamaka, the principal entry point to and from Algeria, was about 800 km north-west of Niamey, the capital.
The order stated that the border post had been closed for "security reasons" because of the increasing number of attacks on tourist convoys by "highway robbers" .
The Ministry emphasized that closure would not affect trade between the two countries.
There was some media speculation that while the decision was made to protect foreign tourists, the government also wanted to secure the border against the infiltration of arms by Tuareg rebels [see p. 38708 for details of Tuareg rebellion].
Unconfirmed local sources claimed that the rebels had been using tourist convoys to transport weapons from Algeria.
AFRICA
TOGO
Election timetable
The government on Jan. 29 adopted a new election timetable, subject to the approval of all political party leaders.
Under the new schedule the period Feb. 29-March 28 was set aside for the registration of voters and a constitutional referendum would be held on March 18; municipal elections would follow in the first half of April and legislative elections would be held in two rounds on May 17 and May 31.
Two rounds of presidential elections were set for June 14 and June 28.
When the government met with the leaders of opposition parties on Feb. 17 to discuss the electoral programme, several opposition figures raised doubts about the viability of the timetable and suggested its extension to take account of the unrest which had hindered the smooth running of the transition period.
Opposition demonstration
A mass rally organized by 12 opposition groups was held in Lomé, the capital, on Feb. 9.
Over 50,000 people gathered in response to a opposition call to mobilize for the victory of democracy.
Speaking to the rally, Leopold Gnininvi, secretary-general of the Democratic Convention of African Peoples (CDPA), called for a single opposition candidate in the presidential elections.
In a veiled attack on the military, Gnininvi warned against further intervention in the country's move to multiparty democracy and called on the people to thwart "anti-democratic forces" .
Other opposition leaders called for foreign observers to monitor the elections.
AFRICA
SUDAN
Austerity measures and economic reforms
A sweeping programme of austerity measures and economic reforms, including privatization, the abandonment of an official exchange rate and substantial cuts in commodity subsidies, was announced by Finance and Economic Planning Minister Abdul Rahman Mahmoud Hamdi on Feb. 3.
The measures, which represented a significant acceleration in the government's three-year "economic salvation programme" , followed the virtual closure of the world's financial markets to the country.
With debts of more than US$1,300 million to the IMF, Sudan had been declared"non-co-operative by that organization in September 1990.
Although Hamdi denied that his reform programme was taken under pressure from the IMF, it followed a visit by an IMF team and was given a cautious welcome by the organisation.
The Sudanese pound was floated on Feb. 2, the government abandoning the overvalued official exchange rate of US$1.00=£S15.15.
As at Feb. 10 the rate was $1.00=£S90.1971, representing an 83 per cent devaluation, following a 70 per cent devaluation in October 1991 [see p. 38520].
The programme of privatization involved the sale of the national airline, telecommunications company and shipping line to local and foreign investors.
Industry Minister Taj El-Sir Mustafa said that this would be undertaken with the assistance of World Bank experts.
To counteract the increased budget deficit Hamdi undertook to raise import and export duties by 30 per cent and make cuts of 10 per cent in the recurrent budget and 60 per cent in the redevelopment budget.
Most controversially he announced sweeping cuts in commodity subsidies which he said were unavoidable as government subsidies on wheat and petrol had previously amounted to £S1,000 million and £S7,700 million respectively, which simply could not be sustained.
He announced increases in wages and pensions to offset the price rises.
Reports of coup attempt and political unrest
In the aftermath of the announcement of the government's austerity programme, reports abounded of political unrest.
Citing "informed Sudanese sources" the Egyptian paper Al-Sharq al-Awsat of Feb. 6 reported that 41 military officers had been arrested on Feb. 2 before they could carry out a plan to bomb the general staff headquarters during a meeting of the country's military leaders.
According to the report five officers had planned to use two military helicopters to bomb the headquarters during a joint meeting of government ministers and the Revolutionary Command Council (RCC) to discuss the austerity measures to be announced the next day.
Following the government's announcement army veterans from the civil war in the south were reported to have staged a sit-in on the bridge between Khartoum and Omdurman, customs officers to have called for an all-out strike by civil servants "to put an end to the military regime" and tens of thousands of protesters to have taken to the streets of Omdurman on Feb. 9.
Formation of transitional parliament — Cabinet reshuffle
The Transitional National Assembly announced by the chairman of the RCC, Lt.-Gen.
Omar Hassan Ahmad al-Bashir, in January [see p. 38710]was formed on Feb. 13 under the chairmanship of Col. Mohammed al-Amin Khalifah; it met for the first time on Feb. 24 in the building which formerly housed the National Assembly — the elected parliament overthrown by Bashir in June 1989 [see p. 36728].
Col. Khalifah, who led the Sudanese delegation to the unsuccessful peace talks with the southern rebels of the Sudanese People's Liberation Army (SPLA) in 1989, had recently been retired from the army and relieved of his post on the RCC.
According to the Paris-based Indian Ocean Newsletter other appointments to the 300-member assembly included a former communist, members of the opposition Umma Party and Democrat Unionist Party (DUP), and people known to be close to former President Nemery, reflecting a desire by the regime to broaden its support in the face of the unrest unleashed by its economic reforms.
In a government reshuffle in February three central and eight state government ministers were replaced.
AFRICA
SOMALIA
Continued fighting after UN peace agreement
The two sides to the civil war which had raged in the capital, Mogadishu, since mid-November committed themselves to an immediate ending of hostilities at UN-sponsored peace negotiations in New York on Feb. 14.
Held under the aegis of the UN, the Organization of African Unity (OAU), the Arab League and the Islamic Conference Organization (ICO), the negotiations followed the unanimous adoption by the UN Security Council in January of Resolution 733 urging an immediate ceasefire [see p. 38710].
Meeting separately, three-man delegations representing interim President Ali Mahdi Mohammed and Gen. Mohammed Farah Aydid, the rival leaders whose three-month power struggle was reported to have resulted in over 25,000 civilian casualties, made written undertakings to stop fighting to pave the way for a formal ceasefire agreement in late February or early March.
The negotiations were overshadowed, however, by an escalation in the fighting and by the end of the month neither side had honoured its undertaking to put an end to the conflict.
On Feb. 12 Farah Aydid had ordered a major attack on his rival's strongholds in the north of the capital, leaving 16 people dead and 142 injured in only two hours of fighting, according to Western aid workers.
The attack forced the International Committee of the Red Cross (ICRC) to abandon the new hospital it had opened in the suburb of Cisiley in January, the only one serving the part of the capital controlled by the forces of Mahdi Mohammed, and forced aid organizations to suspend their relief flights from Nairobi, the Kenyan capital.
When a joint UN-OAU-ICO-Arab League delegation, headed by James Jonah [for whose new UN designation see p. 38793], arrived in Mogadishu on Feb. 29 to negotiate the formal ceasefire foreseen by the New York agreement the fighting was still reported to be continuing.
UN report on Somali refugees in Kenya
A "confidential" UN report, leaked to the press on Feb. 8, described the conditions faced by the 100,000 Somali refugees seeking sanctuary over the border in Kenya as "appalling, unacceptable and alarming" .
Drawn up by a UN team and representatives of the Kenyan government, the report found that tens of people were dying each week in camps set up for the refugees in the remote border region of Kenya and described it as "appalling and embarrassing" that they were supposed to be under the care of the Office of UN High Commissioner for Refugees.
AFRICA
DJIBOUTI
Deployment of French peacekeeping force
A two-week mission by Paul Dijoud, Director of African Affairs at the French Foreign Affairs Ministry, to find a settlement to the three-month war between the government and the rebels of the Front for the Restoration of Unity and Democracy (FRUD) bore fruit with the deployment of a French peacekeeping force, a ceasefire by the rebels and the release by the government of the FRUD representative in the capital, Abbate Ebo Adou, imprisoned since December 1991 [see p. 38661].
Dijoud ordered the deployment of the peacekeeping troops on Feb. 25 after holding successful talks, in Djibouti on Feb. 20 and 24 with President Hassan Gouled Aptidon, and in the Yemeni capital, Sana'a, on Feb. 23 with representatives of the FRUD.
A total of 250 troops from France's 4,200-strong local garrison took up position around the town of Dikhil in the south-west of the country, the scene of recent fighting between the government and the FRUD rebels [see p. 38711, where Dikhil is wrongly given as Kikhil].
The deployment was welcomed by the FRUD's Paris representative, Ismail Ibrahim, as the first stage in an overall French plan to secure a negotiated end to the conflict.
On Feb. 28 the rebels declared a unilateral ceasefire, the third such move since the start of their uprising in November 1991 [see pp. 38564-65; 38661].
On Feb. 29 the government responded by agreeing to FRUD's basic condition for the start of peace negotiations: the release of Adou.
The moves seemed to mark a major change in the government's attitude to the conflict.
A peace mission in January by the French Minister-Delegate for Foreign Affairs, Alain Vivien had been spurned by the government [see p. 38711], and as late as Feb. 19 in an interview with the French newspaper Libération Gouled Aptidon was quoted as rejecting out-of-hand any French-brokered negotiated end to the conflict, on the grounds that the FRUD was a "foreign" organization which was violating Djibouti's sovereignty.
AFRICA
EAST AFRICA
Revival of regional co-operation
The Ministers of Foreign Affairs of Kenya, Tanzania and Uganda, meeting in Nairobi, the Kenyan capital, on Feb. 9-10, agreed to renew regional co-operation to enhance economic and social development.
Formal co-operation mechanisms between the three countries ceased to function when the East African Community collapsed in 1977 [see pp. 31497; 33448; 35752].
An official of the Kenyan government emphasized the need to promote regional economic integration, especially in agriculture, industry, transport and communication.
On Feb. 15, representatives from the three countries signed an agreement to reactivate and strengthen regional co-operation.
The agreement, based on the discussions of a tripartite committee of experts in Nairobi on Feb. 12-15, identified a number of areas of co-operation including political, economic, social and border security.
AFRICA
SOUTHERN AFRICA
Famine fears
The UN Food and Agriculture Organization (FAO) warned on Feb. 26 that drought in southern Africa could result in famine throughout the region.
The FAO said that the annual maize harvest in 11 countries was expected to be at least 25 per cent down and that countries which would normally export maize, notably South Africa and Zimbabwe, would themselves be seeking imports of the regional staple.
As the extent of the effect of the drought began to be realized, several countries reported potential food crises.
In Mozambique early reports said that drought had affected at least 3,000 hectares of maize in Gaza province.
Namibia predicted that it would have to spend R19,000,000 (about US$6,850,000) on maize imports as the commercial maize harvest, originally forecast to be a record 50,000 tonnes, was now expected to be only 5,000-10,000 tonnes.
The South African National Maize Producers' Organization said that at least three-quarters of the harvest had been destroyed and expected that up to 3,500,000 tonnes would have to be imported.
On Feb. 26 in Zambia President Frederick Chiluba declared the country to be disaster-affected, and appealed for international assistance as three-quarters of the maize harvest had been lost.
The Zimbabwe Grain Marketing Board said that 2,000,000 tonnes of maize would need to be imported from outside Africa as a result of the failure of crops throughout the country.
AFRICA
BURUNDI
The government announced on Feb. 13 that a referendum on a draft constitution would be held on March 9, to be followed by legislative elections by the end of the year and presidential polls in 1993.
AFRICA
CAMEROON
President Paul Biya confirmed on Feb. 7 that legislative elections scheduled for Feb. 16 would now take place on March 1; this postponement — a concessionary gesture to opposition groups who wanted the polls deferred until May — was not, however, sufficient to end opposition threats to boycott the elections.
AFRICA
GABON
Emmanuel Ondo Methogo, Minister of Planning, Economy and Territorial Administration, announced on Feb. 14 that multiparty presidential elections would take place in December 1993, two months before the expiry of President Omar Bongo's current term.
AFRICA
TANZANIA
The delegates to an extraordinary national conference of the ruling Chama Cha Mapinduzi (Party of the Revolution) voted unanimously on Feb. 19 for the introduction of a multiparty system.
AFRICA
MAURITANIA
Five opposition parties lodged a joint request on Feb. 10 for the postponement of the legislative elections planned for March 6; this, they said, would enable the revision of electoral lists and constituency boundaries to prevent a recurrence of what they claimed had been massive fraud in the January presidential elections [see pp. 38709-10].
AMERICAS
UNITED STATES
Presidential election campaign
The campaign for the Republican and Democratic Party presidential nominations began in earnest during February with the holding of the first caucuses and primary elections.
In the New Hampshire primary on Feb. 18 — the first significant contest — the state dealt the most serious electoral blow to an incumbent President since that suffered by Lyndon Johnson in 1968.
Although President George Bush won the primary, his margin of victory over right-wing challenger Patrick Buchanan was unconvincing, and by the end of the month the Bush campaign appeared to be in some disarray.
Among the main Democratic contenders Arkansas Governor Bill Clinton seemed to have overcome the recent spate of "character issues" which had threatened to destroy his candidacy, but finished second to the former Massachusetts Senator Paul Tsongas in the New Hampshire contest.
Development of further character issues surrounding Clinton
Having been damaged in January by allegations of marital infidelity, Clinton began the month with poll ratings which suggested that he had once again established a significant lead over his Democratic rivals.
At the end of the first week of February, however, he was surrounded by fresh controversy over allegations that he had improperly avoided conscription during the Vietnam War.
The claim was made in an article published in the Wall Street Journal on Feb. 6, which suggested that Clinton had received a four-year deferment from the draft by promising to join a reserve officers' training programme (ROTP) at the University of Arkansas.
Clinton, then a student in the United Kingdom, reneged on this arrangement, it was alleged, by returning to the UK and then by attending Yale University, thereby failing to enter either the ROTP or the University of Arkansas.
Whilst he voluntarily gave up his deferment in late 1969, by December the draft had been replaced with a lottery system and Clinton's name was not chosen.
Clinton dismissed the allegations as "an old story that was widely reported in 1978 and has been regularly recycled by the Republicans" .
He emphatically denied that he had acted improperly or had manipulated the system to his advantage.
He stressed that he had relinquished his deferment after only two months, thereby allowing his name to go back into the draft pool at a time when he could not have known that the draft would be shortly replaced by a lottery system.
The story received another twist when on Feb. 12 a letter written by Clinton in December 1969 to the commander of the University of Arkansas ROTP came into the possession of ABC News.
The text of the letter, which was released in full, expressed regret for misleading the officer by failing to disclose the depth of his opposition to the war, and also thanked him for "saving me from the draft" .
Clinton also admitted that, despite his objections to the war, he did not wish to resist the draft because he had already planned a political career and, therefore, wished "to maintain my political viability within the system" .
Notwithstanding Clinton's protestations, the agonies suffered over the issue of draft evasion by Dan Quayle as vice-presidential candidate during the 1988 campaign meant that many Republicans seized upon the allegations against Clinton with undisguised delight.
Iowa senator Tom Harkin, a rival for the Democratic nomination, warned that "voters should be concerned about his [Clinton's]veracity and character" .
Clinton, with his rating in the polls plummeting, was once again forced to fight to prevent his candidacy from self-destructing.
He released the full text of his 1969 letter, and also bought two half-hour television slots in order to answer sympathetic questions from supporters.
Formal announcement of Bush candidacy — Unveiling of health plan
Bush formally announced his candidacy for the Republican nomination on Feb. 12 — he had already spent several days informally campaigning in New Hampshire in January — to a cheering crowd of supporters in Washington DC.
He then flew to New Hampshire where he spent the day on the campaign trail attempting to counter the growing challenge of right-wing commentator Pat Buchanan, although he declined to refer directly to his rival.
Abandoning the "kinder" , "gentler" emphasis of his 1989 inauguration speech, Bush returned to the rhetoric of the Reagan era, stating the belief that "government is too big and costs too much" , and seeking to appropriate much of Buchanan's anti-government, anti-Washington, pro-family, pro-defence and pro-laissez-faire vision of society.
Bush also vigorously rejected the isolationist essence of Buchanan's "America First" campaign.
Remove "the tough talk, all the swagger and the patriotic posturing" , he said, "and protectionism amounts to nothing more than a smokescreen for a country that's running scared" .
Bush also took credit for the end of the Cold War and for pursuing a successful foreign policy, whilst blaming the obstruction of the Democrat-controlled Congress for the failure to realize much of his domestic agenda.
Prior to announcing his candidacy Bush had on Feb. 6 unveiled a health care package which was designed to overhaul the US health system and to win back the initiative on what was widely perceived to be an important electoral issue.
The plan involved the introduction of vouchers and tax deductions, worth up to $3,750 per year for a family of four, to assist some 95,000,000 low- and middle-income people to buy private health insurance.
(It was estimated that 35,000,000 US citizens had no health insurance, and that a further 60,000,000 were inadequately covered.)
The package also proposed reducing the escalating cost of health care — which was expected to rise by an average of 12-13 per cent per annum for the next five years — by increasing the efficiency of the government's Medicare and Medicaid health programmes, reforming the laws covering medical malpractice in order to give increased protection to doctors, and encouraging employers to pool their buying power into "health insurance networks" .
Bush did not indicate how the changes, which were to be phased in over a five-year period at a cost of up to $100,000 million, would be financed.
The health care issue had been of growing concern in the USA both because of its cost (12 per cent of GNP compared with around 8 per cent for most other industrialized countries), and its effect of binding employees to their employers through the fear of losing their health insurance, thereby making the job market less flexible and deterring people from starting new businesses.
The issue had been a key factor in the extraordinary victory of Democrat Harris Wofford in the November 1991 contest for the vacant Pennsylvanian seat in the Senate [see p. 38566].
During the nomination campaign one of the Democratic contenders, Bob Kerrey, a senator from Nebraska, had made the introduction of a national health insurance scheme a central plank of his campaign.
This had also featured strongly in the campaign of former Californian Governor Jerry Brown, whilst Clinton advocated a "play or pay" model whereby businesses would either offer health cover to their employees or would pay mandatory contributions into a national health insurance fund to protect those without cover.
Both of the options put forward by the Democrats were rejected by Bush on the grounds that they involved too much structural reform and were contrary to the principles of the free market.
Iowa caucuses
In keeping with recent tradition the first contest in the nomination process was in Iowa, where both the Republican Party and the Democrats held caucuses on Feb. 10.
(Whereas a primary involved a formal ballot, a caucus consisted of local meetings at which a head count was made of those supporting each of the candidates and, therefore, tended to involve fewer but more committed participants.)
Unlike previous years, however, the significance of the Iowa contests was reduced by the fact that neither of Bush's two challengers (Buchanan and former Ku Klux Klansman David Duke) contested the caucus, whilst amongst the Democrats it had long been accepted that the contest would be won by Tom Harkin, one of the state's representatives in the Senate, and so there had been a minimal amount of campaigning.
As predicted, the Republican contest was duly won by Bush, whilst Harkin massively outscored his Democratic rivals.
Harkin won 74 per cent of the votes cast, although only some 30,000 registered Democrats participated, compared with 120,000 in 1988.
The Democrats had changed the rules for their 1992 contest by allowing candidates to share the delegates sent to the nominating convention by each state in proportion their support, subject only to their exceeding a 15 per cent threshold.
Harkin nevertheless won all of the state's delegates since none of his four main rivals reached 15 per cent.
New Hampshire primary
Both parties held primaries in New Hampshire on Feb. 18.
Bush won the Republican contest, polling 53 per cent of the vote, but Buchanan's 37 per cent share was sufficiently large to embarrass the President severely.
Amongst the Democrats Tsongas polled 35 per cent, Clinton 26 per cent , Kerrey 12 per cent , Harkin 10 per cent and Brown 9 per cent .
An unofficial "write-in" campaign organized by supporters of New York Governor Mario Cuomo — who, after much hesitation, had decided not to contest the nomination — resulted in 3 per cent of participating Democrats recording a vote for Cuomo.
The New Hampshire result ensured that the challenge of Buchanan would be maintained at least into March, and increased the growing belief that Bush — despite having recorded popular approval ratings of up to 90 per cent in the immediate aftermath of the Gulf war — was vulnerable to defeat in his bid for a second presidential term.
Since 1952, when the New Hampshire election was first seriously contested, no President had been re-elected after a challenger in his party had scored 35 per cent or more in the state's primary.
Those who had perished after such a challenge included Harry S. Truman, Gerald Ford, and Jimmy Carter, whilst in 1968 Lyndon Johnson decided against seeking re-election after a poor showing against Eugene McCarthy.
For the Democrats the contest established Tsongas and Clinton as the front-runners.
For Tsongas this was considered a reward for his diligent and intelligent campaigning in the state, whilst for Clinton it represented a powerful resurgence for a campaign which, in early February, was being widely written off as doomed.
As such it underlined Clinton's growing reputation for resilience and once again demonstrated his effectiveness as a campaigning politician.
With a string of southern primaries due in March, Clinton remained the overall favourite for the nomination; the conventional wisdom was that Tsongas could not generate sufficient appeal outside New England, and — given the 1988 fate of Michael Dukakis, a Massachusetts liberal (also of Greek ethnic origin) with whom he was frequently compared — would be unelectable as President even if he did secure the nomination.
Contests in Maine and South Dakota
The remaining contests in February did little to clarify the picture.
In the Democratic caucus in Maine, on Feb. 23, Tsongas finished in first place, narrowly ahead of Brown.
Clinton finished some way behind, and Kerrey and Harkin took fourth and fifth place respectively, having chosen to ignore the caucus in favour of campaigning for the primary in South Dakota on Feb. 25.
Although South Dakota carried little electoral weight, either nationally or in terms of its proportion of delegates sent to the nominating convention, it had considerable significance for the Democratic contest in that it was adjacent to the native states of both Harkin and Kerrey, each of whom needed a good showing after their disappointing results in New Hampshire.
The South Dakota election resulted in a victory for Kerrey who polled around 40 per cent of the vote.
The approximate percentages for the other Democrats were Harkin 26 per cent, Clinton 19 per cent , Tsongas 9 per cent and Brown 4 per cent .
In the Republican contest, in which neither Buchanan nor Bush appeared on the ballot paper, a slate of uncommitted candidates won 31 per cent of the Republican vote, thereby underlining the widespread dissatisfaction felt towards Bush.
Approval by House of Representatives of "October Surprise" investigation
The House of Representatives on Feb. 5 approved a resolution which ordered an investigation into the "October Surprise" allegation.
The essence of the allegation was the unsubstantiated but persistent claim that the 1980 presidential election campaign team of Ronald Reagan and Bush conspired with representatives of the government of Iran in order to reap electoral advantage by delaying the release of the 52 US hostages being held in the US embassy in Tehran, in return for which the Reagan team promised, when he gained office, to supply arms to Iran.
The resolution, which was passed by 217 votes to 192, opened the way for the creation of a congressional task force which would investigate the issue and deliver its preliminary findings to the House on July 1.
In October 1991 the Senate foreign relations committee had narrowly voted to approve a congressional inquiry into the issue, but a Republican filibuster had prevented any funding of the investigation.
In the House, a decision was delayed whilst Democrats and Republicans negotiated in an unsuccessful attempt to reach a consensus over the scope and procedures of the inquiry.
When the issue finally came to a vote in the form of the February 1992 resolution, it reflected the bitterly partisan nature of the debate, with no Republican voting for the measure and 34 Democrats opposing it.
The investigation was due to be led by Lee H. Hamilton, a Democrat from Indiana, who was a co-chairman of the House-Senate panel which had examined the Iran-contra scandal.
Further extension of unemployment benefits
Congress on Feb. 4 approved a further extension of unemployment benefits which aimed to provide an additional 13 weeks of benefits to some 2,000,000 unemployed workers, many of whose benefits were about to expire.
The $2,700 million emergency measure was passed by 404 votes to eight in the House and by 94 votes to two in the Senate.
Bush promised to sign the bill without delay.
This commitment, together with the bipartisan majorities in favour of the measure in both Houses, was in sharp contrast to the partisan disputes which had delayed the passage of the initial benefits extension in late 1991.
Bush had blocked or vetoed two bills before finally agreeing to a compromise formula which had extended benefits for 13 or 20 weeks beyond the standard 26 weeks of benefits provided under state unemployment programmes [see pp. 38428; 38521; 38568].
Sponsors of the bill suggested that the cost of the latest extension would be met through the use of $2,200 million left unspent during the last fiscal year and of $500 million from an accelerated collection of taxes from large corporations.
Inauguration of Teamsters president
Ron Carey was sworn in as president of the Teamsters union (International Brotherhood of Teamsters, Chauffeurs, Warehousemen and Helpers of America) on Feb. 1, in a move which marked the culmination of a process of reform which appeared to have transformed one of the most notoriously corrupt of US trade unions.
Carey, 55, who had spent most of his union career as president of the Teamsters' New York branch, had been elected as president in the government-supervised elections of December 1991, succeeding William J. McCarthy.
The poll, which had provided the first opportunity for the union's 1,600,000 membership to elect directly its national officers, had been organized as part of a settlement agreement to a huge civil racketeering suit brought against the Teamsters by the Justice Department [see also pp. 37954-55].
In addition to winning the presidency Carey also swept into office with him every member of his reformist slate of candidates.
In his inaugural speech, delivered from the union's headquarters in Washington DC, Carey promised "that I will use the full power of this office to rid this union of mob influence and win this battle for once and for all" .
He followed this with his first official act, which was to reduce the annual salary of the president from $225,000 to $175,000.
AMERICAS
HAITI
Agreement on conditions for return of Aristide
After the decision to suspend further negotiations on the return of exiled President Jean-Bertrand Aristide [see p. 38716], the Haitian Senate voted on Feb. 13 to resume talks under the auspices of the Organization of American States (OAS).
Talks were subsequently held in Washington DC, and on Feb. 23, after three days of discussions, an agreement was signed between members of the Haitian parliamentary team, Aristide and the OAS special envoy, Augusto Ramírez Ocampo.
Under the terms of the agreement, to be ratified by the Haitian parliament, Réné Théodore was to be installed as Prime Minister as planned previously and was to prepare for Aristide's return.
The economic sanctions imposed on Haiti would be lifted after ratification.
The agreement also included a general amnesty for those police and soldiers involved in Aristide's overthrow, and excluded the immediate dismissal of the Armed Forces C.-in-C.
Lt.-Gen.
Raoul Cédras, which had been a major demand of Aristide.
Intervention by any foreign forces was also ruled out.
Military leaders in Haiti were reported to have accepted the accord on Feb. 25.
The prospects for the successful implementation of the agreement were jeopardized, however, by Aristide's continued demand for the dismissal and prosecution of Cédras.
In a broadcast on the US ABC television network on Feb. 24 and in a speech to the UN Human Rights Commission in Geneva on Feb. 27, Aristide claimed that as a "common criminal" , the amnesty did not apply to Cédras.
In the agreement Aristide had agreed to respect decisions made by the Haitian parliament since Sept. 30 (the date on which the coup ousted him), one of which included the appointment of Cédras as army commander for a three-year period.
A provision in the agreement allowed for matters of disagreement to be placed before a conciliation commission.
On Feb. 5 interim president Joseph Nerette promoted Cédras to the rank of lieutenant-general.
Important armed forces appointments made by Cédras included the reinstatement of former Col. Phillipe Biamby, who had been expelled from the army while commander of the Presidential Guard for allegedly participating in the attempted coup of April 1989 [see p. 36586], as Army Chief of Staff with the rank of brigadier-general, and the promotion of Col. Jean-Claude Duperval, a former Port-au-Prince police chief, to deputy army commander with the rank of major-general.
On Feb. 4, the USA moved to lessen the effects of sanctions by allowing imports and exports from and to US companies operating assembly factories in Haiti.
The move followed strong lobbying from US business interests.
Bernard Arenson, Assistant Secretary of State for Inter-American Affairs, claimed that the relaxation had been made to assist the poor in Haiti who had suffered unduly from the effects of sanctions depriving them of jobs and wages.
Repatriation of refugees
On Jan. 31 the US Supreme Court reversed the injunction preventing the administration carrying out its policy of repatriating Haitian "boat people" intercepted by US coastguards and temporarily housed in camps at the US base of Guantánamo Bay, Cuba [see p. 38569].
On Feb. 1 the repatriation of refugees recommenced.
Some 12,500 refugees were held at Guantánamo or offshore on US vessels, 3,500 of whom were granted preliminary asylum status after interviews with the Immigration and Naturalization Service.
On Feb. 3 both the UN High Commissioner for Refugees and the US section of Amnesty International called on the US government to reconsider its policy.
Critics of the administration's policy claimed that some Haitians who had fled the country a second time, after being repatriated in 1991, had given evidence of persecution in interviews to UN officials.
The US Secretary of State, James A. Baker, however, stated before the House of Representatives foreign affairs committee on Feb. 6 that there was no evidence of repatriated Haitians being persecuted or ill-treated after their return.
Vice-President Dan Quayle further justified the administration's policy in a speech to the UN Human Rights Commission in Geneva on Feb. 10, claiming that most Haitian refugees were economic migrants and not political refugees.
On Feb. 20 the House of Representatives judiciary committee voted for a six-month halt to repatriations, but on Feb. 24 the US Supreme Court rejected an appeal against the repatriation policy by eight to one and also rejected an emergency request to halt all repatriations.
AMERICAS
CUBA
Tarara naval base executions
Luis Miguel Almeida and René Salmerón Mendoza were executed by firing squad on Feb. 19, having been convicted of killing four policemen at the Tarara naval base on Jan. 8 during an unsuccessful attempt to steal a vessel and escape from Cuba to Miami [see p. 38715].
The death penalty, upheld after an appeal to the Supreme Court on Feb. 16 and subsequently confirmed by the Council of State chaired by President Fidel Castro, had been passed on Feb. 5 by the Havana Popular Provincial Court.
Another four men and three women were sentenced to prison terms of between four and 30 years on charges of murder and piracy [for January execution of alleged counter-revolutionary see p. 38715].
Le Monde of Feb. 12 reported that the Cuban painter Jésus de Armas, in Paris for an exhibition of his work, had requested political asylum in France.
Job losses in administrative rationalization
On Feb. 12 the Communist Party daily Granma announced that the Ministry of Agriculture was to lose 25,500 posts, and the Ministry of Construction 50,000, as part of the government's rationalization of central administration; 15,000 of those affected in the Ministry of Agriculture would be relocated, and half of those affected in the Ministry of Construction would be sent to work in the fields.
AMERICAS
MEXICO
Reform of savings funds
The Congress on Feb. 25, in a decision that was expected to boost domestic savings by US$1,000 million, approved reforms to the country's pension and housing funds.
Employers were required from May onwards (i) to pay 2 per cent of their employees' salaries into personal pension funds administered by the commercial banks; and (ii) to pay 5 per cent of salaries into personal housing funds administered by the reformed Infonavit housing agency.
The scheme was to run alongside the existing social security system by which 7 per cent of an employee's salary was deducted at source and paid into a government-administered scheme.
The financial sector welcomed the changes while employers complained that they had to pay out more money for no increase in productivity.
The response of labour unions was also lukewarm since the changes were seen as limiting their scope for bestowing benefits on their members.
Constitutional amendments on agricultural reform and church legalization
At the end of January an amendment to Article 27 of the 1917 Constitution implementing a radical agricultural reform was approved by Congress and signed by President Carlos Salinas de Gortari who had first proposed the reform in November 1991 [see p. 38569].
It was opposed only by the centre-left Party of the Democratic Revolution (PRD) led by Cuauhtémoc Cárdenas Solórzano, son of Gen. Lázaro Cárdenas who pioneered land distribution in the 1930s.
At the same time Article 130 of the Constitution, recognizing the Roman Catholic Church and lifting restraints on the clergy after more than 130 years, was amended after a three-week debate.
AMERICAS
GUATEMALA
Limited progress in peace talks — Human rights situation
The latest round of peace talks between the government and the Guatemalan National Revolutionary Unity (URNG) ended in Mexico on Feb. 23 without agreement [see p. 38330 for previous round].
However, the president of the National Reconciliation Commission, Mgr Rodolfo Quezada Toruño, asserted that "important progress" had been made, which had opened up the prospect of a comprehensive agreement on human rights.
In an effort to improve its image before the UN Human Rights Commission passed judgment on Guatemala later in the month, and to revive its diminishing foreign aid income, the government of President Jorge Serrano Elías in mid-February announced a seven-point plan to safeguard human rights and revive the peace talks, while Guatemalan diplomats visited other Latin American countries and Europe.
The human rights situation in Guatemala, a major stumbling block in the peace negotiations, was regarded as the worst in the region.
Official human rights sources in the country reported 228 "extrajudicial executions" and 45 disappearances in 1991, two-thirds of them attributable to the security forces and civil patrols.
In the first two weeks of January 1992, 18 more people were killed in murders bearing the stamp of death squads.
The European Parliament on Feb. 14 approved a resolution calling for an end to "the deplorable situation of human rights abuses" in Guatemala and expressing concern at the lack of progress in investigating abuses.
In a report released in early February the US State Department blamed "the military, the civil patrols and the police" for the worst excesses in Guatemala.
Asserting that the situation had improved since 1990 and that the Serrano government was more highly motivated than the previous administration in promoting respect for human right and bringing the perpetrators of abuses to justice, the report pointed out that the army still failed to co-operate with the police and the judiciary in prosecuting army personnel.
Two army officers had been sentenced to prison terms for an attack on unarmed demonstrators in Santiago Atitlán in December 1990, when 16 were killed and 24 wounded [see p. 37912], and another army officer was awaiting trial for the murder in September 1990 of anthropologist Myrna Mack [see p. 37707].
In October 1991 the Air Force Chief of Staff was dismissed after military aircraft strafed an Indian village.
Two soldiers were arrested for the murder of four people outside Guatemala City on Jan. 17.
Although the US administration cut off military aid to Guatemala in December 1990 [see p. 37912]in protest at the failure to investigate the June 1990 murder of US citizen Michael Devine [ibid.], the US Defence Secretary Richard Cheney visited Guatemala for official talks on Feb. 17.
AMERICAS
EL SALVADOR
Entry into force of ceasefire
An official ceasefire came into effect at midnight on Jan. 31-Feb. 1 in accordance with the peace agreement signed on Jan. 16 [see p. 38716].
Thousands of citizens joined commanders and guerrillas of the Farabundo Martí National Liberation Front (FMLN) in jubilant celebrations in the streets of San Salvador to mark the end of the 11-year civil war.
At a simultaneous official celebration in the capital President Alfredo Cristiani swore in the 10 members of the National Commission for the Consolidation of Peace (Copaz) which would monitor the ceasefire.
They included Francisco Jovel and Joaquín Villalobos, both members of the FMLN high command, Gen. Orlando Zepeda, the Deputy Defence Minister, and representatives of the political parties.
In a separate ceremony barracks also attended by Cristiani on Jan. 31 the military high command acknowledged the end of the war at a ceremony also attended by Cristiani at First Infantry Brigade barracks.
Four members of the FMLN high command (Jovel, Villalobos, Shafick Jorge Handal and Eduardo Sancho) had returned from exile to an emotional welcome at San Salvador airport on Jan. 31, accompanied by leading members of Latin American political parties including the Cuban Communist Party (PCC) and the ruling Institutional Revolutionary Party (PRI) of Mexico.
The fifth member, Salvador Sánchez, had returned a few days previously.
Villalobos announced the transformation of the FLMN into a populist political party which would contest the 1994 presidential elections and continue to defend the interests of the poor "in a revolution which will not divide the nation" .
In the first few days of February the armed forces began a swift withdrawal from the towns and, notably, from the area around the Guazapa volcano, the FMLN's main bastion.
The peace agreement provided for the separation of guerrilla and military forces according to a set timetable by March 12, 1992, under UN supervision.
The government in late February protested to Honduras after a series of incidents beginning on Feb. 20 in which Honduran aircraft buzzed areas of guerrilla concentration in El Salvador.
Early on Jan. 31 the Congress had approved final constitutional reforms in implementation of the peace agreement, placing the armed forces under the control of the head of state (as supreme commander of the armed forces) and the legislature.
Their chief responsibility would henceforth be to protect national sovereignty and defend the country from external danger, while responsibility for internal security would pass to a new National Civilian Police (PNC).
New Finance Minister
A new Finance Minister, Edwin Sagrera, was sworn in on Feb. 28, replacing Rafael Alvarado Cano.
Death of d'Aubuisson
The government declared three days of national mourning for Roberto d'Aubuisson, the extreme right-wing founder of the governing National Republican Alliance (Arena) who died of cancer on Feb. 20 at the age of 48.
The former deputy chief of intelligence in the National Guard until his dismissal from the armed forces in 1979, d'Aubuisson was widely held to have directed the death squads in the late 1970s and early 1980s and to have masterminded the assassination of Archbishop Oscar Romero in 1980 [see p. 30324].
AMERICAS
VENEZUELA
Attempted military coup
Rebel army units led by a parachute regiment failed in an attempt to overthrow the government during the night of Feb. 3-4 just as President Carlos Andrés Pérez returned from Switzerland.
In the capital, Caracas, the rebels tried to take over the government palace and the presidential residence, La Carlota airport, the Ministry of Defence, Navy and National Guard buildings and the national television station.
Pérez escaped from his residence just before it was surrounded, and went to a private television station from which he made the first of four broadcasts to the nation repudiating the coup.
Loyal armed forces launched a counter-attack against the rebels, and just after midnight there was a burst of heavy fighting around the palace and residence, the Ministry of Defence and naval headquarters, and at the Miranda base.
Incidents continued sporadically throughout the morning.
The rebel leader Lt.-Col. Hugo Chávez Frías, 38, ordered his men to surrender after the Defence Minister, Gen. Fernando Ochoa Antich, convinced him that the insurgency could not succeed.
Simultaneous action was also staged in Maracay (80 km west of Caracas), where there was a major air force base, Valencia (125 km west of Caracas) where the rebels were counting on student support, and Maracaibo (500 km west of Caracas), where the state governor was captured.
Ochoa stated on Feb. 6 that 14 people had been killed and 57 wounded, and a total of 956 soldiers, five senior officers and 128 other officers had been arrested; those who had merely followed orders would, he said, be treated leniently.
A group of 33 officers were charged on Feb. 18 with leading or helping to stage the attempted coup.
Noé Acosta, leader of the small left-wing Causa R, was also arrested on Feb. 6 in Maracaibo.
The rebels were part of a strongly nationalist "Revolutionary Bolivarist Movement" whose intention was to establish a "junta of national reconstruction" to deal with economic problems, social disparity and corruption, taking advantage of the government's low popularity, particularly among the middle classes.
Rumours of a military coup had circulated for some time [see p. 38571].
Discontent appeared to be widespread in the armed forces and, according to the president of the congressional defence committee, between 15 and 20 per cent of the armed forces supported the attempt; other army sources put the level of support even higher.
In a declaration published in the press on Feb. 7 a group of 62 retired officers, one of whom, Gen. Jacobo Yépez, was later arrested, accused civilian governments since 1974 (when Pérez embarked on his first term of office) of creating the circumstances for a coup by failing to fight corruption and provide the Venezuelan people with order and justice.
After the attempt various constitutional clauses were suspended and press and television censorship was imposed for the first time in over 30 years to exclude media coverage of coup leader Chávez Frías.
The distribution of one of the country's leading newspapers El Nacional was prevented on Feb.10.
After a public outcry Pérez met with editors on Feb. 10 and announced that censorship had been a mistake and would be lifted.
Other restrictions on freedom of movement and speech and on the right to strike were also lifted on Feb. 17.
On Feb. 7 Pérez authorized a 50 per cent rise in the minimum wage from $100 to $150 per month, plus a monthly public transport bonus of $15 and a 30 per cent increase in the pay of middle-ranking officers.
As part of a restructuring of the armed forces announced on Feb. 10 he appointed new commanders to rebel garrisons.
Claiming that a coup was being planned even before he introduced economic austerity policies on taking office three years previously, Pérez told foreign correspondents on Feb. 9 that he intended to continue with his economic policies but would bring forward a $4,000 million social project to improve health care, education and social welfare over the next four years.
Cabinet changes prior to coup attempt — Further changes in late February
Under pressure both from within the ruling Democratic Action party (AD) and from the opposition to alter his government's economic adjustment policies, Pérez had reshuffled his Cabinet on Jan. 9, making changes in seven posts.
Roberto Pocaterra was replaced as Finance Minister by Pedro Rosas Bravo, hitherto deputy head of the Ministry of Planning and a leading architect of the government's economic strategy.
His promotion led critics, including the centre-right Social Christian Party (COPEI) and the left-wing Movement towards Socialism (MAS), the two main opposition parties, to dismiss the reshuffle as a "cosmetic" operation which would not lead to any significant changes in government economic policy.
Key members of Pérez's economic team kept their posts, including Minister of Energy and Mines Celestino Armas [but see below for his replacement]and Minister of Co-ordination and Planning Miguel Antonio Rodríguez Fandeo, chief strategist of the economic reform programme.
Virgilio Avila Vivas replaced Alejandro Izaguirre Angeli as Minister of the Interior, an appointment seen as a move to build up political support for the efforts of the security forces to deal with increasing protests against the government's economic policies [but see below for his replacement; for November 1991 protests, see p. 35571].
Avila's previous post as Governor of the Federal District, with Cabinet rank, was taken over by Antonio Ledezma, a leading young AD member.
The other new ministers appointed were Fernando Martínez Mottola (Transport and Communications), Rafael Orihuela (Health and Social Welfare), Diógenes Mújica (Urban Development) and Mabelys de Léon Aponte (Family).
The Cabinet changes were also seen as the result of an effort by the AD secretary-general, Luis Alfaro Ucero, to boost the image of his party in the run-up to municipal and gubernatorial elections later in 1992.
In Cabinet changes which took effect on Feb. 25 Carmelo Lauria Lesseur was appointed Interior Minister, Arminda Quintana Justice Minister, Rafael Guevara acting Minister of Energy and Mines, and Celestino Armas Secretary of the Presidency.
The COPEI and the MAS on Feb. 24 declined Pérez's request to the secretaries-general of all main opposition parties to join a "political cabinet" of ministers without portfolio to draft policies for the next two years of government.
On Feb. 20 the president of the Central Bank, Pedro Tinoco, one of the architects of the government's economic reforms, resigned.
AMERICAS
PERU
Election of García as APRA secretary-general
Alán García Pérez, the former President of Peru, was elected secretary-general of the American Popular Revolutionary Alliance (APRA), Peru's largest party, at its annual congress in Trujillo on Feb. 17.
García, who defeated the incumbent secretary-general Luis Alva Castro, insisted on the appointment of his own candidates to key party positions, notably deputy secretary-general (Senator Mercedes Cabanillas), organization secretary (Augustín Mantilla) and secretary for planning (Abel Salinas).
The Supreme Court had on Feb. 1 rejected any further attempts to try García for corruption during his term of office [see p. 38718].
Guerrilla bomb attacks
A large bomb placed by the Sendero Luminoso guerrilla movement exploded at the tax administration office in Lima on Feb. 7, killing two people and injuring 31.
Simultaneously a bomb at the National Institute of Public Administration killed one guerrilla and injured four other people.
María Elena Moyano, the deputy mayor of a Lima slum area who the previous week had led a rally opposing an "armed strike" threatened by Sendero, was shot dead on Feb. 16.
The Revolutionary Tupac Amarú Movement (MRTA) was believed responsible for a car bomb which exploded outside the residence of the US ambassador during the night of Feb. 11-12, killing three policemen and injuring several other people.
A deep split within the MRTA had resulted in several dozen deaths among MRTA adherents during January and February.
AMERICAS
ARGENTINA
Menem's European tour
President Carlos Saúl Menem began an official 10-day visit to France and Belgium on Feb. 12, continuing the efforts of his government to project the image of a new Argentina which was economically and politically stable and could be regarded by the West as its most reliable ally in Latin America [for Menem's November 1991 US tour see p. 38572].
His delegation included Foreign Relations Minister Guido di Tella, Interior Minister José Luis Manzano, Army Chief of Staff Gen. Martín Balza, members of the ruling Justicialist (Peronist) and opposition Radical Civic Union parties, and business leaders.
In a speech to the European Parliament in Strasbourg on Feb. 12, Menem claimed that Argentina had left behind its Third-World status and non-aligned past [for Argentina's September 1991 exit from the Non-Aligned Movement see pp. 38458-59], and he appealed to the European Communities (EC) not to become isolationist as they pursued economic and political union.
He urged the EC to end agricultural export subsidies which damaged Argentinian producers, and called on European firms to become involved in the current privatization programme due to be completed by the end of 1992 [see p. 38572].
A Europe-Argentina Club was set up in Brussels on Feb. 13 to promote joint ventures and investment in Argentina.
Menem also indicated that Argentina, in return for EC aid and improved trading arrangements, would be prepared to accept up to 300,000 immigrants from the former Eastern bloc over the next three years; he discussed with EC commissioners the possible arrival of 40,000 immigrants in the short term.
In Paris, Menem and his entourage met with President François Mitterrand and French ministers on Feb. 17 during of a three-day visit.
Cancellation of Condor missile project
On Feb. 10 the Air Force formally handed control of its Condor II missile project to the National Space Activities Commission (CNAE), a new space agency, which would develop the missile's facilities "for peaceful purposes" .
The government had agreed to cancel the project, begun in 1983 in collaboration with Egypt and indirectly financed by Iraq with support from German companies, in April 1990 after US pressure [see p. 37501].
Suspension of the military aspects of the project preceded a visit to Buenos Aires of US Defence Secretary Dick Cheney on Feb. 20-21 as part of a Latin American tour.
Officials urged Cheney to lift all remaining restrictions on US arms sales in the wake of Argentina's 1982 Falklands war with the United Kingdom.
US concern was expressed over possible Argentinian arms sales to Iran.
Conflicting demands over commercial debt
Hopes of the Economy Minister, Domingo Cavallo, for quick progress in talks begun in January over the Argentina's foreign debt received a setback in mid-February when creditor banks rejected his requests for a 40 per cent cut in the country's US$31,000 million commercial bank debt, under the terms of the 1989 Brady debt reduction plan [see pp. 36541-42].
The banks offered a 30 per cent cut and asked for a US$1,000 million payment to reduce interest arrears of US$8,000 million.
State of emergency over cholera
Following the death of 10 people and hundreds of cases of illness after the arrival of cholera in the country, Menem declared a state of emergency on Feb. 6, with four northern provinces, Salta, Jujuy, Formosa and Chaco under "red alert" .
On Feb. 21 Health Secretary Alberto Mazza denied that the government would close the border with Bolivia but said that it would prevent the entry of illegal immigrants in order to stem the spread of the disease.
On Feb. 27 health ministers from 10 Latin American countries met in Buenos Aires to draw up a joint anti-cholera plan [for April 1991 meeting see p. 38142].
AMERICAS
URUGUAY
Cabinet reshuffle
President Luis Alberto Lacalle Herrera reshuffled his Cabinet on Feb. 7, after growing pressure within his National (Blanco) Party for the dismissal of Economy and Finance Minister Enrique Braga Silva.
Vice-President Gonzalo Aguirre Ramírez had joined in the demands for the dismissal of Braga, who was subsequently appointed president of the Banco de la República.
Braga was replaced by Ignacio de Posadas (Blanco).
Also dropped was Industry and Energy Minister Augusto Montesdeoca Galagorri, who was replaced by Eduardo Ache of the Colorado Party's Unión Colorada y Batllista faction (which now held two portfolios, the other being Tourism).
José María Mieres Muro (Blanco) took over from Raúl Lago Finsterwald responsibility for Housing and the Environment, pending a decision by the Party for the Government of the People (PGP, part of the centre-left Nuevo Espacio coalition) over whether to accept Lacalle's invitation to join the government.
However, the Colorados' Batllismo Radical faction, which hitherto had had one representative in the Cabinet pulled out of the coalition.
The other ministers were confirmed in their posts.
Announcing the changes, Lacalle stated that he was creating a "special cabinet" , comprising de Posadas, Ache, Braga and Agriculture and Fisheries Minister Alvaro Ramos Trigo, to supervise the restructuring of Uruguay's industrial sector and to make it competitive in the planned 1995 four-member South American common market, Mercosur [see p. 38096].
On Feb. 27 de Posadas announced the third "and most severe" stage in the fiscal readjustment programme.
By mid-February opponents of the government's privatization law, narrowly approved by Congress with Colorado support in late September 1991, had successfully gathered the 12,000 signatures constitutionally required to continue their campaign for a referendum on privatization.
New army C.-in-C.
Gen. Juan Rebollo [not Rebonio, as given on p. 38720]took over as C.-in-C. of the Uruguayan army on Feb. 1.
AMERICAS
NAFTA
Further talks between Mexico, USA and Canada
Talks on a North American free trade agreement (NAFTA) embracing the USA, Canada and Mexico continued in Dallas (USA) on Feb. 17-21 amid considerable secrecy on the part of the USA.
Although an agreement was thought likely to be ready in March, major concessions were still required from all sides and many disagreements remained, particularly over rules of origin.
The Mexican Minister of Commerce and Industrial Development, Jaime Serra Puche, accepted that legislative proceedings on the final treaty would probably not be completed until after the November 1992 US elections.
In the light of concern in the USA about environmental damage from new industrialization in Mexico, the USA on Feb. 25 unveiled an Integrated Border Plan to clean up the polluted US-Mexican 2,560-km frontier, to which the USA would commit $380,000,000 over two years and Mexico $460,000,000 over three years.
AMERICAS
CARICOM
Inter-sessional meeting
The third inter-sessional meeting of the Conference of Heads of Government of the Caribbean Community (CARICOM) was held in Kingston, Jamaica, on Feb. 19.
Chaired by Kennedy Simmonds, Prime Minister of St Christopher and Nevis, and attended by seven other heads of government of the ember states (the remaining five delegations being headed by ministers), the meeting discussed regional integration and the progress made in six key areas since the 12th annual summit held in July 1991 [see p. 38336].
They also discussed a regional security scheme, an assembly of CARICOM parliamentarians, an intra-regional television network and the proposed privatization of the West Indies Shipping Corporation.
The heads of government pledged their support for the attempts of the Organization of American States (OAS) to find a solution to the crisis in Haiti [see p. 38758]and condemned the attempted coup in Venezuela [see pp. 38759-60].
It was also agreed that Edwin Carrington, a former Secretary-General of the African, Caribbean and Pacific (ACP) group, would on Aug. 1, 1992, become the next CARICOM Secretary-General, succeeding Roderick Rainford, who had held the post since 1983 [see p. 32620].
The first meeting between the Foreign Ministers of CARICOM and of Central American states was held at the end of January in San Pedro Sula, Honduras.
AMERICAS
CENTRAL AMERICA
San José VIII meeting
The San José Group of Foreign Ministers of the five Central American countries met their counterparts from the 12 European Community (EC) countries in Lisbon on Feb. 25-26 for their eighth annual conference, which was also attended by Colombia, Mexico and Venezuela.
The participants decided to upgrade the existing agreement between the two blocs into a "third-generation" agreement providing for more extensive co-operation, and signed a four-year agreement supporting human rights which would among other things give financial assistance to El Salvador for police and armed forces training.
AMERICAS
LATIN AMERICA
San Antonio drugs summit
US President Bush hosted a two-day summit on drugs in San Antonio, Texas, on Feb. 26-27, attended by the Presidents of Bolivia, Peru and Colombia (these three the participants, with the USA, at the February 1990 gathering in Cartagena, Colombia — see pp. 37243-44), the Presidents of Ecuador and Mexico, and the Venezuelan Foreign Minister.
The seven countries agreed to establish a permanent structure for annual drug summits and follow-up meetings, to curb the trade in the chemicals used to process cocaine, and to co-operate in the seizing of aircraft used for drug trafficking.
As a result of Peruvian opposition, the meeting failed to approve a Colombian plan, supported by the USA, for a 70 per cent reduction in cocaine production by the end of the decade.
Bush claimed that the summit had set an "aggressive agenda" in the war on drugs, but rejected Peruvian requests for more US aid.
Instead, the meeting agreed to seek additional aid and practical co-operation from Europe and Asia — including Japan — in view of their expansion as cocaine markets.
Peruvian President Alberto Fujimori claimed that "millions of dollars" had been wasted, and that efforts by the US Drug Enforcement Agency to eradicate coca crops in Peru had violated civil rights and been counterproductive, particularly when no alternative economic activity was available.
Peru, Bolivia and Colombia opposed US proposals, made at a preparatory meeting in Quito, Ecuador, in early February, to allow aircraft or warships of member countries of a "regional conference and action group" to enter each other 's territory, sea or airspace in pursuit of drug traffickers.
Drug abuse prevention group
Congressional deputies from Brazil, Colombia, Costa Rica, Cuba, Ecuador, Mexico, Panama and Peru, who (together with the United States) were in Quito primarily for the third inter-parliamentary meeting on money laundering, agreed on Feb. 19 to form a Latin American Inter-Parliamentary Group for the Prevention of Drug Abuse (Grilapad).
AMERICAS
ST VINCENT AND THE GRENADINES
Prime Minister James Mitchell carried out a Cabinet reshuffle in late January, transferring responsibility for foreign affairs from himself to Herbert Young, hitherto Minister for Trade and Tourism, whose Trade portfolio was passed to Jonathan Peters, hitherto Minister of State for Trade and Tourism, who took responsibility for the new Ministry of Trade and Consumer Affairs; Mitchell also created a new portfolio of Grenadines Affairs, with Stephanie Brown as Junior Minister.
ASIA — PACIFIC
INDIA
Elections in Punjab
Elections were held on Feb. 19 in Punjab for 13 seats in the Indian Lok Sabha and for the 117-seat state Assembly, last elected in 1985.
Punjab had been under president's rule since May 1987 and its assembly, suspended at that time, had been dissolved in March 1988 [see p. 36692 for constitutional amendment passed at that time allowing for the continuation of president's rule for three years].
Elections for both the Lok Sabha and the state Assembly had then been scheduled to coincide with the June 1991 general election but were cancelled at the last moment [see p. 38287].
The turnout, officially recorded at only 28 per cent of the electorate of 13,170,000, was the lowest ever in any Indian state election, below even that for Jammu and Kashmir in 1987 (31.6 per cent).
This reflected the boycotting of elections by all but one faction of the Akali Dal and the threat of violence by Sikh militants.
The poll was, in the event, relatively peaceful, although there were reports of killings of some 20-30 people in pre-election attacks on candidates, canvassers and officials.
A widely observed general strike was called on Feb. 18-20.
Congress (I), which emerged with 12 of the 13 Lok Sabha seats and a clear overall Assembly majority with 87 seats, hailed the result as a triumph, and a Congress (I) state administration was sworn in on Feb. 25.
Beant Singh as Chief Minister headed a 27-member government.
The Bahujan Samaj Party (BSP), supported mainly by members of the scheduled castes, won one Lok Sabha seat and nine seats in the Assembly, where it emerged as the second party, having previously held no seats.
The Bharatiya Janata Party (BJP), the main (right-wing Hindu) opposition at Union level, won only six seats in the Assembly despite having mobilized its national leaders to support its campaign.
The Communist Party of India won four Assembly seats, the CPI-Marxist one, Janata Dal one, and independents and others six.
Whereas the Akali Dal had been the dominant force in the previous Assembly, the only Akali Dal faction not supporting the boycott, that led by Capt. Amrinder Singh and known as the Shiromani Akali Dal (Kabul), won only three seats.
Distribution of Lok Sabha seats
The Punjab result strengthened the position of the governing Congress (I) at Union level.
Congress (I) 243 BJP 119 Janata Dal (including three expelled members) 58 CPI (M) 35 CPI 14 Telugu Desam 13 AIADMK 11 Jharkhand Mukti Morcha 5 Samajwadi Janata Party 5 RSP 4 Shiv Sena (including two dissidents) 4 Forward Bloc 3 BSP 3 IUML 2 Others 11 Unattached 1 Nominated 2
One seat was occupied by the Speaker, and there were 11 vacancies (six in Jammu and Kashmir where elections had not been held, three in Bihar, one in Uttar Pradesh and one in Delhi).
Introduction of radical budget
The improved position of Congress (I) was of particular importance as the Lok Sabha convened on Feb. 24 for the session in which it would discuss the controversial direction of the radical anti-protectionist budget introduced on Feb. 29 by Finance Minister Manmohan Singh.
Supported by the IMF and the World Bank, the budget emphasised tight fiscal control along with liberalization of the economy with important incentives for private investment.
Advance indication of its impact in terms of austerity measures had come with the presentation of the railways budget on Feb. 25, with reduced government support and a concomitant increase averaging 20 per cent in passenger fare prices.
Election of dissident Janata Dal leader
Dissident members of the Janata Dal held a meeting on Feb. 5 which, they claimed, was attended by 40 of the party's 75-member national executive, including 10 of its Lok Sabha members.
They claimed legitimacy for themselves as Janata Dal, applying for the exclusive right to use this party name, and elected Ajit Singh, expelled by the Janata Dal leadership in December [see p. 38682]as their president.
[For other Janata Dal expulsions in January 1992 see p. 38726, where the party's strength in the Lok Sabha is given as 58 after expulsions; the listing of Lok Sabha members as of late February as given above, however, from The Hindu of Feb. 29, gives the total as 58 including those expelled.]
Caste violence in Bihar
On Feb. 12 in the village of Bara in Bihar state, hundreds of people described in press reports as Maoist extremists launched a violent attack apparently directed against upper-caste Hindu landlords, burning down houses and dragging men out and beheading them.
The decapitated bodies of 33 people were recovered the following day; most reports gave a death toll of at least 36, but cited a survivor as stating that 85 had died.
The attack was believed to be a revenge killing after an incident on Dec. 23, 1991, in which 10 people of low caste status ( "untouchables" or scheduled castes) were killed in a nearby village.
The Press Trust of India reported that some of the Maoists had been killed in a subsequent encounter with police, but there was no confirmation of this at state government level.
Resignation of Tripura Chief Minister — Meghalaya government
The Chief Minister of Tripura, Sudhir Ranjan Majumber of the Congress (I), resigned in mid-February, as reported by All-India Radio on Feb. 17, after the collapse of the coalition on which his administration was based.
President's rule in Meghalaya, in force since October 1991, ended when D. D. Lapang of the Congress (1) was sworn in on Feb. 5 as Chief Minister, heading a coalition including members of the Hill People's Union.
ASIA — PACIFIC
PAKISTAN
Admission on nuclear capability
Pakistani Foreign Affairs Secretary Shahryar Khan was quoted by the Washington Post of Feb. 7 as saying that Pakistan had the components and expertise to assemble at least one nuclear explosive device.
His statement was confirmed in the Pakistan National Assembly on Feb. 20 by the Deputy Foreign Minister, Siddique Kanju, according to a report in the Independent of Feb. 22.
Khan was in Washington for talks with United States officials during which he repeated undertakings not to explode a nuclear weapon or transfer nuclear technology to other countries.
Some US$570 million in military aid to Pakistan had been cut off since 1990 under US legislation requiring such a cut-off unless the President certified to Congress that Pakistan was not developing nuclear weapons [see p. 37764].
 "The capability is there," the newspaper quoted Khan as saying in an interview.
He was reported to have said that Pakistan had in 1991 frozen production of highly enriched uranium, meeting one of the US demands, but would only destroy its weapons cores if India did the same.
Radio Pakistan quoted Khan as saying on Feb. 8 that he had been quoted out of context.
A Pakistani Foreign Affairs Ministry spokesman described the Washington Post interview as "distorted" and added, as reported on Radio Pakistan on Feb. 9, that Pakistan had "considerable capability in the nuclear field" but had decided to use that capability only for peaceful purposes and not to produce nuclear weapons.
Khan emphasized Pakistan's support for a proposed conference on nuclear non-proliferation in the region to be attended by China, India, Pakistan, Russia and the USA.
Disruption of development plans after Islamic court ruling
Plans for major development projects, including the giant Hab River power complex near Karachi, were reported in early February to have been disrupted as a result of the November 1991 ruling by the Federal Islamic Court banning bank interest [see pp. 38683-84].
Uncertainty after the ruling was also reported to be raising doubts about the government's plans for privatization of public-sector industry.
Banks had appealed to the Supreme Court against the ruling [see p. 38726].
The Hab River project, near Karachi, was to include a US$360 million investment by a consortium of foreign banks.
Work on the 1,300MW power plant was due to begin in March or April, but an international donors' meeting to set contributions for the $1,300 million project had been postponed in December.
ASIA — PACIFIC
KASHMIR
Attempted cross-border protests
Prime Minister Mohammad Nawaz Sharif of Pakistan and the Indian Prime Minister P. V. Narasimha Rao, meeting briefly on Feb. 2 during the World Economic Forum in Davos, Switzerland, discussed Indo-Pakistan relations and the Kashmir situation; Sharif later told reporters that 1992 was "the year of reconciliation" between India and Pakistan.
On the same day, however, the Indian daily Pioneer published an interview with the Pakistan High Commissioner to India which strongly criticized the Indian army's actions in Kashmir.
Sharp diplomatic exchanges between the two governments followed, and on Feb. 3 Sharif announced that there would be a "total strike" throughout Pakistan on Feb. 5 to focus international attention on "Indian atrocities" in Kashmir.
Tension rose when Amanullah Khan, leader of the Jammu and Kashmir Liberation Front (JKLF), announced on Feb. 5 that his organization would organize a mass march across the "line of actual control" separating Pakistani- and Indian-controlled territory on Feb. 11, the eighth anniversary of the hanging of JKLF president Maqbool Butt in Delhi [see p. 33224].
The Indian government, warning that the march could have "unforeseen consequences" , called in the ambassadors of the five permanent members of the UN Security Council on Feb. 6 to discuss the situation.
This was seen as a very significant move, given India's longstanding insistence that Kashmir was an exclusively bilateral issue, but subsequent statements by the Ministry of External Affairs emphasised that purpose of the meeting was purely to give information and that India was not asking for international mediation.
The Pakistani authorities banned the proposed protest on Feb. 6, and on Feb. 7 deployed 40,000 security personnel along the border and blockaded roads in and out of the Azad Kashmir capital of Muzaffarabad; nevertheless, 7,000 JKLF supporters set off from the city on Feb. 11.
Police blockades forced them to proceed on foot, and as the march approached the border the following day it came under fire from the security forces.
Official figures put the casualties at seven dead and 22 wounded, but independent sources estimated that 16 demonstrators and two policemen had been killed and 350 demonstrators injured, 66 of whom were in critical condition.
In spite of the firing 300 demonstrators succeeded in reaching the border at Chakoti, where Khan eventually agreed to call off the march.
In the Kashmir capital of Srinagar 4,000 demonstrators defied the Indian army's curfew to demonstrate solidarity with the marchers.
On Feb. 15 Khan announced that there would be a second attempt to cross the border on March 30, the anniversary of the death of another JKLF leader.
On Feb. 18 JKLF commander-in-chief Javed Ahmed Mir announced that he would lead a column from the Indian side of the border to link up with the marchers from Azad Kashmir.
The following day Sharif sent a special envoy to the UN Secretary-General, calling for a UN fact-finding mission to Kashmir, and warning that Pakistan "cannot be expected to continue to indefinitely prevent such marches by use of force" .
ASIA — PACIFIC
BANGLADESH
Conviction of Ershad
Former Bangladesh President Hussain Mohammad Ershad was sentenced on Feb. 3 to a further three years' imprisonment for illegally amassing some 19,000,000 taka (about US$510,450).
Ershad had been sentenced in June 1991 to 10 years in prison for illegal arms possession [see pp. 38288-89], and faced further charges of corruption and abuse of power.
A special court trying Ershad under anti-corruption legislation ordered confiscation of the money, which was found in his official residence after he was forced to resign and placed under house arrest in December 1990.
Co-operation protocol with Turkey
A protocol on economic, trade, technical and cultural cooperation between Bangladesh and Turkey was signed in Dhaka on Feb. 17.
ASIA — PACIFIC
SRI LANKA
Foreign aid agreement
The World Bank consultative group on aid to Sri Lanka met in Paris on Feb. 7 and ended with pledges of assistance worth US$825 million for 1992 (three-quarters of this in project aid and the rest in balance-of-payments support).
Western aid had totalled a record $1,000 million in 1991.
The outcome reflected Western endorsement of the government's economic policies (and in particular its measures to foster private-sector growth while holding down the budget deficit), notwithstanding the concerns about the continuing war with the separatist Liberation Tigers of Tamil Eelam (LTTE), and criticisms (particularly from Canada) of the government's human rights record.
There were several reports of significant clashes between the army and LTTE guerrillas in mid-February, and extensions of curfew regulations in northern and eastern areas, amid speculation that the government was preparing to launch what it hoped would be a conclusive military offensive in the north.
The government was under pressure from Sinhalese right-wing critics (including the Buddhist clergy, hardliners in the armed forces, and a recently launched Sinhala Defence League or SAS) to crush the Tamil separatists, but nevertheless raised intermittently the expectation of a political solution.
Comments by the LTTE leader in an interview published on Feb. 23 encouraged the belief that the separatists, now suffering serious food shortages in areas under their control, were ready to respond to proposals falling short of full independence.
According to the Sunday Island interview, Vellupillai Prabhakaran proposed negotiations under UN auspices, without preconditions (but with insistence on the recognition of the right to self-determination of the Tamils).
ASIA — PACIFIC
KAZAKHSTAN
Riot at space centre
On Feb. 24-25 some of the 17,000-strong construction battalion (composed of conscripts) at the Baikonur space centre in Leninsk, the main space-launch centre of the Commonwealth of Independent States (CIS), demonstrated in protest over poor living conditions and maltreatment by officers.
Reports spoke of three deaths, the burning of four barracks and the theft of cash and vehicles.
A Kazakh government commission was sent to Leninsk, and gave all conscripts 10 days' leave and extra food and cigarettes.
About 400 sick conscripts were discharged (this having been one of the demonstrators' demands), as were those who had served 18 months of their two-year service.
A Radio Moscow report of Feb. 26 noted that the situation had been aggravated by the absence of any Kazakh officers in a unit consisting mostly of indigenous servicemen.
On Feb. 27 it was announced in connection with the events at Baikonur that seven officers had been dismissed.
Foreign relations
A German government delegation, headed by Economy Minister Jürgen Möllemann, visited Kazakhstan on Feb. 4-5.
After talks with Prime Minister Sergei Tereshchenko, and President Nursultan Nazarbayev, agreements were signed on a Kazakh-German co-operation council.
The talks also included the issues of disarmament and of the ethnic Germans in Kazakhstan.
Nazarbayev was reported by the news agency Interfax to be in favour of a separate agreement between Germany and Kazakhstan on the German community in Kazakhstan.
Nazarbayev made an official visit to Austria on Feb. 19.
At a press conference with Chancellor Franz Vranitzky the two leaders advocated expanding co-operation, with emphasis on Austrian economic aid and advice to Kazakhstan.
Nazarbayev stated that Kazakhstan was willing to sign the Nuclear Non-Proliferation Treaty, and he expressed concern at growing Islamic fundamentalism in Central Asia.
Austria and Kazakhstan agreed to establish diplomatic relations.
ASIA — PACIFIC
NEPAL
Internal divisions at convention of governing party
Over 1,400 delegates met for the governing Nepali Congress Party's first national convention for 32 years on Feb. 13-15, at Jhapa, 400 km east of Kathmandu, the capital.
The Agence France-Presse (AFP) news agency reported bitter arguments between party leaders and Prime Minister Girija Prasad Koirala, who was accused by party leader Ganesh Man Singh of making key political appointments without consultation and of failing to address problems of the economy and of social order.
According to AFT, Singh threatened to withdraw from politics and Koirala in turn offered to resign.
(Koirala had formed his government after the party's election victory in May 1991 — see p. 38193.)
Disagreements had been expected at the party convention after Koirala's dismissal of six key ministers on Dec. 30, 1991.
India Today named the six as Basu Dev Risak (Water Resources and Communications); Dhundi Raj Shastri (Industry); Sheikh Idris (Social Welfare, Labour and Co-operation); Tara Nath Rana Bhatt (Law and Justice, and Parliamentary Affairs); Gopal Man Shrestha (Commerce); and Chiranjibi Wagle (Local Supply).
It described them as aligned with Singh or with acting party president and former Prime Minister Krishna Prasad Bhattarai.
According to a report by AFP, Koirala addressed a rally of 15,000 people on National Democracy Day on Feb. 19, appealing for patience and commitment on the road to democracy, and five youths were arrested after shouting slogans opposing the monarchy and the government.
Formation of new party
Former Prime Minister Maitrika Prasad Koirala announced on Feb. 19 the formation of a new political party, Rashtriya Janata Parishad, under his chairmanship, which would work to provide a democratic alternative to the Nepali Congress Party.
ASIA — PACIFIC
CHINA
Re-emergence of reformist line
Reformist ideas received further official sanction at an enlarged meeting of the Chinese Communist Party (CCP) politburo on Feb. 12 when general secretary Jiang Zemin, read out "important" speeches made by the now-retired paramount leader, Deng Xiaoping, during his recent tour of southern China [see p. 38722].
Official domestic media had maintained a virtual silence over Deng's January tour of the Shenzhen and Zhuhai special economic zones (SEZs) in Guangdong province, which had been extensively reported by the Hong Kong press, both Beijing-controlled and independent.
During the visit Deng had praised the progress of the economic reforms in the SEZs and stressed the importance of accelerating the reforms and opening still wider to the outside world.
Deng reportedly said in Shenzhen: "If capitalism had something good, then socialism should bring it over and use it" , recalling the reformist line adopted at the 13th party congress in 1987 [see pp. 35576-78]and never formally repudiated despite the strong influence of hardline conservatives, especially after the crackdown on pro-democracy demonstrators in June 1989.
Jiang Zemin in a New Year address in Beijing on Feb. 4 had urged people to "accelerate the pace of reform" , to "make explorations boldly" and to "further emancipate our minds" by changing work styles and avoiding formalism.
Implicitly dismissing fears of "peaceful evolution" (capitalist infiltration), Jiang said that the important thing was to concentrate on the domestic situation.
At the Feb. 12 enlarged politburo meeting, Jiang conveyed Deng's remarks that reform represented the only future for socialism in China, and that there was no need to fear capitalism as some parts of it could be "useful" .
Deng was also said to have attacked formalism within the CCP, and called for "new thinking" in speeding up the reforms.
 "We have not even reached a state of modest comfort, so there is nothing to brag about," he reportedly said.
The speeches were later relayed to lower levels, the Hong Kong press reported.
The meeting provoked a number of pro-reform articles and editorials in the official media.
One article, carried on the front page of the official party paper Renmin Ribao on Feb. 24, gave the first ever positive appraisal of capitalism and called for developing a capitalist economy within China as a "useful supplement" to the socialist economy.
Arguing that elements of both capitalism and Western culture were necessary to growth and prosperity, the article warned: "If we unanalytically fear" capitalist influences' and return to the old road of the closed door, this could really shake the socialist foundation."
It listed such positive attributes as free ports, open tendering, the issue of stocks, and contracting and leasing systems, explaining that these were part of the class-neutral "commodity economy" , rather than belonging solely to capitalism.
Release of priests and bishops
Three members of the Roman Catholic clergy belonging to the pro-Vatican underground church were released from prison on Jan. 28, according to Reuters news agency.
Bishop James Xie Shiguang, 74, from Xiapu in Fujian province, and two priests, Fr Zhu Rutan and Fr Zheng Xinzong, had been arrested in July 1990 at a religious discussion meeting at a church in Fujian.
Launch of illegal union manifesto
Reuters news agency, quoting Chinese sources, reported on Feb. 6 that a group of workers calling themselves the China Free Union Preparatory Committee had posted out 2,000 copies of their anti-government manifesto for the organization, modelled on Poland's Solidarity.
Imprisonment of pro-democracy dissidents
Prison sentences of between two and five years were on Feb. 25 imposed on 10 dissidents involved in the 1989 pro-democracy movement.
Wu Xuecan, a former editor of Renmin Ribao, was given a four-year sentence for circulating a mock-up of the paper following the military crackdown in June 1989, while student activist Peng Rong received a two-year term for publishing a survey in May 1990 showing that students were depressed.
Both men were charged with "spreading counter-revolutionary propaganda" .
Other student dissidents sentenced included Zhai Weimin and Li Mingqi; an eleventh was released.
The Hong Kong paper Ta Kung Pao said on Feb. 28 that all those involved in the 1989 protests had now been dealt with.
It reported that nine people had been released in January, and one other released on bail.
Visit by Vice-Premier to Australia
A visit by Vice-Premier Zhu Rongji to Australia on Feb. 10-17 marked the "full restoration and further development of normal relations between China and Australia" , according to China's official regional news agency Zhongguo Xinwen She.
Meeting the Australian Prime Minister, Paul Keating, and the Minister of Foreign Affairs and Trade, Gareth Evans, Zhu said that China and Australia had no fundamental conflicts of interest and should co-operate in preserving peace and stability in the Asia-Pacific region.
He added that prospects for economic co-operation were good, and thanked the Australian government for supporting China's efforts to rejoin the General Agreement on Tariffs and Trade (GATT) and for its adherence to a "one-China" position.
In response to Australian concerns about human rights, Zhu acknowledged differences but said that China wanted to exchange views.
During the visit, demonstrators protested in Canberra against Chinese human rights violations.
ASIA — PACIFIC
TAIWAN
Relations with mainland China
The non-governmental Straits Exchange Foundation (SEF) on Jan. 5 protested over the detention in China of a former mainland air force pilot, Lee Hsien-pin, who had defected to Taiwan in 1965.
The pilot, holder of a Taiwan passport, had been arrested in December 1991 while visiting family in Qingdao, Shandong Province.
The SEF's mainland counterpart, the Association for Relations Across the Taiwan Straits, said on Jan. 20 that Lee was a "wanted criminal" .
Reuters news agency reported on Feb. 20 that according to local press reports, the Taiwan government had agreed to lift the ban on investments in China by subsidiaries of Taiwan banks and financial institutions in third countries.
A new policy allowing 240 spouses to immigrate annually from the mainland went into effect in early January, ending a 43-year ban.
Some men had become separated from their wives at the end of the civil war in 1949, while other had married in China during tourist or business trip.
Applications had vastly exceeded the quota within a few days, reports said.
Imprisonment of pro-independence activists
Chen Wan-chen, founder of the pro-independence Organization for Taiwan Nation-Building, who had spent four months in hiding, was arrested on Feb. 8 and charged under a controversial law with "preparing to commit sedition" , an offence carrying a maximum life sentence.
Four other members of the organization had been imprisoned on Jan. 10 for terms ranging from two to 3 1/2 years for alleged sedition.
Criticism of Chiang Kai-shek in report on 1947 massacre
On Feb. 22-23 an officially commissioned report on the 1947 massacre of civilians by government troops [see pp. 38741-42]was released in an attempt to end controversy over one of Taiwan's most divisive political issues, discussion of which was until recently banned.
In the report the former President, Chiang Kai-shek was criticized for the first time for failing to punish the officials responsible for the massacre.
It blamed the incident on "insufficient mutual understanding between the nationalist government and the people in Taiwan" .
According to the report Kuomintang troops brought over from the mainland massacred between 18,000 and 28,000 people following what was deemed to be a Communist-inspired rebellion which began on Feb. 28, 1947.
The report revealed that the riots had been sparked off by police mishandling of a case in which a trader was beaten up by a customs official in Taipei.
The Interior Minister, Wu Po-hsiung, said that the government was considering demands from victims' families and the opposition Democratic Progressive Party for an official apology and compensation.
Halting of foreign equity investment
The Taiwan Central Benk on Feb. 17 imposed a temporary but indefinite freeze on the inflow of foreign funds for equity investment in an attempt to stem the rise of the Taiwan dollar against the US dollar, which was threatening the competitiveness of Taiwan's exports.
The Taiwan stock market fell 3.3 per cent following the decision, which was not officially announced, while the Foreign Ministry criticized the bank's intervention, saying that it would damage Taiwan's year-old financial liberalization programme.
Critics ascribed the rise in currency to the current trade surplus and high domestic interest rates rather than the impact of foreign investment funds, which account for a small proportion of equity investment.
Announcement of lifting of gold export ban
The Monetary Affairs Bureau announced on Jan. 12 that the government had agreed to lift by the second quarter of 1992 the ban on the export of gold, in place since 1949.
Other foreign relations
Concluding talks with Taiwan trade officials on Jan. 24, the French Minister-Delegate for Foreign Trade, Jean-Nöel Jeanneney, announced that direct air links and more formal trade ties would be established, including the setting up of trade offices in Paris and Taipei.
He also met the Taiwanese Foreign Affairs Minister, Frederick Chien Fu, during the visit.
The Netherlands Prime Minister, Ruud Lubbers, on Feb. 14 halted a $1,500 million sale of four submarines to Taiwan, which he said would have breached a 1984 accord with China [see pp. 33036-37].
ASIA — PACIFIC
HONG KONG
Attack in refugee detention camp
Some 22 Vietnamese refugees were killed and 128 injured in an arson attack at the Shek Kong detention centre on Feb. 4, the worst outbreak of violence since Vietnamese "boat people" began arriving in Hong Kong in 1975.
The Governor, Sir David Wilson, announced an inquiry into the events.
According to investigating officials, the arson attack followed a violent dispute between southern and northern Vietnamese refugees over the distribution of hot water.
Despite police intervention, hundreds of inmates managed to break through a reinforced gate to help a group of fellow southerners attacking a group of northerners in an adjacent section of the camp.
In the ensuing riot, a hut containing refugees seeking to flee the violence, mainly northerners, was set on fire.
On Feb. 5, police fired tear gas after further rioting and moved 2,500 refugees to other detention centres to defuse tension between rival factions.
Over 150 Vietnamese were charged with involvement in the riots.
Some aid workers claimed that gang-like violence had been exacerbated by the security-minded approach of the police which stressed control of the refugees at the expense of community organization.
Others believed that nervousness over forced repatriation might have been a contributory factor in the incident, following the October 1991 agreement between the United Kingdom and Vietnam [see p. 38531]that any refugees arriving after that date would be returned home.
On Feb. 12 some 36 such refugees were returned in the first mandatory repatriation of 1992.
In the wake of the arson attack, the head of the Hong Kong Office of the UN High Commissioner for Refugees said that the estimated 100,000 Vietnamese refugees in South-East Asia should be repatriated in order to avoid such tragedies being repeated.
Vietnam informed the UK that it required adequate Western financial assistance for resettlement.
Possible Chinese army involvement in post-1997 government
The Far Eastern Economic Review of Feb. 13 reported that the Chinese government had refused to discount participation by a People's Liberation Army officer in the civil government of Hong Kong after the colony's return to Chinese sovereignty in 1997.
The journal quoted a Hong Kong-based Chinese Foreign Ministry official who referred to Article 55 of the Basic Law, Hong Kong's post-1997 constitution approved in 1990 by the Chinese legislature [see p. 37376].
Article 55 covered the composition of the Executive Council (Exco), the highest policy-making body, on which the commander of the UK Forces in Hong Kong automatically had a seat.
According to Article 55, the future Chief Executive had the power to invite "other persons" to sit in on Exco meetings.
A UK Foreign and Commonwealth Office spokesman denied that the UK had a responsibility to monitor the composition of Exco after 1997.
In mid-February Chinese officials and Chinese-controlled Hong Kong newspapers, including the communist Wen Wei Po, voiced Chinese concern that plans to change the status of Radio Television Hongkong (RTHK) would deprive China's post-1997 Special Administrative Region government of its own broadcasting organization to communicate official policies.
Selection by China of Hong Kong consultants
It was reported on Feb. 14 that China had appointed the 40 members of the Chinese People's Political Consultative Committee to advise it on the affairs of the territory, leading to concern that the Chinese government might use the group, composed of business executives, conservative politicians and pro-Chinese sympathizers, to strengthen its control over Hong Kong in the run-up to 1997.
The appointments followed the January visit of Lu Ping, head of the Chinese State Council's Hong Kong and Macao Affairs Office [see p. 38723].
ASIA — PACIFIC
JAPAN
Corruption charges against senior politicians — Boycott of budget debate — Measures against gangsters — Increase
in trade surplus — Tensions with USA
Political pressure on Prime Minister Kiichi Miyazawa increased in February, with fresh allegations that senior government figures had been involved in several cases of corruption.
At the same time concern was growing in the business community over the government's increasingly critical attitude toward the USA, Japan's biggest trade partner, and by mid-March Miyazawa's position as leader was considered by many observers to be in danger.
The ruling Liberal Democratic Party (LDP) was heavily defeated in two by-elections, on Feb. 9 and on March 5, in what had hitherto been regarded as safe LDP constituencies.
Miyazawa had taken over from Toshiki Kaifu only on Nov. 5, 1991, after the Kaifu administration had been brought down by a string of financial corruption cases [see pp. 38558-59].
It had been known at the time of his appointment that Miyazawa and members of his Cabinet had been implicated, in varying degrees, in the Recruit-Cosmos share scandal which brought down the Takeshita administration in 1989 [see pp. 36463-64; 36589].
His appeal for what he termed the "purification" of their political records had been well received at the time, but new investigations into the Recruit-Cosmos scandal had revived allegations that he had lied to the Diet (Parliament) in 1988 over his involvement with the case, and allegations of other, hitherto unknown, scandals had spread rapidly.
Charges over Kyowa Steel Corporation scandal — Boycott of budget debate
Fumio Abe, the leader of the Miyazawa faction within the LDP, was formally charged on Feb. 1 with accepting some 80,000,000 yen (US$600,000) in bribes from the bankrupt Kyowa Steel Corporation in return for allegedly awarding construction contracts to the company in respect of tourism developments in the northern island of Hokkaido.
Fumio Abe had been forced to resign on Dec. 12, 1991, when he was first accused of taking the bribes [see p. 38678]; he had been arrested in January 1992 [see pp. 38720-21].
He was bailed on Feb. 5, but further charges relating to another 10,000,000 yen were lodged against him on Feb. 17.
Meanwhile, there were mounting allegations that some of the money paid to him had found its way into the Miyazawa faction's own campaign funds.
Opposition demands for a full parliamentary investigation into the corruption issue led to a prolonged boycott of the Diet's deliberation for the 1992-93 budget.
The Social Democratic Party of Japan (SDPJ — formerly the Japan Socialist Party) announced on Feb. 4 that it was declaring a total parliamentary boycott of the discussion of the budget, in support of its demands that former Prime Minister Zenko Suzuki (in 1980-82) should be called to testify before the Diet on the question of his involvement with the Kyowa scandal.
Debate on the budget issue was not allowed to recommence until Feb 26, following the reluctant agreement of Suzuki and of Jun Shiozaki, a former junior minister, to be cross-questioned on the issue.
Suzuki, who had retired from politics, had told investigators on Feb. 4 that he had received 110,000 million yen (US$880,000) from Kyowa, but he insisted that he had immediately returned the money.
Arrests in Sagawa Kyubin scandal
A former president of Sagawa Kyubin, the country's second-largest parcel delivery company, was among four people arrested on Feb. 14, following a police raid conducted the previous day on the company's Tokyo offices.
The authorities were investigating claims that the company had paid out 528,000 million yen (US$4,200 million) in questionable unsecured loans to yakuza (gangster) groups [see p. 38721].
Hiroyasu Watanabe, the former president, and Jun Sataome, the former managing director, were detained on Feb. 14 along with Michio Ouchi, the former chief accountant of a golf course company and Yasuo Matsuzawa, the president of a medical equipment company.
The sums involved in the Sagawa scandal were vastly greater than those paid out during the Recruit Cosmos case.
At least 100,000 million yen were alleged to have been diverted to the Inagawa-kai, the second largest crime syndicate in Japan.
More seriously, it was also alleged that senior public figures, including both government and opposition party officials, had received up to 40,000 million yen in payments from the Tokyo branch of the company.
Sagawa's chairman, Kiyoshi Sagawa, said on Feb. 13 that the company had given money to 280 politicians for use in "hiring secretaries" .
Kakuei Tanaka, a former Prime Minister (in 1972-74) who had also been implicated in the Lockheed scandal of the mid-1970s, had already acknowledged that he had received money from the Sagawa group.
New laws on yakuza groups
As concerns mounted about the extent of the yakuza groups' officially tolerated dominance of prostitution and gambling, the government adopted new measures to control their activities.
A law which came into force on March 1 required all yakuza groups to register themselves with the local authorities as criminal organizations, so that they could be better supervised; in practice, most were reported to have re-formed themselves as limited companies instead.
Arrest of intruder in Miyazawa headquarters
Shots were fired in Miyazawa's party office on Feb. 11, after an armed man forced his way in to demand that the government should resign over its corruption record, and that the pre-war system of emperor worship should be reinstated.
The intruder, a member of the extreme right-wing Great Japan Patriotic Party, was arrested.
Trade balance — Relations with United States
Relations with Japan's major trading partners were strained during this period by renewed evidence that Japan's trade surplus with the rest of the world was still rising, despite continuing international pressure to open up its domestic markets and to restrain Japanese exports.
Figures released on Feb. 13 showed that the seasonally adjusted surplus for January 1992 had quadrupled since January 1991 to $3,840 million, and that exports had risen by 9.7 per cent against a 3.8 per cent fall in imports.
The European Community (EC) deficit with Japan increased by 33 per cent, with a 24 per cent increase in purchases of Japanese vehicles.
The USA, however, had increased its purchases from Japan by only 1 per cent, while selling 0.3 per cent more goods to Japan.
In January it had been announced that the country's global trade surplus for 1991 had risen to $78,230 million, a 50 per cent increase on the $52,150 million recorded in 1990.
Observers noted that the export drive by Japanese industry was the result of slowing demand on Japan's domestic markets, but they expected the situation to stabilize as the year progressed.
The US government issued a mild rebuke on Feb. 4 in response to remarks which had been made by Miyazawa to the Diet budget committee on Feb. 3, to the effect that the American people "lacked a work ethic" , that "speculative greed" had eroded their competitiveness, and that they had forgotten how "to live by the sweat of their brow" .
Although the Bush administration stopped short of making a full protest, its official statement described the remarks as "not helpful" , and the issue added to the political pressures already mounting in the USA for protectionist action against Japan.
Miyazawa, at the time of his appointment, had expressed the view that Japan's perennial trade surplus was a "fundamentally insoluble problem" , caused by unstoppable world demand for superior Japanese products.
His Foreign Minister, Michio Watanabe, had caused outrage in 1988 by attributing America's difficulties to what he called the irresponsibility of its black population.
Miyazawa apologized on Feb. 4 for the remark about America's work ethic.
On Feb. 13 Shin Kanemaru, the head of the Miyazawa faction, commented that many Japanese had forgotten that Japan owed its prosperity to the American market.
ASIA — PACIFIC
NORTH-SOUTH KOREA
Ratification of non-aggression accords
At the sixth round of Premiers' talks held in the North Korean capital Pyongyang on Feb. 19-20, Premier Yon Hyong Muk of North Korea and Prime Minister Chung Won Shik of South Korea, formally exchanged signed copies of the Agreement on Reconciliation, Non-aggression and Co-operation between the South and the North and the Joint Declaration of the Denuclearization of the Korean Peninsula, thus bringing into effect the terms of the two accords which had been reached in talks between the two sides in December 1991 [see pp. 38659-60].
The non-aggression and nuclear accords, ratified shortly before the meeting by President Roh Tae Woo of the South and President Kim Il Sung of the North, raised hopes for a presidential summit in 1992.
Prime Minister Chung, however, voiced suspicion over the North's nuclear programme, pointing out that North Korea had not yet ratified the nuclear safeguard agreement which it had signed at the International Atomic Energy Authority (IAEA) on Jan. 30 [see p. 38721], allowing for international inspection of its nuclear facilities.
He warned that the reconciliation process would not progress until the North had moved on this issue.
On Feb. 4 Seoul Home Radio Service reported the North Korean permanent representative at the UN as stating that North Korea would allow nuclear inspection immediately after ratification of the IAEA accord which would take place within six months.
According to the Washington Post of Feb. 23, the US government believed that North Korea was only months away from having nuclear weapons capability.
US intelligence had estimated that North Korea could have nuclear weapons ready by 1993 and that it was taking action to hide the existence of components from possible international inspection.
On Feb. 25 the South Korean government announced that the authorization granted to the Daewoo conglomerate to become the first South Korean group to invest directly in the North had been suspended.
The group's chairman had visited the North in January.
ASIA — PACIFIC
MYANMA
Government campaign against opposition
The ruling military junta, the State Law and Order Restoration Council (SLORC), placed further legal restrictions on the National League for Democracy (NLD) and other opposition parties during early 1992.
On Feb. 2, in accordance with the recommendation of the Multi-Party Democratic General Elections Commission of the Union of Myanma, the SLORC ordered the abolition of 17 political parties, on the grounds that they had failed to provide the Commission with details of their party structures and membership.
Six more were abolished on Feb. 13, and a further three on Feb. 27.
An NLD member of the People's Assembly was disqualified on Feb. 19.
This followed the deregistration of 17 parties in January and the disqualification of 15 People's Assembly representatives from the NLD.
Gen. (retd.)
Tin U, former chair of the NLD, was imprisoned for seven years on Feb. 21.
Military appointments
The SLORC announced the appointment on Feb. 7 of Commander Than Nyunt as C.-in-C. of the Navy and of Maj.-Gen.
Thein Win as C.-in-C. of the Air Force.
Military offensives against rebels — Continued border tension with Bangladesh and Thailand
Throughout February the army continued its offensive against rebel forces in the south and west of the country [see also p. 38725].
As part of Operation Dragon King along the Thai border, 7,000 troops advanced to within 10 km of the town of Manerplaw, headquarters of the Karen National Union (KNU), of exiled students and of the "National Coalition Government of the Union of Burma" , a parallel administration established by opposition parties in December 1990 [see pp. 37915-16].
Despite being outnumbered by three or four to one the KNU claimed that it had inflicted heavy casualties.
According to the KNU in January the army lost 128 dead and 500 wounded, while the KNU lost 20 dead and more than 75 wounded.
About 10,000 civilians from Manerplaw and the surrounding villages were reported to have fled to temporary refugee camps in Thailand.
As part of the campaign the army attacked KNU strongholds along the border south of Manerplaw, capturing camps at Yegyaw (on Feb. 4) and Azin, overrunning an outpost of the KNU base at Kawmoora and attacking KNU positions in the Tenasserim region.
Many of these bases were particularly vulnerable to attack from the Thai side of the border and on a number of occasions Myanman troops were reported to have crossed into Thailand.
This led to a deterioration in relations with the Thai army.
During the attack on Yegyaw Thai aircraft fired warning shots at a Myanman unit of 100 men which had crossed into Thailand before attacking the KNU camp.
On Feb. 10 a Thai military commander announced that Myanman troops had been ordered to halt the construction of a bridge across the Moei River near the Thai border town of Mae Sot.
Thai officials feared that the bridge would be used by Myanman troops to enter Thailand to attack rebel camps just inside Myanma.
The government also continued its offensive against Moslem Rohingya rebels in Arakan province [see p. 38725]and the numbers of civilians crossing into Bangladesh continued to grow.
The Office of the UN High Commissioner for Refugees (UNHCR) announced on Feb. 21 that it was allocating $1,000,000 in emergency funds for the refugees, which it estimated now totalled at least 100,000 and were crossing the border at the rate of 1,000 a day.
The Bangladesh government said on Feb. 24 that thousands were on the verge of starvation because relief efforts were inadequate.
On the same day the UN World Food Programme announced that it was granting $1,900,000 in emergency supplies to Bangladesh.
The SLORC continued to accuse the foreign media of carrying "exaggerated and fabricated" reports about the situation in Arakan and the refugees crossing into Bangladesh.
The Associated Press news agency on Feb. 9 reported Bangladesh sources as claiming that 200 Moslem rebels detained in Arakan by the government had died of starvation or suffocation in the preceding week, while 75 others were reported missing after Myanman troops fired on boats of refugees.
A report issued on Feb. 9 by the New York-based organization Lawyers Committed for Human Rights said that inside Myanma thousands remained detained for long periods under poor conditions, with some prisoners being tortured.
ASIA — PACIFIC
CAMBODIA
Approval of UNTAC mission
The UN Security Council on Feb. 28 passed Resolution 745 authorizing the dispatch "as soon as possible" of a 22,000-member peacekeeping force to Cambodia to establish the UN Transitional Authority in Cambodia (UNTAC — see p. 38511).
At a cost of at least $1,900 million, the implementation of UNTAC would be the largest and most costly operation in the UN's history.
Under the 15-month plan recommended by UN Secretary-General Boutros Boutros-Ghali, 15,900 military personnel, 3,600 civilian police officers and 2,400 civilians were to be sent to Cambodia to monitor the ceasefire, to disarm the combatants of all four Cambodian factions and supervise the cantonment of the remaining armies, to take over the running of key ministries and police forces, and to organize elections in April 1993.
UNTAC would only be successful, Boutros-Ghali stressed, if it had adequate human and financial resources.
There were widely held concerns over the funding of the mission, the dispatch of which had been delayed since November 1991 when the leaders of three of the four factions returned to Phnom Penh, the capital.
UNTAC's newly appointed co-ordinator, Yasushi Akashi, had admitted that UNTAC was "in competition with Yugoslavia" for resources, while observers had termed the UNTAC budget unrealistic, according to the Far Eastern Economic Review of March 5.
Attack on UN helicopter
A senior Australian UN officer was wounded when a helicopter of the UN advance mission in Cambodia was hit by gunfire on Feb. 26 while flying over Khmer Rouge-controlled territory in Kompong Thom Province.
The Khmers Rouges issued a denial of responsibility for the attack, blaming the Phnom Penh government for staging the incident.
Visit of Chinese Foreign Minister
The Chinese Foreign Minister, Qian Qichen, visited Phnom Penh on Feb. 11-12.
The first visit by a senior Chinese official in over 13 years, and designed to signal China's support for the Cambodian peace process, it had been postponed twice in December due to unrest in Phnom Penh [see p. 38680].
Qian told Prince Norodom Sihanouk, head of state and Chairman of the Supreme National Council, that China would "at all times" back the implementation of the peace accord.
He also emphasized China's position on equal treatment of all four factions.
Alluding to ceasefire violations, Qian also called on each faction to do its utmost to achieve reconciliation and to abide by the peace accord.
Qian announced that China was willing to take an active part in rebuilding Cambodia, and provide necessary assistance to aid projects after the elections and the formation of a new government.
Sihanouk said that he was particularly pleased with Qian's announcement that China would restore aid to all four factions through the SNC; previously, China had been the main backer of the Khmers Rouges.
Speaking on relations with Vietnam, Qian said that the normalization of ties embodied China's good-neighbour policy, and he looked forward to the restoration and development of the old friendly Sino-Cambodian relations.
During the visit, Qian also met SNC members from the four factions, and the representatives in Phnom Penh of the UN and of the five major powers.
ASIA — PACIFIC
LAOS
Friendship treaty with Thailand
Gen. Khamtay Siphandon, the Lao Premier, visited Thailand from Feb. 18 to Feb. 21.
He and his Thai counterpart Anand Panyarachun signed on Feb. 19 a friendship and co-operation treaty; Khamtay also met with King Bhumibol Adulyadej of Thailand and an agreement was concluded under which Thailand would help to develop tourism in Laos.
The rapprochement followed a visit by Lao President Kaysone Phomvihane to Thailand in January [see p. 38724]and an invitation by the January summit of the Association of South-East Asian Nations (ASEAN) to Laos to accede to ASEAN's 1976 Treaty of Amity and Co-operation (TAC)[see p. 38729].
Vietnamese visit
A delegation led by Gen. Vo Van Kiet, Chair of the Vietnamese Council of Ministers, visited Laos on Feb. 13-15.
An agreement was signed to promote co-operation on economic, cultural, scientific and technological issues.
[For Kaysone's visit to Vietnam in October 1991 see p. 38532.]
ASIA — PACIFIC
VIETNAM
Visit of Chinese Foreign Minister
The Chinese Foreign Minister, Qian Qichen, became the most senior official to visit Vietnam since the 1979 border war when he arrived in Hanoi from Phnom Penh, the Cambodian capital, on Feb. 12 for a four-day visit.
The Chairman of Vietnam's Council of Ministers, Senior Gen. Vo Van Kiet, hailed the visit as an "important event" in the normalization of the two countries' relations.
Qian and his Vietnamese counterpart, Nguyen Manh Cam, promised to work together to ensure the success of the UN peace plan in Cambodia [see p. 38511].
They signed two agreements on improving economic co-operation and removing visa requirements for diplomats and businessmen.
They also agreed to set up consulates and to arrange a meeting of experts to discuss territorial disputes, including border issues and control of the Paracel and Spratly islands in the South China Sea.
Qian also announced that the Chinese Premier, Li Peng, would visit Vietnam in the second half of the year.
While visiting Ho Chi Minh City, Qian Qichen met Do Muoi, secretary-general of the Communist Party of Vietnam, and Nguyen Van Linh, senior party adviser (and Do Muoi's predecessor).
US offer of aid for typhoon victims — Embargo controversy
Concluding a three-day visit to Vietnam on Feb. 1, the US presidential envoy, Gen. John Vessey, announced that for the first time the USA was to provide assistance to typhoon victims.
Vessey was in Vietnam to discuss co-operation in determining the whereabouts of the 1,500 US servicemen missing in action (MIA) after the Vietnam war [see p. 38532].
The resolution of this issue was one of the USA's main conditions for establishing diplomatic ties and lifting its trade embargo, in place since 1975.
Local media quoted observers as saying that the visit opened new prospects for normalizing relations.
A US-owned Airbus, leased to Vietnam Airlines by Bulgaria's JES Air for flights between Ho Chi Minh City and Hong Kong, was grounded in Singapore on Feb. 19.
The US owner, United Technologies Corporation, had won an injunction barring the flights on the grounds that any deal under which control of US-built or US-equipped aircraft passed to Vietnam, would violate the US embargo against Vietnam.
The move raised questions over the issue of control in aircraft charter arrangements, which several airlines operated with Vietnam.
Establishment of free-trade zone
Construction began on Feb. 6 of Vietnam's first free-trade zone, a $90,000,000 joint venture with two Taiwan partners in the southern outskirts of Ho Chi Minh City.
The Tan Thuan manufacturing and processing zone, to be built over six years, would offer favourable tax terms and import and export duty exemptions.
It was Taiwan's biggest single investment in Vietnam.
Decentralization of import-export quotas
Officials of the State Planning Committee said on Feb. 13 that the number of goods subject to its setting import and export quotas was to be reduced in 1992.
In the agriculture and forestry sector the committee would set a target only for rice production, leaving export quotas for other major products such as rubber and coffee to be set by government departments.
ASIA — PACIFIC
PHILIPPINES
New alliances in election campaign
The 90-day campaign for the May 11 presidential elections began officially on Feb. 7 when the deadline for the registration of candidates expired.
Some 78 individuals presented their nomination papers for the presidency, 18 for the vice-presidency, and 265 for 24 Senate seats.
According to the Commission on Elections (Comelec), the transitional provisions of the 1987 Constitution meant that elections would also be held for the 200-seat House of Representatives, as well as for provincial, municipal and district posts, with all forms of national and local government to be replaced on June 30.
Campaigning guidelines, including a ban on gifts and propaganda materials such as T-shirts, were issued, with a Supreme Court ruling on political advertising still due to be made.
By Feb. 12 Comelec had reduced the number of presidential candidates to the following eight (plus vice-presidential running mates): Ramon "Monching" Mitra and Marcelo Fernan; Fidel Ramos and Emilio "Lito" Osmena; Eduardo "Danding" Cojuangco and John Osmena; Imelda Marcos and Vic Magsaysay; Salvador "Doy" Laurel and Rodolfo Ganzon; Jovito Salonga and Aquilino Pimentel; Joseph "Erap" Estrada and Vicente Rivera; Miriam Defensor Santiago and Ed Maranan.
These configurations reflected shifting alliances among the various political groups and figures [for the earlier emergence of likely candidates and their background see p. 38728].
Fernan had joined House Speaker Mitra, candidate of the ruling Laban ng Demokratikong Pilipino coalition party (LDP — Democratic Filipino Struggle Party), on Feb. 2, the day after the key figure of Fernan's own grouping, Emilio Osmena, the governor of Cebu, switched his allegiance to former Defence Secretary Ramos (the preferred candidate of incumbent President Corazon Aquino).
On Feb. 3 the LDP received a further boost, when one of the wings of the divided Nacionalista Party (NP), that led by Senator Juan Ponce Enrile (Defence Secretary under former President Ferdinand Marcos, and until Feb. 3 a candidate in his own right) and former Senator Arturo Tolentino, announced that it would join a coalition with the LDP, in exchange for places in the LDP's slates of candidates for the congressional and local elections.
Ramos, a Protestant, was criticized on Feb. 18 by the influential (Catholic) Archbishop of Manila, Cardinal Jaime Sin, who attacked him as a former Marcos stooge and expressed his preference for Mitra, thus denting Ramos' dwindling support within the LDP.
Mitra attacked a secret visit by Ramos to Switzerland in mid-February, hinting that Ramos had been seeking foreign funds for his campaign.
Cojuangco, who was Aquino's cousin, a former Marcos "crony" and leader of another wing of the NP, was joined by Senator John Osmena (Emilio Osmena's brother) on Feb. 4 and was also backed by a splinter group from the Liberal Party.
Outflanking Imelda Marcos, Cojuangco emerged as the leading right-wing opposition contender, continuing his campaign to build up support in the former Marcos bastions of northern Ilocos province and the Cagayan valley, and in the Mindanao and the crucial Visayas, estimated to represent some 21 per cent of the total vote.
Salonga, leader of the Liberal Party and former Senate president, and his running-mate Pimentel, leader of the PDP-Laban Party, were traditionally backers of Aquino in the Congress, and were expected to perform well in their party power bases in the western Visayas and northern Mindanao.
Estrada, a senator, and Defensor Santiago, were both seen as populist outsiders.
The decision of Emilio Osmena to stand as Ramos' running mate led to a Cabinet change on Feb. 13 when Aquino named Lilia Bautista as Trade and Industry Secretary, replacing Peter Garrucho, who had resigned his post to become Osmena's campaign manager.
NPA announcement of election boycott — Continuing clashes
On Feb. 13 Gregorio Rosal of the rebel communist New People's Army (NPA) announced that the NPA did not have a candidate to support in the elections and that its members would not be taking part.
At the same time, some 58 people died in clashes between the army and the NPA in the north and south of the country.
In Manila, the capital, 1,000 members of human rights groups, backed by the Catholic Church, demonstrated near the Malacaang Palace, calling on the government to end its "total war" against the rebels, because of the victimization of innocent civilians.
In a report released on Feb. 26, the human rights organization Amnesty International alleged that more than 550 unarmed people had died in political killings by government or government-backed forces since 1988, while hundreds of others had "disappeared" .
Also alleging rape and torture, Amnesty urged the government to take urgent action against the security forces.
Austerity budget — IMF agreement
The government reached an agreement with the IMF on Feb. 15, allowing the release of the balande remaining under @$382 million standby facility agreed in February 1991 [see p. 38012]but suspended in July after the Philippines failed to meet IMF economic stabilization targets.
Resumption of the lending programme followed approval on Feb. 7, in the final session of Congress under Aquino, of five of six measures to raise tax revenues, in order to cover the projected 1992 budget deficit of P37,700 million (US$1,460 million), or 2.7 per cent of gross national product (GNP), as agreed with the IMF.
The failure of the Senate to pass a law extending value added tax would leave a shortfall of P1,000 million, but this would be covered by proceeds from the sale on Jan. 30 of the state-owned Philippine Airlines.
Despite its being an election year, Aquino had also vetoed a provision in the 1992 budget to limit payments on the country's US$29,000 million foreign debt (currently 30 per cent of export earnings) to 10 per cent of 1990 export revenue.
Government departments were ordered to set aside 10 per cent of their budget to be released only with presidential approval; spending on all non-infrastructure projects, except schools, hospitals and disaster relief, would be deferred.
Signed in mid-January, the budget, totalling P308,400 million (US$11,600 million), was aimed at cutting expenditure, with 37 per cent earmarked for debt-servicing (as against 18 per cent in 1980-85 and 39 per cent in 1986-91).
While appropriations were expected to increase by 7.5 per cent compared with 1991, a 20 per cent rise in expenditure would be contained by an anticipated reduction of inflation to an annual rare of 8 per cent(from 17.7 per cent ) and a 2-3 per cent growth in the stagnant economy.
The largest allocations went, in order of size, to education, public works, defence, local government and health.
Debt agreement following Bataan compromise
The passage of an austerity budget and approval of the IMF loan paved the way to an agreement in New York with commercial creditors on Feb. 20 to restructure more than US$5,300 million of commercial-bank debt.
Debt would be sold for cash at a discount or converted into 17- to 25-year bonds.
Conclusion of the deal was helped by a compromise over the conversion into bonds of some US$1,100 million allegedly fraudulent loans for the Bataan nuclear-power project [see p. 30194].
Citibank, a subsidiary of the US Citicorp, accused by Philippine senators of paying bribes to former President Marcos in order to lead the syndicate of banks which partly financed the Bataan plant, agreed not to tender its Bataan loans for conversion.
In return, Central Bank governor Jose Cuisia agreed that US$344 million of other banks' loans would be eligible for bond conversion, while securing the right of the Philippines to take action against any bank later found to have been involved in fraudulent transactions.
In February a US district court rejected a petition by Westinghouse Electric Corp., a US firm alleged to have used bribery in 1976 to win the contract to construct the Bataan power station, to dismiss the case filed against it by the Philippine government.
ASIA — PACIFIC
INDONESIA
Punishment of officers over East Timor massacre
In an effort to calm international outrage over the massacre of pro-independence demonstrators in Indonesian-annexed East Timor in November 1991 [see pp. 38579-80], the Chief of Staff of the Indonesian Army, Lt.-Gen.
Edi Sudrajat, announced on Feb. 27 that it had punished six senior army officers for their role in the events.
Three had been dismissed, two had been taken off active duty and the other had been suspended.
Sudrajat was announcing the findings of a special military council investigating the massacre and said that a further five officers were being investigated for indiscipline.
Two of the six found guilty — Maj.-Gen.
Sintong Panjaithan, then commander of the 9th Military Command (eastern Indonesia), and Brig. -Gen.
Rudolf Warouw, then commander of the East Timor Operational Command — had been relieved of their posts in December [see p. 38677](and replaced in January by Maj.-Gen.
Herman Mantiri and Gen. Theo Syafei respectively).
The other four were reportedly Warouw's deputy and number three, the head of East Timor's military intelligence, and the commander of Dili, the East Timorese capital.
Eight other soldiers of lower rank were also to be court-martialled on criminal charges related to the massacre.
The punishments followed pressure from foreign aid donor countries which had demanded that the government act on the December 1991 report of its own National Investigation Commission (KPN).
This report had partially blamed the armed forces for the massacre [see p. 38677], but its findings were described by a February Amnesty International report as "unacceptable and fatally flawed" .
Diplomatic offensive
Foreign Affairs Minister Ali Alatas went on a foreign diplomatic offensive in February, holding talks with officials in the United Kingdom, France, the Netherlands, Belgium, Switzerland, the USA, Canada (which had cut off new aid in the wake of the massacre) and Japan.
In The Hague, Alatas told the Netherlands Minister for Development Co-operation, Jan Pronk, that Indonesia would not accept Netherlands aid — suspended after the massacre, but resumed after publication of the KPN's findings — if the Netherlands continued to insist on linkage with respect for human rights.
In London, UK ministers called for those responsible for the November killings to be brought to justice but made it clear to Alatas that the UK, the second-largest arms supplier to Indonesia after the USA, would not cut off aid or arms sales.
In Brussels, Alatas held meetings with European Commissioners Frans Andriessen and Abel Matutes.
In Tokyo, the Japanese Foreign Minister, Michio Watanabe, informed Alatas that Japan's policy of economic assistance would not change, despite the massacre.
In New York, UN Secretary-General Boutros Boutros-Ghali informed Alatas that the UN was studying the report of his special envoy, Kenyan Attorney General Amos Wako, who arrived on an official visit to Indonesia on Feb. 8 and made a two-day visit to East Timor on Feb. 13-14.
Wako met President Suharto, members of the KPN and representatives of non-governmental organizations.
Meanwhile, at the UN Commission on Human Rights in Geneva, Portugal, the former colonial ruler of East Timor, called on Feb. 12 for a UN-sponsored international delegation to be allowed into the occupied territory to carry out an independent assessment of the situation there.
On Jan. 14 Portuguese President Marío Soares had called, in a meeting with US President Bush, for US pressure to induce Indonesia to accept UN resolutions on East Timor.
On Feb. 26 the government banned journalists from East Timor, seeking to pre-empt publicity surrounding the expected arrival, from Lisbon, of a "peace ship" , the Lusitania Expreso, carrying some 100 overseas Timorese and reporters intending to lay a wreath at the Santa Cruz cemetery in Dili, where the November massacre took place.
On Feb. 25 Indonesia had declared its territorial waters closed to the ship.
Irian Jaya famine
On Feb. 5 Public Welfare Minister Supardjo Rustam announced that famine in Kuriwa, a district of the remote province of Irian Jaya, had claimed the lives of 132 people, after bad weather had prevented crop-planting in the area.
Repatriation of Marauke villagers
At a meeting with the director of Asian Affairs of Papua New Guinea's Foreign Ministry in Marauke, Aceh Province, on Feb. 11, Irian Jaya Deputy Governor Sudrajat Nataatmaja agreed to accept the return of 208 Marauke villagers who had been forced to flee to Papua New Guinea after armed clashes between the security forces and members of the separatist Free Aceh Movement (GKN) on Jan. 24.
On Feb. 25, two alleged GKN members, Imran Hasan and Hasbi Abdullah were sentenced to seven and five years' imprisonment respectively on national security grounds.
ASIA — PACIFIC
PAPUA NEW GUINEA
Agreement on restoring service to southern Bougainville
A memorandum of understanding was signed on Feb. 4 between the government and pro-independence leaders from the southern part of Bougainville Island to restore government services to the south of Bougainville.
Foreign Affairs Minister Michael Somare was reported as saying that he was "confident the agreement would bring lasting peace to Bougainville" .
The agreement, which still had to be endorsed by local chiefs, left central Bougainville as the only area where government services had yet to be restored.
Clashes on the island were reported in early February.
Fighting between the secessionist Bougainville Revolutionary Army (BRA) and pro-government villages near the town of Arawa in the south of the island left five people dead, it was reported on Feb. 3.
A government defence forces patrol boat exchanged fire with the BRA on Feb. 2, shelling a village in central Bougainville.
ASIA — PACIFIC
AUSTRALIA
Economic recovery plan
Prime Minister Paul Keating on Feb. 26 announced an ambitious A$2,300 million (about US$1,720 million) 16-month public spending programme, aimed at reactivating the economy and lowering unemployment in the run-up to the next federal elections, due to be held by mid-1993.
Launched under the slogan of "One Nation" , the programme was designed to counter the success of the so-called "Fightback Package" which the right-wing Liberal-National Party opposition coalition had unveiled in December 1991 [see p. 38675]as an economic blueprint to pull Australia out of recession.
Keating's spending programme would involve the injection of public money into infrastructure — including airport facilities, railways, ports, roads and the development of a national electricity grid — and vocational training, as well as a special A$300 million family allowance payment benefiting some 2,000,000 families.
Sales tax on new cars would be reduced from 20 per cent to 15 per cent to stimulate demand (Nissan having closed its Australian operations earlier in the month), and special assistance was announced for other groups affected by the recession, including wool and wheat farmers and the textile industry.
A$235 million would also go on measures to boost exports.
To finance the programme the government would allow the federal budget deficit to rise from a projected A$6,800 million in 1992 to A$8,000 million in 1993.
The current-account deficit, forecast at 3.75 per cent of gross domestic product (GDP) for the year, would rise to 4.25 per cent, and inflation from an anticipated 1.5 per cent to 4 per cent in the same period.
GDP would recover from two years' contraction or stagnation to grow by 4.75 per cent in 1992-93.
Announcing the package in parliament, Keating said that the spending programme was the first stage of a four-year "strategy for growth" which would produce an average GDP growth of 4 per cent, cutting unemployment from the current post-war high of 10.3 per cent to 7.75 per cent through the creation of 800,000 jobs.
Inflation and the current account deficit would decline by mid-1996.
In contrast with the opposition's plans for a 15 per cent "consumption tax" , there would also be personal tax cuts, giving three-quarters of taxpayers a top tax rate of 30 per cent , totalling A$3,400 million in 1994-95 and A$5,200 million in 1995-96.
Changes in the corporate tax system designed to stimulate private-sector investment included accelerated depreciation allowances, a more generous tax treatment of banks' bad debt provisions for businesses, and tax-free bonds for infrastructure projects.
Longer-term economic reforms to boost foreign investment included the loosening of environmental and Aboriginal heritage controls in planning procedures for mining projects, the completion of deregulation of the aviation market, and further relaxation of rules to open up banking to foreign competition.
The recovery programme was also seen as an attempt by Keating to heal divisions in the ruling Australian Labor Party (ALP) after his 1991 leadership battle with former Prime Minister Bob Hawke [for Keating's replacement of Hawke see p. 38675].
Attacked as irresponsible by the conservative opposition but welcomed by the Australian Council of Trade Unions which pledged to contain wage pressure, the programme marked a return towards the ALP's traditional Keynesianism after years of economic liberalization and rationalization begun in 1983 when Keating was Treasurer under Hawke.
Hawke resigned from parliament on Feb. 20 to become a television chat-show host.
Controversy over constitutional relationship with UK
Australia's constitutional relationship with the United Kingdom emerged as a possible election issue on Feb. 27 when Prime Minister Keating accused the UK of "deserting" Australia during the Second World War and of later downgrading relations with its former colony in favour of the European Communities (EC).
Defending his nationalist stance in parliament, Keating presented the ALP, which came out in 1991 in favour of establishing a republic by 2001, as the patriotic party and accused his conservative opponents of servile nostalgia.
His remarks, downplayed by the UK Foreign and Commonwealth Office, provoked an uproar among UK right-wing Conservative politicians.
They followed widespread criticism of Keating in the British tabloid press, which accused him of insulting Queen Elizabeth during her 12th state visit earlier in February for the 150th anniversary of the proclamation of Sydney as a city.
Keating had allegedly breached protocol by putting his arm round the Queen's waist, and his wife had failed to curtsey.
In the week before the visit, Keating had become the first Prime Minister to suggest that Australia drop the Union Flag device from its own, further fuelling public debate between republicans and monarchists about Australia's status.
The Australian Republican Movement, formed in 1991, had campaigned against the Queen's visit, which drew a much smaller and less enthusiastic public response than on previous occasions.
ASIA — PACIFIC
NEW ZEALAND
Narrow government by-election victory
The ruling National Party narrowly retained the Auckland seat of Tamaki at a by-election on Feb. 15.
The NP candidate won 43 per cent, in a low turnout, against 38 per cent for the newly formed Alliance coalition [see p. 38676], which campaigned against cuts in the welfare state and for the renationalization of privatized state assets.
The Labour candidate was beaten into third place with only 12 per cent.
Tamaki had been held until December by Sir Robert Muldoon, the former National Party leader and Prime Minister in 1975-84.
Muldoon, who had won 59 per cent of the vote in Tamaki in the 1990 general election [for which see pp. 37781-82], had resigned his seat in protest at the economic, health and social welfare policies of Prime Minister Jim Bolger [see p. 38676], and had appealed to voters to send a message to the government to change its ways.
The by-election came only two weeks after the ending of universal free hospital care.
EUROPE
COMMONWEALTH OF INDEPENDENT STATES
Heads of State summit
Delegations from the 11 member states of the CIS met in Minsk on Feb. 14 for a summit conference, concerned mainly with military issues.
In nine cases the delegations were led by the respective state Presidents, while the Kirgiz and Tajik delegations were led by their Prime Ministers; the Georgian Defence Minister attended as an observer.
Military agreements
The agenda included 13 draft documents, which had been prepared on all aspects of strategic and general purpose armed forces.
Ukrainian President Leonid Kravchuk, who chaired the meeting, announced at a news conference that after several hours of what were reported to be stormy discussions, 20 documents had been signed, notably including an agreement defining the status of the strategic forces and stipulating that their commander was subordinate to the Council of Heads of State and to the C.-in-C. of the joint armed forces of the CIS.
Yevgeny Shaposhnikov was formally appointed as C.-in-C.
CIS member states would participate proportionally in financing the maintenance and ultimate destruction (according to international agreements) of strategic forces.
Member states had the option to withdraw from this agreement with one year's notice.
The agreement was, however, subject to ratification by member states.
All CIS member states signed an agreement on a single defence budget into which they would pay fixed contributions to be determined by the Council of Heads of Government.
Ukraine and Azerbaijan, however, refused to participate in a single defence budget for joint strategic forces, undertaking only a share of financing the strategic forces stationed on their territory.
Eight states agreed on a unified command of general-purpose armed forces for a transitional period of two years.
(Of the eight, Byelarus and Uzbekistan accepted only with reservations; the other three, Azerbaijan, Moldova and Ukraine, were still insisting on setting up their own armed forces.)
General-purpose forces were taken to be those parts of the military not included in strategic forces, and "the armed forces of the participant states themselves, operationally subordinated with their consent to the C.-in-C. of the joint armed forces" .
This agreement grew out of a proposal put forward by Kazakh President Nursultan Nazarbayev as a compromise between the demands for individual states' armies and unified CIS conventional forces.
The co-ordinating council of the officers' assemblies set up in January [see p. 38730]sent a message to the summit calling on delegates to agree on the draft proposals on military issues, to halt troop withdrawal from eastern Europe until social protection for servicemen could be assured, and to maintain the military at an adequate level for defence.
An opinion poll taken at the January officers' meeting, published on Feb. 5 in Nezavisimaya gazeta, showed that some 71 per cent of the officers polled favoured restoring a unified state within the former Soviet Union's borders, and that 79 per cent thought that the military should have the deciding say on issues of the armed forces' future.
Economic agreements
Economic agreements signed at the heads of state summit included a clause on maintaining the rouble as a common currency for trade between republics (which would be pursued at world prices), while still leaving republics the option to introduce their own currencies.
A document on the free movement of goods between republics was also signed.
Kazakhstan's President Nazarbayev, however, pointed out in an interview after the close of the summit that no executive or supervisory bodies had been set up to monitor the implementation of the agreements reached there.
Relations between Russia and Ukraine
Friction between Russia and Ukraine remained high, and reports that the two Presidents were to hold an extra day of bilateral negotiations after the Heads of State summit proved to be false.
On Feb. 17, Ukraine published documents to prove its allegations that a joint venture company, in which naval officers were involved, had been selling ships of the Black Sea Fleet.
The allegations were denied by a senior naval official who said that the sales were of obsolete vessels and fulfilled contracts signed by the former Soviet Union's Ministry of Defence.
On Feb. 14, the crews of six SU-24 fighter-bomber jets who refused to take the oath of loyalty to Ukraine defected from Ukraine to Russia, where, it was later announced, they had all been given new postings.
Subsequently, on Feb. 17, it was reported that a long-range airforce division with nuclear capacity had put itself under Ukrainian jurisdiction, and that its commander, who had been dismissed by the long-range Air Force Commander, Col.-Gen.
Igor Kalugin, had then been reinstated on Kravchuk's orders.
Russian newspapers said on Feb. 12 that the Russian Republic was considering setting up Russian armed forces.
The Guardian of Feb 15 pointed out that a united [CIS]military "can hardly be sustained" and that Ukraine's main fear was of united armed forces being effectively under Russian control.
Observers commented that Russian President Boris Yeltsin needed to ensure support from the officer corps while the unpopular economic reforms more implemented, citing the presidential decree, published on Feb. 19, "on measures to enhance social protection of servicemen and persons discharged from military service" , which included improved housing provisions and a monthly minimum wage of 1,800 roubles for officers.
Earlier CIS heads of government meeting
Heads of government of CIS member states, meeting in Moscow on Feb. 8, signed five documents on economic matters, including a five-year agreement on the free transit of goods between CIS states, a ban on the re-export to third states of goods traded between CIS states for domestic consumption, and steep increases in freight and passenger rail costs, to, respectively, 8.3 and three times their end-1991 levels.
Ukraine participated in a non-voting capacity, since its head of delegation had not been given plenary powers other than to sign agreements on co-operation in meteorology, environmental protection, and electricity production (Ukraine did not in fact sign these agreements).
Georgia attended the Minsk summit meeting as an observer.
All delegations, except Ukraine, formally agreed to recognize the Russian Federation as the "legal successor and guarantor of foreign credits of the CIS member-states and the republic of Georgia" .
The CIS states agreed to act in concert on food imports from abroad, an agreement which was also signed by Georgia, but again Ukraine demanded the right to negotiate separate food credits for itself.
Heads of parliament meeting
The chairmen of the Supreme Soviets (parliaments) of the CIS member-states (except Uzbekistan) met in Moscow on Feb. 27.
(Moldova attended as an observer, as its Supreme Soviet had not yet ratified the CIS document.)
Documents were signed covering four of the nine topics on the agenda.
Those signed covered inter-parliamentary co-operation to avoid discrepancies between states' legislation; consultative meetings between heads of parliaments; and two protocols (i) on an interparliamentary information service and (ii) on drawing up multilateral legislative acts.
A draft proposal put forward by Russia, Tajikistan, Armenia, Byelarus, Kirgizstan and Kazakhstan to establish an interparliamentary assembly was rejected by Ukraine and Azerbaijan because they were opposed to any sort of supranational body.
The holding of regular consultative meetings between heads of parliaments was supported as a compromise notion.
Baker's visit and tour of Central Asian capitals — Diplomatic relations with USA
US Secretary of State James Baker made a 10-day tour of the former Soviet Union during February, concentrating on building up relations with the Islamic states (a shift in policy prompted partly because of the fear of Iranian activity in the region), and on defence conversion matters [see pp. 38792-93.
Baker's visit coincided with Turkish Prime Minister Suleyman Demirel's visit to the USA, during which US-Turkish collaboration on activity in central Asia was discussed.
It was announced on Feb. 19 that the USA would have embassies in Azerbaijan, Tajikistan, Turkmenistan and Uzbekistan from March 15.
The announcement followed Baker's visit to these republics to gain formal acceptance of US conditions for recognition.
Baker flew to Dushanbe (Tajikistan) on Feb. 13 following talks with Turkmenistan's President, Saparmurad Niyazov.
On Feb. 13 and 14, Baker met Tajik President Rakhman Nabiyev.
Opposition leaders from the Islamic Renaissance Party and the chair of the Tajik Democratic Party, Shodmon Yusupov, denied that Tajikistan was a democratic state, as Nabiyev had assured Baker, and regretted that Baker had not met with opposition parties.
Nabiyev agreed to all the US proposals for weapon control, specifically to restrictions on sales of arms components, and gave assurances that Tajikistan would not sell uranium for the use of weapons production.
Reports that Tajikistan was selling uranium had been denied on Jan. 31 in an official statement from Tajikistan's Foreign Ministry.
On Feb. 16, Baker met President Islam Karimov of Uzbekistan as well as leaders of the democratic opposition, who urged the USA to extend diplomatic recognition to Uzbekistan as a means of improving the situation for opposition parties.
Abdurahim Pulatov, leader of the Birlik movement, was reported as saying that "the totalitarian regime has been destroyed in Moscow but in Tashkent it continues to exist" .
Relations between Moldova and USA
On Feb. 11, Baker had visited Moldova, and held talks with President Mircea Snegur.
He received assurances that Moldova would meet US conditions for recognition.
Baker denied that the situation in the Gagauz and Dnestr regions would create a problem in establishing diplomatic relations between the USA and Moldova, although at the beginning of February there had been reports of fighting between Dnestr separatists and Moldovan police.
Snegur travelled to Washington on Feb. 16 with the intention of "speeding up the establishment of diplomatic relations with the USA and Canada" .
On his return on Feb. 22, he said that his visit had been "very fruitful" , and it was announced in Washington on Feb. 25 that a US embassy would be opened in Moldova by March 15.
Only Georgia among the former Soviet republics would thus be left without diplomatic relations with the USA.
EUROPE
RUSSIA
Foreign relations
Russian President Boris Yeltsin visited France at the beginning of February.
The Russian delegation included Marshal Yevgeny Shaposhnikov, C.-in-C. of the CIS armed forces, and Yegor Gaidar, at that time the Russian Deputy Prime Minister in charge of economic reform.
Arriving in France on Feb. 5, Yeltsin noted that the main purpose of his visit was a discussion of disarmament issues [see also pp. 38792-93].
However, its major tangible result was economic aid given by France; on Feb. 6 it was announced that France would donate F3,820 million (US$704 million) in credits to Russia.
Most of this amount was in fact credits hitherto allocated to the former Soviet Union which had now been unblocked.
At a reception hosted by the mayor of Paris, Jacques Chirac, Yeltsin appealed for support from the West for his reforms, warning that if Russia's economic reform plan failed, "a dictator could surface" .
On Feb. 7 a treaty on co-operation was signed, providing for regular high-level consultations, and pledging to reduce nuclear weapons to levels of minimum security.
The French oil and chemicals group, Elf Aquitaine, signed an agreement during Yeltsin's visit on prospecting for oil in the Volgograd and Saratov regions.
The agreement included a production-sharing deal.
The visit to France had been preceded in January by a brief stopover in the United Kingdom en route to the UN Security Council summit [see p. 38744].
A joint declaration, "Partnership for the 1990s" , was signed on Jan. 30, which pledged co-operation on nuclear weapons and nuclear materials and in defence matters; the UK would lift the 18-month freeze on export credit insurance for business projects in the former Soviet Union, and would continue to advocate Russia's membership of the IMF.
Following the UN summit, Yeltsin visited Canada and on Feb. 2 signed a declaration of friendship and co-operation with Canadian Prime Minister Brian Mulroney.
Mulroney announced that Canada would give Russia an additional $100 million credit for food purchases.
Rival demonstrations in Moscow
On Feb. 9 large rival demonstrations were held in Moscow, organized by supporters and opponents of the government.
Some 10,000-15,000 supporters of Yeltsin rallied outside the Russian Supreme Soviet building, known as the White House.
Neo-communist groups demonstrated outside the Kremlin, but were prevented by police from marching on the White House.
The anti-Yeltsin group, numbered at 50,000, appeared to be made up mainly of pensioners, protesting at the price rises and economic hardship.
Another rally on Feb. 23 provoked violence against the police as about 10,000 people rallied to call for the return of the Soviet Union as a unified state.
Scuffles ensued when the demonstrators tried to break through a police cordon preventing them from marching to the tomb of the unknown soldier.
The demonstration was organized to coincide with what used to be Armed Forces Day.
For 1992, it had been renamed the Day of the Defenders of the [unspecified]Homeland.
Speakers at the demonstration included a former general, Albert Makashov, dismissed after the August 1991 coup attempt, Col. Viktor Alksnis, and the leader of the Liberal Democratic Party, Vladimir Zhirinovsky, who had been a candidate in the Russian presidential elections of June 1991 [see p. 38273].
All were characterized as conservatives, who wanted to restore the unified state of the Soviet Union.
In a related development, the constituent congress of the Fatherland (Otchizna) group was held on Feb. 25.
Described as "red patriots" the group had only eight deputies in the Supreme Soviet, but observers noted that the ideas which it promoted were gathering increasing support in Russia.
Economy
The rouble rose in value during February from 110 to 70 roubles to the US dollar.
Radio of Russia on Feb. 16 said that Russian enterprises had a powerful incentive to acquire roubles, and that because of a lack of roubles, they were being forced to put goods on the market which they had been trying to hold back.
The Economist of Feb. 29 noted that enterprises were selling dollars in increasing amounts, and suggested that although the shortage of rouble notes was a major reason for the rise in the rouble's value, monetary pressure could also be a factor.
The Russian budget deficit was in danger of being inflated by measures forced on the government in order to maintain levels of social protection, and by lower tax revenues caused by non-payment.
Value added tax on food was reduced in February from 28 to 15 per cent.
Pensions would rise by 200 roubles per month, to bring them to a minimum of 550 roubles, which was the new estimated amount needed to maintain a minimum standard of living.
Aleksandr Shokhin, the minister in charge of social protection, said at a news conference on Feb. 5 that price rises since January had been in the region of 300-350 per cent rather than the 250 per cent anticipated by the government.
The changes in the planned economic reform programme were described by Gaidar as "technical adjustments" .
It had been decided to go ahead with arms sales on the open market, it was announced on Feb. 3, because of the need for revenue, especially in hard currency.
Part of the profit would go towards improving pay and conditions for army officers.
An arms trade committee, the function of which would be to issue export licences to enterprises, was in preparation.
According to the Petr Aven, who on Feb. 24 became minister of the newly created Ministry of Foreign Economic Relations, the committee would draw up a list of prohibited types of armaments and of countries to which arms sales were prohibited.
Rossiskaya gazeta of Feb. 20 published the full text of Yeltsin's decree of Jan. 29 on accelerating privatization.
This elaborated temporary measures for implementing the planned sale of state-owned enterprises.
Some of the problems associated with large-scale privatization became clear on Feb. 28 when Anatoly Chubais, the chair of the Committee for Property Management with responsibility for implementing privatization, revealed at a news conference that prosecutors were investigating an incident of "privatization by nomenklatura" (former communist party officials).
High-ranking officials were said to be rigging privatization to their own advantage, using their influence in local administrations.
On Feb. 3 the Russian Information Agency reported further economic legislation in the form of a decree by Yeltsin, permitting free trade and middleman activities by enterprises or individuals.
Under the decree, which was intended to create the mechanisms of a free market to replace the administratively determined distribution system of the old Soviet economic system, local governments were ordered to organize facilities for wholesale markets in cities.
Peasants' congress — Rutskoi's appointment to head agricultural reforms
The third congress of the Association of Private Peasant Farms and Agricultural Co-operatives of Russia was held in Moscow on Feb. 3-5.
As of the beginning of 1992, there were 60,000 private farms registered in Russia, compared with 4,500 a year earlier.
It was noted that private farms faced difficulties both in obtaining equipment and because of poor sales and transport networks.
In his address to the congress, the chair of the Russian Supreme Soviet, Ruslan Khasbulatov, expressed support for the continued existence of collective and state-owned farms as the most effective way to provide food at the present time.
Khasbulatov also said that only 10 per cent of the population were living in satisfactory conditions, and that Russia was experiencing the "pauperization and lumpenization" of its people.
The chair of the Association, Vladimir Bashmachnikov, claimed, however, that rather than strengthening the network of private farms, the Russian leadership was destroying the collective farm system
Gaidar (as Deputy Premier in charge of economic reform — see below for his transfer to the Finance Ministry) pledged government help for the farmers, promising that they would continue to be eligible for preferential loans, and that a draft bill to release farmers' sons from military service was in preparation.
He supported the demand for private farmers to be allowed the use of firearms to combat rising crime against them.
Gennady Burbulis, First Deputy Prime Minister, also addressed the congress.
The delegates supported a motion to create a co-operative bank network, the capital for which would come from part of the government subsidies to farmers for 1992 of 6,500 million roubles.
Independently of the Association of Peasant Farmers, the Russian Peasants' Party's second extraordinary congress opened on Feb. 1.
Delegates demanded (without result) that Yeltsin and other government members attend the congress.
The chair of the Peasants' Party, Yury Chernichenko, read an appeal to Yeltsin, which protested against the appointment of collective and state farm chairmen to head the commissions for the privatization of state and collective farms.
The introduction of an obligatory consignment of 25 per cent of farm produce from individual farms to the state was said to be the potential means of bankrupting private farmers, as it would be administered by the nomenklatura (the local authorities).
At the Russian Supreme Soviet session on Feb. 13 it was announced that responsibility for farm reform would be taken on by Russian Vice-President Aleksandr Rutskoi, whose public criticism of Yeltsin's economic reform had become increasingly sharp over previous weeks.
At a meeting of "patriotic groups" on Feb. 8-9, numbering 1,000 delegates, Rutskoi had described the government's policy as "economic genocide" .
It had been announced on Feb. 4 that food supplies in Russia stood at a critical level, with stocks about to run out within 20-40 days.
The Russian Ministry of Trade and Material Resources blamed this on the failure of Russia's neighbours, particularly Ukraine and Byelarus, to fulfil agreements on food supplies.
Creation of new ministries
A presidential decree of Jan. 24 established the Russian Federation Ministry of Security (RFMS), on the basis of the Russian Federal Security Agency [see pp. 38654; 38731]and the Inter-Republican Security Service, which had been the successor to the USSR KGB [see p. 38654]and had then been incorporated into the Russian Ministry of Security and Internal Affairs, abolished in January as being unconstitutional [see p. 38731].
Reorganization of these two bodies into the RFMS was to be completed by July 1992, and the Minister would be appointed by the President.
It was reported on Feb. 6 that a presidential decree of Jan. 29 had set up the Atomic Energy Ministry (Minatom) of the Russian Federation.
It was to be the successor to the USSR Ministry of Atomic Power Engineering and Industry in matters concerning the Russian Federation, and was to take over its property on Russian territory.
The decree stated that within three months negotiations with other CIS member-states and former Soviet republics would establish co-ordinating mechanisms for the safe use of atomic energy.
As of Feb. 24 the Ministry of Economics and Finance was divided into two.
Gaidar was made Minister of Finance, and Andrei Nechayev (Gaidar's first deputy) became Minister of the Economy.
EUROPE
UKRAINE
Kravchuk's visit to Germany
Ukrainian President Leonid Kravchuk made a 24-hour visit to Germany on Feb. 3-4, accompanied by the Ministers for Foreign Affairs and for Foreign Economic Relations, Anatoly Zlenko and Valery Kravchenko.
During the course of meetings with Federal Chancellor Helmut Kohl and other officials, Kravchuk said that Ukraine intended to become nuclear-free by 1994, and confirmed that Ukraine's armed forces would have a maximum strength of 220,000.
However, he emphasised that Ukraine wanted a share of the resources allocated to the former Soviet Union by Germany, for resettling on its territory some of the former Soviet servicemen who were to be withdrawn from Germany by 1994 [see p. 38354].
The Ukrainian delegation also reiterated Ukraine's refusal to form a common agreement with the other former Soviet republics on servicing the Soviet Union's foreign debt, although Ukraine did not dispute responsibility for its 16.37 per cent share.
Kravchuk proposed holding a conference to arrange repayment and appointing a Western bank to manage it.
German Finance Minister Theo Waigel, however, emphasized Germany's preference that Ukraine sign the G-7 October 1991 memorandum of understanding on joint responsibility for servicing the debt [see p. 38537].
The Ukrainian delegation offered to resettle in Ukraine the ethnic Germans who were forcibly deported from Ukraine during the Second World War.
Five million roubles had already been allocated to aid resettlement, and a presidential decree had created the legal prerequisites.
The German Secretary of State for the Interior, Horst Waffenschmidt, proposed a bilateral working group to discuss its implementation.
Observers noted that Kravchuk's offer, and specifically the offer to settle the ethnic Germans [for whose status see below], could be seen as a snub to the Russian Republic, whose hesitancy in creating a Volga republic for the deported German population had been a topic of discussion in the Russian Foreign Minister's recent visit to Bonn [see also p. 38730].
German officials noted Ukraine's successes in dealing with national minorities on its territory, suggesting this as an example to other Commonwealth of Independent States (CIS) member countries.
Ukrainian government issues
On Feb. 20 the Ukrainian Supreme Soviet approved the first draft of a bill to alter the administrative system.
Kravchuk had requested increased presidential powers on Jan. 28, and in addition a new constitution was under discussion.
Under the new regulations, local representatives with power to enforce presidential and parliamentary decrees would be appointed.
On Jan. 30 the Ukrainian Supreme Soviet had adopted a law allowing private, state or co-operative ownership of land.
On Feb. 21 Kravchuk held talks with opposition representatives on the possibility of forming a coalition government.
He called for new elections and promised to replace half the Cabinet.
Deputies had criticized the government of Prime Minister Vitold Fokin for its alleged lethargic attitude to economic reform.
Dispute over Crimea
A delegation of Ukrainian Supreme Soviet deputies, led by the deputy chair Volodimir Hrynov, visited Crimea on Feb. 5 and held talks with members of the Crimean Supreme Soviet.
In a statement issued after the meeting, the participants recognised the need to demarcate powers between Crimea and Ukraine [for February 1991 restoration of Crimea's autonomous status within Ukraine see p. 38015].
On the following day the Ukrainian Supreme Soviet debated the status of Crimea in the light of the Russian Supreme Soviet decision of Jan. 23 to re-examine its transfer in 1954 from Russian to Ukrainian jurisdiction [see p. 38732].
In a statement, deputies noted that the Jan. 23 decision ran contrary to a number of treaties including the Dec. 8 agreement on the formation of the Commonwealth of Independent States [see p. 38654]and the 1975 CSCE Helsinki Final Act.
The Russian Supreme Soviet decided on Feb. 6 (the date by which the final report on Crimea's status was to have been completed) to set up a commission, with Foreign Affairs Ministry participation, "to study all the circumstances of the legal grounds of the decision taken in 1954" .
The Crimean Supreme Soviet resolved on Feb. 26 to change the name of the autonomous republic from the Crimean Autonomous Soviet Socialist Republic to the Crimea Republic (Respublika Krym).
EUROPE
GEORGIA
Resistence to new government
The crisis in Georgia continued during February, with demonstrations in Tbilisi and major cities in the west in support of deposed President Zviad Gamsakhurdia.
Despite the banning of rallies in Tbilisi on Feb. 1, pro-Gamsakhurdia demonstrations continued in early February.
On Feb. 2, National Guardsmen forcibly dispersed a meeting, killing two people and injuring several others.
A leading member of the Military Council, Dzhaba Iosseliani, said on Feb. 5 that all "pro-Gamsakhurdia provocateurs" would be shot on the spot.
On Feb. 6, with the agreement of the authorities in the Georgian autonomous republic of Abkhazia, government troops established control in Sukhumi, where rallies in support of the deposed President had been taking place daily.
Tbilisi's airport was reopened, putting an end to the transportation blockade of the city.
Civil disobedience continued in many cities in western Georgia.
In his first appearance since his attempted return from exile on Jan. 6 [see p. 38731], Gamsakhurdia held a press conference on Feb. 18 in Grozny, capital of the Russian autonomous republic of Chechen-Ingushetia.
He condemned the "junta" in Tbilisi and vowed to continue his struggle for the restoration of "lawful authority" in Georgia.
Internal political developments
Speaking in Moscow on Feb. 10, Georgian Prime Minister Tengiz Sigua described the economic situation in his republic as very grave, with severe shortages of basic foodstuffs and fuel.
Sigua said that he was hoping for economic aid and credits from the USA and Iran and for bilateral trade agreements with Commonwealth of Independent States (CIS) countries to relieve the situation.
Georgian observers attended the meeting of CIS heads of state held in Minsk on Feb. 14 [see p. 38771], but the republic would make no decision about joining the Commonwealth until after the election of a new parliament.
On Feb. 21 the Military Council announced that it had restored the 1921 Constitution of the Georgian Democratic Republic.
EUROPE
AZERBAIJAN/ARMENIA
Failure of peace initiatives
Fighting intensified during February around the regional capital, Stepanakert, in Nagorny Karabakh, the disputed and mainly Armenian-inhabited enclave within the territory of Azerbaijan.
Following the admission of both Azerbaijan and Armenia to the Conference on Security and Co-operation in Europe (CSCE) in January and to the UN in February [see p. 38745], leaders in Russia, Armenia and Nagorny Karabakh called for the involvement of CSCE representatives and UN forces to guarantee peace, but the Azerbaijani leadership resisted attempts to "internationalize" the conflict, and on Feb. 5 vetoed the deployment of peacekeeping forces.
A CSCE mission was nevertheless permitted to visit Nagorny Karabakh on Feb. 12, and on Feb. 17 Hassan Hasanov, the Azerbaijani Prime Minister, arrived in Brussels to attend a session of the European Parliament and a meeting of NATO's Political Council, where he spoke about the background to the conflict.
On Feb. 20 Raffi Hovhannesyan and Hussein Sadikhov, respectively the Foreign Ministers of Armenia and Azerbaijan, met for peace talks in Moscow.
They called for a ceasefire in the region and for access for humanitarian aid deliveries.
Azerbaijani President Ayaz Mutalibov failed, however, to attend talks scheduled for the same day with Russian President Boris Yeltsin and Armenian President Levon Ter-Petrosyan.
Mutalibov faced increasing pressure as demonstrators in Baku, the Azerbaijani capital, called for his resignation, and the republic's parliament refused to endorse his proposed peace plan (involving cultural autonomy for Nagorny Karabakh within Azerbaijan).
On Feb. 25 the Iranian Foreign Minister Ali Akbar Vellayati flew into Baku for talks with both sides as a prelude to mediation.
An Iranian-brokered ceasefire, due to start on Feb. 27 to enable Vellayati to visit the enclave, failed to hold, however, and on Feb. 28 he flew direct to Yerevan, the Armenian capital.
Meanwhile on Feb. 25 Armenian troops had taken the village of Khodzhaly, north of Stepanakert, and Azeri sources claimed that these troops had murdered more than 1,000 of the town's fleeing Azeri inhabitants.
The attack came in response to massive Azerbaijani shelling of Stepanakert with Grad rockets — proscribed weapons of mass destruction — and attacks against Armenian-populated villages in the north-east.
Several Commonwealth of Independent States (CIS) servicemen were killed in Stepanakert, and on Feb. 28 the CIS C.-in-C.
Marshal Yevegny Shaposhnikov ordered the immediate withdrawal of all remaining CIS troops from the region [for December 1991 decision to withdraw troops see p. 38655].
EUROPE
LITHUANIA
Demands for troop withdrawal from Kaliningrad
In an address to the Lithuanian Supreme Council (parliament) on Feb. 16 to mark the anniversary of Lithuanian Independence Day in 1918, President Vytautas Landsbergis made a demand for former Soviet armed forces to be withdrawn from the Russian enclave of Kaliningrad oblast (region).
Despite the February agreement with Russia on troop withdrawal [see p. 38771], Landsbergis said that the troop concentration in Kaliningrad "has already become a historical anachronism, a threat to all its Baltic neighbours, and this threat will always be the greatest to us" .
Kalinigrad (formerly Königsberg), the base of the Baltic Fleet and a highly militarized zone, was separated from the rest of Russia by Lithuanian territory.
Landsbergis's remarks came in the context of ongoing negotiations between Lithuania and Kaliningrad concerning border issues; a draft agreement was due to be submitted by July 1, 1992.
Landsbergis reiterated his demand for troop withdrawal in an interview for Radio Moscow's World Service on Feb. 19, saying that "army units [in Kaliningrad]may be viewed as a survival of the former policy and ideology of the Soviet empire, which was always prepared to expand its influence and possessions" .
EUROPE
POLAND
New government's economic policy
The government's socio-economic policy was unveiled at a joint press conference on Feb. 17 by Prime Minister Jan Olszewski, Acting Head of Ownership Transformation Tomasz Gruszecki and Jerzy Eysmontt, Minister Director of the Central Planning Office and Chair of the Economic Committee of the Council of Ministers.
Its key element was a relaxation of the past two years' tight monetary controls in an effort to halt recession.
The government's state-of-the-nation report on Feb. 10 had acknowledged the achievements of 1989-91, but also the present critical state of the economy.
The new policy shifted emphasis away from fighting inflation, aiming to halt recession through greater investment in state enterprises and by boosting exports.
Calling for an increase of the money supply above the expected level of inflation to improve liquidity in the economy, Eysymontt stressed that monetary expansion would be within well-defined limits, after consultation with the Central Bank (NBP).
The government expected inflation to slow from 60 per cent to 40-45 per cent in 1992, and aimed to limit the budget deficit to within 5 per cent of GDP.
Tougher wage controls would attempt to cut real incomes by 5 per cent, and taxes would be raised on consumer goods and some luxury items.
Extra funds were earmarked for the reorganization of public administration in the police, the army, the judiciary and the civil and diplomatic services.
The Solidarity trade union and the Senate (upper chamber of parliament) health and social policy committee rejected the policy as too vague and internally contradictory.
On Feb. 26 the policy was presented to the Sejm (lower chamber), which referred it for a report by its economic, finance and budgetary committee.
As from Feb. 26 the zloty was devalued by 12 per cent against a basket of five Western currencies.
This devaluation was on top of the regular 1.8 per cent monthly "crawling devaluation" in place since October 1991.
(As at March 2, 1992, US$1.00=Zl13,254.9.)
Resignation of Finance Minister
On Feb. 17 Finance Minister Karol Lutkowski resigned in disagreement with the new socio-economic policy, citing fears that relaxing monetary controls could refuel hyperinflation as well as lead to a greater budget deficit than targeted.
The Sejm accepted his resignation on Feb. 19 and approved Andrzej Olechowski as his successor on Feb. 28.
Visit of IMF delegation
On Feb. 11 an IMF delegation visited Poland to discuss the economic programme and the 1992 budget.
Debt reduction and rescheduling agreements with several of Poland's Western creditor countries were dependent on conditions set by a 1991 agreement with the IMF.
Following concern that the IMF would react unfavourably to the new socio-economic policy and to Lutkowski's resignation, Olszewski stated that talks with the IMF were continuing over target figures.
He denied any conflict with the IMF over his policy.
On Feb. 20 an agreement with Germany first planned in April 1991 was officially finalized, forgiving half of Poland's DM9,100 million (about US$5,520 million) debt to Germany and setting an 18-year repayment schedule for the rest.
Resolution declaring martial law illegal
On Feb. 1 the Sejm passed by 220 votes to six (with 38 abstentions) a resolution declaring illegal the introduction of martial law on Dec. 13, 1981 [see pp. 31389-401].
In an emotional debate, all Democratic Left Alliance (SLD) deputies walked out in protest, claiming that they had been insulted by Confederation for an Independent Poland (KPN) leader Leszek Moczulski.
In a letter to Sejm Speaker Wieslaw Chrzanowski, the former President, Gen. Wojciech Jaruzelski, said that before voting the Sejm should hear explanations from himself and his colleagues responsible for introducing martial law.
Chrzanowski ruled out inviting Jaruzelski to a Sejm meeting, but told the press that he might be summoned by a special committee, set up as a result of the resolution, to investigate ways of compensating people for wrongs inflicted for political reasons under martial law.
Indictment of generals for murder of Popieluszko
On Feb. 5 the former Under-Secretary of State in the Interior Ministry, Wladyslaw Ciaston, and department director Zenon Platek, were accused of ordering the murder of Fr Jerzy Popieluszko in October 1984 [see pp. 33292-93].
Under arrest on suspicion since October 1990, the two, both of whom held the rank of general under Communist rule, did not plead guilty when indicted in the Warsaw provincial court on Feb. 11.
The trial was set to start in early April 1992.
Local government elections
On Feb. 23 in local government by-elections 692 out of the 1,053 contested seats were won by independent candidates.
Of the new candidates 60 were supported by citizens' committees, 56 by the Polish Peasant Party (PSL), nine by the Democratic Left Alliance (SLD), four by the Centre Alliance (PC), four by the Christian National Union (ZChN), and two by the Confederation for an Independent Poland (KPN).
Visit by German Foreign Minister
On Feb 4, at the end of an official two-day visit, German Foreign Minister Hans-Dietrich Genscher said that Germany would support full membership of the European Communities for Poland.
The timing would depend on economic progress.
Designed to establish contact with Poland's new government, the visit reflected improved Polish-German relations.
Genscher was received by President Lech Walesa (who was to visit Germany in the coming months), by Foreign Minister Krzysztof Skubiszewski, and by representatives of the Sejm and the Senate for talks on Polish-German relations, inter-parliamentary contacts, and Poland's treatment of its German minority.
On Feb. 15 police intervened to break up an illegal demonstration by right-wing extremists at Zgorzelec on the German border.
Amidst calls of "Poland for the Poles" , aggressive behaviour by the demonstrators reportedly provoked incidents with German citizens, and eight demonstrators were arrested.
EUROPE
ALBANIA
Public order bill — Postponement of elections
The People's Assembly began discussion of a new public order bill at the end of January, proposing a series of tough measures aimed at rioters and looters and the establishment of a new intervention force designed to act when public order was threatened.
The bill was introduced in response to a wave of food riots and looting of warehouses used to store foreign aid supplies.
The riots had swept the country during January, and continued throughout February, resulting in dozens of deaths.
On March 2 the Albanian Council of Ministers issued an appeal calling on the public to dissociate itself from rioting and looting.
A demonstration in Tirana, the capital, on Jan. 17, by 20,000 supporters of the Union of Independent Trade Unions of Albania (UITUA), was reportedly followed by a meeting on Jan. 18 between union officials and Prime Minister Vilson Ahmeti, and by promises from Ahmeti that wages would be inflation-adjusted and that social assistance would be given to the unemployed.
UITUA's first national conference on Feb. 10-11 elected Valer Xheka to chair its co-ordinating council.
Postponement of elections — Election law
President Ramiz Alia signed a decree on Feb. 11 which dissolved the People's Assembly and set March 22 as the date for a general election.
The election had originally been planned for March 1, but was postponed because of the need to finalize a new election law, which was approved by the People's Assembly on Feb. 4, and because, according to reports, the government faced difficulties in financing and organizing the election.
The new election law provided for the election of not less than 140 deputies to parliament (previously 250).
There would be 100 single-member constituencies of approximately equal population, with candidates requiring an absolute majority on the first ballot or a simple majority on the second.
The remaining deputies would be elected by proportional representation on party lists, on the basis of the number of first ballot votes won by the party's candidates in the single-member constituencies, and with a minimum threshold of 4 per cent before a party would qualify for such seats.
The most controversial elements of the new law were its provisions defining recognizable and legitimate political parties and groups for electoral purposes.
These effectively banned organizations representing ethnic minorities, including Omonia, the organization representing the Greek minority in Albania, which had five seats in the current parliament.
The ban was denounced by Greece, and the European Communities (EC) issued a statement on Feb. 17 reminding Albania of its human rights commitments under the CSCE treaty.
Alia, however, in a letter on Feb. 19 to Catherine Lalumière, Secretary-General of the Council of Europe, stated that Omonia was excluded because it was not a political party.
The Greek minority, he said, could nominate independent candidates to stand in individual constituencies, and Greeks could also stand and be elected as deputies for other parties.
Albanian attacks on Greeks
The EC's Feb. 17 statement expressed grave concern about attacks on the Greek minority in Albania, and called for the re-establishment of public order by the Albanian government.
Greece also lodged strong protests over nationalist attacks on Greeks and their property in Albania, and over a series of raids on villages on the Greek side of the Greek-Albanian border.
Albanians had complained of the torture and harassment of refugees in Greece.
Trade agreement with EC
Albania and the EC signed an agreement on Feb. 18 in Brussels on the development of various forms of trade and economic co-operation, including the granting of most-favoured-nation status by both sides.
EUROPE
BULGARIA
Trade union opposition
On Feb. 19 the independent Podkrepa (Support) Labour Confederation announced its withdrawal from the June 1991 Agreement on Social Peace (ASP — see p. 38304).
Podkrepa had been one of the founding members of the Union of Democratic Forces (UDF) now in government.
At its second congress on Feb. 8-12, however, it had criticized the government for failing to implement the UDF programme, and called for the replacement of the Cabinet's economic team.
The letter announcing Podkrepa's withdrawal from the ASP highlighted unacceptable government proposals on tripartite co-operation with unions and employers as a reason for its abrogation.
The other principal union body, the Confederation of Independent Trade Unions in Bulgaria (CITUB — the successor to the official trade unions of the former regime) had itself ended on Feb. 10 its no-strike pledge, applied since the formation of the UDF government under Filip Dimitrov in November 1991 [see p. 38583].
It issued a strike threat in support of demands for rises in pensions and wages, a programme for dealing with unemployment and in defence of workers' interests in the context of privatization.
On Feb. 21 the first meeting was held between the new government and the trade unions, but Podkrepa refused to attend the meeting with Dimitrov and other Cabinet members because the CITUB's chair, Krustyu Petkov, was also invited.
At the meeting Petkov expressed concern about the government's economic programme, in particular a proposed wage freeze until the end of 1992.
He reportedly stated that CITUB would not undertake any commitments without first consulting Podkrepa, and did not wish to take advantage of any conflicts between the latter and the government.
At an extraordinary CITUB congress on Feb. 22 Petkov accused the UDF government of aggressive anti-trade unionism, but said that he was not seeking a clash with it.
Economic policy
At the end of January the government froze the prices of 14 staple goods, in a measure which Dimitrov described as anti-market but necessary for social reasons.
On Feb. 13 the government agreed its budget proposals for 1992, envisaging a budgetary deficit of 9,100 million leva (about US$515 million), equivalent to 4.2 per cent of GDP.
The deficit wold be financed by a loan from the National Bank of Bulgaria and the issuing of state bonds.
Various measures connected to the government's economic reform programme were enacted by parliament in February, but a privatisation bill, under discussion in the Assembly, was delayed because of technical difficulties and because of political and trade union opposition.
A new law on foreign investment was passed, abolishing restrictions on the repatriation of profits and foreign ownership of Bulgarian companies, and permitting foreign investors to set up their own enterprises in the country.
Bills on reform of the banking system and the restitution of nationalized properties to their former owners were also approved.
At a press conference in Sofia on Feb. 25 John Wilton, the leader of a World Bank delegation, pointed out that Bulgaria was now the only east European country without a privatization law.
He said that this was the main obstacle to the World Bank releasing the second $250 million tranche of an agreed loan to the country.
Figures on name changes in campaigns of 1980s
The Minister of the Interior stated on Feb. 21, in answer to a parliamentary question, that between 1984 and 1989 the names of 820,000 Bulgarian Moslems and ethnic Turks had been changed in the Bulgarian cultural nationalism campaigns encouraged in the latter years of the communist regime under Todor Zhivkov [see pp. 33670; 34509-10; 35520-21; 36305; 36662].
Party leadership change
Milan Drenchev, the leader of the Nikola Petkov Bulgarian National Agrarian Union (BZNS), was replaced at an extraordinary party congress on Feb. 15-16 by Anastasiya Moser, the daughter of a noted agrarian leader, G. M. Dimitrov, who had emigrated to the USA in the mid 1940s.
Moser, who had returned to the country from the USA on the eve of the party congress, advocated close co-operation with the ruling UDF alliance.
Franco-Bulgarian treaty
A Bulgarian-French treaty of friendship and co-operation was signed by President Zhelyu Zhelev and President Mitterrand of France in Paris on Feb. 18.
The 10-year treaty provided for economic and political co-operation between the two states and for regular high-level political consultations, and committed France to sponsoring an association agreement between Bulgaria and the European Communities (EC) leading eventually to EC membership for Bulgaria.
Energy crisis
Bulgaria faced an energy crisis during February after a series of faults at its Kozloduy nuclear plant, which supplied 40 per cent of the country's electricity.
The plant had been criticized as being "in very poor condition" by an IAEA inspection in 1991, after which the two oldest reactors had been shut down [see pp. 38350-51].
Repeated attempts to start up a newly refitted reactor were delayed by a series of minor faults, including a small fire, insulation problems, and pump failures.
After the shutdown of a further reactor on Feb. 3 (leaving only two fully operational), limited power cuts were introduced.
The problems were compounded by a shortage of coal and natural gas and uncertainty over supplies of oil from the former Soviet Union.
The state-owned Burgas petrochemical company announced on Jan. 29 that petrol supplies were exhausted, and would not resume in the near future.
It was announced on Feb. 18 that energy prices would increase by 30 per cent from April 1.
EUROPE
CZECHOSLOVAKIA
Constitutional talks — Slovak rejection of draft proposals
The negotiations on the country's constitutional framework appeared to be on the verge of a breakthrough in early February, when a joint commission of the Czech and Slovak National Councils (republican parliaments) agreed on a draft text defining the relationship of the republics in a future federation.
However, subsequent decisions by the Slovak National Council threw doubt on the viability of the agreement.
Popularly called the "Milovy agreement" (after the location of the commission's meetings), the document declared that the peoples of the Czech Republic and the Slovak Republic "recognize each other 's sovereignty" and that "we express our will to live in a common state" .
Its key provisions were that (i) foreign, defence and monetary policy would remain the responsibility of the federation;(ii) the two republics would be represented equally in federal bodies;(iii) each republic would have the right to sign international treaties in areas of regional concern (to be defined in a future constitution); and (iv) each republic would have the right to leave the federation after a referendum.
The Presidium of the Czech National Council approved the draft on Feb. 12, describing it as "the basic point of departure for the talks…on the final wording of the agreement" , but the Presidium of the Slovak National Council rejected it on the grounds that the Slovak delegation had made too many concessions.
The vote in the 20-member body was tied, however, and senior political leaders from several parties expressed the view that the preliminary decision did not present a bar to further negotiations.
The full Slovak National Council, meeting on Feb. 25, noted the decision of its Presidium and recommended that the political parties represented in the assembly submit their comments and proposals on the draft by March 2.
Privatization developments
The privatization of the state-owned economy took a further step on Feb. 17 with the start of the preliminary or "zero" round, under which investors were allowed to start placing their vouchers in any of the 437 officially sanctioned investment funds [for details of privatization programme see pp. 38584-85; 38734].
Many funds were promising substantial returns, in some cases up 10 times the invested value within a year, and for this reason the number of citizens choosing to place their investments with them exceeding predictions.
Opinion polls suggested that about a third of the 8,400,000 people who had been issued vouchers intended to place them with funds set up by banks or private financial groups.
The deadline for registration, which had been extended in January, expired on Feb. 29.
The first round of privatization was due to start in late March.
Appointment of Constitutional Court
President Vaclav Havel on Jan. 31 appointed the 12 judges of the Constitutional Court, based in Brno, the Moravian capital.
As provided for in the relevant legislation passed in February 1991 [see p. 38018], six of the judges were Czech citizens and six Slovak citizens; they were chosen by the President from lists submitted by the federal and the two republican parliaments and would serve for seven-year terms.
Ernest Valko, who was appointed the chair of the court, declared on Feb. 12 that all the judges had accepted a recommendation not to be active politically.
Although the law explicitly allowed judges to be members of political parties, it was felt that suspension of involvement would be in keeping with the court's function to provide independent rulings.
Friendship treaties with Germany and Russia
Havel and the German Chancellor, Helmut Kohl, signed a treaty of goodneighbourliness and co-operation between Czechoslovakia and Germany on Feb. 27.
Initialled in October 1991 [see p. 38541], the treaty had become the focus of considerable controversy in both countries.
It was criticized in Czechoslovakia for lacking a clause annulling the 1938 Munich Agreement which had led to the dismemberment of Czechoslovakia, and in Germany for lacking provisions on the property rights of the 2,000,000 Sudeten Germans expelled from Czechoslovakia after the end of the Second World War.
The law on restitution of private property seized under communist rule passed in May 1991 [see p. 38207]specifically ruled out restitution to Sudeten Germans.
In the event the initialled text was signed without amendments.
Both leaders admitted that several issues remained unresolved by the treaty, but they described it as a good basis for the development of future bilateral relations.
The signing of the treaty was the highlight of a two-day visit by Kohl to Prague and Bratislava.
In both cities he underlined his government's commitment to early Czechoslovak membership of the European Communities (EC).
Czechoslovakia and Russia on Feb. 18 initialled a new bilateral friendship treaty, replacing the treaty applying under communist rule between Czechoslovakia and the Soviet Union.
The text was based on a draft treaty between Czechoslovakia and the Soviet Union initialled in October 1991 but never signed [see pp. 38540-41].
In a key passage the treaty declared that neither country would "permit the use of their territories for the purpose of aggression or any other acts of violence against the other contracting party" .
The second draft of the treaty contained a change in the section referring to the Soviet-led invasion of Czechoslovakia which had ended the Prague Spring in 1968.
The earlier draft referred to the treaty constituting a break with the past, but the wording was now strengthened to specify "a definitive break with the totalitarian past linked to the use of force against Czechoslovakia" .
Both sides declared that the treaty thus contained, for the first time, an "honest" interpretation of the 1968 events.
EUROPE
HUNGARY-CZECHOSLOVAKIA
Dispute over dam
Tension between Hungary and Czechoslovakia over the Gabcikovo hydro-electric dam project increased during February, as Czechoslovakia prepared to resume work on the project, contrary to Hungarian wishes.
The dam was sited on the Danube frontier between the two states.
Originally conceived as the joint Gabcikovo-Nagymáros project under a 1977 agreement, work on the dam was suspended after Hungary withdrew from the scheme in 1989 [see p. 37048].
Environmentalists had criticized the project on the grounds that it would damage the Danube valley ecosystem.
The Czechoslovak government had in July 1991 announced its intention to resume work [see p. 38351].
Czechoslovak Prime Minister Marian Calfa declared on Feb. 5 that work would recommence on the basis of the so-called "C" scheme, which envisaged the diversion of Danube waters.
Earlier, Czechoslovak officials had said that the delay in construction was costing the country the equivalent of US$233,000,000 every year.
The issue was raised inconclusively in talks between Hungarian President Arpad Göncz and the Chairman of the Czechoslovak Federal Assembly, Alexander Dubcek, during a visit by the latter to Budapest on Feb. 6-7.
On Feb. 14 the Hungarian government appealed to the Czechoslovaks to halt the "illegal and unacceptable" Danube diversion work.
EUROPE
HUNGARY
Divisions within Smallholders' Party
During February continuing divisions within the Independent Smallholders' Party (FKgP — see also p. 38585) appeared to threaten the coalition of Prime Minister Jozsef Antall, which also comprised Antall's own Hungarian Democratic Forum (MDF) and the Christian Democratic People's Party (KDNP).
On Feb. 21 the FKgP's controversial chair, Jozsef Torgyan, announced that the party was withdrawing from the coalition on the grounds that the MDF had frustrated its attempts to influence government policy.
Of the 45 Smallholder deputies 33 (led by Gyula Pasztor) were expelled from the party, prompting them to call a mini-congress on Feb. 22 in Budapest, attended by nearly 4,000 supporters who reaffirmed their support for the Antall government.
Antall asserted on Feb. 23 that the coalition was not threatened, and expressed the hope that as many as possible of the 12-strong minority Torgyan faction in the FKgP would decide to support the government.
The following day the faction was reduced to 10 deputies, although its rally on March 1 in Szeged, 150 km south-east of Budapest, was attended by 4,500 people.
Cabinet resignation
On Feb. 26 it was reported that Andras Galszecsy had resigned as Minister without Portfolio in charge of national security affairs.
Price liberalization
On Feb. 11 the National Assembly approved legislation abolishing the last remaining centrally fixed food prices; nearly all retail prices in Hungary were thus liberalized.
Prices continued to be fixed centrally only for postal services, electricity and gas supplies, water rates and water transport, and radio and television licences.
Relations with Germany and Spain
Antall and German Chancellor Helmut Kohl signed a bilateral friendship and co-operation treaty in Budapest on Feb. 6.
The treaty included (i) a promise to work "to create a Europe in which human rights…are respected" ;(ii) German support for Hungarian membership of the European Communities (EC) "as soon as the political and economic prerequisites are fulfilled" ;(iii) German support for the development of a social market economy in Hungary; and (iv) a Hungarian undertaking to "take concrete steps to promote the protection and strengthening of the identity of the German minority" in Hungary.
In Madrid on Feb. 6 Hungarian Foreign Minister Geza Jeszenszky signed a friendship and co-operation agreement with Spain.
Under the agreement Spain declared its support for full Hungarian membership of the EC as soon as possible.
EUROPE
ROMANIA
Local elections
The first multiparty local elections in Romania for 45 years, held on Feb. 9, 16, and 28, demonstrated significant loss of support for the ruling National Salvation Front (NSF) compared with the parliamentary elections held in May 1990 [see p. 37441].
The Democratic Convention (an alliance of 14 opposition parties) gained substantial support.
In the first round of voting on Feb. 9 (which saw a turnout of 64.91 per cent), 1,340 mayoral posts out of 2,951 were won outright (for which over 50 per cent of votes cast in each constituency was necessary).
The NSF won 764 posts (57.01 per cent), the Democratic Convention 100 (7.46 per cent ), the Hungarian Democratic Union of Romania (HDUR) 117 (8.73 per cent ), the Agrarian Democratic Party (ADP) 70 (5.22 per cent ), and the ultra-nationalist Romanian National Unity Party (RNUP) 38 (2.84 per cent ).
In voting for councillors, 38,946 were elected on the first round out of the total of 40,178, with the NSF winning 15,670 seats (40.24 per cent), the Democratic Convention 8,088 (20.77 per cent ), the ADP 4,532 (11.64 per cent ), the HDUR 2,606 (6.69 per cent ), independents 2,425 (6.23 per cent ), and the RNUP 1,508 (3.87 per cent ).
The elections were deemed by foreign observers to have been held without widescale irregularities, although cases were reported in a few localities.
In Tirgu Mures, the HDUR candidate for mayor had been deemed ineligible to stand by a local court; the party then supported an independent candidate, who won the election but then resigned after revelations that his nomination papers were irregular.
No election was held in the village of Sapinta, Maramures county, after clashes between supporters of the former mayor, who had been disqualified from standing, and those of another candidate.
The government decided on Feb. 19 that elections should be held in such localities on April 19.
Run-off elections were held in a second round of voting on Feb. 16 and 23 where no candidate had obtained a simple majority in the first round.
In this second round the NSF won 617 mayoral posts (39.7 per cent), independents 468 (30.1 per cent ) and the Democratic Convention 151 (9.7 per cent ).
Following the second round, the Democratic Convention held the mayoralties of all six sectors of Bucharest and its candidate, Crin Halaicu, was elected general mayor of the capital with 56 per cent of the vote against 44 per cent for his NSF opponent.
The Democratic Convention also won the mayoralties of the important cities of Brasov, Constanta, Ploiesti, Sibiu and Arad (having won Timisoara in the first round, with 64 per cent of votes).
Cluj-Napoca was won by the RNUP.
It was announced on Feb. 28 that further voting to complete the local elections would be held on March 1 and 8, as well as on April 19.
Disagreement between government and trade unions over minimum wage
On Feb. 5 Prime Minister Theodor Stoloyan met representatives of the National Advisory Council of Trade Unions and the Employers' Association to discuss a collective labour agreement, but a government spokesman described their talks (which had begun in January) as deadlocked; the government claimed that a minimum monthly wage of 24,000 lei (US$1.00=194.967 lei as at Feb. 3, 1992), as demanded by the trade unions, would lead to a rise in the number of unemployed from 700,000 to 2,550,000.
Up to 15,000 members of the three big union confederations incorporated in the National Advisory Council — Fratia, Alfa and the National Council of Free Trade Unions of Romania — on Feb. 14 held a protest rally in Bucharest against the government's economic and wages policy.
It was reported on Feb. 17 that workers in over 20 enterprises in the port of Galati had been striking against the state of negotiations on the national labour agreement.
The trade unions on Feb. 20 warned that if the issue of the labour agreement was not settled soon, union actions over pay would start, which might lead to the blocking of activity in key economic sectors.
Senate dismissals
The Senate on Feb. 13 removed five of its members who also held important official posts, in order to comply with the legal requirement that senators could not also hold high public office.
Following the earlier removal of Karoly Kiraly from the Senate for not voting on the new Constitution [for which see p. 38586], and the death of one other senator, this left seven seats vacant in the 119-seat Senate.
Relations with Moldova
Mircea Snegur, the President of Moldova, held talks with the Romanian President, Ion Iliescu, on Feb. 3 during a stopover at Bucharest airport on his way home from the World Economic Forum in Davos, Switzerland.
Further such talks were held during another stopover at Bucharest by Snegur on Feb. 17 on his way to the USA, when he met Iliescu, Stolojan, and Foreign Minister Adrian Nastase.
The talks covered the creation of a free-trade area between the two states, improved operation of additional crossing points and border trade, Moldova's future diplomatic links with other countries, and Romania's assistance in this.
Nastase on Feb. 21 rejected domestic criticism that the government was not doing enough to bring about the reunion of Romania and Moldova (divided when Moldova was annexed by the Soviet Union in 1940).
He said that the government's actions were aimed at bringing the two states closer and promoting integration.
Romania and Moldova concluded a bilateral long-term trade agreement in early February.
Relations with Hungary
Nastase held talks with the Hungarian Foreign Minister, Geza Jeszenszky, on Feb. 6 in Spain, where both were on an official visit [see below].
They discussed improving Romanian-Hungarian relations and other international issues.
A Hungarian military delegation led by Lt.-Gen.
Antal Annus, Secretary of State at the Ministry of Defence, visited Romania on Feb. 29-March 1, holding talks with Lt.-Gen.
Nicolae Spiroiu, the Romanian Defence Minister, on developing military co-operation between the two countries.
The "Open Skies" agreement signed by Romania and Hungary in May 1991, which enabled both countries to carry out surveillance flights over each other 's territory, came into force on Feb. 27.
Other foreign relations
A protocol on the establishment of diplomatic relations between Romania and Byelarus was signed on Feb. 14 during a two-day visit to Romania by Petr Kravchenko, the Byelarus Foreign Minister, who also held talks with Iliescu, Stolojan and Nastase.
During his visit to Spain on Feb. 5-6, Nastase met the Spanish Prime Minister, Felipe González Márquez, and signed agreements on bilateral co-operation in various fields with Spanish Foreign Minister Francisco Fernández Ordóñez.
Nastase also held talks with Chinese Foreign Minister Qian Qichen, who was also on an official visit to Spain.
EUROPE
YUGOSLAVIA
Imminent dispatch of UN peacekeeping force
As sporadic violations of the Jan. 3 ceasefire continued in Croatia, preparations for the dispatch there of a 14,000-strong UN peacekeeping force, one of the largest in the history of the UN, went ahead in late February in accordance with a UN peace plan agreed in January [see p. 38704].
Although this plan had the endorsement of Serbian leaders including Slobodan Milosevic, the President of Serbia, the troop dispatch had been delayed because Milan Babic, leader of the self-proclaimed "Serbian Republic of Krajina" within Croatian territory [see p. 38685], rejected the idea of the deployment of UN forces in ethnically mixed areas of Croatia, conceding only that they should be stationed on the front line between Serbian and Croatian forces.
After 40 hours on Jan. 31-Feb. 2 of fraught meetings with government officials from the republic of Serbia and Yugoslav generals, Krajina leaders led by Mile Paspalj, president of the Krajina assembly, agreed to the UN peace plan while Babic was taking a break.
Later on Feb. 2 Babic again rejected the peace plan, stating the following day that the participants at the meetings had been subjected to heavy pressure and physical assault from Serbian leaders and that Paspalj had been coerced into signing.
However support in Krajina for Babic continued to disintegrate under intensified pressure from Serbian leaders and a Serbian media campaign against him, and on Feb. 4 the leader of the newly formed Serbian Democratic Party, Jovan Raskovic, called for the removal of Babic from power.
The UN Security Council heard on Feb. 6 from UN special envoy Cyrus Vance that Franjo Tudjman, the Croatian President, had given him Croatia's "full and unconditional acceptance" of the UN plan to deploy forces in special UN Protected Areas.
However, fearing that the UN force would legitimize the loss of its territory to Serbia, Croatia also continued to insist that the force should be deployed only on the 560-km front lines and only for a period of six months.
The Security Council on Feb. 7 adopted a resolution calling on Serbian leaders to accept the UN peace plan, increasing the number of UN military liaison officers (UNMLO) in Yugoslavia from 50 to 75, and stressing that the implementation of the peace plan "is in no way intended to prejudge the terms of a political settlement" .
The extra 25 UNMLOs arrived on Feb. 11.
The decision on troop dispatch was further delayed when the Krajina assembly voted in Knin on Feb. 10 to hold a referendum on Feb. 22-23 on whether the enclave should accept the UN peacekeeping plan unconditionally.
(The referendum was subsequently postponed until March 7-8.)
Meanwhile a breakaway session of the assembly, endorsed by Serbian leaders, met in Glina, northern Krajina, on Feb. 9 and unconditionally accepted the UN plan, expressing full support for peace efforts.
The leaders of eastern Slavonia, another Serb-populated part of Croatia, had already accepted the UN plan.
Despite his continuing reservations the UN Secretary-General Boutros Boutros-Ghali on Feb. 13 recommended to the Security Council that the deployment of the UN force should go ahead in eastern and western Slavonia and Krajina.
The Security Council on Feb. 21 endorsed the despatch of the force and demanded "full and unconditional" co-operation from the warring factions.
The cost to the UN of the UN Protection Force (UNPROFOR), whose mandate would be reviewed every six months, was estimated at between $400,000,000 and $635,000,000 for the first year.
Commanded by Gen. Satish Nambiar of the Indian army, the force included contingents from 30 countries including for the first time Security Council permanent members France, Russia and the United Kingdom.
Although deployed in Croatia it would be based in Sarajevo (Bosnia-Hercegovina).
Dismissal of Babic by breakaway Krajina assembly
Meanwhile the breakaway Glina assembly, comprising half the Krajina deputies, on Feb. 16 dismissed Babic as president of Krajina and commander of its armed forces, rejected his referendum proposal and relieved the Krajina government of its duties.
Goran Hadzic, leader of the Serbian enclave of Western Slavonia, was elected by 230 votes with six abstentions as Babic's replacement in Borovo Selo on Feb. 26 at the first joint session of the assemblies of Serbian Krajina, the Autonomous Region of Western Slavonia, and the Serbian Region of Slavonia, Baranja and Western Srem.
The Knin assembly continued to function and on Feb. 21 voted to dismiss Paspalj and the assembly's two vice-presidents, and also to replace Milan Martic as the Krajina "Interior Minister" after he ordered local militias to be placed under the command of the Yugoslav National Army (JNA) in preparation for the arrival of the UN force.
On the same day Babic reversed his opposition to the peace plan, stating that Krajina was satisfied with what he said were UN guarantees that Croatian laws and institutions would not be valid in the territories under UN protection.
The ceasefire in Croatia was seriously threatened when Osijek and Vinkovci came under heavy shell fire from the JNA on Feb. 26, while Sibenik on the Adriatic coast was bombarded by federal forces.
Tudjman on Feb. 26 announced the demobilization of 20,000 Croatian reservists.
EC Lisbon meeting on Yugoslavia — Talks on Bosnia-Hercegovina
At a meeting in Lisbon on Feb. 17 European Community (EC) Foreign Ministers issued a statement endorsing the deployment of UN troops in Yugoslavia but postponed a decision on Macedonia (in deference to Greece — see also below).
On the future of Bosnia-Hercegovina they urged that the legitimate concerns of all the peoples living "within the inviolable borders of the republic" be taken into account, and proposed international supervision of the forthcoming referendum in the republic on Feb. 29-March 1, in close co-ordination with the institutions of the Conference on Security and Co-operation in Europe (CSCE).
Talks on the future of Bosnia-Hercegovina (brokered by Lord Carrington, chair of the EC peace conference, during a visit to Yugoslavia on Feb. 5-6) opened on Feb. 13 in Sarajevo.
They were attended by President Alija Izetbegovic (for the Moslem community) and by representatives of the Croatian Democratic Community and the Serbian Democratic Party.
No breakthrough on the future of the republic after the referendum had been made by the end of the third round of talks on Feb. 27.
At subsequent talks with EC representatives in Lisbon the same leaders of Bosnia-Hercegovina on Feb. 22-23 agreed broadly to maintain the existing external borders of the republic but to devolve power to various ethnic entities within the republic.
Tension rose in the republic when a dozen people were injured in a bomb attack on a Croatian cultural centre at Odzak on Feb.24.
Another explosion on Feb. 27 damaged the ancient central mosque in Banja Luca.
Future of Yugoslav federation
Serbia and Montenegro agreed on Feb. 12 in Titograd to retain "the principles of a common state which would be the continuation of Yugoslavia" [see also p. 38703].
It would retain the Yugoslav flag and anthem and a joint parliament and government, co-operate in foreign policy and defence, and form an economic union.
Montenegro decided nevertheless to hold a referendum on its future on March 1.
Diplomatic recognition of Slovenia and Croatia
Russia accorded diplomatic recognition to Slovenia on Feb. 14 and to Croatia on Feb. 17.
Slovenia and Croatia established full diplomatic relations with each other on Feb. 6, and with Macedonia on Feb. 12.
Turkey on Feb. 6 recognized the independence of Slovenia, Croatia, Macedonia [see also below]and Bosnia-Hercegovina.
Concern over human rights in Croatia
In a report on Feb. 14 the New York-based human rights group Helsinki Watch called on Tudjman to investigate and bring to an end serious human rights violations in Croatia, where it claimed that the new government had been executing and torturing detainees and unarmed citizens and destroying property.
The report documented several incidents of mass atrocities in detail.
Developments in Macedonia
Macedonia, which in January took the first steps towards independence [see p. 38704], faced hostility from Greece which felt that its name implied a territorial claim on the northern Greek province of Macedonia.
Macedonian vehicles were being turned back at the Greek border and hundreds of thousands of demonstrators in Salonika (Greek Macedonia) protested on Feb. 14 at the republic's use of the name Macedonia.
Greece also reacted angrily to Turkey's recognition of Macedonia on Feb. 6.
Bulgaria, which had recognized Macedonia in January [see pp. 38703; 38734], amended its position in February by stating that full diplomatic relations would be established only if the republic officially declared that there was no Macedonian minority in Bulgaria and that it had no territorial claims on Bulgaria.
The JNA began pulling out of Macedonia on Feb. 2 and agreements were reached with the JNA on leaving equipment behind, the withdrawal to be completed by April 15.
The republic took control of its borders with Albania on Feb. 6, and recalled ambassadors and other diplomats of Macedonia origin in the Yugoslav foreign service.
The Albanian Party for Democratic Prosperity (PD), which held 22 seats in the 120-seat Macedonian assembly, staged its first congress in Tetovo on Feb. 8-10.
EUROPE
IRELAND
Resignation of Haughey — Succession of Reynolds
Charles Haughey announced on Jan. 30 that he would resign as Prime Minister and leader of Fianna Fáil on Feb. 6.
Haughey's resignation came after the speaker of the Senate and former Justice Minister, Sean Doherty, revealed that Haughey had been fully informed of the tapping of two journalists' telephones by police in 1982 in an effort to trace Cabinet leaks.
Haughey had denied all knowledge of the bugging, but on Jan. 21 Doherty said that he had taken the blame "to protect Haughey" and had decided to speak out only because a new telephone-tapping bill was about to be presented to the Dáil (lower house of parliament).
He stated: "Haughey had retained all but one of the tapes I gave him, and at no stage indicated disapproval of the action that had been taken." 
Two days later the junior partner in the coalition government, the Progressive Democrats (PD), said that without "the necessary step to restore authority and effectiveness of government" it would withdraw after the presentation of the budget [see below].
On Feb. 6 Fianna Fáil MPs chose the former Finance Minister, Albert Reynolds, as the new party leader.
Reynolds, dismissed by Haughey in November 1991 after a failed leadership challenge [see p. 38588], won 61 votes, with two other contestants, the Agriculture and Food Minister, Michael Woods, and the Health Minister, Mary O'Rourke, gaining 10 and six votes respectively.
Reynolds was elected Prime Minister by 84 votes to 78 in the Dáil on Feb. 11 and immediately announced a new Cabinet, replacing eight of Haughey's 14 ministers.
The most significant change was at the Foreign Ministry, where Gerry Collins was replaced by David Andrews, a junior Foreign Minister from 1977 to 1979.
Bertie Ahern, who had dropped out of the leadership contest to assure Reynolds of victory, remained Finance Minister.
Senior ministerial posts were also given to a former Environment Minister, Padraig Flynn, and two junior ministers dismissed with Reynolds in November, Maire Geoghegan Quinn and Michael Smith.
1992 budget
Ahern presented a budget for 1992 on Jan. 29, calling it a "pro-jobs tax reform" .
The basic rate of income tax was to be reduced from 29p to 27p in the punt, and the upper 52 per cent tax rate was to be abolished, leaving a single higher rate of 48 per cent.
Other measures included a 4 per cent rise in social welfare spending and, to balance this, an increase in the lower value added tax (VAT) rate from 12.5 to 16 per cent on a wide range of goods and services.
Excise duty on cigarettes was to be increased by 16p per packet.
Government spending was to go up by 6 per cent, necessitating an exchequer borrowing requirement of 2.4 per cent of gross national product (GNP), which was forecast to grow by 2 per cent .
Ahern also paid special attention to the motor industry, with a 1.7 per cent cut in car excise duty and a 9p per gallon reduction in petrol taxes, but vehicle road tax was to be increased by 20 per cent.
Constitutional controversy over abortion
The High Court in Dublin sparked a huge controversy on Feb. 17 when it ruled that a 14-year-old girl, who became pregnant after allegedly being raped by the father of a friend, could not travel to the United Kingdom for an abortion.
The Court made three orders: two preventing the girl and her family procuring an abortion, and a third banning her from leaving Ireland for nine months.
The Court ruled that the threat to the girl's life from her repeated threats of suicide was less than the certainty of the unborn child's loss of life through an abortion.
The decision led to demonstrations and angry protests outside government buildings and parliament in Dublin.
The court's hearings were in private, but the judgment revealed that the Attorney General, Harold Whelehan, had obtained a temporary injunction on Feb. 7 preventing the parents of the girl from taking her to the UK for an operation.
The girl was already in England, but was brought back to Ireland by her parents, who faced a fine or imprisonment if they ignored the injunction.
The case had been brought to the attention of the legal authorities when the family contacted the police to ask if a DNA genetic fingerprint could be obtained from the aborted foetus to provide legal evidence on the identity of the alleged rapist.
The police then sought the advice of the Director of Public Prosecutions and were told that such evidence would not be admissible in Irish courts, and that the Attorney General would be seeking an injunction to prevent termination.
Reynolds held talks with leading politicians on Feb. 19, in an attempt to find cross-party agreement on the case, but made it clear that a referendum to dilute the constitutional clause on abortion would be avoided if possible.
The Supreme Court ruled on Feb. 26 after a two-day private hearing that the order banning the girl from leaving the country should be lifted.
The appeal had been based on both the Irish Constitution's recognition of the equal rights of the mother and the unborn child, and the freedom of movement guaranteed within the European Communities.
Workers' Party split
Six of the seven MPs of the Workers' Party resigned on Feb. 22 at an executive meeting of the party.
The six included the party leader, Proinsias De Rossa, who had been trying to reform the party and whose proposals to replace "democratic centralism and Leninist revolutionary tactics" with democratic socialism had narrowly failed to be adopted at a party conference a week earlier.
The Workers' Party conference had also confirmed the continued existence of the Official Irish Republican Army (IRA), which ceased its campaign in Northern Ireland in 1972, at which time its political wing, Official Sinn Féin, changed its name to the Workers' Party.
The party had always strongly denied the continued existence of the Official IRA, and De Rossa had hoped to remove its shadow from the party, but failed to achieve a required two-thirds majority at the conference.
De Rossa said that his breakaway group would form a new democratic socialist party.
EUROPE
NORTHERN IRELAND
Escalation of sectarian violence
An increasing number of apparent revenge attacks in early February marked an increase in sectarian violence.
A Roman Catholic taxi driver was shot dead by the outlawed Ulster Freedom Fighters (UFF), the military wing of the Ulster Defence Association (UDA), at his home in north Belfast on Feb. 2.
Twelve hours later on Feb. 3 a Protestant delivery man was killed by the Irish Republican Army (IRA) at Dungannon in County Tyrone.
A policeman, James Allen Moore, killed three people at the west Belfast offices of Sinn Féin on Feb. 4 and later apparently committed suicide.
His body was found in Ballinderry, west of Belfast.
A day later, five Catholics were killed when UFF gunmen raked a crowded betting shop in south Belfast.
In their statement claiming responsibility for the killings, the UFF referred to the IRA bombing at Teebane Cross in January [see p. 38738].
Four members of the IRA were shot dead by soldiers on Feb. 16 after an attack on a police station at Coalisland; another two men were injured.
The Royal Ulster Constabulary (RUC) said that a heavy machine gun was recovered, as well as several other weapons, at the scene of the gun battle between police and the IRA.
One of the four who died was Kevin O'Donnell, who had been acquitted in 1991 in London on gun-running charges.
A 17-year old Protestant man was shot dead in north Belfast on Feb. 17 at the video club where he worked.
A nationalist splinter group, the Irish People's Liberation Organisation, claimed responsibility for the killing.
A 35-year-old Catholic man was shot dead on Feb. 19 outside a shop in Belfast.
Sending of additional troops
In response to the rise in violence the United Kingdom government on Feb. 10 ordered more than 500 extra troops to the province.
Army officers described the deployment as "very short-term" , but stressed that they would remain as long as they were needed.
The extra troops brought the strength of the British army, including the Ulster Defence Regiment, to its highest level since the 1970s, standing at more than 18,000.
Irish President's visit to Northern Ireland
Mary Robinson, the President of Ireland, visited the province on Feb. 4 at the invitation of women's organizations.
It was the first official visit to Northern Ireland by an Irish head of state.
She was met in Belfast by the UK Secretary of State for Northern Ireland, Peter Brooke.
Unionist leaders organized a demonstration against her visit and the Lord Mayor of the city refused to meet her on the grounds that she represented a state which laid claim in its constitution to jurisdiction over Northern Ireland.
Major's meeting with political leaders
The UK Prime Minister, John Major, held two hours of talks at Downing Street in London on Feb. 11 with the leaders of the four main constitutional parties — the Official Ulster Unionist Party (OUP), the Democratic Unionist Party (DUP), the Social Democratic and Labour Party (SDLP) and the Alliance Party.
It was the first meeting of its kind for 16 years.
Major said that the meeting had produced "an excellent dialogue" and that all the parties had agreed to further meetings, and to support a new effort by Brooke to resume talks on the political future of Northern Ireland.
During the talks the Unionist leaders argued hard for a reintroduction of internment, but the SDLP suggested that such a measure would only alienate the Catholic minority in the province.
The meeting was held only hours after police found and defused an IRA bomb in a telephone box in a street close to Downing Street.
The leaders of the four parties met again on Feb. 28 and reached agreement in principle to restart the political negotiations, if assurances were received from Major and the UK Labour Party leader, Neil Kinnock, that any talks would continue on the same basis after the UK general election.
Imprisonment of former secret agent
A former agent for British military intelligence and member of the UDA, Brian Nelson, was sentenced on Feb. 4 to 10 years in prison after pleading guilty to 20 charges, including five of conspiracy to murder.
In exchange for Nelson's guilty plea, the prosecution had agreed not to proceed with 15 other charges, including two of murder.
At the trial, it was established that Nelson had joined the UDA in 1972, and offered his services to military intelligence in 1983.
The prosecution alleged that Nelson had played a pivotal role in collecting information on individuals for the UDA and, at the same time, provided information about the UDA to military intelligence.
Extradition of IRA member from USA
The US authorities on Feb. 19 returned Joseph Doherty to the prison in Belfast, whence he and seven other accused terrorists escaped in 1981.
Doherty had been sentenced to life imprisonment in 1981 for the murder of a British army captain during an ambush in Northern Ireland.
He was arrested in 1983 in New York, but an attempt to extradite him to the UK as a convicted criminal failed when a judge ruled that his crime was political.
Doherty agreed at first to be deported to Ireland as an illegal alien, but requested political asylum after the UK signed an extradition treaty with Ireland in 1987.
His battle against deportation and extradition was lost when the US Supreme Court ruled in December 1991 that he was not entitled to a new asylum hearing.
EUROPE
UNITED KINGDOM
Ashdown incident — Redundancies — Fraud cases — HIV compensation
As the build-up to the pending general election got under way, the position of the leader of the Liberal Democrats, Paddy Ashdown, came under scrutiny when on Feb. 5 he made a statement acknowledging that some years earlier he had had a "brief relationship" with a woman (identified as Patricia Sullivan, now known under the name Howard); he stressed, however, that this "should have remained a private and personal matter of concern only to those involved" .The issue had come to light following a break-in at the office of his solicitor (one of a number of such incidents in recent months at premises connected with political parties or with individual politicians) and the theft of a document on the affair.
An attempt had been made to sell this document to a Sunday newspaper, and Ashdown had secured a "gagging" injunction preventing mention of anything to do with the matter.
Announcement of industrial redundancies
During February a number of key industrial companies announced forthcoming contraction and redundancies, reflecting the continued rise in unemployment (to a seasonally adjusted level of 9.2 per cent in January compared with 6.7 per cent a year earlier and 5.7 per cent at the beginning of 1990 — see also p. 38200).
Doubts about economic revival were borne out by figures published on Feb. 19 showing that for 1991 as a whole gross domestic product (GDP) had, on a provisional basis, fallen by about 2.5 per cent compared with 1990.
Among the hardest hit industries were motors, where Ford and Vauxhall on Feb. 7 announced cuts of over 2,000 jobs and around 300 respectively to take effect mostly from late 1992; aerospace, with BAe announcing on Feb. 12 some 2,350 job losses in its military and regional divisions; coal, with several pit closures or staff reductions having been announced in January, and with a prediction by Malcolm Edwards, then British Coal's commercial director, on Feb. 19 that the corporation could be slimmed down to possibly as few as 12 pits in the next two years; and steel, where on Jan. 8 British Steel had confirmed the closure by September of the remaining part of its huge Ravenscraig plant in Scotland, with around 1,200 job losses.
Fraud cases
In the first half of February three separate trials involving alleged fraud on a huge scale came to their respective conclusions.
However, their length and complexity raised questions as to the appropriateness of existing procedures for such cases.
On Feb. 11 Peter Clowes was sentenced to 10 years' imprisonment and Peter Naylor to 18 months for fraud in connection with the collapse in 1988 of the Barlow Clowes investment management group in which up to around 18,000 investors, many of them elderly, faced large potential losses of their savings.
Two co-defendants were acquitted, and the Serious Fraud Office (SFO) stated that no further proceedings would now be taken against two other men on conspiracy charges.
The regulatory role of the Department of Trade and Industry in respect of Barlow Clowes had been sharply criticized in reports both of an independent inquiry (published on Oct. 20, 1988), and of the Ombudsman (published on Dec. 19, 1989); on the latter date the government had announced that in the exceptional circumstances it would make ex gratia payments (totalling some #150,000,000) to all investors who had suffered loss, while stressing that it had no legal liability to pay compensation.
The second Guinness trial arising out of fraudulent share support operations in connection with the 1985-86 takeover of the Distillers Company by Guinness was ended by the judge on Feb. 11 in view of the deteriorating physical and mental health of one of the two defendants, Roger Seelig, a financial adviser to Guinness.
Seelig was conducting his own defence and, together with Lord Spens (also a banking adviser), faced conspiracy and false accounting charges.
Counsel for the SFO announced on Feb. 7, 1992, that charges against Seelig and David Mayhew (a stockbroker) which were to have formed the basis of a third trial had now been withdrawn.
Thomas Ward, who had returned to the UK from the United States in June 1991, still faced charges under the Theft Act 1968.
The first Guinness trial had ended in August 1990 [see pp. 37662; 38200].
Four men were on Feb. 14 found guilty of conspiracy to defraud in connection with the takeover in 1987 by the UK Blue Arrow employment and recruitment agency of its considerably larger US rival Manpower.
The takeover had been financed by an £837,000,000 Blue Arrow rights offer in September 1987 which had, however, been only partially successful.
In order to deceive the markets, senior financial advisers had undertaken a scheme artificially to support the price level of Blue Arrow shares.
The scheme's "warehousing" operation might not have come to light had it not been for the fact that the global equity market crash of the following month [see pp. 35740-42]had made the irregular holdings virtually unsaleable.
Charges against two other individual defendants had been formally dismissed by the judge on Sept. 30, 1991, while on Jan. 30, 1992, verdicts of not guilty were returned by the jury at the direction of the judge in respect of all three corporate defendants.
Finally, on Feb. 14 one of the remaining individuals was found not guilty, and although the other four were convicted they received on Feb. 17 in each case only suspended prison sentences ranging from 12 to 18 months.
BCCI settlement
A settlement was initialled on Feb. 20 by the majority shareholders in the failed Bank of Credit and Commerce International (BCCI — see pp. 38355; 38545; 38737) and by the bank's liquidators.
Under this settlement, subject to approval by the courts in the UK, Luxembourg and the Cayman Islands and by 70 per cent of the creditors involved, those shareholders — the Ruler and authorities of Abu Dhabi — would (i) make a payment of $1,700 million (adjustable up or down by $500 million) to make possible a return to creditors of between 30 and 40 per cent; and (ii) assume responsibility for certain liabilities of BCCI branches in the United Arab Emirates.
The majority shareholders at the same time expressed strong criticism of the Bank of England and other regulators over their handling of the affair.
Compensation for HIV infection from blood transfusions
William Waldegrave, the Health Secretary, announced on Feb. 17 that although the government had never accepted the argument for a general scheme of "no-fault" compensation for medical accidents, it had now agreed, at a cost of £12,000,000, to extend compensation to the estimated 70-80 people who had been infected with the AIDS virus HIV as a result of National Health Service blood transfusions or tissue transfers in the UK.
They would receive compensation on the same basis as already existed for haemophiliacs thus infected — a scheme announced in November 1989, confirmed in January 1990, and extended in December 1990.
[For HIV-infected blood scandal in France see p. 38544.]
EUROPE
GERMANY
Steel industry wage settlement
A steel workers' ballot at the end of January recorded 87 per cent in favour of strike action in support of wage demands, but a revised offer from the employers on Feb. 2, equivalent to a wage increase of 6.35 per cent, was then accepted and the strike thus averted.
Employers, the government and the president of the Bundesbank all warned that the level of this settlement could lead to unemployment in the steel industry and, if imitated by other trade unions, to inflation and higher interest rates.
Unemployment statistics for January revealed that the numbers out of work in the former East Germany had increased to 1,340,000, a rate of 17 per cent(compared to 11.8 per cent in December), partly because of the end of several short-time working arrangements.
In the former West Germany unemployment rose to 1,870,000 or 6.3 per cent(5.8 per cent in December).
A section of the bank employees' trade union voted on Feb. in favour of strike action after claims for salary increases in excess of 10 per cent were countered by an offer from the banks of only 5 per cent, plus a one-off lump sum payment of DM300 (nearly US$200).
A number of short and localized warning strikes by bank employees occurred during February.
Tax increases
Despite opposition from the Social Democrats (SPD), a law designed to change aspects of the tax system was approved by the Bundesrat (upper house of the federal parliament) on Feb. 14 by 35 votes to 33, after delegations from two Länder in which the SPD participated in government — Brandenburg and Berlin — were persuaded to vote in favour of the package.
The rate of value added tax was to rise from 14 per cent to 15 per cent from Jan. 1, 1993, compensating for the loss of revenue from the termination of the special one-year income tax surcharge imposed from July 1, 1991 [see p. 38109].
The additional revenue would be used for job-creation measures in the former East Germany.
To obtain this majority in the Bundesrat, the government made concessions to the Länder concerning additional subsidies for Land and local government funds.
New Minister President in Thuringia — Further investigations of Stasi connections
Josef Duchac resigned as Christian Democrat (CDU) Minister President of Thuringia on Jan. 23, as a result of pressure from his party following growing discontent concerning his relations with the communist regime prior to unification.
Bernhard Vogel, a former Minister President of Rhineland-Palatinate and brother of Hans-Jochen Vogel, the former chairman of the SPD, was nominated as the new Minister President.
After talks between the CDU and the Free Democrats (FDP), its coalition partner in the Land government, Vogel was elected on Feb. 5 by the Land parliament, securing 50 votes as against 27 for Gerd Schuchardt.
Vogel stated that his priorities would be to combat unemployment and to secure more investment for Thuringia.
A parliamentary commission of investigation was set up in Brandenburg to examine the past links between Minister President Manfred Stolpe (SPD) and the Stasi (state security police), after Stolpe had admitted in the press to having had numerous clandestine contacts with the Stasi under the pre-unification communist regime.
Stolpe denied that those contacts had harmed anyone, and asserted that they were undertaken to help those he represented as a lawyer for the Evangelical church in the former GDR.
A number of prominent politicians made public statements supporting Stolpe, including the federal President, Richard von Weizsäcker.
Gerhard Riege, a Party of Democratic Socialism (PDS) member of the Bundestag (lower house of federal parliament), committed suicide on Feb. 15, leaving a note in which he stated that he could not face media publicity concerning his alleged Stasi connections in the former GDR.
Sentences over May 1989 East German local election frauds
Wolfgang Berghofer, a former mayor of Dresden, was given a suspended one-year prison sentence and fined DM36,000 (US$23,000) on Feb. 7 for fraudulent activity in connection with the East German local government elections in May 1989 [see p. 36665].
Werner Moke, the head of the Dresden city branch of the Socialist Unity Party of Germany (SED) at the time, was given the same suspended prison sentence and fined DM3,600 (US$2,300).
Hans Modrow, then the leader of the Dresden regional SED organization (and later East German Prime Minister), refused to give evidence in the trial, on the grounds that there was a case pending against him relating to those elections.
The presiding judge said that higher organs of the SED, beyond the city itself, clearly had been involved in the decision to falsify election returns.
Security issues: espionage, Red Army Faction and border guard trials
Klaus Kuron, a former employee of the West German intelligence service (the Federal Office for the Protection of the Constitution) was sentenced on Feb. 7 to 12 years' imprisonment by a court in Düsseldorf on charges of treason and corruption, and fined DM692,000 (the sum which he had been paid by the East German government), for passing secret information obtained through his position in the West German intelligence agency, especially relating to West German secret agents in East Germany, over a period of nine years.
Monika Helbing, a former member of the Red Army Faction, received a seven-year prison sentence on Feb. 24 for her complicity in the kidnap and murder in 1977 of Hans-Martin Schleyer, the West German industrialist [see p. 28918; 28920], and for her part in a bank robbery in Nürnberg in 1979.
In the second case of its kind, two former GDR border guards, Uwe Hapke and Udo Walter, received suspended prison sentences of 21 months and 18 months respectively for shooting dead a refugee, Michael Schmidt, who attempted to escape to West Berlin on Dec 20, 1984.
Honecker's hospital tests in Moscow
Erich Honecker, the former East German leader given refuge in the Chilean embassy in Moscow in December, sought permission to travel to relatives in Chile on compassionate grounds, claiming that the condition of his health was such that he might not live much longer.
He was given permission to undergo tests in a Moscow hospital, but official statements from the hospital on Feb. rejected claims that he was suffering from cancer and other dangerous infirmities, and denied that any operation was planned.
The German government reiterated its insistence that Honecker should return to Germany and face charges relating to his period in office [see pp. 38687-88].
Asylum issues
Neo-Nazi attacks on the hostels of asylum applicants continued.
On the weekend of Feb. 8-9 there were two separate arson attacks in which 15 people (including eight children) died.
In January and February over 30,000 applicants for asylum entered Germany each month, as well as about 20,000 ethnic Germans.
The total in 1991 had been 256,112 asylum applicants, chiefly from Yugoslavia, Romania and Turkey (an increase of over 30 per cent on the 1990 figure of 193,063), and 221,995 ethnic Germans.
The CDU proposed the addition of a clause to the Basic Law (constitution) which would allow the authorities to reject applicants for political asylum entering Germany from a third country in which they were not at risk of political persecution.
This proposal was not acceptable to their coalition partner, the FDP, nor to the SPD opposition.
EUROPE
FRANCE
Habash affair
There was a major outcry in early February over a decision by officials of the Foreign Affairs and Interior ministries to allow George Habash, the leader of the radical Popular Front for the Liberation of Palestine (PFLP), to enter France on Jan. 29 for medical treatment.
The affair caused considerable embarrassment for President François Mitterrand and for the government, which survived by 28 votes a motion of censure in the National Assembly on Feb. 11.
The Habash affair assumed great political significance largely because it became a focus for the Socialist (PS) government's overall performance.
With high unemployment levels and rising social tension, Mitterrand, the Prime Minister, Edith Cresson, and the PS had unprecedentedly low opinion poll ratings.
The affair was also seized on by opposition politicians as an opportunity to highlight the government's incompetence and to call for its resignation and for an early general election, in the run-up to the regional elections due in March.
Habash, who had reportedly suffered a stroke, was allegedly involved in a spate of terrorist bombings in France in 1986 [see pp. 34308; 35079].
Four senior officials in the Foreign Affairs and Interior ministries were dismissed or resigned over their role in granting him entry.
The head of the French Red Cross, Georgina Dufoix, one of Mitterrand's closest advisers, also resigned.
There were also calls across the political spectrum for the resignation of the Interior Minister, Philippe Marchand, and the Foreign Minister, Roland Dumas.
Habash was placed briefly in custody while in a Paris hospital to be questioned by an investigating magistrate about an arms and explosive cache found near Paris in 1986 and about several bombings and hijackings.
However, a team of government-appointed doctors decided that he was too ill to answer questions.
He was released on Feb. 1 and allowed to leave for Damascus, Syria.
(He subsequently declared in a radio interview that he was in good health.)
With criticism of the government's handling of the affair mounting, Mitterrand on Feb. 4 called an extraordinary session of parliament.
In a television interview on the same day he acknowledged that the officials who had allowed Habash to enter France had made an "error of judgement" by treating the matter as "routine" .
He declared that neither he nor Dumas, who were on an official visit to Oman at the time, were informed of the request for entry.
He said that Habash had been allowed to leave because there were no legal reasons for holding him.
 "There were no national or international arrest warrants, no extradition requests." 
During the censure motion debate leaders of the right and centre opposition parties reiterated their criticism of the government as being out of touch and not in control, and repeated their demand for an early general election.
In reply Cresson denounced the opposition for being "demolishers" damaging France rather than "builders" , and said that the government intended to stay in office until the end of the parliamentary term in 1993.
In a vote on Feb. 11 the motion fell 28 votes short of gaining the required majority in the 577-seat National Assembly.
The French Communist Party (PCF), whose votes would have been needed for its success, boycotted the session; it had declared that while it did not support the government, it would not vote for the motion, which it described as a "manoeuvre" .
Near-victory for FN in Nice by-election
The far-right National Front (FN) narrowly failed to win a regional by-election in Nice on Feb. 23.
The FN candidate led in the first round of voting, but was defeated in the second round by 50.6 per cent to 49.4 per cent by a centre-right candidate supported by all the mainstream parties.
EUROPE
SPAIN
Industrial unrest
A massive industrial crisis came to a head in late 1991 and early 1992 with widespread industrial unrest in some areas as Spain began to restructure its loss-making steel, coal, shipbuilding and other sectors and withdraw subsidies in preparation for the EC single internal market in 1993.
At least 35,000 jobs were expected to be lost in the mining and metallurgical industries alone (including defence, electronics and telecommunications) over the next few months.
In Asturias strike action began in late December 1991 in all the mines owned by the state company Hunosa (the biggest employer in the region, which had made a loss of 65,000 million ptas — US$674 million — in 1991) in protest at a restructuring plan which would involve the loss of 6,000 jobs by the end of 1993 at a saving of only 15,000 million ptas.
Protest action by miners included a 12-day occupation of the Barredo de Mieres mine over Christmas and two general strikes throughout the Asturian mining industry on Dec. 27 and on Jan. 2-3.
A European Community (EC) plan was drafted for Hunosa allowing for most job losses to be covered by early retirement on full pay until the age of 68 or by natural job shrinkage.
The Council of Ministers on Jan. 24 also approved a 300,000 million ptas investment plan for Asturias providing for the creation of 1,800 new jobs over the next six years with special regard to the mining sector.
Blocked negotiations with the unions resumed at the end of January, opening up the possibility of extending the deadline for job losses to the end of 1994.
The 22,000 workers in the Asturian state steel sector and auxiliary industries staged a 24-hour strike throughout the region on Feb. 6 organized by the UGT (Uniòn General de Trabajadores) and the CCOO (Confederación Sindical de Comisiones Obreras).
About 50 people were injured in Cartagena (Murcia) and the regional parliament building was set on fire during five hours of clashes on Feb. 3 between police and thousands of workers.
The demonstrators were protesting at the imminent loss of 5,000 jobs in the region in the mining, steel, shipbuilding and fertilizer industries, and expressing fears for the future of at least half of Cartagana's active workforce of 60,000.
In industrial protests in other regions six Civil Guards and eight miners were hurt and six miners were arrested on Feb. 7 during a demonstration in León, while a policeman and four workers from a shoe factory were injured in Valencia on the same day.
Violence and arrests in Basque region
A remote control bomb placed by the Basque separatist organization Euskadi ta Askatasuna (ETA — Basque Homeland and Liberty) exploded under a military bus in central Madrid on Feb. 6, killing four soldiers and a civilian passenger and injuring seven passers-by.
This followed about 30 ETA-linked arrests in the Basque region the previous week and a statement by ETA on Feb. 3 to the effect that violence would continue as long as the Basque region "continues to be denied its political, social and cultural rights" .
In January ETA "itinerant commandos" had killed three soldiers, a policeman and a former government minister in four attacks in Barcelona, Bilbao and Valencia.
Thousands of Basques marched through Bilbao on Feb. 1 demanding peace and an end to terrorism.
Dissension within ETA over future of armed struggle
In an internal document issued on Dec. 14 and discovered by police during a raid in February, the leadership of ETA rejected arguments from within the organization to the effect that the armed struggle was lost, was senseless and was damaging the Basque nationalist left, and that ETA must face up to defeat.
In its hardline response ETA reiterated that the armed struggle remained the decisive factor in the process of attrition against the "political enemy" .
Indication by González of probable resignation by 1995
Prime Minister Felipe González Márquez told the Portuguese newspaper Público in an interview in late February that he would probably have relinquished his post by 1995; a general election was next due in 1993.
EUROPE
SWITZERLAND
Rejection of proposal to curb testing on animals
Voters on Feb. 16 turned down a popular initiative to introduce drastic limits on experiments on animals.
The vote was 1,115,963 to 865,978, and only four of the 26 cantons and half-cantons (Zürich, Bern, Appenzell Innerrhoden, and the Grisons) returned majorities in favour of the proposal.
Interpharma, representing pharmaceutical groups, described the vote as a "clear indication of the commitment of the Swiss people to continue as a leading country in medical and bio-medical research" .
Animal rights campaigners, the architects of the initiative, indicated their intention to put the issue before the electorate again.
EUROPE
ITALY
Dissolution of Parliament
President Francesco Cossiga announced the dissolution of Parliament on Feb. 2, in preparation for a general election on April 5-6, approximately two months before it was constitutionally necessary [for June 1987 general election see pp. 35586-88].
During much of Prime Minister Giulio Andreotti's seventh administration, formed in April 1991 [see p. 38157], the four coalition parties had been conscious of the approaching election and the government had progressively lost cohesion.
The 1992 budget had been passed in December 1991 and related measures in January 1992 [see pp. 38690; 38739].
Major health service legislation was not completed, but other legislation was hurried through.
Cossiga, however, caused controversy by stating that he would not sign some of these hurriedly approved laws, and objecting in particular to a bill on conscienscious objection which, he said, failed to reconcile the freedom of the individual and the constitutional duty of citizens to defend their country.
The impending general election was the first since the launch of the opposition Democratic Party of the Left (PDS — formerly the Communist Party)[see p. 37785-86], the consequent foundation of the Communist Refoundation Party (PRC)[see p. 38689], and the rise of a number of regional autonomy parties [see p. 38021]which had scored important successes in local elections.
The Christian Democratic Party (DC), the largest party in Parliament since 1948, had experienced internal dissent, including that which had led to the formation of La Rete ( "The Network" ) as a new national political force [see pp. 38481-82].
Cossiga's term of office was also due to expire shortly after the general election, the first time since 1948 that parliamentary and presidential elections had been held so closely together.
Election campaign smear against Togliatti
The weekly news magazine Panorama published early in February what purported to be the text of a letter written in February 1943 by the then leader of the Italian Communist Party (PCI), Palmiro Togliatti, in which he refused to intercede with Stalin on behalf of Italian prisoners of war.
Togliatti's apparent cold indifference to the fate of his fellow countrymen shocked many and seemed likely to damage the electoral chances of the PDS and the PRC, the two parties which were the direct successors of the PCI.
Subsequently, however, the Moscow correspondent of the daily La Stampa examined the original of the letter, which had been discovered in the KGB archives, and reported that it had been misquoted in 12 places.
The controversy aroused strong emotions because it was estimated that at least 27,000 Italians sent by Mussolini to fight in Russia had perished from cold, disease and starvation after being taken prisoner.
According to the version of the letter published in Panorama, owned by socialist media baron Silvio Berlusconi, Togliatti, who spent much of the Second World War in Moscow, had expressed the view that the deaths of the prisoners would help to turn the Italian people against fascism.
The text reported by La Stampa, however, was not couched in such inhumane terms.
Retrial for Bologna station bombing
On Feb. 12 the Italian Supreme Court overturned the decision of the Bologna appeal court, which in July 1990 [see p. 37624]had quashed the convictions of 13 individuals in connection with the bomb attack in August 1980 on Bologna railway station, in which 85 people were killed [see p. 30522].
Of the individuals acquitted by the Bologna appeal court four had been sentenced to life imprisonment and nine to lesser terms.
The 13 were ordered to stand trial again.
MALTA
Maltese election results
Maltese Cabinet
Election victory for ruling Nationalist Party
The centre-right Nationalist Party (NP) was returned to office for another five-year term in elections on Feb. 22.
The NP gained 51.8 per cent of the vote and 34 seats in the House of Representatives, while the Malta Labour Party (MLP) gained 46.5 per cent and 31 seats.
The NP share of the vote was slightly higher than in 1987 [see p. 35214].
A key issue in the campaign had been Malta's foreign policy, in particular its relationship with the European Communities (EC).
The Nationalist government, led by Edward Fenech Adami, had filed an application for EC membership in July 1990 [see p. 37625]and was strongly in favour of securing the country's entry at the earliest possible date.
The Labour Party, led by Karmenu (Carmelo) Mifsud Bonnici, was opposed to full membership and instead favoured strengthening the existing association agreement.
The government also stressed its record of liberalizing the economy and five years of continuous growth, while Labour claimed that it had mismanaged the public finances by allowing the national debt to double.
Democratic Alternative (AD), a breakaway from the MLP, stressed environmental and social issues.
The turnout, traditionally high in Maltese elections, was 96 per cent.
Observers noted an absence of the intimidation and violence which had been a feature of previous elections, all of which had been closely fought.
After the election Mifsud Bonnici announced his intention to resign as Labour leader.
He had led the party since 1984, succeeding Dom Mintoff [see p. 33794], and had been Prime Minister from then until the party's defeat in 1987.
New government
The new government appointed on Feb. 27 consisted of 12 ministers and seven parliamentary secretaries.
All senior ministers retained their posts (in some cases renamed), although the Justice portfolio, hitherto one of those held by Guido De Marco, was given to Joe Fenech, who had been a parliamentary secretary in the outgoing government.
Three other portfolios (Social Security, Youth and Arts, and Transport and Communications) were also raised to full Cabinet status.
EUROPE
TURKEY
Avalanche deaths
On Feb. 1,174 people were killed by avalanches in the mountains of south-east Turkey.
Most of the deaths occurred in the villages of Gormec, 15 km south-west of Sirnak, and Tunekpinar.
Over 100 of those killed were paramilitary gendarmes who were stationed in the area to counter Kurdish guerrilla activity.
By the evening of Feb. 1, 104 bodies had been found.
US helicopters based in Pirinclik near Diyarbakir assisted in taking food and a medical team to Gormec.
On Feb. 3 four more people in the village of Seslice were killed in another avalanche.
Killing of security prosecutor
On Feb. 6 the chief state security prosecutor Yasar Gunaydin, 58, was shot outside his home in Istanbul and died later in hospital.
His driver and guard were also killed.
Newspapers received phone calls to the effect that the shooting was the work of the left-wing Dev-Sol group, which also claimed responsibility for killing a policeman in the southern town of Adana on the same day.
An organization called the Turkish People's Liberation Party Front was also reported to have claimed responsibility.
On Feb. 19 the state prosecutor in the town of Bursa was badly wounded by gunmen, and his driver and a policeman killed.
A bomb which exploded in Istanbul's chamber of commerce building on Feb. 20 killed one person and injured 16.
The Kurdistan Workers' Party (PKK) guerrilla movement was said to have claimed responsibility.
The PKK had denied responsibility for a bomb which caused one death in Istanbul on Jan. 25, claiming that it was carried out as a provocative act by a "counter-guerrilla" force.
In the south of the country politically motivated killings in February included the shooting at his desk of Halit Gurgen, a reporter of the far-left Ikibin-e Dogru magazine, in Diyarbakir on Feb. 18.
Another journalist, the Batman-based correspondent of the Yeni Ulke newspaper, was killed by gunmen on Feb. 24.
EUROPE
EUROPEAN COMMUNITIES
Signature of Maastricht treaty
The 12 member countries of the European Communities (EC) formally signed the Treaty on European Union at a ceremony on Feb. 7 in Maastricht, where the final terms of the treaty had been negotiated in December 1991 [see pp. 38657-59].
The treaty and related documents, including separate protocols and declarations, were signed by the 12 countries' Foreign and Finance Ministers.
The treaty was scheduled to come into effect on Jan. 1, 1993, after ratification by the national parliaments and by the European Parliament (EP).
The Netherlands Prime Minister, Ruud Lubbers, who had been the president of the European Council in the final phase of the negotiations, declared that "we have now passed the point of no return" .
The Portuguese Prime Minister, Aníbal Cavaco Silva, the current president of the Council, described the treaty as "a wise balance between ambition and prudence, idealism and pragmatism" .
Five-year budget proposals
The EC Commission on Feb. 12 presented a draft five-year budget to the European Parliament which provided, controversially, for a rise in EC expenditure from ECU66,000 million (US$86,000 million) in 1992 to ECU88,000 million in 1997, an increase of one-third.
The bulk of the new funds would be used to assist the poorer EC countries (Greece, Ireland, Portugal and Spain) in meeting the conditions for EC monetary union as set out in the Treaty of Maastricht [see p. 38658].
The draft also provided for additional aid to industry to improve its competitiveness.
Support for farmers under the common agricultural policy would also rise in real terms, but would continue to decline as a share of the total budget.
In presenting the proposals the president of the Commission, Jacques Delors, said that in the post-Maastricht era the "EC must find new money if it is to have a greater profile on the international scene" .
He added: "Without solidarity among the EC members, Europe might revert to being a continent of fear and apprehension." 
Bundesbank doubts on economic plans
In a statement released on Feb. 7, the Bundesbank, the German central bank, expressed doubts about the plans for a single currency outlined in the Maastricht Treaty.
Urging national governments to develop further the structure of the planned political union, as an essential concomitant to successful economic and monetary union, the Bundesbank said that the fulfilment of entry criteria and conditions of economic convergence between EC countries should not be linked to a specific time frame (as provided for in the treaty).
Despite these problems, the Bundesbank noted that the current framework for economic union was "broadly in line" with its recommendations.
Schengen ratification problems
The timetable for the implementation of the agreement which would end border controls among most EC countries by Jan. 1, 1993, known as the Schengen Agreement [see pp. 37535; 37870; 38297], was thrown into doubt in February amid Netherlands and German opposition to some of its elements.
The Tweede Kamer, the lower house of the Netherlands parliament, voted by a large majority on Jan. 31 to instruct the government to reopen negotiations.
Among its criticisms of the treaty were the lack of a judicial body to adjudicate disagreements on its provisions, the lack of democratic control, inadequate provisions on immigration and asylum, and the lack of data protection with regard to the central database to be compiled within the framework of the treaty.
In Germany the parliamentary faction of the largest of the ruling parties, the Christian Democratic Union (CDU), on Feb. 12 voted to make its approval of the treaty dependent on the passage of an amendment to the country's Basic Law (constitution) to restrict the right of asylum.
Trade agreements with Baltic states
The EC signed trade and co-operation agreements with Lithuania, Latvia and Estonia on Jan. 31, Feb. 5 and Feb. 28 respectively.
The accords, described as the "first step" towards closer trade, economic and financial relations between the Baltic states and the EC, provided for an end to import quotas on some products from the Baltic countries and greater economic co-operation.
EP vote on tobacco advertising
The EP on Feb. 11 voted, by 150 votes to 123, for an EC-wide ban on tobacco advertising in magazines, newspapers and posters, on sponsorship of sporting events by tobacco companies, and on so-called "parallel" advertising (in which other goods were associated with a tobacco brand name).
Advertising would only be allowed inside establishments which sold tobacco products.
The vote was not legally binding, but was thought to put strong pressure on the Council of Ministers, which would have the final decision on the basis of qualified majority voting.
The measure was highly controversial, and had been the subject of rival proposals from the Commission, the EP and the Council of Ministers.
It had also been strongly criticized by the tobacco industry.
A television ban on tobacco advertising went into effect in 1991.
EUROPE
EFTA
Revision of agreement with EC
At a meeting in Brussels on Feb. 14 negotiators from the seven-member European Free Trade Association (EFTA) and the 12-member European Communities (EC) reached agreement on a revised accord on their planned European Economic Area (EEA).
The initialling of the agreement, reached in principle in October 1991 [see pp. 38541-42], had been held up by legal objections raised in December [see p. 38691]by the EC's European Court of Justice (ECJ).
The ECJ, defending its own supreme right to interpret EC law, had objected to the rights of a proposed EEA joint legal body to resolve disputes.
The revised accord dropped the idea of a new legal body.
Under new disputes procedures,(i) competition cases would be handled by the EC Commission and the ECJ if they involved companies from both the EC and EFTA (and by EFTA only if they concerned only EFTA companies);(ii) disagreements over the operation of the EEA would go to a joint EEA political committee, with either party having the right to seek binding arbitration if the issue were unresolved; and (iii) the ECJ would have sole powers to rule on the interpretation of EEA laws, while EFTA courts would give their "best endeavours" to comply with such rulings.
Where they did not, different rules could apply within the EC and EFTA.
The Financial Times of Feb. 4 had identified a "shift in EC mood" , which it ascribed to "a realization that the EEA may only be short-lived, as most EFTA countries have applied or are about to apply for full EC membership" .
On Feb. 14 the EC's European Parliament again requested and the Commission on Feb. 20 agreed that the ECJ be asked for a new opinion on the agreement.
This was expected in early April and, if positive, would allow signature of the agreement in May.
After that it required ratification by the 19 EEA parliaments and the European Parliament.
EUROPE
BALTIC STATES
Troop withdrawal negotiations
Negotiations between Russia and all three Baltic states on the issue of troop withdrawals took place on Jan. 31-Feb. 2 [for January 1992 appeals by Baltic Assembly and Baltic Council see p. 38733].
After the dissolution of the Soviet Union, Russia, whose delegation was led by State Councillor Sergei Shakhrai, had taken over responsibility for the former Soviet military divisions in the Baltic.
The talks with Lithuania and Latvia concluded with an agreement that troops would begin to leave Lithuania in February and Latvia in March.
Talks with the Estonians, however, failed to set a date for the start of the troops' departure.
The Russian side attributed this to the political crisis in Estonia [see p. 38733], but Estonian Foreign Minister and delegation leader Lennart Meri claimed that troop withdrawals from Estonia had effectively already begun when 10,000 troops had left in September 1991.
No indication of a date for the completion of troop withdrawals was given, and Shakhrai claimed that there was a fundamental difference between these latest agreements and the decisions of the former Soviet leadership.
The communiqué issued after the talks with Latvia said that the troops concerned were to be regarded as "foreign military forces" leaving "another sovereign state" , and the schedule for departure was to be established with regard for the national security of the states and the welfare of military personnel.
The Russian side recognized Latvia's right to buildings erected before June 17, 1940, and used by the military, and would discuss handing over military equipment to Latvia.
The agreement on troop withdrawal was to be regarded as the basis for a future treaty on the issue.
Lithuania and Russia would also begin work on a treaty on the withdrawal of troops, for which the current agreement would be a basis, and the two sides would also discuss transferring military equipment to Lithuania.
EUROPE
BLACK SEA COUNTRIES
Economic co-operation meeting
Foreign Ministers from states bordering the Black Sea met in Istanbul on Feb. 3 and initialled a document on the principles of the Black Sea Economic Co-operation Project.
The proposal for a new trading zone and for regional economic co-operation had first been mooted in 1989 by Turkey, which was responsible for convening this meeting.
Armenia, Azerbaijan, Bulgaria, Georgia, Moldova, Romania, Russia, Turkey and Ukraine would sign the agreement in the summer, with the option for other states joining as founder members, specifically Greece and Yugoslavia, which currently had observer status.
EUROPE
CARPATHIA-TISZA COMMUNITY
On Jan. 23, representatives of Hungary, Poland, Romania, Slovakia and Ukraine established the Carpathia-Tisza Economic Working Community at Nyiregyhaza in Hungary, along the lines of the Alpen-Adria Economic Community [see p. 38508]; a formal document was due to be signed by member states in April.
EUROPE
CENTRAL EUROPEAN INITIATIVE
The Hexagonale regional grouping (comprising Austria, Czechoslovakia, Hungary, Italy, Poland and Yugoslavia — see p. 38508) decided in Vienna on Jan. 28 to rename itself the Central European Initiative with immediate effect; Yugoslavia did not participate in the meeting but Slovenia and Croatia were represented.
EUROPE
CYPRUS
On Feb. 1 the Greek and Turkish Prime Ministers, respectively Konstantinos Mitsotakis and Suleyman Demirel, jointly issued a seven-point communiqué during the World Economic Forum in Davos, Switzerland [see p. 38795]; it noted that the two governments were planning to conclude an accord of friendship and co-operation later in the year and that they were working together towards a negotiated settlement of the Cyprus issue under UN auspices.
EUROPE
GREECE
Athanassios Kanellopoulos, one of Greece's two Deputy Prime Ministers, resigned on Feb. 18 after criticizing the government's economic policy.
EUROPE
PORTUGAL
The secretary-general of the opposition Socialist Party (PS), Jorge Sampaio, 52, resigned on Feb. 3, to be replaced by Antonio Gutérres.
MIDDLE EAST — ARAB WORLD
MIDDLE EAST
Washington round of peace talks
The fourth round of bilateral Middle East peace talks between Israeli, Jordanian, Syrian, Palestinian and Lebanese delegations opened in Washington on Feb. 24 [see p. 38740 for third round of bilaterals in Washington and first round of multilaterals in Moscow in January].
The 10-day round of talks had made little progress by the end of February.
As in previous rounds of talks, the atmosphere between Israel and the Arabs was tense during the weeks prior to the start of negotiation.
There was intense speculation that the whole peace process might have been derailed by Israel's assassination of Hezbollah leader Sheikh Abbas Musawi on Feb. 16 [see p. 38750].
The next day Palestinian leaders threatened to boycott the talks after two members of the Palestinian negotiating team, Mohammed Hourani and Jamal Shobaki, were arrested under six-month detention without trial orders after being accused of unspecified "terrorist actions" .
The Israeli delegation was shaken by US Secretary of State James Baker's unequivocal announcement on Feb. 24, coinciding with the opening of the talks, that the USA would not provide US$10,000 million in loan guarantees to Israel unless settlement building was halted in the occupied territories.
Baker's announcement was greeted with satisfaction by many Arab representatives who believed that the settlements issue was the major obstruction to progress on the peace process.
From the start of the fourth round of negotiations the Palestinian strategy was aimed largely at halting settlements in the territories.
The Palestinian delegation, bolstered by several new members, insisted that it was only prepared to negotiate with Israel over the issue of settlements and over human rights violations in the occupied territories.
Palestinian spokeswoman Hanan Ashrawi said on Feb. 25 that the delegation would be prepared to address other issues, such as self-rule in the occupied territories, "only after they are satisfied on these two key points" .
On Feb. 26 Israeli Justice Minister Dan Meridor said that the US policy over the guarantees had "interfered with the peace process and given Arab negotiators an unfair advantage" .
Israel's Foreign Minister David Levi, also responding to Baker's statement, had said that "peace can not be imposed on Israel" .
The Palestinians also ridiculed Israeli proposals on Palestininan self-rule, presented on Feb. 24 by chief Israeli negotiator Elyakin Rubinstein.
The 10-page document aimed to maintain Jewish settlements in the West Bank and Gaza Strip, and contained no offer for a redeployment of Israeli troops stationed in the territories, although Israeli officials said that this could be considered later.
The proposals fell far short of arrangements for Palestinian "full autonomy" which Israel had endorsed in the first of the two Camp David agreements signed with Egypt in September 1978 [see pp. 29654-69].
They made no mention of an elected authority and insisted that Israel would have sole responsibility for security.
However, the document did propose that Palestinians should control their own justice, agriculture, education, taxation, tourism, social security and labour offices
Ashrawi said that the proposals were designed to perpetuate Israeli settlements and to foster apartheid.
The Palestinian delegation head, Haider Abdel-Shafi, added that the Israeli position was "very negative and endangered the negotiations" .
Israeli meetings with Jordanian, Lebanese and Syrian delegations
The Jordanian and Israeli delegations met on Feb. 24 and again on Feb. 27.
According to the head of the Jordanian delegation, Abdul Salam Majali, the two sides remained divided over the settlements issue and the interpretation of UN Resolution 242.
Little progress was also made after a round of talks between the Lebanese and Israeli delegations on Feb. 24.
Chief Lebanese delegate Suhayl Shammas said that Lebanon could only address Israel's security concerns within the framework of UN Security Council Resolution 425.
Israel, however, pressed for Resolution 425 to be made part of a peace treaty, a proposal rejected by Lebanon.
During negotiations between Syria and Israel the head of the Syrian delegation, Muwaffaq al-Allaf, was reported to have raised immediately the issue of UN Resolution 242, stating that Israel continued to distort the interpretation of the resolution by claiming that it did not demand a withdrawal from the occupied territories.
At the end of the first week Allaf was particularly critical of the Israeli delegation's tactics, saying that the Israeli delegation had arrived at the talks with a "premeditated determination not to allow any progress" .
The fourth round of talks, he said, had "achieved no progress" .
MIDDLE EAST — ARAB WORLD
ISRAEL
Internal political affairs — Security and foreign affairs
Announcement of June election — Re-election of Shamir as Likud leader
On Feb. 4 the Knesset approved legislation which provided for the holding of a general election on June 23.
Elections were due by November 1992, but an early election had been necessitated when two right-wing ultra-nationalist parties, Tehiya and Moledet, left the ruling Likud-led coalition in January, depriving the government of a majority in the Knesset [see p. 38740].
On Feb. 20 Prime Minister Itzhak Shamir was re-elected as leader of the Likud party, defeating a challenge from Ariel Sharon, the hardline Minister of Housing and Construction, and David Levi, the moderate Minister of Foreign Affairs.
Shamir received 46.4 per cent of the total vote of Likud's 2,800-member central committee.
Levi and Sharon received 31.2 per cent and 22.3 per cent of the votes respectively.
Sharon had announced his intention to challenge Shamir in mid-December [see p. 38694].
Levi announced his decision on Feb. 8 before a gathering of supporters in Herzliya.
Election of Rabin as Labour leader
On Feb. 19 former Prime Minister Itzhak Rabin unseated his long-time rival Shimon Peres as chair of the Israel Labour Party, the country's main opposition party.
Rabin had lost the party leadership to Peres in 1977 [see p. 28533].
Rabin polled 40.5 per cent and Peres 34.5 per cent of the votes of the 108,000 party members.
Yisrael Qeysar, secretary-general of the Histadrut national labour federation, won 19 per cent and Ora Namir, a veteran Knesset member, 5.5 per cent.
Following the vote Peres announced that he would support Rabin's leadership and "do everything to uphold party unity" .
New left-wing coalition — Resignation of Weizmann
On Feb. 5 three left-wing political parties — Mapam Socialist Party, Citizens' Rights Movement and Shinui Party for Change — formed a front to contest the June 23 elections.
Veteran politician Ezer Weizmann announced his resignation from the Knesset on Feb. 4.
The move was widely regarded as an expression of his increasing dissatisfaction with the Labour Party, with which his Yahad party had merged in 1986 [see p. 34770].
Israel-US talks on loan guarantees — Failure to negotiate compromise agreement
US Secretary of State James Baker and Israel's ambassador to the USA Zalman Shoval met for a third round of talks in Washington on Feb. 21 but failed to arrange a compromise agreement on the terms of Israel's request for loan guarantees worth US$10,000 million to be used for the absorption of new Jewish immigrants.
As on previous occasions, the talks faltered over Israeli intransigence on the controversial issue of Jewish settlements in the occupied territories.
Baker restated the US compromise formula, under which Israel would freeze all so-called housing starts in the occupied territories (including East Jerusalem), following the completion of 6,000 units already under construction.
In addition, the USA was insisting on a "dollar for dollar" reduction in the guarantees for all money spent over the pre-1967 Green Line for settlement construction.
Shoval informed Baker that a freeze on settlements was unacceptable.
However, he said that Israel would be willing to slow construction.
The Guardian of Feb. 24 reported that Baker's firm line over the guarantees issue was in effect a "signal of support" for a Labour victory in Israel's June general election.
Labour fully supported a settlement freeze.
Baker formally outlined his position on the guarantees issue on Feb. 24, the date of the start of the latest round of the Middle East peace talks in Washington [see p. 38780].
Shamir said that he regretted the US decision, but that Israel could not, under any circumstances, "go along with the principle that Jews have no right to live in this or that part of Greater Israel" .
Israel's Finance Minister, Itzhak Moda'i, indicated on Feb. 24 that Israel was fully prepared to settle for less than the full US$10,000 million in loan guarantees.
Killing of Israeli soldiers
On Feb. 14 three Israeli soldiers were killed and one wounded when guerrillas attacked an army encampment some 50 km north of Tel Aviv.
The guerrillas, all of whom escaped, attacked the sleeping soldiers with axes, knives and a pitchfork.
Defence Minister Moshe Arens accused the Fatah affiliated Black Panther group of carrying out the attack.
He condemned the action and claimed that organizations such as the Black Panthers were "attempting to increase terrorist activity in parallel with the peace process" .
Israel immediately launched retaliatory air raids into Lebanon [see p. 38750].
Controversy over death of Palestinian in detention
On Feb. 12 the human rights organization Amnesty International formally requested the Israeli government to launch an investigation into the death on Feb. 5 of a Palestinian prisoner, Mustapha Akawi, who had been arrested on Jan. 22 on suspicion of acting on behalf of the Popular Front for the Liberation of Palestine.
Akawi, 33, a Palestinian from East Jerusalem, had been remanded in custody by a military court on Feb. 3.
His death two days later in a Hebron prison provoked Palestinian, Arab and international accusations that he had been tortured to death.
However, the results of an autopsy carried out by an Israeli and a US pathologist on Feb. 7 indicated that whilst Akawi had been beaten he had died as a result of a "cardiac insufficiency" brought on by a serious heart condition.
On Feb. 13 Police Minister Ronni Milo said that the Shin Bet secret service "acted as it would have to act and there was no place for all the complaints and accusations" .
Rejection of Vanuanu appeal
On Feb. 11 the Israel Supreme Court rejected an appeal by nuclear technician Mordechai Vanuanu against his 18-year prison sentence [see p. 38596 for details of the conduct of the appeal].
Vanuanu was convicted in 1988 for revealing details of Israel's nuclear programme to a United Kingdom newspaper [see p. 35922].
Relations with Vietnam and Cambodia
An Israeli diplomat was reported to have visited Vietnam in early February.
The visit, by an Israeli diplomat serving in Thailand, was the first of its kind since the end of the Vietnam War in 1975.
Other reports in February indicated that Israel was keen to extend medical aid to Cambodia.
This followed a major breakthrough in Israeli diplomacy in January when diplomatic ties were established with China [see p. 38741].
MIDDLE EAST — ARAB WORLD
PALESTINIAN AFFAIRS
New Israeli army orders on firing on Palestinians
The Israeli army issued new orders on Feb. 2, apparently in response to pressure from Israeli settlers, easing the circumstances under which soldiers in the occupied territories were authorized to open fire.
According to a spokesman, "the orders regarding the opening of fire were clarified and broadened to enable Israeli soldiers to properly react in cases of danger to life" .
Although the statement did not give further details, other official sources confirmed that soldiers who saw a Palestinian carrying a firearm, a knife or other lethal weapon might open fire without further warning "in an attempt to stop him" .
Previous standing orders had required troops first to order a suspect to halt, then to fire in the air, and finally to fire at the legs, in order to arrest the suspect.
Since the start of the intifada in December 1987, Israeli soldiers or Israeli settlers had shot and killed at least 850 Palestinians the majority of whom, according to Palestinian and Israeli human rights groups, were throwing stones.
Injuries to Israelis in bomb attacks
Three Israelis were injured in two bomb explosions in the Israeli-occupied Gaza Strip on Feb. 9.
According to Israel Radio, this was "the first time since the beginning of the intifada that terrorists have managed to plant bombs in a Jewish place, wounding civilians and soldiers" .
The first bomb exploded in a tomato packing plant at Kibbutz Netzarim, an Israeli settlement south of Gaza, injuring an Israeli woman doing a year's national service.
Two soldiers were injured, one critically, by a later bomb which exploded as they were searching the area.
Responsibility for the bombs was claimed by the Islamic Resistance Movement, Hamas.
Arafat's speech to UN Human Rights Commission
In an address to the UN Human Rights Commission in Geneva on Feb. 13, Yassir Arafat, chair of the Palestine Liberation Organization (PLO), accused Israel of establishing "concentration camps comparable with those of the Nazis" and of the use of chemical weapons "disguised as tear gas" against Palestinians.
An Israeli diplomat denied the accusations, claiming that Israel used "the same [tear gas]that is used in Zurich" .
In the course of his hour-long address, Arafat criticized US support for Israel, while welcoming Secretary of State James Baker's statement linking loan guarantees with the halting of Israeli settlements in the occupied territories.
Calling for the establishment of Palestinian self-determination, he reaffirmed the PLO's call for "a political peace settlement…on the basis of…the principles of international law and Security Council Resolutions 242 and 338" .
As a result of US pressure Arafat, unlike the heads of other delegations, was not permitted to speak from the podium.
Launch of Palestine Ba'ath Party
Voice of Palestine, broadcast by Republic of Iraq Radio in Baghdad, announced on Feb. 8 "the birth of the Arab Socialist Ba'ath Party in the Palestine Region" .
According to the announcement, "a party conference…was convened somewhere in the Arab world in late January 1992" .
It named Nasif Awwad as secretary of the party.
The statement praised the intifada and President Saddam Hussein of Iraq, and attacked what it described as "American imperialism and its ally, the Zionist entity" , "the Damascus regime and the Arab Gulf regimes" , and "the Iranian regime" .
The statement also opposed "the current suspect moves, led by the USA, to make the Arabs surrender to the Zionist entity through what the USA calls peace" .
It made no reference to the PLO.
Setback to Hamas in Gaza elections
On Jan. 24, Hamas lost control of the Gaza Strip Engineers' Association, when PLO-supported candidates won five of the nine seats.
Nationalists also defeated Hamas in the Feb. 1 elections for the Gaza Strip Medical Association, winning nine of the 11 seats.
Marriage of Arafat
Palestinian sources confirmed on Feb. 3 rumours that Arafat (62) had married his economic adviser, Suha Tawil (28), in November 1991.
Arafat had always maintained that he was married to the Palestinian revolution.
Tawil, a Greek Orthodox Christian, was the daughter of prominent Palestinian journalist Raymonda Tawil.
Deaths in Jerusalem café disaster
Twenty-three men died in what Jerusalem mayor Teddy Kollek described as "the worst building disaster in modern Jerusalem history" when the roof of the Paradise Garden café in East Jerusalem collapsed on Feb. 29.
It was believed that the accident happened as an indirect result of heavy rain and snow storms in the city.
Police ruled out the possibility of sabotage.
MIDDLE EAST — ARAB WORLD
SYRIA
Visit of French Foreign Minister
On a visit to Damascus on Feb. 12-14 French Foreign Minister Roland Dumas held meetings with President Hafez al-Assad, Vice-President Abdel Halim Khaddam and Foreign Minister Farooq ash-Shar", in which the parties discussed Lebanon, the Middle East peace process, and bilateral economic and cultural relations.
The visit had been postponed from December 1991, apparently because Syria had failed to act on France's December 1988 request for the extradition of the condemned Nazi war criminal Aloïs Brunner [see pp. 36414; 38695].
Both parties stressed their desire for the restoration of full Lebanese sovereignty and for the withdrawal from Lebanon of Israeli forces, as demanded in UN Security Council Resolution 425.
However, Dumas was believed to have expressed disquiet at the suggestion that Lebanese elections might be held before the proposed withdrawal of Syrian troops in September.
Dumas announced France's decision to grant Syria F39,000,000 (US$7,000,000) in aid, despite problems over the existing Syrian debt to France of F1,200 million.
Syria was the third-largest regional recipient (after Egypt and Lebanon) of French aid.
Visit of IAEA head — Agreement on nuclear safeguards
During a visit to Damascus by the Director-General of the International Atomic Energy Agency (IAEA), Hans Blix, ash-Shar"announced on Feb. 9 Syria's willingness to reach a safeguards agreement permitting the IAEA to inspect all nuclear facilities in Syria
Syria, which signed the Nuclear Non-Proliferation Treaty (NPT) in 1969, had previously declined to conclude such an agreement on the grounds that it had no nuclear installations.
In December 1991 the IAEA withheld approval of the sale of a Chinese reactor to Syria until an agreement was reached.
According to IAEA spokesperson David Kyd, Syria's new stance left Israel as "the last significant Middle East country refusing to open its nuclear installations to international inspection" .
Syrian Prime Minister's visit to Cairo — Meeting of Syrian-Egyptian Commission
Syrian Prime Minister Mahmoud Zubi visited Cairo on Feb. 7-11, at the head of the Syrian delegation to the third session of the Higher Syrian-Egyptian Commission.
He also held talks with President Hosni Mubarak.
The Commission met on Feb. 8-9, reaching agreement on a number of issues on bilateral economic co-operation.
US refusal to drop Syria from "terror" list
The US State Department rejected on Feb. 16 a Syrian request to be removed from a report listing states sponsoring terrorism.
The USA would vote against any proposed aid or credits from international institutions to which it was a contributor to the states on the list (Cuba, Iran, Iraq, North Korea, Libya and Syria).
Syria had hoped to be dropped from the list, having supported the US-led coalition in the Gulf war and participated in the Middle East peace talks.
MIDDLE EAST — ARAB WORLD
IRAQ
UN ultimatum on weapons
Rolf Ekeus, the head of the joint UN and International Atomic Energy Agency (IAEA) special commission on Iraq, held talks in Baghdad with the Iraqi government on Feb. 21-24 following a UN ultimatum to the Iraqi regime to comply with UN ceasefire terms or face "serious consequences" .
The Iraqi government offered to co-operate in return for the lifting of economic sanctions and announced that it would send a mission to New York to discuss this with the UN Security Council on March 10.
Ekeus stated that co-operation with supplying full lists of defence materials, weapons destruction and long-term weapons monitoring, which Iraq also rejected, would not guarantee the lifting of sanctions.
On Feb. 28 the government refused to carry out the destruction of Scud missile materials.
The Security Council agreed to wait until March 10 before deciding action.
Chemical and nuclear weapons
On Feb. 22 UN experts began destroying 400 122mm rockets loaded with the nerve agent sarin at Khamisiya.
The rockets had been damaged by allied bombing raids during the Gulf war and could not be moved to the main destruction site at Muthana, where most of the other 45,000 chemical warheads had been transported.
Destruction under UN supervision was due to take place there from mid-1992 to mid-1993.
The 10th UN-IAEA inspection on Feb. 3-13 into Iraq's nuclear weapons failed to find evidence of a suspected secret underground plutonium facility capable of supplying several nuclear warheads a year.
A further search at the end of February was also unsuccessful.
Intelligence reports had indicated that such a reactor, the plans and equipment for which could have been supplied by China in 1990 [see p. 38548], had been built in the northern mountains.
Supply by US and UK companies of weapons for Iraq
The chair of the US House of Representatives banking committee stated on Feb. 3 that investigations revealed that 13 US firms had knowingly or unknowingly participated in the Iraqi nuclear weapons programme prior to the invasion of Kuwait, despite an administration report in autumn 1991 to the contrary.
The United Kingdom parliamentary trade and industry select committee was also told that several ministries and senior members of the government had known about the manufacture of propellant for the Iraqi "super-gun" by a British-owned company at least six months earlier than they had admitted.
The evidence hinted that British officials could even have encouraged the deal [see pp. 37332; 37390-91; 37471; 38361; 38743].
UN report on border with Kuwait
In late February the UN boundary commission was preparing a report which would reinstate the 1923 border with Kuwait, delineated by the British and accepted by the Iraqi government in an agreement with Kuwait in 1963.
This border would give Kuwait several new oil wells and would divide the Iraqi port of Umm Qasr, currently Iraq's only fully operational port.
Cancellation of oil talks
The Iraqi government cancelled negotiations with UN representatives scheduled for Feb. 5-7 regarding the sale of oil worth US$1,600 million to pay for medicines and food and other civilian needs.
The government refused to accept UN conditions that proceeds should be paid into a UN escrow account [see p. 38742].
UN sanctions renewal
On Feb. 5 the UN Security Council extended economic sanctions against Iraq for a further 60 days on account of Iraq's non-compliance with previous UN resolutions.
Iraq condemned the decision as interference in its internal affairs.
On Feb. 3 the government stated that 31,033 children had died from lack of medicines and food as a result of UN sanctions [see also p. 38742].
Iraqi casualties and reconstruction
The government announced on Feb. 12 that 8,000 Iraqi civilians had been killed by allied air raids during the Gulf war.
They included 403 dead at the Amiriya shelter in Baghdad [see p. 37984]: 52 children, 261 women and 90 men.
At the end of January the government stated that allied bombing had damaged 84 per cent of utilities but that 90 per cent of the damage had been repaired.
However, the government demanded a five-year grace period before paying into the UN-supervised compensation fund for Kuwaiti victims of Iraq's occupation and the ensuing war, on the grounds that it had to meet domestic needs first, including the US$194,000 million cost of reconstruction.
UN human rights reports
In a report on Feb. 20 the investigator from the UN Human Rights Commission, Max van der Stoel, called for long-term monitoring of human rights in Iraq by a UN team.
He claimed that hundreds of thousands of Iraqi opponents of the regime had been subject to arbitrary detention, torture, execution and disappearances.
A separate report delivered to the Commission on Feb. 4 by UN special investigator Walter Kaelin accused the Iraqi government of systematic torture and summary executions during its occupation of Kuwait.
Controversy continued over the alleged killing of 250 Kuwaiti babies by Iraqi soldiers.
A report from the US embassy in Kuwait upheld the allegation, whereas the human rights group Middle East Watch rejected it [see pp. 37927; 38743].
Kurdish crisis
The Office of the UN High Commissioner for Refugees (UNHCR) reported in mid-February that Kurdistan was on the point of collapse and that hundreds of thousands of people were facing starvation as a result of the Iraqi blockade and the cutting of supply lines to Iran by snow and to Turkey by a lorry strike.
The strike resulted from a crackdown by the Turkish authorities on the smuggling of Iraqi oil by lorry through Kurdistan to Turkey.
This trade had enabled the Kurds to raise a levy to pay for food and medicines.
In early February the UK Prime Minister, John Major, urged the UN to convene a donor conference to establish a long-term development aid effort for Kurdistan.
The Office of the UNHCR had decided to withdraw its representatives from Kurdistan in April.
Other UN personnel and allied military observers were due to leave in June following the expiry of the agreement with Baghdad.
Massoud Barzani, leader of the Kurdish Democratic Party (KDP) and of the eight-member coalition of Kurdish opposition groups, the Kurdish Democratic Front (KDF), secured agreement from Turkey and the UK at the end of February that allied aircraft would continue their protection of Kurdistan against a possible attack by Iraqi forces.
However, Iraqi forces were reported to have mined the northern oilfields around Kirkuk, claimed by the Kurds as part of their territory.
Barzani stated that negotiations were continuing with the government for Kurdish autonomy.
CIA visit — Disunity amongst Iraqi opposition groups
Robert Gates, the director of the US Central Intelligence Agency (CIA), visited the capitals of Saudi Arabia, Egypt and Israel in early February.
The publicity surrounding the Gates visit was seen as part of US moves to put increased pressure on the Iraqi government, as were other "covert" US-backed activities — a propaganda campaign inside Iraq and support for the creation of a single leadership of Iraqi opponents to the regime.
Members of Iraqi opposition groups in exile met in Riyadh, Saudi Arabia, at end-February, but made little progress in overcoming their differences regarding the future of Iraq or plans to topple the regime of President Saddam Hussein.
The leaders of two main Kurdish opposition groups, Barzani and Jalal Talibani, did not attend the meeting.
Ayatollah Seyyed Mohammad Baqr al-Hakim, chairman of the Iranian-based Shia Supreme Assembly for the Islamic Revolution in Iraq (SAIRI), stated that the opposition would meet again in March.
He expressed his hope that they would set up a national assembly and leadership council in exile to focus efforts around a single opposition leadership.
He added that the Iraqi opposition and the Iraqi Kurds had agreed to maintain the territorial integrity of Iraq.
This consideration was of primary importance to many of the allies and was a top priority for Syria and Turkey.
The February meeting was the first of its kind to be hosted by Saudi Arabia, which opposed a major role for the Shi'ite opposition in a future Iraqi government, but now considered that the ousting of Saddam Hussein had become a priority.
Egypt also adopted this view.
The allies' preferred option as a means of removing Saddam Hussein remained that of an internal army coup.
However, the Egyptian magazine Sada al-Usbu reported that a coup attempt involving 90 army officers led by Brig. -Gen.
Jasim Ali had failed on Feb. 19 and that the officers had been executed.
New presidential adviser
A former Defence Minister and Saddam Hussein's son-in-law, Lt.-Gen.
Hussein Kamal Hassan, was on Feb. 12 appointed presidential adviser.
MIDDLE EAST — ARAB WORLD
IRAN
Inspection of nuclear facilities by IAEA
A high-level team from the International Atomic Energy Agency (IAEA), visiting six Iranian installations on Feb. 6-13, failed to uncover any evidence to support allegations that Iran had embarked on a covert nuclear weapons programme.
On Feb. 10 President Hashemi Rafsanjani said that Iran was the victim of "propaganda blackmail" aimed at denying it access to nuclear technology.
The Voice of the Islamic Republic of Iran radio station accused the West of double standards for not demanding that the IAEA be permitted to mount a similar inspection visit to Israel.
The leader of the four-man IAEA team, an IAEA Deputy Director-General, Jon Jennekens, said that the group had been "offered every assistance and ready access" to Iranian officials, research centres and staff members, and that "nothing we have seen proves that there is any activity here against the peaceful principles of nuclear policy" .
Western allegations about Iran's nuclear ambitions had been mounting.
In late 1991 US intelligence officials reported that Iran was aggressively seeking to develop nuclear weapons and had bought millions of dollars-worth of equipment capable of producing weapons-grade uranium from that supplied by China.
On the eve of the IAEA visit Argentina announced that it was cancelling an US$18 million deal to supply nuclear equipment to Iran, because of a lack of safeguards to ensure it would not be used to make nuclear weapons.
MIDDLE EAST — ARAB WORLD
KUWAIT
Election preparations
Voter registration took place in February for the long-awaited elections to the country's parliament, which was dissolved in 1986.
Only 92,000 people, 15 per cent of all Kuwaiti nationals, were eligible to take part in the polling planned for October.
Early reports suggested that few of them knew about the registration process because the government's public information had been put out on a Friday, the first day of the Kuwaiti weekend.
On Feb. 11 Justice and Legal Affairs Minister Ghazi Obaid as Sammar said that it was out of the question for foreign observers to monitor the elections, which were a purely internal matter.
Defence pact with UK
A defence agreement with the United Kingdom, covering the provision of military advisers, joint exercises and the sale of military equipment, was signed on Feb. 11 by Defence Minister Sheikh Ali Sabah As Salim as Sabah and his UK opposite number Tom King.
Kuwait had in September 1991 concluded a defence agreement with the USA [see p. 38455].
As Sabah said that an agreement with France would soon follow, the aim being to "guarantee peace and security in the region, be it through the storage of weapons and military equipment in Kuwait, as is the case with the agreement with the USA, or the articles in the agreement signed with Britain which make stipulations on helping to build, organize and train the Kuwaiti army" .
Although the agreement did not include specific weapons contracts, King said that he had discussed the supply of Vickers Challenger 2 tanks, GKN Warrior armoured fighting vehicles and other equipment.
MIDDLE EAST — ARAB WORLD
SAUDI ARABIA
Reports of crackdown on fundamentalist dissent
There were sketchy but persistent reports of a crackdown on fundamentalist dissent during December and January.
King Fahd was said to have intervened personally to warn Islamic radicals against any "excessive behaviour" , saying that "any recourse to any means other than peaceful dialogue is excluded" .
On Feb. 8 and 13, however, the official Saudi news agency quoted anonymous officials denying the "fabricated reports about arrests and differences of opinion in the kingdom" .
On Jan. 29 the Arabic-language daily al-Quds reported that the Saudi Justice Minister Muhammad ibn Ibrahim ibn Jubair had ordered the removal from office of Shaikh Abd al-Muhsin al-Ubaykan, president of the main court in Riyadh.
According to the paper, he had worked for 21 years as a judge and preacher and was an outstanding reciter of the Koran and the author of books on Islamic law.
He had reportedly criticized the kingdom's policies in his Friday prayer sermons, opposed the presence of US troops, and put his name to a collective letter by a group of Moslem clerics to the country's supreme theologian, Sheikh Abdel-Aziz bin Abdullah bin Baz, expressing opposition to the US-sponsored Middle East peace conference which had begun in Madrid in October 1991.
On Jan. 30 the Agence France-Presse news agency reported that some 20 Moslem clerics had been arrested in recent weeks and that a 40-year-old preacher had been sacked and condemned to 80 lashes in December after he had used his Friday sermon to insult the leaders of a Saudi women's association.
On Jan. 31 the country's religious leader, Sheikh bin Baz, called on people to ignore what he called "the smear campaign" against the government and praised its implementation of Sharia and efforts to spread the message of Islam.
Attempt to discredit imprisoned dissident
Advertisements were placed in the International Herald Tribune, the Washington Post and the New York Times at the end of January, purporting to announce that several well-known figures were withdrawing their support from a campaign backed by the human rights organization Amnesty International for the release from prison of Mohammed al-Fassi.
Fassi, a campaigner for Saudi democracy and opponent of the Gulf war, had been in prison in Saudi Arabia since his sudden arrest in and deportation from Jordan in October 1991.
He was the brother-in-law of King Fahd's brother, Prince Turki bin Abdul-Aziz.
The Independent, which had declined to carry the advertisements, claimed on Feb. 7 that they were fraudulent.
The newspaper had, it reported, contacted some of those whose views the advertisements claimed to express, and found that they had not approved or even been aware of the advertisements.
It concluded that this was part of an elaborate and well-financed Saudi campaign to discredit al-Fassi.
MIDDLE EAST — ARAB WORLD
ALGERIA
Violent protests — Detentions — State of emergency
Following the assumption of presidential powers by the High Committee of State (HCS) on Jan. 14, successive Fridays saw heightened tension and outbreaks of violence round the principal mosques controlled by the Islamic Salvation Front (FIS) in Algiers and other towns.
The new authorities began to detain FIS activists including a number of imams (prayer leaders).
The first victim of violence following the establishing of the HCS was a soldier who was killed in a sub-machine-gun attack on a checkpoint at Sidi Moussa, 40 km south of Algiers on Jan. 19.
Detentions of FIS activists and supporters had meanwhile begun, with the FIS claiming on Jan. 17 that 500 people had been detained as they attended Friday prayers.
Among those detained in January and February were reportedly some 50 imams whose sermons the new authorities claimed were prejudicial to public order [for Jan. 22 prohibition of political activity in mosques see p. 38703].
Rabeh Kebir, who had assumed the role of principal FIS spokesperson following the arrest of Abdelkader Hachani [see p. 38703], was arrested on Jan. 28.
Abdelkader Moghni, the imam of the al-Sunna mosque in Bab al-Oued in Algiers and recently elected as a deputy, was arrested on Feb. 7 and replaced by a government-appointed imam.
On the weekend of Feb. 7-9 some 40 people were killed and 300 wounded nationwide as FIS activists and youths apparently without any marked party affiliation stoned members of the National Gendamerie and the army, erected barricades and attempted to prevent the arrests of imams.
A peaceful demonstration called by the FIS in Algiers on Feb. 14 was cancelled by the organizers.
Fierce protest in the town of Batna, 300 km south-east of Algiers, was triggered on Feb. 4 when a local imam was sentenced to three months' imprisonment for public order offences.
Clashes between protesters and the army continued for five days, with protesters seizing the regional telecommunications centre on Feb. 7.
The authorities reported 11 dead and 70 injured and claimed to have found explosives in one of the town's mosques.
The FIS said that 21 people had been killed.
A communiqué issued by the HCS on Feb. 5 referred obliquely to "excesses that reportedly occurred" during the army's intervention in Batna and said that measures would be taken to avoid their repetition by the security forces.
Scenes of disorder on a smaller scale were reported in the first two weeks of February in Laghout, Constantine, Tiaret, Medea (where disturbances lasted six days), Bourj Menail, Mascara, various suburbs of Algiers and elsewhere.
Following introduction of a state of emergency on Feb. 9 [see below]the focus of protests shifted to college campuses, in Algiers and nearby Blida, and in the east in Sétif, Annaba, Constantine and Skikda.
On Feb. 11, four members of the underground Takfir wa Hijra group were arrested near Blida, while a group of so-called "Afghans" (fundamentalist combatants trained in Afghanistan) were reported to be responsible, among other attacks, for an attack on a naval repair centre near Algiers harbour on Feb. 13 in which one soldier and two of the attackers were killed.
Official figures on Feb. 10 recorded over 50 deaths and 100 to 200 injured, while the FIS said that 150 people had died and 700 had been injured.
HCS member Ali Haroun said in Brussels on Feb. 26 that half of a total of 50 people killed had been members of the army and gendamerie.
The human rights organization Amnesty International on Feb. 13 cited 70 killed and 500 wounded.
On Feb. 20 the government reported that some 5,000 people had been detained and transported by air to the first two of five detention camps being set up in the Sahara region of southern Algeria.
The FIS claimed in late February that many more than 5,000 people remained in detention: some FIS sources cited 30,000, including 200 mayors and 109 former parliamentary candidates, while other sources said 14,000.
State of emergency
A state of emergency decreed by the HCS on Feb. 9 gave the Ministry of the Interior the power to designate "areas for the organized residence of non-residents" and to detain any adult "whose activity is clearly found to be constituting a danger to public order and security, or to the good running of public services" .
The measures would remain in place for 12 months, unless rescinded at an earlier date.
Other articles in the decree allowed the ministry to authorize house arrests, to "issue exceptional search orders by day and night" , to oblige workers to return to work in the event of an unauthorized strike, and to suspend local councils.
Presenting the measures in a television address on Feb. 10, the chairman of the HCS Mohammed Boudiaf said that there was no intention to dissolve the FIS provided it "took part in the democratic game" .
Passages of the speech in which he attacked "robbery, trafficking, corruption and nepotism" in the "former regime" were unexpectedly cut from the television broadcast.
Boudiaf had met the leaders of eight opposition parties on Feb. 9 in order to give them prior notice of the measures.
Hocine Ait Ahmed, leader of the Socialist Forces Front (FFS), declined to attend, and reiterated on Feb. 10 that a date should be set for a return to a "democratic process" which should include the FIS.
Those who met with Boudiaf were: Abdelhamid Mehri for the National Liberation Front (FLN); Mahfoud Nahnah, leader of the moderate Islamist Hamas party; Ahmed Ben Bella of the Movement for Democracy in Algeria (MDA); Said Saadi of the Rally for Culture and Democracy (RCD); Sharif al-Hashemi of the stalinist Socialist Vanguard Party (PAGS), aligned with conservative currents within the FLN; Kasdi Merbah of the Algerian Movement for Justice and Democracy (MAJD); and Norredine Boukrouh of the Algerian Renewal Party (PRA).
Report of Tedjini Haddam's resignation
A number of news agencies gave the French Minister of the Interior Philippe Marchand as the source for the report which they carried on Feb. 7 to the effect that Tedjini Haddam had left the five-member HCS in order to continue his duties as head of the Islamic Institute attached to the Paris mosque.
Tedjini had met with Marchand during a brief visit to Paris on that day, but the report of his resignation from the HCS was immediately denied by the Algerian ambassador in Paris.
Cabinet reshuffle
Cabinet changes announced by Prime Minister Sid-Ahmed Ghozali on Feb. 22 introduced five new ministers, including two identified with the FIS.
The key ministries of Defence and the Interior, however, remained in the hands of Maj.-Gen.
Khaled Nezzar and Maj.-Gen.
Larbi Belkheir respectively.
Former FIS leader Said Guechi entered the government as Minister for Professional Training and Employment, replacing Anissa Benameur.
According to the French press, he had been discreetly dismissed from the FIS the previous summer [for split in FIS leadership see p. 38364].
An opposition imam who was regarded as sympathetic to the FIS, Sassi Lamouri, was appointed Minister of Religious Affairs, replacing Mohammed Benredouane.
A gesture was similarly made towards the secular opposition, with the appointment as Minister for Transport and Telecommunications of Hashemi Nait Djoudi, who had been secretary-general of the FFS from 1989 until March 1991, when he was replaced by Ait Ahmed and subsequently (according to a letter from Ait Ahmed in Le Monde of Feb. 28) "suspended from all activity in the name of the party" by the national council of the FFS.
A new Housing Minister, Ferouk Tebbal, was to oversee major housing construction planned for 1992-93.
Ali Haroun, who had entered the Cabinet at the head of a new Human Rights Ministry in June 1991, and since January had been a member of the HCS, was no longer a member of the Cabinet.
His ministry was dissolved, to be replaced by a "national monitoring centre for human rights" operating under Boudiaf.
The new Cabinet met on Feb. 24 under the chairmanship of Boudiaf to discuss a five-point economic "emergency plan" .
Encouragement for small and medium-sized businesses would be accompanied by the "purging of public institutions" , and fresh foreign investment was to be sought.
On Feb. 25 Lamouri said that the Religious Affairs Ministry hoped to appoint new imams to about 40 per cent of the country's 9,073 mosques, many of which, he said, had been taken over by individuals not competent to preach.
New credit agreement
On Feb. 26 the French bank Crédit lyonnais announced that a crucial credit agreement between the Algerian government and eight major banks would be signed formally on March 4.
The agreement was designed to "reprofile" US$1,500 million of Algeria's foreign debt falling due between Oct. 1, 1991, and March 31, 1993, by allowing longer periods for its repayment to the 240 creditor banks.
Debt due for repayment within two years could be paid within five years, and debt due to be repaid over a longer period could be paid within eight years.
Other loans to Algeria from the IMF, the World Bank and the European Communities had been delayed pending the signing of this agreement.
MIDDLE EAST — ARAB WORLD
LIBYA
Rejection of Libyan response to Security Council resolution
France, the United Kingdom and the USA on Feb. 13 rejected Libya's response to the unanimous UN Security Council Resolution 731 of Jan. 21 urging it to co-operate in the investigation of the December 1988 bombing of a Pan-Am airliner over Lockerbie, Scotland, and the 1989 bombing of a French airliner over Niger [see p. 38743].
The resolution had insisted on "a full and effective response" to UK and US requests for the surrender of two Libyans wanted for trial for involvement in the Lockerbie bombing.
Libya's response, presented to the Security Council by UN Secretary-General Boutros Boutros-Ghali on Feb. 12, refused to hand over the two men, offering instead to try them in Libya.
Libya did, however, offer full co-operation with French investigators, who would be allowed to question the four senior intelligence officers, one of them the brother-in-law of Libyan leader Col. Moamer al Kadhafi, suspected of having carried out the Niger bombing.
Kadhafi said that the government had decided on this dual response because France — which did not seek extradition of its suspects — had acted "in conformity with international law and did not infringe upon the sovereignty of Libya" .
Libyan court appearance of Lockerbie suspects
On Feb. 18 after what he described as a "routine investigative hearing" a Libyan judge rejected extradition of the two men accused of the Lockerbie bombing.
The appearance in the Tripoli courtroom of the two suspects, Abdel Baset Ali Mohammed al-Megrahi and al-Amin Khalifa Fhimah, disproved persistent US suggestions that they had been hidden or even executed by the Libyan authorities.
Abdul Taher Zawi, councillor to the Supreme Court, said that under Libyan and international law there was no basis for their extradition.
Criminal proceedings could be started in Libya, but this had so far proved impossible because neither the USA nor the UK authorities had responded to his requests to hand over copies of the evidence in their possession.
US State Department spokesman Richard Boucher dismissed the proceedings as a "travesty of justice, nothing more than another attempt by Libya to delay and evade its responsibility" .
PLO claim to have evidence of Libyan innocence
On Feb. 16 Bassam Abu Sharif, senior adviser to the chairman of the Palestine Liberation Organization (PLO), Yassir Arafat, said that a secret PLO investigation had produced evidence that "Middle Eastern parties" unconnected with Libya were responsible for the Lockerbie bombing.
While refusing to disclose the identity of these parties, he said that the PLO would share its evidence with Libya and was willing to co-operate with any international organization to prove the accuracy of its information.
In its Feb. 21 edition the Tunisian magazine Haqa'iq reported that the PLO dossier shown to Libya confirmed the involvement of Ahmed Jabril, leader of the Popular Front for the Liberation of Palestine — General Command (PFLP-GC).
Jabril, it said, had allegedly had Iranian financial backing, and the Lockerbie attack was thus interpreted as a revenge attack after the US navy had shot down an Iranian airliner in July 1988 [see pp. 36169-70].
This claim was later diplomatically disowned by the PLO.
Asked in the House of Commons about the allegations, which were repeated by the Sunday Times, UK Prime Minister John Major said that there was no evidence that any country other than Libya was involved in the bombing.
Escape of key French bombing witness
Congolese officials admitted on Feb. 5 that the key witness linking the bombing of the French airliner over Niger to Libya had escaped from police custody in Brazzaville, Congo, on Jan. 26.
Bernard Yanga, a Congolese who underwent paramilitary training in a camp for Moslem youths in Libya, had told authorities, before later changing his story, that he had helped Libyan officials smuggle the bomb aboard the plane.
His escape was described by the French government as "mysterious" .
Announcement of Libyan acceptance of IAEA nuclear inspection
The International Atomic Energy Agency (IAEA) announced on Feb. 3 that Libya had agreed to allow it to inspect any sites rumoured to be involved in the development of nuclear weapons.
The announcement followed a visit to Libya by the agency's Director-General, Hans Blix, who was given assurances by Kadhafi that Libya was not trying to produce an atomic bomb.
Blix, in Libya for the opening of the first Arab conference on the peaceful uses of atomic energy, visited Libya's one declared nuclear reactor, the small Soviet-built Tajura research reactor outside Tripoli, and found that it had been shut down since June 1991 because spare parts were no longer available and most of the Soviet scientists who had worked there had gone home.
MIDDLE EAST — ARAB WORLD
EGYPT
Rift with Israel over arrest of alleged spy ring
Relations between Egypt and Israel, already strained by differences over the Middle East peace process, deteriorated further after the arrest of four Israeli citizens accused of spying for the Jewish state in the first such case since the signing of the Camp David peace accords between the two countries in 1978 [see pp. 29654-60].
Faris Subhi Misrati, 41, and his daughter, Fayiqah, 17, were arrested on Feb. 3 in a flat in the suburb of Heliopolis, north-east of Cairo.
The Egyptian police claimed that false identity papers had been discovered and that Misrati had jumped from a balcony in a bid to escape, breaking a leg in the process.
Misrati's son Majid was also arrested, allegedly while travelling on forged papers, as was David Ovitz, an Israeli furniture importer, who according to Israeli reports had employed Misrati as an interpreter.
Egyptian reports about the Misratis were rather confused, claiming first that they were Moslem Arabs, later that they were Jews of Libyan origin; first that they had confessed to spying for Mossad (the Israeli secret service), later that they had admitted only counterfeiting documents.
Some of the more sensational reports claimed that Misrati had used his attractive young daughter to gain access to information.
Egypt's Foreign Minister, Amr Mohammed Moussa, was forced to deny claims that she had AIDS.
The Israeli Foreign Ministry formally denied that any of the four were spies and on Feb. 12 demanded an apology from the Egyptian government.
Uncovering of alleged fundamentalist plot
On Feb. 9 Interior Minister Mohammed Abdel-Halim Moussa announced that the security services had uncovered a fundamentalist group which had been compiling false reports on the human rights situation in Egypt to tarnish the country's reputation abroad.
Documents discovered in a raid on offices of the Salsabeel computer company in Heliopolis showed, he said, that the group was financed from abroad and that it had links with Islamic investment companies in Egypt and the Moslem Brotherhood.
Three people were arrested and warrants were issued for the arrest of other members of the group who were abroad.
Egyptian newspapers had carried reports on Feb. 2 and 3 claiming that the security services had foiled a "sabotage attempt" by "Egyptian extremist groups" allegedly linked with the National Islamic Front in Sudan and financed by Iranian services.
On Feb. 10 Ahmed al-Malat, assistant general guide of the Moslem Brotherhood, rejected the government's claims that it was linked to a conspiracy.
 "The Moslem Brothers, who are more anxious than anyone for the stability of Egypt and the welfare of its citizens adhere to legal means in their preaching and the defence of their right to undertake activities to realise their goals," he said.
Failure of Moslem Brotherhood's bid for legal status
The Administrative Court in Cairo on Feb. 6 rejected an appeal originally lodged by the Moslem Brotherhood in October 1977, against the decree which had outlawed it in Egypt since 1954.
The court ruled that the Constitution did not permit any appeal against the decisions taken by the Revolutionary Council between 1954 and 1971.
President Gamul Abdel Nasser had dissolved the organization after a failed coup attempt in Alexandria in which he claimed it was involved.
Several of its leaders were executed and many others sentenced to life imprisonment.
Tolerated once again under President Anwar Sadat, who wanted to use it as a counterweight to the left, the Brotherhood had been prevented from operating openly by a clause in the Constitution which prohibited the recognition of political parties based on religion.
It was thus forced to participate in elections under the cover of front parties, currently the Socialist Labour Party.
A lawyer for the Brotherhood said that it would appeal to the High Administrative Court.
MIDDLE EAST — ARAB WORLD
ECO
Admission of Central Asian members
The admission of five of the newly independent former Soviet Moslem republics to the Economic Co-operation Organization (ECO) in February gave new significance to this grouping, hitherto involving only Iran, Pakistan and Turkey, first created in 1965 as the Regional Co-operation for Development and reactivated and renamed in 1985 [see p. 34499].
Azerbaijan, Kirgizstan, Tajikistan, Turkmenistan and Uzbekistan were all approved as members at the organization's first summit meeting in Tehran on Feb. 16-17.
The Iranian regime gave great prominence to its hosting of the meeting and to the Islamic identity of the participants.
The summit also approved plans which had been outlined by ECO Secretary-General Ali Reza Salari at an ECO ministerial council meeting in Ankara on Feb. 5 for the harmonization of transport and communications, the reduction by 10 per cent of customs duties on a list of goods, and the establishment of a joint investment and development bank.
To the fury of the Cyprus government, Turkey persuaded its fellow ECO states to grant ECO associate status to the "Turkish Republic of Northern Cyprus" .
A growing rift was apparent between Iran and Turkey over competition for influence among the newly independent Central Asian states and over the future role and shape of ECO.
Iranian diplomats denied any rivalry, but a Turkish diplomat was quoted by the Independent of Feb. 18 as saying that the Iranians were "clearly wanting to appear as leading" and that this was "the source of some irritation" in Turkey.
The Turks made little secret of their pleasure that the majority of the Central Asian delegations spoke in Turkish at the summit.
Statements by the Iranian government made it clear that it saw ECO as the basis for a future Islamic common market which might ultimately embrace some 300 million people — a quarter of all Muslims — and rival the European Communities in importance.
It saw "the somewhat inconsistent political orientation of the member states" — a euphemism for Turkey's aggressively secular stance by comparison with Iran and Pakistan — as the "most important obstacle" .
Turkey, on the other hand, while agreeable to strictly trade-related ECO proposals such as cuts in regional tariffs, was eager to play down ECO's Islamic dimensions, and to offer a secular model for the Central Asian states.
MIDDLE EAST — ARAB WORLD
WESTERN SAHARA
A report by the US Senate foreign relations committee released on Feb. 6 condemned the UN's failure to respond to ceasefire violations, and to threats by Moroccan forces to fire on unarmed UN military observers; the UN peacekeeping mission in the territory was in jeopardy, the report said, because of mismanagement and possible financial irregularities in its US$58,000,000 budget.
MIDDLE EAST — ARAB WORLD
UNITED ARAB EMIRATES
UAE troops joined around 1,000 troops from France's Rapid Action Force (FAR), navy and air force in a joint exercise on Feb. 22-27; codenamed "Little Fox" , it was the first of its kind between the two countries.
INTERNATIONAL
DISARMAMENT
First US-Russian summit
US President George Bush and Russian President Boris Yeltsin conferred on Feb. 1 at the US presidential retreat at Camp David, Maryland, and hailed the start of a new era of friendship between their countries.
It was the first time that Yeltsin had been received by Bush as the president of an independent Russia following the break-up of the Soviet Union.
The meeting came within days of separate proposals by each of them for sweeping new reductions in nuclear weapons.
Yeltsin had also called on the USA to replace its "Star Wars" space-based anti-missile programme with a "global system of defence" based on co-operation with Russia — an idea which Bush afterwards described as "worth discussing in more detail" .
[See pp. 38744-45 for earlier Bush and Yeltsin proposals.]
Bush's most recent arms reduction proposals, in his annual State of the Union address to Congress on Jan. 28 [see p. 38744], would reduce each country's nuclear warheads to about 4,500, well below the totals allowed under the Strategic Arms Reduction Treaty (START) agreed by Bush and Soviet President Mikhail Gorbachev in July 1991 [see p. 38320].
Yeltsin urged even deeper cuts, to perhaps 2,500 warheads each.
After three hours of talks, Bush and Yeltsin signed a general declaration emphasizing the principles of trust and friendship on which relations would be based, but containing no concrete new plans.
More detailed discussions were planned for the visit to Russia of US Secretary of State James Baker two weeks later.
Two more summit meetings were planned before the end of the year.
Yeltsin took the opportunity of the summit to warn that the reform process in Russia could be jeopardized by economic problems; Bush was reported to support early entry for Russia to the IMF, but there were no new US aid proposals.
On the issues of location and control of the former Soviet nuclear arsenal, Yeltsin said that all tactical nuclear weapons would have been moved from other republics of the former Soviet Union to Russia by July 1, although moving long-range strategic weapons was more complex.
According to the Washington Post of Feb. 7, US officials said that the former Soviet republics holding nuclear weapons had agreed that all strategic nuclear weapons outside Russia would be destroyed within seven years.
Destruction of long-range missiles in Kazakhstan, Belarus and Ukraine by the end of the decade, following the already announced agreement on the transfer of tactical nuclear weapons to Russia by July 1992, meant that all remaining Soviet nuclear arms would eventually be in Russia.
Baker talks with Russian officials — Creation of science research centre
Baker's visit to the former Soviet Union [see also pp. 38771-72]included talks on disarmament and the problems of dismantling the Soviet nuclear arsenal.
He discussed with Russian Foreign Minister Andrei Kozyrev the differing proposals by Bush and Yeltsin for cuts in numbers of warheads.
Baker and Yeltsin announced on Feb. 17 the creation of a new science and technology institute, backed by the US and Germany, to employ nuclear and other scientists who had worked in Soviet programmes.
Germany was to raise support within the European Communities (EC) for the project.
The USA was to contribute US$25,000,000; funding both for the new science centre, and for help in moving and storing nuclear warheads safely, would come out of a US$400,000,000 fund approved by Congress in 1991 to help dismantle and remove Soviet nuclear weapons.
The announcement came against a background of rumours that unemployed or impoverished nuclear weapons experts in the former Soviet republics might be hired by other countries, resulting in the proliferation of nuclear expertise.
The new science centre would be a clearing-house for developing and funding projects to be carried out primarily in the republics of the former Soviet Union, the announcement said.
It would let the scientists and technicians "redirect their talents to non-military endeavours" .
Before the announcement, Baker had an unprecedented meeting on Feb. 14, at a previously closed nuclear weapons development laboratory, Chelyabinsk-70, with scientists there, who outlined suggestions for civilian work which they could do for the West.
The head of the Soviet nuclear weapons programme, Viktor Mikhailov, had said in an interview published by Komsomolskaya Pravda on Jan. 31 that slightly over 100,000 people worked in the nuclear weapons programme, including 10,000-15,000 who had secret information and 2,000-3,000 who had important information on "sophisticated technologies." 
There were still restrictions on foreign travel, he said, for people who held valuable information.
Mikhailov was quoted by the Washington Post as saying that Russia would need US help to dispose of its stockpiles, and that the commonly cited figure of 27,000 warheads was "the lowest estimate." 
US and Russian officials also began talks on creating a joint computer centre to provide early warning of any ballistic missile attacks by other countries, the Washington Post reported on Feb. 19.
Possible purchase of Soviet technology
The New York Times of Feb. 10 reported that officials of the US programme for a space-based anti-missile system, the Strategic Defence Initiative (SDI) or "Star Wars" project, wanted to buy advanced technological developments and to hire scientists from the equivalent programme of the former Soviet Union.
It said that Russian scientists appeared to be ahead of their US counterparts in some technologies, including an orbiting nuclear power system and electric propulsion units for rockets.
SDI officials were said to want the USA to buy prototypes and to hire about 1,000 scientists and engineers.
Nuclear reductions by United Kingdom and France
The office of UK Prime Minister John Major announced on Feb. 3 that the UK no longer intended to order the maximum 512 nuclear warheads for deployment on its four planned Trident submarines.
Authorities declined to say exactly how many warheads would be deployed.
French President François Mitterrand said on Feb. 7 that France had decided to moderate some of its nuclear arms programmes.
This included the number of warheads to be deployed on submarines and other missiles.
His statement was reported at the end of a three-day visit by Yeltsin [see p. 38772].
UK Defence Secretary Tom King said on Feb. 28 that the UK would provide special containers and vehicles to help Russia move and dispose of nuclear weapons.
The help would be worth about £10,000,000 (US$18,000,000) in the first year.
INTERNATIONAL
NATO
US warnings at NATO conference
US Vice-President Dan Quayle warned a NATO security conference held on Feb. 8-9 that failure to resolve trade disputes could create a crisis in trans-Atlantic relations.
Speaking on Feb. 9 at NATO's annual Munich Conference on Security, which was attended by leading figures from the 16 member countries, Quayle warned of the consequences if a solution were not found to the deadlock in talks on the General Agreement on Tariffs and Trade (GATT — see p. 38746).
Resolution of the GATT problem was "critical to the security of Europe" and if a quick solution was not achieved there would be a crisis.
Earlier, US Republican Senators Richard Lugar (Indiana) and William Cohen (Maine) had warned that the trade dispute could undermine support in the USA for the country's commitment to NATO.
In a brief visit to London on Feb. 10 Quayle denied that there was any linkage between trade and US troop levels in Europe, but reiterated the importance of resolving the GATT dispute.
US President Bush also told reporters in Washington on Feb. 11 that there was no linkage between the issues; he denied using the Republican senators to convey a message to European leaders.
Canadian decision to withdraw troops from Europe
Canadian Finance Minister Donald Mazankowski announced in his budget speech on Feb. 25 that Canada would withdraw all its combat troops from Europe after 1994.
The decision, part of budget cutbacks, replaced a previous plan to leave 1,100 troops in Europe while withdrawing most of the 6,600 currently stationed there.
NATO Secretary-General Manfred Wörner expressed regret at the decision.
A US State Department spokesman said the USA was "very disappointed" .
Wörner's visits to Ukraine and Russia
Wörner visited Kiev, capital of Ukraine, on Feb. 22-23 and Moscow from Feb. 24-25 for talks with Ukrainian and Russian officials on security and co-operation.
He told the British Broadcasting Corporation (BBC) afterwards that the former Soviet states wanted to implement the Treaty on Conventional Forces in Europe (CFE) on troop reductions, and now had to decide how to apportion their shares of troop numbers under the treaty's overall ceiling for the former Soviet Union.
INTERNATIONAL
UNITED NATIONS
Restructuring of Secretariat
On Feb. 7 the UN Secretary-General Boutros Boutros-Ghali announced sweeping changes to the structure of the UN Secretariat, cutting the number of top departments from over 20 to eight, and reducing the number of first and second-level jobs from 48 to 32.
In future there would be (i) one political department covering Africa, Asia and the Middle East — headed by James Jonah (Sierra Leone);(ii) one political department covering Europe, Latin America, disarmament, the General Assembly and the Security Council — headed by Vladimir Petrovsky (a former Soviet Deputy Foreign Minister);(iii) peacekeeping operations — headed by Marrack Goulding (United Kingdom);(iv) a single economic department — headed by Ji Chaozhu (China);(v) legal affairs — headed by Carl-August Fleischhauer (Germany);(vi) disaster relief — headed by Jan Eliasson (Sweden);(vii) information — headed by Eugeniusz Wyzner (Poland), and (viii) administration and budget — headed by Dick Thornburgh (a former US Attorney General).
The eight department heads all had the rank of Under-Secretary-General.
Jonah and Petrovsky were to be assisted by Giandomenico Picco (Italy, who had been involved in negotiations for the release of hostages in Lebanon — see pp. 38550; 38694) and Sotirios Mousouris (Greece), both with the rank of Assistant Secretary-General.
The Washington Post of Feb. 12 reported that diplomats from the major powers saw these changes as "necessary if the UN is to adjust to current world realities by moving away from its former, almost exclusive preoccupation with North-South issues and put more stress on conflict-prevention and peacekeeping" .
INTERNATIONAL
UNCTAD
Eighth session
The eighth full session of the United Nations Conference on Trade and Development (UNCTAD VIII) was held in Cartagena, Colombia, on Feb. 8-25, attended by more than 2,000 delegates from over 150 countries.
[For 1987 UNCTAD VII held in Geneva see pp. 35547-50.]
A major theme reported by the Financial Times of Feb. 27 was the effort of developing countries to adopt market-economy structural changes and to compete efficiently in the changed international climate.
Debt relief, development aid and regional co-operation continued to be important UNCTAD concerns, but press reports on UNCTAD VIII showed an increased emphasis on domestic policy reforms and on finding ways of improving efficiency.
An UNCTAD report prepared for the conference said that savings of US$75,000 million a year could be made through more efficient trade administration, including computerized customs procedures.
The conference agreed to hold a trade efficiency symposium in 1994.
The organization had long been seen as a forum for developing countries to press their interests and often for confrontation between developing and developed countries.
Industrialized countries, however, felt that with international economic arrangements increasingly being negotiated through the General Agreement on Tariffs and Trade (GATT), the World Bank and the International Monetary Fund (IMF), UNCTAD had to find a new purpose.
The session ended with agreement on structural reform which would focus more on encouraging analysis and policy studies.
New committees were established on commodities, poverty alleviation, service sectors and economic co-operation among developing countries.
Kenneth Dadzie's term as UNCTAD Secretary-General was extended for a year until the end of March 1993.
The changed emphasis noted at Cartagena was described by Le Monde of Feb. 28 as a victory for USA with the support of Latin American countries, as exemplified by the absence from the final statement of any specific proposals on debt relief and the emphasis on the market economy.
Report on LDCs
UNCTAD's annual report on the least developed countries (LDCs), issued on Feb. 11, said that these countries could benefit from the new international situation and especially from the settlement of long-standing conflicts, which would permit resources to be diverted from military purposes and the care of refugees to improve economic prospects.
Almost 80 per cent of an estimated 17,000,000 refugees in the world were in the 47 countries classified by the UN as LDCs.
The report urged industrialized countries to increase aid to LDCs, to ease their debt burden, and to give them preferential trade treatment.
INTERNATIONAL
OPEC
Sixth ministerial monitoring committee meeting
The ministerial monitoring committee of the Organization of Petroleum Exporting Countries (OPEC) held its sixth meeting in Geneva, Switzerland, on Feb. 12-16.
It was attended by ministerial delegates from the 13 member countries, and chaired by Jibril Aminu, the Nigerian Minister for Petroleum Resources, who had been elected President of OPEC at the last six-monthly ministerial meeting in Vienna on Nov. 26-27 [see p. 38602].
The February meeting took place against a background of mounting disagreement between the OPEC members over the need to restrain production, so as to boost world petroleum prices.
World prices for Arabian light grade had dropped by around $4.50 per barrel since October 1991, to about $18.50, at a time when the onset of winter in the northern hemisphere would normally have increased demand and thus shored up the price.
OPEC's target reference price, agreed in July 1990, was $21 per barrel.
Prices of up to $40 were being paid in late 1990 after Iraq's occupation of Kuwait.
Shortly before the February 1992 meeting it had been reported that OPEC production in January had been running at 24,200,000 barrels per day (bpd), about 70,000 bpd above the level in December 1991 and the highest levels since the 25,000,000 bpd recorded in 1980.
This compared with predictions by the International Energy Agency that the world market would only amount to 22,700,000 bpd in the year starting March 1992.
Algeria, Iran, Iraq and Venezuela were especially anxious to secure a substantial cut in general production levels.
Saudi Arabia, however, believing that the IEA was being too pessimistic about future demand, was unofficially estimated to have increased its production by some 150,000 bpd to 8,500,000 bpd (excluding 150,000 bpd Saudi production from the neutral zone which it shared with Kuwait).
The United Arab Emirates (UAE) and Iran were also accused of exceeding their quotas.
Kuwait, with a capacity of 2,000,000 bpd before the Iraqi occupation and subsequent fire damage, was thought to be producing only about 500,000 bpd, but planned to increase its output to 900,000 bpd by June 1992 and to 1,500,000 bpd by the end of the year as most of its fire-damaged wells came back on stream.
Iraq, which had been barred from exporting oil since its invasion of Kuwait in August 1990, was permitted to attend the sixth ministerial meeting.
It had turned down an offer by the UN, under which Iraqi exports of up to 1,000,000 bpd would be permitted if the revenues were spent on humanitarian aid [see p. 38742], arguing that the conditions were unacceptable.
Iraq's Oil Ministry claimed that Iraq was now in a position to export up to 2,000,000 bpd.
The OPEC talks ran into early resistance from Saudi Arabia, which demanded that all OPEC members should accept a pro rata production cut which would be calculated in relation to their current actual output — a move which would have left its share of OPEC output undiminished.
It was reported on Feb. 15, however, that the 13 member states had reached agreement on a plan to restrict production to 22,982,000 bpd, of which Saudi Arabia would have a ceiling of 7,887,000 bpd, Iran 3,184,000 bpd, the UAE 2,244,000 bpd, Venezuela 2,147,000 bpd, Nigeria 1,751,000 bpd, Libya 1,395,000 bpd, Indonesia 1,374,000 bpd, Kuwait 812,000 bpd, Algeria 760,000 bpd, Iraq 505,000 bpd, Qatar 377,000 bpd, Ecuador 273,000 bpd and Gabon 273,000 bpd.
Under the Feb. 15 quota system Qatar and Libya would suffer the heaviest pro rata cuts, equivalent to 10.24 per cent and 10 per cent of their current quotas respectively, while Venezuela and the UAE were to reduce their production by 9.68 per cent and 9.63 per cent respectively.
The least affected countries were Saudi Arabia, which would sacrifice 7.75 per cent of its total output, Ecuador, which would lose 7 per cent, and Algeria, which would lose 5 per cent .
International petroleum markets viewed the new agreement with considerable scepticism, believing the cuts to be unenforceable, and world prices immediately resumed their fall, to below $18 per barrel.
INTERNATIONAL
NON-ALIGNED MOVEMENT
Ministerial meeting
At a meeting in Larnaca, Cyprus, on Feb. 3-4 representatives from 54 countries of the Non-Aligned Movement (NAM), including over 20 foreign ministers, made limited progress towards defining a new role for the movement following the end of the Cold War.
There was broad agreement that the NAM should seek to represent the interests of countries of the South, especially within the UN.
However, an Iranian proposal (supported by Cuba and Libya) that the Movement should become an organization with permanent headquarters (preferably in Tehran) was in conflict with an Egyptian proposal (supported by Cyprus and the Gulf states) to incorporate it into the Group of 77 (founded in 1967 to represent the economic interests of the developing countries, currently numbering 130.)
Resolution of these issues was postponed until the Jakarta summit scheduled for September 1992 [see pp. 38458-59].
Indonesia, which was expected to take over the chair of the movement from Yugoslavia in September 1992, was elected by the Larnaca meeting as de facto chair with immediate effect.
Yugoslavia would remain official chair, but had asked to be relieved of its practical duties in view of the civil war.
INTERNATIONAL
ARMS TRADE
Concern over arms supplies to Middle East
As the east European member states of the former Warsaw Pact and Council for Mutual Economic Assistance (CMEA, or Comecon) continued to experience severe economic difficulties in their transition to free-market systems, concerns were expressed during January and February at a series of incidents in which arms manufactured by those countries were supplied to Middle Eastern countries, apparently in contravention of the existing multilateral arms control provisions.
German officials reported on Jan. 29 that a German freighter, the Godewind, bound from Szczecin in Poland for Syria, had been found to be carrying 16 Czechoslovak-made T-72 tanks for the Syrian armed forces, apparently in contravention of the Czechoslovak government's promise to end such transactions.
The vessel was intercepted in the Mediterranean by the German navy and escorted to the German port of Kiel where its cargo was impounded.
The incident aroused official protests from both Syria and Czechoslovakia, which claimed that the tank shipment formed part of a 252-tank deal approved by the Czechoslovakian authorities before the 1991 constraint agreement came into force.
It was further reported on Feb. 2 that another 12 T-72 tanks had been loaded on a Danish freighter, the Nadia J, bound from Szczecin for Syria; it ran aground near the Danish port of Saeby and the tanks were seized by the Danish authorities, together with 46 tonnes of ammunition, on Feb. 3, giving rise to further protests from Syria.
There were also persistent reports that Czechoslovak arms manufacturers were selling weapons to the Yugoslav federal forces, in contravention of UN policy.
A Prague-based magazine, Respekt, reported in January that Yugoslavia was the intended recipient of some US$1,500 million-worth of guns, rifles and anti-tank missiles ostensibly being sold to Nigeria.
The Czechoslovak authorities maintained throughout that all such arms deals were intended to help counter "problems of unemployment" , and that they did not represent part of the Czechoslovak Army's own weapons stocks but were newly-manufactured weapons.
They emphatically denied on Feb. 7 an unofficial report that they had also agreed to sell 350 T-72 tanks to Israel.
INTERNATIONAL
GATT
Report on trade and environment
The General Agreement on Tariffs and Trade (GATT) published a report on Feb. 12 on trade and the environment.
Among its proposals were the payment of fees by industrialized nations to countries with tropical forests, for "carbon absorption services" .
Such fees, it claimed, would be more effective in halting deforestation than logging bans.
The report also called for support for employment promotion policies in tropical forest countries, and for improved access to industrial markets for their exports.
The report argued against the imposition of bans on imports from countries with low environmental standards.
It claimed that the removal of barriers to trade could, in certain circumstances, be beneficial to the environment.
In support of this, it suggested that the ending of farm subsidies would result in a shift in production from farmers in richer countries to those in the developing world whose farming methods, the report asserted, were less polluting.
INTERNATIONAL
ENVIRONMENT
Acceleration of ban on ozone-depleters
Following satellite evidence that record amounts of ozone-depleting gases were present in the atmosphere over the northern hemisphere, the USA (on Feb. 11), the UK (on Feb. 12) and the European Communities (on Feb. 23) announced bans on production of most of the gases from the end of 1995 — five years earlier than the date agreed in the Montreal Protocol [see p. 37552].
US President George Bush's Feb. 11 announcement stipulated that production of chloroflurocarbons (CFCs — the principal ozone destroyers) in the USA would cease from the end of 1995 with the exception of any which proved absolutely essential.
The following day, as the UK government announced a similar decision, the chemicals company ICI declared that it would stop making CFCs as from the same date.
The decision announced by EC Environment Ministers on Feb. 23 meant a ban from the end of 1995 on a range of ozone-depleting substances including CFCs, halons (used mainly in fire extinguishers), and the industrial solvents methyl chloroform and carbon tetrachloride.
Amazon summit
The Presidents of six Amazon Basin states — Bolivia, Brazil, Colombia, Ecuador, Guyana and Surinam — together with representatives of Peru and Venezuela, held a two-day summit meeting in Manaus, Brazil, on Feb. 10-12 to draw up a joint position in advance of the UN Conference on Environment and Development (UNCED) in June.
They produced a declaration calling for financial and technological assistance from the developed world in return for taking steps to preserve their forests.
The declaration stated that "biological resources are without doubt the natural resources of the countries which exercise sovereignty over them" .
It called for international agreements to support sustainable development, with payments made by companies which profited from indigenous knowledge of plant properties.
INTERNATIONAL
HUMAN RIGHTS
Amnesty report on rape
In a report published on Feb. 5 the human rights organization Amnesty International said that rape by members of the armed forces and police of women and of girls as young as 14 was a "global occurrence" .
Amnesty International declared: "Governments cannot brush rape in custody aside as a lesser abuse or isolated act.
When the rapist is a government agent, that rape is torture or ill-treatment and the state is responsible for it."
Such abuses were seldom reported, thorough investigations were rarely held, and "the few perpetrators disciplined or prosecuted usually get little more than a slap on the wrist and most know they can get away with it unchallenged" .
The report also stated that in countries where there was an armed opposition government troops were often given extensive powers and not held accountable to civilian legal authorities for their actions.
During counterinsurgency operations government forces sometimes used rape and sexual abuse to try and extract information from women suspected of involvement with the armed opposition, or even to punish women merely for living in areas known to be sympathetic to insurgents.
In other cases women were raped or sexually abused because they were related to men the authorities could not capture or because they were of a particular ethnic or national origin.
INTERNATIONAL
WAR CRIMES
Argentinian disclosure of files on Nazi fugitives
Argentinian President Carlos Menem issued on Feb. 3 a decree ordering his government to make public its police archives relating to the activities of Nazi war criminals who had fled to the country after the Second World War.
Menem's announcement came in response to a request by the World Jewish Congress, some of whose members he had invited to Buenos Aires to witness the signature of the decree.
The Minister of the Interior, José Luis Manzano, revealed on Feb. 4 that the government of Juan Domingo Perón, which had ruled the country between 1946 and 1955, had issued some 2,000 Argentinian passports to German Nazi fugitives in the years after the war.
Among those covered by the files were Josef Mengele, a former superintendent of the Auschwitz concentration camp who had lived in Buenos Aires from 1959 until his death in 1979 [see p. 33759]; Josef Schwammberger, extradited in 1990 [see p. 37899]; and, reportedly, a self-styled "Slovakian National Socialist" , Stefan Polakovic, who was still writing for an Argentinian publication in 1992.
INTERNATIONAL
IMO
Estonia joined the International Maritime Organization (IMO) on Jan. 31, bringing the number of members to 136 [see p. 38267].
INTERNATIONAL
ICRC
On Feb. 20 the assembly of the International Committee of the Red Cross (ICRC) accepted the resignation of Guy Deluz as ICRC Director-General and as a member of the ICRC's executive board.
INTERNATIONAL
WORLD ECONOMIC FORUM
The annual World Economic Forum in Davos, Switzerland, on Jan. 30-Feb. 4 was attended by over 30 heads of state and government, including many from eastern Europe and the Commonwealth of Independent States, and by some 1,000 business people, politicians, officials and academics.
Expressing concern about the global economic recession, US and German officials called for a special G-7 summit to break the existing stalemate on GATT talks.
Bilateral meetings were held between the Prime Ministers of Greece and Turkey [see p. 38786], and of India and Pakistan, while African National Congress president Nelson Mandela and South African President F. W. de Klerk also addressed the gathering.