

I want you to think about it during the in cos it does help if you think about this  before  .
So some time, you know, during the interval or at the end if you could er give them to Heather  and then she'll hand them on to me afterwards.
Erm, the social, I've got tickets for the social.
So if you see erm 
Right.
during the interval.
The dinner.
Er, if anybody hasn't booked would they please see Elaine  either this week or next.
Erm  I think that brings us to the end of the  announcements.
Which brings us to  tonight's big competition number two.
And I have pleasure in introducing our judge, Mark  from Chelmsford.
Would you please welcome Mark .


Good evening.
I've been to your lovely new  really smashing!
Really nice.


Erm  you know, I mean er  all the other places are alright, but this is er  I don't know 
 
the only one I know of that's with 
Well 
with a carpet on the floor.


Can, can we have  can we have some light on?
If someone could crawl under the
No th 
Underneath.
fo underneath the  you've gotta clo crawl underneath the cupboard.
Oh!


You found it.
Right.
Thank you.
Okay?
The .
Right.
This one 
 
this one is called Ancient Greek.
Ancient Greek?
Ancient Greek.
Yeah, well there's no doubt about that is there?
Certainly er, the er  in fact, some of them have got titles at the front so
Yeah.
you know.
Anyway, Ancient Greek.
It's a  a sort of a  a candid portrait I suppose.
And the reason I call it a candid portrait is because I don't think that the  he may have seen somebody there with a camera, but he certainly wasn't posing  for the camera.
He's  appears to be  erm  not looking at the  the cameraman, photographer.
So maybe he didn't know he was going to be photographed.
But certainly, his  er location is correct for the costume.
He's got this er  I guess he's  could he be a priest?
I don't know, I'm not  familiar with that.
But it looks as if he could be  an Orthodox  er Jewish Orthodox priest.
With the long beard and the  sort of box hat.
Erm  the, as I sa already said, the location is correct.
Got nice sort of archway here to give a sort of a  bit of interest to the  erm  the  bri the stonework behind him.
Erm  doorway there, always a doorways always add interest to a picture.
Erm, they're sort of a little bit intriguing, you wonder what's going on there, what sort of place it is, and so on.
And there's nobody else in the picture so we're totally concentrating on him.
It does lack a little bit of sharpness this one.
Yes.
It's not quite as crisp as it ought to be.
It's er  but  the actual tones in it are, are ideal.
Beautiful!
Nothing wrong with that at all.
You've got er, all the tones it should have but, the overall crispness, sharpness I'm afraid, is lost.
But I'm not quite sure why.
It doesn't look like camera shake.
It just  appears to be  just a fraction  out of focus maybe, I don't know.
Maybe er  could be a camera shake .
I it,i it does lack that  crispness we feel ought to have there.
Have marks out of ten so erm
I like the subject, and I like the composition and so on, but it just loses a bit because of the lack of sharpness so a five for that.


This
Steps.
Step.
Yeah, right.


Slowly got that.
Certainly  a very simple picture and I believe often that simple pictures are successful pictures.
Erm  not always, but I think a lot of pictures or photographs  erm  suffer because people have got too much in them.
You know, and, and I  I prefer something to be kept as simple as possible and not to try and  erm  make it too busy.
Certainly, the quality of the printing in this one is excellent.
Lovely light on the  the wall here.
The texture's right everywhere through that photograph, it's got nice texture.
Cos even in the  the shadow area  you see there's still nice textures shown on the  fronts of the steps here and on this wall here which is in shadow, it's still got th the texture showing through.
And, the way those steps go round the corner, up behind the er  erm  the wall here, I think again, it has a sort of an intriguing effect, you wonder  erm  where they're leading to and so on.
And they're very steep steps.
I mean, er  you know er, a little bit dodgy.
I would think som someone a little unsteady coming down those steps they could be a bit dodgy.
But, certainly, I like the shapes, I like the diamond shape of this wall here, the, and I like the tree at the back.
Yes, I, I like that one.
I think that's an  an excellent  simple  study.
It's the sort of picture which  people who are not interested in photography wouldn't even bother with, probably, but see what they're missing?
So they've done it, I think  someone er who's walking along the road, see you standing there taking that picture and say, what on earth are they taking a picture of that for?
But I, you know, the end result erm  is worth it.
Erm  I've had a quick look through so I'm trying to remember  er what we've got coming.
Mm.
I'm gonna give that one a ten cos I like it.


That was Elaine .
Skyscape, Loch Linnhe.
I like this one too.
I know erm  it's got loads of punch.
It's got  er, impact, it's, it appeared relatively small so  you know,to erm  it's a fact of life that small prints  have a, a lot more to do to keep up with big ones, they have to more impact.
I mean, they can  er  be lost a bit if they're a bit small.
But, I, I'm not, you know, because thi but compared with the one that we've just looked at  this is small, but it's still got plenty of impact.
Now,yo you can imagine what this would be like if it was twenty by sixteen.
Just a, to, just trying to illustrate the point that size does matter sometimes.
I like the erm  lighting throughout this, although it's  fairly dark  there's nowhere  excuse me, on the, on the land which is  in bright light, although the sun is still fairly high, so it could be artificially dark, but, nevertheless, you can see detail everywhere.
On the water, the ripples on the water are  throughout the picture  and even on this sort of headland here, something like that, there's even some detail there.
So even though the whole thing is in  fairly dark tones, there's still plenty of detail.
And lovely light on clouds and the water.
So, I'm gonna give that one an eight.
Eight?
Heather .
Next one is Fascination.
Fascination of watching somebody doing something which you're not familiar with.
Probably that's it.
Er, that's where the title comes in.
Now with  people who are  at work, who are  erm, working  with their hobby, or a job, it's always important that it's clear what's going on.
I've seen lots of pictures where  people are obviously doing something that you just don't know what's going on and that, that is a pity because er  er  the idea of a photograph is to illustrate what's happening.
Now I think er  it's clear what's going on here, there's er  weaving going on, I'm not quite sure what the material is  er but there's certainly a loom with some kind of er, weaving being demonstrated.
And it, er, er, cos I say demonstrated because we've got these two people here, er this man and the little girl there who are obviously, erm  on a visit to this mill  watching what's going on.
So i it's a, it's a  a straightforward demonstration.
And er  I think that's er, the actual composition with the three people in it  is quite good.
It is a little bit weak and it lacks a bit of punch.
You know, it's a bit sort of er  washed out.
I think a bit more  contrast  added to it would help  it does lack a little bit of contrast.
Erm  I just wonder whether it might not have been better  to move round a little bit to the left  so we could have seen the lady's hand and sa as well er er and  as well as her face, you know, we've gotta get  we can see what she's doing, know what she's doing  but it'd been nice if you could have included  her hands.
And er  yes i also, I would think, it's a little unfortunate this chap happened to have his hand up on that er  post there,yo you know, it's a little bit er  ungainly, it's not sort of a very  elegant sort of po I'm not su suggesting he should pose for you, but I think, maybe had you waited until perhaps he moved his hand out of the way, it might have been a better  erm  composition.
Erm  a five for that.
And so 
Kathle Sorry.
Sorry.
Kathleen.
As opposed to the candid portrait, we've now got a  a formal portrait, obviously taken  er in a studio or erm  with light, well I don't know 
 
about pho photographic studio, but certainly lights and a background erm  of some nature being used  to produce this photograph.
Now with  photographs of young ladies  you need  a soft light  cast shadows.
I'm sure a lot of cliches, you hear cliches from judges  er but  you know, some  facts erm  are bound to be repeated with na and with being a  photographer you,yo normal female photography you do need  er soft lighting, you don't want harsh lights and shadows.
The they, there are always exceptions to the rule.
This one's, certainly, got very soft lighting.
Erm, no harsh shadows anywhere  on her face.
Nice flaunting of the  er the  erm  the face, her cheeks there.
Nice lighting on the hair.
And I like the inclusion too, of  just a little bit of jewellery, not too much.
This earring here, this pendant earring just  lifts that area up just a little bit, not too much, not too obtrusive, but just enough for sort of a  a highlight catching the pendant earring just to lift it up a little.
And particularly I like the background too.
I think the  erm  breaking up of the background with his sort of mottled tones,, or whatever it is, whether it's the background, you know th the background  paper or lights, there's lots of ways you can achieve that.
And it is important that the background has got some interest, but no so much interest that you've forgotten about the subject.
That's a nine for that one.
Howard .
Western Isles, Scotland.
Erm  the  use of the letter box format here, this long, narrow  format is ideal for this  type of landscape.
Well for most landscapes to be honest.
Er, I think fit into the horizontal format le within the vertical, but, when you've got  long, sort of, gentle slopes like this, and expanses of water I think if you can narrow it down, as you've done here, that helps too.
So I like the  the narrow  er  letterbox format.
The other good thing about this is the recession through it.
The, the way the hills  get lighter as you go through  until we get right to the back and you finish up with a little bit of  erm  very light cloud  beyond the hills in the distance.
It's not a great exciting  er, picture.
It's not, the light over the water is perhaps a little bit disappointing.
Erm  i it doesn't  it's got plenty of ripple on it.
I'm surprised that we're not picking up  a bit more  a few more highlights, it's a bit.
It hasn't got any sparkle to it.
But I think, it looks a, a bit like a ploughed field, you know, but when you, it's obviously, water but it, it doesn't look  wet like water should do.
Now the boat there with, with the wash, yeah that's fine.
But,the light, I think, is perhaps, the thing which lets it down, just a little.
It's a pity really because  the hills and so on beyond are, I think, fine cos the, I like the way it's presented and very, very nicely mounted.
Just lacks a little bit of er  quality lighting.
So a seven for that one.
Sunshine and  Sunshine and Shadow.
Sunshine and Shadow.
Yeah well  certainly er  it's got the, the title which explains  erm, what the photographer was trying to portray.
These er   on  when they look to be the cloisters of a cathedral, although, when you look through  they seem to open out into street, so I'm not quite sure  exactly what sort of building it is.
It seems to  turn into a street when you get beyond  you know, those archways.
Erm  again, it's not quite as sharp as I would like to see it, it's  a little bit er   unsharp .
Erm, another thing too  it's a, just a pity that that  chap there, well both of them actually are standing whe pity they couldn't  be persuaded to move over a little bit because they are, you see this chap in a dark suit, he's right against that very dark archway there.
The only real reason you get to know that there's somebody there because you can see the legs and the sort of, sort of head, but yo it does tend to get a bit lost against the background.
So you're not standing in quite the right place.
I like the idea of the sort of  archways looking out  to the right  letting light  sort of fall in  and it, and  make a nice pool of light ideal for somebody who's standing, but he's not standing in quite the right place.
He's not picking up  the, the light.
Which is a shame.
Nice archways there.
Very interesting shapes in the roof.
But it does lack a bit of  erm  quality.
A five for that.
The Closed Door.
Another door.
Another very simple  you can er  another   simple picture.
Very similar to the steps that we saw 
Mm.
erm  earlier on.
This one, I think, is nice.
I don't think it's quite as nice as the, the previous one.
It's er  erm  a little bit more  straightforward a we're looking straight onto this wall, looking straight onto the steps, and we're looking straight onto the door, so everything is  looking, sort of  erm  full-faced as it were and I think that makes for a less interesting composition than the previous one.
Being sort of at an angle to it and, but i it  first of all it  allows you to see textures in the wall and things rather better, erm  and it makes for  generally speaking, a more interesting composition.
You see, these  steps here tend to look as if it's a pile of  beams or something with a door standing on top, but you quite clearly see those steps, but you don't get the depth of the steps so  everything is a bit flat.
The whole thing tends to get flat.
Certainly, it's a very interesting door, and it's got nice er  positioning of the  of the er   and so on.
And I'm sure that there is a  the thing is, it's quite a nice photograph but I'm not too happy with the actual  view.
I think it would be better, in my own experience, move over to that er  the left a little bit just to  go for a slightly more interesting  composition.
A seven for that one.
Eileen .
That's er
Mm.
the name of the place is it?
It's a co is that the one with the castle?
It's a castle.
Yeah.
Yeah.
That's is Eileen's then.
Oh!
Right.
Oh sorry, I've got, I've got  written here.
No.
I'm sorry.
Print number eight.
It's got 
Oh yes.
Yes.
Yeah.
Mm.
Yes it is.
Erm, now this a  a castle which  I'm sure has been photographed  thousands and thousands of times.
Erm, I can never remember the name of it and I, I, and I forget it by the time I get home, but , the name of the castle that is.
But it's erm  often photographed a I've  don't recall seeing it photographed  from this actual point.
Er, er it  I think the whole  place is sort of over the other side there's a, sort of a bridge there and possibly, I mean, I'm sure that I've seen a photograph from the other side .
Erm  with this  sort of landscape  I always  credit the type of lens which is being used, and I think a wide angle lens has been used here, because  we could see there's been a lot of interest created in the foreground, and this is what a  a wide angle lens  will do for you in, in, in a landscape.
It will create interest in the foreground which I think is important and often, especially looking across water  an expanse of water  if you haven't got any interesting detail in the foreground yo you have to go a long way into the picture before it begins to get interesting.
So, don't forget the foreground, and the best way to emphasize the foreground is with a  a wi wide angle lens.
Something wider than a standard lens.
A thirty five millimetre or something that'll be quite  erm    yeah, I think the  er cloud and sky is nice and the foreground is nice.
It's just a pity that the  castle itself is  a little bit indistinct  I mean, when you stand away from it you can't er  you can hardly see the castle there and er, it is an attractive castle, photographed many times but  I would just like to see that  shown up a little more in the picture.
And I think possibly you could  er, with a little bit of erm  er  slightly more contrasting  in the back maybe.
Er, and I think perhaps that castle could be persuaded to show up just a little more than it does.
It does tend to get lost in the boundaries.
Erm  another seven for that one there.
Fingers Crossed.
Yeah.
Fingers crossed for luck.


Yeah it's a  I would guess that this er  we you know, when they come down  and the strips and they go back up again, it looks as if perhaps that's what's happened here because the  the rope has sort of got this twist in it and one imagines that when they jump down it's not quite er  er  right and so perhaps he's on his way back up again.
But er, nevertheless, I think er it's a, obviously a spectac a spectacular thing  to watch.
To stand down here and see this idiot who's gonna leap off


there.
Erm  er  it's quite a spectacular  thing to watch, I imagine if you're there.
As a photographic subject, but yeah, I, it's  simple  and it's, it's a bit sort of small, the actual, I don't know how you could make it any bigger but I do don't know what you could do.
Really, the, the real point of interest is the chap who's doing the  person rather, who's the doing the jump.
Erm  I suppose having this great exten extended crane there does give a good impression of height, but, the action is here and  i it's a little small in the frame and, but  although I'm sure, you know, there's quite a fe I imagine there's a lot of people standing around watching and so on, but  as a  photograph at the end of the day I'm not sure it has quite enough impact to be  erm  terribly interesting.
It's a  an interesting thing to do, I'm sure, er  but erm  maybe you should have the jump  taken the photograph on the way down.
 




But er  yeah, it's, it's  I find it loses er, a little bit of interest fairly quickly  erm because it's, the main subject, the chap jumping down, I think the road was nicely shown, but  perhaps if you could have just  had a, a longer lens just to make it a bit more important  in the picture.
Er, five for that one.
Leica Three C, manufactured nineteen forty nine to nineteen fifty.
Well  


Well this  to, to photograph anything, this just happens to be a camera and I suppose that would appeal to a lot of camera collectors  to people that I  er er who I work with, people I know, friends and that, they know I'm interested in photography and they always ask me about cameras
 
and I hate it!
I


and I say well, you know, I'm not really interested in cameras.


Oh!
Alright.


No, I'm interested in photographs but not so much in cameras.
I, I'm interested in the cameras which I use and that's it.
So, I really know nothing about Leica cameras, I've never used one, I don't particularly know anything about them.
Cos this happens to be a camera but it could just as well be  er an electric toaster, or any, any inanimate object  taken  er, in this fashion, and the thing you've got to do if you take a photograph of an inanimate object  er, like this, is to light it correctly, er  it's got to show all the erm, detail finely, and it's got to have good quality in the printing.
And I think this one does.
I think the lighting on it is excellent.
When you look at the  erm  the, all the engraving around the various controls and the nerving on the knobs here, all very nicely  lit.
And even, although you can't read it all, it's very hard because it's sort of at a  an oblique angle.
Even the engraving and writing on the top  on, on, on the top of the viewfinder here is nicely lit, you can see that it's er  er, the light is catching all the various edges of the engraving on the top.
So, very nicely lit.
Erm  where  it has lost a little bit of the quality of the lighting  is round the base.
You see, especially here, that sort of erm  white metal bit, the er  brushed chrome sort of finish on that tends to get a little bit lost in this white background.
It doesn't here, that's fine, it's great here, but, at the bottom  because it, it's not being lit quite so well as the top you're tending to lose a little bit of  quality, especially there.
Not so much there, little bit better there, but that  bit so, okay, it's er, you've set yourself a task to do a  sort of a lighting exercise to photograph this camera  er  so,yo you  you know, you must really  control the lights  and the  do the best you can.
But I think  you've done very well, with just one little weak area round that but  but it's not easy to do, you've got a very light background  and you've got a very dar presumably black  body of the camera 
 
so you  you've got a very contrasting to start with.
So, to get the exposure right and get the  the whole thing right throughout is, is not an easy task to do.
And this has almost worked, just a slight   there.
So, a seven for that one.
Seven.
Yes.
Sarah.
Very nice er  nicely presented  er print.
Lovely mounting and very clean and crisp.
And  I often say that  young ladies who are looking over their shoulder like this, you've gotta be careful  of the neck because when they turn round and look over their shoulder you get creases in the neck, and there is a slight crease in the neck there but most of it has been disguised  by covering it  with her hair, so  look out for that when you  have a young lady, or anybody, looking over their shoulder, particularly with young ladies, when they look over their shoulder like that it does cause creases in the side of the neck  which can be unsightly.
Erm  I think you've  been conscious of that and have  made sure the hair  has covered the creases up.
Erm  the light on her hair is excellent.
Very nice lighting on her hair.
Again, that sort of mottled background, I don't know whether it's the same background, but it's very similar  to the one 
 
we had earlier.
This time we've er included her hand and  because she's got  nail varnish on  er, you've got the sort of highlights coming from the nails which tend to accen accentuate her fingers.
However, they're not too obtrusive, they do sort of when you're looking at her shoulder here and her hand wasn't there I could well imagine that you'd get a bright highlight  off her shoulder, so maybe putting hands there it has helped in er, er to, to eliminate that.
So, yeah, I quite  er  like the use of the hand in that one.
Sometimes hands can be a bit of a problem, but I don't think it is there.
Erm  I think it's just a little too much looking over their shoulder because  sh to, to, in order to look at the camera she's having to  keep her eyes over really,yo you know really  over to her  er right, and erm  it tends to be a little bit erm  uncomfortable.
I think perhaps not quite so much, you know, bending of the head might have been slightly more comfortable.
Nevertheless, I think that's good.
Eight, for that one.
Gordon .
Green Bottles.
Green Bottles ha?
I'll take your word for that.
Hanging on the wall.
Yes they look like erm  yeah I thought they were gourds when I first saw them.
I thought they're good gourds.
Good gourd !
And by, Gordon.


Yeah.
Yeah, they are gourds.
Are they?


Anyway  yeah, there's three of them which is good er  number to have.
Any subject  er  three seems to suit, all odd numbers, funny enough, seem to better  than o even numbers, I dunno why, but erm  maybe I've been told that by so many judges I begin to believe it.
Erm, but, yeah, I think three is a good number.
The third one up here, the small one, is a little bit sort of lost because  it's against er, this sort of  cavity light here so that one tends to get a little bit lost.
These two  are quite erm  clear.
Erm  the actual shape of them is er  quite  quite interesting and fairly unusual shapes so that's er, an interesting feature.
I don't find the  the  the overall thing terribly interesting.
I don't think it's a  er  maybe it's because the background, I think, I'm just trying to  make up my mind why it loses a bit of interest, and I think what happens is, that the background being, having all this foliage which is lots of light pouring on er, all this sort of twiggery round here is  er picking up lots of highlights and that tends to detract from the  fairly plain shapes  and smooth surfaces  of the gourds.
So, so, I think the background, I think, as I said earlier on that keep the photograph simple  and I think this one, perhaps, has got too much background.
It's one of those where the background tends to overpower the subject.
Certainly that one is totally overpowered by the background and these ones are tending to be just a little bit.
I think it would have been perhaps better if you, somehow er, maybe er I dunno, you could erm, nothing to do with you so you ri you're not in a position to be able to move them  erm  but if it was possible to put them in a, a different situation I think would have made a more interesting picture.
Er, six for that one.
The Porch Way.
This is a, you know, this is the third one which is er  was similar to others we've had, the steps and we had the other door and  a few steps down, and then, this is all similar types of photographs and all taken from different sort of  angles.
Erm, one, the first one, nice  angle to the stairs and the other one looking straight on, and this sort of half and ha half.
It falls between the two.
I think the composition again is simple, which is, nice light, the simplicity of it.
Er  I particularly like the land that it's on there, that adds a bit of interest to it, it's another  view, another sort of  point  to attract your eye.
But I think perhaps, that in a way that becomes the main  point is that, although it's called The Porch Way, I mean, you know that's fair enough because you can see it is a porch, it's not clearly defined we we've got this sort of two pillars here, and a little bit of green, so they're losing a bit of shape of the porch  er and this becomes the sort of erm  main  er  point of the picture.
I it it's, I think  the porch itself  again is  we're not showing the shape of the porch and the details of the porch in sufficient detail and  it's a pity really because I think that there is a, a nice  photograph to be had there.
Er  again, it's all down to  where you're going to stand to take the photograph, and I'm not so sure that you  I think you've gone a little,no you know, I, I criticized the other one a bit, from the same person I think it possibly is because it's the same style, the same sort of mounting.
Erm  but I think it's gone a bit too far the other way this time unfortunately.
But, it's nice quality, very good printing, erm  another seven for that.
Ha.
Ne next one is no title.


Well you couldn't really get much more simple than that.
Just this post on a pebbly beach somewhere, er with some very nice clouds in the  in the sky.
And I think er  the quality of the printing is again very good.
The clouds are nicely shown, the pebbles are nicely shown.
And, as this post here, with, whatever it is, it looks as if it's got some paddings on the ground, maybe a, a boat sometimes gets moored up to it and that's just to stop the boat  er banging up agai maybe the tide comes in that far, I don't know.
Erm  the actual post I liked, I'm glad it's standing up above the horizon because at least that way, you know,i it does  it's given some dominance in the picture.
But once you get down below the horizon you get to look round this area here where there's some rope tangled round, some kind of padding, it does tend to get a little bit lost amongst all the pebbles.
So maybe, it would have been better if you could have even got down a bit lower  and to, to, to  get more of it from the horizon.
I think the idea of using this in the foreground er, as I was saying, with landscapes, and the same thing applies to seascapes as well, it's nice to have a bit of detail lower down, but I don't think that the  the background, the sort of, main part of the photograph is  terribly strong.
I think it really needs to be  the whole photograph needs to be given more strength on making more of this post here.
I think the bit that stands up above the horizon is fine, I mean I think that gives you a good idea  of what it would have been like had you been able to get the whole, or not perhaps the whole of it, but a lot more of the post up above the horizon simply by getting down lower.
So six and a half for that one.
Six and a half?
Yes.
Thank you.
Next one is The Shrimper.
I think this is a chap
Yep.
wading out there  with a shrimp net.
Erm  well perhaps .
And again, we've got three  boats.
Er  three, a nice number to have of any subject.
And they're  nicely separated.
But often boats moored up on the river  tend to blend into one another, but these three boats are completely separate, separated, they don't overlap  each other at all .
Erm  although we can, if you look closely you can see that this chap has got a shrimp  net in his hand, er  so  you get a fair idea of what's going on.
There's a  someone here with a couple of dogs.
Erm  but,he's a bit sort of lost in it, he's, he doesn't have any dominance really.
I think he's overpowered by the three white blobs of the boats.
It tends to  it tends to be a bit lost  in the earthiness of the mud and the water.
Er, you can see that this is a  I don't know whether, it appears to be darker at the centre than it is round the edges, I don't know whether  you  tried to burn it in just a little bit in the middle, holding back the edges, but it's, it's got sort of a darkish patch  i in the centre.
Erm  yeah I, I, it's  the idea's there but I think it does lack a little bit of impact.
Th the boats are fine but the  the main  human interest in it does tend to be, in fact, the  personally, the two dogs has  has more prominence in the picture than this chap, which is a pity.
I think possibly a long lens, just the having  sort of, the two boats, again, that might have been  better.
And a five for that one.
Dusk on Derwentwater.
Yeah.
Nice  lighting on the hills beyond
 

this is a very good example of er  putting interesting detail  in the foreground in the way that tall bit of  wood there  is really making quite a  a, an interesting subject in itself  in the foreground.
Also, the fence which runs out into the  the lake  er  just breaks up the  the distance between the  the piece of wood and the bank.
Because the water in itself er, I'm sure that when you're there it's erm  it's a beautiful place to be, but the water in itself in this photograph  has not got the best of light on it.
You don't get the good, really good light until you get across the water and out onto these hills and that's where the  the good light is in that erm  top i third of the picture I think is where the real quality is.
Erm, the bottom of the picture, perhaps not quite such good quality, but certainly it's got  er, interesting detail.
Lovely clouds.
That, sort of, it's got the, it's one of those sort of days I think  when you've got lots of cloud about  broken clouds, so every now and again the sun will come through and light up different areas of the picture.
Er, and that's, that's the sort of light you do need for  landscapes, and that's happening over here.
Just not quite such lowish light on that  er, foreground, but certainly interesting detail there.
An eight for that one.
Mm.
No title for the last one.
You see this post standing up here  now we've got down a lot lower this time, in fact, I think, it's the same post.
Yeah.




The erm  much, given much more  dominance in the picture by  making it stand right up above the horizon.
And I think this one is  better  for several reasons, I think you can quite clearly see now once you've had a chance to look at this, the other one we saw, we, we eliminated this boat, we eliminate that post and this boat, or rather we just have this post and the sea beyond.
Now, same sky
It's the same.
but I think now you've included this little foreground it really brings the whole picture to life.
And a very good example, if you put these two together just to see what you can do by moving round to a different viewpoint.
Er, don't always take the first one  and that you take loads of picture around, if you see an interesting subject, make sure you move around and take loads of pictures, and then select the one for printing.
And I think this is a very good  erm  er  illustration of that fact.
All you had to do here was to move back a few steps and you've made it much more interesting  in the foreground.
So a much more satisfying picture  erm  yeah I think that one works  much better.
So, and eight and a half for that one.
Gordon .
Okay, so we start judging?
Well yo yes you can do Mark.
Let's get   three of copies and  if you do three of the colour you'll be half way.
Yeah.
We should be.
Alright.
Right.
Okay er
That's called It's My Teddy.
Yeah, and I think the way she's cuddling the teddy bear and that expression on her face seems to, to, to suit the title.
And also, the use of the yellow background, I don't know, erm  whether it was deliberately chosen or whether she just happened to be standing there, but the yellow background makes it stand out.
Erm, you know, it's the sort of picture which captures your eye, and this is  one thing you should try and do with your photography is to capture the onlooker's eye or  eye, and having the yellow background, it does.
I like the er, you know, the nice little grin on her face, and the way she's cuddling the teddy, erm  teddy that happens to be a rabbit, it leaves us




the teddy is a rabbit you could say.
Mm mm.
Er  yeah, I think that one's  quite a nice family  album  er portrait.
It's not a great competition-winning portrait, but er certainly, it's fine, sort of family album stuff and the sort of thing which'll be in the family for many, many years to come.
When she's  sort of, twenty five or thirty, someone will drag this out and say, oh no!
Not that again.
But er  nevertheless, it would be kept  er for many, many years and quite deservedly so.
Erm  a seven for that.
Seven.
Now 
Dusk at Finchingfield Mill.
I think the er  one of the things which helps this  one, is the way it's been mounted.
I think this large mount, tends, somehow tends to accentuate the er  the windmill  certainly the colour, the  sort of creamy colour of the mount, and the creamy colour of the windmill go nicely together, as do the sort of more subtle colours in the sky.
And er, it's difficult to  know quite how to photograph windmills.
Er, you know, do you include all the  four sails?
Or do you  move around and just  erm  concentrate on one or more of them?
Do you have them going right to the edge ?
You've gotta  make up your mind how you're going to photograph them.
And I think this one  is reasonably successful.
I often think that perhaps putting the hub of the sails in, more or less in the centre of the picture perhaps, not the best place, but I think because in this case, we've got a lot of trees down to the bottom here.
Although the, the hub of the sails is more or less in the centre of this photograph  it's not in sent not in the sense of, of the area of vision because you've got a lot of dark area here so that tends to move the centre of vision so it becomes  this bit, if you like, and  so that's not in the centre there.
So, it doesn't really matter so much in this particular case.
A seven for that picture.
This one is called Nonnie.
Nonnie, Nonnie, Nonnie.
Nonnie, Nonnie.
Erm  the idea of, sort of, close cropping as you've done here and, you know, that's quite a  an acceptable and  well-known method of showing facial portraits.
And I think it does  work nicely because it,th most of the frame is filled with the girl's hair and she's got nice blonde hair, nicely lit, that erm  is a good way of showing off her head.
The light on the hair is fine.
Where it's not quite so good I feel  is on her face.
You got this, sort of shiny nose and quite vast shadow  there and then quite  bright highlight on her bottom lip.
So the light on her face is just a little bit too harsh.
I don't know whether  a reflector or a, an umbrella was used, but it does need  something, er, some form of lighting which is a little less harsh.
I find that  there's, you know  a lot of shade on her face  er  which is a shame.
I like the use of the  pe the pearls have made, I think that's good.
And the earring does a very nice job  there.
Tt.
Just a, I find that  she almost looks as if she's been out in the sun and that it sort of looks like very strong sunlight on her face which is a shame really.
Needs to be softer, needs to be softer and that can be done by using a  a diffuser over the light, using an umbrella, any way that you can  soften, like using a reflector, all kinds of things to do.
Erm  yeah it's a pity really.
Er, a seven er for that one.
Next one, Two's a Pair.
And  although these are obviously er  at some kind of show because if you look beyond the horses you can see there are marquees  and so on in the background.
So it's presumably er  a  competition  or a  or er  demonstrating the old fashioned agricultural machinery.
It's obviously a show, and I mean  you could well imagine that in the old days you need  horses were really used to do  a full day's work, they didn't have quite such  er  nice clean tack a as these  ones .
Certainly they are magnificent animals.
And they are, and they're  magnificently photographed.
The two  erm handlers here, I don't know whether there's one who's handling and the other one's just  sort of having a chat  with him about  but, you know, they  they're important in the picture but they're not er  you know, the horses completely dominate the, the two people in the picture.
And it's nice, I think, to include  this  plough, if that's what it is.
No it's, yeah it is a plough.
Er, this is a harrow  plough.
Er, so it's a nice to include that lovely bit of old machinery as well.
Very handsome pair of  horses, nicely photographed.
It's not got the creative thing, which, I mean, competition, to get a  a ten, or a nine, you've gotta really have  some creative element in it, this hasn't quite got that, but it is a very strong picture and, and very nicely photographed so I'll give this one, eight.
Eight.
Nigel .
I don't know if I saw, or that one.
Yeah.
If you'd like to do this one Mark then  you can have a break 
Yeah.
and tha you're, you're 
Okay.
just over half way.
Alright.
Erm  well he's certainly  you know, he would go ideally with the horses, I don't know whether this one is 
 
at the same show  er 
Ha.
show or whatever, I,
Mm.
I could well, could well be the same  event as that because he certainly  looks to be the right sort of character.
Got a lovely  erm  weather-beaten face and the way he's  wearing his hat.
I dunno, I dunno whether he's erm  he really could be, I mean  he could be  the thing is he could be  compared to  a hobo.
But erm  certainly with this style of hat was commonly worn I suppose to his  and by the people who work on the land, certainly in this part of the world.
But he has got the continental grammar  sort of Italians, you know what they're like.


Erm, but certainly  erm  but er  he's certainly got an interesting face.
And it's nicely lit.
Er we, we  this time we don't mind that we've got  fairly harsh lighting because he's a, someone who's used to being out in the erm  all weathers  whether it's  cold or  sunny, I have a feeling mostly sunny.
Erm  so that's fine, to have a harsher lighting on his face is fine cos it does tend to show up the  er the wrinkles in his forehead, under his eyes and his whiskers which is fine because  when erm  my old portraits of this nature, that's the sort of thing you're trying to emphasize.
And I like, I like the way he's got his hat on.
Erm  if he was local, if he was from  Chelmsford we would say he was wearing his hat in the Hollywood fashion, I don't know whether 
 
whether that means anything to people who live in Bishop's Stortford but  I've always lived in Chelmsford and people who wore their hat sort of at a  flaunty angle on the back of their heads were always  seem to wearing their hats in the Hollywood fashion.
Erm


but er  then I suppose it doesn't matter where they come from because it's er  yeah, very nice.
I like that.
Right a nine for that one.
Gerald .
Right.
Okay.
Yes.
But er  this is a sort of a  you know, jigsaw puzzle, chocolate box that type of thing.
Erm, nothing  derogatory meant  er by that because the reason  photographs are used for chocolate boxes and biscuits and things and jigsaw puzzles is cos they're good photographs and they, they're  subjects which people like.
This is a  very nicely lit cottage.
You can see that the er  erm  the texture in the plasterwork, certainly on the front here is nicely shown.
And er, I like  the fact that we've got  similar cottages down here, we've got this one here, but  similar ones there so there's nothing in the picture which sort of erm  detracts from that  er very pretty, that little cottage.
Nice sky.
And just a hint of sea  in the background.
Now we, we, the title tells us that's in Cornwall, it doesn't really matter where it is  but erm  just a hint of the sea, a, a super place to live I should think there.
Erm, you know, there's a very nice cottage and just a short walk down the road  you're at the se at the  sea.
And, also I think it's very fortunate that er  the two cars that are in the picture have been very nicely disguised by the sort of containers, these brick  erm this, this appears to be sort of a stone or a brick wall there  with sort of flowers growing  in them, which has very nicely  dis disguised those two cars  that are parked there.
So, that's good.
There's nothing in the picture  I don't, there's not even a television aerial or
Mm.
anything, there's nothing in there  which does, just a few  er telephone lines er, going across the skyline there but they're very faint, you can hardly see them, you've gotta look very closely to see them.
Yeah, I, I  kinda like that one.
It sort of grows on you and it, it's er  very good quality, er  nice colours.
A nine for that one.
Gordon .
Breaking Waves.
Yeah.
I thought he said er breaking 
Now,
waves .
remember I said earlier on in one of the black and white ones that we haven't, we've got some water there which hasn't got nice lines on, well this, this water certainly has.
Look at the way those,tha beyond the waves there, that piece of water, a lovely light  on it.
All the ripples in the waves nicely shown.
A very simple picture, again, it's er  you couldn't have anything much more simple than this, just two waves coming in onto the  shingle beach  and er  you can almost hear the  the  the waves rushing u running across the shingle.
Erm  I think the, the thing about it, which I  th the good points about it th are the light on it, the light on the  water here, the light on the waves here, and even on this one  and also, I think, the choice of mount is very good, that  you know, to choose the blue, it may be a bit obvious but I mean I, you'd be surprised what  some people do with their mounts.
Erm  you can, something like this on a red mount or something, you can imagine it would be absolutely hopeless.
But to, to, to make it all a very nice  gentle sort of  colours throughout, including the mount is the right sort of thing to do.
I think possibly it needs something just to break up this, sort of, the lines, you just got those bands of waves going across there.
Er, would have been nice if there'd been a rock or something for one of them to break over.
It's just a little bit sort of er  the waves themselves are nice but I think they do need something else in it just to  erm  break up the linearity of the  er er, of the  composition.
A seven and a half.


Tied up.
I think.
Yes.
Yep.
Well I'll be  nice little er, a very small boat there but because it's, of the colour it has a lot of impact.
It's only a tiny little dinghy, two people in there is about as much as you could  manage.
Erm  but it's got impact because of the colour  even the  the trolley that it's standing on  erm, has got er  red wheels, and this  yellow sort of er towing bar there.
No, beg your pardon!
It's not a towing bar  it's another boat.
I thought it was a  towing bar for that, but it's another boat  sort of down in the  in the se se harbour.


And that's the  colour of the boat.
Erm  so it's got a, erm  a little bit of impact because of the colouring to start with.
Erm  yeah, it's reasonable quality.
It's er  good colours on the  this stone bollard here.
Quite nice colours   the lichen and what have you that's growing on there.
Erm  maybe the  the composition, having the boat sort of, the bow of the boat just hidden behind there is perhaps  er  not be better.
Yeah I know if you'd have moved round to the other side that would have been in the shadow so you wouldn't have got those nice bright colours.
Er  bit of a problem with the contrast too, I think the fact that the boat is white on the inside  and the rest of it er fairly dark, I mean


this, this is obviously where  the brightest area is and that is becoming a bit burned out because erm  if it was an automatic camera that was used  it's exposed for this  consequently over-exposing on the inside of the boat.


Especially painted white and it is reflecting an awful lot of light.
A seven for that one.
In Pastures Green.
Mm.
Couple of very nice  horses.


It's er  good composition having the two separated like that.
You know, often horses do stand close together and they, sometimes you get them overlapping and that is not the best thing to do, it's nice to have them separated if you possibly can.
So when you see a pair of horses  move round  and so that you do get them separated as they are, or any animal, not just horses, any animals really, get them separated, er or any, any object really, it's better to have a little bit of separation.
Erm


yeah, I think it's a very pleasant picture.
It's not  it doesn't, it's not got a lot of er  excitement about it, it's very pleasant, you can't criticize it for erm  exposure, colours are good.
So I'm very, it's not a picture which  unless you are sort of mad keen on horses that i it's perhaps not a picture which  erm  will hold your interest for too long.
You know, nothing  a very pleasant picture er o of a couple of horses, very attractive horses, but  if you're not a  a horse enthusiast perhaps it hasn't got quite the same impact, er, as it otherwise would have.


The er  pleasant background, nice light on the horses, but I find the, the subject matter, you know, okay, it's okay but it's not a great competition  winning er, picture.
A six for that one.
Here's somebody  having a go at something a little creative.
Altered States.
Altered State.
Yeah, certainly is an altered state.
Erm, er  you know, I don't, I wouldn't even begin to suggest how this particular effect was achieved.
I mean, it er  portrait  really is the right sort of subject to, to try out this kind of technique  because er, it doesn't have impact, and here  because the green and the  erm  er, this,th for want of a better colour, it's really red, it's a sort of purply colour, they're very dark and th the, the actual head doesn't really stand out very much from the  from the background, I think the background 
 
colour and th they're, they're too much  they're too dark and er  they need to be, have more contrast.
And I'm not so sure that portrait is the best possible  erm  medium to use, or the best possible photograph to use for this type of  er trick.
I think that  erm  modern structure and that sort of thing, this type of treatment 
 
tends to work better, I'm not so sure portrait is the right thing to do.
Erm  er a it's, it's almost an abstract, it's  a, you know, if, if  one would accept that as an abstract and forget that it's a portrait then it's  perhaps works a little better.
The two colours don't go too badly together but er I'm not so sure that I would really want that hanging on the wall, I, it doesn't really appeal to me very much.
Sorry about that.
But another judge will come along and give it a fine mark, but 
 
I'm gonna give it a five.
The Dordogne.
The Dordogne.
Mhm.
Yeah, I  guessed it was certainly vineyards, I'm  you know, quick like that, you know.


Erm  yes, well the high viewpoint obviously is er  er   a thing which  I think makes the picture.
It  now whether you're taking a portrait or  anything at all it's always more interesting I think, if you can  take a  a slightly different viewpoint, a di whether it's up high or down below, or whatever  er i that always adds interest to it.
We're looking down here, obviously standing on a hill  because here we've got some plants which are  on the hillside  and there's a river here so we're on sort of a  fairly steep slope, I would imagine, down to the river, looking over across these vineyards.
Erm  nice lighting  very good sort of er  gentle lighting across the countryside there, nothing very dramatic.
Erm, not much drama in the sky.
It's a very pleasant picture.
Not a great competition-winning shot but er, at the same time it's a, it's a nice enough shot of this particular  area.
A very beautiful part of France.
Erm  being that I, one of the bits which I think catches your eye is this little house here, although there's lots of them about, because this one tends to be in a slightly darker area, and for some reason that, the light on there is sort of picking that one out rather more than all the others, and I think that's quite a nice  little feature.
A seven for that one.
That
Le Tower D'Eiffel.
Ooh!
Yeah.
Oh!
Dear oh dear!
I like your French accent.
 


He didn't know he's  
Yes.
Well  yeah, as I say  very recognizable subject isn't it?
I 
Mhm.
I 
 

I haven't been to Paris since er  ooh a long time a whe last time I went there I was on honeymoon so that's a few  years ago.
 


Erm
Did you see the Eiffel Tower ?
and er so  there's a landmark now, I don't think tha that was there when I was there.
My wife's been a couple of times si since then but not me.
Erm  yeah it's a, again, a very  straightforward shot of a  very well internationally known landmark  erm but I think to stand sort of at an angle to this bridge, sort of, so you're, the bridge leads you up to the  archway underneath the tower is a nice viewpoint.
So you  obviously thought about where you were going to stand.
It might, you might be tempted to walk along the embankment a little further and, and look  along the bridge, and er, sort of straight at the tower.
And I don't think that would be anywhere nearly so effective.
Much more  effective to  to get the very attractive bridge in as well.
And the  the boat going underneath just er at the right sort of time.
Yeah, I think that's good.
It's not a  erm  you know, it's, it's, it's not a  a sort of print which is going to be exhibited on exhibition walls er er to that extent, but it's a very pleasant erm  shot.
It's a very competent shot.
Not a, pity there's not a, one or two clouds in the sky.
An eight for that one.
Nigel .
Seljuk Peasant  Turkey.
I do wondered how you were gonna say that George, that, you know that 
 




Yeah, I like this one.
I think it's a super  erm 
 
portrait  and erm  you can see that she's knitting.
Er, lovely light on her hands and on her face, and er  this lovely quality, nice colours  and I think that is a  super  portrait.
Erm  the background, can't, having the tree in the background just to fill up the  erm  the bare sky is ideal.
She almost has a three D  effect, I er, you know her face really stands out from that background.
I, I get a very strong  three D impression from her head.
She's stan really sa of stands out from the  the background.
I like that one.
Erm  be careful with your titles  cos it's not easy to title them.
That title is  perhaps a  not quite as straight as it might be, it's got a little bit of a kink in it.
Though, using Letraset to title them is not easy to do, you know it's very difficult to keep them on a straight line.
Mm mm.
Erm but  nevertheless I do think that is a  a super portrait.
I can't really criticize it all really.
I'm gonna give that one a ten.


Gerald .
Over the stile.
I think the strong point of this  is the light.
I mean the lovely  golden light on the  the grass  very late  afternoon light I would suggest  and it's got this lovely warm  colour on the grass.
And on this hillside over here.
And having someone just climbing over the stile is a good idea with the signpost pointing.
It doesn't really matter which way it's going.
And er  yo you get the impression that  it's late in the day, the sky's a bit stormy  and maybe  it's time to be thinking about  er getting home and er  I get the impression that that person climbing over the stile  is sort of on his way home after having a super day out walking in the  the Yorkshire Dales or somewhere like that.
And er, the pubs are open.


Yeah, well it could be .
 
Yeah, that's very, very nice.
Lovely colours  and er  a very nice light in the, in the sky and on the grass here.
Perhaps again, it lacks just a little bit of sharpness which you've lost.
The colours, the quality and the colours are fine.
The actual quality in the, in the er  print  the sharpness, er that sort of thing, is perhaps not quite as good as it should be but I still, an eight for that one.
Eight?
Gordon .
Knossos, Crete.
Knossos.
Knossos.
Ka nossos.
Ka nossos.
Yes, it's a  a typical sort of  Mediterranean er lighting, or Aegean I suppose is it?
Erm  if you wanna be really  accurate.
Er, it's got  a very lo strong clear sunlight which er  is quite attractive for the type of scene.
Not attractive for every subject but for the  where you get these old  erm  broken  walls or summat like that, it's ideal for showing up  er  textures and so on, this type of lighting.
This is often why it works, I think, in er, in the Mediterranean er and places  in that area.
Er  just a little bit of cloud in the sky which is good.
I suppose 
 
you've got to have the tourist there, it's a  I find, tourists, they always wear the wrong sort of clothes.
 
I feel a little guilty, but they've always got shorts and T-shirts, which, really, often, to my mind,
 
spoil photographs of  places such as this.
Erm


you know, we would li I don't mind people being in it, but I'd rather, you know, can you imagine that er  the Greek priest we had in the very first print 
 
I mean he would fit into this  er in a, in, in a superb way.
Erm  so we just have to accept that tourists don't dress in  those sort of clothes.
Yeah, I think that's a  got nice lighting, nice quality  in it.
Er


a seven and a half for that.
Brooding Skyline.
Yeah I think the, the drama in the sky is the thing which makes this, and the little lighthouse right on the edge of the cliff there  showing up quite nicely.
You can imagine that er  on some occasions with a li just a little more sunlight that er  lighthouse would really stand out.
Yeah, it stands out reasonably well in this one, but I can imagine it standing out even more under other conditions.
Erm  the darkening of the edges, I suppose that's been done to create a little more atmosphere in the picture, and I think it possibly does.
And there are some people actually on the beach as well, which I think is important because we've got a lot of  empty area here, fairly featureless  area, but it's nice to have these  two or three people  er  dotted around on the beach.
Very nice light on these cliffs over here.
Yeah, I think that one works quite well.
An eight for that one.
Heather .
Another studio  portrait.
Nadine.
Nadine.
Nadine.
She really looks like  Sandy Shaw.
But er 
 
she's got her shoes on there.
Shows your age if you can remember.
Some of you might do as well.
 




Erm  I suppose to most of us here Sandy, Sandy Shaw was .


Yeah it's  
Ha.
erm  the thing about this title portrait which I always er  like to emphasize and  is that when you're using props like these stools  or any other props at all in this sort of  glamour photography  then they must be in absolutely pristine condition, and they are here.
I just mentioned that so that when you, if you do this type of photography always remember that your props, whatever they might be, must be absolutely in pristine condition.
We don't want any chipped paint, or rusty legs on the stools or anything like that.
They've gotta be really good  er  good things.
Otherwise it tends to make the whole picture, like, I went to er  er one club once and there was a very nice portrait, not unlike this, there was a girl sitting on a stool, rather less clothes on than this girl has got  and it was very nicely done except she was sitting on a painted stool and all the paint was chipped and that to me looked really tacky!
And I thought ah, you know 
 
they're, went to all that trouble to produce a good photograph, and absolutely ruined it with the stool.
So, make sure that everything is in good nick.
Yes.


Erm  yeah, I think the pose is quite nice.
I think, possibly erm  having the two different stools is a little bit er  unfortunate.
Erm  I don't know  I don't yo I, I think possibly  having that foot up on the stool was perhaps a mistake.
Mm.
I think perhaps if you could have arranged her so that er  this foot somehow was resting down here, well it might have been better.
 
It looks a little uncomfortable  er  like that.
And it looks a little bit sort of set up having that totally different stool brought into the picture.
Erm


I just wonder whether  erm  I think that stool there might have been better to have her sitting on that one, not quite so high up and she could have adopted a more comfortable pose and she wouldn't have needed another prop for her foot.
So I think perhaps, that's where  the picture is not quite right in the, the composition, and also the fact that this stool is sort of 

being er  chopped off  along the side as well as the leg.
So, I think possibly  a little more thought in the actual, I think the actual shape of the girl there, the way she's actually sitting is fine, but er  it, it looks as if she's been propped up with, you know, you better put this stool under your foot to hold that up and  put this crutch under your arm to hold that up and 
 
and so on.
It looks as if she's had these things put there to support her rather than actually casually sitting on them.
But certainly the lighting's quite nice and I think, very pretty girl and  could be better with the better composition.
Erm, six and a half for that one.
Feeding Quietly.


Feeding?
Feeding.
Ya.
Eating.
Feeding.
It would be, yeah.
Well it 
Quite, quite .
I think erm, often when  judges, I don't know whether George  or any other judges that might be here tonight, one of the things which I as a judge often dread is photographs of babies coming up in competition.
 
Not that I've got anything against babies.


But, it's often difficult because quite often they come up and to be absolutely honest  they're not that good.
So, you start to criticize them and you think oh my God!
This is someone's baby in the audience that we're, we're having a go at.
But that's not the problem here because I think this one  is excellent.
I think the light on er the baby's face, I, I dunno whether it's a little boy or a little girl, but it doesn't matter, the light on the baby's face


is super.
And I certainly love the way that both eyes are catching those lovely highlights!
Great big brown eyes.
very appealing.
Nice light on that sort of, the curls over the forehead.
So we've got lovely soft lighting  throughout.
Erm  brighter on the side which is furthest away from us, and the fact that he's er, he or she, is eating a, you know a piece of fruit or something  is quite appealing.
I like that one.
Not quite a ten because I think it's er  you know, this hand here perhaps a little bit er  obtrusive  but certainly I think that one's worth a nine.
Elaine .
Restored to former Glory.
Yeah I can remember when I was about er  seven or eight years old I had a  a Hornby  train which is almost identical, except it was red, I go I think some other people had one as well.
Hornby loco we had those  things you used to pull out of the cabs and they could go


forwards and backwards.
Oh lovely!
Erm  and it was almost identical to that.
Very nice quality print.
Er lovely  I mean,re re restored in absolute pristine condition.
Magnificently restored locomotive.


And it's standing in the right sort of location in this old station.
Erm  a little bit of steam around so you do get an impression that it's erm  you know, it's alive and working  obviously not doing a day's work, but certainly being restored back to working condition.
And for anybody who's a, a rail enthusiast would be  er, very pleased with this  shot.
And I think possibly that maybe the little bit of a problem with it, it's a little bit too specialized.
It's very good  quality, erm  yeah, I think it's, it's  it's, the quality of it is good enough to put it up for,i in the sort of higher echelon of marks.
So I shall er  I give that one an eight  for the quality.
Peter .
Blaze 
What 
Away.
Ah!
That's an apt title.
Blazing the gun away, Blaze Away.
Yeah.
A little bit of


er  thought given to the title of that.
I was quite surprised, er during the summer I went to my grandson's school fete  and  they had a hot air balloon  demonstration there and this er, this car turned up with a trailer on the back with, I dunno, probably some name, hot air balloon name on the trailer, I thought oh yes he's  gonna show us how to inflate it and  i I was quite amazed from the time he unpacked the balloon  to the time it actually took off was only ten minutes.
I was really quite impressed!
I didn't realize that they could be  got ready in such a short  space of time.
But anyway, very dramatic shot looking up into the mouth of the balloon with this huge flame going up.
I guess th that you must have be actually been in the basket.
We don't get the impression erm  of whether you were airborne at that stage.
I would think if you weren't, you must have been very nearly.
Perhaps  yeah I think you must have been airborne at that stage to be  er, had such a enormous flame going up  into the balloon.
Very, sort of, eye-catching because of the nature of it.
And I think  it's quite nicely exposed  er  to show the detail in the  erm  the burner.
You can see the gas burner here th quite a lot of detail, a hand rail or something around it there, and all the, the details in that burner are quite nicely shown.
But most of all obviously the, the great roar y you know, the tremendous noise that they make.
Or I believe they have got some quieter ones now.
Erm  a seven for that one.
Seven.
Ferry   Zy de Zi 
That's nice .
Looks like a mini Battersea Power Station.
 
, I dunno .
Erm


yeah I think those three chimneys there  are from a, I dunno, is it, looks as if it could be a  kiln or something, you know.
Er, it could be, be a pottery, I don't know.
It, they, they certainly look as if they are sort of intended  er to heat things up.
That's obviously a furnace
Kiln.
at the bottom of each one of those.
But nice light on the chimneys and on the sky, and throughout the picture really.
I think that's quite intere find a, a nice  composition.
And the thing which really makes it are the three chimneys, without those, I think the rest of it would be okay, but not terribly exciting.
I think the three chimneys are  vital to the er  the strength of the picture.
Quite nice natural colours.
Yeah I think that is er  it's not a great  competition- winning shot, but I still think a seven and a half for that one.
Seven and a half.
The next one is no title.
Well it doesn't really need a title, it's a  er  it could be anywhere it's, it, it, sort of got that hint of west country, but it doesn't really matter it's, we're not interested in where it is, we're interested in the  the final image.
And er  I think the  that's quite good.
Although there's some, but these sort of pictures they always look darker than they actually are because you can see the sun is still pretty high up, so, I imagine that the surrounding  scene was still in quite sunlight, but, looking straight into the sun, as we are here, albeit behind the clouds 
 
it does have the effect  of darkening everything down.
Th the strong highlight on the reflection on the water obviously is a thing which  makes the picture as, and also the, the sort of rays of sun coming down through the cloud.
Just enough light around to make out the  that tree there, and a little bit of detail in the  in the foreshore and obviously the headland.
But erm  yeah, it's, it's  er good for what it is, but I think this has been done many times before  and er  I sh would think that everybody's seen some just slightly better than this, but it's quite a nice  er sunset.
A nice reflection on the water.
Er, a six for that one.
Olive Trees.
Ah!
A pity there, I was gonna  sort of le air my knowledge and say a and say look at these olive trees.


Yes, well, obviously I think, you know they, quite obvious what they are.
Erm 
 
I think again, the choice of the mount is good bu you know we tend to associate olive trees growing in hot  erm  erm  fairly dry areas, and I think the choice of the  mount colour accentuates that.
Erm  I think possibly just the trees themselves are we you know,th okay they're olive trees, so they're a little bit unusual, we don't  get too many olive trees growing in this country, but  I'm not so sure that they're as  er  that attractive to make  a, a photograph solely out of the olive trees.
I think, er you know, they're just a, you know, if, if they were  erm  elm trees or something like that, or  you know blackthorn trees here and you'd taken them in this country, you'd say, oh there's a couple of blackthorn trees!
And  here we've got a couple that happen to be olive trees, and I, I'm not so sure that just the fact that they're olive trees  really is  that important.
And I think perhaps it's  it lacks a bit of importance, you know, it hasn't got the strength  erm  to stand up on its own.
It really needs something else.
We need a donkey in it or something like that, you know just to 
 
erm  be in keeping with the situation, a donkey there would be, would be nice.
But the trees on their own, it's like a scene waiting for something happen.
It, it's a bit empty.
So a six for that one please.
Deserted 
Well 
Shore.
The last one.
well guess what?
Deserted Shore.
That's right.
I think you said that.


Someone sent the boat over !
 
You know the
 
You couldn't move around a lot.
Move around a bit more


a bit more
Tip the boat over.
the camera.
And you've got a third photograph.


Yeah, I, I think again, this er deserves a good, it's a good exercise to do this sort of thing, taking colour and black and white because you can then decide whe whether one medium has got an advantage over the other or not.
And you can, you know you can argue about it, it's a good talking point, good discussion point, and I think you  you will get different opinions er to, whoever you speak to.
But certainly the fact that this is being in colour, you know, that boat which is lying there becomes much more important.
The red sort of er  erm bit round the top of the boat


is er  becomes important, as does the colour in the sky.
So it, this has  some things in the picture gain importance, although I still  the black and white ones.
Er, now you've chosen this time to eliminate the other boat, we know there's another boat around about here somewhere, and we know there's another post here, so erm  but  if this was shown in isolation we wouldn't have known that.
And I think this one stands up quite nicely on its own.
Very nice quality.
Lovely sky.
I, I particularly like the sky in that one.
Erm, I think possibly again, if you'd got down a bit lower this sort of little rise in the ground there, that er  that's a, it's erm  what do you call it?
A  breakwater  would have just risen up above the horizon and come, become slightly more important.
But still, I still think that's quite good.
I'll give that one an eight as well.
Heather .
I must er
Thank you Mark.
That was the last one.
Could we have the lights please.
While George is er  doing the marks, I might call on Gerald  please to give the vote of thanks.
Evening everybody.
Can you hear, hear me over there?
Yes.
Yes.
Thank you.
Yeah?
Once again, Mr  has done us proud.
I've heard hundreds of judges in the last few years and Mr  is one of the very few  who, in, in every picture delivers a very  picture.
He comes up with a little piece of advice on how to  make that picture, or the colouring, or the mounting better.
And you don't often see the  every picture he tells something, something nice about it.


And compared with mine as well you see.


About this time last year  I think it was the same week  he came  there were five judges that he picked every year  for fifteen years.
Oh!
And despite , you know, managed, he somehow he'd get them through and get .
But we've had a very good evening and we must thank Mr  for it.
So, in our usual way, a vote of thanks.


Thanks very much Mark, you've given me the hardest part.




Anyway, erm  on the night monochrome prints  Elaine  and Alf  tied with twenty four.
Gordon  had twenty three and a half.
Heather  had twenty one and a half.
And Gloria  had sixteen.
So aggregation then with number one, we have Gordon  leading the way with fifty and a half.


But Alfie  was second with forty nine and a half.
Oh!
So there's not a lot, lot in that.
Heather  is forty six, she's third.
Elaine  is fourth with forty four.
And technicolour, on the night  er top of the shop tonight was Gerald  who gave the vote of thanks, who got twenty six and a half.


And   but, we have  Nigel , Gordon , and Heather 
Tt!
all with twenty three.
Vince  has twenty two.
Bill  and Elaine  have twenty one each.


Erm  aggregating again with number one  Gerald  is leading the way with fifty two and a half.


And then we have erm  Nigel with forty nine.
And then, Gordon  and Heather  both with forty six.
Elaine  with forty five is fourth.
And Peter  forty four and a half is fifth.
Thank you George.
Well done George.
Thanks.
Right, well next week is the auction.
Er  we have got some, one or two expensive items so  bring your 
 
money bags along.
Er, if anybody's got any items that they haven't told me about tonight and they go before  perhaps you'd be kind enough to give me a phone call.
And if you could get here by half past seven those of you who have got items, it'll be much appreciated cos it takes quite a time to  to set them out.
Er, the coffee next week is going to made by Jane  and Peter .
Er, next week will be the last week for selling tickets for the social  so if  you'd like to come  tickets next week.
And if you haven't made arrangements about your dinner  after Christmas, would you please do that now.
I'll leave you to say goodnight, thank you for coming .