

Chapter Twelve
Melissa slept late and awoke with a splitting headache.
Grumbling to herself, she put on her dressing-gown and tottered downstairs, filled a kettle and rummaged in a drawer for aspirin.
After a cup of strong coffee and a slice of dry toast, she contemplated the day ahead.
She normally did this quietly in bed before getting up and almost invariably began with an early breakfast followed by three or four hours' work on her current novel.
This morning, having forced herself to her study, still wearing her dressing-gown and clutching a second cup of coffee as if it were attached to a lifeline, she began searching among her papers for the output of the previous day.
It came as a mild shock to realise that there was none.
Today was Saturday and she had not written a word since Thursday morning.
Ruefully, she recalled her pleasure at the way the book, after a difficult patch, had begun to develop.
She had been reluctant to put it away, wishing she had no other commitments so that she could continue with the next chapter and looking forward to getting down to work again the following morning.
And all the time, she thought as she sat at her desk nursing the remains of her hangover, Angy had been dead in her little one-room flat, alone and open-eyed, lying where she had fallen with the knife in her throat and her lifeblood flooding her lungs.
With her vivid imagination, Melissa could visualise the scene and it sickened her.
How much worse must the recollection be for Barney, who had seen the hideous reality?
She got up and opened the window.
The sky was clear and the sunlight had a brilliance and intensity that made her head reel.
She winced and shaded her eyes.
It was no good, she simply couldn't concentrate.
The best thing  she could do was take a shower, get dressed and go out for some fresh air.
By the time she was ready it was almost ten o'clock.
Normally, she would have been up for several hours and written a couple of thousand words.
Today threatened to be a write-off as far as work was concerned, but perhaps she could recoup some of the lost time later on.
She was about to leave the house when the telephone rang.
‘How are you this morning?’ asked Joe.
‘Fragile, thank you.
Iris's elder brew is not for the faint-hearted.’
‘Serves you right for overdoing it.’
‘Your sympathy is just what I needed.
What can I do in exchange?’
‘Mel, just how involved are you in this murder?’
He sounded hesitant, embarrassed almost.
She vaguely remembered saying something rather foolish and provocative last night.
‘I mean,’ Joe stumbled on, ‘you aren't doing anything…silly, are you?’
‘Silly?’
‘Dangerous, then.
You said something about ‘number one suspect’.’
‘Oh, that.’
Damn, why did I have to go and let that out?
Aloud, she said, ‘I was a bit tight…just talking nonsense.’
‘I hope you're not taking any risks.’
An authoritative note had crept into his voice and Melissa felt a stab of resentment.
First Harris, then Iris, and now Joe, all telling her what to do.
‘Did you ring to give me a lecture or have you got something you want to discuss?’ she asked impatiently.
‘Don't take offence, Mel.
I'm only thinking of your safety.
You have been known to get yourself into scrapes.’
‘Well, I'm not in a scrape this time, so stop fussing.’
‘All right, all right !’
Now he was getting irritable with her.
She'd have to be more discreet in future.
‘The reason I rang last night is that I had a message from your publishers,’ he went on.
‘A girl called Louise Stacey has been on to them, asking how she could contact you.
They wouldn't give  her your address, of course, but promised to refer to you through me.’
‘Did she leave a number?’
‘Yes, do you want it?’
‘Please.’
He dictated a London telephone number and she wrote it on her pad.
‘Do you know this girl?’ he asked.
‘I've met her.’
‘Any idea what she wants?’
‘It could have something to do with Angy's murder.
They used to be friends.’
Melissa made herself sound casual but the curiosity that Lou's call had aroused was breaking through her lethargy.
‘Does she know you're connected with the college?’
‘I've no idea.
I'll give her a call and find out.’
‘Remember what I said.
Don't go getting involved in anything dodgy.’
Melissa restrained a sharp retort.
‘I'll remember.
Was that all you called to say?’
‘More or less.
How's the book going?’
‘It's been buzzing along quite well lately but the murder — the real murder, that is — has thrown me rather badly.
I expect I'll get back to it quite soon.’
‘Would you like me to come down?’
‘What for?’
‘I could help take your mind off the unpleasantness.’
The signals were unmistakable.
Alarm bells rang; some quick thinking was called for.
‘Weren't you saying something a few months ago that too quiet a life was bad for a writer's creativity?
Now something exciting has happened, you want to dull the effect!’
‘Meaning, you don't want me to come?’
‘Not this weekend, Joe.
I must get down to some work.’
She adopted a brisk, businesslike tone.
‘I'll be in touch when I've got something to show you.’
There was a short silence before he said, ‘Sure, goodbye then,’ and hung up.
Immediately, Melissa dialled the number he had given.
Lou answered in a voice distorted by stress.
When Melissa gave her name, she burst out in mingled relief and fear, ‘Ms Craig, the police are looking for Rick!’ ' 'Yes, I know,’said Melissa.
‘You know?
But how…?’
‘I do some tutoring in the college where Angy worked.
I was there the day her body was found.’
Emotion overwhelmed Lou for several seconds.
When, at last, she managed to speak, the words fluttered out so faintly that Melissa had to strain to catch them.
‘Ms Craig, I need your advice.’
‘I'm listening.
Just take your time.’
‘I'd rather not…not on the phone.
Someone might…could I possibly come and see you?
It must sound a bit of a cheek,’ Lou rushed on as Melissa hesitated, ‘but I don't know who else to…’
‘Was Rick at Angy's flat last Tuesday?’
Melissa interposed.
‘Yes.’
It was hard to believe that a monosyllable could convey so much terror.
‘Then why do you want to talk to me?’
‘I thought that you…being a crime writer…you know about the police and things…you could tell us what to do.’
‘I think you already know what you should do.’
‘You mean, Rick should give himself up?
But he didn't kill Angy!
She was dead already!’
The words rang with the passionate, unreasoning conviction of a girl in love.
‘Ms Craig, please!’ she implored again, ‘let me come and talk to you!’
It was, of course, Melissa's plain duty to end the conversation without arousing the girl's suspicions and immediately pass the telephone number to the police.
Well, so she would, she assured her conscience, after hearing what Lou had to say.
‘I hardly see what I can do, but come if you want to,’ she agreed.
Fifteen love to writer's curiosity.
‘Oh, Ms Craig, thank you!’
Relief all but swamped the words.
‘How will I reach you?’
‘The trains run from Paddington.
How long will it take you to get there?’
Melissa checked herself from asking the  obvious question; the girl might fear betrayal if she wanted to know her exact whereabouts.
‘I don't know.
Half an hour perhaps.’
‘Hold on a minute.’
Melissa rummaged in a drawer and dragged out a timetable, glancing at the clock.
‘There's a train at eleven — you should be able to catch it.
Get a ticket to Stowbridge and I'll meet you at the station.’
‘You're so kind.
Ms Craig, you won't tell anyone?’
‘I won't tell anyone you're coming to see me,’ Melissa promised, ‘but if you have any important information, the police will have to know.
You do understand that, don't you?’
‘Yes, but I want to talk to you first.’
The words struggled out through a tangle of sobs.
‘You be on that train,’ said Melissa.
She cut short the stumbling thanks and put down the phone.
So much for her intentions of doing some work.
Never mind, this was more exciting.
She'd have to organise something for lunch though, instead of making do with a sandwich.
First, however, she'd take the walk she'd promised herself.
It would help to clear her head in readiness for whatever Lou had to say.
Leaving the cottage, Melissa climbed the stile and made her way along the footpath which led past the church to the village.
In the far corner of the churchyard, a woman was tending a grave; she bent over the stone urn to arrange fresh flowers, then stood quietly with bowed head and folded hands.
Soon, thought Melissa sadly, it would be the turn of Uncle Vittorio and Aunt Rosina to stand sorrowing over the grave of their niece.
Such a waste of a young life.
Outside the church, she was surprised to see Snappy, tethered to a drainpipe.
He had at last accepted her as a friend and began whining and wriggling with pleasure as she approached.
Stooping to pat him, she glanced into the porch.
The inner door stood open and through it she caught sight of Eleanor Shergold sitting in one of the pews.
Melissa felt a pang of remorse.
The murder must have been a severe shock to her and she would no doubt be deeply concerned over its effect on her husband; she should have gone to see  her yesterday, or at least telephoned.
She tiptoed across the aisle and sat down beside the motionless figure.
Eleanor was staring at the altar.
She did not turn her head when Melissa entered and for a moment it seemed that she was unaware of her presence.
Melissa touched her arm; still she did not move but as if a tap had been opened, tears spilt from her eyes and began streaming down her face.
She made no attempt to wipe them away and one by one they dripped from her nose and chin on to the hands that lay folded in her lap.
It was as if a statue had started to weep.
‘All this must be terrible for you,’ said Melissa in a hushed voice.
She fished a paper tissue from her pocket and held it out.
‘Here, take this.
It's quite clean.’
Her words seemed to break a spell.
Eleanor stifled a groan, put her hands over her face and began quietly sobbing.
Melissa slid an arm round her and patted her on the shoulder.
‘There now…it's all right…it's all right ,’ she soothed.
With her face still hidden, Eleanor began shaking her head violently from side to side.
‘They…think…
Rodney…did it!’ she gasped between sobs.
‘Oh dear God, what shall I…what shall we do?’
‘Rodney?
Oh, surely not!’
‘They've been questioning him.
He's quite ill with worry, and the reporters have been pestering him.
A detective came to the house and took some of his clothes…it's like a nightmare!’
She reduced the tissue to a pulp and Melissa, searching her pocket, managed to find another.
‘Listen, Eleanor,’ she said gently, ‘you have to understand how the police work.
They question everybody very closely, just to make sure that they find out every tiny detail that might be useful.
It doesn't mean…’
With more violent shakes of the head, Eleanor began demolishing the second tissue.
‘They suspect Rodney!
I know they do…they took his fingerprints!’
‘They've taken all our fingerprints.
It's just routine, honestly.
Everyone associated with Angy has to be checked  — her colleagues, her friends, the students in her art class…’
Eleanor lowered her hands and turned to stare at Melissa, an expression of bewilderment on her blotched and swollen face.
‘Her students?
They think it might be one of them?’
‘Not necessarily.
It's just for comparison with prints they might find in her flat — on the murder weapon, for example.
Once they've eliminated someone, the prints are destroyed.’
Eleanor was clearly unconvinced.
‘It's terrible to think of Rodney being suspected,’ she whimpered.
‘I'm sure you're wrong.
As a matter of fact, they're already looking for someone else.’
Hope blended with the fear in Eleanor's ashen face.
‘I know they've been questioning Mr Willard but he was the one who found her.’
‘No, not Barney.
Someone else, an ex-boyfriend of Angy's.’
‘A boyfriend?’
The look of bewilderment returned, as if Eleanor had difficulty in grasping the significance of what Melissa was saying.
‘It seems she jilted him, which might be a motive.’
‘Of course, there has to be a motive, doesn't there?’
Eleanor was beginning to calm down; she stopped crying, dried her eyes and patted her hair with quick, fussy movements of her small, white hands.
‘They couldn't really think a man in Rodney's position would have a motive for killing a little secretary, could they?’
If it wasn't so tragic, it would be laughable.
Eleanor's devotion to her husband amounted almost to veneration.
It did not seem to occur to her that he might suffer from any of the normal masculine weaknesses.
‘I'm sure it'll be all right,’ Melissa repeated.
‘Try not to worry.’
‘You're very kind.’
Eleanor's eyes still betrayed anxiety but she had regained her self-control.
From outside came the sound of impatient whining.
‘I think Snappy's getting restless,’ said Melissa.
‘Hadn't you better see to him?’
‘Yes, of course.’
Eleanor put on her gloves and stood up.
‘Are you going home?
I'll walk with you if you like.’
‘You're very kind,’ Eleanor repeated mechanically and followed Melissa from the church like a submissive child.
Rodney Shergold was cutting his front lawn when they reached Cotswold View.
He glanced up as they approached and gave Melissa a distant nod without interrupting his progress up and down the small patch of grass.
As the two women were saying their goodbyes he came to the end of his task, switched off the motor-mower and headed with it towards the narrow gate at the side of the house.
‘I'll leave you to do the edges, Nell,’ he called over his shoulder.
‘We'll have coffee when I've finished the back.’
‘Yes, dear,’ said Eleanor.
With a brief, tremulous smile at Melissa, she trailed meekly behind him.
As Melissa passed Tanners Cottage on her way home, Dudley Ford was pretending to trim his already immaculate front hedge while shooting glances up the lane from beneath the brim of his panama.
No doubt he had observed her talking to the Shergolds and was itching for the chance to find out what she knew.
She would have hurried on after an exchange of greetings and comments on the splendour of the morning but he moved forward to take a snip at a dandelion growing on the grass verge and contrived to block her path.
‘Dreadful business, this murder!’ he observed as he straightened up, red in the face and breathing heavily.
He leaned towards Melissa with an air of great confidentiality.
‘A CID johnny called on us, asking if we could say what time a certain person came home last Tuesday.
We were able to help him…we can see their house from our bedroom and we just happened to be looking out of the window at the time, don't you know.’
His fierce little eyes swivelled towards Cotswold View.
‘We've been wondering,’ he lowered his voice and gave a sly grin, ‘whether there was any hanky-panky going on?’
‘It was probably just part of their routine enquiries,’ said Melissa briskly.
‘They check up on everyone's movements for elimination purposes.’
He was not to be put off.
‘Never can tell with these quiet, donnish chappies…and having a homely little body like that for a wife…
I understand the poor young lady was quite a beauty?’
‘She was a very lovely girl and it's been a great shock to us all,’ agreed Melissa.
‘Excuse me, Dudley, I have to meet someone at the station.’
‘Of course.
I mustn't detain you!’
He raised his panama, all correctness and courtesy.
As Melissa turned to go, she saw Harriet Yorke approaching.
Anxious not to be further delayed, she merely nodded and waved but before she was out of earshot she heard Ford's voice boom out a greeting.
The Yorkes lived next door to the Shergolds and might have gleaned some scraps of information that he could wheedle out of Harriet.
What a busybody the man was!
Chapter Thirteen
Lou had allowed her coal-black hair to grow into a softer, more feminine style that flattered her small features.
She was wearing little or no make-up, so that for a moment Melissa did not recognise her.
It was her air of nervous tension that set her apart from the other passengers as she jumped from the train at Stowbridge, searching the platform with a fraught expression that only partially lifted when she caught sight of Melissa.
‘Oh, Ms Craig!’ she exclaimed, rushing forward with outstretched hands as if afraid Melissa would vanish if she did not lay hold of her.
From the way her mouth twitched, it was plain she was on the verge of breaking down.
Melissa took her by the arm and piloted her through the booking hall.
When Lou got in the car, the bulky jacket that she wore over her washed denim skirt got in the way of her seat belt and her movements as she struggled to fasten the buckle were jerky and nervous.
Melissa had barely turned the key in the ignition when she began to speak in a brittle, staccato voice.
‘Ms Craig, I don't know what to do!
I've told Rick to go to the police but he won't and I'm so afraid…’
‘I can't concentrate on what you say while I'm driving,’ said Melissa gently.
‘It's only a short distance.’
Lou bit her lip but took the hint and settled quietly into her seat.
‘And by the way, suppose you start calling me Melissa?
I'm not terribly keen on Mizz.’
The minute they were indoors, Lou burst out, ‘I suppose, because you saw Rick stab Angy's portrait, you think he killed her!’
‘Why don't you just sit down and tell me the whole story from the beginning.’
Melissa led the trembling girl to the sitting-room and sat beside her on the window-seat.
‘What  about a drink, or some coffee?
Have you had anything to eat today?’
‘I don't want anything.’
There was desperation in Lou's eyes and she clutched at Melissa's arm while words poured from her mouth like water from an overflowing vessel.
‘He was there but he didn't do it!
I know he stabbed the portrait but he'd got over all that and he never killed her…he did it out of sheer unhappiness and frustration…but that was months ago…you must believe me!’
‘Look, I can't make any sense of all this, so try and calm down,’ said Melissa.
Lou withdrew her hand, leaned her head against the wall and stared out of the window as if trying to pull her thoughts together.
She had abandoned the huge earrings for dainty gold studs and wore a fine gold chain round her neck.
For a split second she seemed to metamorphose into Angy…
Angy with dead eyes wide open and blood gushing from the terrible wound in her throat.
Horror crept into the room and settled beside them like a crouching beast.
‘I don't know where to start,’ Lou mumbled.
‘Just tell it the way it happened and try not to get sidetracked,’ said Melissa, thinking that this could take a long time.
Workwise, the day was already a write-off and in any case she was eager to know what the girl had to say.
It might help to clear Barney.
The police would have to know about this visit, of course; her conscience persistently reminded her that she should have informed Harris already but she silenced it by telling herself that a few hours would make no difference.
It wasn't as if Rick was a dangerous psychopath who might kill again, she reasoned, and Lou had as good as agreed that after their talk she would tell them what she knew.
‘After the bust-up I didn't see Rick for several weeks,’ Lou began.
‘Then I ran into him again.
He'd left home.
His parents were furious over the engagement business.
They felt they'd been made fools of…and the ring is some sort of family heirloom and his father went on as if it was all Rick's fault that Angy had made off with it.’
Lou began fulminating at the injustice of it all.
‘Never mind whose fault it was.
Just stick to the facts,’ said Melissa, trying not to sound impatient.
‘All right, I'll try.’
The story, told with mounting bitterness, was a classic example of a well-intentioned action leading to tragedy.
Rick had gone to Cheltenham to help some friends to set up an art exhibition and Lou had gone with him.
She had found out from Angy's relatives that she was living in the area and had secretly taken the opportunity of getting in touch with her.
Her main motive was simple: to retrieve the ring and thereby enable Rick to make peace with his family.
As Lou's story progressed, however, it emerged that she had been living with Rick for several months and had high hopes of becoming engaged to him herself.
Angy had professed to be delighted to hear from her, had invited her to her flat but refused point-blank to hand over the ring.
Instead, having been assured that Rick no longer had any violent feelings towards her, she earnestly pleaded that she had long been awaiting an opportunity to return it in person and apologise for causing so much distress.
With every evidence of cordiality and goodwill, she invited them both round for supper the following evening.
By the time she reached this point in her narrative, Lou's eyes had hardened, her nostrils were flaring and her small-boned hands were gripping her knees like talons.
She reminded Melissa of an angry young hawk.
‘She sat there wearing her cat-at-the-cream expression and saying how lovely it would be for all three of us to be together again!’
Lou spat out the words as if they had turned rancid in her mouth.
‘Did you think she was trying to get him back?’ asked Melissa.
‘I didn't know what to think.
Angy always played up to a man…any man.
She just couldn't help it.
Even though she once told me she didn't really care much for men, she said it was fun to see the way they reacted to her.
I could imagine her in her sexiest dress and her most alluring perfume, cooking pasta the way Rick liked it.
I was afraid…’
‘That he'd realise he was still in love with her?’ suggested Melissa gently.
Lou nodded miserably.
‘I made excuses, said I thought he'd be too busy and so on, so she said, ‘Well, just pop round for a drink then.’
She was quite determined to get Rick there and there was no way she was going to give the ring to me.
I even thought of trying to grab it from her but she put it away in the drawer where she kept it and stood in front of it.
I wasn't going to fight her for it but I was so angry I could have killed her.’
Lou's hand flew to her mouth.
‘Oh my God, what am I saying?
I didn't mean that, honestly!’
‘All right, I believe you!’
Melissa patted her hand.
‘Tell me what you did then.’
‘I went back to the house.
We were all staying with some friends of Steve's — that's the man who's organising the exhibition; Rick shares a studio with him in London.
They hadn't come in yet so I started getting some food ready and tried to make up my mind what to tell Rick.
Already I was wishing I'd never been to see Angy, even though I knew how much being estranged from his family had hurt him and it would mean a lot to him to get the ring back.’
Lou put her hands over her eyes.
‘Oh, if only I'd let well alone!’
‘Now, let me get this straight,’ said Melissa.
‘You went to see Angy on Monday afternoon and told Rick that evening about the invitation for Tuesday, right?’
Lou nodded.
‘How did he react?’
‘He was very surprised, but over the moon about the ring.’
‘Did he agree to accept Angy's invitation?’
‘Yes, but he said he'd go on his own.
I had to stay behind to cook supper for the others.’
Lou's heightened colour betrayed her embarrassment, as if she could read Melissa's unspoken disapproval at this example of male chauvinism.
‘How did he get there?’
‘Steve lent him his car.’
‘And what time did he arrive?’
‘He thinks it was a few minutes after six.’
‘Where were you when he left?’
‘At the house — he dropped me off on the way.
Steve and the others were still working and I began getting the meal ready.
Oh, if only he'd let me go with him!’
Without warning, Lou began beating her forehead and moaning; plainly she was on the verge of hysteria.
Melissa grabbed her wrists.
‘Now stop that, you're not rehearsing Ophelia!
What time did Rick get back?’
‘A little before seven.’
Lou's voice, her hands, her whole body shook uncontrollably.
‘He walked in looking dreadful, like a ghost.
He collapsed into a chair and began to cry…it was ages before he could say anything.
There was blood on his hands and I thought he'd had an accident.
I found some brandy and it steadied him a bit…and then he told me he'd been to Angy's flat and found her dead.’
For several seconds the two women sat staring at one another, unable to speak for thinking of that awful scene.
Melissa broke the silence.
‘Why didn't he phone the police?’
‘He said he was going to.
He actually picked up Angy's phone…it was off the hook and covered in blood as if she'd tried to use it to call for help.
Then he got scared.
Angy had been stabbed in the throat and that's exactly what he'd done to her portrait…he was afraid that would all come out and everyone would think he'd done it.’
‘So what did he do?’
‘He says he can't remember exactly but he thinks he may have tried to pull out the knife.
Then he lost his nerve and rushed out of the flat and came back to the house to find me.’
Leaving his fingerprints all over the place, thought Melissa.
Aloud, she said, ‘Didn't you try to persuade him to call the police?’
‘Of course I did.
I argued and pleaded…
I even went to the phone to call them myself and he snatched it away from me.
He was so angry, I thought he was going to hit me.’
‘He's got quite a temper, hasn't he?
Isn't that why Angy was afraid of him?’
‘He was in a panic…he hardly knew what he was doing!
He'd never really have hurt anyone.’
‘So what did you do?’
‘We checked his clothes for bloodstains…there weren't many but he told me to wash his shirt and handkerchief while he had a shower.
I did that, and then I went to sponge his jacket.
I felt something hard in his pocket and I took it out…it was the box with the ring in it!’
Lou shook her head as if unable to believe what she was saying.
‘He had the ring in his pocket?
Are you telling me that after finding Angy's body he was too scared to stay and call the police but still found the nerve to go rummaging around her flat?’
‘He didn't rummage around!
I'd already told him where she kept it…and he was afraid that if he left it there it'd be traced back to him.
Anyway, it belongs to his family, doesn't it?’
The girl's voice took on a whine as she flew yet again to the defence of her man.
Melissa bit back a scathing comment but she could hear the icy edge in her voice as she said, ‘So you helped him to clean up.
Then what?’
‘Rick insisted we go home straight away.
Nothing I said could make him change his mind.
Luckily the others still weren't back so he made me write a note saying we'd been called to London on some family matter and we took the next train from Cheltenham station.’
‘How did you get there?’
‘By taxi.’
‘And where's Rick now?
Back at the flat?’
‘No, at the studio.
Steve's due back tomorrow evening…he'll have to leave before then but I can't think where he'll go.’
Lou's voice trailed into silence; she was played out, too exhausted even to weep.
Under its crown of smooth black hair, her face had the colour and texture of wax.
‘I think perhaps you should have some food before we talk any more.’
Melissa got to her feet.
‘There's some lunch ready in the kitchen.’
‘I'm not hungry,’ protested Lou.
‘Well I am, I'm ravenous,’ declared Melissa.
‘And you won't be much help to Rick if you starve yourself, so at least have a sandwich and a cup of coffee.’
Reluctantly, Lou dragged herself upright and trailed behind Melissa.
After some coaxing she struggled with a minuscule portion of chicken salad and half a slice of bread, all the while gazing at Melissa with the eyes of a frightened child.
‘They're going to arrest Rick, aren't they?’ she said.
‘He'll be charged with murder.’
‘That depends on whether they believe his story,’ said Melissa.
There was no point in glossing over the situation.
‘He's going to have to answer some pretty tough questions.’
‘They've got to find him first,’ muttered Lou defiantly.
‘I'm afraid they'll do that all too easily.
The taxi-driver will probably remember picking you up, people on the train may have seen you…and of course they'll question your friends.’
‘Steve wouldn't give him away.’
‘I don't think you can count on that.
It's a killer they're after, not a burglar or a car thief.’
‘And you…you're going to ring the police the minute I've gone, aren't you?’
Suddenly hostile, the girl leapt to her feet and snatched up her handbag.
‘I thought you'd help us!
I should never have come…just let me call a taxi and I won't bother you any more!’
‘Now don't go flying off the handle.’
Melissa put out a restraining hand.
‘The police are going to find Rick without any help from me — they may already have found him — and they're going to want to talk to you as well.
You're a material witness…you talked to Angy the day before she was killed.
You realise that, don't you?’
‘Yes, I suppose so,’ said Lou in a dull voice.
She stood with hunched shoulders, a pathetic picture of defeat and despair.
‘But Rick didn't kill Angy, he swears he didn't and I believe him.
Somebody else must have done it.
I thought perhaps you…you know about crime and detection and that sort of thing…
’ Her eyes were fixed on Melissa as if in quest of a miracle.
‘Is that what you had in mind when you talked about my helping you?
My dear girl, I'm a writer, not a private  investigator.
Besides…
’ Melissa broke off, trying to think of a tactful way of stating the brutal, unpalatable truth.
‘You may be convinced of Rick's innocence, but it's asking a lot of me.’
‘I know he's innocent!
Despite her misgivings, the passionate sincerity in the girl's declaration of faith struck a chord.
Hadn't she, Melissa, expressed just such a sentiment?
But if Rick wasn't the killer, what did that imply for Barney?
‘When he's angry, he acts the fool — you saw what he did to the portrait — but he wouldn't kill anyone.
And he wasn't angry when he went to see Angy, he was happy.
He thought everything was going to be all right…’
‘Something might have happened between them to make him lose his temper.’
‘It didn't!
She was already dead when he got there!’
‘So he says, but there's going to be a lot of circumstantial evidence against him.’
‘It isn't fair!
Someone else killed her and Rick's going to get the blame!’
‘He was very foolish not to tell the police right away.
There may still be time before they get to him…why don't you have another go at persuading him?
Is there a phone at the studio?
You can call from here if you like.’
‘Thanks, but it wouldn't be any good.
He wouldn't even answer the phone.’
Standing there in her denims and her cotton T-shirt, she looked like a lost, lonely child.
Melissa stood up and put an arm round the thin shoulders.
‘Where are your parents, Lou?
Why don't you go to them?’
‘They're in the States,’ Lou muttered.
‘My Dad works there.’
‘Really?
So does my son.’
There was no response but the rigid stance seemed to soften a fraction.
‘He works for an oil company.
Look at me, Lou.’
Melissa took the girl by the shoulders.
‘Do your parents know about this trouble you're in?’
Reluctantly, Lou met her eyes.
‘No,’ she whispered.
‘They're on vacation in Hawaii at the moment.
I haven't spoken to them for nearly two weeks.’
‘Haven't you any other relatives?’
‘Only my young brother.
He's in Germany with the army.’
Her voice wavered and her face crumpled.
‘I know I said horrid-things about Angy but she was my friend and I…
’ A spasm of violent weeping threatened to tear the slight young body apart.
Melissa took the girl in her arms and gently stroked her head until she became calmer.
‘I keep thinking of her, lying there in all that blood,’ Lou moaned between her sobs.
‘Rick's so frightened!
He didn't kill her but he'll go to prison just the same.
What can we do?
Please help us, Melissa…please!’
‘Sit down again for a while.’
Melissa pushed her gently into a chair.
‘Listen, I've been thinking.
You told me you had a bit of a chat with Angy before you asked her about the ring.’
‘Yes.’
‘I want you to try and remember everything the two of you said, right from the beginning.
What time did you get there, by the way?’
‘Soon after two o'clock.
She finished at the college at one but she had some shopping to do.’
‘And you said her reception was friendly?’
‘Oh yes.
She said, ‘Lulu, how lovely to see you!’ and kissed me on both cheeks.’
‘So what then?’
‘She was making herself a sandwich in the kitchen and we went in there first while she ate it and made coffee for both of us.’
‘Did you notice any knives lying about?’
Lou screwed up her eyes.
‘Yes,’ she said after a pause.
‘Now you mention it, there was one of those wooden blocks with about six knives sticking out of it.’
‘Where was it?’
‘Next to the cooker, I think…yes, it was.
She had quite a few gadgets.
She enjoyed cooking, especially Italian things.’
‘And what did you talk about?’
It was plain that Lou's recollection of everything prior to Rick's discovery of the body had been blurred by shock but under Melissa's gentle probing, details began to emerge.
Angy had asked most of the questions at first…about Lou's job with a fashion magazine, former acquaintances at college, recent visits to Uncle Vittorio and Aunt Rosina.
She had spoken affectionately of them and shown Lou a postcard from Italy where they were spending a holiday.
‘Hm.
Nothing very significant so far,’ Melissa commented when Lou paused for further thought.
‘Tell me about the ring.
Is it an antique, by the way?
You said it was an heirloom.’
‘It's a garnet in a heavy gold setting…a gorgeous, blood-red stone.’
Lou looked down at her left hand with a wistful expression, as if picturing the jewel on her own finger.
‘And you say she kept it in a drawer?’
‘That's right, in a cabinet next to her bed.
It was in a leather box with a crest on it.’
‘And you asked her to give it to you so that you could return it to Rick.
Was that before or after you'd had your chat?’
Lou scowled.
‘After.
I think she'd guessed what I'd really come about and was sort of savouring it, waiting to see how I'd approach the subject.
She was so sure of herself, so self-satisfied!’
Like a fire that has been damped down but not extinguished, anger smouldered in Lou's eyes.
‘Now don't get worked up again.
Did she talk about herself at all?
Her job, her friends, people she worked with?
What about boyfriends or lovers?’
‘I got the impression that she had several on a string.’
Lou frowned.
‘Now, how did that come up?’
‘Perhaps,’ suggested Melissa in a flash of inspiration, ‘she showed you sketches of them!’
‘That's right.
How did you know?’
‘I've seen them.
I told you, I tutor at the college.’
It would be bad psychology to tell Lou that she had been shown them by the police.
‘I remember now!’
Suddenly, Lou came alive.
‘I'd been asking why she'd taken a clerical job when she'd had an art training and she said it was all she could get at first but after a while she'd managed to wangle this daytime class.’
‘Wangle?
Is that the word she used?’
‘Yes, I'm sure it was.
Some man at the college had arranged it for her…she more or less admitted she'd worked on him.’
‘What do you mean, worked on him?’
‘She said, ‘I showed him a bit of leg and he came running.’
Then she said something like, ‘The poor sap's been a bit of a pain since.
I'll have to do something about him but you know how I hate scenes.’
' Lou's eyes flared in her pale, pointed face.
‘Oh, Melissa!
Do you suppose he's the one who killed her?’
Cold fingers clawed at Melissa's stomach.
‘Let's not jump too far ahead,’ she said in a voice that was not quite steady.
‘Did you see a picture of this man?’
‘I don't know…
I might have done.
She had this portfolio of crayon portraits.
She asked me what I thought of them.
They looked good…she was very talented, you know.’
‘Yes, I thought so too.
Think about those portraits, Lou.
Did you see them all?
What did Angy say about them?’
Lou made a helpless little gesture.
‘I can't remember.’
Melissa's mouth had dried out and a pulse was vibrating like a pneumatic drill somewhere near her navel.
‘You can…you must!’ she insisted.
‘Concentrate!
You're an artist; use your visual memory.
Picture that portfolio lying on the table…’
Lou pressed her hands to her eyes.
‘They were just heads…men and women.
There was one who looked familiar.
Of course!’
She looked up and stared at Melissa in sudden recollection.
‘It must have been you!
I remember Angy saying, ‘She's one of the tutors at the college.’’
‘Go on,’ said Melissa quietly.
‘If you can remember that, you can remember the others if you try.’
‘She was picking them up at random and saying things like, ‘This boy's in a wheelchair but that doesn't stop him  giving me the eye,’ or, ‘This is the college stud but he cuts no ice with me.’’
Doug Wilson, no doubt, thought Melissa, and young Godfrey Mellish who had been so firmly put in his place by Barney.
‘There were two of women in her class.
One she said was new this term and quite talented, and the other did ‘twee little flower paintings’.’
Poor Sybil, how hurt she would be to hear that.
Still, Iris had encouraged her.
‘You're doing splendidly,’ encouraged Melissa as Lou fell momentarily silent.
‘What about the ‘poor sap who'd become a bit of a pest’?
Did she point him out?’
‘He could have been one of several.’
‘Can you describe any of them?’ 'There was one with a beard…
' Barney, of course, ‘and a po-faced one with glasses…
’ Despite her anxiety, Melissa's lips twitched at this description of Rodney Shergold, ‘and one she called ‘Eddie’.
I had the feeling she rather liked him.’
‘So the ‘poor sap’ she was going to have to ‘do something about’could have been either Po-face or,’Melissa swallowed a hard lump swelling in her throat, ‘the one with the beard.’
‘I guess so.’
‘Can you remember which one?’
‘Sorry.’
‘Please, try!’
‘Honestly, I can't.’
Lou sat back in her chair and closed her eyes.
She looked utterly spent; there was nothing to be gained by pressing her further.
With an effort, Melissa sifted mentally through all she had just heard.
Was Rodney Shergold the ‘poor sap’?
Supposing he'd agreed to let Angy take the art class in return for her favours?
If he'd become too demanding, and ‘doing something about him’ meant ending the relationship, that could well have been a motive for killing her.
Dudley Ford had his suspicions and the police seemed to have been doing  a pretty thorough job on him…but Doug Wilson believed that Shergold lacked the nerve and she was inclined to agree with him.
‘So what about Barney, then?’ a voice whispered in her head.
Barney, enraged by Angy's taunts, had just as much motive and was a far stronger character…
She felt exhausted.
Every nerve had been strained in the effort to prompt Lou's memory but what she had learned could do little to prove Barney's innocence.
On the contrary, said the voice, it could do his case untold damage.
But surely, she reasoned, once they catch Lawrence, the police will demolish his story…the story that he and Lou have cooked up together.
Perhaps this was all a conspiracy between them…they were trying it out on her first.
Rubbish, said the voice, you're getting as hysterical as Lou…
‘The police will have those sketches,’ she told Lou.
‘You could find yourself going through all this again.’
Lou opened her eyes and sat up, looking bright and determined.
‘I don't care what they ask me if it helps them find the real killer.
It must have been one of those men Angy sketched…the one she was talking about packing up.
I think it was the man with the beard.’
‘You mustn't say that if you aren't sure!’ said Melissa sharply.
‘No, of course not.
I'll think about it on the way home.’
‘And you'll get in touch with the police and tell them what you've told me?’
‘I…
I'll have to speak to Rick…’
‘You asked me for my advice, and that's it.’
Melissa glanced at the clock.
‘If you want to catch the four o'clock train, we'd better be leaving.’
Chapter Fourteen
When Melissa returned from taking Lou to the station, Iris was working in her garden.
She looked up and waved as the Golf drove past and when Melissa had put it away and locked the garage door, she rammed her fork into the ground and strolled over for a chat.
‘Just had a load of muck delivered,’ she announced with a complacent nod in the direction of a sinister-looking mound at the bottom of her vegetable patch.
‘More than I need.
Want some?’
‘Yes please, if you can spare any,’ said Melissa.
It was a timely reminder that her own garden needed attention and in any case, mechanical tasks like digging and muck-spreading might have a therapeutic effect on her emotional system.
‘Wanted sheep but got cow, and it was promised weeks ago,’ Iris complained.
‘Well-rotted, though.
Should be okay.’
Melissa gave a wry smile.
The provenance of a manure heap seemed of limited importance beside the problems presently exercising her mind.
Iris scrutinised her, eagle-eyed.
‘You all right?’ she asked.
‘You look tuckered.’
‘I am.
I've just had a visit from Lou Stacey.’
‘The girl you drove off with just now?’
Melissa nodded.
‘Thought she looked familiar.
Quite presentable without the warpaint!
What did she want with you?’
‘You're not going to believe this!’
‘Something to do with that crazy young boyfriend, I suppose.’
‘She's convinced he's innocent of Angy's murder and she only wants me to play detective and find the real killer!
According to her, Rick Lawrence is caught in a web of circumstantial evidence.
While he languishes in gaol, the  real murderer will go free unless I unmask him!’
‘Could be right,’ said Iris, her eyes still fixed on Melissa's face.
‘You aren't serious!
You think I should…?’
‘Of course not.
Stay out of it.
But if circumstantial evidence is all they've got…’
‘You wait till you hear the whole story.
Come in for a cup of tea?’
‘Sure.
Just go in and clean up.’
Iris retreated behind her cottage, reappearing a short while later at Melissa's front door.
She listened in silence to the story of Lou's visit, seated straight-backed and cross-legged on the floor.
‘I feel desperately sorry for the poor kid,’ said Melissa when she had finished.
‘She's got no one of her own to turn to in this country, but the notion that I can help her to clear Rick is so fantastic it isn't true.
She'll just have to face up to the fact that he's guilty, I'm afraid.’
‘Think so?’
Melissa stared at her friend in dismay.
‘You mean, you believe their story?’
‘You want it to be him, don't you?’
Melissa shifted uncomfortably.
‘I don't know what you mean.’
Scorn at the feeble prevarication glittered in Iris's eyes.
‘Yes, you do.
If Rick didn't do it, we come back to your lover-boy, don't we?’
‘Iris, you're hateful!
I know Barney didn't do it!’
‘More likely him than Rick Lawrence.’
‘How can you say that?’
‘Be logical, like your detective character…
Norman Thingummy.’
‘Nathan Latimer,’ Melissa corrected frostily.
Iris brushed aside the interruption with a wave of a hand.
‘What was the motive?’
‘Revenge, of course.
She'd hurt his pride…brought about a rift with his family…’
‘Forget the wounded pride.
Soon consoled himself with his old flame, didn't he?
And getting the ring back would solve the family problems.’
‘Suppose Angy changed her mind about letting him have the ring?’
‘Knew where she kept it.
He'd just have taken it.’
Melissa shook her head.
‘She'd have tried to stop him.
She was quite a determined little thing under that gentle exterior.’
Suddenly, it all seemed clear.
‘Yes, that must have been it!
He went to take the ring from the drawer…there was a struggle…he picked up a knife…’
‘The knives were in the kitchen.’
‘So he went and fetched one.’
Iris's grin was a mixture of pity and condescension.
‘Be your age!
Hefty young chap like that could have swatted her out of the way with one hand!’
Melissa had to admit that was true.
‘But there could have been an argument about something else,’ she pleaded, reluctant to abandon her theory altogether.
‘Something that brought all the old resentment and tension and violent feelings back to the surface.’
Iris clasped her ankles and rocked gently to and fro, shaking her head.
‘Don't believe it.’
‘How can you be so certain?’
Iris shrugged.
‘Just doesn't smell right.
Not a nice type, not good enough for Lou…but not a murderer.’
‘So what's your theory?’ snapped Melissa in exasperation.
‘No, don't bother telling me.
I know you think Barney did it.’
She got up and began slamming the tea-things on to a tray.
Iris stayed where she was, a troubled expression on her face.
‘Never said that.
Only that he was the more likely of the two.
Could have been someone else.
This chap Eddie, for example.
She might have had other irons in the fire as well.
Bit of a slut, if you ask me.’
‘Don't let Barney hear you say that,’ Melissa murmured with a faint smile.
She put down the tray and went back to her chair.
‘It appears that Eddie has a cast-iron alibi.
I did wonder about Rodney Shergold, though.’
‘Shergold?’
Iris screwed up her face in amusement and disbelief.
‘You serious?’
‘When we were waiting to be questioned by the police, Doug Wilson was saying that Rodney had been making a play for Angy and hinting that he might have got somewhere.’
‘Wilson?
The randy English teacher?
Just trying to stir things for Shergold, more likely.’
Melissa grinned.
‘Maybe.
There's no love lost there.
But it's possible, you know.
Remember what Lou said.
And I've told you before that I've noticed an atmosphere in the office now and again.
Incidentally, I met Eleanor this morning and she's scared out of her wits that the fuzz suspect her beloved.’
Iris gave an unfeeling cackle.
‘Serve him right if they do.
Teach him a lesson.
Sorry for Eleanor, though, poor little rabbit.’
‘The way things look at the moment, Barney Willard and Rick Lawrence are rivals for the role of chief suspect.
At the moment, the odds would seem to be on Rick but…
’ Melissa gave a sigh.
Iris, her common-sense unclouded by emotional involvement, had forced her to face reality.
‘I'd give a lot to know what forensic evidence they've found.’
A lock of hair had fallen across her face and she raked it back wearily with her fingers.
‘It's so frustrating.
I wish I could do something!’
‘Like what?’
‘Oh, I don't know.
Maybe Lou's notion wasn't so crazy after all.
I might turn up something the police have missed.’
‘Something to clear Barney and nail the killer?’ suggested Iris, looking alarmed.
‘Forget it, Melissa.
Your job is writing about crime.
Leave the real thing to the professionals.
Must be going now.’
She rose gracefully to her feet and made for the front door, with Melissa following.
‘Thanks for the tea.’
‘You're welcome.
Thanks for listening.’
‘And stay out of trouble!
Stick to writing and gardening.’
The grey eyes were serious and the mouth and chin set in a stern line.
‘You sound like Joe!’ taunted Melissa.
‘Now there,’ said Iris with unusual gentleness, ‘is a nice man.
Much safer bet than an artist!’
Her features relaxed  into an impish grin.
‘Oh, and by the way, you'll he telling your policeman friend about Lou's visit?’
Melissa sighed.
‘I know I should, but I hate the idea.
It seems like a betrayal of trust.’
‘Don't be wet!’
Iris snorted.
‘You of all people.
Suppose he finds out about it from some other source?’
‘Like who?’
‘Like Lou.
They'll question her, you said so.’
‘I suppose you're right,’ said Melissa resignedly.
‘If Ken Harris thought I'd withheld information…’
‘Wouldn't make you flavour of the month, would it?’
Iris gave her a pat on the shoulder.
‘Do your duty.
Get on that phone right away.
Promise?’
‘Oh, very well.’
Iris departed and Melissa went disconsolately to the telephone and called police headquarters.
As she acknowledged the formal expression of thanks for the information she had given, she consoled herself with the near-certainty that they knew most of it already.
She trailed wearily into the kitchen to clear away the tea-things, her thoughts turning to Barney.
When the telephone rang and she heard his voice on the wire, her spirits soared.
‘Oh Barney, I've been thinking about you so much!’
‘That's nice.
I've been thinking about you, too.’
‘How are you?’
‘Surviving.
May I see you?’
‘Yes, of course.’
‘How about meeting for a meal this evening?’
‘I'd love to.’
‘Where would you like to go?
Do you like American food?’
‘Do I?
It's wickedly fattening, but once in a while…’
‘There's a new restaurant in Stowbridge called the Mayflower.
It's opposite the library.’
‘I know it.’
‘Meet me there at seven?’
‘I'll look forward to it.’
Melissa put down the phone and ran upstairs, singing.
When Melissa arrived at the Mayflower American restaurant, Barney was waiting near the entrance — a tall, distinguished figure in a well-fitting fawn suit with a paisley cravat tucked into the neck of his light red cotton shirt.
He wore a sombre, brooding expression that relaxed into a half-smile as he caught sight of her, sending a surge of electricity round her nervous system.
Careful now, she warned herself, this is not the time to get carried away…
‘I hardly recognised you in that sharp gear!’ she teased him.
‘Would you rather I turned up in my paint-stained jeans and smelling of turpentine?’
He smiled again, fleetingly, and her pulse gave another blip as he took her arm and led her through the entrance.
The place was fitted out in dark, polished wood in the style of the twenties.
A huge ceiling fan turned slowly above an open area in the centre which was laid out with bentwood chairs and marble-topped tables for the bar customers.
The dining tables were tucked away in high-sided compartments like old-fashioned church pews.
With, the modern embellishment of piped music to smother conversation it was, Melissa reflected as they sat down, an ideal setting for meetings between lovers…or spies or plotters of stings or heists.
For a moment, her crime writer's instinct took over and she made a mental note to jot down a description as soon as she got home.
A jolly young waiter with a Gloucestershire accent and the stars and stripes emblazoned on his apron lit the candle lamp on their table and gave them each a menu.
When he had retired with their order and the drinks waiter had served them with lime daiquiris, Barney planted his elbows on the table and leaned towards Melissa.
‘Haven't they arrested Lawrence yet?’ he demanded.
‘Why hasn't there been anything in the papers?
No photograph, not even an artist's impression or a description.
People won't know who to look out for.’
‘The police won't name anyone publicly until they're sure it's the right person.’
‘You've got friends in the local CID — can't you find out  what's going on?’ he pursued.
His face was flushed and his eyes glittered.
‘Ken Harris has promised to keep me up to date with the press briefings…’ she began.
‘Press briefings!’
He made a scornful gesture.
‘I can read the papers for myself.’
‘They don't necessarily print every detail they're given,’ she said.
‘As soon as I hear anything definite, I promise I'll let you know.’
Already, she had decided against any mention of Lou's visit and Rick's claim to have found Angy's body.
Things were too uncertain and it would be wrong to raise false hopes.
‘You mentioned something last night about a ring,’ he said.
‘Surely you noticed the antique ring with the garnet that Angy used to wear?’
‘Of course.
It was a family heirloom and she was very fond of it.
What did it have to do with Lawrence?’
‘Everything.
It was his family heirloom.
He gave it to her as an engagement ring and when she took off, she never sent it back.’
‘And that's why he killed her?
To get back a miserable ring?
If that's the sort he is, it's no wonder she was terrified of him!’
For a moment, he reminded Melissa of Lou in his haste to defend a loved one, but she had seen how his knuckles whitened on hearing the story and guessed what he must be thinking.
Little by little, he was getting to know the true Angy.
She reached out to cover one of his hands with her own.
It felt like ice.
‘You're cold,’ she said.
‘You aren't ill, are you?’
He rolled his hand over so that hers rested in his palm.
‘I haven't had much food today.
I'll soon warm up in here.’
He gave her fingers a brief squeeze, then released them and began drumming on the table.
‘Do try to relax,’ she urged.
‘How can I, when the brute who killed Angy is still free?’
He took a gulp from his drink and began fidgeting with  the cutlery.
‘The sooner they get him, the sooner she can be laid to rest.’
There was a catch in his voice; he was on a knife edge and for a moment Melissa feared he would break down.
‘Forgive me,’ he said, pulling out a handkerchief and brushing it across his eyes and nose.
‘It's all right, I understand.’
‘Yes, I think you do.’
‘I lost someone dear to me, very suddenly.’
‘You did?’
‘My son's father, in a road accident.
I thought my world had come to an end.’
She hesitated.
Knowing Barney's standards of morality, she wondered if she was being wise, but it was best to be honest.
‘I was two months pregnant and my parents said I'd brought shame on their house and they kicked me out.’
‘That was inhuman!’
Barney stopped short in the act of lifting a spoonful of clam chowder to his mouth.
There was no disapproval in the exclamation, only a shocked concern for her.
‘Whatever did you do?’
‘I was lucky.
Guy's parents looked after us — Simon and me.’
They finished their first course in silence.
Barney appeared to be mulling over what he had just learned; several times he looked searchingly at Melissa across the table.
The flame of the candle in its amber glass shade threw shadows that accentuated the dark rings under his eyes.
The waiter removed their empty plates and brought huge portions of southern-fried chicken.
Melissa declined Barney's offer of wine and asked for mineral water.
‘Living out in the sticks, I can't afford to lose my licence.’
‘How very sensible.
I'll join you.’
By mutual consent, it seemed, they spoke for the rest of the meal of anything but the one topic that was on both their minds.
It was Barney who returned to it first, dribbling cream into his coffee and watching it swirl into a spiral on the surface.
‘How long do you think the trial will last?’ he asked.
When Melissa did not immediately answer, he made an  impatient movement with one hand.
‘You know about these things.
You must have some idea.’
‘It's impossible to say.
Quite often, the police ask for a remand to give them time to make further enquiries, assemble their evidence and so on.
And then it can be several weeks after committal before the trial takes place.’
Melissa concentrated for a moment on the unnecessary task of stirring her unsweetened black coffee.
‘Of course,’ she continued, avoiding his eye, ‘all this is on the assumption that he's going to be charged.’
‘Whatever do you mean?’
She flinched at the outraged disbelief in Barney's expression and it took some courage to say what she had to say.
It was only fair to forewarn him that Rick's arrest, let alone his trial and conviction, were by no means a foregone conclusion.
‘I mean that without evidence, they can't bring a charge.’
‘You mean, they'll let him go?
He'll get away with it?
That's monstrous!’
He glared at Melissa as if holding her responsible for this potential miscarriage of justice.
‘There may be evidence-I don't know.
But if there isn't, if he can convince them he's innocent…’
‘Innocent?
Are you crazy?’
He was becoming agitated and his voice was getting louder.
‘Shsh!
People will hear!’ she warned.
‘I tell you, he did it!’ he said in a frantic whisper.
‘He must have done it.
His family declared vendetta or whatever they call it!’
‘You have to admit, that does sound a bit far-fetched and melodramatic.’
‘Italians are melodramatic!’
‘Sometimes, yes, but I can't help wondering if it's likely that a young man on the brink of a successful career and maybe planning marriage to another girl would…
’ Melissa broke off.
What she was doing was unbelievable.
It was Iris, throwing doubts on Rick's guilt, who had cast her in the role of the devil's advocate.
Once again, the thought that if not Rick, then possibly Barney was the killer, returned to torment her.
The indirect reference to  Lou had been a mistake; if he picked it up and she had to admit she knew more than she had told him, he'd never trust her again.
Even so, it was plain from the mixture of resentment and hostility on his face that her words had wounded him.
‘You think I killed her, don't you?’ he hissed, his voice barely audible.
‘No Barney, of course I don't!’
She reached out to him but he drew his hand away and sat back, distancing himself from her.
Across the table, his eyes reflected the candle-flame; the twin images seemed to grow and generate a searing heat of their own.
‘I find that hard to believe,’ he said stiffly.
His face had grown hard as flint, the skin taut and bloodless.
He signalled to the waiter; during the brief ceremony of settling the bill, handing over a tip and saying yes thank you they'd had a lovely evening and enjoyed their meal, his avoidance of her eye was constant and deliberate.
‘Where did you leave your car?’ he asked as they stepped on to the pavement.
His tone had the same finality as the sound of the door closing behind them.
‘Just round the corner.’
‘I'll walk you there.’
‘There's no need.’
He gave a bitter laugh.
‘Perhaps you don't feel safe with me in a side street!’
‘Oh Barney, please!
You're getting it all wrong.
I never meant to imply…’
‘Forget it.
No one would blame you.’
They reached the spot where the Golf was parked.
He put out a hand for her key, unlocked the driver's door and held it open while she settled into her seat.
‘I'll see you around,’ he said, dropping the key into her outstretched palm and slamming the door.
She wound down the window, trying to think of some way of putting things right.
All she could think of was,
‘Thank you for a lovely meal.’
‘Sure,’ he said and turned away.
Depression clamped itself round Melissa's head and  shoulders and the meal she had enjoyed so much lay like a stone in her stomach as she drove home.
She put away the car, quietly locked the garage door and stood for a few moments looking out over the valley.
A steady breeze sent shreds of cloud tumbling across the face of the moon.
She closed her eyes and inhaled through her mouth, tasting the freshness, letting it play round her head and soothe its ache like a splash of cool water.
She leaned on the fence, wrapped her coat more closely round her body and tried to assimilate something of the tranquillity of the night, but all she could think of was the hurt in Barney's eyes and the stiffness of his voice.
She hated herself for doubting him.
Iris might be right in implying that Rick was the innocent victim of circumstantial evidence coupled with his own cowardly refusal to go to the police…but Rick's innocence did not automatically confirm Barney's guilt.
She hurried indoors and went to the telephone.
Trembling slightly, she dialled Barney's number.
He answered immediately, as if he had been standing by the instrument.
‘Barney, it's Melissa.’
‘Yes?’
‘I'm sorry if you got the wrong impression…’
‘Was it the wrong impression?’
‘Yes, it was.
Barney, please listen.
I'm not sure whether I believe Rick Lawrence killed Angy or not but I am sure that you didn't, truly I am.’
A gush of tears took her by surprise, swamping the last few words.
‘You mean that?’
Instead of being wooden, his tone had become hostile.
Melissa pressed blindly on.
‘Of course I do.
I was only trying to warn you that things aren't always cut and dried.
We don't know everything.’
‘What you're saying is, there could be more than one person who hated Angy enough to do that to her.
You're making her sound like some kind of monster.’
And you're making a hash of this, Melissa.
It's hard enough for him to accept Angy's shabby treatment of Rick, her lies about the ring and her deceit in letting him think she was carrying another man's child.
Now you're suggesting that's only the tip of the iceberg .
‘Is that what you're saying?’ he persisted.
‘Barney, it's a wretched, miserable business and I can only guess what it's doing to you.
I haven't got any answers.
All I can say is that whatever happens, I do believe in you.’
‘Thank you, Melissa,’ he said quietly and this time she knew she had reached him.
‘That helps a lot.
There was a pause before he added, ‘I'm sorry about the misunderstanding.’
‘I'm sorry too.
‘I'll keep in touch.’
‘Yes, please do.
Goodnight, Barney.’
She put down the receiver and was on her way upstairs when the telephone rang.
It was Lou — frantic, almost incoherent, reporting that Rick had vanished along with his passport, that the police had been to see her and had asked hundreds of questions.
She was sorry…terribly sorry…but she'd had to tell about her visit to Melissa…she hoped it wouldn't mean trouble for her.
The end of the message disintegrated into sobs which no amount of soothing words could stem.
Thank goodness for Iris, thought Melissa as she plodded wearily up to bed, for insisting that she cover herself by reporting Lou's visit.
Presumably they'd now be watching the docks and airports.
Ten to one, they'd have Rick Lawrence by the morning.
The next day was Sunday.
There was nothing on the seven o'clock news; she listened again at eight and nine but still there was no mention of the hunt for Rick Lawrence.
It was a relief when Iris called for her to go to church.
All the regular attenders were there: the Yorkes, glossy as newly-painted furniture; the Fords, sending darting glances round the congregation to see if anyone was missing; the Shergolds, sitting in their usual place near the door in the pew where Melissa had come upon Eleanor the previous day, Rodney with his normal air of self-importance that might or might not be hiding an inner anxiety, his wife pale and twitchy as she pulled off her gloves to turn the pages of her hymnbook.
The one o'clock news included a brief statement that a man had been detained early that morning while attempting to board a cross-Channel ferry at Dover and was helping police with their enquiries into the murder of Angelica Caroli, found stabbed in her Gloucestershire home the previous Thursday.
On Monday evening it was reported that the man detained the day before had been released without charge.
Detective Chief Inspector Kenneth Harris, in a radio interview, announced that another line of enquiry was being pursued.
He appealed to any member of the public who had been in the neighbourhood of the deceased's home at the critical time to come forward.
A joyful Lou called Melissa to thank her for her kindness and to say that Rick was now reconciled with his parents.
No, he hadn't actually said anything about getting engaged yet.
The poor darling had been through a lot and couldn't be expected to…well, she was sure Melissa would understand how he must be feeling.
Melissa murmured some banal phrases of encouragement and put down the telephone with a feeling of desolation.
For Lou, the future held almost certain disillusion; for Barney, the shadow of suspicion; for those who had loved Angy, the anguish of uncertainty.
And meanwhile, a ruthless killer still lurked in the darkness.
Chapter Fifteen
Melissa rang Barney's number but there was no reply.
He should be home by now; there was no evening class on Monday.
She tried again an hour later with the same result.
After some hesitation she called Ken Harris's home and was told by his wife that he had not yet returned.
Her imagination went wild; she pictured Barney seated in a hard chair in a dingy police interview room while the detective probed and bullied and cajoled, plucking away at the outer layers of his mind, stripping it down to its sensitive core, implacable in his search for signs of weakness or guilt.
He would use whatever insight into Angy's true nature that he had gleaned from Rick and Lou to undermine the pure, unsullied image that Barney was dedicated to preserving.
She spent the evening trying to work, with limited success.
At ten o'clock, Harris rang back.
‘Sorry I was out when you called,’ he said affably.
‘What can I do for you?’
‘I've been trying to contact Barney Willard.’
That was foolish, she thought, laying yourself wide open.
She detected some irony in Harris's voice as he replied, ‘We haven't arrested him, if that's what you're worried about.’
There were sounds of swallowing and the rattle of a cup in a saucer.
‘I did pop round for a chat with him earlier this evening and I thought he seemed a bit jumpy.
Perhaps he's gone to the pub to steady his nerves.’
‘So he's still under suspicion?’
Melissa's heart descended into her stomach and lay there, throbbing like a muffled drum at a funeral.
‘He's one of several people who may be able to help us with our enquiries.’
‘Oh please, Ken, spare me the jargon.
Why did you let Rick Lawrence go?
He had a long-standing grudge against Angy…surely he's the obvious…’
‘Sometimes,’ Harris said blandly, ‘things are almost too obvious.’
Immediately, she grasped his implication and was outraged.
‘Are you suggesting that Barney made up his mind to kill Angy and cold-bloodedly chose a method that would throw suspicion on someone else?
He wouldn't do a thing like that!
It's monstrous!’
‘I'm not suggesting anything.
We're simply proceeding with our investigations.’
‘Oh please, Ken, what have you got on Barney?’
‘You know very well that I can't give you that sort of information,’ said Harris, his gravelly voice unusually gentle.
‘But here's something I'd like you to think about.
Of all the ways to commit a murder, isn't it a strange coincidence that Angy was stabbed in the throat, just like she was in the portrait?’
‘Not if the same man carried out both attacks.’
‘You heard the reports.
We've eliminated Lawrence from our enquiries.’
Melissa felt as if she was falling through layer after layer of despair.
‘I won't believe Barney killed Angy!’ she declared.
‘Now look here, Melissa!’
A note of impatience, anger almost, had entered Harris's voice.
‘I want you to promise me you won't see Willard alone again until this case is cleared up.
Do you hear me?’ he went on as she remained silent.
‘If you're so sure he killed Angy, why don't you arrest him?’
She hadn't meant to shout, and the rage and frustration in her own voice shocked her.
‘At the moment, there's insufficient evidence to arrest anyone,’ said Harris quietly, ‘and if I thought you were keen on any of the other men in this case, I'd be saying the same thing about them.’
Damn you, Kenneth Harris, thought Melissa, for making me doubt Barney all over again.
Aloud, she said miserably,
‘All right, I promise.’
‘Good girl.
I'll keep in touch.’
‘Thanks, Ken.
Goodnight.’
She put down the receiver and stood for a moment with her hand resting on it, her head bowed and her thoughts in turmoil.
Then, feeling utterly defeated, she went mechanically through the routine of locking up the cottage for the night and plodded upstairs.
In the bathroom, her woebegone face stared at her from the mirror.
She scowled in disgust at the sight of her drooping mouth and reddened eyes.
‘You look a fright!’ she said aloud.
‘You've been making a fool of yourself, dripping around like some lovesick teenager.
Ken's right.
Iris was right.
You're old enough to have known better.’
She cleaned off her smudged make-up, filled the bath and had a long soak.
Tomorrow she really must settle down to serious work on her novel; time was slipping past, her deadline was approaching and if she didn't get on with it she'd have Joe making agitated phone calls and coming down to visit.
She didn't want to see Joe or anyone else; she wanted to close her mind to the outside world and crawl back into the safe, controllable environment of her imagination.
As she lay down in bed and put out her light, she forced herself to recall the latest chapter, completed a few days before, and fell asleep mulling over the next.
When she awoke next morning it was raining.
That should please the farmers — and Iris; for a couple of weeks or more it had been dry and unusually mild and the land was thirsty.
She stood at the open kitchen window with her early cup of tea clasped in both hands, listening to the swish of the falling water and watching it gather in tiny globules on the tips of the leaves of the apple tree like crystal drops on a chandelier before sliding with a slow, regular inevitability on to the grass.
The air was cool and pure; she felt an urge to be out in the rain, to smell and taste it, let its cleansing freshness wash over her.
She dressed quickly, put on rubber boots and a waterproof, and set off along the footpath leading to Benbury Woods.
Half a mile or so along the valley bottom, the path converged with another which led down the hill from the village.
Someone was approaching, clad like Melissa  herself in waterproof and wellingtons.
A small brown dog scurried out of the undergrowth, pulled up at the sight of another human, then rushed towards her.
It was Snappy, a squirming bundle of wet fur and muddy paws, greeting her with excited yaps while his mistress uttered a torrent of ineffectual commands and reproaches.
‘It's all right, I'm only wearing old clothes,’ said Melissa reassuringly as the dog hurled itself at her legs.
‘You're out early, Eleanor.
I thought I was the only one mad enough to go walking in this weather.’
Eleanor smiled and pushed a sodden lock of hair under her hood, which was pulled close to her face by a drawstring.
‘Yes, dreadful isn't it,’ she agreed.
‘Still, the farmers need it, Rodney says, and the garden…’
Compared with the near-despair that she had shown during their recent encounter in the church, her manner was almost jaunty.
Perhaps she'd heard on the college grapevine that Barney had been getting an undue amount of visits from the police and was rejoicing that the heat was off her beloved Rodney.
Well, that was natural; only a short time ago, when Rick Lawrence was the quarry, Melissa had felt exactly the same.
‘I take it you and Rodney are feeling better?’ she commented as they strolled side by side.
Eleanor's eyes sparkled.
They were pure jade, like a shallow sea on a clear day, the eyes of a water-nymph set in a pale, pudgy face above a dumpy body encased in rubberised nylon.
‘Oh yes, much better, thank you.
Things are still very difficult for Rodney, of course.’
Eleanor seemed anxious not to lose sympathy.
‘It's not nice, is it, having one of your staff suspected of murder.
And then, not having a secretary, you know, he even has to do his own typing!
It's too bad, really.
He tries to do a couple of hours’ work on his book before going to the college.
I get up to cook his breakfast and there's no point in going back to bed…
'She ended on a slightly peevish note.
Melissa did not reply.
Her sympathy had evaporated; she felt sickened by the self-centred attitude of the Shergolds.
A  girl had been murdered and their sole concern seemed to be its effect on their own convenience.
‘Of course, everyone kept saying how beautiful she was but she couldn't really have been a very nice girl,’ Eleanor went on, her small mouth a prissy rosette of distaste.
‘All those men coming to her flat…’
‘All those men?’
‘Well, there was that young man they arrested and then let go, and Mr Willard, of course, and who knows how many others?
Girls like that simply ask for trouble, don't you agree?
Rodney says…
’ She broke off to pick her way round a patch of mud.
‘I do so hate getting my feet dirty, even when I'm wearing wellies,khikhikhi !’
‘Has Rodney solved the murder yet?’ asked Melissa, making little effort to keep the sarcasm from her voice.
It was, however, completely lost on Eleanor.
‘Oh, he's sure it was Mr Willard who killed Angy, and I agree with him.’
Of course you do, you haven't got an independent thought in your head, reflected Melissa crossly as Eleanor prattled on.
‘Such a strange-looking man, I've always thought…khikhikhi …my father always told me not to trust men with beards.
Silly isn't it?’
‘Very silly.’
With an effort, Melissa twisted her mouth into something she hoped was a smile.
‘I think I'll have to be going back now.
Hearing about Rodney's book has reminded me that I've got to get down to work on mine.’
‘How is it coming on?
Have there been any more murders lately?’
Eleanor turned her head to peer at Melissa, her doughy face alight with a morbid curiosity.
‘I expect you're finding this real-life mystery quite useful for a plot, aren't you?’
‘Not particularly.’
Melissa was shocked at the lack of sensitivity and promptly made up her mind to use Eleanor as the model for a future victim.
In her present mood, it would relieve her feelings to devise a sticky end for her.
‘So long for now, Eleanor.’
She turned and headed for home.
Snappy bounded after her for a few yards, then scampered away to follow his mistress.
Melissa glanced back for a moment and watched her plodding stolidly on her way.
In her shapeless garments, she had the silhouette of a Russian ‘Babushka’ doll, the type that held a number of smaller dolls within its hollow wooden shell.
Irritation melted into pity.
However many prettily-painted Eleanors might lurk inside that dumpy frame, the combined influence of an overbearing father and a domineering husband would ensure that they remained securely locked away.
Back indoors, she brewed coffee and ate a hasty breakfast before settling down to work.
She unplugged the telephone and disconnected the doorbell, resolutely shutting herself off from the world as she manipulated her characters like pieces in a board game, reading their thoughts, putting speech into their mouths, controlling their destinies.
Playing God with them, no less, someone had once said to her.
The hours passed and she worked on, taking hurried meal breaks and firmly rejecting all thoughts of listening to the radio or reading the newspaper.
At five o'clock she got up from her desk.
She was stiff and tense in every muscle but she had done her first good day's work since the discovery of the murder.
She spent the evening rereading the day's output and went to bed moderately satisfied.
The plot was working and the characters had played their parts as she intended.
She fell asleep with her mind determinedly focused on plans for the next chapter.
The following day was Wednesday and Gloria, the extrovert young matron who ‘did’ for both Melissa and Iris, arrived to do her weekly stint of housework.
She came bustling into the kitchen, exuding good humour and exotic perfume as she took off her jacket and put on her overall.
‘You've had your hair done differently,’ Melissa remarked.
Gloria's huge brown eyes sparkled as she twisted her head this way and that to give a better view of the elaborate blond topknot from which floated multi-tinted spiral streamers.
‘D'you like it?
My Stanley says it makes me look like a film star!’
‘Very becoming’ agreed Melissa.
‘It really suits you.’
‘Ooh, thanks.
Any special jobs this morning or just the usual?’
‘Just the usual, please.
I'll be in the study if you want me.’
‘See you presently then!’
‘Dreadful business about the murder, innit ?’
Gloria remarked as they shared their coffee break in the kitchen.
Melissa suppressed a sigh.
She had hoped to dodge the subject but might have known that Gloria's boundless interest in all things morbid and sensational would make it impossible.
‘Yes, dreadful,’ she agreed.
‘I suppose you've been reading all about it in the papers?’
Excitement sent the topknot quivering.
‘We got inside information!’
‘Really?’
‘You know my Stanley's showroom?’
Melissa nodded, concealing a smile as she pictured the ramshackle building where Gloria's husband operated his used-car business.
‘Well,’ continued Gloria between swallows of coffee, ‘the lady what polishes the cars for him has got a sister what does cleaning at Stowbridge Tech.’
She paused to crunch a ginger biscuit.
‘Oh, yes?’
‘Laura — that's Jean's sister, see — was talking about the murder with the other cleaners during their tea break.’
‘I can imagine,’ murmured Melissa.
The entire college must have been humming with gossip and speculation.
‘Some of them reckoned one of the teachers — some arty chap with a beard — might have done it, but Laura don't think so.’
So far, Melissa had been only half listening.
Now, she gave the conversation her full attention.
‘She doesn't?’
Gloria shook her head, sending the streamers aswirl.
‘She reckons it were that chap she worked for, the one what lives in one of they new houses here in Upper Benbury.’
Gloria was from Lower Benbury herself, commuting to  her various jobs in a red Ford Escort supplied from her Stanley's stock of ‘genuine, low-mileage used cars’.
‘You don't mean Doctor Shergold?’
‘ 'sright .’
‘Whatever makes her think that?’
‘Laura's a bit of a nosey parker,’ Gloria continued, draining her mug and drawing the back of her hand across her mouth.
‘She were doing his room one evening and she noticed he'd left his cupboard open.
She had a peek inside, and what do you think she found?’
Gloria paused for dramatic effect and Melissa shook her head.
‘I've no idea!’
Gloria leaned forward and dropped her voice to a hoarse stage whisper.
‘A jacket!’ she announced.
‘Reeking of fancy perfume!
Laura reckons,’ she continued, a salacious gleam in her toffee-brown eyes, ‘old Po-face-that's what they all calls him cos he never smiles-had been having it off with that secretary for weeks.
She reckons he's a two-coat man.’
‘Has she told the police about it?’ asked Melissa, wondering if ‘two-coat’could he local dialect for ‘two-faced’and thinking that it might well be a suitable epithet for Rodney Shergold.
‘Not she.
Avoids the coppers like the plague since they done her Jimmy for joy-riding in a borrowed car.’
Plainly, Gloria well understood this point of view.
‘Anyway,’ she added with a shrug, ‘the jacket might not be there now.
It were weeks ago Laura found it.’
Melissa played thoughtfully with her empty coffee mug and reflected on what now seemed the certainty that Rodney Shergold had been having an affair with Angy.
Still, the idea that they could have had the kind of torrid relationship that leads to murder was another matter.
From what she knew of him, the man simply didn't have the character, or the guts.
From what she knew of him.
That didn't amount to much and most of it was second-hand, picked up from his wife's artless prattle and staff-room gossip.
Maybe, as  Gloria had hinted, there was another side to his nature, carefully hidden from the outside world, a side that was capable of strong passion and sudden violence.
There were plenty of people around who were not what they seemed.
Crime writers would be lost without them.
Gloria's round face was pink with excitement.
She loved a bit of gossip and this morsel must seem particularly juicy.
She should not be encouraged to share it with too many people.
‘I do hope,’ said Melissa, trying not to sound censorious, ‘you won't go spreading this around the village.
There's probably nothing in it and it would be dreadful to cast suspicion on an innocent person.’
‘Ooh, don't worry, I won't say nothing to no one else round here,’ promised Gloria.
‘Only you, cos you're into this sort of thing with your books.’
Admiration shone in her luminous eyes.
‘I'll bet you could find some clues the coppers have missed.’
‘I think that's most unlikely,’ said Melissa, wishing it could be true.
It would be good to make Ken Harris admit that for once he had suspected the wrong man.
Gloria's expression became pensive.
‘I do hope it wasn't that arty chap.
Laura told her sister he's a real nice gentleman, not like old Po-face, he's a real pain in the backside she says…’
‘You really shouldn't speak of Doctor Shergold like that,’ said Melissa firmly.
‘I think it's time we got back to work, don't you?’
Obediently, Gloria slid her ample bottom from her stool.
‘Ooh my, is that the time!’
After Gloria had gone home, Melissa ate a sandwich before driving into Cheltenham to do some shopping.
She was back at her car, stowing her purchases, when someone called her name.
It was Sybil Bliss, laden with bulging plastic carrier bags.
‘Oh Melissa, what a piece of luck!
I was going to ring you.
Have you got a minute?’
‘Of course.’
Melissa glanced at her watch.
‘Why don't we go and have a cup of tea?’
‘Super idea!
I'll just dump this lot in the car.’
They found a cafe a short distance from the car park.
‘Shall I pour?’ said Melissa when the waitress brought their tea.
‘Oh no, let me!’ responded Sybil eagerly.
Her movements as she set the inverted cups upright on their saucers and manipulated milk jug, teapot and hot water jug were precise and just a little fussy.
‘There we are!
Do you take sugar?’
‘No, thank you.’
‘Have a scone?
They're simply smothered in butter, and there's jam and cream too.
I'm afraid your friend Miss Ash wouldn't approve!’
Iris had given Sybil a severe lecture on the dangers of eating animal products of any kind.
‘Never mind, she'll never know, will she?’ said Melissa.
They chuckled and helped themselves, exchanging guilty glances like naughty schoolgirls.
‘Have you done anything more with your flower pictures?’
Melissa asked.
Sybil's smile faded.
‘Not yet.
As a matter of fact, I was going to have a chat with Angy, you see, at this week's art class, but of course…
’ She bit her lip and played with her teaspoon.
‘It's terrible, isn't it?
Such a lovely girl!
Whoever would want to kill her?’
‘I'm afraid the police suspect Mr Willard,’ said Melissa.
‘Oh no, I can't believe that!’
Melissa looked up in surprise at the earnest ring in Sybil's voice.
‘I know he had a rather possessive attitude towards her-I told you about that time he came into her class, didn't I?— but from the way he looked at her, you'd have thought she was the most perfect and precious thing on earth to him.
I can't think he'd ever hurt her.’
‘Not even if he found out she was less than perfect?’
Sybil shook her head, sending her wings of hair swinging across her chin.
With two forefingers she tucked them behind her ears.
‘I wouldn't have thought so.
It'd be rather like having a lovely picture that you thought was a genuine old master and then being told it was a fake.
You'd be very  disappointed, even angry, but it would still be beautiful.
You wouldn't destroy it, surely?’
‘Some people might.’
Neither Harris nor Iris, Melissa reflected, had expressed any such view.
‘I suppose it's a matter of temperament.’
‘Well, I'm sure the police will find out they're making a mistake.’
Sybil appeared entirely confident in her assessment of Barney's character and Melissa felt warmer towards her by the minute.
‘Maybe she was carrying on with someone they don't know about.
There's that chap Eddie, her landlord.’
‘I'd thought of that…in fact, she once mentioned Eddie to me.
Said he didn't charge her much rent for her flat.
I remember at the time wondering why.
What do you know about him?’
‘Nothing really, except that last week Angy showed us a sketch she'd done of him.
It was with some others.
She was good at heads — she'd done several of us, from memory.
There was one of Mr Willard, and the head of department, I can't remember his name…’
‘Doctor Shergold?’
‘Yes, that's right.
Now I come to think of it, there was one of you.’
‘Yes, I know, I've seen the drawings,’ interrupted Melissa.
She ignored the question in Sybil's face; she could tell her about Harris's visit some other time.
‘Did she make any comment about this man Eddie?’
Sybil frowned, absent-mindedly twirling a strand of hair round her fingers.
‘So far as I remember, she just said something like,
‘That's Eddie who owns the house where I live.’
The police will have interviewed him, surely.’
‘Yes, I suppose so.’
Yes, of course they had.
Harris had mentioned that the owner of the house was a social worker.
He'd been away at the time of the murder but if, as seemed likely, he'd been having an affair with Angy…suppose he was married and his wife had found out, and taken the opportunity while her husband was absent to do away with her rival?
‘I mustn't keep rattling on like this!’
Sybil's voice, apologetic and embarrassed, interrupted the wild onrush of Melissa's thoughts.
‘I'm quite forgetting what I wanted to ask you.’
‘Yes, you said you were going to phone me.’
With an effort, Melissa hauled her mind back from its helter-skelter ride.
‘Yes.
It was just that I and the others in the class — at least, the ones who turned up yesterday, a lot of people didn't bother — anyway, we felt it would be nice to send some flowers and a card or something to her relatives.
We could all sign it…’
‘What a nice thought!
I'm sure they'd appreciate it.
They live in London but I can get their address for you.’
‘That would be so kind.
There's one other thing.
As I said, not everyone was there yesterday and I don't know how to contact the others.
Is there any way I can get hold of their addresses?’
Melissa was touched by the look of gentle compassion in Sybil's eyes and thought what a thoroughly nice person she was, despite the odd bout of histrionics.
‘No problem,’ she assured her.
‘I'll get them from the register tomorrow.
Will you be at the workshop?’
‘Oh yes, of course.
I do so look forward to it.’
‘That's good.’
Melissa glanced at her watch.
‘I'd better be going.
I like to get home before the rush hour.’
‘Me too.’
They paid their bill and strolled back to the car park.
As they reached it, a white Ford Fiesta heading for the exit drew up alongside them, waiting for a gap in the traffic.
Eleanor Shergold was at the wheel with Snappy in the back.
Melissa waved and Eleanor wound down the window.
‘Hullo, Melissa,’ she said.
The bright April sun was full in her eyes and she shaded them with one hand.
Recognising his friend, Snappy jumped up at the window and barked.
‘Hullo, Eleanor!’
Melissa glanced over her shoulder and gestured to Sybil, standing behind her.
‘Can you spare a moment?
I'd like you to meet a friend of mine.’
‘Down, Snappy!’ said Eleanor ineffectively.
She peered beneath her hand at Sybil, then jumped as an impatient hoot sounded behind them.
She glanced in her mirror and fumbled with her gear lever.
‘Some other time!’ she said hastily, looking thoroughly flustered.
She edged the Fiesta forward, found the road clear and let the clutch in with a jerk.
The following car, a Volvo with a fat, red-faced man at the wheel, shot out on her tail.
‘Well, really!
The manners of some people!’ commented Sybil as they made their way to their cars.
‘I'd have made him wait!’
‘That was Doctor Shergold's wife,’ explained Melissa.
‘You mean the head of our department at college?
Isn't she the one you tried to persuade to come to our art class?’
‘That's the one.’
‘She seems a very nervous lady.’
Melissa shrugged.
‘She's been so conditioned by her husband that she instinctively kowtows to any man who says ‘boo’ to her.’
‘I didn't realise he was that sort.
Of course, I've only set eyes on him a couple of times.’
‘Eleanor told me her late father was Principal of Brigston.
Rodney was a lecturer there and they cherished hopes of a chair for him but unfortunately Daddy died before he could wangle it.
Reading between the lines, I suspect that Rodney has never quite forgiven either of them.’
‘You mean, he married her just to further his career?’
‘Well, it wasn't for her looks, was it?’ said Melissa with a grin.
‘No, that was catty of me.
She's not a bad sort but there are times when I could shake her.’
‘How absolutely dreadful to be so downtrodden.’
With her key in her hand, Sybil stood by her car, her mobile features working overtime to register shock and disapproval.
‘Poor woman!’
‘Oh, she seems happy enough, living in his shadow,’ said Melissa.
‘She's got him on a pedestal.’
She moved towards her own car, parked a few yards away.
‘See you tomorrow!’
Chapter Sixteen
On Thursday afternoon, Melissa arrived at the college to find Barney alone in the staffroom.
She greeted him warmly but he responded with a perfunctory nod and immediately got up to leave.
‘What's the hurry?’ she asked.
‘It's only half-past one and you haven't finished your coffee.’
‘Got some things to set up.
I'll take it with me.’
Avoiding her eye, he scooped up portfolio, briefcase and half-empty mug and went out.
Ken Harris again, thought Melissa angrily.
He was so sure that Barney was his man, even though the evidence against him wasn't strong enough to arrest him, that he'd had the cheek to warn him off.
Once he had his teeth into something he was like a bull terrier; you'd have to wrench his jaws apart to make him drop it…or produce some equally strong evidence to blow his case to bits.
‘Well, so I will,’ Melissa informed the empty room through gritted teeth.
‘You just wait, you mutton-headed copper!’
She found her own register in its usual place and then took from the ‘Tuesday’ pigeonhole the one marked ‘Line Drawing and Water-colour’.
As she opened it, a faint breath of perfume escaped.
Angy had moved in an aura of musk and here it was, clinging to the papers she had handled so many times.
Was this the perfume that an inquisitive cleaner had detected on Rodney Shergold's jacket?
At the back of the folder was a neatly typed list of names and addresses which she photocopied before going downstairs to Rodney Shergold's office.
He was on his feet, gathering up books from his desk.
He glanced up as she entered, gave a curt nod and began hunting through some papers with jerky, impatient movements.
‘I wish they'd hurry up and find me another girl,’ he muttered irritably.
‘It's most inconvenient having no one to keep things in order.’
‘I'm sure it must be.’
If he noticed the heavy slice of sarcasm that Melissa laid on the words, he paid no heed.
He picked up his jacket from the back of his chair and dragged it over his shoulders.
‘I'm lecturing in the main building this afternoon.
Was there something you wanted?’
‘I was wondering if you could give me Angy's address?’ she said casually.
She could, of course, have obtained it from the Bursar's secretary but was interested to see if the question brought any reaction.
She was not disappointed; if a firebell had gone off within a yard of his ear, he could not have appeared more shaken.
‘Wh…what makes you think I would know that?’
His sallow face turned a dull pink and his voice, never particularly strong or resonant, became a querulous squeak.
Melissa received his alarmed stare with an innocent smile and a careful blend of honey and vinegar in her voice as she replied, ‘I thought, as she worked for you, you'd be bound to have a note of it…but never mind, I can always ask Mrs Ellis.
Oh, excuse me, Doctor Shergold.’
She raised a finger and he gave a nervous start.
‘Did you realise you have a smudge of chalk on your lapel?’
‘Huh?
Oh, er, thank you.’
He brushed blindly at the front of his jacket.
‘No, the other one!’
But Rodney Shergold, normally so dapper and careful of his person, was not interested in chalk smudges; his one desire was to escape from further conversation with Melissa.
With a sulphurous glance at her, he grabbed his books and papers and rushed out.
‘Well,’ Melissa murmured aloud as she listened to his footsteps pattering through the hall, followed by the slam of the outer door, ‘there goes a man with a guilty secret.
Now, I wonder…
’ She glanced round the room and her eye fell on the desk where Angy used to sit.
It had been cleared of papers; the typewriter was covered and the chair pushed  firmly into place.
The police would have been through every drawer with a toothcomb in their search for clues; there was nothing to be gained there.
But the cupboard in the corner, behind Rodney Shergold's desk, was for his personal use.
Perhaps the police hadn't searched in there; if not, they could have missed a vital clue after all.
Melissa dumped her register and handbag on a chair, marched round the desk and tried the cupboard door.
It was locked.
‘Bother!’ she muttered.
She glanced at her watch; in ten minutes her class was due to start.
She tried the door again, then pulled open the top drawer in Shergold's desk.
It was only two or three inches deep, more like a tray divided into sections containing a neat arrangement of pins, paperclips and other small office requisites.
In one of the compartments lay a key.
A little hesitantly and with an ear cocked for approaching footsteps, she picked it up and tried it in the cupboard lock.
It fitted and the door swung open.
It was a narrow wooden cupboard with a shelf at the top and a rail below.
The shelf and the floor were piled with books, boxes and folders stuffed with papers.
She picked up a dusty-looking volume at random and flipped through the pages.
It contained reprints of some papers presented to a local antiquarian society — probably research material for the book on neolithic burial mounds.
She dropped it back on the pile.
Hanging from the rail was an empty coat-hanger.
Remembering what Gloria had said, Melissa took it down and sniffed it, hoping to detect some tell-tale trace of scent, but there was nothing.
Well, it had been a forlorn hope at best.
Disconsolately, she relocked the cupboard, replaced the key and went slowly upstairs to her classroom.
It was inevitable that the previous week's tragedy should colour the contributions to the writers' workshop.
With few exceptions, they were meditations on death, bereavement and the uncertainty of the human condition.
Sybil had composed a poem about dead flowers, each quatrain ending with the line ‘And the spent petals fall, one by one, to the ground’, which she read aloud to a receptive audience, a  note of melancholy in her voice and a trace of moisture dimming her eyes.
By four o'clock Melissa's spirits were at rock bottom.
Normally, she thoroughly enjoyed her Thursday afternoons; today, she was thankful when the session was over and the aspiring authors trooped out, clutching their masterpieces and chanting their thanks.
Only Sybil Bliss lingered behind.
‘You look tired,’ she said.
‘Would you care to come round to my house for a cup of tea?
I only live a couple of streets away.’
Melissa accepted without hesitation.
She felt jaded and in need of emotional uplift.
Iris had an American cousin staying with her and had been too busy dragging him round every art gallery and stately home in the county to have time for her.
In any case, she had recently shown a disconcerting facility for mind-reading.
The last thing Melissa wanted at the moment was for Iris to find out that she was planning to probe into the circumstances of Angy's death.
Sybil would be a far more sympathetic companion.
‘I do feel a bit drained,’ she admitted.
‘By the way, I've got that list of addresses you wanted.’
She took out the photocopy and handed it over.
‘The last one's a bit indistinct.
I think it must have been added later by someone using a dud typewriter ribbon.’
Sybil scrutinised the list.
‘That's Delia Forbes.
She only joined the class at the beginning of this term.’
‘I'll check it in the Bursar's office.
I have to go over to hand in my register now there's no one here to take charge of it.’
A pathetic little shade hovered for a moment at her elbow, reminding her of her other errand.
‘And I want to get Angy's address.
I know she lived in Tranmere Gardens but I'm not sure of the number.’
‘It's number twenty-two.
Now, how do I know that?’
Sybil's brow wrinkled.
‘I've never been there myself.
Oh yes, I remember!
I overheard her telling Delia.’
Her eyes rounded with curiosity.
‘Were you planning to go round there?’
‘I thought I might have a word with Eddie Brady.’
Melissa heaved a sigh.
‘I'm not sure what good it can do but I've  been thinking over what you said about Barney Willard.
I don't think he killed Angy either.
Perhaps there's something the police have missed.’
Sybil's face glowed.
‘Are you going to do some detective work?
Could I help, do you think?
I'm a great fan of your Nathan Latimer!’
‘Why not?
Two heads are better than one.’
‘How super !
Shall we talk about it over that cup of tea?’
‘Yes, let's.
I'll just drop this register in to Mrs Ellis and double check that address.
See you outside the main gate.’
Ten minutes of easy walking brought them to Sybil's house.
It stood on a corner, at the end of a terrace of four which had, Sybil explained as she put her key in the front door, replaced a large Victorian dwelling.
The sitting-room was on the first floor, above the garage, with a picture window overlooking a small park.
The place was comfortably and tastefully furnished, with some good ornaments and pictures and several vases of fresh flowers.
‘Do make yourself at home,’ said Sybil hospitably and bustled off into the kitchen.
When she returned with a tea-tray, Melissa was on her feet admiring a portrait of a handsome, grey-haired man that hung above the stone fireplace.
‘My late husband,’ said Sybil.
She stood for a moment beside Melissa, looking up at the portrait.
‘We'd only been married five years when he died.
We had to wait a long time because I had my mother to look after and she was rather difficult.’
‘I'm so sorry.’
‘He had cancer.
We took up painting after we found out.
It was something quiet that we could do together.’
Sybil's expression, which had become momentarily sad, softened into a tender smile that was wholly natural.
‘He'd always been keen to try but never seemed to have the time.
He wasn't very good at it, but we both enjoyed it very much,’ she added wistfully.
‘I've kept on going to classes ever since.’
‘And you are very talented,’ said Melissa.
‘It's kind of you to say so.
Do sit down.’
Sybil placed a small table at her elbow and poured tea into dainty china cups.
‘No sugar…that's right, isn't it?’
‘Mmm.’
Melissa sipped gratefully.
‘Just what I needed.
I thought today's class would never end!’
‘It was rather depressing, wasn't it?
But I suppose it was only natural that people should feel affected by what happened.’
‘I checked Delia Forbes’ address, by the way.
Mrs Ellis looked out her enrolment form for me.
Her writing wasn't all that easy to read but I think it's correct.’
Melissa handed over a slip of paper.
‘Talking of addresses, you mentioned that Angy gave hers to Delia.’
‘That's right.’
‘Have you any idea why?
Was Delia going to visit her?’
‘She might have been.
She was very taken with those drawings we were talking about.
Maybe Angy had offered to show her some more of her work, or lend her a book or something.’
‘What's Delia like?’
Sybil thought for a moment.
‘About my age, I suppose.
Dark curly hair…glasses…
’ Her pointed face rounded into a smile.
‘I'm not much of a detective, am I?
I'm usually too absorbed in my work to spend much time looking at the other students.’
Melissa's brain was nibbling away at an idea.
‘Can you remember when it was that Angy gave Delia her address?’
‘Oh, quite recently.
Let me think…yes, it was the last time we had a class.’
‘Then it must have been the day Angy was murdered!
This could be very important, Sybil.
Suppose Delia had become friendly with Angy and gone to her flat that afternoon She'd have been one of the last people to see her alive.’
Sybil's eyes grew round.
‘My goodness, so she would!
The last I saw of Angy was a few minutes after the class ended.
I'd popped into the library to get a book renewed  and when I left the college building I saw her walking along the road on her own.’
‘Delia might have followed later.
Did you tell the police?’
‘About Angy giving Delia her address?
I don't think so.
No, I'm sure I didn't.
It'd gone right out of my mind until just now.
A policeman came to call on me that Thursday evening, after Angy's body had been found, asking what time the class ended and where I went afterwards…that sort of thing.
Oh, and he asked if I'd ever seen Angy having any kind of disagreement with anyone and I had to tell him about that little contretemps with Mr Willard and young Godfrey Mellish.’
She sighed heavily.
‘Poor Mr Willard, I don't suppose that helped him very much.’
‘I don't suppose you were the only one who mentioned it,’ sighed Melissa.
‘And the police will have spoken to Delia herself by now, so we can't expect to find anything new there.’
‘Never mind!’ said Sybil briskly.
‘When do you propose calling on Eddie Brady?’
‘Why not now, if you've got time?
It's not far, is it?’
Sybil was already on her feet, her eyes shining.
‘Just round the corner from the college.
Isn't this exciting !’
Number twenty-two Tranmere Gardens was a double-fronted house in the Regency style which bore all the familiar signs of having seen better days: peeling stucco, blistered paint and sagging gutters.
Behind a low wall, a ragged hedge squatted like a moulting hen over a clutch of empty drink cans and discarded crisp bags; a couple of unkempt evergreen trees, grown to roof height, screened the house from the road and severely restricted the amount of light reaching the dingy windows.
Sybil and Melissa mounted what had once been an imposing flight of steps flanked by tall white pillars and peered at the labels alongside the row of bell-pushes in a corroding brass frame affixed to the wall beside the front door.
One was blank, two were roughly printed with unfamiliar names and the top one read ‘Caroli’ in artistic capitals.
‘Not much help, is it?’ said Sybil, frowning.
‘Hang on, I've just remembered,’ said Melissa.
‘He lives in the basement flat.’
As they descended the steps, a battered car turned into the drive and pulled up in a corner of the small courtyard.
The driver, a slight figure in a tweed jacket and grey flannel trousers, got out and looked across at the two women before turning to rummage behind the front seat and extract a bulky briefcase and an armful of files.
The glance was sufficient for identification.
‘That's him!’ said Melissa.
‘Excuse me,’ she called, ‘aren't you Mr Brady?’
A pair of deep-set, greyish-brown eyes stared from beneath a high forehead and strongly-marked brows.
Their expression was guarded and none too friendly, and the response to Melissa's question was a jerk of the head that plainly said, ‘What if I am?’
‘We recognise you from your portrait,’ said Melissa.
There was no softening in the defensive manner.
‘The one Angy Caroli did of you,’ added Sybil.
‘You knew Angy?’
It seemed to Melissa that the expression had become a shade less hostile.
The voice had a curious quality, husky and high-pitched as if uncertain whether it was a light tenor or a throaty mezzo-soprano.
The face, too, was intriguing, its strong lines accentuated by severely cropped hair and a skin smooth and ruddy as an apple.
‘We knew her from college,’ Sybil was explaining.
‘I was a student in her art class — I'm Sybil Bliss — and this is Melissa Craig who teaches creative writing.’
‘Eddie Brady.’
A slim hand shook each of theirs in a powerful grip.
‘Angy's spoken about you both.
Come to think of it, she did your heads as well, didn't she?’
They nodded, relieved that the ice was broken.
‘What can I do for you?’
‘I don't know if you've heard, but it rather seems that the police suspect one of the lecturers at the college of killing her,’ said Melissa.
Eddie Brady looked from one to the other and said, ‘I think I know the one you mean.’
‘We both know the gentleman concerned and we're not very happy about the way things are going so we're making a few enquiries of our own.’
‘Mrs Craig's a crime writer.
She knows a lot about detection and things!’ explained Sybil, evidently thinking this would impress.
Melissa smiled and shook her head.
‘Oh, I'm no Sherlock Holmes!
It's just that Mr Willard is a friend…and the police do make mistakes sometimes.
We understand you knew Angy quite well and we thought you might be willing to help us.’
An extraordinary change came over Eddie Brady's face.
Grief welled into the deep-set eyes and the reply, when it came, was unsteady and uttered through tightened lips.
‘I've told the fuzz all I know.’
‘Please.
It won't take long.’
‘Oh, all right.
You'd better come in.’
The sitting-room of the semi-basement flat was overfull of shabby furniture and littered with books and papers.
Eddie Brady dumped the briefcase on the floor with the heap of folders on top, took off the tweed jacket and threw it into a corner, and dragged two chairs from under the cluttered table.
‘Have a seat.
How about some tea?’
Melissa sensed rather than saw Sybil's nervous hesitation as they sat down.
‘Actually, we've just had tea, thank you,’ she said.
‘Oh, well, mind if I do?’
‘Not at all.’
‘Shan't be a tick.’
‘Well!’ murmured Melissa as the door closed.
‘That's something I hadn't thought of.’
The haircut would have won the approval of an army officer and similar clothes could be seen in the windows of men's outfitters in any high street, but the body inside them was unmistakably female.
‘Oh, dear!’ whispered Sybil in some alarm.
‘I've heard about such people, of course…’
‘Shh!’ murmured Melissa, smothering a grin.
Plainly, Sybil was about to have her horizons widened.
After a few  minutes, the door reopened and Eddie returned with a mug of tea, drew up a third chair and sat down.
‘Mm, that's better!’ she said after a few mouthfuls.
She found a stained beer-mat and put down the mug, which bore the legend, ‘When God made man, she was only joking’ in spiky black letters.
‘Right, now!’
She sat leaning forward in her chair, her hands planted on her thighs so that her elbows jutted outwards.
‘How can I help you, ladies?’
Outwardly, she had recovered her composure but her eyes were watchful as well as sad.
Conscious of Sybil at her side, tense as a patient in a dentist's waiting-room, Melissa took the plunge.
‘How well did you know Angy?’ she asked.
Eddie scowled.
‘If you've come here to pry…’
‘Please.’
Melissa put out a hand.
‘I don't mean to offend.
We want to find out who killed her.
Surely, you want that too, if you were fond of her?’
‘Fond?’
Eddie made a harsh sound that could have been intended as a laugh but sounded more like a cry of pain.
She grabbed her mug of tea, gripping it in both hands and staring down into it with an expression of such misery that one could almost imagine the dead girl's face reflected in the surface of the liquid.
‘I'm sorry, I didn't mean to distress you,’ said Melissa softly.
Eddie put down the mug and pulled a man-sized handkerchief from her trouser pocket.
Angrily, she dashed away the tears that had gathered in her eyes.
It was several moments before she regained her self-control.
‘I fell in love with her the minute I saw her,’ she said at last.
‘When was that?’
‘Last summer.
She came here looking for somewhere to live.
She'd seen the card I put up in a local shop, advertising the top flat.
She was like a waif…alone, anxious, scared.’
‘What was she scared of?’
‘A man, of course!’
Eddie's lip curled.
‘He'd beaten her, bullied her into an engagement she didn't want.
I took her  in, looked after her, helped her get settled.
Then these other creatures started pestering her.’
‘Creatures?’
‘Men from the college.
She used to tell me about them.
There was that bearded artist, Poppa Barney she called him.
He was constantly interfering in her life, lecturing her, ordering her about.
I tried to get her to give him the elbow but she would always say, ‘but Eddie, he means well and he's so kind’.
Kind!’
Another mirthless bark.
‘He slapped her around as well, did you know that?’
‘I know he hit her once, just before she was killed.
He never had a chance to speak to her again and he'll never forgive himself.
Did she tell you what the quarrel was about?’
‘She did!’
A faint, sardonic smile softened the harsh lines of Eddie's face.
‘We had a good laugh about it once she'd got over the shock.
‘At least,’ I said to her, ‘he won't bother you any more, now he thinks you're having my sprog.
Now all you've got to do is get rid of your Wednesday afternoon creep and start planning your own life.’’
Who was the Wednesday afternoon creep?’
‘Her boss — Shergold, his name is.
She wheedled him into letting her take the art class…for a consideration, of course.’
Eddie mimed an attack of nausea.
‘It was that Barney who put the idea of teaching into her head.
Ironic, isn't it?’
‘And Shergold came to see her regularly?’
‘Like I said, every Wednesday afternoon.
I don't know how she put up with it but she said she felt obligated.
She was like that.’
Eddie gave a fond, sad smile.
‘Soft as a mop.
‘He's so repressed, Eddie,’ she told me after the first time.
‘I felt so sorry for him.’
Sorry!
I'd have kicked his balls in!’
Sybil made a faint tutting noise and shuddered, as if she had just discovered an unpleasant insect on one of her flowers.
Melissa frowned, shook her head and put a finger to her lips but Eddie appeared not to have noticed.
‘Did you ever meet either of these men?’
Melissa asked.
‘I never met Barney but I caught sight of the other one once, scuttling across the yard like a nervous rabbit.
Looked a right little prat!’
Eddie's lip curled.
‘He used to sneak out of college wearing a spare jacket so's  no one 'd know he was missing.
Rush round here every Wednesday afternoon, have it off with Angy and rush back.
She hated it, I know she did.’
Every word was coated with a gritty layer of disgust.
‘She just couldn't bring herself to tell him to sod off.’
So that, thought Melissa in a flash of enlightenment, was what Gloria had meant when she called Shergold a two-coat man.
That coat-hanger had once held the spare jacket — but where was it now?
‘Yes, that fits in with everything I've heard about her,’ she told Eddie.
After a pause, she said, ‘And you were hoping that one day she'd give up seeing men altogether and have a steady relationship with you?’
‘So what's wrong with that?’
Eddie glared and clenched her fists.
‘She was halfway there already…and I'd have looked after her.’
Impulsively, Melissa leaned across and put a hand on the bowed shoulder.
‘Yes, I'm sure you would,’ she said gently.
The gesture of sympathy was almost too much for Eddie.
Her features buckled and she put a hand over her eyes.
‘I was sure she'd come to love me in the end, if I could just be patient,’ she whispered.
Sybil was increasingly and audibly restless and Melissa was becoming irritated; she had no business to make her disapproval so obvious.
It might be better to leave before there was open unpleasantness but she was reluctant to go now.
She had the feeling that if she could get Eddie to go on talking long enough, there was a chance that something significant would emerge.
It was, she knew, wholly irrational; her common-sense kept reminding her that Eddie must already have been closely questioned by the police.
There was, however, one point that might not have been raised.
‘Did Angy ever mention a woman called Delia Forbes?’ she asked.
Eddie put down her empty mug with a thump and glared.
‘Who's Delia Forbes?’ she demanded.
‘One of her students,’ said Melissa.
‘We think Angy may have invited her round to her flat last Tuesday.
Mrs Bliss overheard her giving her this address.’
‘I don't believe it!
She's never been involved with another woman!’
Eddie's jaw set and her hands gripped the edge of the table.
Her breathing had become agitated.
Sybil at last found her voice.
‘You needn't worry,’ she said prissily.
‘Delia Forbes is a decent married woman, not one of your sort!’
‘And what the hell's that supposed to mean?’
Sybil flinched at the aggression in Eddie's manner but she held her ground.
‘I mean, she wouldn't be capable of…’ her mouth became a tight bunch of disgust, ‘your…unnatural practices.’
‘You sanctimonious cow!’
Eddie was on her feet, leaning across the table with one hand raised.
Her face was scarlet.
‘Think you're so bloody superior just because you happen to be straight!’
Sybil leapt from her chair, sending it toppling sideways on to the floor.
‘Don't you dare touch me!’ she hissed.
‘Are you coming Melissa?
I'm not staying here another minute!’
‘You're dead right!’
Eddie marched to the door and yanked it open.
‘There's the way out…piss off!’
Looking as if there was a dead cat in her path and leaving as much space as possible between herself and Eddie, Sybil marched out of the room.
Drawing aside her skirts, thought Melissa sadly.
She just can't cope with this sort of thing.
Eddie stood holding the door-knob, her face twisted in a ferocious glare.
‘What are you waiting for?’ she snarled at Melissa.
‘Please, let me stay another minute or two,’ said Melissa quietly.
Outside, they heard Sybil's shoes clattering up the stone steps.
‘She's really a very kind person but she's led a completely sheltered life and…’
‘Don't bloody patronise me!’
Eddie's stance was still aggressive but her grip on the door-knob slackened.
‘I'm not patronising you.
Your relationships are nothing to do with me.
All I'm after…’
Eddie swallowed and gnawed her lips, blinking ferociously.
‘We've got as much right to love as anyone.’
‘Of course you have; we all have.
Barney Willard loved Angy too but we both know it wasn't her body he was after and I can't believe he would ever have hurt her.
I want to help him and the only way I can do that is try and find out who really killed her.
You were in love with her…won't you help?’
‘Don't see what I can do.’
Eddie gave the door a shove and returned to her chair.
She spun it round and straddled the seat, laid her forearms along the back and sank her head on them.
‘Any one of those three could have done it, couldn't they?’ she mumbled, her face hidden.
‘And in the end, what difference does it make?
She's dead, that's all I can think of.’
‘If they charge the wrong man, it'll make a difference to him!’ said Melissa drily.
Eddie raised her head.
‘So what's your theory?’
‘I haven't got one, but I have a hunch that Delia Forbes may be involved in some way.
Not in that way!’ she added hastily as Eddie jerked her head up like a watchdog at the sound of an intruder.
‘She joined the art class at the beginning of this term and I believe Angy was quite impressed with her talent.’
‘Ah, that one!’
Comprehension and relief softened the hard set of Eddie's features.
‘Now I know who you mean.
Angy never mentioned the name, or if she did, it didn't register.’
‘You met her?’
‘No, but I saw a sketch of her.’
‘Ah yes, Angy's portrait sketches.’
‘She'd been working on them for quite a while.
They were all done from memory and she was quite pleased with them.
It was only the other day that she showed them to me.
She kept them all in a portfolio; the fuzz took it away.’
‘Yes, I know, I've seen it.
I remember the one of you.
It was very good — they all were, as far as I could tell.
There was one of a young man in her class that I'd never met but …wait a minute!’
Melissa sat bolt upright.
Signals were flashing in her brain.
‘What's up?’ demanded Eddie.
‘Have you thought of something?’
‘Please, let me think!’
Melissa closed her eyes and gnawed her thumb as she struggled to nail down the clue that fluttered moth-like in her memory.
‘Those sketches…can you remember how many there were and who they were of?’
Eddie cocked her head on one side and pursed her lips.
‘I think so.
I went through them a second time with the copper who came round here.’
She straightened up and began ticking off on her fingers.
‘There was me, there was you and your holier-than-thou friend.’
Her mouth contorted in a sneer.
‘Then there was the  beardo-weirdo ,’ Melissa winced at this pejorative reference to Barney, ‘and the Wednesday creep.
That's five.
There were eight altogether.
Angy counted them as she was putting them away.’
Eddie wrinkled her brow.
‘There was that randy English teacher…’
‘Doug Wilson!
I'd totally forgotten him!
Did Angy ever talk about him?’
‘Now and again.
Earthy type, she used to say, but it was all talk with him and he never gave her any trouble that she told me about.’
Eddie shook her head and added wistfully, ‘I think she would have told me.’
‘She never went out with him?’
‘Don't think so.
She said he asked her once or twice but she turned him down and he soon got the message.’
‘That's six.
What about the other two?’
‘The disabled lad in her class.
She took a lot of pains with him.
It was because she felt so sorry for him but your Barney didn't like it…huh!
And the last one was of that Delia woman…but now I come to think of it, it wasn't there when the police brought them round.’
‘Are you sure?’ asked Melissa.
The signals were flashing furiously; was this the breakthrough she was after?
Eddie nodded, frowning.
‘I never noticed at the time.
I must have been too upset.’
‘I saw those sketches too, after Angy was killed.
All the ones you've mentioned were there except the one of Delia Forbes.’
‘So?’
‘Angy took her portfolio of sketches to show the students at her art class on Tuesday afternoon, the day she was murdered.
I know the one of Delia was there then because Sybil saw it.
Sybil also heard Angy giving Delia her address so it's reasonable to assume that she was expecting a visit from her some time.
Let's suppose Delia did come here that afternoon.
Maybe Angy gave her the sketch of herself as a present?’
‘She wouldn't do that!’ shouted Eddie, pounding the back of her chair with her fists.
‘She'd never part with any of her stuff…she wouldn't even let me have the one of me!’
This time, grief was too much for her.
Tears rolled unchecked down her face and her shoulders shook.
‘I might get hold of it when the Bill have done with it,’ she gasped between sobs.'
 it'd be something to remember her by.’
‘I daresay her aunt and uncle would let you have it,’ said Melissa, aware that this might be unlikely but feeling impelled to give some comfort to a fellow human being in so much distress.
Eddie lifted her head.
Her face was blotchy and her eyes swollen.
‘You think it's important, the portrait of Delia being missing?’
‘I'm not sure.
Maybe it was there after all and we both missed it.
It was there on Tuesday, it was there on Monday when Lou Stacey came to see Angy…’
At the mention of Lou's name, Eddie's face darkened.
‘Angy never told me she was coming here.
I got to hear about it from the police.’
‘But you knew about her relationship with Lou and Rick?’
‘Rick?
You mean that brute she ran away from?
Yes, of course I did.’
Eddie's knuckles whitened as she gripped the back of her chair.
‘Angy and I had supper together on the Monday evening but she never said that girl had  been here, or that Rick was corning to see her.’
Once more, the strong features threatened to disintegrate but she held them bravely in place.
‘I could have arranged to be there when he called…none of this would have happened if I'd been there to take care of her.’
She gave the back of her chair a despairing slap, got up and began pacing to and fro, jerkily shaking clasped hands.
‘Why the hell didn't she tell me?’
‘It was obviously something she wanted to handle on her own,’ Melissa said gently.
‘In any case, weren't you going to be away on a course or something?’
Eddie swung round and glared.
‘What do you know about that?’
‘Only that you couldn't help the police very much because you'd been away for a couple of days,’ said Melissa.
‘The course was in Bristol and I went there straight from my office during the afternoon,’ said Eddie and there was a kind of hasty defiance in her tone.
‘I could have arranged to set off later if I'd known.
She should never have had to face him by herself.’
‘You're forgetting one thing,’ Melissa pointed out.
‘Rick claims that Angy was already dead when he got there and he's obviously managed to convince the police that his story is true.
DCI Harris says he's been eliminated from the case.’
‘Ken Harris?
You know him?’
‘Yes.
Do you?’
Eddie shrugged.
‘our paths cross from time to time, when we have a client in common .
He's okay as coppers go.’
She picked up her empty mug and got to her feet, her self:control apparently restored.
‘Sure I can't get you any tea?
I'm going for a refill.’
‘No thanks.’
Melissa stood up.
‘I don't suppose you'd let me see Angy's flat?’ she asked.
Eddie hesitated.
‘It's probably a bit of a shambles.
I got the woman who comes in to clean the hall and stairs to go up and wash off the floors but I haven't been up there myself since the fuzz left.
Couldn't bring myself to.’
‘I'll go up on my own if you'd rather not.’
‘If you think it'll do any good.’
Eddie rummaged in a china bowl of oddments on the mantelpiece and handed Melissa a bright new key.
‘I had the lock changed after…it happened.
The old one was worn and didn't always shut properly.
I'd been meaning to do it for days and I keep asking myself whether it was my fault her killer got in.’
‘Don't blame yourself.
It's pretty certain it was someone she knew and she'd have let him — or her — in anyway.’
It was the first time that the possibility of the murderer's being a woman had occurred to Melissa and the realisation came as a shock.
Eddie was staring at her with eyes as hard as granite but all she said was, ‘You'll have to go in at the front door.
It's right at the top.’
‘Thanks.
I'll only be a minute or two.’
The interior of the house was very much like the outside.
The woodwork, once painted white but now faded to a dingy cream with a grey deposit in the crevices, was chipped and scuffed and the pattern of leaves and flowers on the stair carpet had long since been reduced to a brownish blur.
Doors with tarnished locks and dog-eared name cards attached with drawing-pins indicated the entrances to the individual flats.
At the top of the final flight of stairs was a single door.
Like the key which Eddie had given to Melissa, the lock was new and there were marks where the paint had been disturbed.
Would it have made any difference, Melissa wondered as she turned the key, if that lock had been changed earlier?
Probably not, but the possibility would haunt Eddie for a long while.
Melissa felt a faint sensation of queasiness as she pushed open the door.
It led into a tiny vestibule with doors on all three sides.
The one on the left was half open, revealing a narrow kitchen, little more than a passage with a sink and draining board under a window at the far end, a cooker, refrigerator, a small table and a wooden chair on one side and on the other a laminated work-surface with cupboards and drawers below and a run of shelves above.
All the fittings were shabby and well used, probably obtained through the ‘small ads’ column in the local paper.
There was a row of bright enamel saucepans, an Italian coffee pot and two or three painted ceramic jars on the shelves; Melissa bent down to peek into a cupboard and saw an array of packets and tinned foods and several types of pasta in glass jars.
In another cupboard were two or three bottles of Italian wine.
The police who had occupied the flat while they made their searches had left plenty of traces of their stay.
Mugs containing the congealed remains of tea and coffee stood in the sink, on the draining-board was an ashtray filled with cigarette butts and the smell of stale tobacco smoke hung in the air.
The place had a seedy atmosphere totally out of keeping with Angy's flower-like freshness.
Ken Harris had said she was stabbed in this room.
What had she been doing when the killer struck?
She had been expecting a visit from Rick Lawrence; if Lou's predictions were correct she would have changed from her working clothes into something more alluring and put on fresh make-up and perfume to receive him.
Melissa wondered if the police had taken this into account and what Angy had been wearing when her body was found.
It might be insignificant.
She pulled a notebook from her handbag and wrote ‘query clothes’ on a fresh page.
In their search for fingerprints, the detectives had been liberal in their use of grey aluminium powder and little or no attempt had been made to remove it.
The cleaner had evidently taken her instructions literally and limited her activities to washing the blood off the floor, which was covered in a hideous, embossed vinyl.
Melissa stared at it and then glanced again round the little kitchen, trying to picture Angy's last moments.
On the work-surface, several well-defined areas clear of the ubiquitous dust showed where items had been removed for further examination.
One was large and rectangular; Melissa guessed that it was here that Angy had kept the wooden block of kitchen knives that Lou had mentioned.
Iris had a similar block in her kitchen; once Melissa remembered being asked to hand her one f the knives.
She recalled how she had steadied the block  with one hand while pulling at the handle with the other, and how smoothly the blade had slid from its slot.
Was this what the murderer had done, leaving fingerprints which were by now enlarged and recorded and locked away at the police station, waiting to be produced at the trial?
Whose trial would it be?
Someone who had called on Angy, found her groomed and perfumed and ready to receive a rival, and been moved to uncontrollable violence by the belief that she had been unfaithful?
With a shudder, Melissa returned to the hall.
The door facing the entrance turned out to be a bathroom.
The fittings here also looked as if they had been in service for a long time — probably salvaged from a demolition site.
There were traces of police activity here as well— more grey dust mingled with Angy's musky talc.
Sadly, Melissa closed the door — like the floors, washed clean of Angy's blood — and went into the bed-sitting-room.
It was a largish room under the roof, with a dormer window let into the sloping ceiling and a second window which, like the kitchen, overlooked the garden of the house next door.
The furniture was sparse: a circular table and two chairs; a plain bookshelf crammed with books about art and artists.
Under the window was an easel and a stool and beside it a battered chest of drawers.
The bed was at the far end and next to it was a small cabinet on which stood a lamp and a telephone…the telephone through which the dying, terrified Angy had tried to summon help.
The floor was bare as if a carpet had been removed, no doubt for forensic examination.
In a kind of bemused horror, Melissa imagined the ugly pattern of stains that must have formed as the lifeblood flowed remorselessly away.
On the window-sill, wearing like everything else its grey veil of powder, a white china vase held the remains of half a dozen tulips.
Denuded heads on pale green drooping stems hung like mourners at a  graveside over the ring of faded scarlet petals that lay on the painted wood.
The recurring line of Sybil's poem came back to Melissa's mind, the poem about dead flowers that she had written in memory of a beautiful girl, savagely cut down.
Without  realising it, she spoke the words aloud: ‘And the spent petals lie, where they fall, on the ground.’
‘That's very moving,’ said a voice at her elbow.
Melissa spun round, almost petrified with shock, to see Eddie standing behind her.
‘You frightened the daylights out of me!’ she gasped.
‘I never heard you come in.’
‘Sorry.’
Eddie took a couple of steps forward, her eyes fixed on the dead flowers.
‘I bought her those the day before she died, so's she'd think of me while I was away.’
She gathered the faded petals together with cupped hands, lifted a couple between her fingers and then let them fall.
‘Who wrote the poetry?’ she asked gruffly.
‘Oh, er, one of my students.’
It would have been tactless to reveal that Sybil was the author.
Eddie nodded abstractedly.
‘I had to come sooner or later and I thought  it'd be easier with someone else here.’
She stared about her, grimacing.
‘What a pigsty they made of it!
You should have seen the way Angy kept it…like a new pin.
I used to tease her about being so house-proud and she'd tell me how her Aunt Rosina brought her up to do everything just so.’
Teaching her all the domestic arts, Melissa reflected, in the hope that she'd one day end up a housewife and mother in the true Italian tradition.
Eddie would have to be pretty discreet about her relationship with Angy if she wanted to persuade Aunt Rosina to hand over that sketch as a keepsake.
Eddie's gaze ran on round the room, taking in, as if seeing them for the first time, the stool and easel, the framed reproduction Leonardo drawings on the walls, the low divan bed.
The Florentine lace cover was rumpled and she walked over and bent down to straighten it.
‘I can see the copper on night duty made himself comfortable,’ she muttered resentfully.
‘I'd better be going,’ said Melissa.
She felt awkward at intruding on private grief.
‘Here's the key.
Thank you so much for letting me in and everything.’
‘Don't suppose it's been much help.’
‘You never know.’
A glint of sardonic humour appeared unexpectedly in Eddie's eyes.
‘Tell your friend I'm sorry I offended her sensibilities!’
Melissa grinned back at her.
‘Thanks.
I will!’
= Chapter Seventeen
Sybil's expression when she opened the door in response to Melissa's ring was a blend of dignity and embarrassment.
‘So you managed to escape unscathed!’ she commented as she led the way up to her sitting-room.
Behind her back, Melissa smiled at this shot at appearing worldly-wise.
It struck her as comical, so soon after the expressions of revulsion and outrage on coming face to face for the first time with sexual deviance.
‘It occurred to me,’ Sybil continued as she waved Melissa to a chair, ‘that…that person might have had a motive for killing Angy.’
She herself sat on the couch and settled her skirts primly around her legs in what struck Melissa, in a flash of impish humour, as a symbolic gesture of respectability and self-protection.
‘You mean Eddie?’ she responded in surprise.
‘Whatever gave you that idea?’
‘We have to consider all possibilities, don't we?’
Sybil gave a knowing smile as if to imply that in the interests of justice she was prepared to face up to this bizarre, extremely unpleasant but undeniable phenomenon.
‘I'm quite sure she's capable of violence, and with her unfortunate ah…
’ Sybil groped for a word and after some hesitation came up with, ‘tendencies…yes with her ah peculiar tendencies, it would be a sort of crime passionnel , wouldn't it?’
Melissa shook her head.
‘I'm not saying Eddie's incapable of violence but in this case I think you're on the wrong track.
According to Ken Harris, she has a cast-iron alibi.
She was in her office all Tuesday afternoon and went straight off for a couple of days on some residential course.’
‘People do sometimes manage to leave their offices without anyone noticing.’
Sybil was not going to abandon her  theory without a fight and, thinking of Rodney Shergold and his spare jacket, Melissa could not dismiss the idea out of hand.
‘Supposing she slipped out during the afternoon, perhaps to go home for something she'd forgotten?’
Sybil continued eagerly.
‘She might have gone up to see Angy and found Delia Forbes there…’
‘Playing sex games with Angy on the bed?
You're not serious!’
Sybil's jaw dropped.
‘Really, Melissa, that's quite disgusting!
I'm surprised at you!’
It hadn't taken much to disturb the woman-of-the-world pose.
‘I can't believe that finding Angy having a cup of tea with a middle-aged housewife would have incited Eddie to commit murder,’ said Melissa flatly.
‘Anyway, the police will have checked everyone's movements very carefully and if Eddie had left her office during Tuesday afternoon I'm sure they'd know about it.’
‘So really, we haven't achieved anything by going to visit that per…to visit Eddie?’
‘One interesting fact emerged after you'd gone.’
Melissa told Sybil about the missing sketch.
‘So far as we know, the police aren't aware of its existence.
In spite of what Eddie said, it's possible that Angy gave it to Delia but if Eddie's right, then it looks very much as if Delia — or someone else — took it.
But why?
And how did she manage to do it without Angy knowing?
Eddie said she was very meticulous about counting the sketches as she put them away.’
‘Let's ask her?’ suggested Sybil.
‘I've looked up her number.’
‘Could do.’
Sybil picked up the telephone and dabbed at the buttons with a well-scrubbed finger.
‘Funny,’ she said after a moment, ‘I'm getting the unobtainable tone.’
‘Try again.’
Sybil tried again, with the same result.
‘The line must be out of order.
Never mind, I'm going into Cheltenham tomorrow to the library.
I'll call round and see her…it's  only just round the corner.
If she's out, I'll leave a note.’
‘Fine.’
Melissa stood up and moved towards the door.
‘I think I'll be going now.
I'm going to have a word with Chief Inspector Harris this evening.’
Sybil's eyes sparkled.
‘You will keep me posted, won't you’?
This is really quite exciting!’
Her face grew sad again.
‘You know, I do so hope Angy wasn't really like that.
I hate to think of her and that…and that Eddie…’
‘I'm beginning to think that under the charming exterior, our Angy was quite amoral,’ said Melissa thoughtfully.
‘If Eddie was going to offer her security, she might have gone along with it.’
‘But it's horrible!’
Sybil wrinkled her nose as if she had suddenly detected a smell from the drains.
‘If that's what was going to happen, then the girl's better off dead!’
‘You can't mean that!’ exclaimed Melissa, appalled.
‘Oh yes, I do!’
Sybil's features set in a blank mask of prejudice.
There was no point in arguing.
Melissa descended the stairs to the front door with Sybil following.
‘I'll give you a call if I learn anything interesting from Ken Harris.’
‘Oh yes, please do!’
When Melissa got back to the college it was after half-past five and the car park was almost empty.
The rush-hour would be at its height, with long tail-backs at the busiest junctions; she resigned herself to a tedious journey home.
Approaching a set of traffic lights where she normally went straight on, and where the queue ahead seemed to stretch into infinity, she realised that only a few cars were waiting to turn left into the Cheltenham road.
On an impulse, she joined them.
It was six o'clock when she reached the outskirts of the town and the traffic had dwindled to a trickle.
She found a parking space near the Queen's Hotel and strolled across Imperial Gardens where a few tourists were admiring the spring flowers and chestnut blossom in the Promenade.
Ten minutes of easy walking brought her to the cul-de-sac where Delia Forbes lived.
It was almost like turning the clock back a couple of centuries.
The tiny Regency houses had no doubt been listed to spare them the attentions of developers; from the state of the paving stones and the grass-studded cracks in the roadway, it seemed that the town council too had passed them by.
Yet the houses themselves were trim and well maintained, with bright varnish, window-boxes, polished  doorknockers and newly-painted railings.
There were a couple of trees on the pavement and between them one or two cars were parked.
A blue Mini arrived and began manoeuvring into the limited space remaining as Melissa picked her way along the uneven path and knocked on the door of number three.
Almost immediately, the ground-floor window of the house next door flew up and the head of an elderly woman popped out between the curtains like a character in a Punch and Judy show.
Beneath a halo of white hair, her face had the texture of a withered apple.
‘She's away!’ the apparition announced.
‘Oh dear!’
Melissa was nonplussed.
‘Have you any idea when she'll be back?’
‘Eh?’
A shrivelled hand made a cupping gesture.
‘You'll have to speak up!’
Melissa approached the railings which separated the house from the path.
‘When…will…she…be…back?’ she shouted.
‘Went this morning.
Back in a day or two!’ the old woman croaked.
Her face lit up and she waved to someone behind Melissa.
‘Evening Miss Matthews!’
‘Evening Mrs Rogers!’
Melissa swung round.
A young woman who had evidently just got out of the Mini was approaching.
She walked briskly, carrying a manila file in one hand and a bunch of keys in the other.
She was smiling at the old woman in the window; she nodded to Melissa as she climbed the two or three stone steps leading to the house.
Mrs Rogers leaned out.
‘Thought you were never coming!’ she grumbled.
‘Been expecting you since Thursday!’
‘Today is Thursday’ Miss Matthews gave Melissa a sidelong glance as she inserted a key in the lock of Mrs Rogers' front door.
‘Excuse me, do you live here?’ asked Melissa.
Miss Matthews shook her head.
‘I'm a social worker,’ she explained.
‘I call round and see her once a week to make sure she's got everything she needs.
She manages pretty well on the whole but she's a bit vague.
I'll he glad when the neighbour gets back from Australia.’
She jerked her head towards number three.
‘Australia?’ echoed Melissa in bewilderment.
Miss Matthews nodded.
‘Visiting her daughter.
Mrs Rogers misses her dreadfully.
She's awfully good about popping in to see her.
The poor old lady loves a bit of company and her legs are bad so she can't get out much.’
‘I don't understand,’ said Melissa.
‘Mrs Rogers said Mrs Forbes went away this morning and…’
‘Oh, don't take any notice of that!’ said Miss Matthews with a grin.
‘She's been saying that since last November…
I suppose it's wishful thinking.’
‘Last November!
There must be some mistake!
I'm talking about Mrs Forbes at number three.’
Miss Matthews nodded.
‘That's right.
Nice woman.’
‘Are you going to stand there gossiping all day?’ demanded Mrs Rogers peevishly.
‘It's me you're here to see!’
She treated Melissa to a baleful glare.
‘Just coming.’
Miss Matthews opened the door and stepped inside.
‘You could put a note through her letter-box if you want to contact her,’ she suggested.
‘I believe someone comes in to pick up the post from time to time.’
‘You don't happen to know…’ began Melissa but the door had already closed.
Simultaneously the window slammed shut and there was nothing but a quivering of curtains where Mrs Rogers' face had been.
Melissa walked back to her car, trying to make sense of this new development.
Obviously, the Delia Forbes who had been attending Angy's art classes and whom  she suspected of having taken one of the sketches, was not the Mrs Forbes who inhabited number three Regency Terrace.
Yet the address was correct; maybe there was a relative — a sister-in-law or another daughter perhaps — living there…but in that case the phone should still be working and there would be no need to arrange for someone else to come in to pick up the post.
It was all very strange.
The day had been cool and overcast with intermittent drizzle but now the sky had begun to clear and the dappled clouds made a patchwork of blue and pale grey with a hint of hazy gold.
When Melissa reached home, Iris, in slacks and a baggy sweater, was leaning on her gate studying the sky as if assessing the prospects for tomorrow's weather.
She waved as the Golf drove past.
‘Had a good day?’ she called as Melissa closed the garage door after putting the car away.
‘Not bad.
It's nice to get a glimpse of the sun, isn't it?’
Melissa strolled across, leaned against Iris's fence and closed her eyes, listening to the bleating of young lambs and the chuckle of a solitary starling on the roof.
‘Oh, isn't this peaceful!’
‘Something on your mind?’
‘Sort of.’
Melissa opened her eyes and glanced round.
‘Your cousin gone home?’
‘Gone to London for a couple of days.’
Iris yawned, stretched and pushed up one sleeve to scratch an arm.
‘Not sorry to have a break.
Nice fellow but visitors upset the routine.’
‘He's coming back then?’
Melissa felt no particular interest in the man's movements but it was comfortable standing here, chatting to Iris about things totally unconnected with the death of Angy and the attendant anxieties and problems.
She felt disinclined to go indoors and start preparing a solitary supper.
‘At the weekend.
Staying till Wednesday, then back to the States.
You must have supper with us…
Sunday any good?’
‘Yes, I'd like to.’
Melissa pulled her sagging weight from the fence.
‘I suppose I'd better go and sort out something to eat for this evening.’
‘You look tired,’ said Iris critically.
‘Come and have a nut burger with me.’
Melissa hesitated, considering the rival attractions of a grilled lamb chop cooked and eaten in solitude and a nut burger in sympathetic company.
‘With fried onions and mushroom sauce,’ tempted Iris.
The lamb chop would keep until tomorrow.
‘Thanks, that'd be lovely.’
‘That was really delicious,’ said Melissa, laying down her knife and fork.
Iris grinned at her over the rim of her glass of mineral water.
‘Nearly turned it down in favour of some filthy meat dish, didn't you?’ she said, a hint of malice in her eyes.
‘You'll find your brain works much better on my kind of diet.’
‘Maybe,’ said Melissa.
‘I'm not disposed to argue about it this evening.
What do you make of this business about Delia Forbes?’
Over the nut burgers, she had put Iris in the picture concerning her encounter with Eddie, the visit to Angy's flat and her subsequent trip to Cheltenham.
Iris thought for a moment, turning her glass to and fro on its painted wooden coaster.
‘Very rum,’ she said.
‘Could be some straightforward explanation, though.
Have you told Harris?’
‘I've been trying to get him but there's no reply from his home.
He's not on duty so he and his wife must both be out.
I'll try again later.’
‘Seen that artist fellow lately?’
The grey eyes were sharp as razor-blades.
‘You mean Barney?
I saw him in the staffroom this afternoon but he hardly spoke to me.’
Melissa had pushed this small incident into the back of her mind; now she remembered it, she realised how much it had hurt.
Iris appeared absorbed in a study of her glass.
‘Just as well,’ she observed.
‘You still think he killed Angy, don't you?’ said Melissa resentfully.
‘No idea.
Just want you to be on the safe side.
Know what you're like…can't resist poking about when you get a whiff of mystery.’
She got to her feet and picked up their empty plates.
‘I'll go and get the pud.’
‘I've been thinking,’ said Melissa while Iris ladled out dollops of home-made fruit yoghurt, ‘whoever has been coming to Angy's class and calling herself Delia Forbes must know the real Delia is away.’
‘Makes sense.’
‘Could it be the same person who goes to the house to pick up the post?’
‘No reason why not.’
‘So where do we start looking?’
‘Neighbours?’
‘Unlikely.
Old Mrs Rogers has lost a lot of her marbles but she'd surely know if it was someone actually living along there.’
‘So it's someone from another part of town.’
‘Whoever it is has presumably been coming regularly since last November so he or she must have been seen by other people.
It was probably the old woman who told Miss Matthews but I don't suppose she'd have the vaguest notion of the day or time.’
‘Assuming whoever it is comes regularly.
No guarantee of that,’ Iris pointed out.
Melissa sighed.
‘It's going to be difficult to get hold of this person.
I wonder if the police are doing anything about it…
I must try and contact Ken Harris.’
‘That girl you saw…you say she's a social worker?’ said Iris, brandishing a tablespoon.
‘More yoghurt?’
Melissa held out her plate.
‘That's right.
What of it?’
‘Isn't that Eddie's job?’
Melissa almost choked on a spoonful of yoghurt.
‘So it is!
Suppose Miss Matthews is based at the same office as Eddie!
They discuss their cases and Miss Matthews mentions old Mrs Rogers and how much she misses her neighbour.
So Eddie knows the real Delia Forbes has gone  away and won't be back for a long time…but so what?’
The burst of enthusiasm died as swiftly as it had kindled.
‘It couldn't possibly have been Eddie who impersonated Delia and anyway there'd have been no point when she lives in the same house as Angy.’
‘But another colleague might…someone who's in love…who's been having an…is a close friend of Eddie.’
‘You mean, someone who had been having a lesbian affair with Eddie?
Hears her talking about Angy and is madly jealous?
Iris, you could be on to something!’
Iris winced at this unnecessarily blunt reference to Eddie's sexuality, having already made it clear that she held similar views to Sybil's.
However, she pursued this new line with enthusiasm.
‘Would have been easy, wouldn't it?
Assume Delia Forbes’ identity, go to the art class, get to know Angy and wangle an invitation to her flat.
Didn't your detective johnnie come across something like that in one of your books?’
‘That's right…
Mirrors of the Dead .’
Iris, normally strongly critical when she saw Melissa becoming involved in some mystery, was quite carried away with her theory.
‘Of course, she'd have to cook her report sheet or whatever they call it,’ she went on, becoming — for her — positively prolix.
‘Or she might be a part-timer who's free on Tuesdays anyway.’
‘It's certainly worth looking into.’
Melissa glanced at her watch.
‘I'll see what Ken Harris has got to say.
I think I'll be getting home if you don't mind.
I want to try him again this evening.’
She got up and began clearing the table.
‘Leave that.
You push off.
Keep me posted, won't you?’
‘Of course.
Thanks so much for the supper.’
There was still no answer from Ken Harris's number.
On impulse, Melissa called Barney.
‘Melissa!
Why are you phoning?’
He sounded uneasy.
‘Why did you rush off like that this afternoon?’
‘I had to get to my class.’
He was hedging; she could tell by his tone.
‘You aren't usually in such a hurry.’
There was silence.
‘It's DCI Harris, isn't it?
He's warned you off.’
‘Sort of.
He told me he'd said much the same to you.’
‘He hasn't any right to interfere!’ said Melissa angrily.
‘He suspects me of killing Angy and he's trying to protect you.
I can see his point.’
‘Well I don't believe you did and he isn't going to be able to prove it.’
‘He's having a darned good try.
He's taken away some of my clothes for forensic tests.’
‘Oh, my God!’
A cold tongue of fear licked Melissa's spine.
‘What did he take?’
‘Several things…slacks, a sweat-shirt.
The trouble is, I can't for the life of me remember what I was wearing the last time I went to see Angy, or on the day she died.
It's all a blur.’
‘Well, of course it is.
That should prove you're innocent.
I mean, if you'd really done it you'd have had a story ready to tell the police once the body was discovered.’
There was another pause before Barney said, ‘It's nice of you to call, Melissa, and thanks for believing in me.’
She was on the point of telling him about her investigations but it was all so uncertain and there was no point in raising false hopes.
‘I do believe in you Barney,’ she whispered.
‘See you soon.’
There was a lump in her throat as she put down the phone.
She went upstairs and spent some time soaking in a hot bath.
Presently, relaxed and generously anointed with body-lotion, she wrapped herself in a fluffy towelling robe and went back downstairs.
It was ten o'clock; she brewed a pot of tea and made one more effort to contact Harris.
There was still no reply; it would have to wait until the morning.
Then she remembered that she had promised to keep Sybil in the picture but decided that could wait as well.
Later, she was to ask herself if the decision had made any difference to subsequent events.
That was something she would never know for certain.
Sitting on the edge of her bed and sipping her tea, she began jotting down notes of the day's events, separating  them into facts and possible explanations.
It was rather like working out the details of one of her plots: circumstances capable of more than one interpretation; actions which might or might not be innocent; individuals who might or might not have a genuine motive, the means and opportunity to commit the crime.
The difference was that when constructing a plot she was able to invent clues that would subtly direct her readers in the direction of the guilty person while strewing their path with red herrings.
In this case, her thought processes were negative, seeking before all else to draw suspicion away from Barney but lacking the vital scene-of-crime evidence which, if Harris's attitude was anything to go by, pointed strongly at his guilt.
And he was innocent of murder; she felt it in her bones.
Her talk with Eddie had convinced her that he was telling the truth about his relationship with Angy and that Rodney Shergold was the ‘poor sap’ who had fallen an eager and tiresome victim to her charms.
Barney might experience flashes of impatience and anger, say and do things he would later regret, but she could not believe him capable of the blind, destructive hatred that had driven the knife into Angy's throat.
Of all that she had learned that afternoon, the only possible hope lay in trying to establish the real identity of the woman calling herself Delia Forbes.
Yet even as one half of her mind speculated on its significance, the other half reminded her that if she had stumbled on this odd circumstance, then the police would almost certainly have done so in the course of their routine enquiries and, since Barney was still their prime suspect, found a satisfactory explanation.
The more she thought about it, the more her confidence ebbed away until she was ready to believe that her efforts had turned up nothing of positive help.
With a disconsolate sigh she stood up, slipped off the towelling robe and threw it over a chair.
It was a soft rosy pink; looking at it she thought of Barney's robe of saffron yellow and how he had admired its effect on her.
She remembered his touch as he wrapped it around her shoulders and the slumbering animal within her stirred  and stretched and unsheathed claws of desire.
How had their conversation gone?
‘I'd like to paint you.’
'What, in this?’ 'Yes…no, without it.’
And he'd appeared suddenly and endearingly shy, as if embarrassed at the memory of seeing her naked in his bed the night before.
She went to the full-length mirror beside her dressing-table, pulling off the headband she had worn in the bath and releasing the glossy brown hair that tumbled almost to her shoulders.
Narcissus-like she studied her reflection, running her fingertips over her flesh, breathing its perfume and recalling Barney's enjoyment of its smoothness.
She observed with satisfaction the firmness of her breasts the flatness of her stomach and the trim roundness of her hips.
She peered closely at her face; there were a few lines about the mouth and eyes but at forty-seven that was only to be expected.
At least her skin was clear and her neck hadn't started to sag.
‘You shall paint me like this if it would please you, Barney dear,’ she whispered aloud.
‘And love me again…please.’
Then, feeling foolish, blushing in the empty room like a self-conscious adolescent, she put on her nightdress got into bed and switched out the light.
She slept soundly and awoke just as the dawn was swelling in a luminous golden tide across the sky.
It would be several hours before she could think of calling Harris and she reminded herself that there was a book waiting to be finished.
She got up, brewed a pot of coffee, went to her study and started work.
At half-past nine she rang the police station and was told that DCI Harris had just gone out and was not expected back until after lunch.
She left a message asking him to  contact her urgently, dialled Sybil's number and found it engaged.
Frustrated, she changed into her gardening clothes and went out to collect and spread her promised share of Iris's manure heap — an activity which cleared her mind wonderfully so that when Harris rang at two o'clock she had at her fingertips every point she wanted to put to him.
One by one he shot them down.
‘Yes, of course we know about Shergold's affair with the girl but he didn't kill her.’
‘Did you know about the spare jacket?’
‘Of course.
We took it for forensic tests.’
‘Did you find anything?’
‘Hairs, perfume, make-up.
No blood.
As a matter of fact, we haven't got around to returning it yet.’
Harris gave one of his rare chuckles.
‘Do him good to sweat a little.
We suspect he found the girl's body on the Wednesday afternoon but we can't get him to admit it.’
‘That could be why he went home that day feeling groggy.
I met his wife in the village shop and she was very concerned about him.’
‘She'd have been more than concerned if she'd known what he'd been up to over the previous few weeks!’ said Harris drily.
‘Lucky for him, his alibi is as watertight as it's possible to be, unless the college Principal, half his staff and all his students are Iying.
We've checked his story in detail and it fits.
What else have you got for me?’
‘I went to see Eddie Brady,’ began Melissa a little sharply, stung by the note of self-satisfaction in his voice.
She was interrupted by another hoarse, gleeful chuckle.
‘Quite a character, isn't she?
First-class social worker too.
I've got a lot of respect for Mizz Edwina.’
‘I think you might have warned me.’
‘Couldn't do that.
Prejudice and so on.’
‘I had a friend with me and she was quite upset.’
‘Too bad.
So what did you get out of Eddie that my sergeant failed to spot?’
‘Is it totally impossible for her to have slipped home during the critical time?’
‘Totally.
What the hell do you take us for, Melissa?
Real policemen have brains as well as your know-it-all Nathan.’
Self-satisfaction had given way to an impatience that said, as clearly as the words, ‘If that's the best you can do, stop wasting my time and let me get on with my work.’
Well, perhaps she could give him something to think about.
‘Eddie was very jealous of Angy, wasn't she?
You should have seen her reaction when I mentioned that Delia Forbes might have been round to see her the day she was killed.’
‘Who's Delia Forbes?’
‘One of Angy's art students.
Don't tell me your men haven't checked her out?’
‘I'm a busy man, Melissa.
If you've got something to tell me…’
Now she had his attention.
As concisely as she could, Melissa told him about the missing sketch of Delia Forbes, her subsequent visit to the house in Regency Terrace and the possibility of a plot by one of Eddie's discarded lovers to kill Angy.
Even while she was speaking, the theory sounded bizarre and far-fetched, yet there were no more quips or chuckles from the other end of the line, only a series of grunts.
When she had finished, he said quietly, ‘That is interesting, Melissa.’
She heard papers being shuffled.
‘I'm just looking at the report of the officer who called on Delia Forbes.
A neighbour told him she'd gone off to see her daughter that morning-that would be the Thursday — and would be back in a couple of days.’
‘That must have been old Mrs Rogers.
She lives in another world.
Time means nothing to her.’
‘I'll get Waters on to it right away.
Anything else?’
‘I was wondering what Angy was wearing when she was found.’
‘A plain navy-blue skirt and a white blouse.
She'd been wearing it to the office that morning and put on an overall for the art class in the afternoon.
We found it, chucked on a chair.’
‘She was expecting Rick Lawrence about six o'clock.
Lou seemed to think she'd have dolled herself up a bit before he came.
That would narrow down the time a bit, wouldn't it?’
‘We had thought of that.’
‘I'm sorry, Ken…
I'm just trying to’
‘Don't tell me.
The earlier she was killed, the better it looks for Willard because he was in college till gone five, right?’
‘Just what evidence have you got against him?
It can't be all that strong or you'd have arrested him by now.’
There was silence.
‘Oh, come on Ken, you've just admitted I've turned up something that might be useful.
What about a quid pro quo?
You can trust me, can't you?’
‘It isn't a question of not trusting you.
Our investigations are at a delicate stage…’
‘Waiting for forensic reports on Barney's clothing?’
‘He told you about that?
I thought we agreed you wouldn't see him till this was over.’
‘We're colleagues…we use the same staffroom.’
No point in admitting to the telephone call; that would mean even less chance of prising anything out of Harris.
‘I haven't seen him outside college, honestly Ken.’
That at least was true.
‘Well…
’ He was beginning to weaken.
‘Just between ourselves…’ she begged.
The need to know what Barney was up against had become overwhelming.
‘There were traces of cotton fibre in the blood on the girl's body that didn't come from her own clothing.
Willard owns a cotton sweat-shirt’
‘So do lots of people.’
'…which he thought he might have been wearing that afternoon and then changed his mind and said he hadn't,’ continued Harris, unperturbed by the interruption.
‘Is that all you've got to go on?’
‘There's the little matter of his fingerprints all over the flat’
‘They would be.
He often went there.’
‘As he keeps pointing out to us.
However, one or two of those prints are highly significant.
On the knife-block, for example.’
‘Perhaps he touched it while helping her in the kitchen…putting the knives away’
‘His prints weren't on any of the handles.
From their position on the block, he'd been steadying it with his left hand while drawing out a knife with his right.’
‘So Angy asked him to pass her a knife while she was cooking something.’
‘That's what he claims.’
‘What about the murder weapon?
Aren't there any prints on that?’
‘That's our main problem.
There was so much blood, and the girl left her own prints where she grabbed at the knife — probably trying to drag it out.
Any prints left by the killer would have been completely obliterated.
Young Lawrence left his, of course, on the knife and the telephone and the cabinet where the ring was kept, but from the state of the blood it was long enough after death to tally with his story.’
‘He could have gone back later and done all the things he claimed to have done…’
‘He wouldn't have had time.
We found the taxi driver who took him and the girl to the station and witnesses who saw them get on the train.
Lawrence didn't kill Angy.
We've checked his story against the girl's account and it hangs together in every detail.’
‘And Barney's doesn't?’
‘There are holes in it.
He had motive and he's the right build.
The angle at which the knife entered seems to indicate that the killer is fairly tall.’
‘But no one saw him near the flat that afternoon.
His clothes would have been blood-stained.
Surely, someone would have spotted him.’
‘We found traces of blood in the bathroom.
We think the killer went in there to clean up immediately after striking the blow.
He probably knew the house was empty and there was little chance of his being disturbed.
And no one saw him in the street; that little turning is almost entirely occupied by people who are out at work all day.’
‘Are you trying to tell me,’ Melissa began, on a low note that she could hear becoming steadily more shrill, ‘that after stabbing Angy, Barney locked himself in the bathroom and left her to die while he calmly washed away her blood?
He couldn't have done it…he'd have been frantic with remorse, stayed with her to comfort her, tried  to get help.
For God's sake, Ken!’
She was almost hysterical.
‘What about this psychological offender-profiling you're all supposed to be into nowadays?
Think about it!
It might save you making complete idiots of yourselves!’
‘Try not to get upset.’
Harris's voice was unusually gentle.
‘I can understand how you feel.’
‘Never mind how I feel!’
Melissa raved.
‘You find Delia Forbes!
She'll lead you to the real killer!’
With a futile, melodramatic flourish, she banged down the receiver.
While she stood staring at it, breathing heavily and conscious that if anyone had made a fool of herself during the past few minutes it was Melissa Craig, the phone began to ring again.
= Chapter Eighteen
Sybil Bliss was almost incoherent with excitement, her voice rising and falling in a series of breathless peaks and troughs.
‘Oh, Melissa, there you are!
I've been trying to get you for ages but your line's been engaged.’
A hint of reproach hung round the final words.
‘Ages’, thought Melissa, meant fifteen minutes at the most.
‘I was talking to Chief Inspector Harris,’ she said, a little wearily.
Her outburst had left her feeling deflated, almost disinterested.
She had established the fact that the real Delia Forbes was in Australia and that for the past few weeks someone else had been using her name and address; because of her desperate desire to help Barney she had leapt to conclusions which could be hopelessly wide of the mark.
There was probably a perfectly simple explanation, if only she could give her mind to it, but for the moment she seemed incapable of logical thought.
Meanwhile, Sybil was twittering on.
‘Well, wait till he hears about this!
I simply couldn't believe it…it didn't seem to make sense and I thought I must be mistaken but I'm sure I wasn't…’
‘For goodness’ sake, Sybil, what are you on about?’
It wasn't really fair to snap like that but Melissa's nerves were still jangling.
‘Oh, sorry!
You must think me very silly but it's just that I'm so excited !
I think I've found out…’
‘Found out what?’ said Melissa testily, as Sybil broke off.
‘Just a moment…
I can hear something.’
There was a pause.
Melissa pictured Sybil with her head cocked, the way she held it when she was listening to someone, gazing with exaggerated, wide-eyed intensity.
‘What is it?’ she asked.
‘I must have left the garage door open.
I think I heard it banging.
Hold on, will you?’
There was a clatter as the phone was put down, followed by the sound of footsteps scurrying down the stairs and fading into silence.
Half listening, half occupied with looking out of the open window at a flock of rooks riding in circles on the breeze, Melissa was vaguely aware of a succession of faint bumping noises in the distance, followed by returning footsteps.
The sounds mingled in her mind with the harsh cries of the birds as she waited for Sybil to pick up the phone again.
Instead, there were  rustlings , faint and unintelligible mutterings suggesting that she was looking for something, more footsteps going downstairs, a sharp sound like the slamming of a door and then complete silence.
Seconds ticked by and Melissa grew impatient.
What on earth was Sybil doing?
Surely she hadn't gone out again, forgetting that she had left a friend waiting on the telephone?
She strained her ears but could hear nothing.
She jiggled the receiver rest, shouted ‘Hullo!’ several times and eventually, exasperated and irritable, put the phone down.
If whatever Sybil had to say was so important, she could call again.
Half an hour later, she had not done so.
By this time Melissa's temper had calmed and her curiosity revived.
She went back to the telephone, dialled Sybil's number and waited for the ringing tone.
Nothing happened.
She tried again.
Still nothing.
She jiggled the receiver and realised that there was no dialling tone.
Something must be wrong with the line.
She put down the instrument and went next door.
Not surprisingly on such a mild afternoon, Iris was in the garden.
She had dug a trench and was busy shovelling manure into it from an antiquated wheelbarrow, her thin arms in the tightly fitting sleeves of her black sweater swinging to and fro like crankshafts.
She straightened up as Melissa approached, pulled off one of her gardening gloves and combed back her hair with her fingers.
Her cheeks were rosy from the exercise; with her pointed  features and sparkling eyes she looked like an amiable, wholesome witch.
‘Getting ready for the runners,’ she explained.
‘Isn't it a bit early to be planting beans?’
‘Not planting yet.
Just preparing the ground.
Nearly done.’
She heaved up the handles of the barrow and the remaining contents slid neatly home.
She picked up a fork and stirred the dark mass, grunting with satisfaction.
‘What can I do for you?’
‘My phone seems to be out of order.
Mind if I report it from yours?’
‘Help yourself.
Be in in a minute.’
Iris stuck her fork in the earth and trundled off down the garden with her barrow while Melissa went indoors, reported her problem to the telephone engineers and wandered back to the kitchen.
‘I've given them this number and they're going to test the line and call me back,’ she said when Iris came in from the garden.
‘Good.’
Iris washed her hands and filled the kettle.
‘Might as well have a cuppa while you're waiting.’
Melissa perched on the edge of the table and watched her as she bustled about with tea-things.
‘It would have to play up just as Sybil was going to tell me something important,’ she complained.
‘I can't think what kept her so long.
I hung on for ages.’
‘Probably got talking to a neighbour and forgot all about you.
Struck me as a bit of a scatterbrain!’ commented Iris, arranging oatmeal cookies on a hand-painted plate.
‘Yes, she is rather.’
Melissa turned the plate to admire the delicate rose design.
‘She does some lovely flower paintings, though.
She'd appreciate this.’
‘She ought to try her hand at decorating china some time.’
‘I'll suggest it next time I speak to her.’
Melissa nibbled thoughtfully at a cookie.
‘I wish I knew what she wanted to tell me.
She was bubbling with excitement.
It might have had something to do with the murder because she seemed to think Ken Harris would be interested.’
‘Try ringing her now.’
Iris jerked her head in the direction of the telephone.
Melissa stood up.
‘May I?’
She went out of the room but returned almost immediately.
‘Her number's engaged.’
‘Probably trying to get you.
Try again before you leave.
Any other news?’
‘I told Harris what I discovered yesterday about Delia Forbes.’
‘And?’
‘He's going to follow it up but I had the impression he was only so interested.
As far as he's concerned, Barney is his man and he's simply waiting for the forensic reports to confirm it.
I can't tell you any more than that,’ Melissa added in response to Iris's lifted eyebrows.
‘I did manage to worm a few details out of him but strictly in confidence.’
They fell silent for a few moments as they drank their tea.
When the phone rang, they both jumped.
‘You get it,’ said Iris.
It was the engineer, speaking from the exchange.
‘Did you have a call from a Stowbridge number recently?’ he asked.
‘Yes, that's right.’
‘The caller must have left the receiver off.
We'll get it cleared for you as soon as possible.’
‘Thank you very much.’
Melissa returned to the kitchen.
‘I don't like the sound of it,’ she said.
‘It looks as if she never came back to the phone.
Whatever can have happened?’
‘Found you'd hung up and didn't put her receiver on properly,’ suggested Iris.
‘Easily done with these modern phones.
Did it myself the other day.
Didn't realise until it started howling like a demented banshee!’
‘Howling?’
‘Something they do from the exchange to get your attention.
She'll ring again as soon as she tumbles to what she's done.’
Iris picked up the teapot and held it over Melissa's cup.
‘Want a refill?’
Melissa waved the teapot away, frowning.
‘You know, this doesn't make sense.
She had something she was simply  bursting to tell me.
She'd never have waited this long.
I don't like the sound of it at all,’ she repeated.
‘Oh, I'm sure it's all right,’ said Iris.
‘She'll be in touch presently, you'll see.’
‘Supposing she's been taken ill or something?
She lives on her own.’
‘We agreed she must have been talking to someone…’
‘I never actually heard voices, except a sort of muttering as if she was rummaging around trying to find something.
I wasn't really listening, just waiting for her to pick up the phone.’
‘Try again.
She may have hung up by now.’
Sybil had not hung up; the line was still engaged and Melissa was becoming more uneasy by the minute.
‘I'm going round to her house to find out what's wrong,’ she said.
‘Thanks for the tea, Iris.
I'll see you later.’
‘Up to you.
Think you're wasting your time.’
Melissa was not given to premonition but the fear that something had happened to Sybil had taken hold and would not be shaken off.
‘I've got to set my mind at rest,’ she said.
‘Iris…
I don't suppose you'd come with me, would you?’
Iris stared at her.
‘You really are worried, aren't you?’
‘Yes, I am.
The more I think about it…’
‘Okay, if it'll make you feel better.’
The little street where Sybil lived was deserted except for a British Telecom van parked a short distance from her house.
A red and white striped tent had been erected on the pavement and two young men in blue overalls were lounging against a nearby wall, mugs in hand.
‘That looks like the answer,’ commented Iris as Melissa pulled up.
‘Fix one line, foul up two more and then take a tea-break!’
‘I hope you're right.’
They got out of the car and walked up Sybil's short drive.
Two-thirds of the ground floor of each house in the terrace was taken up by a garage; the door to Sybil's stood open with the car inside but the other three were  closed, revealing that the owners had differing and not particularly compatible tastes in colour.
‘Look like slabs of rainbow chocolate!’ sniffed Iris, pausing to assess the effect.
‘Architectural vandalism!’
‘We can't all live in listed cottages,’ Melissa pointed out as she pressed the bell-push.
There was no  movement inside the house.
She rang again and rattled the letter-box but still there was no response.
She peeped through the slot into the narrow hall with its little polished table bearing a silver letter-tray and a vase of flowers.
Everything appeared normal.
‘Gone to report her phone out of order!’ suggested Iris.
‘No.
Listen.’
From somewhere in the house came a faint, high-pitched hum.
‘Isn't that the howler thing you were talking about?
Surely she'd have heard that.’
‘Must have gone out in a hurry.
Maybe a neighbour needed help.’
‘I can't believe she'd have gone out and left her garage open.
There must be a personal door into the house.
I'm going to look.’
Melissa led the way, easing herself between the car and an assortment of garden implements ranged along the wall.
Across the end of the garage was a workbench with a rack of tools above and a hydraulic jack beneath.
‘Don't tell me she does her own car maintenance,’ commented Iris.
‘I doubt it.
I expect that lot belonged to her late husband.’
As she spoke, Melissa found the door and turned the handle.
It was unlocked.
Something behind it prevented it from fully opening and a dark, viscous substance that in the subdued light looked like a patch of oil was spreading from an invisible source and had begun soaking into the carpet.
Melissa's heart began to thump as she peered round to see what was causing the obstruction.
She stared down at the floor and the remains of what had been a human being.
For a moment she stood transfixed in shock and disbelief; then she screamed, and the  scream drained her lungs until she was all but suffocated.
Like someone drowning, she fought for air, gasping and retching, covering her eyes in a futile attempt to blot out the memory of the crushed skull, the shattered features and the foul, oozing stain.
‘What is it?’
Iris stepped forward, saw, and turned away in horror, her eyes like black holes in a face the colour of bleached bones.
‘Something wrong?’
One of the telephone engineers, alarmed by the shrieks, appeared behind them.
Dumbly, they pointed to the open door.
‘Jesus!’ he gasped, and fainted.
‘That's all we need!’ said Iris, her nerve restored by this display of masculine weakness.
She knelt beside the young man as he lay slumped against the wheel of Sybil's car.
‘I'll see to him.
You go and tell the other one to call the police.
An ambulance too.
Not that they can do much.’
She began a vigorous slapping of hands and face while Melissa, on legs that would barely carry her, stepped shakily over the inert form and went for help.
Detective Inspector Clarke had smooth, pink skin, pale eyes and receding sandy hair.
His habit of constantly raising his eyebrows had etched a row of horizontal lines on his forehead, giving him an air of permanent surprise.
He raised them now at the two shaken women who sat facing him in the interview-room at Stowbridge police station.
His sergeant, an alert girl whom he addressed as Barbara, served them all with mugs of strong tea before sitting down with her notebook on her lap.
‘Now, you're sure you feel well enough to make a statement?’ he asked for the second or third time.
‘If you'd rather go home to rest and get over the shock…’
‘No, that's all right, really,’ said Melissa.
‘Best to get it over with,’ agreed Iris.
‘So long as you're okay?’ she added with a glance of concern at Melissa.
‘Don't worry, I'll be fine.’
‘Right then.’
Clarke took a swig from his mug.
‘I believe it was you who discovered the body, Mrs Craig?’
‘I was the one who saw it first,’ said Melissa.
She took a sip of the dark, bitter tea but, almost overcome by nausea, she hastily put down the mug and covered her mouth with a handkerchief.
‘Just take your time, and tell me exactly what happened.’
Briefly, she related the sequence of events, beginning with the interrupted phone call.
‘Do I understand,’ said Clarke when she came to the end of her story, ‘that you had reason to believe your friend might have been the victim of a violent attack?’
‘Oh no, nothing like that.
I thought she might have been taken ill or had a fall or something.’
‘You say you heard bumps.
Perhaps you thought she'd fallen downstairs?’
‘Not then, because I heard her come back.
It sounded as if she was looking for something.
I could hear impatient noises, but I wasn't really paying close attention.’
Clarke's eyebrows jiggled up and down.
‘It didn't occur to you,’ he suggested, ‘that it wasn't the poor lady herself that you heard?’
‘Oh, my God!’
Melissa felt the room start to spin.
Barbara was on her feet in a second, pushing her head forward and speaking brisk words of encouragement.
Iris grabbed the hand nearest to her and squeezed it.
‘Feeling better?
Have a drink of tea?’
Barbara held out the mug.
‘No, thanks very much.’
The sight of the scummy liquid aroused more warning signals from her stomach.
She sat up and put a hand to her forehead.
‘I'll be all right now.
It was just the shock of realising…of course, it must have been the killer I heard.
How absolutely ghastly!’
‘It rather looks,’ said Clarke, ‘as if this was an opportunist crime.
Sorneone saw the open garage door and sneaked in to see what he could pinch.
He probably tried the door to the house, found that unlocked as well and picked up the hammer in case he was disturbed.’
‘Sybil was killed with a hammer?’ of course, it would have had to be something heavy to cause those dreadful injuries.
‘A seven-pounder.
He might have brought it with him but more likely it was already there with the other tools in the garage.’
‘You mean, he went in quite prepared to kill someone?’
One read of such crimes in deprived areas of inner cities, but…
‘How do you suppose it happened?’
‘We can't be absolutely sure of the sequence of events but the victim was hit from behind and fell against the door leading into the garage, so the killer must have been in the house.
Maybe he'd already started up the stairs when he heard the lady coming down and dodged round them to hide.
From what you've told us, Mrs Craig, she'd heard him come in.
He must have come at her as she closed the door.’
‘But surely she'd have screamed or cried out?
I never heard anything like that.’
‘We must assume he took her completely by surprise.’
‘But why such a murderous attack?
It's brutal…senseless!’
That someone as gentle and inoffensive as Sybil, with her flower paintings and her harmless little poems, should have been needlessly and savagely battered to death, made Melissa seethe with rage.
‘I'm afraid that brutal and senseless attacks are all too common nowadays,’ said Clarke, the resignation in his voice making an odd contrast to his air of perpetual astonishment.
‘Was anything stolen?’
‘We can't find the lady's handbag.
We shan't know what else is missing until the relatives get here but it was probably money he was after…for drugs, I dare say.’
Melissa closed her eyes and shivered.
She felt cold and sick and wished she could crawl away and lie down.
What sort of a society have we become, she wondered miserably, that our homes are no more secure  form drug-crazed humans than were the dwellings of Stone Age tribes from marauding beasts?
‘Is that all you want to ask us?’
Everyone turned in surprise to Iris, who had sat bolt upright in her seat throughout the interview, replying in her own brand of verbal shorthand to the questions that came her way.
‘She's  had enough!’
Iris nodded in Melissa's direction and turned fierce eyes on the detective.
‘Tomorrow will do if you want to know anything else.’
She got to her feet, grasped Melissa by the elbow and hauled her upright.
If Clarke had intended to pursue his enquiries further, he obviously thought better of it under that formidable gaze.
He too stood up.
‘Yes, that's all for now.
Thank you, ladies, you've been most helpful.’
After the artificial light in the interview-room, the late afternoon sun shining directly on the entrance to the police station was like a physical blow to the eyes that tapped a gush of protective tears.
Half-blinded, Melissa faltered, stumbled and collided with a burly figure hurrying towards the building.
A strong arm prevented her from falling.
‘I beg your pardon, Madam…
Melissa!’
The face of DCI Harris swam out of the mist.
‘What brings you here?
And Miss Ash?
Is something wrong?’
Melissa could only nod speechlessly.
‘A friend murdered,’ she heard Iris explain.
‘We found the body.’
‘Good heavens!’
Harris looked from one to the other in consternation.
‘Where?
When?’
‘This afternoon.
In Stowbridge.
Your colleague's got our statements.
We're going home.’
There was a steely ring in Iris's voice that dared Harris — or anyone else — to delay them further but he was more than equal to the challenge.
‘Who was the victim?’ he asked, looking directly at Melissa.
‘One of her students.
Can't you see, she's had enough for one day?’ snapped Iris.
‘You both look as if you could use a stiff drink,’ said Harris, softening the natural rasp of his voice with an almost paternal note of concern.
‘There's a good waterhole just round the corner.
If you don't mind waiting here a second while I…’
‘Not now.
Got to get home.’
Iris tugged at Melissa's arm.
‘Come on I'll drive you.’
‘I think Ken's right.
A drink would do us both good,’ said Melissa.
There was something solid and comforting  about the big detective's presence that was already having a restorative effect.
‘Oh, all right.’
Reluctantly, Iris relaxed her hold.
‘Just wait here a second while I drop this in.’
Brandishing a large manila envelope, Harris bounded up the steps and vanished while Iris sat Melissa on a convenient wall and stood over her like a guardian angel, a protective arm on one shoulder.
‘You're incredible, Iris,’ said Melissa gratefully.
‘You must be just as shaken as I am.’
‘Not quite.
Didn't know her so well as you did.
Wonder if they'll get him?’
‘The killer, you mean?
They've got to get him.
If Clarke's theory is correct, he's very dangerous.’
It was several minutes before Harris reappeared.
‘Right, that's that,’ he said breezily.
‘Let's go and have that drink.
You okay to walk, Melissa?’
‘Of course I am.’
How stupid to have been caught tottering about like an invalid.
It was hardly the way her readers would expect the creator of Nathan Latimer to react to a crisis, she thought, ashamed of her weakness.
Already she was feeling more herself.
Harris installed the two women in a quiet corner of the bar and bought a pint of bitter for himself, a brandy for Melissa and orange juice for Iris.
He went back for a plate of sandwiches and Melissa was surprised to find that she was hungry.
She ate the food, sipped her brandy and was even able to smile at the sight of Iris peering between the slices of bread to ensure that the contents were acceptable to a vegetarian.
‘I've heard of people being accident prone,’ Harris observed after a while, ‘but you seem to he murder prone, Melissa.’
It was the nearest she had known him come to making a joke.
‘I should carry some sort of health warning, shouldn't I?’ she said wryly.
‘How did all this come about, then?’
The tone was casual but it did not deceive Iris.
She glared at Harris like a tigress defending a cub.
‘I told  you, she's made her statement,’ she snapped.
‘Not up to any more questions.’
Melissa patted her arm.
‘It's all right, Iris.
I'm quite okay now.’
‘You said your friend sounded very excited about what she had to tell you,’ Harris continued between mouthfuls of bitter.
Obviously he had taken the opportunity whilst in the station of running through her statement.
‘Have you any idea at all what it was?’
‘None whatever.
She was saying things like ‘unbelievable’ and ‘'doesn t make sense’, hut she never came to the point at all.’
‘Try to remember her exact words.’
Clarke had said the same thing and she had tried desperately to comply but it had been like trying to lay hold of darting butterflies.
Now, relaxed by the brandy, she felt her reflexes improving.
‘She was complaining at not being able to get through because my number was engaged and I said I'd been talking to you.
Then she said, ‘Wait till he’— she meant you —‘hears about this!’'
‘Have you any idea where she'd been before she phoned?’
‘She was going into Cheltenham, to the library and then to call on Delia Forbes.’
Melissa felt a tingle of excitement.
‘I wonder if she spoke to the person who's been doing the caretaking?
Maybe she learned something that could help us find the person who's been using Delia's name.’
‘Maybe.’
Harris set down his empty beer mug, took out a handkerchief and wiped foam from his mouth.
‘Or maybe she just learned from a more rational neighbour that the real Delia has been abroad for six months.
Or had you already told her that?’
‘No, I hadn't.
That was probably it.’
As had happened so many times lately, what looked like a flash of illumination had turned into a damp squib.
‘Whatever it was, she was so excited that she forgot to lock her door.
Poor Sybil!’
‘Dangerous thing to do nowadays,’ observed Harris.
‘I hope you two are careful about security, living in that isolated spot.’
‘Give us credit for some sense!’ barked Iris, who had been showing signs of impatience.
She stood up.
‘Going to the ladies’.
Then home.’
She vanished through the bar and Harris turned to Melissa.
‘I'm glad she's out of the way for a moment.
I've got some news that may cheer you up.’
‘Really?’
‘It's not much help to me, though.’
A rueful grin crumpled the craggy features.
‘Nothing belonging to your friend Willard matches up with the fibres we found on the dead girl.’
‘Oh, thank God for that!’
‘Thought you'd be pleased.
Not surprised, are you?’
‘Not really, but circumstantial evidence can play lousy tricks, can't it?
Oh, Barney'll be so relieved — can I tell him?’
‘Certainly not, you leave it to us.
No doubt he'll call you as soon as he hears.’
Harris leaned forward with clasped hands, his forearms resting on his knees and his head bent.
‘It puts us back to square one, of course.’
‘You mean, in the hunt for Angy's killer?’
‘Right.’
‘Inspector Clarke seems to think Sybil was killed by a walk-in thief.
Could the same be true of Angy, do you suppose?’
‘That's something we'll have to consider.’
He sighed and stood up.
‘Here comes your friend.
I'd better let her take you home or she'll eat me alive and spit out the bones.’
Chapter Nineteen
Melissa slept uneasily, haunted by visions of blood, twisted limbs, staring eyes and crushed bones.
She awoke early, took a shower, went to her study and tried to work.
Her output was not impressive but at least she succeeded for a couple of hours in driving the memory of Sybil's murder into the back of her mind.
It was a brief respite; when, presently, she took a break and switched on the radio, she found herself listening to the voice of Detective Inspector Clarke who was being interviewed by a reporter.
She caught only the last few words: ‘the sooner this dangerous person is apprehended the better’, and switched off in frustration.
An hour or so later her telephone rang.
She rushed to answer, thinking that it might be Barney, but it was a young journalist from the Gloucester Gazette who had interviewed her a few months previously when her latest book was published.
‘Melissa?
Sophie.
I hear it was you who found that woman's body.
What led you to think a tragedy might have occurred?’
Damn Inspector Clarke, thought Melissa.
Harris would have kept her name out of it and she had forgotten, in her agitation, to ask for it not to be revealed.
‘The notion of tragedy didn't enter my head,’ she protested, ‘but it did seem odd for her to break off in the middle of a phone call like that.’
‘And you immediately scented a mystery and set out to solve it for yourself!’ said Sophie in a voice of triumph.
‘Everyone's asking themselves,’ she went on before Melissa had a chance to put a brake on her roller-coaster imagination, ‘whether there could be a connection between this crime and the Angelica Caroli murder.
‘Vicious Killer at Large in Quiet  Market Town’— this'll be on the front page of the tabloids!’
‘Angy was stabbed,’ Melissa pointed out.
‘If this was the start of a series of attacks, surely…’
‘An opportunist killer would use whatever weapon came to hand,’ declared Sophie, undeterred.
‘The circumstances are similar: doors unlocked, quiet street, easy for anyone to sneak in unobserved.
Of course, the police aren't prepared to commit themselves yet but I'll bet that's what they're thinking.
By the way, you referred to the Caroli girl as ‘Angy’— did you know her?’
‘We were colleagues, that's all.’
This was tricky ground.
The last thing she wanted was for the local press to find out that she had a personal interest in finding Angy's killer.
Being well known had certain disadvantages for anyone who set a value on privacy.
‘Then perhaps you can tell me…
’ Sophie had seized eagerly on this possible lead and was determined to follow it, nose to the ground.
‘You probably know more than I do,’ Melissa interposed.
‘You go to the police briefings.
I presume you were at this morning's?’
‘Yes, of course, that's why I'm phoning you.
Can you give me some impressions?
What did the place look like?
Was there much damage or disturbance?’
‘I didn't notice any but I never went inside the house.
What else did they say at the briefing?
Have the police got any leads yet?’
‘Not a lot.’
Sophie's voice dipped in disappointment, as if she had been hoping for a graphic account of overturned furniture and blood on the walls.
‘Just exactly what did you see?’
‘I saw a woman's body Iying in the passage behind the personal door from the garage,’ said Melissa wearily.
‘That must have been pretty frightful for you,’ said Sophie, her optimism regenerated.
‘It was, rather.’
Up flashed an image of the hideous thing on the floor.
‘How could you be sure she was dead?’
No doubt Sophie was hoping for a lurid description.
If she didn't get one, she would invent it and she would embroider whatever she was told.
‘Her head and the side of her face had been bashed in,’ said Melissa.
Already, the memory had set her stomach churning.
‘Look, Sophie, it was a pretty harrowing experience.
I don't really want to relive it.’
‘I quite understand!’
Synthetic sympathy floated over the line.
‘Can you describe your feelings when you saw the body?’
Melissa was running out of patience.
‘What do you suppose?
I was shocked, I felt sick, I screamed.
Now could you please answer my question?
What else did the press officer say?’
There was a pause; Melissa overheard mutterings of ‘shocked’, ‘sick’, ‘screamed’, as Sophie scribbled in her notebook.
She pictured her, frowning in concentration, her lower lip caught by her small white teeth and her short fair curls a-quiver.
The probing continued.
‘I believe you had someone with you?’
‘My neighbour.’
Sophie pounced.
‘Miss Ash?
The one who came across that body in Benbury Woods a year or so ago?
My, the two of you certainly have a knack of finding corpses, don't you?’
Iris would be furious.
She had a poor opinion of reporters after her experience at their hands during that unpleasant episode.
‘Look Sophie, do you have to mention names?’
It was hopeless, of course; there was no way Sophie was going to drop this one.
At any rate, Joe would be pleased; he always relished a bit of publicity for his authors.
‘You haven't answered my question,’ Melissa pursued.
‘The least you can do…’
‘Oh yes, the press briefing.
Well, there were two British Telecom engineers working in the street…’
‘Yes, I know.
one of them saw the body and passed out cold.’
‘Cor, did he!
I'll have to get hold of him!’
It was easy to imagine the sparkle in Sophie's eyes as she snapped up this morsel.
‘They didn't see anything because they were working in their little tent,’ she went on, ‘but they did hear someone hurrying past and then a car starting up a little way away.
And a short while before that, while one of them was getting some tools or something from the van, a car drove past quite slowly as if the driver was looking for somewhere.
He didn't see who was in the car and it went up a side road.
The police want the driver and the owner of the running feet to come forward…and of course, anyone who saw anything suspicious, please call this number…the usual stuff.’
‘Not much to go on, is it?’ said Melissa.
‘You never know.
Someone may have spotted something.
Anyway, thanks for the interview.
Bye!’
‘Goodbye.’
As she put down the phone, Melissa wondered what garbled version of their conversation would appear in the columns of the Gazette that evening.
There was a tap on the window as Iris passed on her way to the front door of Hawthorn Cottage.
She stood in the little porch with Binkie in her arms, her chin resting on his head; they both gazed at Melissa with calm, unblinking eyes.
‘How're you feeling this morning?’ said Iris.
‘All right, I suppose.
How about you?’
‘No problems.
Did extra yoga last night.
Giving a lesson this morning.
Three or four people from Craftworks.’
Recently, Iris had taken an interest in a group of young artists who had set up a studio in a converted barn in Lower Benbury.
‘Care to join us?
Settle your nerves,’ she added as Melissa hesitated.
‘You know I'm hopeless at it.
Last time I let you talk me into having a go, I felt as if I'd had a session in a tumble dryer.’
‘Rubbish.
Out of condition, that's all.
Put on some joggers and bring a blanket.
Half an hour.’
‘Oh, all right.
I'll just have a cup of coffee…’
‘No coffee.
Nothing to eat or drink till after.’
Iris swung round and marched away.
Binkie stared back over her shoulder and Melissa could have sworn that, behind his impassive expression, there was a smirk on his furry face.
‘Feeling better?’ asked Iris.
‘Much better, thanks!’ said Melissa warmly.
It was true.
Despite her scepticism, the slow, rhythmic yoga movements and the controlled breathing had exercised a calming effect.
Iris's  proteges had consumed their coffee and nut biscuits and departed, leaving the two of them to put the sitting-room to rights.
‘Knew it would help,’ said Iris with an air of satisfaction as she heaved a sofa back into place.
‘Should do a little every day.’
‘Perhaps I will.
Could you work out a routine for me?’
‘Promise to stick to it?
No good just now and then.’
‘I'll try.’
‘Saw Rodney Shergold in the shop this morning,’ Iris observed, pulling a face.
‘Jumpy as a cat and as cross as two sticks.
Eleanor had the cheek to have a tummy upset so he had to fetch his own newspaper.
Poor thing!
Can't think how she puts up with him.’
‘She thinks the sun shines out of his…well, you know what I mean’ Just in time Melissa remembered that although Iris had been known, in moments of crisis, to permit herself the occasional ‘bloody’, she strongly disapproved of vulgarity.
‘She's been worried sick because she thinks he's still a suspect.’
‘Of Angy's murder, you mean?
Is he?’
‘As far as I know, his alibi is okay.’
Melissa was on the point of telling Iris about Shergold's affair with Angy and the business of the jacket.
It was the kind of story that she would relish but with her blunt ways one could never be sure she wouldn't at some time let the cat out of the bag.
Not that one cared too much about the feelings of pompous, over-bearing Rodney Shergold but there was Eleanor to consider.
She was suffering enough as it was.
‘Any developments? or does that murder take a back seat now they've got a new one to think about?’
‘It certainly hasn't taken a back seat and there have been developments, but I'd better not tell you what they are until the details are officially released.’
Melissa pushed the last chair into place and glanced round the room.
‘Have we finished?’
‘That's fine, thanks.’
Iris picked up the tray of coffee mugs and headed for the kitchen, then stopped short.
‘Is that your phone?
They listened for a moment; through the wall separating the two cottages came a faint, rhythmic warble.
‘Yes, it is.
Excuse me if I dash!’
Melissa was on her way in a flash, but not so quickly that she missed the knowing look on Iris's face.
Almost certainly, she had guessed that the developments had something to do with Barney.
‘I was just going to hang up,’ he said in response to her breathless ‘Hullo’.
‘I was next door.’
‘I've had a visit from your policeman friend.’
So Harris had been round personally.
She wondered how much he had told Barney about the purpose and the result of the forensic tests.
Not much, she suspected, and it wouldn't do to reveal what she knew.
‘What did he want?’ she asked.
‘He came to return my gear.
I suppose they couldn't find anything to incriminate me.
He had the grace to thank me for my co-operation.’
‘That's  wonderful !
I'm so glad!’
‘But not surprised, by the sound of it.’
‘Of course I'm not surprised.
I always believed you were innocent!’
‘So you did.
Thank you, Melissa.’
If he had guessed that she had prior knowledge, he was not prepared to say so.
‘I hear there's been another woman killed not far from where Angy lived.
D'you suppose there's a connection?’
‘There may be.
No one knows yet.
It was one of my workshop students, Sybil B1iss.
She used to go to Angy's painting class as well.
I found her body.’
‘How dreadful for you!
However did that happen?’
‘It's a long story and I don't think I can bear to tell it again just now.’
‘I can imagine.’
The sympathy in his voice was heart-warming.
Of course he understood, having been through the same gruesome ordeal.
Worse, in fact.
At least she herself was not being treated as a suspect.
‘Melissa,’ he went on, ‘when can I see you?’
It was what she had been hoping and longing for but there was no surge of delight, only a strong but strangely detached sense of relief that the worst of his ordeal was over.
Perhaps she was still traumatised by shock.
Surely, once she was with him, the magic would return.
‘How about this evening?’ she said.
‘I hoped you'd say that.
Will you come here for dinner?
I cook quite a reasonable steak.’
‘That would be lovely.’
‘About seven-thirty?’
‘I'll look forward to it.’
She managed to convey enthusiasm but the feelings came from the head and not the heart.
She put on a coat and walked into the village for some shopping.
On her way through the churchyard she was greeted by excited barks from Snappy, tethered to the boot-scraper by the south door.
Immediately, she changed course and made her way among the gravestones, stopping for a moment to fondle and quieten the wriggling, prancing little dog before entering the church.
She was greeted by the familiar smell of ancient timbers overlaid with the indefinable atmosphere that clings to the interior of many old churches.
Like the wooden chancel rail on which countless hands awaiting the sacrament had laid a patina, and the memorial stones in the floor of the aisle worn smooth over the centuries, the very fabric of the building seemed to have distilled and preserved some essence of generations of worshippers.
There were traces in the air of beeswax, metal polish and fresh flowers, and the brass lectern, the candlesticks and the carved  pews gleamed in the mosaic of light pouring through the stained-glass windows.
Eleanor, her back to the door, was standing in front of a flower arrangement on a pedestal at the side of the altar.
She glanced round as Melissa entered, alerted by the creak of the heavy wooden door, but immediately returned to her task of removing faded blooms and replacing them with fresh ones.
She had spread a newspaper on the chancel steps to receive the discarded items and next to it, arranged neatly side by side, were her handbag, a pair of scissors and a flat basket containing some sprays of foliage and white carnations.
Melissa stooped to inhale the clove-like scent of the flowers.
‘That's a lovely arrangement,’ she said.
‘Thank you.’
Eleanor had uttered no greeting and her voice sounded flat and tired.
‘Are you all right?’ asked Melissa.
‘Why shouldn't I be?’
The response was sharp, almost defensive.
‘Rodney told Iris you weren't feeling well.’
‘Just a stomach upset.
I'm all right now.’
Eleanor picked up the fresh flowers and began trimming their stems.
She kept her face averted but Melissa could see that she was drawn and pale.
‘Well, you don't look all right.’
Poor thing, she must be having a rotten time just now.
‘Do you have to be doing this?
Those flowers could last another day or two, surely?’
‘It gives me something else to think about,’ said Eleanor with a catch in her voice.
‘Something else?
You mean, beside Angy…but you really shouldn't…’
Melissa's attempt to find some words of comfort was interrupted by the sharp sound of metal on stone as the scissors slipped from Eleanor's hand.
Instead of picking them up, she moved behind the pedestal as if taking refuge.
Melissa took a step forward and saw that she was clinging to the cast-iron pillar with both hands, her face half hidden among the foliage, her shoulders heaving.
‘Eleanor dear, what is it?’
‘It's…it's Rodney!
I'm sure they think he killed that girl!’
‘Oh no, you mustn't…
’ Melissa began but Eleanor paid no heed as wave after wave of pent-up fear poured out between her sobs.
‘Oh God, what shall I do if they arrest him?’
Her voice rose to a thin shriek.
‘Eleanor, I'm sure you're making a mistake…
I don't believe the police suspect Rodney.’
‘They do!
They do!’
In the stillness of the empty church, the words echoed and re-echoed as if every rafter vibrated in sympathy.
Eleanor released her grip on the pedestal and put her hands over her eyes, rocking to and fro and moaning, ‘I can't bear it, I can't bear it!’
For a moment, Melissa was tempted to put the poor creature's mind at rest by revealing what DCI Harris had told her, but immediately rejected the notion.
Such a breach of confidence could rebound in all sorts of directions.
So she murmured soothing words and patted Eleanor's shoulder until, little by little, the rocking and moaning subsided like the vibration of a spring coming to rest.
‘Did you know,’ said Melissa when Eleanor at last became quiet, ‘that there's been another murder?’
There was no response.
‘As a matter of fact, I found the body.
It was one of my students.’
‘Oh, no!’
The words were barely audible.
‘oh Melissa, I'm so sorry!’
‘No need to apologise!’
As an attempt to introduce a note of levity, the words were a disastrous flop.
Eleanor succumbed to another shuddering tide of despair.
‘Now stop that!’
Melissa gave her a gentle shake.
‘The police think she — Sybil — must have disturbed an intruder, and there's some suggestion that the same person killed Angy.
Sybil had never even set eyes on Rodney so they couldn't possibly suspect him of her murder, now could they?
You'll see, it'll be all right, so stop fretting.’
‘You really think so?’
Eleanor raised a blotched and swollen face.
‘I'm sure so,’ said Melissa earnestly, and in perfect faith.
‘Well, I only hope you're right.
It's been so awful, lately…and Major and Mrs Ford keep hinting…
’ Still convulsively sniffing, Eleanor dabbed her eyes.
‘Madeleine and Dudley Ford are a pair of malicious old gossips.
Don't you take any notice of what they say,’ said Melissa tartly.
‘Now, have you finished here?’
‘Nearly…just these few carnations.’
With nimble fingers, Eleanor put the remaining flowers in place before rolling the newspaper into a neat parcel which she carried into the vestry.
Melissa heard the sounds of a dustbin lid being replaced and the running of a tap as Eleanor washed her hands.
She came back into the church and picked up her belongings.
‘Are you going home now?’
Melissa asked.
Eleanor did not reply.
She stood for several moments in front of the altar before turning away and walking back towards the door.
Her head was bent and her shoulders drooped as if her fears had been only partially allayed.
Melissa hurried after her.
‘Are you sure you're all right?
Shall I walk home with you?’
‘That would be kind.’
Outside, she bent to unhitch Snappy's lead.
The dog whined and squirmed with pleasure, jumping up at the two women in turn.
‘Down, Snappy!’ said Eleanor in the same dead tone she had used when Melissa first arrived.
As they reached the corner of Woodbine Close, Dudley Ford emerged from his front door and came striding down the garden path with Sinbad snuffling at his heels.
He had a jaunty air, his panama at its usual rakish angle and his cane swinging.
‘Oh, no!’
Eleanor groaned in dismay.
‘I can't face him this morning.
Excuse me!’
She scuttled across the road, dragging a reluctant Snappy who was obviously spoiling for a scrap, just as Ford reached his front gate.
‘Ha!
Good morning, Melissa!’
He lifted his hat an inch or two and directed a toothy smile first at her and then at Eleanor's retreating figure, as if ready to return the wave and the greeting that he evidently expected of her.
‘She seems in a bit of a hurry!’ he observed, implying with raised  brow and compressed lips that such haste must hold some deep and possibly sinister significance.
That anyone would deliberately avoid him would never enter his head.
Resigned to being detained for several minutes, Melissa forced herself to be pleasant, making suitable replies to his comments on the weather and agreeing that it was a bit unsettled, that frost was still likely to be a problem but was only to be expected at this time of year.
She was certain, however, that it was not the weather that was uppermost in his mind.
From the way his eyes kept darting to and fro she guessed that he had something more important to say and that he was waiting until Eleanor was safely out of sight and earshot.
As she disappeared round the side of her house, he leaned towards Melissa with a sly, knowing look on his face.
‘Poor old Shergold has had another visit from the boys in blue!’ he confided.
‘Shouldn't like to be in his shoes!’
‘Really?’
Deliberately, she used a tone of cool detachment.
She had no wish to appear impolite but there was something about the man that made her cringe.
He was so  blatantly , shamelessly inquisitive, so ready to place the most sensational interpretation on the smallest of circumstances and, under the guise of concern, to savour to the full the trials and tragedies of his neighbours.
‘Brought something in a plastic bag…for identification, I shouldn't wonder.
Didn't stay long but I expect they'll be back.
Part of their tactics, don't y'know.
Psychological pressure and all that.’
The florid countenance was within a foot of Melissa's face.
‘Y'know what, I still reckon it was him who killed that girl, alibi or no alibi.
And I reckon his wife thinks so too.
She's been going around lately looking like death warmed up.’
as if that settled it beyond doubt, he rocked back on his heels, planted his cane between his feet and assumed an expression of profound wisdom.
Melissa's patience had been tried to the limit.
‘I don't think we should make that sort of speculation without any evidence,’ she snapped.
‘The Shergolds must both be under a great deal of strain and it's up to us all  to be as supportive as we can.
Excuse me, Dudley, I really must be going.’
Without waiting for the inevitable flourish of the panama and the affected little bow that she knew would accompany his farewell, she turned round and hurried away.
Chapter Twenty
When Barney opened the door to Melissa he greeted her with a smile but his eyes remained grave.
He stood aside to admit her; in the tiny entrance hall he helped her off with her coat without touching her.
‘Do go in.
Mind the step.’
He followed her into the sitting-room, still leaving space between them.
Music played softly in the background as they stood on either side of the hearth, smiling uncertainly at one another like former lovers reunited after a long absence and wondering whether they still had anything in common.
‘It's nice to see a fire,’ she said, breaking the silence.
‘Yes, it makes the room look cheerful, doesn't it?’
‘Yes.’
A pause.
‘That's Mozart, isn't it?’
‘That's right.
The clarinet concerto.
Do you like it?’
‘I love all his music.’
‘So do I. Won't you sit down?
Can I get you a drink?’
She didn't want to sit down.
She wanted him to take her in his arms and make her feel once more the strong, swift surge of desire that she remembered from their one night together.
Yet, perversely, she found it a relief that he kept his distance.
So often since then she had lain awake in the darkness aching for him…but that had been before the discovery of Sybil's body and the awful, emotional turmoil that had followed.
The knowledge that he was not going to be charged with Angy's murder had aroused profound relief but not elation; his invitation for this evening had brought pleasure but no excitement.
It was probably just as well.
His own manner was controlled, almost detached.
Perhaps he had no intention of making love to her again but had merely invited]her round for a meal and a couple of hours of music and conversation, out of a sense of gratitude for her  loyalty and her repeated assurances that she believed in his innocence.
She asked for red wine and when he brought it she raised the glass and tried to think of something original and witty by way of a toast but he forestalled her by saying, ‘Cheers,’ and she could think of no other response.
They settled in armchairs and she saw how the standard lamp threw shadows on his face, accentuating the hollows in his cheeks and the overhang of his brow so that his eyes seemed to sink into their sockets and burn there in the firelight like lamps in darkened caves.
Only the music and the hiss of burning wood broke the silence.
‘You must feel there's a great weight off your mind,’ said Melissa at last.
He looked at her with a sombre expression.
‘Yes.
It's no fun, being suspected of murder.’
‘I'm sure it isn't.’
‘You know they checked on Doug Wilson and Rodney Shergold as well?’
‘I hadn't heard about Doug but in a case of murder, nobody close to the victim gets overlooked.’
‘They couldn't find a motive in Doug's case, but they tested some of his clothing just the same.’
Barney gave a short laugh.
‘They seemed particularly interested in cotton sweat-shirts.
We found out later that we each had an identical one from Marks and Sparks.
That would have set them a puzzle, wouldn't it, if the fibres had come from one of them?’
She smiled back in relief.
The ice, if not broken, was beginning to soften a little.
‘It certainly would.’
‘I wonder where they go from here’?
His face became serious again; he leaned forward and stared at the fire, slowly sipping his wine.
‘You said there might be a connection with this latest killing.’
He turned to her with a searching expression, as if he suspected her of withholding something.
‘They think Sybil was the victim of a walk-in thief maybe a junkie, and it's possible the same person killed Angy.’
‘When I think of all the time they've wasted, trying to prove me guilty while the real killer goes free…’
His voice disintegrated.
He stood up and began moving restlessly around the room, fiddling with books and ornaments and adjusting the glasses and cutlery on the table laid ready for their meal.
He had taken great pains to make it attractive; green candles in crystal holders stood waiting to be lit and in the centre was a bowl of white miniature roses, their heads like pale ghosts against the polished wood.
He seemed to be considering it, as if wondering if something had been overlooked, but when he turned round, the pain in his eyes was almost too much for Melissa to bear.
In an instant, she was beside him, standing close but still not venturing to touch him.
‘Whoever did it will be caught in the end,’ she said gently.
‘Yes, of course.’
He stared down at her, his mouth working.
‘It's just so awful, not knowing.
I lie awake at nights, seeing her Iying there…’
‘You must try not to brood.’
He gave a despairing little shrug and closed his eyes.
Melissa decided that it was time to be sensible and practical.
Too much sympathy would only encourage self-pity.
‘What about that dinner you promised me?’ she reminded him.
‘Is there anything I can do in the kitchen?’
It had been the right thing to say.
He squared his shoulders and forced a smile.
‘What a rotten host I am!
It's all ready except for the steak.
How do you like yours cooked?’
Melissa stared at the two slabs of raw meat that he took from the refrigerator and felt her appetite vanish.
‘I'm sorry, Barney,’ she faltered.
‘I don't think I can face that.’
Instantly, he understood and put the steaks away.
‘How about a quiche?
There's one in the freezer…
I can thaw it out in the microwave…and I've done a salad and jacket potatoes.’
‘That'll be fine.’
By mutual consent, the conversation switched from mystery and death to more mundane topics: the latest political  scandal; the protests of wildlife conservationists against a proposed motorway extension.
By the time they sat down to eat, much of the tension between them had eased.
‘My vegetarian neighbour would thoroughly approve of this meal,’ commented Melissa.
‘You mean Iris Ash?’
‘That's right.’
Melissa gave a mischievous grimace as she suddenly remembered the disapproving gleam in her friend's eye on learning where she was spending the evening and, possibly, the night.
‘What's the joke?’
Barney, too, was smiling as he reached out to refill her glass.
‘I was picturing her face when I said I was seeing you this evening.’
The smile faded.
‘She's still worried about your safety?’
‘Of course not.
It's just that she has this idée fixe that my agent is the man for me.
Truly!’ she added as the shadow on his face continued to darken and his head to droop.
‘She won't be the only one who still has their doubts,’ he muttered, pushing his plate away.
‘We're all under a cloud until they find the real killer…me, Doug, Rodney Shergold.’
‘I haven't seen Doug since the day you…since Thursday of last week.’
Just in time, she remembered to avoid the direct reference.
‘How has he been taking it?’
‘I think it shook him pretty badly, but you know Doug.
Likes to kid everyone he's the big macho tough guy.
Not like poor old Rodney!
He's been going round looking like the wrath of God.
Haven't you seen him?’
‘Only once.
I gather he's pretty much on edge.
His wife is going round the bend, thinking he's under suspicion, but I'm sure she's barking up the wrong tree.
Not that she's the only one.
Their busybody neighbour is convinced that he did it.’
‘But he's got an alibi.’
‘It'd take more than a few facts to convince Dudley Ford that he's mistaken!
I haven't a lot of time for Rodney but I really do feel sorry for Eleanor,’ Melissa went on thoughtfully, remembering the afternoon's encounter.
‘I  found her in church earlier on today, howling into her flower arrangement.
The strain is really getting her down.’
‘Poor thing.’
Barney sounded as if he meant it.
‘What sort of a woman is she?
I picture some self-effacing little creature who won't say boo to a goose.’
Melissa laughed.
‘You're not far off!
She certainly wouldn't say boo to Rodney but get her out from under his shadow and she's got plenty of…character.’
She had been going to say ‘potential’ but felt it might sound patronising.
‘It's sad really.
She's quite talented but she subordinates all her interests to his.
It's almost unhealthy.’
Barney nodded vaguely.
It was clear that his mind was once more centred on the hunt for Angy's killer.
‘What are the police going to do now, do you think?’
‘Just carry on with their usual kind of enquiries: forensic tests, house-to-house visits, appeals for witnesses.
They'll be trying to establish whether the two crimes are related or not.’
‘Finding your friend's body must have been a terrible shock for you,’ he said.
For a moment, he had put his own pain to one side to share in hers.
She felt her eyes prickle.
‘It was awful,’ she whispered.
‘How did you come to be there?’
Briefly, she recounted her and Sybil's efforts to track down Delia Forbes.
‘I keep asking myself what it could have been that she was so keen to tell me on the phone.
I can't help thinking it had something to do with Angy's murder, but we'll never know now.
Some wretched little junkie saw to that!’
Barney was looking at her with a strange expression, half puzzled, half tender.
‘Were you really doing all this on my behalf?’
‘Sybil didn't believe you'd killed Angy either.
She…we both thought we'd like to do something to help.’
‘I find that very touching,’ he said.
‘It seemed a long shot, but we felt we had to try.’
She hesitated for a moment before saying, ‘We went to see Eddie Brady on Thursday.’
‘The man Angy was always talking about?
Wasn't he her landlord?’
‘Not exactly.
‘Eddie’ is short for Edwina.’
Barney frowned.
‘I don't understand.’
‘Eddie Brady is a woman.
She was in love with Angy…very sincerely, very deeply.
I don't think there was any commitment on Angy's part but I've no doubt Eddie hoped — and believed — there would be, given time.’
‘That explains why Angy thought my suspicions about her being pregnant were so wildly funny,’ said Barney, slowly and with some bitterness.
‘Why in the world couldn't she have been more honest with me?’
Melissa was surprised that he had taken the news so calmly.
She had thought long and hard before deciding that it was best for him to hear it from her rather than risk it reaching him through the more sensational tabloids, but she had braced herself for an outburst of shock, anger, even disgust.
‘My guess is that she hadn't come to terms with the situation herself,’ she said.
‘The more I think about it, the more it seems she was very confused about her feelings.
She seems to have been a girl who drifted into relationships because she didn't like upsetting people.
Her so-called engagement to Rick was a disaster, and Eddie said…
’ She broke off, thinking that further revelations about Angy's sex-life would be a mistake, but Barney pounced.
‘What did Eddie say?’
‘That Angy had started an affair with Rodney Shergold, as a kind of quid pro quo for letting her take the art class.
Eddie wanted Angy to end it but said that she was too soft-hearted.’
‘Just a girl who couldn't say ‘No’,’ said Barney with a quiet irony that held a hint of resignation.
Once again, the feared explosion of rage had not materialised.
He sat looking at his hands as they rested on the table, palms down, the fingers softly drumming.
She thought how long and lean they were, a true artist's hands, and remembered how they had felt when he touched her.
It was several moments before he spoke.
‘She never told me about Shergold but it was common gossip how he felt about her,’ he admitted at last.
‘I didn't like to think of it but Doug Wilson was always making sly innuendoes.
You're right about her being tender-hearted, of course.
She couldn't bear to see anyone upset.
When I think of what I did…
I'd give anything in the world to undo that quarrel with her!’
‘Don't be too hard on yourself.
You told me how she taunted you…
’ Melissa was about to point out that Angy's tender heart had not prevented her from flaunting Rick's ring as if it were her own, nor had she intervened to protect Barney from hurt, but she merely said, ‘It was enough to make anyone angry.’
‘That's no excuse for hitting a woman.’
‘A slap in the face doesn't exactly amount to grievous bodily harm, does it?
You must try and forget about it.’
‘I suppose so.’
He took the hand that, without thinking, she had reached out to him.
‘Bless you, Melissa.
I can't tell you what it's meant to me, knowing that you cared, even a little…’
‘I care quite a lot,’ she said softly.
The warmth of his fingers on hers was like electricity.
‘Have you had enough to eat?’ he asked.
‘Shall we have coffee?’
He had it already prepared and he went and fetched the tray.
‘What about some more music?
A piano concerto?’
‘Lovely.’
He put more logs on the fire and she sat on the floor with her back resting against a settle.
‘You don't mind, do you?
Iris always sits on the floor and I've got into the habit.’
It wasn't entirely true but it could very well have been and he showed no surprise.
‘You don't look very comfortable.
Have a cushion.’
He took one from an armchair and put it behind her back.
Then he sat on the floor beside her, half turned towards her, leaning on one elbow.
They drank their coffee and he took both cups and leaned across her to put them on the settle.
His arm came down on her shoulder and tightened  round her, pulling her close.
She smelled the clean tang of his breath, felt the softness of his beard and the purposeful movements of lips and tongue and hands.
The air was filled with sublime music and the sound of burning wood was like the soft crackle of melting ice.
Chapter Twenty-One
On Sunday, as arranged, Melissa joined Iris and her American cousin for supper.
David Burleigh was a retired professor of literature at a New England university, quietly spoken and witty.
In normal circumstances, Melissa would have found him stimulating company but that evening she found her thoughts constantly wandering.
The shock and mystery of two tragic and violent deaths jostled for attention with a sense of uncertainty over her future relationship with Barney.
At ten o'clock, overcome by weariness, she excused herself and went home.
Next morning, she went into the village to collect bread and newspapers.
Eleanor was just coming out of Mrs Foster's shop.
‘How are you this morning?’ enquired Melissa, holding out a hand for Snappy to lick and noticing with relief that some of the strain had lifted from her friend's face.
‘Fine, thank you.’
Eleanor glanced from side to side and then said in a low voice, ‘It's all right…what I told you about.’
She broke off as if afraid of being overheard and moved away with a nod and a wave.
‘I must get back and see to the washing.
I think it's going to be fine, don't you?’
‘Well, she seems more like herself,’ said Mrs Foster as the door closed.
‘Been looking like death lately, she has.’
‘Yes, she does look better,’ replied Melissa, thinking that the return of Rodney's jacket must have convinced Eleanor that he had at last been eliminated from police enquiries.
‘Mind you, it's no wonder she's been out of sorts after that dreadful business at the tech…and Major Ford tittle-tattling all over the village.’
If it was Mrs Foster's intention to express disapproval of the Major's predilection for gossip, the animation in her tone and the wild fluttering  of her colourless eyelashes seemed rather to show an unhealthy interest in what he had to say and an eagerness to discuss it.
Melissa had no intention of obliging her.
‘I take anything the Major says with a large pinch of salt,’ she said crisply.
‘If I could just have a wholemeal loaf and the papers…and I need a tin of tomatoes and half a dozen eggs.’
‘Yes, of course.’
Mrs Foster bobbed about collecting the items and putting them on the counter.
‘Any news about who did in that poor lady that you found, Mrs Craig?’ she asked as she took the money.
Melissa shook her head.
‘Poor soul, what a way to go.
I expect it's made you feel a bit jumpy too, like?’
The eyelashes fluttered harder than ever, doubtless in anticipation of some highly-coloured account of the state of Melissa's nerves.
‘It did shake me up, but I'm over it now.’
‘Yes, well I suppose in your line of business you get used to bodies and blood and things,’ said Mrs Foster, as if writing crime fiction was in some way akin to working in an abattoir.
Melissa stowed her purchases in her shopping bag and picked up her change.
‘I really must hurry along, I've got a busy day in front of me.’
Late that afternoon she had a telephone call from Joe Martin, just back from a trip to New York.
‘Hi, Mel!’ he said breezily.
‘I see you've been having more fun and games!’
‘What's that supposed to mean?’
‘I've been catching up on the week's news, and who do I find hitting the headlines yet again?’
‘That was hardly my idea of fun and games.’
‘No, of course not.
It must have been creepy for you, going into that empty house and finding something nasty behind the door…hey, that'd make a title, wouldn't it?
Something Nasty …’
Melissa was not amused.
‘You make it sound like part of a publicity exercise,’ she interrupted.
‘It was a very unnerving experience.’