

Prologue
An October mist, blown in from the Channel, hung around the rusted legs of the derelict pier.
A muffled moon could be glimpsed through its broken deck, a pier long closed to those who once sought to find out what it was the butler saw.
A bitter-sweet smell of excrement, orange peel and old ice-cream papers mingled with the sea and sand.
In Brighton, the Prince Regent's city, people do not go to bed early, and an observer would have noticed a small group of revellers making its way along the strand to the accompaniment of snatches of song and bursts of loud laughter.
The party were clearly conference goers, for plastic-covered ‘photo-passes’ hung from their lapels; indeed, there was something familiar about their faces.
Their voices, a blend of proud and plebeian, would, when taken with the early autumnal chill, have suggested they were Tories in Brighton for their Party's annual conference.
One of them was certainly Kenneth Baker, glossy, sleek and cheerful; behind him plodded his detective, a  literate and unhappy member of the Special Branch who much preferred Brighton rock to Brighton beach, especially at such a late hour.
John Gummer, who was not considered to be in need of protection, was singing ‘Lead Kindly Light’ in a falsetto voice.
Terry Dicks, not so well known, was crushing beer cans and tossing them in the direction of France.
Their wives, hand in hand, stepping carefully in expensive shoes over the summer's jetsam, brought up the rear.
They had met when dining at English's Oyster House, and were on their way back to the rebuilt Grand Hotel for a night-cap and bed.
It was the former Home Secretary who first noticed the deck chair, its legs awash with the incoming tide, part-hidden by the Victorian metal-work of the pier.
The back of the canvas chair had been turned towards the town, and in the gloom it was not immediately apparent that someone was sitting in it.
A second glance revealed a pair of pretty legs and a tousled, damp head of hair.
The sea, in which were reflected the lights of the promenade, surged uneasily around the sides of the chair, covering Baker's black brogues with a film of sand.
The four men ventured farther out and turned to face the chair; their wives hung back.
All were silent.
The bodyguard concluded that the seated woman was undoubtedly dead; Baker thought anxiously about the political consequences of the discovery; only Terry Dicks spoke.
‘Sod me,’ he said almost under his breath, ‘it can't be?
It is!
It's that bloody woman!’
Ken Baker pulled himself together.
A bookish man, and as such an untypical Tory, he was never at a loss for a quote, however unusual the circumstances.
‘Oh, is it weed, or fish or floating hair…?’ he intoned, and then  added for no one 's benefit, ‘Charles Kingsley.’
It had been a perfectly bloody conference.
Sod's law.
Everything that could go wrong had gone wrong.
And now this.
One of the wives started to cry.
Midnight clocks struck the hour.
It was the morning of Friday, the last full day of the Party conference.
Tuesday Morning
‘All mink and no knickers,’ said Amaranth Wilikins, running her wicked pink tongue over her lipstick.
It was a phrase often used by her mother to describe women whose husbands had made money and moved to Edgbaston.
Amaranth, thirty-nine rising forty, darkly blonde and almost beautiful, stood posed before the glass in her room at ‘Mon Repos’, a genteel boarding house in Gardner Street, Brighton.
It was eight o'clock on Tuesday morning, the opening day of the Tory Party conference.
Her suit was by Mondi, her shoes by Harrods, her make-up by Max Factor.
Twice married, a former BBC Radio 4 panellist and one-time Harlech TV ‘weathergirl’, Amaranth was a woman in search of a husband, an income of £100,000 a year and a seat in Parliament.
Especially a seat in Parliament.
Why else should she have come to Brighton on her own, and out of season?
She pinned her conference photo-pass to her lapel, dabbed ‘Adieu Sagesse’ behind her ears, and tripped  lightly downstairs to breakfast.
The elder of the two men who ran the establishment shook muesli on to her plate.
‘You don't look like a typical Tory woman to me,’ he said.
‘I thought you all wore terrible hats.’
‘I'm not,’ said Amaranth, taking a spoonful of Greek yoghurt.
‘I'm very untypical.
I'm here to make a killing.
Watch me on telly.’
Having finished her breakfast, Amaranth walked down to the front and entered the Grand Hotel.
Where better to sit and be seen?
Just after nine she would join the throng of the prominenti and walk the two hundred yards or so to the conference centre.
Who knows whom she might meet?
Although she could not afford to stay there, she certainly intended to give the impression that she was lodging under the same roof as the leaders of the Party.
Indeed, she had dined in the Hotel the night before and had been introduced to her local MP, Sir Ralph Grunte.
‘I'm sure I know your name,’ he said.
Amaranth was delighted.
She did not appreciate that this was his normal greeting, and assumed that her reputation had preceded her.
‘You might have heard me on the radio,’ she said.
‘I was a panellist in ‘Out of Order’ and ‘Looking Forward to the Past’.’
Grunte nodded, and Amaranth told him of at least one of her ambitions: she wished to be adopted as candidate for a safe seat.
A party conference is a natural stamping ground for those who have barely four days in which to make a mark.
Grunte had seized his chance.
They were to take lunch together today, at Langan's Bistro.
‘I can be of help to you, my dear,’ he assured her.
Ms  Wilikins was unconvinced, but she had accepted the invitation.
Before she left the Grand Hotel for the opening of the conference, she was chatted up by a ponderous Patrick Cormack, a chastened Colin Moynihan and an eager Charles Harvey.
Cormack promised to take Amaranth ‘under his wing’.
No fear.
Moynihan, once a junior minister, who had lost his seat at the election, had had the good fortune to buy her a drink the evening before and had suggested ‘an exquisite light lunch’ at Macau, the town's only Portuguese restaurant.
Amaranth, who was over 5 feet 8 inches in height, had her eye on someone taller.
Moynihan had been in his time a University cox and a flyweight boxing blue, and barely came up to her elbow.
Anyway she was promised for lunch to Sir Ralph Grunte.
‘You poor thing,’ said Moynihan, promptly jogging off in the direction of Hove.
Charles Harvey, on the other hand, was tall, six foot, and he was wearing an Old Carthusian tie.
At least Amaranth thought it was an OC tie, but she was not entirely sure.
The pink stripe was not quite right.
‘We met’, he had said, ‘at the Goodharts’ party.’
Amaranth, who had never heard of the Goodharts, said how much she had enjoyed the party.
She told him that it was her intention to make her maiden speech at the conference.
Harvey replied that as a junior Minister at the Department of Transport, he did not have to speak.
His sole task was to listen to a speech made by his master in reply to a short debate.
‘MacGregor speaks, I listen.’
Amaranth liked the look of Harvey.
Cormack had smelt of Old Spice, and Moynihan of embrocation.
Harvey, with his public school accent and laid-back  manner, was a different kettle of fish.
Would he kindly help her with her speech?
Harvey said he would be only too delighted, and suggested they might meet that evening.
He would leave a message for her at the desk in the Grand Hotel foyer.
Hyacinth Scragg accepted her hotel breakfast with disgust — the statutory sausage, a tepid tomato and an institutionally fried egg.
‘Sauce, dear?’ said her companion.
It was indeed bloody sauce putting the Party's delegation up at such a crummy hotel.
Hyacinth, who worked as beautician in a hairdresser's in Arden, was nineteen, big-busted (‘It's like seeing Fylingdales Early Warning system coming at you’) and handsome.
She was the chairman of the Forest of Arden Young Conservatives which she had joined three years previously at her mother's prompting.
‘Such a nice class of young men.’
On the previous evening she had been told by her MP, Sir Ralph Grunte, that she reminded him of ‘the young Alma Cogan’, but she had no idea who Alma Cogan was.
Sipping her milky coffee from a thick cup, she resolved to find out.
The bread was sliced-white, the butter was packed in New Zealand, and the marmalade came in a tiny plastic box.
It was not user-friendly.
The Malcolms, Kevin and Janet, who were fellow members of the delegation, were bickering as usual.
She pinned on her photo-pass, without which no Tory is properly dressed, and, avoiding her colleagues, walked briskly along the front in the direction of the conference centre.
Two window-cleaners threw her a cheerful obscenity, but she took no notice.
It was her first Party conference, and she was certain she could do  far better than them.
‘Almost makes you think of voting Tory,’ said one ladder-bound youth to the other.
‘My dad did,’ was the reply, ‘but not after what they gone and done to Margaret Thatcher.’
An unseasonal sun shone brightly on Brighton, the gulls ducked and dived, and a breeze of summer tickled the gutter-borne rubbish.
The elderly pushed one another along the prom in wheelchairs.
There was even an open-topped double-decker bus, defying the calendar.
Blue-haired widows who had lived out their prime in Hendon Central, were bound for Sainsbury's, their husbands abandoned in Golders Green.
An old man in a long overcoat rummaged in a hotel's bins.
As Hyacinth walked, the long line of hotels, great and small, disgorged its residents on to an increasingly crowded pavement.
They came down the side streets in droves, like T.S.
Eliot's clerks over London Bridge, swelling the river of the anointed.
There was much hand-shaking, waving and pecking of cheeks.
Hyacinth felt excluded from it all, and rather wished she had waited for Carole Swan, or for Angela Cartwright, the delegation's leader.
The prospect of four days ‘politicking’ at Brighton now seemed daunting.
She ought to have stayed at home, or gone to stay with her boyfriend in Halesowen.
But it was too late for second thoughts.
Grasping her conference handbook tightly, she took her place in the queue where, she had been told last night over supper, she ran the risk of being stripped and searched by an army of discharged traffic wardens.
After the bomb of 1984, nobody was taking security lightly.
Joshua Morris stood in line waiting to be searched for an  offensive weapon.
As an occasional journalist his only ‘offensive weapon’ was his pen, or rather his word processor.
Morris was in his early sixties, and Tory MP for Shropshire West.
Tall, silver-haired, and a touch overweight, he had become, over the years, a somewhat cynical observer of the political scene.
Who's Who listed his hobbies as ‘collecting Staffordshire and reading military history’.
He was also the chairman of the Sherlock Holmes Society of Great Britain, a body of self-appointed sleuths who dined quarterly in Baker Street.
Both on duty and off, Morris wore the uniform of a Conservative MP, the double-breasted suit.
The IRA had seen to it that getting in and out of the Party conference building was like a rich man confronted with the gates of the Kingdom of Heaven, or, what was worse, like checking-in at Gatwick on an August flight to Marbella.
Tories, long, short and tall, queued with the stoicism that had once made us the envy of the world.
Pockets were emptied of loose change, parcels scanned as if for a malignant tumour and handbags rifled for evidence of evil intent.
The ordeal, which lasted all of twenty minutes, was repeated twice a day; a high price, thought Joshua, for having to listen to Bill Cash warn of the dangers of Europe.
While he waited, Morris picked out from the throng those whose names he knew.
Charles Harvey, a sleek and ambitious junior Minister: Peter Worthington Evans, an earnest Government whip who wore waistcoats, watch and chain; and Nicholas Budgen, Enoch Powell's puck-like successor in Wolverhampton.
In the parallel line of the submissive, a pretty, dark girl of about twenty was emptying her handbag on the instructions of a uniformed harridan.
A lipstick, a packet of  tissues, a ball ticket for the Young Conservatives and a Jilly Cooper paperback were put on view.
‘Any good?’ asked Joshua.
‘Not a patch on Riders,’ was her reply.
A large man in a purple pin-striped suit standing behind her was complaining about the political bias shown by the BBC.
A group of the young set up a chant of ‘why are we waiting’, and the line duly moved forward another inch.
Joshua was sorry he had turned his back on sunny Brighton.
He should have gone for a walk on the Downs or gone shopping in the town for antiques, or spent the morning browsing in bookshops.
But it was too late; the warders in charge of the metal detector waved him through, and the press of the crowd propelled him, willy-nilly, into the conference hall itself.
The noise suddenly abated.
The platform had summoned them in to give thanks to God, and to pray for wisdom.
It was, thought Joshua, probably the least he should do.
‘Dear Lord and Father of mankind, Forgive our foolish ways…
Seven thousand Tories were on their feet.
As is the custom, the annual Conservative Party conference begins with a brief religious ceremony followed by an official greeting from the local Mayor.
In Brighton at nine-thirty on this Tuesday morning in October, the singing could only be described as ‘tentative’, not at all like the rendering of ‘Land of Hope and Glory’ which invariably follows upon the Leader's speech on the Friday afternoon.
The representatives of shire and suburb had arrived on  the Monday evening, and had drunk and dined exceedingly well.
In consequence, the level of the Party's blood sugar was low; their expectations none too high.
A benign observer of the event, sitting in among the press and nursing his hangover, would have cast his eye unenthusiastically over the massed ranks of what Sir Peregrine Worsthorne had once described in Mrs Thatcher's golden days as ‘the most successful political party in the world’: ‘Essex Man’ and ‘Wessex Woman’, stockjobbers, garage-owners and a scattering of country women in lavender tweeds.
Towards the front of the hall, which was coldly functional and had none of the baroque charm of Blackpool's Winter Gardens, sat a group of Young Conservatives, their tattooed arms hidden beneath designer jackets.
One large young man was wearing a T-shirt bearing the legend, ‘We want ink in our Pen’.
He meant Monsieur Le Pen.
They were likely to make trouble, having not yet come to terms with the hurried departure of Mrs Thatcher following upon the events of November 1990.
On the opening day the congregation, for that was what it had become, listened uneasily to the local Rector whose refusal to wear a clerical collar had not gone unnoticed.
The Church of England was not what it once was; but neither was the Conservative Party.
He spoke briefly of the responsibility the rich owe to the poor of the Third World.
All too often sensible Tories at conference had to endure the views of unsound parsons and leftish Mayors, an aberration which was soon to be submerged beneath a torrent of party oratory, obsequious loyalty and special pleading.
‘Through the night of doubt and sorrow, Onward goes the pilgrim band, Singing songs of expectation, Marching to the Promised Land.’
Joshua Morris had given up hope of ever reaching the promised land.
A long-serving backbencher (and amateur detective who had recently helped to unmask the murderer of a woman MP whose body had been found hanging in a House of Commons lift), he sat uncomfortably at the back of the hall.
His part in the murder proceedings had attracted unwelcome publicity; the tabloid press invariably referred to him as ‘the Shropshire Sherlock’, a nickname which had not afforded his rustic constituents much pleasure.
The then Leader of the House, John MacGregor (who was today sitting on the platform with the great ones of the party, wearing a kilt to which, strictly speaking, he was not entitled) had called upon him to help with the inquiries.
Joshua, whose conceit it was to prefer the old gods to the new, took no part in the singing.
He believed, with Gibbon, that the value of Christianity lay in the fact that it was a ‘magistrate's religion’, a necessary cement in society's fabric.
But he could not take its mythology too seriously.
He scrutinised the crowd, looking for a friendly face.
His agent in Shropshire West had tried to persuade him to stay with his local Party members in a small, temperance hotel, but he had refused.
Instead, he had put up in a hotel some miles out of town, high up on the Downs, which owed more to Laura Ashley than to Nancy Astor.
Wenlock Manor was some twelve miles out of Brighton, far enough away to discourage conference-going Tories, the more important of whom preferred to stay at the rebuilt Grand Hotel, and the  more humble at sea-front bed-and-breakfasts.
He was to be joined the next day by his mistress, Felicity.
Their affair could be described either as ‘passionately discreet’ or as ‘discreetly passionate’, the relative anonymity of Wenlock Manor being preferred to the sodium-lit splendour of the Grand Hotel.
And bored journalists, lodged there on expenses, with nothing better to write about, were dangers to be avoided.
He would entertain his local Party members to lunch on Thursday at English's, a sea-food restaurant which usually attracted the prominenti.
It was their duty to permit themselves a swift handshake and a kindly word to those, less august than themselves, whose long evenings on the ‘knocker’, canvassing for the party, sustained them in the political positions to which they had become all too easily accustomed.
‘Daphne, have you met Norman Lamont?
Norman, this is Daphne Cadwallader, the chairman of my local Party…
’ Such encounters were lubricants, confirming, at one and the same time, the importance of all the people concerned.
‘Not for our sins alone, Thy Mercy, Lord, we sue.‘
Joshua's roving eye discerned Gerald Kaufman of all people.
Kermit-like, he was peering disapprovingly at the massed ranks of his political opponents, a stare that was returned, by those who caught his eye, with surprise tinged with disapproval.
Kaufman was nobody's favourite Labour MP, whom Joshua Morris had once described, somewhat rashly, as a salad dressing — one part oil to five parts vinegar.
In his Beverly Hills suit and hand-painted 1950s tie, Kaufman looked like a divorce lawyer in ‘LA Law’; his presence at the Tory Party's  autumn festival could be explained only by the need to earn a crust; he had been invited by the BBC, no doubt, to comment on the proceedings.
Morris had once done as much at a Labour Party conference in Blackpool.
What a pity the invitation had not been extended to someone more congenial, such as the ubiquitous Austin Mitchell.
The platform party sat smugly in extended line.
Next to the Rector was the Mayor of Brighton, on his left was the Chairman of the Conference, a party worthy who had been knighted for his pains.
Sir Charles Webb-Bowen was a Hertfordshire solicitor with views.
It would be his task to summon speakers to the rostrum (from a list supplied by Central Office) and to introduce in appropriate terms of admiration and approval the Ministers of the Crown who would respond to a series of debates.
The Prime Minister crouched behind his spectacles, while spread out on both wings of the platform sat the members of his Cabinet.
Behind and above the platform, like cherubim around the head of the risen Lord, sat the members of the Party's national executive committee, spiced with a scattering of MPs.
Edwina Currie was opening her post, Sir James Spicer was picking his nose.
Joshua was suddenly overcome with a feeling of cafard; why the hell had he bothered to come?
He had spent the last twenty years attending the Party conference, four days of gin and oratory.
In recent years he had stayed only a day or two, until, overcome with boredom, he had returned home to watch Mrs Thatcher's Leader's speech on the telly.
Thirty minutes of oratory and twelve of applause; or had it been the other way round?
Would this year in Brighton promise better?
The service over, Joshua repaired to the clinically clean Gents.
Sir Ralph Grunte,(‘the ‘e’ is sounded, dear boy, as in Bronte’) stepped out of the next stall with pee on his brightly polished brown brogues.
‘Men of my age frequently need a new washer,’ was his cheerful comment, an unsolicited reference to his urinary difficulties.
The MP for a seat in Warwickshire, Grunte was not one of the better-loved Tories, but he rarely went unnoticed.
A Midlands motor dealer (‘A fair deal with Grunt' — the ‘e’ had been added later, upon his election to Parliament), he was built like an elderly Land Rover.
His enemies in the Party, who were numbered among the brightest and the best, suggested unkindly that his libido was turbo-assisted, and that he traded in his women after two years.
In business, his practice was sharp.
It was the universal view of the members of the 1922 Committee of Tory back-benchers that, given Grunte's probity in matters financial, the Governorship of the Cayman Islands would be the most suitable place for him.
Ralph Grunte was very large, bald, and wore a 1914-type subaltern's moustache.
His suits were as chequered as his career.
He was one of those men who, once the bloom had gone (in his case his hair), never seem to age, although a glance at Vacher's Guide would have revealed him to be sixty-two.
He was a keen Party conference-goer.
Thirty years previously a slimmer Grunte had seduced the female chairman of the Bridgwater Young Conservatives.
They had lain on the damp sand under one or other of Brighton's twin piers, having spent the evening dancing to the music of Joe Loss.
The girl, whose name was Marion, was now a magistrate, and a grandmother, but the escapade had sharpened the  young Grunte's appetites and he had made it his business in the intervening years to keep up what he cheerfully called ‘my rate of strike’.
His record, however, was not one of unbroken success.
Lynda Chalker had smacked his face in the crush bar of the Grand Hotel.
Edwina Currie had rejected his advances (‘What sort of girl do you think I am?’) while Emma Nicholson had not caught exactly what it was he had proposed.
Did he want her to speak in his constituency?
Grunte was not so easily discouraged.
Youth might have given way reluctantly to late middle-age, but his victims had grown old more gracefully with him, dalliance being preferred by many Tories to oratory.
The more mischievous of his colleagues, bored by the proceedings and with time on their hands, watched with fascination the progress of his affairs.
So too, did the Gentlemen of the Press.
Now he strode towards the hall, acknowledging the respectful salutes of Party agents.
After the service, the Mayor had said his piece: ‘I welcome you warmly to the city of the Prince Regent.’
Sir Charles Webb-Bowen was delivering himself of a homily.
He had a hearty manner and his heavy spectacles suggested an even greater myopia than is usually the case with conference chairpersons.
Last night, Amaranth Wilikins had told Grunte that she had yet to make up her mind in which of the many debates she would try to speak.
Should she demand, as had the young Edwina, the return of the rod and the rope?
Her instinct told her that atavistic attitudes, once so popular under John Major's predecessor, might not now be the thing.
In the eighteen months since Mrs  Thatcher had taken up employment at Dickins and Jones, the mood of the Party had perceptibly changed for the better, the great bulk of the membership having transferred its loyalty smoothly from the old Leader to the new.
John Major was not a hanger and flogger and the conference would take its tone from him.
Ms Wilikins might speak in favour of female emancipation, but as the majority of the representatives were women, too strident an approach would be dangerous.
Her sisters under the skin would man the constituency selection committees.
Perhaps the best course would be to speak in the debate on policy and public relations, a pretty appeal for less of the first and more of the second?
Grunte had promised to think it over and would give her his advice at lunch over Langan's warm salad of duck followed by white chocolate ice cream.
(Amaranth never travelled without a copy of the Good Food Guide.)
Sir Ralph was careful not to take his place among his constituents, although his local chairman, Mrs Angela Cartwright, had kept a seat vacant for him.
He had begun to suspect that, despite his many years of unstinting service to the Party in both Warwickshire and Westminster, he was not as loved as he once had been.
There had been the regrettable occasion in the Chamber when he had kissed the Labour Party's spokesman for the Arts, a Mr Mark Fisher, on his bald pate, an escapade that had attracted what his wife Marjorie had called ‘bloody bad publicity’.
And had not a pupil of the Arden Convent school complained that he had pinched her bottom while conducting a group of girls on a tour round the Palace of Westminster?
He had denied it emphatically, of course.
Grunte could not be described as being a sensitive  man, but even he had become aware of a general climate of disapproval.
It was as an exercise in the restoration of goodwill that he had booked an alcove table at the Hospitality Inn's restaurant for that evening.
The time had come to splash out to the tune of forty quid a head for the eight members of his party who had travelled with him from the Forest of Arden to Sussex by the Sea.
Amaranth Wilikins for lunch, Angela Cartwright and Co. for dinner: Grunte hoped that the one would prove as profitable as the other.
He found a seat and settled down to listen to the opening speaker in the first of the day's debates.
The long line of leading Conservatives on the platform fixed their faces into expressions of interested concern, and prepared themselves for what could only turn out to be a surfeit of oratory.
In the old days, when Margaret Thatcher was still a chemist, and John Major was John Major-Ball, most MPs and many Ministers stayed away from the Party conferences, regarding it as a necessary vulgarity, an annual opportunity for the spear-carriers and party bit-players to travel to a seaside resort out of season to spend a few days in the proximity of the great.
Those MPs who succumbed to the pressures of Party democracy brought their golf clubs with them and spent long days on the sandy links of Southport and elsewhere, returning to their hotels in the evening to take part in an entertainment such as the Agents' dinner and dance.
Today, attendance for Ministers (or shadow Ministers, as the case may be) is compulsory.
Even the Prime Minister, who once used to arrive on the last day by aeroplane in order to deliver his speech, sits every day on the platform listening to rebuke, complaint and exhortation.
It is an innovation for which Edward Heath  was responsible.
Many run-of-the-mill MPs turn up, some in the hope of speaking in the debates, others, like Grunte, to feed the faces of the faithful and to press all available flesh.
No sooner had the debate begun than people began to leave the hall.
What fun there was at Party conferences could most often be found outside it — in the Grand Hotel, where the prominenti stay and the Irish plant bombs, at the many and various meetings of the conference ‘fringe’ and among the bars, coffee stalls and bookshops which accompany the conference on its triangular three-year odyssey between Blackpool, Bournemouth and Brighton.
Joshua Morris began a slow progress in the hope of refreshment and of meeting old friends and enemies.
He had been an MP for many years in two incarnations, for a seat in South London and now for Shropshire West.
His political ambitions, once strong, had burnt themselves out and he now watched carefully the progress of others.
He made for the travelling bookshop, where he found Jeffrey Archer sitting at a portable desk to one side of the bookstall.
In front of him stretched a long queue of women each clutching a copy of As the Crow Flies.
Jeffrey was doing his customary book signing.
He gave each supplicant twenty seconds —‘name, please’(pause for boyish smile) and a swift signature.
One by one, the women departed, clasping their treasures.
Lord Archer occupied an equivocal place within the ranks of the Conservative Party.
An influential minority disapproved of him, disliking his bumptiousness, cringing before the armour of his self-confidence.
Unlike the rest of Mrs Thatcher's ‘court’, he had survived her downfall, and John Major claimed to have taken Crow  with him when he flew to Spain for a week's holiday.
The more sophisticated Tories might have their doubts but not the hoi polloi.
Jeffrey Archer's tireless energy and folksy oratory were much in demand at constituency lunches and dinners.
Joshua Morris had not invited him to break bread in Clungunford, Clunbury, Clunton or Clun, but Ralph Grunte had booked him for his Warwickshire Tories' annual dinner and dance.
‘Say what you like about Jeffrey, he's a damn good read,’ was Grunte's view.
It was shared by many.
Joshua took refuge within the bookshop.
Two girls, who both turned out to be called Fiona, were still unpacking the stock.
The flavour of the booth was political: memoirs by forgotten Cabinet Ministers, Night and Day by Nicholas Ridley, The Hand on the Tiller by Sir Norman Fowler and Leading Man by Cecil Parkinson, stood shoulder to shoulder with a company of Archers.
What Every Woman Wants by Edwina Currie stood cheek by jowl with a thriller by Douglas Hurd.
There were stacks of unreadable pamphlets produced by the Party's Young Turks, and a remaindered copy of a Michael Heseltine.
Joshua asked one of the Fionas if she sold fiction.
He had in mind a Brookner, a Lively or a Colegate; a Pym (Barbara, not Francis) would be a comfort; anything but Martin Amis.
The girl pointed impatiently towards the Archers.
Unsatisfied, Morris resumed his tour of inspection, buying a raffle ticket from a woman who claimed to have once heard him speak.
A glance at the television monitor showed that the Chancellor was on his feet, replying to the brief debate.
Age had given Norman Lamont a faintly oriental look; the sound had been turned off, but it was plain from the  speaker's gestures that jam, or whatever was its Japanese equivalent, if it were not on today's bill of fare, was certainly expected to be on the morrow's.
The object of the whole conference exercise was the boosting of Party morale.
Joshua noticed the tall, willowy figure of Charles Harvey, one of several Tories who had enjoyed the favours of the late Emma Kerr, the MP who had been murdered.
He was in the company of a smartly dressed older woman to whom he seemed to defer.
Kenneth Clarke drifted by under his Home Secretarial escort.
The better-known Cabinet Ministers moved in a stately fashion as if speed of foot might trample accidentally a party worker bent upon homage; better to tread slowly so as to receive fittingly the admiration of many.
Suddenly a posse of television men with lights, handheld cameras and furry sound-amplifiers like caterpillars on sticks arrived in front of Morris with Amaranth Wilikins in tow.
The presenter was as black as Viv Richards but his accent was West End and not West Indies.
The lights were switched on, and Amaranth stood, illuminated for all to see.
She was tall, waspwaisted with the kind of hair women's mags called ‘dark blonde’.
Joshua thought she would be in her early forties.
A small crowd of the curious and respectful gathered round the impromptu studio.
Had Ms Wilikins political ambitions?
She had.
Did she hope to stand in a winnable seat at the next election?
She did.
Had her career as an actress come to an end?
Morris had no idea she had trodden the boards.
Could that be the reason her face was familiar?
Politics, it appeared, now came first.
Did her recent divorce now mean that she was foot-loose and fancy free?
Ms Wilikins did not look too happy with the question for which she had been  given no prior notice.
She smiled bravely and replied to the effect that next time she would take care to marry a politician.
‘Not if you have any sense, duckie,’ shouted a stout Northern female bystander to much laughter.
‘They're all in love with themselves.’
Producer and presenter switched off their lights, and Amaranth Wilikins vanished with a toss of her mane.
Sir Ralph Grunte raised his hand dutifully at the end of Norman Lamont's reply.
Votes were a mere formality, a gesture towards Party democracy.
The motions which were chosen for debate all hovered marginally above the lowest common factor of Party opinion and were designed to be carried nem con.
As the crowd edged towards the exits, and Sir Charles cried manfully for silence so that the next debate could start, Grunte stepped on the heel of his local party agent, Bill O'Farrell who, cursing silently, thrust a newspaper in Grunte's direction.
It was the Forest of Arden Recorder.
‘Have a look at the correspondence column, and tell me what we ought to do about it.’
Grunte left the hall and found a seat.
He turned to the letter page, and felt his guts constrict as he began to read a letter that carried the headline, ‘Grunte to be deselected?’
The letter was short and pointed, and bore the signature of a Tory local councillor who had been, in his time, the Mayor of the Borough.
He had also, ten years ago or more, worked for Grunt's Garages before setting up on his own as a builder/developer.
Sir,
Ralph Grunte has represented the seat in Parliament  for nearly ten years.
He has made few speeches and passed no Bills.
But he is rarely, if ever, out of the papers which, if they are to be believed, have told of Grunte's drunken exploits in Parliament and have recounted his talent as a ‘serial buttocks fondler’.
[A what? thought Grunte angrily.]
Grunte is rarely to be seen in the constituency and even more rarely in the House of Commons.
Isn't it high time that his local Party found another candidate?
Yours etc., David Swan, Mayor of Arden 1987–8.
How was I to know that Grace Swan was a pupil at the Arden Convent School?
Snotty-nosed little bitch.
Grunte looked anxiously around him in the hope of spotting O'Farrell.
De-selection had become something of a fashion in the Tory Party: an attempt had been made to de-select several Tory MPs who had campaigned for Heseltine in the leadership contest of November 1990.
John Browne had been sacked in Winchester while others who had incurred the disapproval of their local parties had gone quietly.
All that was needed was a fifty-signature petition, a special general meeting and a simple majority in favour of the proposition.
The local party would then choose a replacement in time for the next General Election.
How far had the disaffection spread?
As far as Bill O'Farrell, who had worked on the pumps on the forecourt of Grunte's first garage?
Surely his loyalty could be relied upon.
But could it?
Grunte's treat that evening at the Hospitality Inn was well timed.
Sir Ralph (he had been knighted by Margaret Thatcher in 1980 for raising money from commerce and industry to finance the activities of Conservative Central Office when in Opposition) bought a coffee and sat down at a corner table.
Taking an envelope from his pocket he wrote down the names of his guests.
Angela Cartwright had been the chairman of the local Tories for the past two years.
She was a bossy little woman of about fifty whose non-political husband was an accountant.
She tended to wear frightful hats with feathers.
She had a tiny mouth (‘like a hen's arse' was Grunte's privately expressed opinion) and had, because of her aggressive plainness, so far escaped Grunte's ‘paternal’— or should it be ‘fraternal’— sexual attentions.
She had in the past been supportive, and Grunte marked his card 15/20 for loyalty.
Bill O'Farrell, the party's agent, had achieved over the years something of the status of a retainer.
He had certainly been paid one by Grunte over and above his salary, which was met by the local Tory Association.
He was unmarried, wore cavalry twill trousers and a ‘RAFF’ tie, and was a Warwickshire drinking companion of Grunte's.
Grunte put him down as 16/20.
Carole Swan was a very different matter, the mother of the bruised Grace and wife of the outraged David, once Mayor of the Borough.
Grunte had been surprised to see her on duty at Brighton.
She had not acknowledged his cheerful greeting that morning, but had, nevertheless, put the dinner invitation safely away in her bag.
She was a big, handsome woman, a larger Grace with a noble bum, by which Grunte in happier times might well have been tempted.
She spoke with a Brummy whine and had roots that were invariably darker than her ends.
Her husband, although not a ‘representative’, was expected to join her later in the day.
Grunte marked her 0/20 on his card.
The Malcolms, Kevin and Janet, were both incredibly dim.
He was tall, dark and far from handsome; she was small, chirpy and was for ever brushing Kev's shoulders free of scurf.
In consequence, they moved, at Party functions, within a cordon sanitaire.
An ironmonger and former captain in the TA, Kevin Malcolm had become, thanks to Buggins, Chairman of the local Chamber of Commerce.
Grunte had taken him earlier in the year to a lunch at the Connaught Rooms where he (Malcolm) had been introduced to Lady Porter.
This had pleased him mightily as his admiration for Lady Porter was nearly as great as that for Margaret Thatcher, and, in consequence, his attitude to Grunte had warmed.
Janet who had, a lifetime ago, gone dancing with the young Grunte, would, even so, do, or vote, as Kev dictated.
Grunte marked the Malcolms down at 10/20 each.
Hyacinth Scragg had caught Grunte's roving eye.
A 19-year-old brunette who worked in ‘Back and Sides’, an Arden hairdresser's, she reminded him of the young Alma Cogan.
Had he not told her so last night?
Or, at least, she had done so at the Young Conservatives' Summer Dance in July.
She was big and busty and wore the sort of extravagant ‘gowns’ favoured by La Cogan in her prime, and now only to be glimpsed on BBC1's ‘Come Dancing’which Grunte proclaimed to be his favourite programme.
‘It might well be naff, but, by God, it's sexy.’
As the divisional YC chairman she had views on the ozone layer, the council tax and Michael Heseltine (‘He's disloyal’), but she could not sustain them, and any attempt at talking politics inevitably ended in a fit of the giggles.
Carole Swan had drawn her attention to the Member's assault upon her daughter in the Mother of Parliaments, but Hyacinth had been  unshocked.
‘Men,’ was all she had said.
Grunte who had, as yet, made no move in Hyacinth's direction, adopted a joshing manner towards her, as if to a favourite niece.
I'll give her 17/20, thought Grunte: the exercise was rapidly becoming a beauty competition.
Paul Franklin was a nasty bit of work.
He worked at Jaguars in Coventry in a department called ‘Human Resources’.
He had grown a moustache in order to look like Ian Botham and he drove a 1960s Jag like Inspector Morse.
He gave the impression of having little time for the Member, despite Grunte's many years spent in the motor trade.
His wife, Pamela, whom fortunately he had left behind, was an acid-tongued woman who managed a fleet of launderettes.
Franklin, who liked his beer, and Pam who was more witty than wise, were known in the Arden Conservative Club, where the slot machines never sleep, as ‘lager and lime’.
Franklin had once written a letter to Sir Ralph which the Member thought highly offensive and relations between them had since remained frigid.
He marked Franklin down as 5/20.
The eighth guest was Leroy Burns, a Brummie whose parents had come from Antigua.
He was a huge man in his early thirties who had been for a time a heavyweight boxer.
He had been one of Frank Bruno's sparring partners.
But, like most fighters, he had a placid disposition and a great good nature.
The fact that he was black and a Tory gave him a value out of proportion to his contribution to the local Party, so he was frequently trotted out at functions, and encouraged to ask questions of visiting speakers.
Grunte had run into him on the forecourt of one of his garages where he had come to buy a second-hand Sierra.
With that instinct for survival that had kept the Member for Arden in Parliament for so  long, Grunte had sold him the car at a nil rate of interest.
As a result Leroy was as loyal as a hound dog and had undertaken to ‘look after’ Sir Ralph at election campaigns.
He had made a formidable minder so far.
Grunte closed his card by awarding Leroy 20/20.
He took a calculator from his wallet, added up the marks and divided them by 8.
The result was an average loyalty-factor of just over 11 out of 20.
There was precious little margin for survival.
If MPs do not look forward to an annual visit to Babel by the Sea, the Party's rank and file spend twelve months ticking off the days in happy anticipation.
Four whole days in the company of the famous.
The political correspondents both of the written and the spoken word adopt a world-weary pose, but four nights in the Grand Hotel at the expense of their bosses, together with the inevitable excitements, real or manufactured, make a welcome change.
And October is the start of the political year.
Alan Watkins of the Observer had spent August and September as a guest in Great Houses; Michael Jones of The Sunday Times had spent six weeks in Tuscany avoiding, whenever he could, the Gilmours, Jenkinses and Mortimers; Peter Riddell of The Times, Hugo Young, Julia Langdon, Simon Heffer, Sir Robin Day-they were all in Brighton on expenses, refreshed and ready for the fray.
Even Ron Barton of the True Brit, the paper which the Saatchi Brothers claimed had taken the heat out of the Sun, had moved into his brother-in-law's house in Kemp Town ‘for the duration’.
Party conferences were not just piss and wind; among the 7,000 pilgrims there were not a few for whom the hotel bedrooms of Brighton  were the promised land, a weakness shared by some Tribunes of the People.
If another bomb were to go off, just who would come through the ceiling?
And in the company of whom?
‘The Poison Dwarf’(Barton was 5 feet high in his Littlewood's socks) was determined to be the first to find out.
Simon Heffer, gingery and right-wing, took his vile coffee and sat next to Joshua Morris.
Together they watched the passing parade.
Heffer wrote for the two Telegraphs and had not been himself since Mrs Thatcher had been sent packing.
‘Shall I see you at Jeffrey's party?’
Morris said it was unlikely.
Alistair McAlpine, the merchant builder, had, when he served as the Party's treasurer during the Thatcher years, begun the tradition of a lavish party to which only la creme had been invited.
The champagne was vintage, the pate Fortnum's, and the air blue with the smoke of Cuban cigars: only the lobsters were pink.
But Alistair had quit, and the beano had been taken over by the only Tory rich enough to take his place: Jeffrey Archer.
The party was for the Wednesday night in Archer's Bridal Suite in the Grand, and tickets were like gold.
Scribblers and the telly-presenters came as of right, together with the Cabinet and other Ministers, the prettiest women, and a handful of Jeffrey's cronies.
Joshua Morris was not among them.
He took out of his briefcase a sheaf of invitations.
There were parties paid for by the interested ranging from Lord King of BA to The Times newspapers.
Morris laid out on a table spotted with spilt coffee, invitations from Peter Stothard, Andrew Neil, Granada Television and TV-AM.
‘I'll swop you Stothard for an Archer.’
Heffer declined.
He had an extra Archer however, grace of the Telegraph.
‘I'll make you a present of it.
Take care.
I know some ambitious Tories who would kill for it.’
There was a loud noise.
A party of Young Conservatives, led by their national chairman, Wullie Robertson, a hairy, bearded Scot with a beer belly, wearing a T-shirt with the legend, ‘She was stabbed in the back’, across it, made its way towards the exit and the real world outside.
Maggie's praetorian guard were abandoning the chairman of the Party.
Norman Fowler's speech was far too left-wing for them, so they were heading for the ‘Hedgehog and Hogshead’, a railway pub north of the main Brighton railway station.
They had patronised it the previous night, taking to heart its motto (in Latin), ‘drink yourself to hell’.
The police had had to be called.
Now, as they shoved their way through the audience, two wooden chairs were knocked over and there were drawn breaths of outrage.
y blood run cold.
We've enough trouble with our Scottish Members as it is.’
Ralph Grunte had been pleased to receive a letter from the Headmaster of Roedean; yes, it was a headmaster.
It appeared, or so his secretary told him, that a bloke had been given the job of presiding over England's most famous girls' school.
Must be a rum cove, thought Grunte.
Some people have all the luck.
For a moment he thought he smelt a rat; could it be one of Marjorie's ‘little jokes’?
The Gruntes had gone thehere was Hyacinth Scragg.
He rang her hotel, and after a long wait she came to the phone.
‘Hyacinth, it's Dav  no longer a member of the first eleven, although Hyacinth liked his very English good looks.
He has worn well, she mused.
John Major had a nice smile, Douglas Hurd carried himself well, while Michael Heseltine was dishy.
Could he really be almost sixty?
Like all of the young, Hyacinth believed ‘sex’ to end at some arbitrary, and unimaginable age, like thirty-five.
Kenneth Clarke could lose some weight to his advantage, but Richard Ryder, the Party's Chief Whip, was boyishly good looking.
Norman Lamont, she thought, would look good in a gangster movie of the kind she occasionally watched on the telly, playing opposite George Raft or James Cagney.
She could not see Lamont's feet, but she was sure he ought to wear spats.
Angela Rumbold looked like a Derby winner, while Virginia Bottomley was quite lovely.
While Hyacinth awarded marks, others, just as predatory, were giving her the eye.
Wullie Robertson had ‘made a mental note’.
She was a right good-looker.
Charles Harvey had spotted her drinking milky Nescafe at half-time, and had told himself that he should make inquiries as to who she was.
Lovely-looking girl.
She stood out from the general run of Tory women like a Bird of Paradise in Trafalgar Square.
She had not gone unnoticed by Ron Barton of the True Brit who was, as always, in search of local colour.
Sadly unaware of the interest she had caused, Hyacinth made her way back to her undistinguished hotel, and the prospect of a dullish lunch (fried fish in red bread-crumbs, tinned peas and mash) in the company of her fellow ‘delegates’, Angela Cartwright and the boring Malcolms.
All they would talk about would be the even more boring Sir Ralph Grunte and the plot to de-select  him.
Grunte was ancient, but he had always been nice to her.
At lunchtime the Party workers, their appetites sharpened by contention and sea air, quit the conference hall in their thousands.
The more humble queue within the centre for cold cuts and Bakewell tart, sorting themselves out into tables of four or five.
Old victories are savoured; ancient defeats glossed over, and the Party's leaders held up to a not always affectionate scrutiny.
The more fortunate cluster together, striding out down the windy front past a long line of protesters, the disenchanted who, with banners in support of some unspeakable cause, line the entrance to the building, their passivity guaranteed (at the poll-tax-payers' expense) by half-a-hundred provincial policemen.
The happy ones are on their way to their annual free lunch, provided, as is the custom, by their MP or prospective candidate.
These occasions are marked by much conviviality, and the temporary burying of hatchets, promises of continuing support being matched, on the part of the host, by rashly given undertakings to draw a thousand raffles.
Many a career has been cemented for a further twelvemonth over well-done rump steaks and bottles of Bulgarian wine.
The very fortunate indeed slip discreetly into Brighton's better restaurants.
Greeted by a rubbing of practised hands, the Tory Party's celebrities take their seats before well-appointed tables where they listen to the supplications of their hosts while scrutinising the menu.
At Langan's Bistro, with its gallery full of prints, plates and drawings, a waiter stood ready to whisper into more receptive ears a list of the day's specialities.
The  head waiter showed Ms Wilikins to her chair; Sir Ralph, wearing his County Show tweeds, noticed with some satisfaction a general turning of heads.
Alan Watkins, who was awaiting the arrival of the Chancellor himself, gave Amaranth his approving eye.
She had, he mused, the build of a junior Welsh wing three-quarter.
Jeffrey Archer, who was discussing the size of his tax bill with the Features Editor of Woman's Own, momentarily lost his thread; who was she?
A tall, fair woman with legs as long as Julia Roberts', she would be a catch for his grand party.
He rose and came over to Grunte's table.
‘Who's your pretty friend, Ralph?’
Jeffrey had a roguish charm which he used like a bludgeon.
It went down a treat with the matrons in safe seats like South-west Surrey.
Introductions effected, Archer gave Amaranth a large gold-edged card, on which he filled in her name.
‘Come at nine and we'll dance the night away.’
Grunte, to whom the suggestion had not been made, and who had not been invited to Archer's bloody party in the first place, watched the novelist return to his table.
‘Sold him a Rover once.
Number plate ARCH 1.
Never stopped complaining,’ he commented, adding, ‘never mind about him.
I'll introduce you to the people who really count before we go.’
Not to be outdone in the amatory stakes, Grunte recommended a dozen oysters.
‘We are in for a long afternoon,’ he said cheerfully.
That was true enough, although Amaranth Wilikins had no intention of spending it with Ralph Grunte.
There would be a debate on Europe, a topic which tended to divide the Party, and it was rumoured that Norman Tebbitt, known to his friends as ‘The Earl of Essex’— a reference not only to his place of origin, but to  his courtier-like qualities — would be speaking.
He was to oppose the motion, an act of ‘disloyalty’ of which many disapproved.
It would add to the gaiety of nations although many, including Joshua Morris, discounted the possibility of Norm's intervention, believing that Sir Charles Webb-Bowen's myopia could be relied upon in emergencies.
What was his ‘K’ for, after all?
An angry Norman would be left turning in the wind, waving his papers in a desperate attempt to attract the conference chairman's attention.
The boat might be rocked but it would not ship water.
Amaranth refused the offer of oysters, giving a little shudder.
‘They are alive when they go down,’ she said.
‘Peter Mayle, you know the man who writes about his life in Provence, says that the best starter in the world is strips of foie gras, lightly fried in butter and dropped into a well-dressed salad.’
Sadly, it was not on the menu.
Amaranth, whose figure was her fortune, chose Vichyssoise: Grunte, whose fortune, such as it was, owed more to Nissan motors, asked for a smoked trout with horseradish sauce.
‘Well, my dear,’ he said, pressing his knees against Amaranth's, ‘so it's your intention to stand for Parliament?’
He had to consider his rate of strike.
Hyacinth Scragg was certainly younger, and she had big tits- (Grunte, who was a page three man, had crossed swords in the House with Clare Short, who quite definitely was not a page three woman).
But Grunte was no chicken; at his age La Scragg could well be altogether too much of a good thing.
Lady Grunte, who was cooking her lover's lunch in Solihull at that very moment, had warned her husband  off the Young Conservatives.
‘I know you can't help it, Grunt,’ she had said, amicably enough for her, ‘but for Christ's sake stop fouling your own nest.’
Marjorie Grunte held a majority shareholding in Grunte plc (registered in Liechtenstein), and her support, were Grunte to remain solvent, was essential.
He had paid for his latest second-hand Roller out of the firm's pension fund, a fact about which only his accountant knew.
Amaranth moved her knee away, and studied the menu.
‘Tell me, Ralph,’ she cooed, ‘do you know of any safe seats that are coming up in your part of the world?’
After lunch, she permitted herself to be steered from Langan's Bistro by a tipsy Sir Ralph, who, as good as his word, interrupted their retreat by repeated introductions to the Great and the Good.
Amaranth had her hand kissed by Sir Thomas Arnold himself.
Arnold was of Tom Arnold's circus, and his post as the vice-chairman of the party in charge of candidates made him a target of all those who were eager to stand for Parliament.
He had a shrewd eye for the false and the fraud.
Amaranth was at her loveliest.
By God, she would look good on a platform.
‘Good luck,’ he murmured, and then suggested that he might be of further help to her.
‘Worcester West,’ he said, ‘could very well be coming on the market.’
Amaranth wondered who it was who sat so comfortably for Worcester West.
Some old sod in his late sixties ready to take up his Parliamentary pension (fifty-three per cent of the annual salary after twenty-five years of unbroken service), she supposed.
She liked Worcester.
Brown's was a decent restaurant and she might find a small Georgian house in the Close.
She had a Worcester  teapot, first period.
She would ask old Grunte for the MP's name.
After Tom Arnold's encouragement, Amaranth was propelled in the direction of the chairman of the Party himself, Norman Fowler.
‘This lovely lady,’ Grunte boomed, bowing in Amaranth's direction, ‘is the rising hope of us stern, unbending Tories.’
Fowler, who had little time for him, was mildly surprised at his erudition.
He had always thought the MP for Arden read little save for the Motor Traders' Gazette.
‘She doesn't look much like Gladstone to me,’ he murmured, getting to his feet.
Amaranth, who loved his clean-cut looks, rewarded him with a blinding smile, and said she had much more time for Disraeli.
‘I hope to speak in tomorrow's debate on policy and public relations,’ she told him.
‘Will you keep your fingers crossed for me?’
Fowler said he most certainly would do so.
He might even, he mused, have a word with old Webb-Bowen's minder.
Better her than Teresa Gorman.
Ushered to the door of the restaurant by minions, Amaranth, disregarding Grunte's magisterial signal to his hovering chauffeur, plunged into a waiting cab.
She blew Grunte a kiss.
The old fart had served his purpose.
His advice as to her speech before a selection committee (‘Take my tip, Ama,’ he had said, ‘three parts to a good speech.
Ten years of ceaseless fight against socialism; in favour of flogging and hanging; and something nice about whoever it is who happens to be leading the Party.
Like a charm.’)
was not original, but at least she had met Norman Fowler and Jeffrey Archer.
She had, as her Petty Officer father would have put it, ‘shown the flag’.
Her every move had been followed by jaundiced and world-weary senior politicians; she had noticed a gleam of lust in the good eye of a privy Councillor, and Peter Riddell of The Times had made a note of her name.
The food was not at all bad, either.
Amaranth had no wish to be caught napping in the lounge of the Grand Hotel; how much better to return to ‘Mon Repos’ and put her feet up for an hour or so.
She could then descend upon the Grand Hotel to take tea.
Lying on the bed in her Marks and Spencer's slip, she read with interest of the range of conference delights available that evening for those who were otherwise unengaged.
They included the Young Conservatives Ball, Tim Janman's Conservative Political Centre lecture entitled ‘Some of my best friends…‘, and Andrew Neil's party on behalf of The Sunday Times.
Perhaps she could persuade Charles Harvey to take her to Andrew Neil before they went out to dinner.
Wasn't he the one who had been friendly with Pamella Bordes, or was it Donald Trelford of the Observer?
And there was her speech to write.
Harvey was, she had read in the Daily Mail, ‘Cabinet material’.
His ‘input’ into her speech might well make all the difference.
Amaranth fell into a gentle sleep at more or less the same time as did the bulk of Sir Teddy Taylor's conference audience.
Tuesday Afternoon
This October the weather is as balmy as it is in spring, mused Joshua.
The sea shone, the waves sparkled, and a Royal Navy frigate steamed slowly up and down, sent by the Ministry of Defence to deter a seaborne landing on the part of the boyos of the Provisional IRA.
Somewhat ominously, it appeared that its guns were trained upon the town.
The streets were thronged with packets of policemen, drawn from several county forces each with its different helmet.
They stood watching the girls go by, small groups of foreign students or au pairs, leggy and lithe, Indian Summer girls whose presence in Brighton was a far bigger draw for young males than the Royal Pavilion.
There was no sign of Pinky and his razor-wielding gang: Joshua supposed that Graham Greene had drawn his inspiration not so much from Hove as from Kemp Town, where smelly pubs and mean little houses cluster under railway arches, and supermarket mums push twins in Siamese prams.
He was standing outside the conference centre, savouring the sunshine, watching for the return of the Party's prominenti from their lunch.
He watched Gerald Kaufman buy a copy of the Evening Standard; he had probably been lunching with the BBC.
The knot of demonstrators summoned up a ragged cry and waved their tattered banners, but whether it was the sight of Edwina Currie or of Virginia Bottomley was not immediately evident.
Lord Whitelaw, a figure from the past, alighted from a black Rover, and, turning towards France in order to return the salutations of the mob, found himself staring into the bloodshot eyes of Class War.
He turned smartly on his heel and trotted into the foyer, greeting the stewards with indiscriminate effusion.
There goes dear old Willie, thought Joshua, the non-playing captain of the Wets, who was finally persuaded to advise Margaret Thatcher that famous November that ‘the game was up’.
Inside the building Joshua stood in line with the multitude to endure the long wait and the thorough search, the emptying of pockets and the impudent fumblings of security.
It took the usual twenty minutes, and, when he finally entered the conference hall, the motion in favour of Europe was being moved by Gerry Malone, a personable Scot who was now the MP for Winchester.
The choice of Malone was, in itself, surprising; several years ago he had, in cahoots with Nicholas Ridley, stampeded the conference in favour of the early introduction of the poll tax, thereby sealing Margaret's fate.
Joshua hoped that Malone had learnt wisdom with his advancing years.
His words came out in a seemingly endless flow of support and approbation.
Her Majesty's 
Government were to be warmly congratulated for standing up for Britain at Brussels.
At this there was a muted growl of support from those in the hall who had not succumbed to a heavy lunch.
Indeed, the speaker would go further; never in his experience had Britain been so ably represented in the councils of the Common Market.
The audience turned over in its sleep.
Had not the Prime Minister himself said, and here I quote: ‘We would be at the heart of Europe.’
Well, that is exactly where we were, backing Britain.
Joshua Morris, who had been standing near the door, slipped out into the foyer.
Perhaps a quick cup of coffee?
He took an armchair near a monstrously large television screen (the sound had been turned right down) and silently challenged Malone, the conference, and indeed the Party, to bring him back to life.
He was awakened later by the sound of laughter and, heaving himself out of his chair, he joined two Tories, John Taylor, the unsuccessful candidate for Cheltenham, and Mirj Deva, who had been elected for Brentford and Isleworth.
They had lunched together.
Approaching them were three people in line abreast: Nigel Lawson, his son Dominic of the Spectator, and his beautiful daughter, the journalist Nigella Lawson.
As the six of them met, Joshua congratulated Nigel on his hand.
‘What hand?’ was the reply.
‘Three of a kind beats two spades.’
There was a pause and then much laughter, not all of it forced.
John Taylor's huge hand slapped Morris painfully between the shoulder blades.
‘You're a racist, man,’ he cried in mock West Indian accent.
Heartened by this exchange, Joshua re-entered the conference hall  just as Norman Tebbit was getting to his feet.
The motion had been ably moved and seconded-according to Sir Charles.
What was more to the point he was not, or so it appeared, prepared to invite Mr Tebbit to oppose it.
Somnolence, which had enveloped the hall, vanished; static political electricity took its place.
Gaunt, even spectral, the figure of Norman Tebbit (‘Big Norm' as he was known to the irreverent, ‘Little Norm’ being Lamont, and ‘Nice Norm’, Fowler) stood in his place, waving a sheaf of papers.
Without a mechanical aid, he had difficulty making himself heard.
He was protesting at the injustice of the world; the word ‘referendum’ could be distinguished from a flood of complaint.
He was sitting among friends who promptly set up a chorus of ‘hear, hear's.
Sir Charles Webb-Bowen offered his ear to the urgent promptings of a party apparatchik; the fact that it was his ‘bad’ ear, lent a certain comedy to the proceedings.
The supplicant scampered round to the chairman's better side, and said, more loudly than he perhaps intended, the microphone picking up his words quite clearly, ‘Say no to the bugger.’
At this there was a roar of mingled laughter and outrage.
Wullie Robertson, of the Young Conservatives, began to blow blasts on a tin trumpet, and was quickly surrounded by newspaper cameramen and reporters.
Sir Robin Day, who had been taking a nap on a sofa in the BBC room in the balcony, was hurriedly awakened.
His sense of shock was swiftly communicated to the nation.
Sir Charles, whose practice as a family solicitor in Hertfordshire had not prepared him for this sort of thing, was losing control.
Norman Tebbit was still on his  feet, waving what appeared to be a small Union Jack, and trying manfully to make himself heard above the din.
The conference chairman shouted into the microphone that he had got his little list and he was damned if he was not going to stick to it.
At this there was more uproar and, encouraged by their chief, a posse of seven Scottish YCs in kilts paraded in front of the platform singing ‘Rule Britannia’ to the uncertain sound of Robertson's trumpet.
At a word of command, the file of Scots turned towards the hall, bent forward, and at the same time presented their bare arses to the platform party.
John Gummer hid his face in his hands; Dame Angela Rumbold took off her glasses.
At a further word of command the file did an about turn and repeated the gesture, this time for the benefit of 7,000 Tories.
Written in lipstick, one letter to each cheek, was the slogan, ‘Up Yours Delors’.
At the cry of ‘stewards’, forty leathery men of uncertain age, who, as agents, had devoted their lives to the Party, frogmarched the YCs out of the hall to loud applause.
Sir Charles, pink in the face, commanded the hall to settle down, and when it had reluctantly done so, summoned Sir Teddy Taylor MP to oppose the motion.
He was stocky, bald, and invariably gabbled in an incomprehensible West of Scotland accent.
His appearance, conjured up by the magic of Central Office, had a curiously calming effect, and it was not long before those who had been so rudely awakened by Tebbit's demarche, to say nothing of the sight of so many Scottish rumps, were, once again safe in the arms of Morpheus.
David Swan, who had arrived that afternoon to join his wife Carole at the conference, spotted Amaranth Wilikins  almost as soon as he entered the Grand Hotel.
The one time Mayor of Arden, father of the bruised Grace (‘Had it been Paddy Ashdown I wouldn't have minded one little bit’), had checked in at the desk and was about to carry his overnight bag up to his room when he noticed her through the glass door of an adjoining room.
She was crooking her finger around a cup of Earl Grey.
Wilikins had been the name of her first husband, Henry, who had been at King's School, Birmingham with Swan in the 1960s.
As two young married couples they had been close for a time when they lived near Stoke, although Carole had not got on at all well with Amaranth.
She gave herself airs, was the tenor of her complaint.
David had heard of the Wilikinses' divorce there had been quite a lot about the circumstances surrounding it in the Birmingham Mail — and he had been told of a second, short-lived marriage.
To whom, he had not the least idea.
Swan took a careful second look through the door.
There could be no doubt.
It was clearly Amaranth.
She must be pushing forty, he thought, but she's still a good looker.
He remembered the occasion when they had paid a visit to St Whatever-it-was on Magdalen bridge in Oxford.
At Carole's insistence they had climbed the long metal ladder which led inside from the roof of the nave to the top of the tower: Henry went first, Amaranth second; by some accident of fate, David followed on her heels, leaving an indignant Carole to bring up the rear.
The view from the tower was as nothing compared with the view Amaranth unwittingly presented.
David did not know quite where to look, but it was one occasion, he subsequently recounted to his friends, when it was better to travel than to arrive.
Would Amaranth remember him?
He carried his case into the lounge, determined to find out.
‘Amaranth?
Remember me, Dave Swan?’
He thought better of mentioning Oxford.
‘Married to Carole.
We used to be friends.
Years ago.’
Amaranth certainly did remember him.
She noticed, with a feeling of disappointment, that he was not wearing the obligatory photo-pass without which no true Tory could enter the Party conference.
Nevertheless he wasn't bad looking, and she could recall nothing to his disadvantage.
Was he not a prosperous builder?
She asked a waiter for another pot, and settled down to catching up with the story of Swan's life.
Carole was well; what was more to the point she was here at the conference, ‘a queen bee’ of the local Tories — Chairman of the Forest of Arden Women's Association.
Grace was sixteen, at school, and wanted to become a vet.
Dave was in the property business, and had had a baddish time during the recession.
He built houses, shops.
But he couldn't complain, really.
Amaranth's eyes wandered: the hotel foyer was almost empty, and the only other couples seemed as old as the hills.
‘Do you know Ralph Grunte?’ she asked.
‘I've just had lunch with him.’
As Amaranth listened to what David Swan, Carole and the local Party thought of Grunte (it even appeared that Grace Swan had suffered physical assault within the portals of Parliament), her thoughts of representing Worcester West in the Commons swiftly receded.
Was Arden a safe seat?
It was certainly closer to London.
It appeared from what Dave was saying that Grunte's days were numbered.
‘I don't mind telling you, but keep  it under your chapeau’— Amaranth shuddered slightly ‘that Carole and her crowd are having a little meeting early this evening to work out their tactics.
They have in mind the order of the boot.
Years of devoted service, but time to make way for a younger man.
You know the sort of thing.
We will then be in the market.
I must say we could do a lot worse than you.
A lot worse.’
Amaranth smiled warmly; she felt the fish on the line.
If Dave were not to take part in the cabal (‘I'm a member of the Party, but that's all’), what was he doing later on that evening?
But she had to take care.
Harvey was the better catch, and there was her speech to worry about.
She needed the help Harvey had promised.
With any luck she would be on her feet in front of conference some time early tomorrow afternoon.
‘Why not a drink in the bar at six-thirty?’ she suggested.
Swan countered, ‘What about a bite to eat?’
That old bugger Grunte had not included him in the invitation to dine at some poncy joint called La Noblesse, the smartest part of the Hospitality Inn.
Amaranth hesitated.
‘Not tonight, but we could lunch tomorrow.
We'll talk about it when we meet this evening.’
She dismissed Swan with a smile and, having fumbled in her shoulder bag for her copy of The Times House of Commons, turned to Arden.
GRUNTE, Sir Ralph Redvers (Kt 1980), MP (C)
Arden 1974-, s of Percy Haines; b 8 Dec 1930; Educ
Sutton Coldfield GS; Univ of Birmingham; m 1960,
Marjorie Grunt; no chdn; Career motor trader and
garage owner; Pres Midland Motor Traders
1970–74…
There was much more of the same but it was not long before she found what she was looking for.
‘Cons majority 10,445.’
If Charles Harvey would write her speech, and David Swan sponsor her candidature, little Amaranth would be sitting pretty, very pretty indeed.
She paid for her two teas and quit the hotel.
There was still an hour or so left of debate.
Charles Harvey disengaged himself from his constituency chairman.
He had taken her to lunch at La Noblesse where they had eaten cod in a watercress sauce and drunk between them a bottle of Chinon, Clos de l'Echo ‘86.
He had apologised for his wife's absence.
Miriam had no time whatever for Party conferences.
A woman with money of her own, she was only happy with a pencil in her hand, a telephone at her elbow, and a copy of the Financial Times on her lap.
She loved to move her money around, a process which had suffered from acceleration since the stock market collapse of the autumn of 1987.
Theirs was a marriage blanc; Harvey was occupied for eighteen hours a day at the Ministry of Transport where he was one of two Parliamentary Secretaries with responsibility for roads.
Since his affair with the late Emma Kerr, he had behaved himself.
Rudely, Miriam had advised that he tie a knot in it; she had known of their friendship but was too astute, or too calculating, to dig more deeply.
In his turn, Charles suspected discreet goings-on with one or other of her team of brokers, in all probability the braying Harry with the pencil-line moustache.
Charles, who was in his late-thirties, found celibacy a trial; his fancy had been caught by Amaranth Wilikins.
Once the vote on Europe had been taken (an  overwhelming majority in favour of the platform's motion), he had slipped out of the hall, pausing only to watch and listen while, at the bidding of the cameras, the national chairman of the YCs blew his trumpet for the umpteenth time.
The young man was sweating under the lights.
He sported several tattoos: on the back of one wrist was the word ‘left’ in blue; on the other ‘right’.
So wet was his shirt that the stencilled words, now reading ‘I'm an Essex Man’, had no doubt transferred themselves to his chest.
He stank, and Charles moved swiftly out of range.
The ante-rooms of the hall itself had turned into a miniature promenade or fairground.
The Gas, Water and Electricity Companies all had stands as if it were an exhibition.
Mark Lawson of the Independent asked him whether he thought Tebbit should have been called to speak.
‘In an ideal world,’ Harvey replied with what he hoped was a cynical grin.
A loudspeaker called his name, asking him to collect a message.
His progress towards the bureau was remarked upon by two elderly ladies who beamed appreciatively in his direction.
What a nice-looking young man!
Harvey smiled back, hesitated, then continued on his march.
As far as he could tell they were not his constituents.
The message was from his private secretary at the Ministry.
It read, simply: ‘Motorway route confirmed; no public announcement until the House reassembles in the middle of the month.’
The M432 had been subjected to inquiry and appeal.
It was something at least that the route itself had now been agreed on.
With any luck it would go straight through Grunte's Warwickshire front garden.
Charles telephoned a message through to the desk at the Grand.
Would Ms Wilikins come to The Sunday  Times's party with him this evening?
He would meet her in the bar around six o'clock.
David went upstairs to his room, pecked Carole on the cheek and told her he had run into Amaranth Wilikins.
His wife gave no sign of pleasure at the news.
‘I expect she's looking for another husband,’ she said.
‘Not a husband, a seat.
Or perhaps both,’ was the reply.
Carole said it was no good hoping to replace ‘that awful Grunte’ with that blonde tart.
She changed her shoes, did her hair, dabbed her neck with Chanel and slammed the bedroom door.
‘I will be late.’
The sound of her steps died away.
So, with any luck, shall I, thought Swan.
With his hand control he killed the television News and swapped it for ‘Home and Away’.
Carole hurried to the Queen's Hotel, where Angela Cartwright was staying and where the cabal plotting to de-select Grunte had agreed to meet.
It did not go as well as Carole had hoped.
To start with, there were only five of them.
They had decided against inviting Bill O'Farrell, the agent, or Leroy Burns, Grunte's ‘minder’, as the conspirators were pretty certain that those two would leak everything to the MP.
And to Carole's annoyance, Hyacinth Scragg had not turned up, despite the reminder she had received over a cup of tea at the conference centre.
She was a silly girl, and far too easily impressed by Grunte's elephantine attentions.
She was no better than she should be.
Carole would take the first opportunity to get her on her own and have a word with her in private.
As the ‘chair’ of the YCs, she was an officer of the Association and as such had a vote in the matter.
Paul Franklin was sound, and Angela Cartwright confessed that she too had long thought it high time Grunte gave up.
She wondered whether ‘dear John’ would do the decent thing and send Ralph to the Lords.
Franklin thought not.
The Malcolms said very little although that daft Janet mumbled something to the effect that the meeting, held prior to Grunte's ‘treat’, was in bad taste.
She said that despite his little weaknesses (here Carole thought of Grace's bruised bum), she had always found Sir Ralph to be a proper gentleman.
Angela Cartwright, as chairman of the local Party, explained the procedure for calling a Special General Meeting if Grunte was to be de-selected, and the meeting adjourned after Carole Swan said she would take soundings among members of the Party after the conference.
Then it was time to adjourn to attend Grunte's dinner.
The five of them filed into a cab and were decanted outside the Hospitality Inn.
Flunkeys led them into a private part of La Noblesse where they were warmly greeted by an expansive Grunte, who presented the ladies with a flower and with grave courtesy showed each to her seat.
Hyacinth was already there, wearing royal blue taffeta.
It was low cut, and by some welcome if unseen feat of engineering her bosom had been thrust up beneath her chin.
She looked a bit like Margaret Lockwood in The Wicked Lady.
Her hair had been freshly done, after hours spent at the Brighton branch of ‘Back and Sides’.
If her complexion were any guide, she had drunk several glasses of wine already, and was talking to Leroy Burns.
Was she telling him about the plot to de-select Grunte?
Carole stared at her reprovingly.
In fact, Hyacinth was thinking about Wullie Robertson who, to her great surprise, had said he would pick her up from the Hospitality Inn after dinner, and take her on to the Young Conservatives Ball.
Apparently he was the National Chairman, which was a bit of a thrill; on the other hand, he was also a terrific scruff.
And there was that dreadful beard.
She had seen him on the telly — he had been on the early evening news tooting his trumpet.
It was Hyacinth's first party conference, but at nineteen she had been around.
If Wullie Robertson was not to her liking he would soon enough know what he could do with his bloody trumpet.
Sir Ralph Grunte had gone to some trouble over his constituency dinner party, La Noblesse being by no means cheap.
There was a set dinner for nine at 40 a head and an unlimited supply of Mateus Rose, a pink Portuguese wine curiously attractive to women.
He had also arranged for a small box of hand-made chocolates to be given to each of them upon departure.
‘Rome’, said Grunte to himself, ‘is worth a Mass.’
He placed Hyacinth upon his right hand, where he could keep a fatherly eye on her, and Angela Cartwright, his chairman, upon his left.
Carole Swan found to her horror that she was sitting next to Leroy Burns.
‘Hungry, Missus?’ he impertinently inquired.
Enoch Powell had been right all along.
Grunte knew she was rather uppity about blacks.
He put Franklin on the other side of Burns, and separated the Malcolms by making a sandwich of Bill O'Farrell.
He was pleased with the menu: liver pate, followed by scampi with avocado and a julienne of mango, Summer Pudding and petits fours.
If that did not guarantee another five years at Westminster, nothing would.
The  cost would be borne by Grunte Accessories, but that was neither here nor there.
Grunte ordered a large gin for himself.
Many gins later, his guests had just come to the end of the petits fours when Wullie Robertson turned up, forcing his way into La Noblesse, looking like the wrath of God, or the son of some Pictish chieftain, and demanding, ‘Hyacinth!
Where's the Scragg?’
He had changed but not bathed, and the new slogan on his T-shirt, ‘Maggie rules, OK?’ did not compensate for the stench of the great unwashed.
Ralph (Hyacinth had been swiftly urged to drop the ‘Sir’ by her genial host) called for him to be removed, by force if necessary, refusing to believe that so demotic a figure belonged to ‘our great Party’.
Robertson was carrying a can of Tartan Ale from which he frequently refreshed himself, and in turn denied any knowledge of the great part Sir Ralph Grunte had played for so long in the counsels of the Tory Party.
Hyacinth thought it best to leave with him at once, so as to cut short the unpleasantness.
She insisted on a cab to the conference centre where the dance was being held, and when they arrived escape came in the figure of a party agent, who quickly took Hyacinth to one side, and asked whether she would like to start the dancing.
A small crowd of the young, together with a party of celebrities were waiting for the band, which consisted of five yobs and an amplifier, to take up their position on the rostrum.
The agent was older than her father, but Hyacinth had been well brought up, and at least it was an escape from the national chairman; prettily she agreed to dance with him.
‘Not with me, dearie,’ was the response.
‘With John Major.’
Hyacinth, who could not catch her breath for excitement, found herself in the arms of the Prime Minister.
The band played ‘Blue Moon’, and to the flashes of cameramen, cheers and ribaldry, the dance began.
‘Was your father really a trapeze artist?’ asked Hyacinth, emboldened by Grunte's Mateus Rose.
John Major gave a Brixton twirl, and, spinning Hyacinth round, replied, ‘Can't you see how quick I am on my feet?’
He smiled in a way that had charmed the matrons of Europe, and led Hyacinth over to the cameras.
‘Miss Scragg dances like an angel,’ he told them.
He then said ‘God bless!’ to her, and was carried off into the night.
Later that night, much later — for there are no early nights at the Party conference — Hyacinth Scragg lay happily in her hotel bed, flanked by a small teddy bear and a copy of the Gideon Bible.
What bliss!
She had danced with a man who had danced with a girl, who had danced with the Prince of Wales.
Six o'clock in the evening heralds the start of the Party conference's ‘magic hour’.
The 7,000 representatives together with the party's professionals and the MPs and Ministers of the Crown make themselves ready and, in some cases, available, for a night of pleasure.
Doors slam along hotel corridors and bathrooms fill with steam.
Gin, ice and tonic water dull the pain of a long day.
Cabinet Ministers struggle into dinner jackets that have seen better days (so, too, do their detectives), their wives sit long before dressing tables applying powder and paint.
Should they wear their blue or their blue?
There is no chance of a quiet evening slumped before the telly, or even to read a novel.
There are functions to attend, after-dinner speeches to be made.
They are all on parade: Norma and John, Judy and Douglas, Anne and Michael, theirs will be a royal progress under close escort, the firm handshake, the sincere greeting, the steady gaze and the simulated pleasure at the renewal of past friendships.
Old acquaintance should never be forgot, not at Brighton.
The Grand Hotel comes into its own in the evening.
The foyer is packed with pilgrims ready to reach out and touch the hem of any passing garment.
Eager Tories with careers in mind light candles to their ambition.
‘Look, there's Michael Heseltine!’
The bars admit to standing room only (early birds perch on stools), and the extensive lounges with their arm chairs set in fours soon fill to capacity.
The air is filled with cut-glass as handsome women in the prime of life peck at each other 's cheeks and cry welcome; their heavily built, blue-suited, florid-faced husbands exchange boxers' handshakes with a contrived, Golf Club conviviality.
‘Good to see you, Charles.’
Despite Mrs Thatcher's Granthamite certainties, and the rise of ‘Essex Man’, the Conservative and Unionist Party on parade can still muster the English professional and upper-middle classes.
At the Grand, magistrates are two a penny, bankers of the sort who never lent Maxwell a farthing can be seen sipping sherry, chairmen of publicly quoted companies compare salaries, and retired officers of field rank renew old NATO friendships.
Were Harold Macmillan to return to earth and go (reluctantly, no doubt) to Brighton, he would find that little, if anything, has changed.
Fewer of his kinsmen, perhaps, more yuppies and certainly more yobs, but the complement of the Grand Hotel would be much the same: lots of officers and very few ‘other ranks’.
The two bar stools at either end of the crush bar were occupied by Ron Barton and Joshua Morris.
Ron's little legs did not touch the floor.
In his left hand he held a pocket Philips dictaphone into which he would occasionally confide; in his right, a pencil poised over a reporter's pad.
He was the Roving Correspondent (politics) of the True Brit, an appointment that carried a salary of £75,000 a year, plus expenses.
He had already interviewed Norman Tebbit about his exclusion from the afternoon's debate on Europe —'’ Diabolical liberty’, says Norman, in conference outrage' — and tried unsuccessfully to have a word with Sir Charles Webb-Bowen.
‘Sir Charles has his feet up,’ he had been told.
That was enough politics for one edition; he would now revert to being its ‘roving’ correspondent.
He spotted Amaranth Wilikins drinking champagne with Charles Harvey and a second man whose name he did not know.
He had quite a bit on Harvey, a Kennedy Catholic who had been ‘the good friend’ of the late Emma Kerr.
Barton was keeping the info for a rainy day and he would ring his secretary in the morning and ask her to look in the paper's library for any cuttings on Amaranth Wilikins.
Looks a goer to me.
He could do worse than spend his evening keeping an eye on her.
Where she goes, there go I. Ron called for a Horse's Neck, carefully noting its cost (£3) in his pocket-book.
Joshua Morris sipped his vermouth and felt his strength returning in waves.
He was undecided what to do with his evening.
Felicity did not arrive from Herefordshire until Wednesday afternoon.
He could drive out  to Wenlock Manor and dine but he had already lunched on his own.
It would probably be better to drop in at The Times' party, see who he could find to have dinner with and take pot luck in a town not noted for its restaurants.
He would have to watch the amount he drank.
Tories more famous than he had come nasty croppers in the past at conference time, returning tight to their hotels.
Deferential coppers were a thing of the past; they had all been conscripted into the House of Commons' police.
Upstairs in the Bridal Suite, where sniffer dogs do their business once a day, Jeffrey Archer sat before his telephone.
He was ringing people he did not like to tell them that they were not invited to his party on Wednesday night.
He had told Mr Rory Knight Bruce of the Evening Standard Londoner's Diary that ‘whereas people in Cabinet have told me you are fair, I have not found you so.
I am ringing to say that you will not be welcome at my party in Brighton.’
Mr Bruce seemed unimpressed.
He had turned up uninvited last year and no doubt would try it on again.
Jeffrey Archer's ‘private office’ had brought an Amstrad to Brighton; at the push of a button, he could summon up a blacklist of his very own.
It contained many names: journalists whom he deemed to be lacking in a proper respect, politicians (like Joshua Morris) who had made jokes at Mrs Thatcher's expense, Booker Prize judges.
(The Booker, thought Jeffrey, had recently become nothing more than a branch of Overseas Development.)
He glanced at a list of his evening engagements: Peter Stothard's and Andrew Neil's party, the Young Conservatives' Ball, and a late supper with the Lamonts.
Should he try to heal the breach between Andrew Neil and  Lamont?
Their feud was doing the Party no good whatever.
Jeffrey, who had been the youngest MP, but not for long, and the deputy chairman of the Party for a little while, considered that he had not done at all badly.
He was, as Maurice Saatchi had once pointed out, the most prolific Tory novelist since Benjamin Disraeli.
Amaranth had hurried to the Grand and went into the crush bar at ten minutes after six to find Charles Harvey waiting for her.
He had changed his shirt and was freshly shaved.
He was still wearing his Old Carthusian tie.
He had gargled-with a powerfully pepperminted, snake-green wash, and, with a pair of tiny scissors he carried on his Swiss Army penknife, had cut the hairs in his nose.
Whistling ‘I'm in the Mood for Love’, and rejecting the buzz of his telephone, he had prepared himself for the chase.
It might well be Miriam asking him to ask the Chancellor whether she should buy or sell.
Let her ask Dirty Harry instead.
David Swan joined them promptly at six-thirty.
He, too, had his eye on Amaranth.
She was at the age when many women are at their physical best: tall, thin, but shapely; smart, but not too dauntingly so; fragrant (a touch of Poison); and fun: she had mastered early on the necessary female skill of charity towards her suitors' jokes.
Carole he found increasingly irritating.
The simplest proposition seemed to call for endless repetitive explanation; her steaks had become increasingly rare, and, most tiresome of all, whenever they made love, be it after breakfast, lunch or tea, she would leap from the marital bed and turn on the vacuum cleaner, spending the next twenty minutes cleaning an already spotless house.
David had come to associate the noise of the  Hoover with post-coital sadness.
He would lie, exhausted among the twisted sheets, his head buried under the pillow, urging her silently to switch the damn thing off.
Amaranth, thank God, looked like the sort of woman who had never seen a vacuum cleaner in her life.
It was in her honour that he, too, had shaved for a second time and puffed Carole's deodorant over his private parts.
He knew only too well that he had something that Amaranth wanted very badly indeed access to the Arden candidate's selection committee.
He would have to pretend, however, that Carole was as keen as he was that Amaranth should have more than a fair crack of the whip.
He could not take her to bed in his double, conjugal room, but, no doubt Amaranth had a single somewhere.
David tried to work out just when Carole would return.
It would be, he feared, too soon for comfort.
Amaranth introduced Swan and Harvey.
The two had never met.
When Swan heard that Harvey was at the Ministry of Transport, he tried to draw him out on the subject of motorways in Warwickshire, but the junior Minister in charge of roads said that this was not the time or place to discuss the subject.
Swan felt very much at a disadvantage, especially when Amaranth told him that she had promised to go to The Times/Sunday Times party with Charles, who had left them for a moment to have a quick word with Peter Riddell of The Times.
‘I really think we should have a talk if you want to get adopted by our lot,’ he said.
‘What about lunch tomorrow?’
Amaranth suggested.
‘I'm going to try to speak in the debate in the afternoon, and I'll need my hand holding.’
And in the meantime.
push off — that was implied in her attitude, if not expressed in words.
Swan, who had not been invited to Grunte's party, or to Andrew Neil's, or to anyone else's, took himself into the Lanes where he ate a plate of fish, chips and Heinz tomato sauce and drank two pints of lager.
Having looked gloomily into the windows of antique shops, and steered his way past lines of tipsy Tories, he returned to the Grand where a functionary manning the door noticed that he was not wearing a photo-pass.
Twenty heated minutes later he collapsed on to his twin bed, and turned on the telly.
It was showing Pretty Woman and a good deal of Julia Roberts.
The Times/Sunday Times party was in a ground floor room of the hotel.
En route from the crush bar Joshua paused at the palatial Gents.
His neighbour at stall was Charles Harvey.
They acknowledged one another gravely across a narrow divide.
They had barely exchanged a word since Joshua had cross-examined Harvey some months ago — at John MacGregor's request — in search of Emma Kerr's killer.
Joshua, in order to be friendly, asked Harvey if he had heard of Clemenceau's remark about Lloyd George, made at the Paris Peace Conference after the Kaiser's War?
‘Si je pourrais pisser comme Lloyd George parle!’
Harvey, nearly thirty years younger than Morris, did not really get the point, but with that courtesy for which the rising junior minister is rightly celebrated laughed generously in response.
In return, he offered Morris Perry Worsthorne's comment on a speech made by a Liberal candidate at a by-election in the 1960s.
‘All ham and no tongue.’
Harvey suggested Morris go on down to the party ahead of him, as he was waiting for a partner: he had no wish to take Rupert Murdoch's shilling, but he was happy to drink his champagne.
‘My sentiments exactly,’ said Morris.
The ballroom of the Grand, if that was what it was, soon filled with free-loaders.
Peter Stothard, the editor of The Times, stood with Andrew Neil, his opposite number on the Sunday, to greet the guests.
Stothard was flanked by his beater.
They both hoped Joshua would write for their great papers.
Morris replied that he would certainly do so, but only for money, and passed on, taking up a position in a corner of the room.
A waitress offered him champagne or white wine.
As a mark of the recession, about which the Chancellor had said only that morning ‘in conference’ that ‘we could glimpse a bright light at the end of a long tunnel’, the quality of the champagne had dropped a notch, while the white wine had every appearance of being a Muscadet.
Joshua took from his hip-pocket a flask — a birthday present from Felicity, which she had sensibly filled with Mure, a blackberry liqueur, the addition of which rendered any cheap white wine, fizzy or not, instantly palatable.
Morris had learnt this aid to survival many years ago from Sir Fitzroy Maclean.
It had saved both their public lives.
Joshua sipped and watched.
Mrs Edwina Currie was exercising a basic charm.
Mrs Virginia Bottomley, with whom half the Tory Party was secretly in love (Edwina hoped the other half was in love with her), was holding a small court, flanked by her husband, Peter.
Virginia was everyone's favourite, a sweet woman whose schoolgirl looks appealed strongly to the over forty-fives.
The catty  among her sisters (and the hatreds that rive the small band of women MPs have to be experienced to be believed) called her Angela Brazil, but that did not stop her being the most popular girl in the school.
Judy and Douglas Hurd made an entrance, Douglas happily without that terrible mackintosh-overcoat without which no international conference report on the telly was complete.
At Eton he had been known as ‘Hitler Hurd’, but events had mellowed him.
The Hurds were swiftly surrounded by anonymous newspaper executives.
Amaranth Wilikins was pressed against the wall by Charles Harvey.
She appeared to be raising no objection.
Harvey, who had the reputation of a coureur, would run himself into more trouble if he were not careful.
With Emma he had played with fire and narrowly escaped burning.
It now appeared that he was an eager moth to Amaranth's flame.
Norman Tebbit, his blood pressure returned to near normal after the frustrations of debate, was exercising his somewhat malign charm over a group of columnists.
Norman Fowler was no doubt preaching the virtues of greater European integration, while Bruce Anderson, a roving columnist, was talking to Sir Teddy Taylor, the discrepancy in height between them permitting Anderson to keep an eye open for bigger fish.
A waitress shoved a plate of cocktail bits beneath Joshua's nose.
He took a boat-shaped piece of pastry filled with crab and proffered his glass for a refill.
I'll give it ten minutes more, he thought, then I'll push off home.
He watched as Harvey called Kenneth Baker over to him in order to introduce him to Amaranth.
They  chatted for a moment or two and, as Baker extricated himself, he murmured, ‘Venus toute entiere a sa proie attachee.
Racine.’
Baker, at least, was one senior Tory who had read more than the occasional Archer.
Morris suddenly felt tired; the doctored wine was not giving him the uplift he needed.
He slipped from the room and purchased a beef sandwich from the barman upstairs.
It looked very good: the meat red, the mustard English, and the bread granary.
He drove out of Brighton cheerfully enough, munching his sandwich, climbing the London road until he had breasted the Downs.
He missed the excitement which was soon to shake the Grand Hotel.
Amaranth Wilikins and Charles Harvey left the party soon after Morris.
It had been, thought Amaranth, a great success.
Andrew Neil had been charming.
‘Keep in touch,’ he said as she said goodbye.
He had even made a suggestion about a piece she might write on the role of women in the Tory Party, perhaps in the Government Whips' Office.
She had been introduced to Norman Lamont (very sexy) and afterwards Charles had been wonderful, guiding her from cab to restaurant, steering her around the menu (‘the salt cod is quite delicious’), plying her with Vinho Verde and a glass of Setubal.
He had held her hand while listening to her political ambitions, giving to them the same care he devoted to a Ministerial Statement in the House.
Grunte, he opined, was ‘a pain in the bum’, although he had been quite helpful over the matter of the new motorway route which happened to pass through his garden or, if not his garden, damn close.
‘Didn't David Swan ask you about that?’
Amaranth asked.
‘Yes, but I was damned if I was going to tell him it had been OK'd.
He's a developer in those parts and he's trying to get his finger in the pie.’
‘What about Grunte's seat?
It looks as if they're trying to get rid of him.’
‘Safe as houses,’ Harvey replied.
‘If Grunte couldn't lose it, nobody can.
We'll see what we can do.
You've met Tom Arnold, he's an old friend.
So is Jeffrey Archer.’
‘Will you have a word with them?’
‘I'll do what I can.
Most of our women in the House are frightful old bats.
We could do with a transfusion.’
As for Amaranth's speech, he told her what he had in mind and said he would sketch out something in greater detail by early next morning.
Amaranth looked alarmed at first, then excited.
‘We can rehearse it in the lounge at coffee time,’ he said.
‘You have five minutes to shake the world.
You must do a Currie.’
They returned to the Grand Hotel, ascended together to Harvey's room on the second floor, drew the curtains and placed a bedside lamp on the floor.
They were fumbling cheerfully, when the sudden excitement which brought so many conference-goers from their beds, frustrated further progress.
Carole Swan was back in the Grand Hotel around midnight.
She was clutching her key and a small box of sticky chocolates which Grunte had thrust into an unwilling hand.
She had not enjoyed the dinner.
They had all been inhibited from plain speaking by the lavish  hospitality, the fresh scampi with avocado had been too ‘mucked about’ for her taste, while that dreadful black man had insisted on telling her all about his times in and out of the ring with ‘Big Frank’(‘a lovely suit of clothes’), interrupting himself only to raise his glass of pink wine to Sir Ralph who had, in his opinion, ‘done us proud’.
She could see that Paul Franklin had found the whole affair beneath him.
And she had never had much time for Angela Cartwright, who, when it came to Grunte, tended to run with the hare, though it was plain enough that she had been put out by Grunte's placing Hyacinth on his right hand and had agreed with Carole afterwards that they would have little trouble finding the necessary fifty signatures.
‘We'll trade the swine in for a younger model,’ she had said.
As for that girl, words failed her.
After a frightful red-headed youth with a beard had taken Hyacinth away to some dance, the party had broken up, though not before Grunte, who was tight, had made a speech about ‘many years of close friendship…a happy ship…a united party’ and much more of the same.
Riding in her taxi Carole had passed Grunte, Burns and that tyke O'Farrell, walking noisily in the direction of the front.
They seemed to be singing.
She suddenly felt very tired indeed.
David heard her key fumbling in the lock.
Switching off the bedside lamp, he leapt into position behind the slowly opening door.
He was not often so skittishly lustful, but the combination of Amaranth and Pretty Woman had had their effect.
As Carole's hand felt gingerly for the light switch, her husband grabbed her round the waist and buried his face in her neck, making  growling noises as he did so.
Carole's first, irrational thought was that she had entered the wrong room.
Horror-struck, and then furiously angry, she let out a piercing scream and pushed her husband savagely away.
David Swan fell backwards over a chair, clutching his knee in agony.
Her scream, the crash of the chair, and his shouts of pain were followed by a moment's silence, and then by the ringing of an alarm.
Throughout the hotel, doors slammed, and feet could be heard pounding the length of corridors.
Carole, who had fallen to the floor and was attempting to massage her husband's knee, looked up to see Kenneth Baker himself in a camel-hair dressing gown, flanked by two men with guns.
Even ex-Home Secretaries were well protected.
Baker, who had abandoned his spectacles, peered down at what was plainly a sordid scene of domestic violence of the kind he was familiar with only in statistics.
He murmured, ‘To be imprisoned in the viewless winds, And blown with restless violence round about the pendant world.’
And then, to no one in particular, ‘Measure for Measure.’
He then left the room bidding the Swans good-night.
John Gummer ran past the door, an overcoat over his pyjamas, carrying his famous pillow, the one with ‘Not tonight, Josephine’ written on it, and a small valise which he took with him ready for such emergencies.
The wail of alerted police cars filled the night air, Gerald Kaufman left the premises with the help of a fire escape, the fate of the Tory Party being no concern of his.
Ron Barton abandoned his vigil outside Charles Harvey's door.
He had pursued the errant couple from The Times party to Brighton's only Portuguese restaurant and  back to the lift in the Grand Hotel.
But adultery was one thing, anarchy another.
He made as swiftly as he could for the foyer.
Amaranth Wilikins travelled down to the foyer without Charles Harvey.
She had dressed in a hurry.
The clamorous bells had come too soon for both of them.
The Brighton Constabulary, whose marksmen had taken up positions from which they could command the Grand Hotel, was stood down after half an hour.
The alarm had been quite definitely false.
The revellers in the foyer, who included some of the more anxious in decorous nightwear, were shooed upstairs to bed by Alastair Goodlad, once the Party's deputy Chief Whip, whose butlerian rotundity made him quite admirably suited to the task.
John Gummer returned to his room.
The police, recognising Gerald Kaufman from the telly, seemed reluctant to give credence to his story.
‘Shouldn't you be in Blackpool, sir?’
There was only one last contretemps before the hotel settled down to an uneasy sleep.
Security on the door had reported a large black man demanding entry on behalf of a friend, a Sir Ralph Grunte, Member of Parliament, who was certainly in no condition to be in charge of a motor car.
Grunte and his companion were ushered into a lift, and, as the door closed mercifully upon them, the strains of ‘Eskimo Nell’ could be heard as they were borne aloft by the soft hum of machinery.
The first full day of the Conservative and Unionist Party conference was finally over.
‘More trouble than a load of kids,’ was the view of an elderly sergeant of police.
Wednesday Morning
Norman Fowler, the chairman of the Party, was awakened early by the delivery of the national newspapers.
They fell with a thud upon his bedside chair.
The Conference was not just an affair, mounted at great trouble and expense, at which the Party's footsoldiers were given four days simply to kick over the traces.
Some fun and a few games were certainly unavoidable (there are colleagues who always go too far), but that was not the point of the Party's annual seaside jamboree.
It was a public relations exercise in which the Government and Party were shown to the media and the television viewer in as flattering a light as possible.
Hence the portentous, and even fatuous slogan which towered each year in brightest blue above the rostrum.
This year it was ‘The Right Way Ahead for Britain'.
The Party's leaders were held up to the public's scrutiny; it was not the Party's fault that some, those with speech defects in particular, failed to receive the customary standing ovation after their speeches from an  enthusiastic conference, or that others, standing some way up the ladder of promotion, were pinched for drunken driving.
Fornication was inevitable; it was something of a relief that high unit labour costs had driven the boot man to extinction.
Better an unshone shoe than a procession of the crippled, hobbling to their places in unfamiliar brown brogues in a very public breakfast room.
The Party conference would rise to its climax on the Friday afternoon when the Leader spoke.
The conference would become a rally before which John Major must perform, reading from a thirty-minute script cobbled together by a squad of clever young men.
It had once been Chris Patten's task to help Mrs Thatcher as she worked through the night.
She had had the tiresome habit of subjecting her speech-writers to a sixth-form question and answer session along the lines of, ‘Tell me Chris, what do you mean by ‘liberty’?’ and it was not until the welcome arrival of a cheerful Denis at two-thirty in the morning that she could be persuaded to go to bed.
(Her late hours had, in fact, saved her life in 1984 when the Irish bombed the Grand Hotel.)
However, John Major was usually in bed by midnight, thank God.
But, although Margaret was now ‘dead’, she was not yet buried.
Stricken with umbrage, she had spent the months since her destoolment sniping at her successor, travelling the world in order to raise funds for some foundation, and, in general, rocking the bloody boat.
Norma Major was terrified of her, but so were most people.
The likelihood of her arrival at Brighton, the possibility of her speaking in the debate on immigration, and the nice problem of what to do with the old bat on the Friday afternoon (a vote of thanks? a place on the  platform? a solo entrance?)— these matters were all now exercising Fowler's mind, the peace of which was not helped by the lead story in the Daily Mail: ‘MAGGIE BRIGHTON BOUND’.
‘Oh damn,’ exclaimed Norman.
A century ago she would have been sent abroad to govern India or Ireland.
In the 1990s there was only the hope that her fires, so vigorously stoked up by the dispossessed, would begin to burn down of their own accord.
The Mail was firm in its forecast: the other papers only looked forward with relish to her eventual arrival.
So far, it had been a very dull, even grey, conference.
Charles Moore, in a leader-page article in the Telegraph, likened her descent upon Brighton to the Restoration of Charles II.
There would be dancing in the streets.
Like hell there would, thought Fowler.
Why hadn't the piece been spiked?
Where was Max Hastings?
Paul Johnson, the Mail's ‘hired gun’, was recounting for the umpteenth time the glories of the Thatcher Years.
The Sun led with an attack on the Sovereign for having asked the Bishop of Durham to a light lunch, but the rest of the papers made gloomy reading for the chairman.
‘Lamont listless in economic debate’; ‘Tebbit given cold shoulder by blind Tory’ and ‘Amess speaks up for Essex man’were some examples of their headlines.
The reports of the political correspondents, who had all faxed their copy while still sober the evening before were generally downbeat.
The afternoon's debate on ‘Policy and Public Relations’ promised, wrote Ian Aitken, ‘to tap the well of a growing discontent’.
Peter Riddell of The Times had written a piece about the Young Conservatives.
It appeared that he had been thrown out bodily from a pub in Kemp Town called the ‘Hedgehog and Hogshead’ in 
the company of several YCs who had taken exception to three Asians drinking in the saloon bar.
Riddell, who was a modest man, not given to cakes or ale, had, despite his shrill protests, suffered the same fate.
His piece had clearly been written more in anger than in sorrow, the landlord's indiscrimination coming in for as much disapprobation as the racist high spirits shown by the Young Conservatives.
On that topic, Fowler found to his unsurprised dismay that several papers had ‘profiled’ the unspeakable Wullie Robertson.
‘Is this the new face of the Tory party?’ asked the Mirror.
Garland, in the Telegraph, had drawn a cartoon of a kilted bare-arsed Robertson, blowing his trumpet, circling a walled city full of obvious Tories, labelled ‘Jericho’.
Fowler tossed the papers on to the floor and went for a shower.
It would be his task to hold Norma Major's hand, reply to the debate on public relations, and to steady the bloody Buffs.
He should have stayed in the bosom of his family.
The Special Branch man standing outside Lady Thatcher's house in Belgravia noticed the arrival of a theatrical costumier's van.
He had expected to abandon his post at 11 a.m. in time for an early pub lunch, but his colleague's arrival had been unexpectedly delayed.
There was nothing about a delivery in his early morning instructions.
He went up to the driver of the van and asked him his business.
‘A box for her Ladyship,’ was his reply, indicating a large grey box wrapped in string, the sort favoured by expensive tailors.
‘Something for Denis, I expect.’
The policeman spoke into his portable radio and, evidently satisfied with the response, took the box himself, waving the van on its way.
Bloody valet was what he had become.
Because his wife did not want to move house he had turned down the job of guarding Ted Heath in the Close at Salisbury; he had been given Margaret instead.
In a small study off the hall, another policeman put the parcel through an X-ray machine and then began to cut the string.
Lady Thatcher's post was still heavy, despite her exile, and every packet and parcel was carefully checked.
As he cut, the door opened and the lady herself swept into the room and, with an imperious gesture, gathered up the box and carried it off.
‘I know what it contains,’ she cried, ‘and the contents are quite private.’
Her tone bode no contradiction; it was the voice so well remembered by all those who, over twelve years, had sat at her feet in a thousand Cabinets.
At its timbre strong men had quailed; the bearers of Military Crosses awarded for bravery above and beyond in places like Italy and Burma had braced themselves in anticipation of her terrible wrath.
It was certainly too much for two young constables with four ‘O’ levels between them.
Upstairs in the best bedroom among the photographs of ‘Gorby’, and Nancy and Ronnie, Lady Thatcher opened the box and removed several items of clothing.
She took off her bright blue suit with the square shoulders, the outfit she had worn on the morning of her departure from Downing Street, that dreadful day, when betrayed by her Cabinet she had been persuaded (‘against my better judgement, mark you’) to vote for John Major.
What a disappointment he had turned out to be!
And so arrogant!
She was irritated to find that one  essential item at least was missing, and made a mental note to have someone telephone for it immediately.
Taking up a chair, she sat before the wardrobe's mirror, knees drawn up, her right hand outstretched.
She, too, had been invited to Jeffrey Archer's party at the Grand Hotel.
Today she would travel by car to Brighton.
Later, two black bullet-proof Jaguar motor cars headed out of South London.
Lady Thatcher sat in the back seat of the leading vehicle with her loyal biographer, Sir George Gardiner, MP, at her side.
The driver and the large man in the front seat were both members of the Special Branch.
The second Jaguar was the escort vehicle carrying members of her police bodyguard.
Spirits in both cars were high, Margaret scenting battle, her guards taking what pleasure they could from the prospect of a day or two at the seaside.
There were tired jokes about buckets and spades.
Margaret Thatcher had no tolerance for jokes of any kind, believing them to be a waste of time.
She was about to wipe the floor with her enemies.
Not unreasonably, given what had happened in 1984, Lady Thatcher had forsaken the Grand for the Hospitality Inn on the recommendation of an old ally, Sir Alfred Sherman, who had praised the pool, solarium, gymnasium and beauty salon.
Although what use could dear Alfred have for any of them? she wondered.
He was very plain and unathletic.
Still, however difficult he had been in the good days, when they were all riding high, he was still most certainly loyal.
In Banstead, the black Jaguars stopped abruptly at a zebra crossing to allow three rastas and their large mother to cross the road.
Lady Thatcher remembered  the time in the late 1970s when she had gone on television and warned that people were afraid of being ‘swamped’ by immigrants.
At the time, that old woman Willie Whitelaw had been excessively upset.
She had been right of course.
If only she had listened more often to her voices, how much better things would have turned out to be.
And for Britain.
Her thoughts turned to Geoffrey Howe, for so long her most faithful lieutenant, and her right leg made an involuntary kicking movement.
It was Elspeth who had put him up to it.
Such ingratitude.
She would take lunch at Gravetye Manor near East Grinstead (a 3 out of 5 in the Good Food Guide) where Peter Herbert, its owner, would see to it that she had two poached eggs on Bovril toast and a good, old-fashioned pudding.
Fowler joined Norma and John in the Majors' room.
a cooked breakfast of the sort favoured by Mancunian commercial travellers was unanimously rejected.
Over black coffee and croissants (Norma partook of a little black cherry jam) the Leader and chairman of the Tory Party took counsel together.
Downing Street had originally put in a request for the Bridal Suite, only to discover that Jeffrey Archer had got in first.
In consequence, they were a bit short of space.
They were soon joined by the Party's chief press officer.
‘You know Margaret's on her way?’
This piece of redundant information was greeted with silence.
Norma said that she was going to spend the best part of the day as the guest of the Mayoress of Brighton — lunch in the Royal Pavilion — and then tea at the Marina.
She, for one, had had her fill of oratory.
John Major was giving lunch in a private room at Langan's to the French and  German ambassadors.
‘Should I opt in or opt out?’
The press officer laughed uproariously.
Hurd, who was entertaining members of the European Parliament to lunch at the Grand, murmured something to the effect that they would all meet Margaret soon enough, that evening at Jeffrey's great party: ‘The three ‘Bs’: Beluga, Bollinger and bullshit.’
They agreed that John should let Margaret know that any intervention by her in the debate on immigration would be considered ‘unhelpful’, and should extend an invitation for her to sit on the platform on the Friday afternoon for the Leader's speech, sitting as far away from Ted Heath as it was humanly possible.
With any luck they would not run across her during the day, although for press purposes both Major and Hurd would have to say how pleased they were to hear of her arrival.
‘Who the hell was responsible for the fracas at midnight?’ asked Fowler.
‘Two of Grunte's constituents,’ said the press officer, gathering his papers together.
‘Wife mistook husband for someone else when entering her room.
Perhaps she thought it was Grunte.
The security people were very uptight about the whole business.’
David Swan woke painfully to a brilliant dawn and the distant sound of vacuum cleaners.
Carole was already up and dressed.
Tight-lipped, she told him that she was going back to Arden post-haste.
She couldn't be expected to hang around with the press and everyone else knowing that she was responsible for last night's false alarm.
Or, to be more accurate, that her husband was responsible.
‘Why can't you read a book like everyone else  instead of watching dirty movies?
I could have died.
You are a filthy beast.’
David hoped silently that he would live so long.
Aloud he said he would stay for another night and take her place on the constituency slate.
‘Old mother Cartwright has always had a soft spot for me.’
‘Do as you damn well like,’ replied Carole, slamming the door.
David Swan turned over and went back to sleep.
There was lots of time before he was due to meet Amaranth Wilikins for lunch at the Black Chapati, ‘where English eccentricity adopts oriental exoticism to produce something special’, or so Jonathan Meades in The Times had said.
The early morning saw Brighton at its most brilliant.
The sun glinted from the onion domes of the Royal Pavilion, James Joyce's ‘lovely seaside girls’ made briskly for shop and office, and the sparkling waves ended their cross-Channel journey by stirring gently the broken line of last night's jetsam The Navy stood for ever on guard.
In his brother's flat in Kemp Town, Ron Barton, who had filed his copy in the small hours —‘Wife's greeting sends Tories packing’— had fried himself a pig's kidney, and was greedily rereading his copy.
Unsatisfied, he helped himself to an old issue of Penthouse (his brother, a window cleaner, had kept every issue of the magazine) and, turning the pages at random, discovered Amaranth Wilikins spread languorously over three of them.
That she was mother-naked went without saying.
The captions spoke of ‘Birmingham's rose-purple-coloured beauty.’
‘Why rose-purple?’ wondered Ron.
‘She looks white enough to me.’
‘Amaranth Wilikins, 26, is tired of being just a housewife,’ read the caption.
‘She wants to become an international model.
As far as Penthouse is concerned she's got enough on board to drive the Brummie bulls all round the Bull Ring.’
Nice turn of phrase, thought Barton.
The magazine was dated September 1978, which probably made Ms Wilikins, prospective parliamentary candidate, somewhere in her forties.
Ron slipped the mag into his plastic briefcase.
Come in very handy, that spread.
The proceedings of the conference began each morning promptly at nine-thirty.
By ten past nine the entrance and drive-way of the Grand Hotel had filled up with eager Tories, wearing their photo-passes with all the pride of the Old Contemptibles, conference agendas to hand.
Michael Heseltine was surrounded by a small crowd of Tory ladies, the boldest of whom kept fingering the lapels of his suit.
‘A lovely bit of cloth,’ she later told her friends.
She was from Bradford West.
Richard Ryder, the Party's Chief Whip, told his deputy, David Heathcote-Amory, that they should meet for coffee in the conference centre at half-time.
‘We shall have something important to discuss.’
Under an Indian sun, the crowd moved briskly along the prom, chattering about the events of last night (‘You would have thought she'd be too tired for that sort of thing’) and hoping, with an optimism undimmed by experience, that the day's events would be as entertaining as they would be inspiring.
John Patten was to reply to the debate on education and there was to be a debate on defence.
Joshua Morris, who was not expecting Felicity to join  him until late afternoon, determined to spend the morning wandering the streets of central Brighton.
Parking was horrendously difficult, the off-street parking being given over to the Volvos, Rovers and BMWs of the conference-goers.
He took a taxi the twelve miles into Brighton, and was dropped off at the Willett Collection, housed in the town's museum.
For some years Joshua had nursed a gentle passion for collecting early Staffordshire pottery: not the Victorian mantelshelf dogs, or even the soldiers and sailors of the Crimean War, but the turn-of-the-nineteenth-century stuff, the square-based figures of gods and goddesses, busts of great men (few women), and resist lustre jugs.
He avoided the Lanes, that warren of alleyways linked by ‘twittens’, narrow passageways, and ‘cat creeps’, flights of connecting staircases, a roguish rip-off in his opinion, where antique shops sold junk, and jewellers, trinketry.
Real life, he had read somewhere, had moved inland to the North Lanes, the ‘alternative’ Brighton around Gardner and Upper Gardner Streets, Kensington Street and Regent Street.
That is where, or so he had been told, Brighton still offered a whiff of the cosmopolitan, esoteric atmosphere of the Left Bank in Paris or a hint of Berlin's former decadence.
The day was fine, but the gradients steep, and it was not long before Joshua ran out of puff.
He sat in the window of a cafe and ordered coffee from a woman wearing a Campaign for Nuclear Disarmament badge.
His conference photo-pass rested safely in his jacket pocket.
It could have been a provocation.
She seemed harassed and shop-worn, her greying hair tied up in a bun with a twisted elastic band.
There was no hint of Berliner decadence about her, no echoes even of Juliette  Greco and le quartier latin.
She spilt the coffee as she put it in front of him, apologised, and gave the table a cursory wipe.
She was about as ‘esoteric’ as any woman in a telly soap advertisement.
For Joshua, at sixty-two, and suffering from a bad leg, distances had begun to take on an extraordinary significance.
He would need to ring for a cab if he were to regain the Party conference in comfort.
It had been forty years since he had first met Felicity; they had been students at the Sorbonne reading a course entitled ‘Civilisation francaise’, paid for by their indulgent fathers.
She was eighteen, tall, dark and sweetly innocent.
He was a year older, duffel-coated, thin and a little lame from an attack of polio.
Together they had painted the town a decorous shade of palest pink, dancing at Le Bal Anglais, or was it Mimi Pinson, necking in other people's rooms, walking the streets of Paris, hand in hand during one timeless and unforgettable spring.
The following year, they had drifted apart — he to Oxford, she to sit decoratively in London art galleries.
Thirty-five years later they had met again and, despite Felicity's husband and a brood of occasionally unsatisfactory children, they had fallen in love once more.
For three-and-a-half years they had met twice or thrice a month, holidaying clandestinely together, clasping happiness against all the odds, basking blissfully in each other 's company.
Smiling in anticipation of Felicity's imminent arrival, Joshua looked up to find Peter Worthington Evans at his table.
‘Mind if I join you?’ he asked.
Peter ‘Worthy’ Evans was a dull old stick but decent with it.
A Tory MP and a member of the Government  Whips' Office, he, too, had fallen under the spell of the late Emma Kerr, but that was water under another bridge.
‘I'm playing hookey,’ he said.
‘One can have too much of a good thing.’
Joshua had a vision of a packed Party conference rising to its feet to applaud a black woman Tory trade unionist very much in the family way.
There was usually one such every year.
Two more coffees were brought to the table by the Campaign for Nuclear Disarmament.
‘This will amuse you,’ said ‘Worthy’Evans, ‘but I know you'll keep it under your hat.’
Joshua promised to do so.
Richard Ryder, the Chief Whip, and his deputy had been asked by John Major to appoint a woman in the Whips' Office.
Like Paris himself, Ryder was deciding to whom to give the apple.
‘It lies between Edwina Currie and Emma Nicholson, with Dame Elaine Kellett-Bowman a rank outsider.’
Joshua, who had been in the Commons for over twenty years, knew only too well that there had never been a woman in the Conservative Whips' Office.
Major, who before the election had been the subject of adverse newspaper comment for not having put a woman in his Cabinet, had felt compelled to make a move.
The whips, however, would not take kindly to a woman set among them.
Their common room had the feel of a changing room at a minor public school.
And that was not all, said Peter Evans.
‘You know the trouble we've had over the years with MPs’ secretaries?’
Joshua, who had had a series of secretaries, one of whom had married John Biffen, said that he did.
‘There is a long history of MPs,’ said Evans earnestly,
‘separated from their wives, who are left behind in the constituency with little to look forward to save the Mayoress's tea party, falling in love with their secretaries.’
Joshua nodded.
Paddy Ashdown, it appeared, was only the most recent of a long line that stretched back way beyond Sarah Keays and Cecil Parkinson.
MPs did have the opportunity for dalliance, away as they were from home for the best part of the week — and for more than half the year.
Joshua did not think that ‘Worthy’ Evans was the sort to stray, but then he had never met his secretary.
‘They're going to be recruited centrally from now on, that is by the respective Whips’ Offices,’said Evans.
‘It will be my task to see that we employ a reliable sort of woman.’
‘The sort you could take home to mother?’
Joshua started to laugh.
My God, he thought, Edwina Currie a whip, and his own secretary given the once over by ‘Worthy’ Evans.
‘They will be highly qualified, of course,’ said Evans, ‘but on the plain side.
We have an example to set.’
‘When I was at school,’ said Joshua, ‘the housemaster made it his business to cast his eye over the cooks, maids and bottle-washers.
He had two criteria: age and a remarkable plainness.
We had little scope for passion.’
‘Not a word to anyone about what I have told you,’ warned ‘Worthy’Evans.
‘Tony Newton, the Leader of the House, is to make an announcement about it when we go back next week.’
They left the cafe and hailed a passing cab.
They failed to notice Ralph Grunte.
He was on his way to Roedean in another cab to fulfil an engagement to speak to the  girls of the sixth form.
He had been asked to speak some months ago on the subject, ‘A Woman's Place’.
Amaranth crossed her silken legs and waited impatiently for Charles Harvey to show up.
The lounge of the Grand Hotel was almost deserted, save for a tiny man perched on a bar stool, who seemed to spend much of his time muttering into his hand.
The excitements of the previous night had left her jaded but unsatisfied and now her stomach churned in uneasy anticipation.
She had received a note that morning while breakfasting at ‘Mon Repos’ from Sir Charles Webb-Bowen no less, telling her that she would be called upon to speak third in favour of the motion: ‘That this Conference believes that better public and press relations would enable Government and Party to get its message across to the public more effectively.’
She would be given four minutes before the lights.
Four minutes to stand before 7,000 of her peers, to say nothing of the thousands of invalids, shift-workers and bored housewives who might well be tuned in to BBC2.
Could she seize her chance?
What the hell could she say?
Where was Charles?
She sighed with relief when he hurried in, carrying various paper bags marked ‘Bits and Pieces’ and ‘Bijou’.
When Amaranth looked discreetly at the contents, there was much giggling.
Then Harvey took several sheets of paper from his pocket, the contents of which he read quietly to her.
They finished their coffee, and Barton watched as they went upstairs to Harvey's room.
Amaranth descended alone at twelve-thirty, pink and pampered, and called a cab to take her to the Black Chapati in Circus Parade.
Angela Cartwright jammed her befeathered tweedy hat on her head.
She had bought it on a trip to Munich with the League of European Women.
Urging the Malcolms, Kevin and Janet, before her, and with Paul Franklin in tow, she set out, as she put it, to ‘beard the chairman of the Party in his den’.
She had written to Chris Patten well before the election seeking an appointment while at Brighton to discuss several matters of importance.
At the time Patten had been sitting in his Smith Square office, gently smoothing the bags beneath his eyes.
He had discovered when reading A Burnt-Out Case the sentence, ‘The pouches under his eyes were like purses that contained the smuggled memories of a disappointing life’.
He had felt depressed.
The election was looming: the chances of his holding Bath slight indeed.
The Party chairman had rung the area agent in Birmingham, who had put him in the picture.
‘They're after Grunte's blood,’ the agent had said, ‘and I don't blame them.’
During his time as Party chairman, many constituency officers had been to see him on a similar errand.
Their ‘Member’ was either too old, or, in one case, too young.
He or she was too ‘left wing’(‘not in tune with the wishes of the rank and file’) or, and this was very rare, too ‘right wing’(‘fails to move with the times’).
He had either supported Michael Heseltine in his leadership bid (‘disloyal to dear Mrs Thatcher’) or had failed to turn up to a multitude of constituency functions, wine and cheeses, bring and buys.
One MP had consistently not only drawn the raffle but won it, pocketing the prizes which included, said one  shocked party member, ‘a Wedgwood vase’.
Another had a wife who rivalled Mrs Proudie in the intensity of her opinion and the strength of her will.
And yet another had been caught in flagrante with the wife of the Association's Treasurer (‘on a snooker table in the Club.
You can imagine how we felt’).
As in every case the recalcitrant MPs had been chosen from a list of several hundred aspirants by the very persons now so aggrieved, Patten was not inclined to give much weight to their judgement.
Mrs Cartwright and her little band of the disaffected were shown into his hotel room by the new Party Chairman's secretary, a formidable woman who had, in her time, served both Cecil Parkinson and Norman Tebbit.
She had even taken John Gummer under her wing.
She went, as it were, with the job.
Norman Fowler waved the group to a half-circle of uncomfortable chairs.
He had to admit that the charge-sheet read out by Angela Cartwright did contain some remarkable offences.
Her feather bobbed up and down in indignation as she talked, and Fowler, who had no wish to gaze into her eyes, found himself flinching instead at the sight of Paul Franklin's bright yellow socks.
The Malcolms, Kevin and Janet, were clearly overcome by the sight of Norman Fowler in the flesh, and sat silently together, sucking boiled sweets.
The list of sins, venial and otherwise, was long, but not so long as to come as a surprise.
Fowler had taken the trouble to have a word with Richard Ryder in advance, and the Chief Whip had shown him a copy of Grunte's confidential file.
Most of it was humdrum enough, a Young Conservative rogered here, another there.
There was also the famous time when Sir Ralph had kissed  Mark Fisher, Labour's front bench spokesman for the Arts, on his bald pate at the end of a drunken speech in the House.
‘And if Carole Swan were here,’ said Mrs Cartwright, adding a petits four to a long meal of wrong-doing, ‘she would be able to tell you about what he did to her daughter Grace.
And within the portals of the Palace of Westminster.
Purple, she was, for weeks.’
‘Wasn't Carole Swan the woman who raised the alarm last night?’ asked Fowler.
Mrs Cartwright made a face and said, ‘Such appetites,’ in a disapproving tone of voice.
Franklin guffawed.
Janet Malcolm went pink.
There was no doubt that Grunte was altogether too much of a bad thing, but it was not the Party Chairman's task to get rid of him.
He asked them to put their complaints in writing and have a word with the area agent, and bade them good-day.
Christ, what a shower!
Joshua Morris submitted himself to the first of the day's body-searches.
He allowed himself to be groped by motherly women crammed into uniforms of the kind which once might have been issued to the Croatian National Guard, and entered the ante-hall of the conference centre with a quite irrational lifting of the spirit.
There was much noise.
A large board was covered with ‘urgent’ messages.
‘Will Mrs Edwina Currie ring TVS?’ 'Will Sir Nicholas Fairbairn ring his acupuncturist?’'Would Lord St John of Fawsley ring the Queen Mother?’
(That last one must be a joke.)
Huge piles of every newspaper and magazine were being offered for sale.
Notice-boards flourished with handbills advertising some lunchtime meeting, rally or  lecture.
Norman Tebbit and Cecil Parkinson were speaking at a meeting of the ‘Conservative Way Forward’, a group of irreconcilables whose toast was to the Queen over the water.
Joshua thought he might go, if only to relish their discontents.
The ante-hall was never empty, however worthy or exciting the debate might be.
There must be a steady proportion of grass-rooters who never listened to a single word of the conference proper, spending the mornings awash with coffee, lunchtime with lager, and tea with Typhoo.
Everyone seemed to know each other; the four walls resounded to the brayings of renewed insincerity.
Camera crews and their front men cruised the available space looking for celebrities to interview.
BT salesmen pushed mobile phones.
A floodlit Teresa Gorman was holding forth about women; despite Mrs Thatcher's long rule, it appeared that the party discriminated outrageously against them.
A junior hospital doctor was telling Virginia Bottomley of the long hours he worked in casualty.
Gerald Kaufman, as usual, had not a good word to say for anybody or anything.
Joshua found a seat and watched Hyacinth Scragg being put through her paces.
She was wearing a checked calico dress of the sort worn by Annie before she got her gun.
She had good reason to look very pleased with herself.
A caterpillar was thrust beneath her nose and a woman interviewer began the interrogation.
Was it true that she had been one among others who had put up bail for Wullie Robertson?
Hyacinth, who looked dumbfounded, denied the charge.
‘As far as I am concerned…’ she began.
The interviewer, who should have kept her mouth shut, interrupted to ask whether or not Hyacinth had  been with him at the Young Conservatives' Ball.
‘Yes and no,’ mumbled Hyacinth, to whom the news of the arrest and incarceration of the chairman of the YCs had just come as a surprise.
She had glimpsed him afar only a moment or so ago.
‘That's a real politician's answer,’ said her tormentor, grimly.
‘He took me to the dance, it's true,’ said Hyacinth, her temper showing, ‘but I ditched the ginger swine as soon as I possibly could.’
‘You dropped him for the Prime Minister.’
It was not a question, there was no smile.
Hyacinth, happily unused to the ways of the more unscrupulous telly interviewer, promptly stuck a roll of paper she had been carrying into the broadcaster's eye, thus bringing the proceedings to a close.
Joshua rose to his feet and applauded noisily.
The crew looked pleased enough, the camera man muttering something to the effect that the bitch had it coming.
Joshua grabbed Hyacinth by the arm — she had been looking as if she were about to attack her victim's other eye — and steered her away.
‘Well done, but don't push your luck,’ he warned her.
Hyacinth was soon surrounded by well-wishers, and Joshua left her to be spirited away, this time by TV-AM.
He found another seat, and waved Tim Boswell to sit next to him.
Boswell, middle-aged and wearing heavy spectacles, was Morris's whip, responsible for his moral welfare, political views and time-keeping.
He was large and good natured, which was, perhaps, just as well.
‘What's this I hear about the dreaded Wullie?’
Joshua asked.
Boswell took an adjacent seat and sucked in his lips with professional disapproval.
‘Bugger got himself pinched late last night for disorderly behaviour, charging through the streets yelling ‘Up Yours Delors’ and ‘Britons awake’and other such inflammatory and ridiculous nonsense.
Personally, I blame Norman Tebbit.
Robertson spent most of the early hours in the nick getting sober.
He wasn't the only one picked up by the police.
A girl from Essex and a YC from Aldershot were also put in the bag.’
The Party's whips affected Second World War slang.
Forty years ago they would have all been half-colonels in Intelligence.
‘The chief agent was awoken at six in the morning; he had to ask John Wakeham, you know how good John is at this sort of thing, to quit his room at Topps Hotel (he won't stay in the Grand for all the tea in China and who shall blame him?) and pop down to Kemp Town and arrange bail.
Cost the party three hundred quid and a good deal of vile publicity to come, no doubt.
Personally, I think jail's the best place for him.
The very idea of Robertson MP for some Godforsaken seat in the Lowlands makes my blood run cold.
We've enough trouble with our Scottish Members as it is.’
Ralph Grunte had been pleased to receive a letter from the Headmaster of Roedean; yes, it was a headmaster.
It appeared, or so his secretary told him, that a bloke had been given the job of presiding over England's most famous girls' school.
Must be a rum cove, thought Grunte.
Some people have all the luck.
For a moment he thought he smelt a rat; could it be one of Marjorie's ‘little jokes’?
The Gruntes had gone their own ways for years, but Marjorie had a taste for practical jokes.
After one of Ralph's more painful foolishnesses, she had once persuaded a lover to  telephone Grunte pretending he had a message from Downing Street.
‘Ring PM's private secretary soonest.’
It had been the early evening of the day after polling day, 1983.
Grunte, who affected never to have sought office —‘too many people dependent on me, dear boy, wheels of commerce and all that’— would have been only too delighted to accept the seals of any office.
Now it was far too late for a red box and a black Rover.
The Roedean letter seemed genuine.
Could the writer take advantage of Grunte's undoubted presence in Brighton for the Party conference?
Would he speak to his sixth-form girls on the place of women in politics, or on any other subject he wished?
Would he care to stay on for a bite to eat?
Greatly looking forward to his acceptance, the pleasure of his company, and more besides.
Grunte, not altogether convinced of its provenance, showed it to Marjorie over supper (gammon and pineapple, and a bottle of Soave).
Her first reaction had been to laugh, but her second thoughts were more sombre.
‘They must be mad.
Why you?
If you must go, for God's sake turn up sober and keep your hands to yourself.
They're a toffee-nosed lot.
Wasn't Lynda Chalker once Head Girl?’
Grunte had not the faintest idea whether she had been or not, but the invitation seemed genuine enough.
La Chalker was not his cup of tea anyway.
Grunte had written back to say that he would be delighted, and to expect him at mid-day.
Would there be room for his Roller?
There would.
The Roller, however, had developed some fault and had been left in the hands of the Grand Hotel's garage mechanic.
Miffed, Grunte hailed a cab and instructed  the driver to take him gently to Roedean.
‘We are in no hurry.’
He took his seat carefully in the back; only Hitler and his ilk sat in the front of chauffeur-driven motor cars.
The police presence seemed, if anything, to be even more oppressive than yesterday (the Tory Party had become acutely aware just how much its security was costing the poll-tax payer); perhaps there was trouble brewing.
But the bright sun and blue sky with a dusting of high-flying clouds teased Grunte back into his usual state of mindless euphoria.
The sea breeze was strong enough to mould the skirts of passing women, and Grunte, who could remember little of the events of the night, save that he had spent a good deal of money feeding the faces of his party faithful (‘Pity about Hyacinth’), and that he had been seen back to the Grand after a drink or two by Leroy Burns (‘Grand fellow, must see if I can't find him another Sierra’), gave thought to his pending performance.
He had meant to ask his research assistant to sketch something out for him on ‘A Woman's Place’ or some such subject, but the silly girl's talents did not encompass putting pen to paper.
He had forgotten how many women MPs there were (‘too damn many’), and, as with the majority of his age and class, he had gone through life deaf to the quackings of feminists.
Grunte's views were not untypical: there were too many blacks, buggers and uppity women, all of them reading the Observer.
So powerful had these embattled minorities become, that decent chaps like him had been forced upon the defensive.
There was certainly nothing oppressed about Marjorie, who not only slept around the Midlands circuit, but had a controlling interest in his finances.
Once asked many  years ago by a visiting American Congresswoman what it was like having a woman leader, Grunte had replied that it was like being at home all day, a bon mot that had earned him his place in ‘Sayings of the Week’.
At the Copper Beeches, Warwick Road, Arden, a des.
res. with flagpole in landscaped garden and garaging for three motors, Marjorie had picked the curtains, ordered the colour schemes, hired the gardener and packed two large freezers with ready-cooked meals for two from Marks and Spencer's.
Grunte was struck by a twinge of self-pity.
If anyone was oppressed, surely it was he?
Roedean stands high on the cliffs to the east of Brighton on the coast road which leads inevitably, as all roads do, to Peacehaven.
The school is a complex of large, red-bricked barrack blocks, which had been taken over during the war (happily unoccupied) by the American Army.
The site was certainly bracing; the flower beds faintly municipal.
As the cab wound its way to what, the driver assured him, was the administrative block, Grunte noticed a sports field full of girls doing gymnastics.
They were all dressed in green knickers and white vests.
The cab drew to a halt, and Grunte, who was ten minutes early, let the meter tick away as he watched the girls bending and stretching to the commands of a whistle-blowing games mistress.
He supposed they were all about fifteen or sixteen.
The girl nearest to the car, noticing the fixity of his stare, responded with a discreet V sign.
Affronted, Grunte urged the driver onwards, and determined there and then to abandon any idea of making a formal speech and to encourage questions from the girls instead.
It was an easy way out, but one which could make for a far more enjoyable session.
The Headmaster, who had written so fulsomely, was not present.
He had been called conveniently to London.
The invitation had been meant not for Sir Ralph Grunte, but for his colleague, Sir Ralph Howell, a Norfolk Tory of the old school whose granddaughter was in the fifth form.
This alarming error had been spotted by his Deputy when it was too late to do anything much about it.
She had telephoned Lynda Chalker at the Foreign and Commonwealth Office to ask her opinion of Grunte, but the alumna had been abroad, organising the delivery of powdered milk to Ethiopians.
Of Grunte, little was known, and the entry in Who's Who was gnomic, to say the least.
He had been the chairman of the Party's backbench Europe committee until he had been ousted, with the help of the whips, by Sir Norman Fowler.
The fact that he had once been the President of the Midlands Motor Traders' Association, and was a director of Harry Greenway plc, was not considered to compensate sufficiently for Sir Ralph Howell.
‘You'll have to make the best of it,’ were the Headmaster's last words on leaving that morning to catch the 9.22 to Victoria.
The school smelt of cabbage, perspiration and Mansion polish with a discreet top dressing of Rochas' 'Femme'.
The absence of noise placed it happily in the private sector.
Grunte, who had been made very welcome indeed, noticed a table in the corner of the Headmaster's study, laid for four persons.
‘You will join three of the senior staff for a light luncheon, after your speech?’
There were two bottles of Australian cabernet on the table.
Penfold's Reserve.
Could be worse.
Grunte asked his hostess whether there were any press present, and seemed relieved to hear that  there most certainly were none.
‘The girls,’ she trilled, ‘are all yours.’
A second glance at Grunte had been enough to arouse the Deputy's suspicions.
The checks of his three-piece suit were large and loud enough to be migraine-inducing, and the tie, although defiantly striped, was not one she recognised.
But it was hard to tell in the Tory Party, nowadays.
He had two pens in his top pocket, and a red handkerchief rammed up his sleeve.
His voice, although commanding, carried a Midlands twang, and there was a distinct smell of alcohol, blended with Old Spice.
Sir Ralph Howell would have induced confidence, even in schoolmasters; there was something a bit dodgy about Sir Ralph Grunte.
He might have stepped out of John Osborne's The Entertainer.
She decided not to offer him a gin and tonic before his performance.
Let the celebrations begin once it was safely over.
The forty or so girls, dressed in mufti to mark their status as sixth-formers, stood up on the arrival of the speaker and his escort.
After a flattering introduction, culled from Grunte's CV (which he, in turn, had written for Conservative Central Office), Grunte said how delighted he was to accept their kind invitation.
His wife, Marjorie, had been in Bunwell House at Cheltenham Ladies' College, and she was no lady.
This brought a titter, although not from the ‘chair’, who had herself been educated by the successors of Miss Beale and Miss Buss.
Grunte then asked them whether they had heard the one about the Norwegian woman who had bought her son three shoes, having been told he had grown a foot; a sally which was met by universal groans.
The speaker grinned good-naturedly, and said as they were  all clearly so smart, he would sit down and invite their questions.
‘I can't promise to answer them all but I'll do my best.’
The first girl to get to her feet was plain and heavily bespectacled.
‘Monica?’ said the ‘chair’, at the same time passing a scribbled note to Grunte: ‘Jenkins — her father is a Nobel Prize winner.’
It meant nothing to him.
‘What,’ demanded Monica, ‘is the Government's policy towards science?
Are we doing enough to enable us to compete in the world?’
Grunte, who had no idea what the Government's policy was, or even if it had one, charmingly admitted to his ignorance and invited another question.
He had learnt early on that it was better not to flounder; a simple admittance of ignorance was much to be preferred to any amount of flannel.
And, he was an old enough hand to know that nobody else in the room wanted to know the answer.
Monica was a pain.
A black girl with an Afro haircut then asked what was Grunte's attitude to the Third World.
Were we doing enough to bridge the gap between rich and poor?
Grunte, who had little time for the Third World, said that as far as he was concerned, most of it seemed to have moved to Birmingham.
At this there were distinct signs of unease.
The ‘chair’ moved swiftly to his rescue, bowling him what she thought to be a slow ball.
Did Sir Ralph think Party conferences were worthwhile?
Grunte said that by and large most people had a jolly time, although there was, perhaps, a shade too much speechifying.
He, for one, slept through most of the afternoon sessions in order to be at his best for the  partying which took place every evening.
Few of us go to bed sober, he pronounced.
Of course, the conference was not what it was.
In Margaret Thatcher's time — he wished that she were still at the helm — the party could always look forward to a damn good Leader's speech on the last afternoon.
‘She was the only man in her Government,’ he concluded to a room full of raised eyebrows.
‘I know a limerick about Mrs T,’ said a red-haired girl with freckles.
‘Would you like to hear it?’
The ‘chair’ hurriedly intervened.
‘No, Amanda, we would not.’
Now Grunte knew a limerick or two, having been regaled at supper (Safeway's chicken stroganoff with frozen beans) by Marjorie, who had a fund of the milder ones.
‘Have you heard this one?’ he asked.
‘There was a young lady called Gloria
Who was had by Sir Gerald du Maurier,
A few other men,
Sir Gerald again,
And the staff of the Waldorf Astoria.’
There was polite laughter.
The ‘chair’ remained stone-faced.
Encouraged, Grunte essayed a second one.
‘Said the Duchess of Alba to Goya
Please don't forget I'm your employa,
So he painted her twice,
Once dressed very nice,
And once in the nude to annoya.’
There was more laughter.
The ‘chair’, hoping to break the sequence (and to discourage Amanda) asked for a  question on art.
Who, for instance, did Sir Ralph consider to be the leading British artist of the twentieth century?
Grunte knew several piss-artists, but thought better of naming them.
Brushing aside the straw, he solemnly recited a third limerick:
‘My dear Mrs Ormsby Gore
I really can't do any more.
I feel quite ill,
You're not satisfied still,
And look at the time, half-past four!’
At this there was a loud outburst of laughter, and everyone looked at a girl sitting at the back, who, scarlet in the face, ran out of the room, sobbing.
‘That,’ said the ‘chair’grimly, gathering together her papers, ‘was Priscilla Ormsby Gore.’
Grunte's apologies, ‘my dear lady, I had no idea,’ caused much hilarity and more unrest.
Amanda, ginger, pink and cheerful was on her feet again.
‘Have you heard this one, Sir Ralph?’ she asked.
There were cries of ‘oh no’ from her neighbours, but Amanda was not to be deterred.
The ‘chair’ sat with her head in her hands.
‘I tell you in the Welsh town of Abercwmboi [the accent was bogus Welsh]
‘There's a fuck that you're bound to enjoy.
Dilys Rees is the grind,
And up your behind
Comes the nose of her corgi named Roy.’
The ‘chair’ slammed the lid of her desk and, grasping Sir Ralph by the arm, propelled him from the room.
‘That's  more than enough,’ she cried, leading the speaker to lunch.
The Deputy Head poured them both a very large gin and tonic.
‘I deserve this,’ she said.
‘So do I,’ Grunte agreed.
It wasn't as if he had asked for a fee, he had gone to the school for nothing, out of the goodness of his heart.
They were joined for lunch by the geography mistress, whose name he had not caught, and the games mistress, whose whistle-blowing prowess he had earlier admired.
A Miss Nancy Smart.
They showed the Australian red no mercy.
He told Miss Smart the girls she drilled so magnificently ought to be included in the Royal Tournament at Earl's Court, he, for one, being heartily sick of sailors dismantling and reassembling guns.
They started with avocados and a French dressing, and finished with a plate of cold roast beef, and a hearty salad.
Lots of fibre.
Grunte, who suffered from diverticulitis, had to watch his diet.
The Deputy Head held forth at some length on subjects such as the national curriculum and the iniquities of Bridget Plowden, whoever she might be.
She was interrupted by a tapping on the window.
It was Amanda who, beaming like a Cheshire cat, wiggled her fingers at Grunte in a familiar greeting and waved what looked like an autograph book in his direction.
Miss Smart sprang to her feet, left the room and sent her packing.
‘That girl!’ she sighed on her return.
‘She's a real menace.’
The Deputy Head, a charitable woman, did not demur.
‘She is, I must confess, the daughter of the  Bishop of Shrewsbury.
As for that limerick of hers, I have heard her tell worse.
I can only suppose she gets them from her father.’
They polished off the Australians with a piece of Double Gloucester and the three women saw him off.
As his cab departed the gates of Roedean, a handful of girls, including Amanda, raised a ragged cheer.
‘I haven't laughed so much since Grandma caught her tits in the mangle,’ was the verdict of them all.
Ron Barton sat by a corner table in the Black Chapati in Circus Parade, New England Road, watching Amaranth Wilikins take lunch with David Swan.
Forty or not, she was a good-looker.
Jim Lester, a portly Tory MP, who was partly hidden by a pilaff, could not take his eyes off her.
Barton sneaked another look at his copy of Penthouse.
On one of the three pages a nude Amaranth had been photographed playing croquet.
‘In at the first putt’, the caption read.
Ron had rather hoped that she would be lunching with Charles Harvey, with whom she had appeared very thick while taking mid-morning coffee at the Grand.
The table, Barton had learnt, was booked in the name of David Swan.
A telephone call to the Grand confirmed that the Swans, who were from the Forest of Arden and thus constituents of Sir Ralph Grunte, had a double room on the first floor.
Barton did not care for Indian food and ate sparingly from the vegetarian buffet.
He wished that he could have listened to their conversation, but he would not have made much of it if he had been sitting at the next table.
Swan asked Amaranth if Harvey had given her any information about the new motorway.
She laughed.
‘What do you want to know for?’ she asked.
He hesitated, and then told her frankly that he was interested from a financial point of view.
As a developer, it was important that he should know the exact route which it was to take.
It would make a big difference to property values in the area — some would go up, some would go down.
‘I'm interested in making money too,’ Amaranth said.
‘Well,’ Swan ventured, ‘I might be prepared to pay for a copy of the plans.’
They were just finishing their lunch and Barton chose this moment to walk over to their table.
He heard Amaranth say, ‘If I lay my hands on the plans, David, I won't let you have them.
I'll put them up for auction.’
Barton wondered, what plans?
Swan looked furious, and Barton intervened.
‘Mrs Wilikins, I believe?
I'm Ron Barton of the True Brit.
I'm told you are about to make your maiden speech this afternoon.’
Amaranth, who had been showing signs of boredom, flashed Barton her selection-committee smile.
Swan gave him no such greeting.
‘Be kind to me after my speech?’ she pleaded.
‘It is very much a maiden.’
Barton told her that he would be sitting ringside along with a photographer.
‘Would you be interested in going exclusive?’ he asked.
He explained that were her speech a success, she would be paid well for comment and pictures provided they were exclusively for the use of the True Brit.
‘But you'll have to wow them in the aisles.
Take care.’
Barton saluted (he had been the smallest soldier in the army), and took a cab back to the conference, closely  followed by Amaranth.
She dropped a sulky David off at the Grand Hotel.
Not only had she been unhelpful from a business point of view, but the prospects of inveigling her into his empty bed did not seem rosy.
She had told him she was promised that evening to Charles Harvey, who was taking her to Jeffrey Archer's party.
Charles was ‘a sweetie’ and had been so very helpful.
And so very busy building Britain's roads, Swan said to himself.
Lunch had not altogether been a waste of time.
Amaranth had repeated enough of what Harvey had told her about the motorway to make it worthwhile telephoning his partner in Arden to make local inquiries.
And even if Harvey had written just about the whole of Amaranth's damn speech, she would, were it to be successful, be more in need of his favours than Harvey's.
He had told her of that morning's meeting between the local Tories and Norman Fowler.
‘We will have no difficulty in getting the fifty signatures we need for a Special General Meeting.
The task then will be to kick Grunte out.
And then, my love,’ he added meaningfully, ‘if you play ball, I can help you to a very safe seat.’
Spouse-less in Brighton, he managed to catch up with Angela Cartwright in the foyer of the Grand Hotel.
Without a photo-pass hanging from his left lapel, he was uncomfortably conspicuous; his identity had been checked three times since Amaranth had dropped him.
Large men in plain clothes and short haircuts had wanted to know his business.
Property, he had told them.
It had not been enough.
Mrs Cartwright somewhat reluctantly gave him her blessing.
‘I don't know, I'm sure, what you two were up to last night, and it's none of my business, but it's a great pity that Carole has packed her bags,’ she said.
‘We  needed her at our meeting with the chairman this morning.
He was very obliging.
My next port of call is the area agent, if we can get any sense out of the poor old boy.’
Carole had left her photo-pass with Angela, who, taking it from its plastic cover, crossed out Carole's name, substituting that of her husband.
‘I hope it will do,’ she said doubtfully.
‘If I were you, I would go to the conference centre itself and ask to see someone in security.
We don't want to lose you, too.’
David said he would do just that.
Was there anything else he could do?
She knew where he stood over Grunte.
Angela looked at him doubtfully, seemed to change her mind, and then thought better of it.
‘Hyacinth seems to have gone mad.
Something on the local news about her poking some television woman in the eye, to say nothing of her dancing the night away with John Major.
You would think he had better things to do with his time.
Keep an eye on her.
If she is not watched like a hawk she will be in trouble of some sort before you can say Jack Robinson.’
News of the Conservative Party conference at Brighton took up the greater part of Wednesday's ‘The World at One’.
James Naughtie's North British voice, heavy with East of Scotland rectitude — a characteristic he shared with both John Smith and Gordon Brown — warned his listeners that the road ahead for the Tories was a rocky one.
Lady Thatcher had left her home in Belgravia for Brighton, where she had promised ‘a little plain speaking’, a threat which had, according to Naughtie, ‘brought a frisson of excitement to the town’.
(She was, actually, at that very moment congratulating Peter Herbert, the  owner of Gravetye Manor, on ‘the most delicious, old-fashioned, English, scrummy, hot pudding’; as ever, she had placed the emphasis on all the wrong words.)
The platform was faced, warned Naughtie, with a difficult afternoon.
The Government's low standing in the polls meant that the debate on policy and public relations, which was to be replied to by Norman Fowler, the chairman of the Party, would no doubt release a flood of anxiety and complaint.
Tories rarely challenged Party policy as such.
If policies had been misconceived, or even unpopular, it was the Party's press and public relations advisers who were told to pull up their socks.
The message had not been put across properly.
There was some speculation by the estimable political correspondent, John Cole,(brought back by the BBC for the conference) about the role Lady Thatcher might play.
His Protestant voice told the nation that Lady Thatcher might speak in Thursday's debate on race, for that was what it was really all about or, on the other hand, she might be asked to take the chair for John Major's Leader's address on the Friday afternoon.
She was keeping her cards close to her chest, and her powder dry.
Before leaving London that morning she had spent time at the hairdresser's.
What was certain was that she would put in an appearance that evening at Jeffrey Archer's great party; the one social event in the Brighton calendar which was quite definitely not to be missed.
Jeffrey Archer was then interviewed by Sue MacGregor.
The Great Novelist was uncharacteristically coy, denying that he intended to greet his guests dressed as Louis XIV.
‘I have a black list,’ he told Ms MacGregor, ‘and you are on it.
You will not be welcome at my party.’
When asked who would be welcome, Archer replied, ‘La creme de la creme’, and that his lucky friends would be plied with Krug and shepherd's pie.
‘We shall all have a jolly time.’
Would Margaret Thatcher be coming?
She most certainly would.
‘I have a lot of time for Margaret.’
Naughtie asked John Cole whether he had been invited to what was clearly the party of the century, and Cole replied gravely that he had.
But he was not going dressed as William of Orange.
Wullie Robertson's arrest and release on bail was made much of.
There was a brief recording of an interview with him conducted earlier that morning in front of the Kemp Town nick.
He was practically incomprehensible.
Lord Wakeham, who had come with the necessary cheque, had muttered something about boys being boys, and that Robertson would do well to go to his hotel and sleep it off.
It appeared that Robertson and a few of his YC friends had spent the small hours of the morning in Regency Square banging on doors and shouting ‘Britons awake’.
The Young Conservatives involved, intoned Naughtie, a strong note of disapproval in his voice, were mainly Scottish West Coast, former members of the Federation of Conservative Students, a body so high on lager that even Mr Norman Tebbit had been obliged, when Party chairman, to disband them.
There had been something about Harold Macmillan being a war criminal.
It was believed that they were to stage yet another demonstration at the Party conference, this time during tomorrow's crucially important debate on immigration.
Indeed, at that very moment, Robertson, who had spent the morning since his release drinking black Nescafe  in an attempt to clear his head, was handing out drafts of speeches which he wished his mates to make in that debate.
‘Stand in front of a mirror and rehearse them,’ he instructed.
‘If we put ten names in to speak against the motion, even that poor bugger Webb-Bowen will have to pick one of us.
Remember our slogan: ‘No nignogs in Noddy Land’.’
Robertson had once been to Stirling Polytechnic.
Joshua Morris lunched with two journalists, Simon Hoggart of the Observer, and Christopher Hudson of the Telegraph.
Political scribblers were usually better value than politicians, most of them being irreverent and much better informed.
It appeared, to Joshua's surprise, that a Cabinet Minister was about to announce the break-up of his marriage in favour of life in France with another man.
His name was not yet a household one, but, even so, Joshua was certainly astonished.
Were they not given enough to do?
Did they have time for dalliance?
The Cabinet seemed to him to have a reputation of worthiness verging on the dull.
He still had difficulty remembering the name of the Secretary of State for Scotland.
The three had lunch at Al Duomo in Pavilion Buildings, the sort of Italian restaurant where the waiters threaten their customers with giant pepper mills.
But it is hard to pick a quarrel with pasta.
Their conversation consisted almost entirely of gossip of the kind that, if only it could be bottled, would have an instant sale.
The Government's motion on its press and public relations was to be moved by a District Councillor from Saffron Walden.
Hoggart said that Saffron Walden was  surely the current wife of Brian Walden, a joke which he later attributed to James Fenton.
Hudson asked whether they knew the difference between an Essex Girl and the grand old Duke of York?
They did not.
The answer, said Hudson, was that the Duke had only had ten thousand men.
They shared a bottle of Barolo, then made their way back through the Lanes to the Conference Hall and stood on the sea-front opposite the entrance, watching the arrival of the Great and the Good.
Leroy Burns was rebuking a demonstrator, who had arrived to take part in a rally to be held the next day against racism and the National Young Conservatives.
Morris said that he was ‘glad Bums is on our side’.
Race was, in the Tory party, the great unmentionable.
‘Sex is taken in its stride,’ he said, ‘and the days when an MP's career would have been ruined by divorce are long past.
‘Mucky’ publicity in the tabloid press is considered to be an embarrassment, but providing a separation is undertaken discreetly, the response of the local Party is usually ‘sad, but not surprised’.’
It was well known that political life played havoc with family life.
Religion, continued Joshua, warming to his subject, played no part at all.
Even Canterbury's Tory MP was a devout Roman Catholic.
Death was treated with a certain deference, although the passing of a sitting MP was regarded either as a blessing in disguise (‘never liked him’) or, if the Party was unpopular, as a confounded nuisance, a by-election inevitably leading to exposure, expense and humiliating defeat.
‘Death in harness is the Liberals’ best friend,’he said.
But race was the subject about which many party activists felt most strongly.
Conservative clubs, the  financial mainstay of many a local party, discouraged the membership of blacks, and the Saturday night prejudices of the Party's working-class supporters would  appal an Observer reader.
Hoggart agreed: hence the rise of ‘Essex Man’.
The marshes of Essex, he said, were so right-wing that even the newsagents were white.
The Party line was easily enough understood: we should control immigration (for that read ‘black’ immigration) even more strictly in the interests of those Black Britons who were already British citizens.
Equality before the law, certainly, but last in for God's sake slam the door.
Despite the underlying racism of so many, a deliberate effort had been made to attract the ethnics into the Party, if only to deny their votes to others.
Hence John Taylor's unlucky candidature in Cheltenham, with all its resultant difficulties, and the arrival on the stump of several Asians, many of whom sounded more Sandhurst than Sandhurst itself.
Morris, Hoggart and Hudson agreed that the afternoon's debate on press and public relations would be a doddle as far as the platform was concerned.
Wool would be pulled over seven thousand pairs of eyes.
The one to watch would be tomorrow morning's debate on the Government's immigration policy.
What if Margaret were to speak?
Or Tebbit?
The trio stood, their backs to the sea, noting the return from large and jolly lunches, of such tyros as Sam Langford (‘nasty bit of work’), Eric Forth (‘I've got spurs that jingle-jangle’) and the beautiful Amaranth Wilikins (‘a real goer’).
Having been groped by the Croatian National Guard, the friends parted company, the press to their pens on the platform's left hand, Joshua to sit among the  delegates of his local Party.
What pleasures, he wondered, did the afternoon hold in store?
Wednesday Afternoon
Seven thousand Tories took their places, to the urgent encouragement of Sir Charles Webb-Bowen, for what would be, he assured them, a debate of great importance to the Government and Party.
Despite winning the election, ‘we are not as popular as we should be,’ he proclaimed; a truism which met with some ungrudging assent.
There was a faint cry of ‘And whose fault is that?’ but it went largely unremarked.
One advantage of so large a hall was the inability of all but the most vocal heckler to make himself heard.
The chairman solemnly read out the terms of the motion (chosen beforehand by Central Office) and announced that it would be moved ‘by Mr Enderby, who is the chairman of the Saffron Walden District Council and a farmer; and seconded by Mrs de Crespigny, who is a magistrate and a mother of two.
She comes from Cirencester.’
A posse of the Party's agents took up position behind a group of Young Conservatives who were threatening  to unfold a banner.
There was a moment's consultation between Webb-Bowen and his minder, that led the chairman to announce that an amendment had been tabled which, he said, would be moved after the proposer and seconder had spoken, by Ms Amaranth Wilikins.
The moving of a meaningless amendment, or a request to ‘oppose’ the motion, are devices used by the cunning to get themselves called upon to speak.
The noise, which had been post-prandial in its intensity, rose in anticipation.
Would the boat be ever so gently rocked?
Webb-Bowen, peering over his half-spectacles, urged the hall to ‘settle down’.
John Major flashed his Brixton smile, John Gummer put away his Jackie Collins novel and Norman Fowler, whose task it was to reply to the debate, fixed his face into an expression of thoughtful concern.
He had decided upon an announcement to the effect that the Party was to sack its advertising agents.
Councillor Enderby had all the fluency of a life spent in the lower reaches of local government.
He took hold of the rostrum with both hands.
‘We all know the Government's policies to be right, to be in the national interest.’
Here he paused but the applause was not immediately forthcoming.
Undaunted, he continued.
‘Our policies are both necessary and courageous.’
Joshua knew from long experience that ‘courageous’ meant deeply unpopular; he had lived through the poll-tax fiasco.
Still there was no audience response.
Undeterred, Councillor Enderby raised his voice.
‘We will win through.’
No one much seemed to think so.
Then came the inevitable change of tack.
‘We have an admirable Prime Minister [scattered applause], a great Foreign Secretary [no discernible applause]and an  inspired Secretary of State for Trade and Industry.’
(Here Michael Heseltine, smoothing back his mane, got to his feet, thereby prompting a steadily growing cheer.)
‘We have the men,’ cried Enderby, ‘we have the measures, we have the message — but we cannot put it across!
Central Office must carry the good news from Aix to Ghent!’
(Ghent? thought Barton.
He must mean Kent.)
‘Our well-paid spin-doctors must get off their backsides, Mr Chairman, and give us the tools with which we can finish the job.’
His amber light flashing, Enderby quickly gathered together his papers and made for his seat, only to be surrounded by newsmen.
There was a warm round of applause for him and much head-nodding by old women of both sexes.
We must get our publicity right.
Did you see our frightful party political broadcast?
We are no match for Walworth Road.
We are lucky to have won the election.
Mrs de Crespigny (‘Creppiny, Mr Chairman,’ she corrected him irritably) said much the same thing, but took longer to do so.
Her voice was very ‘Cotswold’, her ‘fs’ became ‘rs’.
She had, it appeared, been out on the knocker, ‘like all of you, ladies and gentlemen’, an activity which seemed to meet with universal approval.
To go out on the knocker was party activists' jargon for canvassing, a thankless task usually carried out at night with the aid of a failing torch and a broken pencil.
It was an activity closely related to ‘knocking up’.
It enabled the committed to track down the less committed, and to identify ‘the enemy’.
As an Orficer of her Association, she knew the value of keeping in touch.
Joshua wondered whether the sight, uninvited, of so tweedy a magistrate at one's rarely opened front door  was such as to give confidence to the rural labouring classes.
But she was a cheery old sort, if a shade old-fashioned (‘I am old enough to be your mother, Prime Minister' had gone down rather well), and when she finally shuddered to a halt, having gone through at least two red lights, she was rewarded with much applause.
The Malcolms said she reminded them of Margaret Rutherford.
And now it was the turn of Amaranth Wilikins.
She floated demurely to the rostrum, pausing en route to give Sir Tom Arnold a peck on the cheek.
‘You are sweet,’ she murmured.
The photographer from the True Brit, alerted by Barton, took a picture ‘Beauty and the beast’.
It might make a cover for Private Eye.
Her dark blonde hair and serpentine figure drew the approval of Sir Charles Webb-Bowen himself.
He welcomed her warmly to the microphone, ‘one of the more promising younger women members’, and warned her of the amber and red lights.
‘After five minutes, my dear, the amber; after six, the red.’
He did not look as if he meant it.
The platform, which had become rather glazed during Mrs de Crespigny's harangue, came to life.
This was no constituency battle-axe.
Michael Portillo ran a Spanish comb through his boot-black hair.
Gummer put away his book.
Peter Lilley came down to earth.
Amaranth was wearing what appeared to be a blue-black overcoat with square shoulders, the skirts of which came down to the knee.
Power dressing, noted Joshua cheerfully, who had heard of Amaranth but had not been introduced.
Let's hope she is as good as she looks.
Councillor Enderby and Mrs de Crespigny had made speeches that were as inoffensive as they were predictable.
Those who had been obliged to pay for their own  lunches had managed to keep awake; those who had been the beneficiaries of hospitality of one kind or another, had dozed gently, helped by the lights and the warmth of so many.
At the sight of Amaranth Wilikins there was a deal of coughing, a shuffling of feet and a perceptible rise in the level of attention.
Ron Barton, who had had a word with his editor at his regular table at the Savoy Grill, had been told he could pay five thousand for an exclusive if he thought her to be worthwhile.
Mr Gordon Greig of the Mail turned up a fresh page in his notebook, and Mr Chris Moncrieff of the Press Association, who could sleep standing up, opened a parrot-like eye.
He could smell copy.
Amaranth asked sweetly for the Conference's attention.
She was not going to say or do anything that would make John Major's task more difficult: the Cabinet, here she indicated them with a sinuous wave of her hand, was the most brilliant since Herbert Asquith's and, as for Central Office, and she looked directly at Sir Charles, who was mopping his brow, they were good men and true who strove mightily in the interests of the Party, and for precious little reward.
My God, thought Joshua, what next?
‘I'm going to turn my fire on our opponents, the Labour Party,’ said Amaranth a little smugly, ‘and what is more, I have something up my sleeve.’
At this, she slowly removed her jacket-cum-coat.
She was swathed from neck to knee in what appeared to be a ‘coat’ of many colours.
Those in the front stalls, and in particular the press, could make out that she was wearing beneath her multi-coloured top layer a flesh-tinted body stocking.
‘There are seven strands to Labour's policy,’ said  Amaranth, ‘just as Salome wore seven veils.
I will remove my veils one by one, as I demolish, in turn, the proponents of these cardinal precepts of what today passes for Socialism in the People's Party.’
In the gallery, Charles Harvey's fingers remained painfully crossed.
Amaranth had wanted to call Asquith, ‘Anthony’.
‘First,’ she said, slowly unwinding a scarlet chiffon scarf some three feet in length, ‘we had Neil Kinnock.
A garrulous Welshman who could not see a beach without running along it.
Did we want him to run Britain?’
There were cheerful cries of ‘No’.
Robert Atkins, once the Minister for Sport, shouted, ‘One down and only six more to go.’
‘Next,’ said Amaranth, above a swell of noise and twisting to unravel a tartan scarf, ‘we will dispose of the new Labour leader John Smith, and his promises to spend more of our money and not to raise taxes.’
Amaranth stood apparently bare-breasted before the multitude.
Janet Malcolm slapped her hands over Kevin's eyes, Mrs de Crespigny asserted a total disbelief, and Lord Whitelaw was gently helped from the platform.
My God, thought Joshua, she looks like the figurehead on the Cutty Sark.
Webb-Bowen, who had raised his gavel, let it fall back gently into place.
It was more than his life was worth to bring an end to such a performance.
‘Next,’ said Amaranth, who had let drop the first two scarves on to the heads of the assembled press men, ‘we have Gerald Kaufman, all vinegar and no chips.’
At this there was much unkind laughter, and cries of ‘More, more’.
Amaranth twirled about, and a lemony yellow scarf fluttered on to the head of William Rees Mogg.
Amaranth's midriff was revealed to the multitude.
Nestling in her belly-button was what appeared to be a large diamond.
At this Wullie Robertson's band struck up, several yobs having armed themselves with tin trumpets.
Amaranth quelled them with a glance.
The hall fell totally silent, and John Gummer was distinctly heard to say that he could not stand much more of it.
The sequence, which included Gordon Brown, Robin Cook, Bryan Gould, and, as a finale, Clare Short, was triumphantly concluded.
To a chorus of whistles, Amaranth stood before the party like Rider Haggard's She-who-must-be-obeyed.
Once she had stripped, her body suit became more obvious, and there was a general release of breath.
‘What a cheek!’ cried Angela Cartwright.
Grunte thought her a damn fine woman.
Norman Fowler made hurried notes to his speech in reply.
With a pretty wave Amaranth donned her jacket, acknowledged her applause and, blowing kisses to the crowd, stepped lightly down from the rostrum.
She was promptly grabbed by Ron Barton.
‘Five thousand keeps your mouth shut.
Follow me.’
Sir Charles had great difficulty in restoring order.
‘Quite incredible,’ he kept saying.
‘Remarkable.’
He had to be urged by his minder to call another speaker.
‘Sir Teddy Taylor,’ he shouted, only to be told that Taylor had done his stuff the day before.
‘So sorry,’ said Sir Charles.
‘Sir Trevor Skeet MP.’
Joshua, who had made for the exit in search of a cup of tea, noticed Edwina Currie standing by the door.
She was tight-lipped.
There were tears in her eyes and she was looking far from pleased.
‘What a bloody nerve!’ she cried.
At last she had been totally upstaged.
Trevor Skeet struggled to make himself heard against the din.
A throng of newsmen, accompanied by their photographers, left the hall in pursuit of the vanished Amaranth.
She had been spirited away by the Poison Dwarf.
The British press, yellow and lily-white, thrives upon competition, and a striptease at an otherwise dullish Tory Conference was just what the newsdesk ordered.
The cry went up for more pix.
Sir Robin Day searched a long memory for some event remotely comparable, and could only come up with Edwina's famous threat to handcuff herself to the rostrum until hanging was brought back.
He had insisted on the whole sequence being shown again and, indeed, it was to appear, more or less in full, that evening in every national television news bulletin.
The Dimblebys had been at a loss for words.
David had been shocked; Jonathan, who was altogether the more worldly, found the spectacle to have been immensely diverting.
‘For a moment or two, she had me fooled.’
Delighted by Amaranth's success, Charles Harvey ran down two flights of stairs and plunged into the press room behind the platform.
MPs were usually made to feel welcome; they were always good for a comment (‘Outrageous,’ says senior Tory MP), or a piece of gossip.
He saw Amaranth pinned in a corner by a tiny man who was waving a piece of paper under her nose, while a bevy of journalists tried to attract her attention.
Harvey elbowed his way through and, grasping Amaranth by the hand, pulled her away from Ron Barton, and escorted her out of the room.
‘You promised,’ cried Barton, following, and clinging to her other arm.
Harvey thrust him aside and, with a gallantry which  began even to him to appear to be excessively foolish, given the time and place, dragged Amaranth from the clutches of the mob.
‘Mrs Wilikins will give a press conference at four thirty by the escalators.
In the meantime she has nothing to say to any of you.’
‘What's it to him?’ asked the guardians of our freedom.
‘Has Harvey a piece of the action?’
The debate ended on a predictable note of anticlimax.
Other publicity seekers had had their thunder stolen.
Norman Fowler who, as is customary, devoted the first part of his reply to saying something nice about the speakers (‘Amaranth Wilikins does not need me to gild her lily.
I look forward to her performances on the Government's front bench’) then attacked the Labour Party, sacked the Party's advertising agency, and called for still greater efforts from the Party's rank and file.
‘You, at least,’ he cried, ‘care for the future of our great country.
You are the Party's ambassadors at large,’ and more of the same.
The platform's motion was easily carried, as amended, though no one knew what the amendment was, and the bulk of the hall filed patiently out in search of cups of tea and a Bath bun.
It was unanimously agreed by the platform that if Amaranth had carried Salome's platter as well as the seven veils, Jeffrey Archer's head should have been on it.
Joshua left before the end of the Party Chairman's speech, and took a cab the twelve miles out to Wenlock Manor.
Felicity was expected to arrive around five o'clock, having driven from Herefordshire.
The cab drove steadily out of Brighton on the London Road, and  then, at the summit of the Downs, turned left down a long lane.
The October trees showed no sign of autumn and the fields were being ploughed for winter wheat.
The sea was a Cambridge blue.
Wenlock Manor was a small Georgian country house, which had been sold as a hotel twenty years ago.
It was run by a French couple; he cooked, she sat out front and waited at table, a pretty daughter handed out the keys.
Joshua Morris had told them of Felicity's impending arrival, and-ordered a light supper at seven to be eaten in their room.
The hotel food was too good to miss; if they were peckish later, they could tuck into Archer's shepherd's pie.
There were no messages for him at the desk.
He had taken care to tell no one save Felicity where he was staying.
Joshua removed his jacket, lay on the bed, turned on the telly but cut the sound.
Amaranth was ridding herself of ‘Gordon Brown’.
‘A Scotsman who flatters only to deceive,’ he remembered her saying.
She'll be all over tomorrow's papers, he thought, and drifted off to sleep.
He was awakened by Felicity, who whispered into his good ear: ‘In the beginning was the Word, and the Word was Aardvark.’
The first word in any good dictionary, she explained.
She was a headmaster's daughter.
She unpacked her suitcase, explaining that she had, on this occasion, brought none of her ‘little delicacies’ with her.
‘Coals to Newcastle, the food's far too good.’
She took off her dress and shoes and lay beside Joshua on the narrow bed.
They kissed, and Felicity fell fast asleep, tired from her journey.
Joshua held her for half-an-hour, dozing contentedly.
It had been three weeks since they had last met.
It was an unsatisfactory relationship, but their meetings made up for infrequency by their intensity.
At five-thirty they made gentle love; then Felicity  ran a bath.
Joshua opened a bottle of House Champagne and set a glass of it on the edge.
‘We shall get a better bottle, no doubt, at Archer's soiree.’
Felicity wondered whether attendance was compulsory, but Joshua explained that, as he was writing a column for next Sunday's Observer, it would be as well to look in.
A tap at the door announced the arrival of Madame L'Hermitte who, pushing a trolley before her, announced loudly enough for Felicity to catch, ‘Madame, je peux servir?’
Supper consisted of a tomato salad, a plate of stuffed mussels, and a square of Pont L'Eveque.
There was a half bottle of Pinot Gris.
Felicity, wrapped in her daughter's dressing gown, took a seat.
‘God, I'm hungry.
Tell me, darling, tell me about the Conference.’
‘We have a new star,’ said Joshua.
‘She's Amaranth Wilikins.
Dishy-looking blonde of about forty.
Did a strip-tease on the rostrum.
Seven veils, each one a Labour Party stalwart.
Had everyone fooled for a time, but she was wearing a body stocking.
Old Webb-Bowen nearly had a stroke.’
Felicity asked Joshua what he knew about Amaranth.
‘Not much.
Married but divorced.
Robin Day told me he had seen her lunching yesterday with Ralph Grunte — it's rumoured that she's after his seat.
I'm sure he's after hers.’
At the Grand, David Swan fastened his amended photopass to his jacket and set off briskly towards the conference centre some two hundred yards away.
The mid-afternoon sun was still unseasonably warm, and there were children bathing in the sea.
A train of donkeys, led by an Indian, trundled past, and cheerful Jewish widows went in search of patisseries.
Two antique dealers went  by, holding hands.
Swan bought a lunchtime edition of the Standard, only to find a picture of an angry Hyacinth Scragg confronting a half-blinded lady interviewer.
‘Major's midnight partner makes her point’, was the caption.
Perhaps Hyacinth would be a better bet than Amaranth?
At the sight of his mutilated photo-pass, the Croatians summoned, after some comment between themselves, a senior officer, who listened with growing impatience to Swan's explanation as to the means whereby he had come by it.
‘You say this is your wife?’
The functionary seemed unconvinced.
‘She has packed off home, and your local Party want you to take her place?’
David said that was indeed the case.
‘Out of the question,’ was the reply.
‘All passes have to be issued by Central Office.’
‘In that case,’ argued David stubbornly, ‘take me to whoever it is represents the National Union in this building.’
Swan had made half-a-million by the time he was thirty, he had chaired the Planning Committee of the Arden District Council for the past ten years, and he was not the sort to give in easily.
He made his way into the building, the security officer in tow.
The woman behind the National Union desk broadcast a message for the Party's chief agent and, after ten minutes or so, a harassed man with an unlit pipe introduced himself.
‘What's the trouble?’
David explained all over again, saying that as a member of the executive council of the Forest of Arden Conservative Association, he had been conscripted by the chairman, Mrs Angela Cartwright, to take his wife's place on the constituency delegation.
A cunning glance came into the functionary's eye.
‘Are you by any chance Irish?’ he asked.
David said he was not.
‘What is the name of your Member of Parliament?’
‘Sir Ralph Grunte, and has been for as long as I can remember.’
A message was then broadcast asking Sir Ralph Grunte, Member of Parliament, to please come straightaway to the administrative desk in the lobby, as ‘a matter of urgency’.
Grunte, who had hugely enjoyed Amaranth's performance, was drinking a cup of tea, laced with brandy from his flask.
‘I must ask that young woman to speak at one of my supper clubs.
Damn sight more fun than Angela Rumbold.’
At the sound of his name, he swallowed his tea, excused himself and, followed at a step behind by Leroy Burns, made his portly way down to the lobby.
He spotted the Party's chief agent (whom he did not like) together with a woman, and a man who looked like a car park attendant.
They were surrounding David Swan, one-time Mayor of Arden, the father of the bruised Grace, and the author of the offensive letter in the Arden Recorder calling for his de-selection.
The chief agent asked Grunte whether he was prepared to vouch for a Mr David Swan, who claimed to be a member of his local Party.
Grunte looked Swan in the eye.
‘Never set eyes on the bugger,’ he said.
‘Lock him up.’
He moved on, having scarcely broken pace.
Leroy added, ‘Yeah, piss off,’ and the two stately figures were lost in the crowd.
A struggling Swan was summarily ejected, helped on by a boot up the backside on the part of the Party's chief agent.
‘Bloody Irish.’
When he got back to his room at the Grand Hotel, he  spoke urgently to his solicitor with a view to bringing a private prosecution against the Party's chief agent for assault and battery.
It had not been easy for him to gain readmission.
The security people in the foyer were even more officious.
‘It's the Archer party tonight,’ they told him.
‘We get the riff-raff barging in.’
Idly, David leafed through the list of functions, pleasures and invitations which Carole had left on her bedside table.
He would have to find something to do.
The West Midlands Area Tories, to which organisation Arden belonged, were holding a dance to the music of the Majorettes, but David did not fancy being enveloped in clouds of blue tulle.
There was a Bow Group party at the Metropole, but he had no wish to listen to all those sixteen-year-old merchant bankers with Gummer glasses.
Swan had no view as to the rival merits of the narrow as opposed to the wider band of the Exchange Rate Mechanism.
Perhaps he should have done, as interest rates determined his profitability.
On the table was a list of the Arden delegation together with their hotels.
The Malcolms he could do without.
Angela Cartwright would learn of his humiliation soon enough.
Leroy Burns he never wished to see again, and Paul Franklin with his bicycling and innumerable kids was a right ponce.
But there was Hyacinth Scragg.
He rang her hotel, and after a long wait she came to the phone.
‘Hyacinth, it's Dave, David Swan.
I'm on my tod.
Carole's gone home to mother.’
He paused, waiting for a giggle, but none came.
‘Would you care for a bit of supper, and then we could look in at the Area Ball.
I know I'm not John Major, but I'm better looking.’
He  was in his prime, and had not long ago given up playing Rugger for Dudley.
Hyacinth took a long time to respond.
‘I'd like to go to English's and have lobster,’ she said at last.
‘I've never had lobster.’
‘You're on,’ cried Swan.
‘Pick you up at seven.’
He showered, changed his shirt, and, pulling out the bedside table from between the twin beds, kicked them together.
The lovely Hy would pay for her lobster thermidor.
As long as no one blew up the bloody hotel, that is.
John Major shaved carefully for the second time that day.
The French Ambassador had been elliptical, the German hearty.
Douglas had spent much of the time explaining to the table the intricacies of the plot of his next novel; Leon Brittan had been rather short with him.
It was to be set in Brussels.
John asked Norma, who was putting on her paint, what she thought of Amaranth Wilikins's performance; his question, expecting approval, received the reverse.
The blokes had enjoyed it, but most of the women, including Norma, had thought it cheap and unhelpful to the cause.
‘I expect she will be at Jeffrey's party,’ said Major.
‘She'll be carried in inside a cardboard cake.’
‘If so, don't bring her near me,’ was the reply.
‘And don't leave me alone with Margaret.
She'll want me to give her money for that wretched foundation of hers.’
John Major had forgotten all about Margaret.
Perhaps she too would leap from a passing cake?
At seven-thirty the Prime Minister was expecting Kenneth Clarke and John Patten, together with silly old Webb-Bowen and his  minder.
Thursday morning's debate on immigration was ‘giving cause for anxiety’.
At seven, the Majors switched on the end of the news to listen to ‘Conference Report’.
They lay side by side, doing their relaxation exercises — deep breathing and total muscular relaxation from the feet up.
Norma had picked up the idea from a little woman in Brixton.
‘Conference Report’ carried an electric charge which had been lacking from ‘The World at One’.
The platform had won a comfortable victory in the afternoon's debate on policy.
A blonde Tory had stripped and received a standing ovation from a minority of her audience.
Lady Margaret Thatcher had turned up in Brighton.
‘I'm full of fight,’ she was reported to have said upon her arrival at the Hospitality Inn.
‘I know what's best for Britain.’
She had had her hair done and was wearing blue.
The arrival in the town of what was described as ‘massive police reinforcements’ was put down to the possibility of demonstrations by blacks against Wullie Robertson's Young Conservatives.
‘The front,’ John Cole reported, ‘is stiff with po-lice-men.’
His Celtic tones were complemented by those of Jim Naughtie himself, who had set up shop in an attic room of the Grand, but who had been spending much of the ‘happy hour’ between six and seven trawling for ‘vox pop’.
He had spoken with Norman Tebbit who, when asked his movements that evening, said he had discovered in Hove a pub called the ‘Earl of Essex’ where he was going for a noggin.
After that he would attend upon Jeffrey Archer, who had once been his deputy chairman.
‘Not the happiest of times.’
He had not yet made up his mind whether he would speak in Thursday's debate on  immigration.
After Tuesday's goings on, he frankly did not give a Castlemaine XXXX for his chances of being called to the rostrum.
Cecil Parkinson told Sue MacGregor that he no longer had a part to play in the affairs of the Tory Party.
Things were not what they used to be, he lamented.
His autobiography would be published on the fifth of November.
Its title Leading Man.
Would he tell all?
‘All that Lady Thatcher will let me.’
He hoped to run into her (Sue) later at Jeffrey Archer's grand party.
‘We shall be first among equals,’ he told her.
‘Cecil Parkinson,’ said Ms MacGregor, ‘has not yet lost his touch.’
There had been some dispute among the BBC's team of reporters as to who should interview Ms Wilikins.
In the end, Naughtie pulled rank, and took on the task himself.
Amaranth was still on a high.
She had changed back into her blue suit in the ladies' loo.
Her seven veils were much in demand; one had fallen into the hands of the Party's Wessex Area Treasurer who had undertaken to make it a prize in the Christmas draw.
In the few hours since she had brought the house down she had been interviewed by three tabloids, Sky Television and by Tony Howard for ‘Newsnight’.
Ron Barton, who had received a bollocking from his editor (‘where was yer, you prick?’) had been given instructions to raise the offer to 10,000.
‘A thousand words of her life story, and from what you tell me, Ron, we got the pictures.
Good lad.’
The editor of the True Brit, who had been raised at Kelvin Mackenzie's knee, was the possessor of a mercurial temperament.
Amaranth had received good advice from Charles  Harvey about the interviews.
‘Remember when you meet the press, to say that your speech was all in fun, and that you are really a serious person.
If you are asked why do you want to become an MP, say this: ‘A mixture of ambition and service; ambition is, of course, the engine of the public good.
As for service, it is not for me to give value to the two halves of my equation.’
Smile a lot.
If they ask you if you read, tell them your favourite writers are Hardy, Thomas Love Peacock and Iris Murdoch.
They will have read none of them.
If they ask you what wing of the Party you belong to, say it is your intention to sit prettily on the fence.
Be nice about John Major, Douglas Hurd and Michael Heseltine.
If they ask you about Margaret, look sad and say how much you once admired her.
Got it?’
Amaranth said that she had.
‘Charles, I am so very grateful.’
Now Naughtie told her: ‘You were not only the belle of the ball, but the star of the show.
Do you always take your clothes off when you speak to Conservatives?’
‘Not in public,’ breathed Amaranth.
‘I simply wanted to draw attention to the nonsenses in Labour's policies.
I was perfectly decent.
I was wearing a body stocking.’
Naughtie read out a statement made on behalf of Dame Margaret Fry, a past chairman of the Party's National Union.
‘I hope the example set by Ms Wilikins will not be permitted to lower the tone of this conference.
We are not here to have a good time.’
‘Indeed we are not,’ said Amaranth hastily.
Would Amaranth be going to Lord Archer's party, along with la creme de la creme?
‘If you'll take me, James,’ said Amaranth, her laugh  tinkling like so many distant cow bells.
‘I must go and change.’
The penultimate interview was with Sir Marcus Fox, a doughty Yorkshire man, known to his enemies in the Party as ‘the last of the summer wine’.
Fox was the chairman of the back bench 1922 Committee and could always be relied upon to come to the aid of the Party, especially midway through an election.
When Margaret finally foundered, some hoped that he had gone down with the ship, but here he was as buoyant as the Vicar of Bray.
‘A lovely lass,’ he said in warm Northern tones, reminiscent of an ad for John Smith's best bitter.
‘She'll go down a treat in Shipley.’
‘Does that mean you are giving up your seat in Parliament, Sir Marcus?’ asked Naughtie.
‘Not yet, bha gum,’ was the reply.
Naughtie had been filling in time.
‘We have tried, but without success, to persuade Lady Thatcher to come to the microphone,’ he said.
‘The conference is waiting to discover what it is she intends to do, now that she has finally arrived in Brighton.’
It so happened that Lady Thatcher was, at that very moment, engaged in a nasty altercation with the security men on the door of the Grand Hotel, having, in the excitement, forgotten to wear her conference badge.
‘Don't you know who I am?’ she had demanded imperiously of a recently conscripted Bengali.
‘Take me to your leader.’
She was rescued by James Spicer, a vice-chairman of the Party, and led blinking into the foyer.
Naughtie thrust a microphone under her nose.
‘Have you anything to say?’ he demanded.
‘Not to you, young man,’ she shouted, ‘but I will certainly have something to say to John Major.’
James Naughtie promised more from the Hotel later that evening.
‘We shall all be going to Jeffrey Archer's party.’
Full of mussels and topped up with Pinot Gris, Joshua and Felicity drove down into a twilit Brighton.
They could not make up their minds whether they would like to live there.
Hove was elegant, Brighton racy, and Kemp Town struggling, but there was something louche about the whole place.
‘It must be fearfully packed during the summer months,’ said Felicity, ‘and in October stuffed with politicians.’
When they reached the Royal Pavilion, ‘the prettiest building in England’, they were stopped by two constables.
‘Round you go, sir and madam,’ they were told.
‘The front is impassable.
There's a bloody riot going on, the town is crammed with nigs, er blacks, and they are looking to sort out the Young Conservatives.
All very nasty.
Most of the force have drawn shields and batons, and I've no doubt we're in for a long night.’
Joshua spun the Rover, locked its doors and drove swiftly back to Wenlock Manor.
‘Thank God, we've missed Archer's party,’ said Felicity.
‘If you put your foot down, we could be back in time for pud.’
Lying together in bed with creme brulee and champagne to hand, the only light coming from the soundless telly, curtains left open to the soft night, they talked over old times.
Joshua quoted Lord Rochester on the ‘bitch Paris’:
‘Where man may live in direst need, but ne'er lack land to set his seed.’
‘You weren't in direst need,’ said Felicity, ‘you got  thirty thousand francs a month, which was more than I did.
Thirty quid.
And you didn't succeed in planting your seed in me.
I was too well brought up.
Three years at Cheltenham in the late forties.’
And she added, ‘It was probably just as well.
Someone only had to look at me later on for me to get pregnant.’
Between them the lovers shared eight children, neatly divided between them.
‘We can criticise our children,’ said Felicity, ‘and we certainly do, but we can't blame each other for their failings.
How very nice.’
By ten they were fast asleep in each other 's arms, and so they missed, not only Jeffrey Archer's party, but pictures on the telly of an angry Lady Thatcher, an indignant Jeffrey Archer, a statuesque Amaranth in chiffon, all against a background of racing cars, billowing smoke and licking flames.
The party was already in progress when the riot took place.
The guests — John and Norma Major, Margaret Thatcher, sundry Cabinet Ministers and a collection of the more respectable ‘hacks’— were given champagne and plates of shepherd's pie.
‘In Alistair McAlpine's day,’ said John Cole, who was chatting to Amaranth, ‘we were given lobsters.’
‘I haven't seen anything of Jeffrey Archer,’ Amaranth said.
‘Doesn't he come to his own parties?’
‘He's outside in the corridor,’ Cole told her.
‘Patrolling.
Turning away gate crashers.’
One or two back benchers had had the temerity to chance their arms and had been severely dealt with.
He gathered that the diary editor from the London Evening Standard had been physically removed by Jeffrey himself.
The shepherd's pie was followed by waiters carrying plates of nibbles; nuts, crisps, salted crackers and more champagne.
The host, who had joined the party by now, told his guests how good Krug was.
Amaranth was joined by Charles Harvey, who had accompanied her to the party and had been circulating among his colleagues.
He said he had heard a rumour that Margaret Thatcher was going to be made Governor of Gibraltar, ‘but I'll believe that when it happens.’
The hum of conversation was interrupted by Richard Ryder, who called for silence for the Prime Minister, and John Major had just started a short speech of thanks to their host, not only for his hospitality, but also for his creativity, when there was a thunderous noise of shouting and breaking glass outside.
Those who could moved to the window and looked with shocked surprise at fires, fed by municipal deck chairs and the contents of thousands of bin bags, blazing along the Promenade.
Police, drawn from several county forces, were trying to separate two opposed rioting mobs.
Some two hundred Young Conservatives, reinforced from London and elsewhere, had marched along the front with racist banners (‘No Nignogs in Noddy Land’), led by a piper in full Highland dress.
The procession had been broken up by a large number of black youths from Lewisham, Deptford and Brixton, waving Ethiopian flags.
Kenneth Clarke watched from the window as the police got mixed up in the brawl.
Someone suggested he should go out and read the Riot Act, but he declined.
Jeffrey Archer declared that he would go out on his  balcony and address the mob.
‘They will listen to me,’ he said.
Had he not travelled to parts of Kurdistan where no white man had ever trod?
Lady Thatcher said she would stand at Jeffrey's side.
‘They will certainly listen to me.’
They were both dissuaded with difficulty, Michael Heseltine pointing out that not only would they be the targets of missiles but so, too, would be the windows of the hotel.
John and Norma were escorted out of Jeffrey Archer's Bridal Suite and back to their own and since it was not safe to leave the hotel, Lady Thatcher accompanied them, as she wanted to talk to them about the progress of her Foundation.
John Cole said that he was going to take his camera crew down into the foyer but, before he could do so, the Bridal Suite was invaded by the survivors of a defeated army.
The Young Conservatives had turned their backs on the enemy, broken through the police cordon and forced their way into the hotel.
Jeffrey Archer bravely attempted to remonstrate.
For his pains, he was pushed without ceremony into the adjacent bathroom and a chair back wedged firmly beneath the handle of the door.
His cries went quite unattended.
Wullie Robertson, who was bleeding at the nose, was carrying a banner wrapped around a pole, as if it were the regimental standard of the Gordons.
He waved it around in a manner that threatened to do someone a serious injury.
His cohorts fell upon the champagne and what was left of the shepherd's pie.
Several, standing on the balcony in full view of the crowd, taunted their enemies below.
At this juncture the Party's chief agent  suggested to the invited guests that it would perhaps be better to withdraw.
Hyacinth was as good as her word.
The lobster served to her at dinner with David Swan was her first but, judging from the way she let the butter run down her chin, not her last.
She loved English's: all those fishermen's nets and scallop shells, surly elder waiters and large platters of steamed fish.
She ate a lobster and a half, filling in any gaps with slices of brown bread and butter.
Hyacinth was what David Swan's mother would have called ‘a bonny lass’ and David was beginning to think so too.
He bought a bottle of Frascati (a wine which does not travel much beyond Rome) and they finished with creme caramel, cognac and several cups of coffee.
Although they were eating early in the evening, English's was already full of Conservatives demanding in patrician tones that the bones should be removed from their Dover soles.
Michael and Anne Heseltine were at either end of a large table of their constituents; attending to the annual ritual whereby the faithful are rewarded for a year spent addressing envelopes and running bazaars.
Hyacinth thought Anne Heseltine was very dishy and wondered where she had her hair done.
Later they talked about the rest of the Forest of Arden delegation, agreeing that Angela Cartwright was ‘a pain in the bum’ and Franklin was creepy, while the Malcolms were the world's biggest bores.
‘They only make love on the twenty-ninth of February,’ said Hyacinth, ‘and then only when it rains.’
But when it came to Grunte, they disagreed.
Despite Swan's abuse, Hyacinth stuck up for him.
She thought he had ‘a heart of gold’.
David told her that he had been thinking of working hard to get Amaranth Wilikins selected as the Conservative candidate for Arden in place of Sir Ralph.
Hyacinth exploded.
‘Are you crazy?’ she demanded.
‘That tart?
Not one woman on the committee would vote for her.
We all think she did the Party a great deal of harm with her strip-tease.’
This set David thinking.
If Amaranth was not going to be accepted as the candidate, and if she refused to co-operate with him over the new motorway, and if she rejected his amorous advances, what was the point of pursuing her?
He must, however, find some way of persuading her not to brag to the other members of the delegation about his suggestions.
‘Perhaps you're right,’ he told Hyacinth.
‘She's a bit of a liar, I know.
For instance, Charles Harvey has tipped her off about the new motorway but she pretends she doesn't know.
I think she's going to cash in on it.’
‘There you are then,’ said Hyacinth.
The night was still young and at this point David suggested that, as Carole had pushed off home, they should go back to his room at the Grand and watch television.
Hyacinth, who thought that David was quite good-looking although rather old, wondered what she had to lose.
It could not be her virtue.
She had lost that on top of the Yardley bus at the age of twelve.
It was either the Grand or an early night.
They walked away from the front past a late-night shopping complex where a tipsy David bought Hyacinth several small presents.
He slipped his arm around her waist and, with growing anticipation, they entered the Grand through its rear entrance, thereby missing the riot.
The lift stopped at the first floor where they  glimpsed Jeffrey Archer saying goodbye to a departing guest.
‘I do like a good Jeffrey Archer,’ said Hyacinth.
‘I get them out of the public library.’
David kissed her on the mouth.
He much preferred Jackie Collins.
Once inside No. 23, David turned on the telly.
David Attenborough was crawling up behind two copulating lions.
‘BBC 2,’ said Hyacinth.
‘Let's have ITV.’
David took two quarter bottles of champagne out of the mini-bar, and collected two tooth mugs.
Hyacinth, who was developing a taste for it, knocked hers back in two gulps, while David Swan gathered his strength for the assault.
The night was young and Hyacinth (‘call me Hy’) uncommonly beautiful.
A key turned in the lock, the top light was switched on and the errant Carole stood on the threshold, her suitcase in hand.
‘Hello,’ she said, defensively, ‘I'm back…
’ There was a total silence, interrupted by Hyacinth who smoothed down her skirt, grabbed her coat, and peevishly demanded, ‘Where's my chocolate teddy bear and my new knickers?’
She found the bag containing the several gifts on the bedside table and, with a cheery ‘goodnight all’, left the room.
She was followed five minutes later by an angry Carole, suitcase in hand, who was to find that she was unable to quit the hotel until midnight.
David, who had been given a piece of her mind, returned sadly to a state of detumescence and made do with David Attenborough who at least was living vicariously.
Good on him.
Amaranth and Charles Harvey left the party before the disturbance.
En route to his room they met only Roger Freeman, the Minister for Public Transport, and thus a ministerial colleague of Harvey's, who was on his way to Archer's party.
He wanted to tell Charles, that he had, at last, been on a bus in Brighton.
They were not very comfortable, he complained, and inclined to take ‘one’ way past ‘one's’destination; but cheap, none the less.
Harvey suggested, a shade abruptly, that Freeman might now try the tube.
Their love-making, which was protracted and energetic (Amaranth was afraid she had cricked her neck), continued until midnight, and she slept soundly until seven o'clock next morning.
Thursday Morning
It was reported on TV-AM that there had been forty arrests as a result of the riot, but it was not known if any charges would be brought.
Two policemen had been admitted to hospital along with Wullie Robertson with a broken nose.
The Home Secretary was interviewed.
The police had been magnificent, Kenneth Clarke said.
‘Lore'n orda’ must be maintained at all costs, and the riot, if that was what it was, had been swiftly contained.
He murmured something to the effect that youth must be served, ‘John Donne’, but the interviewer did not take him up on his quotation.
What was the Tory Party going to do about its Young Conservatives?
Had the Home Secretary seen the offensive banners carried by the Party's youth wing?
What effect would last night's regrettable occurrence have upon the morning's debate on immigration, to which Mr Clarke was expected to reply?
The Party chairman would decide later that day on  what course of action to take pertaining to the Young Conservatives: the morning's debate would continue as planned.
‘Nignog’ was not a phrase that came readily to his lips.
It was not in vogue in Nottingham.
What was its derivation?
When told that Robertson's condition in hospital was ‘stable’, Clarke replied with a flash of humour that the news was better than expected.
‘Wullie,’ he mused, ‘was not as balanced as one might like.’
The Grand had a wartime look to it, security having been reinforced.
Municipal workers were dousing the remnants of the street fires that had burned so brightly the night before.
Ash blew along the front, driven by a brisk morning breeze.
At nine o'clock sharp, the party chieftains met in John Major's room.
They had slept badly.
The riot, particularly the part the Young Conservatives had played, had occupied the media to the exclusion of everything else, save for Amaranth Wilikins's ‘exhibition’.
‘We are in danger of turning into some seaside vaudeville,’ was the view of the Prime Minister.
Graver even than usual, he was wearing one of his greyer suits.
Fowler, who had fallen into bed at four in the morning, agreed; if this morning's papers were any guide, the Party conference had given the appearance of a nightclub crossed with a football riot.
The platform's comfortable victories in debate, over Europe and party policy and PR, had passed almost without comment.
Lady Thatcher had arrived breathing fire and smoke, and had, so far, given no undertaking as to her silence in the debate on immigration.
John Gummer was despatched to discover her intentions.
Lamont told how she had gone round the dining room at breakfast handing  out brochures about her Foundation.
‘We must keep alive the sacred flame,’ had been her message.
There was much adverse comment.
They then held a discussion about the riot.
The news from the Brighton General Hospital was that Wullie Robertson was resting comfortably, his injuries were relatively light and he would be released that afternoon into the custody of the Secretary of State for Health.
The police were contemplating bringing charges of riot and affray.
It was agreed that John Major, departing from precedent, should ‘say a few words’ at nine-thirty, and announce that the national YC executive and officers were to be disbanded a la Tebbit.
Kenneth Clarke would reply to the debate on immigration and promise stricter controls on all immigrants, whether Bantu or Bulgarian.
‘Now,’ murmured the Home Secretary, ‘is the time for all good men to come to the aid of the Party.’
He was wearing a newly purchased pair of suede shoes.
As the meeting broke up the conversation turned to Archer's party.
‘I wish,’ said Douglas Hurd, with all the authority of a member of Pop, ‘that Archer would not go round his wretched parties asking if one wanted ‘some Krug’.
‘Some champagne’ might be passable.
But I, personally, was taught to say ‘wine’.
We all know that the stuff costs sixty pounds a bottle.’
Margaret Thatcher was sitting up in her double bed at the Hospitality Inn giving dictation to two secretaries.
Had not Winston done as much when he was Premier during Hitler's War?
The Great Man had risen late, attended to his correspondence while still in bed, lunched and dined extravagantly well (which she certainly did not) and stayed up half the night, much to the chagrin of his generals.
Late hours had probably contributed hugely to Alanbrooke's disenchantment with Our Great War Leader.
As much might be said for members of her cabinet.
It was not usually until two o'clock that Denis could persuade her to go to bed.
George Gardiner and Alfred Sherman sat in an anteroom ready at an instant to do her bidding.
Denis Thatcher, who was knocking golf balls into cups, was at the same time rehearsing his speech, to be delivered at lunch that Thursday to the Hove Rotary Club.
It was entitled ‘Can Britain recover her former glory?’
He, too, had his doubts.
John Gummer was announced, but Margaret Thatcher listened with scant patience to his supplications.
It had been a mistake on her part to appoint him chairman of the Party in the 1980s, the twin conditions of the appointment being, as she remembered, the removal of his ‘dreadful’ beard and the dropping of the ‘Selwyn’.
She told him that she had no intention whatsoever (here her voice rose in pitch) of addressing the Party conference on any subject what-so-ever.
For fourteen years she had delivered the Leader's speech on the last afternoon of the conference; she was too old a hand to speak from the floor.
She would, as John Major knew, take her place on the platform on the Friday afternoon as was her due.
Until then her sole performance would be as guest of honour that evening at the Eastbourne Conservative Club, where she had been asked to unveil a bust in commemoration of Dr Bodkin Adams.
Gummer having been summarily dismissed, a lugubrious George Gardiner tapped on the door and entered  carrying a large parcel, marked ‘urgent’, upon which Lady Thatcher fell with cries of pleasure.
‘Out, out,’ she shouted.
‘We must have a modicum of privacy.’
Amaranth's hosts at ‘Mon Repos’, having remarked upon her unslept-in bed, speculated cheerfully as to the identity of her partner.
Couldn't have been a member of the Cabinet, they agreed.
Judging by their recent performances, they were all living on their memories.
She returned in time for breakfast.
‘Muesli, dear?
And have you seen the papers?’ asked the younger of the two men who ran the boarding house.
‘You're all over them.’
She was told to sit tight while he went round the corner to the newsagent, returning with an armful of print.
The ‘heavies’ all carried more or less the same picture of a statuesque blonde, at first sight naked, standing on the rostrum, her arm outstretched in the direction of Sir Charles Webb-Bowen, whose incredulous, even leery expression, was later to be the cause of much hilarity.
The Mail had indeed captioned the picture ‘Take as long as you like, my dear, the floor is yours’.
She was on every front page, save for the Independent which carried a picture of the Queen Mother (Amaranth was on page 2).
The political correspondents had all been carried away.
Michael White of the Guardian likened Amaranth to Venus rising from the foam, Bruce Anderson to the spirit of enterprise, while Lord Wyatt of Weeford, who had been sent to Brighton for the Telegraph, wrote that he had been ‘captivated’ by a performance which by its daring and originality had brought an otherwise dull Tory conference startlingly to life.
What a filly!
A star is born, was his conclusion.
The tabloids were even more generous.
Today had her on the front page, in full colour.
‘Tories unveil secret weapon’, it claimed.
The Star carried three pictures of her scattering her scarves upon the heads of cheerful spectators: ‘Ex TV Weathergirl sends the barometer rising’.
To Kelvin Mackenzie, the Sun's editor, Amaranth was the Tories' page three girl.
The True Brit had all the usual pictures, but there was a sinister announcement.
Tomorrow, it said, our ace reporter, Ron Barton, will bring you exclusively Amaranth's life story written by the new Madonna herself.
She was under the impression that Charles had put the kibosh on any exclusive agreement with Barton, and most certainly nothing had been said about her writing her life story.
What had he found out about her?
There were secrets she would prefer to keep to herself.
Overwhelmed by her publicity, Amaranth finished her breakfast, and set out for the Grand and Harvey, doing her very best to subdue a worm of doubt.
She felt a little like the sorcerer's apprentice.
The guests of the hotel were picking their way gingerly along the front towards the conference centre.
The weather had turned a chill grey, and a brisk wind scattered the ashes of half-a-hundred fires.
The sea was the colour of slate.
Amaranth had to struggle against the tide.
If she could not find Charles in the hotel, she would be obliged to seek him within the conference building.
She was stopped by the man behind the desk, who had no difficulty in recognising her.
Despite the fact that she had not registered, there was a sheaf of messages.
She took them into the almost deserted coffee lounge.
They were peremptory in tone, flattering in derivation.
‘Please ring Features Editor, the Sun’, and ‘Get in touch soonest with BBC's Newsnight’, and several more of the same.
Ron Barton sidled up to her, and, without as much as a by your leave, took a seat, placing his dictaphone between them as he did so.
‘Pity you didn't accept my offer of five grand.
The editor would have doubled it, if you'd played ball with me.
Now you're all over the bloody papers.
No hope of an exclusive.’
Amaranth, who felt her temper rising, asked about the trailer in today's True Brit.
‘Who says I am writing the story of my life?
Are you paying me for that?’
‘Not a sou,’ was the response.
‘I've got the pictures, lovely pictures.
As for the rest I can make it up.
Our library girl has been through our cuttings and there is quite a lot about you.
And Mr Wilikins has been very helpful.
You made an enemy there.’
At the words ‘lovely pictures’, Amaranth remembered the ‘spread’ in Penthouse for which she had received –500 all that time ago.
‘What pictures?’ she asked, her face colouring.
Would they come back to haunt her now?
Ron Barton looked her up and down.
Amaranth, who was wearing a navy blue skirt, matching blazer and Hermes scarf, felt uncomfortably naked.
‘We all had a good view of you, yesterday,’ said Ron, ‘but not as good as it could be.’
He took from his plastic executive briefcase photostats of the three-page Penthouse spread.
‘A bit raunchy for a family newspaper,’ he said, ‘but I expect we'll manage somehow.’
Amaranth burst into tears, and leapt to her feet.
‘You  little shit,’ she hissed.
She lunged at Barton who ducked.
Ron was looking pleased with himself.
With those pix and the copy he would concoct, he would be in line for a handsome bonus.
A large woman of formidable appearance, who had been passing the open door of the coffee lounge and whose attention had been caught by Amaranth's evident distress, came over to them.
She asked if anything was the matter.
Could she be of any assistance?
‘Is this man being a nuisance to you, my dear?
He seems to spend his time hanging around the ‘otel.’
It was Mrs de Crespigny.
‘I've been sexually assaulted!’ cried Amaranth.
‘This little swine put his hand up my skirt and groped me.
He hurt.’
Her distress was obvious.
‘Get the police,’ cried Amaranth.
‘I want him arrested.
I will prefer charges.’
At the word police three security men and an elderly constable left their post in the hallway and entered the lounge.
They were confronted by Mrs de Crespigny.
‘Orficer,’ she said, ‘I sit on the bench in Cisister.
This young lady has been assaulted sexually by that beastly little man.’
She pointed at Ron Barton who was no longer looking pleased with himself.
‘I insist you take him into custody.
He is a menace to all decent women.’
The elderly constable shooed away the two security guards, and locked the door.
Amaranth was sobbing wildly, Barton was fiddling with his dictaphone, and Mrs de Crespigny was standing between them, her hands on her hips and her legs placed firmly apart.
Her shoes were very sensible.
‘There is far too much of this sort of thing,’ she cried.
‘In Gloucestershire there is a positive epidemic of it.’
The constable took out his notebook, and asked if  anyone had witnessed the incident.
It appeared that Mrs de Crespigny had not actually seen Barton's snake-like right hand thrust itself up Amaranth's navy blue skirt.
‘I was just passing the door, orficer.
But see for yourself, the poor woman is evidently very distressed.’
‘Name?’ said the policeman to Amaranth and then took down her particulars.
‘And you, sir?’
‘I'm Ron Barton and I'll have you know that I am the Roving Correspondent of the True Brit, the newspaper with an even bigger circulation than the Sun, and I never laid a finger on, or up, the lady.
She's making the whole thing up.’
Amaranth cried loudly that she was not.
‘I'm sore,’ she said.
‘He deliberately set out to hurt me.
And simply because I refused to write my life story in his bloody rag.’
Luck enters into all things, and here Ron Barton was unfortunate.
Some police make quite a tidy income ringing up their contacts at the bottom end of Fleet Street whenever they have a customer of public interest.
How else could it be so swiftly known that a prominent member of the Royal College of Acupuncturists, say, had been picked up during the night and pinched for drunk-driving?
There is no agreed tariff, but money most certainly changes hands.
It so happened that the local station was still waiting on the True Brit for recognition of a tidbit passed on to that paper six months ago about a rural dean and a lady elephant-tamer.
They had been told, once too often, that ‘the cheque is in the post’.
‘Do you wish to prefer charges, madam?’ asked the constable.
Amaranth said she most certainly did.
‘In that case I must ask you both to come down to the station  with me.
You will, of course, travel in separate cars.’
‘Shall I accompany you, my dear?’ asked Mrs de Crespigny, and the two women left the hotel together.
Barton, who wanted to telephone his paper, was told he could do so later, ‘in the nick’.
Amaranth sat in the back of the police car with Mrs de Crespigny (‘Nora, my dear’).
In the front, beside the driver, sat a woman PC.
Amaranth, who was by now terrified by her audacity, asked her what would happen next, and was told she would be asked to make a statement, and possibly be examined by a lady doctor.
‘Then off you go.
We are obliged to send the details to the Crown Prosecution Service, and in six months’ time we shall know whether we can prosecute.
Take an hour or so of your time, this morning.
You'll be back in time for dinner.
By the way,’ added the WPC, ‘I thought you were terrific at the conference yesterday.
My sergeant wondered whether you might be available for one of our benefit nights.
But I suppose you will be too busy.’
Mrs de Crespigny said there was no question of Mrs Wilikins performing before the Sussex Constabulary.
‘I've never heard of such a thing.’
Once at the Prince Albert Street police station, Amaranth and her escort were taken to a small, comfortably furnished room where they were interviewed by a woman detective.
With a feeling that the die was cast, Amaranth put her signature to the statement alleging sexual assault on the part of one Ronald Barton.
She was asked to step next door where she was cursorily examined by a female Indian doctor who offered no opinion.
Mrs de Crespigny (‘Nora Champion de Crespigny is my full name’) wrote to the effect that she had been passing the lounge at the time, and was a witness, if not  to the actual assault, then to Mrs Wilikins's evident distress.
‘He would not have been such a fool as to do it in front of witnesses.’
The WPC agreed.
It would have been most unlikely.
Amaranth and Mrs de Crespigny summoned a taxi and were taken back to the Grand.
Ralph Grunte woke late in his room on the top floor of the Grand Hotel, and broke wind.
He had not retired to bed sober, but then he rarely, if ever, did.
At the House of Commons he could at least rely upon one of the whips to put him in a cab, and pay the driver.
This chore fell, more often than not, upon his area whip, the unlucky ‘Worthy’ Evans, who was owed a tidy sum.
Evans kept a note of his expenditure in a little black book which he presented to Grunte at the beginning of each Summer Recess.
In his constituency, the pressures of being nice to people, opening fetes, and being one of the lads had driven Grunte to seek the comforts of alcohol — that necessary anaesthetic without which politics would soon become intolerable.
The duties which fell to Worthington Evans at Westminster became Bill O'Farrell's responsibility in Warwickshire, while at Brighton he could always rely upon Leroy Burns.
What I need, thought Grunte, telephoning room service for ‘a proper English Breakfast’ and a newspaper ‘small enough to read in bed’, is a bit of nooky.
He had picked up the phrase from his teenage secretary.
‘Nook and Cranny.’
Slap and tickle, we used to call it.
A beguiling vision of Roedean's Amanda doing physical jerks in her underwear, touching her toes and running on the spot was interrupted by the telephone.
It was Angela  Cartwright.
Grunte braced himself for remonstrance and rebuke.
‘I am very worried by Hyacinth Scragg,’ she said.
‘I feel that I am, as you might say, in loco parentis.
’ Grunte felt relieved that the responsibility was not to be thrust upon him.
He already had an interest in the lovely Hy.
‘I know I can rely upon your discretion, mum's the word,’ his constituency chairman continued, ‘but all the publicity she has been getting has gone to her head.
Dancing at all hours with John Major and attacking that television reporter-the poor woman might easily have lost an eye.’
(Grunte settled down comfortably and glanced at his Daily Mail; Angela never used one word where three would ‘suffice’.)
‘And that's not all.
Carole Swan has just rung me from her lovely home to tell me what happened last night in the Hotel…’
Grunte, whose attention had been momentarily distracted by the sight of Amaranth on the front page, switched his attention back to the telephone.
He held his breath.
The saucy sod.
Not content with blackguarding him in the columns of the local rag, him and his silly daughter's bum, the one-time Chief Citizen of the Borough had been up to no good with a girl young enough to be Grace's sister, and in the Grand Hotel, and at a Conservative Party conference of all places.
His enemy had been delivered into his hands.
‘And we're supposed to be the Party of the family,’ said Grunte, piously.
‘I am most grievously shocked, and so too, will be John Patten.’
Mrs Cartwright said she was, too.
Grunte seized his chance.
He was well aware of the forces operating against him, and he knew that Mrs Cartwright, as chairman of the Association, carried  enormous influence.
If she could be won over, his seat was probably safe.
And the old thing wasn't really that old…
‘Angela,’ he said, ‘you and me, we've not always seen eye to eye recently, but we are friends.
Come and have a spot of lunch with me today, at the Hospitality Inn at one o'clock.
Just the two of us.
With any luck we can straighten out Hyacinth, David Swan, the swine, and any other little local difficulties.’
Mrs Cartwright said she would be only too delighted.
Joshua Morris looked down his calendar of events, carefully prepared for him by his secretary.
Under ‘Thursday’, he read of only two engagements: his treat, that is, the lunch he was giving at English's Oyster House at one o'clock for six of his local party, much travelled Salopians upon whose goodwill, patience and forbearance he had long relied; and (here his heart fell) the National Society of Agents' dinner at the Metropole Hotel.
This annual event lacked gaiety, being viewed by Ministers and MPs alike as a necessary chore where political shop would be the most attractive item on the menu.
Felicity could not easily attend the lunch as her status was indeterminate; and she had no wish ‘to break bread, or even to take wine’ with the Party's local professionals.
‘I shall come into Brighton with you, and then drive to Battle to visit my brother.
I will be back at the Grand at ten.’
‘I'm sorry you're not coming to the agents’ dinner,’said Joshua.
‘It's the stuff of politics.’
He told her that when Ted Heath was Prime Minister, Mrs Sarah Morrison had been appointed a vice-chairman of the party with a  brief to turn Ted into a human being.
They had attended the agents' dinner at Blackpool, and Sarah, sitting way below the salt, had noticed with alarm that Heath was silent.
She scribbled on her napkin the words, ‘For God's sake say something’, and, having folded it carefully, passed it up through the guests to the Prime Minister himself.
Ted opened it, wrote, ‘I have’, folded it and passed it back to her.
Margaret and the Prime Minister had had no such trouble.
Lady Thatcher never drew breath, while John Major was a good listener.
Joshua made a note of Felicity's brother's telephone number just in case, and joined the queue of conference goers as it shifted sullenly forward step by step.
The Croats had apparently been put on red-alert.
Amaranth was the subject of much comment.
One matron declared that if Ms Wilikins-the accent was on the Ms — came looking for a seat in Camberley she would receive short shrift.
Her husband, who was wearing a Sapper tie, reluctantly agreed.
Hyacinth Scragg, escorted by a camera crew, director and producer, was let through the barrier with scarcely an attempt at scrutiny.
There was a murmur of disapproval.
Her hair had been done in the salon at the Grand (paid for by TVS), and she was wearing what looked like a gypsy costume.
The TVS producer had had the idea of asking Hyacinth to play the role of ‘guest interviewer’ and had spent an hour or so that morning, showing her something of how it was done.
‘Don't let them rattle on; when you have had enough, smile sweetly, say ‘many thanks’ and we'll switch off the lights.’
She got the hang of it quickly enough.
This was fun; with any luck she could say goodbye to facials, mud-packs and manicures.
Tim Renton, once the Minister for the Arts (in any other  country save Britain his title would have been Minister of Culture), thought Hyacinth would have made an admirable Carmen.
His blood, though thin, was still capable of being stirred.
‘My God, what next?’ asked the Camberley matron whose sandy, pine-fringed garden produced nothing quite as exotic.
‘Is she going to dance?’
Her husband, taking his cue, murmured that nothing would surprise him nowadays.
The Party conference was in danger of becoming a music-hall.
One old dear was doing her knitting.
She was sitting on a shooting stick.
Once inside the building Joshua was surprised to see Enoch Powell sitting alone in front of a cup of coffee.
He had aged: his toothbrush moustache, which once might have led the reconquest of India, had turned quite white.
He sat gazing into space, his unblinking stare which had compelled Harold Macmillan to shift him in Cabinet so as to avoid what he took for continual rebuke, unbroken by the throng that pressed about him.
Had he come to prophesy rivers of blood?
Morris could never make up his mind about Enoch.
Was he a great man robbed of political success by his own misjudgement, or a pedant who should have stuck to his texts?
His turning up at Brighton had, given the occasion of the debate on immigration, an almost vulture-like quality.
Had he come to gloat?
Were he to be called in the immigration debate Joshua would most certainly abandon the bookshop where he planned to spend at least part of the morning.
In fact, the great debate, like most ‘great debates’, was something of an anti-climax.
Instructions had gone out from on high that the boat was not to be rocked, and  Margaret Thatcher was as good as her word.
Enoch Powell sat hunched and brooding, breaking his silence only to pass the time of day with John Biffen.
Norman Tebbit had, it was said, returned to a board meeting in the City.
Even the bulk of YCs were absent from the hall.
Their disbandment was announced, almost en passant, by John Major, and the squads of stewards had little to do, save to crick their fingers and steal glances at their copies of the Daily Mail.
The mover of the platform's motion (welcoming the courage with which the Government was facing the problem of transnational migration) was, perhaps, a shade patronising.
His well-meaning attempt at being nice to Black Britons amounted to little more than the recital of a catalogue of sporting achievement.
At the mention of ‘Big Frank’ Bruno, Leroy Burns got to his feet and forced a round of applause.
— John Taylor spoke well and got a standing ovation.
The debate was wound up by the Home Secretary who was at his most Clarke-ish, punching the air with his fists and pushing back a lock of hair a la Heseltine.
Yet it was not an unsuccessful attempt to bring out the best in his audience.
The vote was taken just before eleven o'clock, and only a scattering of frayed cuffs were raised in opposition.
Joshua Morris left the hall and stood in line for a cup of Gold Blend.
Sir Charles called for order as the hall emptied and promised the residue a ‘lively debate’ upon the Health Service.
Webb-Bowen had about him that healthy gloss which derives from subscriptions paid annually by Coutt's banker's order to either BUPA or PPP.
Mrs Virginia Bottomley would reply to the debate.