

II THE ANALYSIS AND VALUATION OF SECURITIES
The second part of this book deals with the analysis and valuation of securities, ranging from cash market securities such as CDs, bills, bonds, shares and foreign currency, through derivative securities such as futures and options, to synthetic securities such as swaps.
It is essential for the efficiency of a modern financial system to analyse all the securities traded in it, since only then is it possible to determine whether securities are fairly priced or whether they are underpriced or overpriced and hence give rise to profitable trading possibilities.
4
Money market securities
Money market securities are securities with maturities of less than a year.
This contrasts with capital market securities, which have maturities in excess of one year.
There are two main classes of money market securities: those that are quoted on a yield basis and those that are quoted on a discount basis.
The UK financial markets assume a 365-day year in contrast with the US and euro markets which assume a 360-day year.
This is important for calculating interest payments.
The settlement day for money market securities in the UK is the first business day following purchase.
4.1 Securities quoted on a yield basis
The most important examples of money market securities that are quoted on a yield basis are money market deposits and negotiable certificates of deposit.
Such instruments are always issued at par.
4.1.1 Money market deposits
Money market deposits (MMDs) are fixed-interest fixed-term deposits of up to one year with banks or discount houses.
The deposits can be for the following terms: overnight, 1 week, or 1,2,3,4,5,6,9 or 12 months.
They are not negotiable so cannot be liquidated before maturity.
The interest rates on the deposits are fixed for the term and are related to the London Interbank Bid Rate (LIBID) of the same term.
For example, the 1 -month deposit rate could be 1 -month LIBID less 0.125 per cent .
The interest and capital are paid in one lump sum on the maturity day (except for discount house deposits, where interest is paid monthly).
Therefore the amount of interest due at the end of the period is calculated according to the formula for simple interest:, where R = amount of interest M= face or par value of deposit d= interest rate on deposit (as a proportion) N= number of days between deposit and maturity.
The maturity value of the deposit (F) is therefore .
EXAMPLE OF MONEY MARKET DEPOSIT
An MMD is opened on 15 January and matures on 15 February: M = 1,000,000 d (1 month, annualized) = 9.25% N = 31 days .
On 15 February, the depositor would get back 1,007,856.16.
The effective rate of interest re on the  deposit is given by .
We can use money market deposits to demonstrate the problem of reinvestment risk, the risk of renewing the deposit at a lower rate in a subsequent period.
Suppose that on 15 January, the 1 month and 2-month rates were the same at 9.25 per cent; i.e., the yield curve was flat over this range and expected to remain flat, so that the l-month rate starting in one month's time is also expected to be 9.25 per cent .
In this case it would always be advantageous to invest for one month at a time rather than for two months at one go.
This is because in the first case the interest earned at the end of the first month can be reinvested in the second month; in the second case, the whole interest does not accrue until the end of the second month and so is not available for reinvestment until then.
In the first case, the maturity value of the deposit at the end of two months is  where  is the current l-month rate, is the 1-month rate beginning in one month's time, and N 1 and N 2 are the number of days in the months of January and February.
In the second case, the maturity value of the deposit at the end of two months is  where  is the current 2-month interest rate.
The reinvestment return is 55.74 but the reinvestment risk is that on 15 February the 1-month rate will have fallen from the 9.25 per cent expected to, say, 8.75 per cent.
The value of the deposit at the end of two months would have fallen from 1,015,007.80 to 1,014,621.23, which represents a loss of 386.57.
4.1.2 Negotiable certificates of deposit
Negotiable certificates of deposit (CDs) are receipts from banks for deposits that have been made with them.
The deposits themselves carry a fixed interest rate related to LIBID and have a fixed term to maturity, so cannot be withdrawn before maturity.
But the certificates or receipts on those deposits can be traded in a secondary market; i.e., they are negotiable.
CDs are therefore very similar to negotiable money market deposits, although the yields are about 0.25 per cent below the equivalent period deposit rates because of the added benefit of liquidity.
The maturities of CDs are  generally between one and three months, although some CDs have maturities in excess of one year (e.g. five years).
Interest is paid at maturity except for CDs lasting longer than a year, in which case interest is paid annually.
While most CDs are fixed-rate, some have variable interest rates.
For example, a 6-month CD could have a 30-day rollover; this means that the interest rate on the CD is related to 6-month LIBID and is fixed for 30 days, and will change every 30 days if LIBID has changed.
The interest on a fixed-rate CD is calculated exactly as in (4.1) above, where d is called the coupon rate on the CD.
However, d does not necessarily represent the yield on the CD, because the price of the CD is not fixed since the CD is traded in a secondary market.
If the current market price of the CD including accrued interest is P and the current yield is r, we can calculate the yield given the price using  or the price given the yield using  where M = face value of the CD, F = maturity value of the CD, N im = number of days between issue and maturity, N sm = number of days between settlement and maturity, N is = number of days between issue and settlement.
Equation (4.3) calculates the current market price by discounting the maturity value F at a yield r with N sm days to maturity.
EXAMPLES OF CERTIFICATES OF DEPOSIT
1
1 m CD issued at par on 15 April with a coupon of 10 per cent with 91 days to maturity (matures on 15 July):
2
1 m CD issued at par with a coupon of 8 per cent with 91 days to maturity, currently priced at 1,005,000 with 61 days remaining:
3
1 m CD issued at par with coupon of 8 per cent with 91 days to maturity, currently yielding 9 per cent with 61 days remaining:.
The effective rate of interest re on a CD yielding 9 per cent with 61 days to maturity is .
It is possible to decompose the current market price P into accrued interest and principal using the formula .
Using (4.4),.
The principal in the last example above is therefore .
The increase in money market interest rates from 8 to 9 per cent has had the effect of reducing the principal (i.e. the clean price of the CD without accrued interest) below the par value of 1 million.
The reason for the fall in the clean price of the CD is simple.
Money market interest rates have risen from 8 to 9 per cent in the course of one month.
A newly issued CD with a maturity of, say, two months will therefore have to yield 9 per cent if an investor is going to hold it.
Since it is issued at par, this CD will therefore have a coupon rate of 9 per cent.
As an alternative, the investor might consider investing in the CD just considered.
It was originally issued with a three-month maturity but now has two months left.
It is therefore identical to the two-month CD apart from the lower coupon rate of 8 per cent.
In order to be actively traded in the secondary market, this CD must also yield 9 per cent.
Since the coupon rate cannot be changed, the CD will yield 9 per cent only if the clean price falls to 998,256.10.
Since the accrued interest of 6,575.34 is guaranteed, the market price which includes accrued interest will be 1,004,831.44.
Finally, we can calculate the holding period yield on a CD.
We will consider the general case of a CD purchased after issue and sold before maturity.
The holding period yield, rh, is given by  where r p = yield on the CD at purchase, r s = yield on the CD at sale, N pm = number of days between purchase and maturity, N sm = number of days between sale and maturity.
To illustrate the holding period return, consider an investor who purchases a 91-day CD (with a coupon of 10 per cent) with 50 days to maturity at a yield of 10 per cent and sells 30 days later at a yield of 10 per cent .
Therefore, = 10 per cent, N pm = 50 days, and N sm = 20 days, so that .
So even though the yield has not changed from 10 per cent over the period, the holding period return is less than 10 per cent.
This is the result of compounding: the CD is priced to include accrued interest, but the interest is not paid until maturity.
4.2 Securities quoted on a discount basis
Treasury bills, bills of exchange, bankers acceptances and commercial paper are the most important examples of money market securities that are quoted on a discount basis, i.e. that are sold on the basis of a discount to par.
Treasury bills (TBs) are short-term UK government IOUs of three months' duration.
If a TB is issued on 10 January, it will mature on 10 April.
On maturity, the holder receives the par value of the bill by presenting it to the Bank of England.
The proceeds are paid from the National Loans Fund.
Most TBs are denominated in sterling, but in October 1988, ECU-denominated TBs were introduced.
Bills of exchange (or trade bills or commercial bills) are similar to Treasury bills but are issued by private companies against the sale of goods.
They are used to finance trade in the short term.
Bankers acceptances are written promises issued by borrowers to banks to repay borrowed funds.
The lending bank lends funds and in return accepts the bankers acceptance.
The acceptance is negotiable and can be sold in a secondary market.
The investor who buys the acceptance can collect the loan on the day that repayment is due.
If the borrower should default, the investor has legal recourse to the bank that made the first acceptance.
Commercial paper (CP) refers to unsecured promissory notes issued by large corporations with maturities of between one day and a year.
The notes are not backed by any collateral; rather, they rely on the high credit rating of the issuing corporation.
Such corporations also tend to maintain credit lines with their banks sufficient to repay all their outstanding  commercial paper.
CP is therefore a quickly and easily arranged alternative to a bank loan.
The sterling commercial paper (SCP) market began in April 1986.
Corporations qualify for access to this market if they have a stock exchange listing and net assets exceeding 50 million.
All these securities are sold at a discount to their par value.
On maturity, the investor receives the par value.
Explicit interest is not paid on discount instruments.
However, interest is reflected implicitly in the difference between the discounted issue price and the par value received at maturity.
So while interest is received in the form of a capital value change, this is treated as income for tax purposes and not as capital gains.
Securities that are sold at a discount, pay no interest explicitly, and mature at par are known as pure discount securities.
If we know the yield on these securities, then we can calculate their price at issue by using the simple present value formula,.
This can be illustrated using TBs.
A 91-day 100 TB issued with a yield of 10.26 per cent would  therefore have an issue price of .
However, convention has it that TBs are not quoted on the basis of a yield, rather, they are quoted on the basis of a discount rate; and the issue price of TBs is not calculated as in (4.7); instead, it is determined as the difference between the face value and the discount.
Given the discount rate, d, the discount is found as follows.
.
From this we can find the issue price as .
If we know that the discount rate on a 91 -day 100 TB is 10 per cent, then we can calculate the Issue price as  implying a discount of 2.49.
The equivalent yield, r, on the TB is given by .
For the TB given here,.
The alternative way of pricing the TB is to substitute this yield into the present value formula (4.7) to give exactly the same issue price (97.51) as that using the discount rate formula (4.9).
The important point to note is that with all discount securities the yield is always greater than the discount rate; i.e., from (4.10), r > d.
This follows precisely because the securities trade at a discount: the return of 2.49 is achieved with an investment of only 97.51, not 100; the yield is based on 97.51 whereas the discount is based on 100.
The difference is greater, the higher the rate of discount and the longer the time to maturity.
For example, a 10 per cent discount rate implies yields of 10.08 per cent (over 30 days), 10.52 per cent (over 182 days) and 11.11 per cent (over 365 days).
The yield on pure discount securities such as TBs can also be compared with that on coupon paying bonds.
To do this we need to calculate the bond equivalent yield (or coupon equivalent yield), rb.
This allows for the fact that a coupon security will pay interest before it matures whereas a discount security will not.
The bond equivalent yield is the coupon of a bond which when trading at par would give the same yield as a discount security.
For a discount security with less than six months to maturity, the bond equivalent yield is the same as the simple equivalent yield (4.10) because the bond will have made only one coupon payment during the six-month period (on the maturity date).
However, for a discount security with more than six months (182 days) to maturity, the bond equivalent yield has to take into account the fact that the corresponding bond makes two coupon payments and that interest is earned by investing the first coupon.
Let rb be the coupon and also the yield that a bond must have in order for the bond that has an issue price P (the same as the discount security) to have a value M at maturity (again the same as the discount security).
The maturity value M will have four components (where N sm > 182 days):
1.
the first coupon payment, which consists of the interest accrued from the settlement date to the first payment date,.
2.
the interest earned by reinvesting the first coupon payment at the rate rb for half a year,.
3.
the return of principal, P;.
4.
the final coupon payment..
Adding these components together gives .
Rearranging this equation gives , where .
To illustrate, consider a discount security with 246 days to maturity with a discount rate of 9.43 per cent.
The purchase price will be  and the maturity value will be M = 100.
The bond equivalent yield (using H = 246/365 = 0.674) will be .
The simple equivalent yield is, from (4.10),.
As can be seen, the bond equivalent yield is always less than the simple equivalent yield because with the bond the first coupon payment can be reinvested, whereas this possibility is not available for a discount security, which therefore has to have a higher yield to compensate.
Finally, we can calculate the holding period yield on a discount security such as a TB.
We again consider the general case of a TB purchased after issue and sold before maturity.
The holding period yield, rh, is given by  where d p = rate of discount at purchase, d s = rate of discount at sale, N pm = number of days between purchase and maturity, N sm = number of days between sale and maturity.
To illustrate, consider an investor who purchases a 91-day bill 10 days after issue at a rate of discount of 10 per cent and sells it 7 days later at the same rate of discount.
Therefore d p = d s = 10 per cent, N pm = 81 days and N sm = 74 days, so that .
So even though the discount rate has not changed from 10 per cent, the holding-period return is greater than the 10 per cent discount rate, but it is less than the 10.26 per cent yield to maturity calculated using (4.10).
The first result follows from the fact that the investment in the TB is less than 100.
The second result follows from the fact that the TB is priced to include accrued interest but the interest is not paid till maturity.
4.3 Recent innovations in the money market
We end this chapter with a brief discussion of some recent innovations in the money market.
A note issuance facility (NIF), first introduced in 1981, is a medium-term commitment between a borrowing corporate and a bank, whereby the corporate can issue  commercial paper (the ‘note’) in its own name but the issue is effectively underwritten by the bank.
The bank stands committed either to purchase any paper that the corporate is unable to sell on a rollover date or, alternatively, to provide standby credit.
The bank therefore has an incentive to ensure that the paper is widely distributed among investors.
If the borrower happens to be another bank, then the notes are usually certificates of deposit.
The NIF commitment generally lasts for between five and seven years, with the commercial paper issued on a revolving basis, typically with maturities of three or six months.
One advantage of a NIF is that the underwriting commitment remains off-balance sheet until it is called upon, although there is an annual commitment fee payable on the unused portion of the facility.
Another advantage of a NIF is that the borrower gets the advantage of guaranteed long-term floating-rate funding, yet borrows only the amount necessary to finance  his short-term needs.
The NIF can be triggered under the following circumstances: demand in the commercial paper market has temporarily dried up, say, as the result of the failure of other borrowers or changes in regulatory conditions; or, the corporate is having financial problems (although the bank can protect itself with a ‘material adverse change’ clause).
In the euromarkets, euronotes are issued with maturities of three or six months under NIFs underwritten by banks; this contrasts with eurocommercial paper (ECP) and eurosterling commercial paper (ESCP), which have maturities of between one day and a year, but are not underwritten by banks.
A multiple component facility (or MCF), first used in 1984, allows the borrower to raise funds in a number of different forms, each of which is associated with a NIF.
The different forms can include short-term advances, swingline credits (which allow borrowers to draw same-day funds to cover delays in issuing notes) and bankers acceptances.
Thus an MCF is a multiple NIF, allowing the borrower to draw funds by whichever means is cheapest or most convenient at the time.
Revolving underwriting facilities (RUFs) are NIFs that have become common in the euromarkets.
RUFs can take two forms: either a single bank acts as a placing agent and arranges for a group of banks to underwrite an issue on a revolving basis; or a group of banks act as a tender panel for the placement of the notes.
The role of tender panels is to bid for the notes issued by the corporate and to use their placing power to transfer them to investors.
An extension of a RUF is a transferable revolving underwriting facility (TRUF) which permits underwriters to transfer their commitments to other banks.
Selected references
Exercises
1.
On 10 May you open a 2-month market deposit paying 8.75 per cent with 5,000,000.
What is the maturity value of the deposit?
2.
What is reinvestment risk?
Provide an illustration of reinvestment risk.
3.
A 1,000,000 certificate of deposit was issued at par with a coupon of 9.5 per cent and 91 days to maturity.
It is currently priced at 1,005,500 with 65 days to maturity.
What is the current yield on the CD?
4.
A 1,000,000 certificate of deposit was issued at par with a coupon of 10.5 per cent and 91 days to maturity.
It is currently yielding 11.5 per cent with 30 days to maturity.
What is the current price of the CD?
5.
You buy a 91-day CD (with a coupon of 9 per cent) with 60 days to maturity and a yield of 9.5 per cent .
Later you sell the CD when there are 10 days to maturity and the yield is 10 per cent.
What is your holding period return?
6.
Calculate the issue price of a 91-day Treasury bill with a par value of 10,000 and a discount rate of 9 per cent.
What is the yield at issue?
7.
The yield at issue on 60-day commercial paper is 8.878 per cent.
What was the discount rate? 8 Why does the yield on a discount security exceed the discount rate?
9.
Why does the yield on a discount security generally exceed the bond equivalent yield?
5
Bonds
Bonds are capital market securities and as such have maturities in excess of one year, unlike money market securities discussed in the last chapter which have maturities of less than a year.
Bonds also have more intricate cash flow patterns than money market securities, which typically involve just a single payment at maturity.
This makes bonds more difficult to price than money market instruments.
It also makes these prices more responsive to changes in the general level of interest rates than is the case with money market instruments.
In this chapter we consider the following issues: different types of bonds, the fair pricing of bonds, different yield measures, different yield curves (or term structures of interest rates), various theories underlying the yield curve, fitting the yield curve, and different measures of the interest rate risk, e.g. duration and convexity.
We conclude with a discussion of floating-rate notes.
The analysis of convertible bonds and bonds with warrants is deferred until Chapter 9.
5.1 Types of bonds
There are many different types of bonds that can be issued.
The most common type is the straight (or plain vanilla or bullet) bond.
This is bond paying a regular (usually semi-annual), fixed coupon over a fixed period to maturity or redemption, with the return of principal (i.e. the par or nominal value of the bond) on the maturity date.
All other bonds will be variations on this.
The frequency of coupon payments can differ between bonds; for example, some bonds pay coupons quarterly, others pay annual coupons.
The coupon payment terms can also differ between bonds.
For example, some bonds might not pay coupons at all (such bonds are called zero-coupon bonds, and they sell at a deep discount to their par values since all the reward from holding the bond comes in the form of capital gain rather than income); some bonds make coupon payments that change over time, e.g. because they are linked to current market interest rates (variable rate bonds or floating rate notes) or to an index such as the retail price index (index-linked bonds); and some bonds make coupon payments only if the income generated by the firm that issued the bonds is sufficient,(such bonds are known as income bonds; unlike other bond-holders, an income bond-holder cannot put the firm into liquidation if a coupon payment is not paid).
The redemption terms can also differ between bonds: some bonds have a range of possible redemption dates (such bonds are known as double-dated bonds), and sometimes the actual date of redemption is chosen by the issuer (callable bonds) and sometimes by the holder (puttable bonds); some bonds have no redemption date at all, so that interest on them will be paid indefinitely,(such bonds are known variously as irredeemables, perpetuals or consols).
Some bonds have option features attached to them: callable and puttable bonds are examples of this, as are convertible bonds (bonds that can be converted into other types of bonds or into equity) and bonds with warrants attached to them.
Bonds can also be differentiated according to their issuer.
Most bonds in the UK are issued by the British government in order to finance and manage the National Debt (such bonds are known as gilts).
Then there are bonds that are issued by UK public authorities, especially local authorities.
Such bonds are secured on the revenues of the local authorities and are generally not guaranteed by the government.
The duration of local authority bonds is typically between one and five years, although most are for one year and are known as yearling bonds.
Private companies also issue bonds, known as corporate bonds.
There are several classes of corporate bond.
Debentures are the most secured form of corporate debt (unlike in the USA, where debentures are unsecured corporate obligations).
They are secured by either a fixed or a floating charge against the assets of the company.
Fixed-charge debentures specify certain specific assets that are chargeable as security and which the company is not permitted to dispose of; in the event of default these assets are sold and the proceeds used to repay the debenture-holders.
Floating-charge debentures are secured by a general charge on all the assets of the company.
The company is able to dispose freely of assets until a default crystallizes the floating charge, at which time the charge fixes on the assets of the company that are not secured by a fixed charge.
Fixed-charge debentures rank above floating-charge debentures in the event of default, but only floating-charge debenture holders can ask for a company to be declared insolvent under the 1986 Insolvency Act.
Unsecured loan stocks are corporate bonds that are not secured by either a fixed or a floating charge.
In the event of liquidation, loan stockholders rank beneath debenture-holders and preferential creditors (such as the Inland Revenue).
Guaranteed loan stocks are corporate bonds that are not secured by a fixed or a floating charge, but are guaranteed by a third party, typically the parent-company of the issuer.
Bonds can also be distinguished by the currency of denomination.
Bonds issued in the UK in sterling by domestic issuers or foreign issuers are known as domestic and foreign (or bulldog) bonds, respectively.
The coupons on domestic bonds are generally paid net of UK basic rate income tax, whereas the coupons on bulldogs do not generally have tax deducted.
Bonds issued and/or traded in the UK in a currency other than sterling are known as eurobonds.
The first eurobond was issued in 1963 by the Italian company Autostrada with a coupon of 52 per cent and an issue size of $15 million.
Eurosterling bonds were first issued in 1972; they have all the characteristics of eurobonds rather than those of domestic or bulldog bonds, and the main issuers have been UK building societies, seeking long-term funds to finance their home loans.
The main currencies of issue of eurobonds are US dollars and Japanese yen.
They are generally issued by multinational companies, international agencies (such as the World Bank) and sovereign governments, and are generally unsecured.
New issues are underwritten and placed with investors by a syndicate of international banks led by a lead manager bank (such as Credit Suisse First Boston or Deutsche Bank).
The size of a eurobond issue usually lies between $50 and $100 million with a maturity of about six or seven years.
Eurobonds are principally in bearer form, transferable by delivery with no record of holder, thereby preserving anonymity.
The bond certificates have detachable coupon claim tokens, and coupon payments are generally paid annually free of UK income tax and withholding tax.
Eurobonds are usually listed on the London or Luxembourg stock markets.
Some eurobonds have a lock-up period of 90 days before they can be sold through the secondary markets to domestic investors.
The eurobond market has been the most innovative of all bond markets in designing new types of bond, both in terms of coupon payments and redemption proceeds.
For example, there are dual currency bonds, where the coupon payments are in one currency and the redemption proceeds are in another; currency change bonds, where coupons are first paid in one currency and then in another; deferred coupon bonds, where there is a delay in the payment of the first coupon; multiple coupon bonds, where the coupon payments change over the life of the bond (although in a predetermined manner), fixed-then-floating bonds, where the coupons change from being fixed rate to floating rate; floating-then-zero bonds, where the bonds change from being floating-rate coupon bonds to zero-coupon bonds; and missing coupon bonds, where a coupon payment is missed whenever a dividend payment on the issuing corporation's shares are missed.
Finally, bonds can be classified according to their default risk (or credit risk).
UK government bonds have a negligible risk of default, whereas the unsecured loan stock of private corporations have a much higher risk of default.
The default risk on a bond is usually assessed in the form   of a credit rating.
There are two main services providing credit ratings: Moody's, and Standard and Poor's.
These are shown in Table 5.1.
Associated with a bond's credit rating will be a default risk premium: the lower the credit rating, the greater the risk of default and the higher the default risk premium.
Table 5.2 shows some typical default risk premia (in excess of that on AAA bonds) on bonds with different credit ratings.
Non-investment grade bonds are sometimes known as junk bonds (or high-yielding bonds).
Junk bonds have been used, mainly in the USA, to finance leveraged buyouts (LBOs) and management buy-outs (MBOs).
There is as yet no junk bond market in the UK, although there was talk of one starting if the Hoylake takeover bid for BAT Industries in 1989 had been successful.
Finally, bonds in the UK are generally quoted in thirty-seconds of a pound (1/32).
For example, the price of a bond might be quoted as 98–08 which means 98382 or 98.25.
5.2 The fair pricing of bonds
A straight bond is a security that promises to pay a fixed interest or coupon payment every half-year, together with the return of principal or par value of the bond at maturity.
For example, 84 per cent Treasury Loan Stock 1997 was issued on 9 March 1987 and will make 20 coupon payments of 4.375 on 1 September and 1 March each year together with a final payment of 104.375 on 1 September 1997.
The fair price of such a bond is given by the discounted present value of the cash flow stream, using the market-determined discount rate for a bond of this maturity and risk class (and also using semi-annual discounting):, where P o = fair price of the bond, d = annual fixed coupon payment, B = par value of the bond, T= number of complete years to maturity, r = market-determined discount rate or required rate of return on a bond with this risk class and maturity (as a proportion).
The formula in (5.1) calculates the fair price on a coupon payment date, so that there is no accrued interest incorporated into the price.
It also assumes that there is an even number of coupon payment dates remaining before maturity.
If there is an odd number of coupon payment dates before maturity, the formula in (5.1) becomes .
EXAMPLE OF THE FAIR PRICING OF A BOND
Treasury Loan Stock 83 per cent 1997, d = 8.75 per 100 nominal, B = 100
, T= 9 years (i.e. the date of the calculation is 1 September 1988) r= 9.54 per cent.
. The fair price of the bond is 95.30, which is composed of the present value of the stream of coupon payments (52.07) and the present value of the return of principal (43.23).
The fair price of a perpetual or irredeemable bond (or consol) is given from (5.1) or (5.2) by setting .
5.3 Clean and dirty bond prices
In the UK bond markets (since 10 February 1986), the price that is quoted is the clean price.
This is the price disregarding accrued interest.
However, the price that is actually paid for the bond in the market is the dirty price (also called gross price or full price), which is the clean price plus net accrued interest.
In other words, the net accrued interest must be added to the quoted price to get the total price.
Accrued interest compensates the seller of the bond for giving up all of the next coupon payment even though he will have held the bond for part of the period since the last coupon payment.
This is illustrated in Fig. 5.1.
The clean price is constant for the whole period.
But the dirty price moves up and down like saw-teeth.
On the coupon payment date (C), the clean and dirty prices are the same and accrued interest is zero.
Between the coupon payment date and the next ex dividend date (X), the bond is traded cum dividend, so that the buyer gets the next coupon payment.
The seller is compensated for not receiving the next coupon payment by receiving accrued interest instead.
This is positive and increases up to the next ex dividend date, at which point the dirty price falls by the present value of the amount of the coupon payment.
The dirty price is now below the clean price, reflecting the fact that accrued interest is negative.
This is because after the ex dividend date, the bond is traded ex dividend; the seller not the buyer receives the coupon and the buyer has to be compensated in terms of a lower price for holding the bond but not receiving the next coupon payment.
The interest accruing between X and C takes the net accrued interest back to zero on the coupon payment date.
The net interest accrued since the last ex dividend date is determined as follows: where AI = net accrued interest, N xc = number of days between the ex dividend date and the coupon payment date (typically 37 days for UK government bonds), N xt = number of days between the ex dividend date and the date for which the calculation is being made.
5.4 Yield measures on bonds
Bonds are generally traded on the basis of their prices, but because of the complicated patterns of cash flows that different bonds can have, they are usually not compared in terms of prices; instead, they are generally compared in terms of yields.
There are many different types of yield measure.
5.4.1 Current yield
The simplest measure of the yield on a bond is the current yield (or flat yield, interest yield, income yield or running yield).
This is defined as  where rc = current yield, P = clean price.
For example, if the clean price of the bond is f95.30 and the coupon is 8.75, then the current yield is .
A more accurate measure of the current yield would be to use the dirty price (rather than the clean price), since this is the price actually paid for the bond.
However, the consequence of doing this is that the current yield would then exhibit a saw-tooth pattern as shown in Fig. 5.2.
The current yield is used to estimate the cost of or profit from holding a bond.
For example, if other short-term interest rates are higher than the current yield, the bond is said to involve a running cost.
This is also known as negative carry or negative funding.
The main problem with current yield is that it does not take into account capital gains or losses resulting from the differences between the current price of the bond and its maturity value.
Suppose that the bond just discussed will be redeemed in a year's time for 100.
The overall return is then given by  which exceeds the current yield by 4.93 per cent.
The current yield is therefore only really useful when there is a long time to maturity, in which case the capital gain or loss element will be small.
5.4.2 Simple yield to maturity
The simple yield to maturity (rms) attempts to rectify the shortcomings of the current yield measure by taking into account capital gains or losses.
The assumption made is that the capital gain or loss occurs evenly over the remaining life of the bond.
The resulting formula is  where rms = simple yield to maturity, P = clean price, T= number of years to maturity.
For the bond just discussed, and assuming T= 9 years,.
The main problem with the simple yield to maturity, though, is that it does not take into account compound interest.
As the dividends are paid they can be reinvested, and hence interest can be earned.
This increases the overall return from holding the bond.
5.4.3 Yield to maturity
The yield to maturity (or redemption yield) is the most frequently used measure of the return from holding a bond.
It takes into account the pattern of dividend payments, the bond's term to maturity, and the capital gain or loss arising over the remaining life of the bond.
From (5.1), these are three of the most important components determining a bond's price.
The yield to maturity is equivalent to the money-weighted rate of return or the internal rate of return on the bond.
The yield to maturity (rm) is calculated by solving the following equation:.
where P d = P + Al = dirty bond price (clean price plus accrued interest), rm = yield to maturity, N tc = number of days between current date and next coupon payment date, S = number of coupon payments before redemption; if T is the number of complete years before redemption, then S = 2T if there is an even number of coupon payments before redemption, and S = 2T+1 if there is an odd number of coupon payments before redemption.
Equation (5.7) uses rm to discount the bond's cash flows back to the next coupon payment and then discounts the value at that date back to date t.
The rm will be the yield to maturity if the value so achieved equals the dirty price of the bond at date t.
In other words, rm is the internal rate of return that equates the value of the discounted cash flows on the bond to the current dirty price of the bond (if date t is the current date).
The solution for rm cannot be found analytically and has to be found through numerical iteration using a computer or a programmable calculator.
EXAMPLE OF YIELD TO MATURITY
A bond has a dirty price of 96.50, an annual coupon payment of 8.75, and there is exactly one year before maturity.
Therefore (5.7) becomes .
Since this is a quadratic equation there will be two solutions, only one of which gives a positive rm.
The positive solution is rm= 12.58 per cent.
As an example of the iterative solution method, suppose that we start with a trial value for rm of r 1 = 12 per cent and plug this into the right-hand side of the above equation.
This gives a value for the right-hand side of  which is higher than the left-hand side (LHS = 96.50); the trial value for rm was too low.
Suppose next that we try r 2 = 13 per cent and plug this into the right-hand side of the equation.
This gives  which is lower than LHS.
Because RHS 1 and RHS 2 lie on either side of LHS, we know that the correct rm lies between 12 and 13 per cent.
Using the formula for linear interpolation, our linear approximation for rm is rm= 12.58 per cent, the same as the exact solution.
The net yield to maturity (or net redemption yield) is the yield to maturity that results from multiplying d in (5.7) by (1 -marginal tax rate).
The net redemption yield is lower than the gross redemption yield.
So far, we have calculated the yield to maturity on the basis of semi-annual discounting of semiannual coupon payments.
This is appropriate for most UK bonds.
But eurobonds make annual payments, and the appropriate method of calculating the yield to maturity is to use annual discounting.
However, the two yields to maturity are not then comparable directly.
We could make the eurobond directly comparable with the UK bond by using semi-annual discounting of the eurobond's annual coupon payments.
Alternatively, we could make the UK bond comparable with the eurobond by using annual discounting of the UK bond's semi-annual coupon payments.
The above four possibilities are listed below (assuming the calculation takes place on a coupon payment date so that Al = 0):
a)
Semi-annual discounting of semi-annual payments:.
b)
Annual discounting of annual payments:
c)
Semi-annual discounting of annual payments:
d)
Annual discounting of semi-annual payments:
Using the last example of a bond with a dirty price of 96.50, coupon payments of 8.75 per annum and a year to maturity, we get the following yields to maturity:
The patterns that emerge from this table are that (1) the higher the frequency of discounting, the lower the yield; and (2) the higher the frequency of payments, the higher the yield.
It is possible to convert between annually and semi-annually compounded yields using the following formulae: or between annually and quarterly compounded yields using the following formulae: where rm q rm s : and rm a are respectively the quarterly, semi-annually and annually compounded yields to maturity.
For example, a semi-annual yield of 12.58 per cent implies an annual yield of , while an annual yield of 12.98 per cent implies a quarterly yield of .
While the yield to maturity is the single most commonly used measure of yield, it nevertheless has several disadvantages.
The most important of these is that it will almost certainly not equal the actual return from holding the bond even if the bond is held to maturity.
This is because implicit in the calculation of the yield to maturity as the internal rate of return is the assumption that each coupon payment as it arises is reinvested at the internal rate of return.
This is demonstrated by multiplying both sides of (5.9) by :.
The LHS gives the value of the investment in the bond on the maturity date, compounding at the yield to maturity.
The RHS gives the terminal value of the returns from holding the bond.
The first coupon payment is reinvested for (2T-1) half-years at the yield to maturity, the second coupon payment is reinvested for (2T-2) half-years at the yield to maturity, and so on.
This is valid only if the rate of interest is constant for all future time periods, that is, if the yield curve (which will be discussed in the next section) is flat.
But a flat yield curve implies that the yields to maturity of all bonds should be identical.
This is clearly false.
Another disadvantage of yield to maturity is that investors do not typically hold bonds to maturity.
They would be much more interested in holding period returns, which depend on the bond's price when it is sold (in relation to the purchase price) and on the coupons received during the holding period.
5.4.4 Holding-period yield
The holding-period yield (sometimes called the reinvestment yield) is the average yield realized during the holding period, taking into account changes in the rollover rate (the interest rate at which coupon payments can be reinvested).
The risk that the rollover rate is less than yield to maturity is known as reinvestment risk (or rollover risk).
The holding-period yield, rh (assuming that the bond is bought on a coupon payment date (so that AI = 0) and sold an even number of coupon payment dates later (so that T is an integer)), is calculated using  where r i is the rollover rate of interest earned by the ith coupon payment and P 1 is the price at which the bond was sold.
EXAMPLE OF HOLDING PERIOD YIELD
A bond is purchased on a coupon payment date for 96.50 and sold exactly two years later for 97.125.
The annual coupon payment is 8.75 and the rollover rates for the first three coupon payments are 10.00,10.25, and 10.40 per cent respectively.
Using (5.17), the holding-period yield is .
5.4.5 Yield to par
The yield to par (or par yield) is the yield on bonds trading at or near their par values (i.e. between about 99 and 101).
The yield to par is therefore equal to the coupon rate for such bonds.
5.4.6 Yield to call and yield to put
Callable bonds are bonds that can be called at the option of the issuer.
Such a bond is likely to be called when the market rate of interest is lower than the coupon rate on the bond.
This will occur when the bond is trading above the call price.
Suppose that a bond is issued with 10 years to maturity and is callable after 5 years with the following call schedule:
The yield to first call is the yield to maturity assuming that the bond is redeemed on the first call date.
It can be calculated using (5.7) with B = 104.
Similarly, the yield to next call is the yield to maturity assuming the bond is called on the next available call date.
The operative life of a callable bond is the bond's expected life.
This depends on both the current price of the bond and the call schedule.
If the bond is currently trading below par, its operative life is likely to be the number of years to maturity.
If the current price is above par, the operative life of the bond will depend on the date on which the call price falls below the current price.
For example, if the current price is 103, the bond is not likely to be called until three years before maturity.
In this case, the operative life is three years less than the number of years to maturity.
Similarly, the operative yield is either the yield to maturity or the yield to relevant call depending on whether the bond is trading above or below par.
The yield to put is calculated in a similar manner as the yield to call.
But the put is exercised at the option of the investor, and he will exercise it only if this strategy maximizes the value of the bond.
Therefore a bond with a put option will always trade on the basis of the yield to maturity or the yield to put, whichever is greater.
5.4.7 Yield to average life and yield to equivalent life
Some bonds have a sinking fund or purchase fund attached to them.
For such bonds a proportion of the issue is redeemed before maturity, either randomly on the basis of the bond serial numbers or through direct purchase in the market.
A redemption schedule specifies the dates, the proportions and (in the case of random drawings) the values of the redemption payments.
The average life of a bond is defined as the weighted average time to redemption using relative redemption cash flows as weights: where  t = proportion of bonds outstanding redeemed in year t, B t = redemption price of bonds redeemed in year t, T= number of years to maturity.
EXAMPLE OF AVERAGE LIFE OF A BOND
A 50 m 8 per cent bond (with annual coupon payments) issued with five years to maturity has the following redemption schedule:
From (5.18), the average life is given by .
After three years, 10m of the bonds have been redeemed, leaving 25 per cent(i.e. 10/40) of the remaining bonds to be redeemed in the following year and 75 per cent (i.e.30/40) of the remaining bonds to be redeemed in the final year.
The average remaining life of the bond is .
The yield to average life is simply the yield to maturity under the assumption that the entire bond matures on the date corresponding to the average life at the average redemption price.
The average redemption price is given by .
For the bond in the last example, after three years, the average redemption price is 100.25.
If at this time the bond was trading at 99.25, the yield to average life (ral) is found by solving  to give ral = 9.77 per cent.
The yield to maturity in this case is 8.42 per cent.
This is below the yield to average life.
The reason is that the bond is trading below par and the redemption schedule has the effect of shortening the period over which the capital gain arises, thereby enhancing yield.
An alternative to making yield calculations based on average life is to make them based on equivalent life.
The equivalent life of a bond is defined as the weighted average redemption date using the present values of relative redemption cash flows as weights.
The equivalent life therefore takes into account the fact that the redemption payments are received at different times.
where  t and T are defined as in (5.18) and where P VB t , is the present value of the redemption price of bonds redeemed in year t.
The discount factor used to calculate the present values of the  redemption prices of the bonds is the yield to equivalent life, so we have to calculate the yield to equivalent life before we can calculate the equivalent life itself.
The yield to equivalent life (rel) is found by solving the following equation (assuming annual coupon payments and beginning on a coupon payment date so that Al = 0):.
To illustrate, we can take the last example of the five-year bond which is purchased after three years.
Equation (5.21) becomes  which solves to give rel = 9.72 per cent(cf. ral = 9.77 per cent ).
The corresponding equivalent life of the bond is found using (5.20):
Both the equivalent life and the equivalent life yield are less than the corresponding average life and average life yield.
This is always true and follows from using the present values of redemption cash flows rather than actual values, a procedure that gives greater weight to earlier cash flows.
As with callable bonds, the operative life and operative yield of a bond with a sinking fund depends on both the current price of the bond and the redemption schedule.
If the bond is trading below par, the issuer is likely to repurchase the bond in the market.
In this case, the operative yield is the yield to maturity.
If, however, the bond is trading above the redemption price, the issuer is likely to draw bonds for redemption.
In this case the operative yield is the yield to equivalent life.
5.4.8 Index-linked yields
With index-linked or indexed bonds, the coupon and principal are linked to a particular index, such as the retail price index (RPI), a commodity price index (e.g. oil) or a stock market index.
In order to determine the yield on such bonds, it is necessary to make forecasts of the relevant index.
As an example, we will use the case of index-linked government bonds which were first introduced in the UK in March 1981.
These bonds are linked to the RPI and are therefore designed to give a constant real yield.
Initially only pension funds could invest in them, because pension funds had index-linked pensions to deliver to their pensioners.
However, since March 1982 any investor can hold index-linked gilts.
Most of the index-linked stocks that have been issued have annual coupon payments of 2 or 2 ½ per cent; this is designed to reflect the fact that the long-run real rate of return on the UK capital stock is about 2 ½ per cent .
Both the coupon and the principal on index-linked gilts are scaled up by the ratio of two values of the RPI.
The denominator of this ratio is known as the base RPI and is the value of the RPI eight months prior to the month of the issue of the bond.
The numerator is the value of the RPI eight months prior to the month of the relevant coupon or principal payment.
The semi-annual coupon payment is   and the principal repayment is  where £d is the real annual coupon payment and where RPI b = value of RPI eight months prior to month of issue of the gilt (i.e. base RPI), RPI m-8 = value of RPI eight months prior to the month in which the coupon is paid, RPI M-8 = value of RPI eight months prior to the month in which the bond matures.
The eight-month lag in the RPI is explained as follows.
It is necessary to know each coupon payment six months before it is paid in order to determine the interest accruing between coupon payments.
The two additional months are explained by the one-month's delay in publishing the RPI (e.g., June's RPI is not published until July) and an allowance of one month to make the relevant calculations.
It is also important to take into account any rebasing of the RPI.
The two relevant bases are January 1974 = 100.0 and January 1987 = 100.0, the latter representing a rebasing from the 1974 RPI value of 394.5.
EXAMPLES OF INDEX-LINKED COUPON AND PRINCIPAL PAYMENTS
Index-linked Treasury 2 per cent 1988 was issued in March 1982 and matured on 30 March 1988.
The base RPI was 297.1 (i.e. RPI for July 1981); the RPI for July 1987 was 101.8.
Thus we can calculate the money value of the final coupon payment and principal repayment on 30 March 1988 as follows .
The interest accruing during the last coupon period (30 September 1987–30 March 1988) can be calculated once we know the final coupon payment, using .
There are two kinds of index-linked yields to maturity: the money (or nominal) yield, and the real yield.
The money yield requires forecasts of all future cash flows from the bond.
This in turn requires forecasts of all the relevant future RPIs.
The commonest way of doing this is to take the latest available RPI and to assume a constant inflation rate thereafter.
The forecast for the first relevant future RPI is determined from  where RPI o =  latest available RPI, = forecast of annual inflation rate, m = number of months between RPI o and RPI 1 .
Suppose, for example, that the bond pays coupons every March and September.
The relevant months for forecasting the RPI are eight months prior to March and September, namely July and  January.
If the latest available RPI is for October, then we are attempting to make a forecast for the RPI the following January, in which case m = 3.
The forecast for each subsequent relevant RPI is found using  where j is the number of semi-annual forecasts after RPI 1 (which was the forecast for the RPI in January).
For example, if the October RPI is 102.8, and an annual inflation rate of 4.5 per cent is expected, then the forecast for the RPI for the following January is , and for the January following that, it is .
The money yield (rm) is calculated by solving the following equation (assuming that the calculation is made on a coupon payment date so that AI = 0): where S is the number of coupon payments before redemption.
The real yield (pm) is related to the money yield through the Fisher equation (after Fisher,(1930)):.
For example, if the money yield is 7 per cent , and the forecast inflation rate is 4.5 per cent , then the real yield is found from (5.27) as .
Equation (5.26) can be rearranged as follows (using (5.27)): where  and  is the inflation rate between the date of the bond's issue and the date of the above calculation.
Equation (5.26) shows that the money yield is the appropriate discount rate for discounting money or nominal cash flows.
Equation (5.28) shows that the real yield is the appropriate discount rate for discounting real cash flows.
Despite being linked to the RPI, index-linked gilts do not in practice offer a guaranteed real return.
This is because of the eight-month lag in indexation, which means that the bond is not inflation-protected for the last six months of its life.
Any inflation occurring during that period will reduce the real value of the redemption payment and hence the real yield.
Finally, we can ask how an index-linked gilt can be compared with a conventional gilt.
The best way is to calculate the break-even inflation rate.
This is the inflation rate that makes the money yield on an index-linked gilt equal to the yield to maturity on a conventional gilt of the same maturity.
Suppose that the yield to maturity on a conventional gilt is 8.3 per cent and that the real return on an index-linked gilt is 2.5 per cent; then using (5.27) we have a break-even inflation rate of .
If the expected rate of inflation is higher than the break-even rate of inflation, investors will prefer the index-linked bond.
and vice versa.
5.5 Yield curves
In the last section we considered a variety of yield measures associated with individual bonds.
In this section we shall examine the relationship between some of those yield measures and bonds which have different maturities but are otherwise similar.
The relationship between a particular yield measure and a bond's maturity is called the yield curve (or term structure of interest rates) for that particular yield measure.
To construct a yield curve correctly, only bonds from a homogeneous group should be included — for example, only bonds from the same risk class or with the same degree of liquidity.
We would therefore not expect a yield curve to be constructed using both government and corporate bonds, since these would be from different risk classes.
In this section we consider the following types of yield curve: the yield to maturity yield curve, the coupon yield curve, the par yield curve, the spot yield curve, the forward yield curve, the annuity yield curve and the rolling yield curve.
5.5.1 The yield to maturity yield curve
The most familiar yield curve is the yield to maturity (YTM) yield curve.
This is a plot of the yield to maturity (derived from (5.7) above) against term to maturity for a group of homogeneous bonds.
Three typical examples are given in Fig. 5.3.
There are several problems with the YTM yield curve.
Implicit in the definition of YTM is the assumption that coupon payments are reinvested at the YTM.
As market rates of interest vary over time, it becomes difficult to achieve this, a feature known as reinvestment risk.
The only type of bond devoid of reinvestment risk is a zero-coupon or pure discount bond.
Another problem is that the YTM yield curve does not distinguish between the different payment patterns of low-coupon bonds and high-coupon bonds with the same maturity.
With the latter, the payments are concentrated in the early years of their lives, while with the former, they are concentrated in the later years.
Yet this is not taken into account in the YTM curve, which assumes a flat payments pattern.
In other words, the cash payments on the bond are not discounted at the appropriate interest rate.
For reasons such as these, bond analysts have devised a number of other types of yield curve.
5.5.2 The coupon yield curve
The coupon yield curve is a plot of the yield to maturity against term to maturity for a group of bonds with the same coupon.
A typical set of coupon yield curves is shown in Fig. 5.4, which shows that high-coupon bonds trade at a discount (have higher yields) relative to low-coupon bonds, because of reinvestment risk and for tax reasons.
(Capital gains tax can be deferred whereas income tax cannot.)
It is clear that yield can vary quite considerably with coupon for the same term to maturity, and with term to maturity for different coupons.
In other words, different coupon curves not only have significantly different levels, but also have significantly different shapes.
Therefore the kind of distortions that can arise in the YTM curve if no allowance is made for coupon is obvious.
As an alternative to the two-dimensional representation depicted in Fig. 5.4, we can construct a three-dimensional yield plane of coupon against yield to maturity against term to maturity (see Fig. 5.5).
5.5.3 The par yield curve
The par yield curve is a plot of the yield to maturity against term to maturity for bonds priced at par.
The par yield is therefore equal to the coupon rate for bonds priced at or near par (since the YTM for bonds priced at par is equal to the coupon rate).
The par yield curve is used to determine the required coupon on a new bond that is to be issued at par.
Suppose that the current par yields on bonds that will mature in one, two and three years' time are given respectively by 10,10.25 and 10.75 per cent.
This suggests, for example, that a new two-year bond issued at par would have to have a coupon of 10.25 per cent and that for a three-year bond (with annual coupons) trading at par the following equality holds (see (5.10)): demonstrating that the YTM and the coupon are identical when a bond is trading at par.
5.5.4 The spot (or zero-coupon) yield curve
The spot (or zero-coupon) yield curve is a plot of spot yields (or zero-coupon yields) against term to maturity.
Spot yields satisfy the following equation (assuming annual coupons and the calculation made on a coupon payment date so that AI = 0): where rs t = the spot or zero-coupon yield on a bond with t years to maturity, = the corresponding discount factor.
In (5.29) rs, is the current one-year spot yield, rs 2 the current two-year spot yield, and so on.
The spot yield for a particular term to maturity is the same as the yield on a zero-coupon bond of the same maturity (hence the alternative name).
The spot yields can be derived from the par yields as follows.
The derivation is based on the interpretation of a bond as a composition of an annuity (which provides the coupon stream) and a zero-coupon bond (which provides the principal repayment) represented by (using (5.29) with P d = B = 100 and d = rp T ): where rp T is the par yield for a term to maturity of T years, where the discount factor D T is the fair price of a zero-coupon bond with par value of 1 and a term to maturity of T years, and where  is the fair price of an annuity of 1 per year for T years (with A o = 0 by convention).
Substituting (5.31) into (5.30) and rearranging gives the expression  for the T-year discount factor.
For one-year, two-year and three-year par yields given by 10, 10.25 and 10.75 per cent respectively, we get the following solutions for the discount factors: and .
It is easy to verify that these are the correct discount factors.
substituting them back into (5.30) we get respectively for the one-year, two-year and three-year par value bonds, and .
Now that we have found the correct discount factors, it is easy to calculate the spot yields (from  (5.29).
In (5.29) we are discounting the t-year cash flow (coupon payment and/or principal repayment) by the corresponding t-year spot yield.
In other words, rst is the time-weighted rate of return on a t-year bond.
Thus the spot yield curve is the correct method for pricing or valuing any cash flow (whether regular or irregular) because it uses the appropriate discount factors.
This contrasts with the YTM procedure (shown in (5.10)), in which all cash flows are discounted by the same yield to maturity.
5.5.5 The forward yield curve
The forward (or forward/forward) yield curve is a plot of forward rates against term to maturity.
Forward rates satisfy  where  = implicit forward rate (or forward/forward rate) on a one-year bond maturing in year t.
Comparing (5.29) and (5.33), we can see that the spot-yield is the geometric mean of the forward rates,.
This implies that .
For the spot yields given above, we can derive the implied forward rates from (5.35): = 10 per cent, = 10.53 per cent and  = 11.92 per cent .
This means, for example, that, given the current spot yields, the market is expecting the yield on a one-year bond maturing in three years' time to be 11.92 per cent .
The relationship between the par yields, spot yields and forward rates is given in the following table.
It is also shown in Fig. 5.6 (in the case of rising yield curves) and Fig. 5.7 (in the case of falling yield curves).
The relationship between par yields and spot yields can be shown using the following example.
Suppose that a two-year bond with cash flows of 10.25 at the end of year 1 and 110.25 at the end of year 2 is trading at par (i.e. has a par yield of 10.25 per cent).
To be regarded as equivalent to this, a pure discount bond (making a lump sum payment at the end of year 2 with no year 1 payment) would require a rate of return of 10.26 per cent(the spot yield), i.e. for the same investment of 100, the maturity value would have to be 121.57 (i.e. 100 x (1.1026) 2).
As another example, if we know the spot yields, then we can calculate the coupon required on a new bond if it is to be issued at par   using .
This gives d = 10.75.
The relationship between spot yields and forward rates is shown in (5.34).
If the spot yield is the average return, then the forward rate can be interpreted as the marginal return.
If the marginal return between years 2 and 3 increases from 10.53 to 11.92 per cent, then the average return increases from 10.26 per cent to .
5.5.6 The annuity yield curve
The annuity yield curve is a plot of annuity yields against term to maturity.
An annuity yield is the implied yield on an annuity where the annuity is valued using spot yields.
In (5.30) above, we decomposed a bond into an annuity and a pure discount bond.
We used the spot yield to price the discount bond component.
Now we are concerned with the pure annuity (or pure coupon) component.
The value of the annuity component of a bond is given by  where rs t and D t are defined in (5.29) and A T is defined in (5.31).
But A T the fair price of an annuity  of 1 per year for T years, is given by the standard formula  where ra T is the annuity yield on a 1-year annuity.
Suppose that we have a three-year bond with annual coupon payments of 10.75.
The value of the annuity component is given by (5.36):.
This implies that A3 = 2.47 (i.e. 26.51/10.75).
Solving for ra 3 in (5.37) or using standard present value of an annuity tables gives a three-year annuity yield of ra 3 = 10.48 per cent.
The relationship between the spot and annuity yield curves is shown in Fig. 5.8.
With an upward-sloping spot yield curve, the annuity yield is below the end-of-period spot yield (10.48 < 10.81); with a falling spot yield curve, the annuity yield curve lies above it.
With a low-coupon bond, the present value will be dominated by the terminal payment and the annuity curve will lie close to the spot curve; with a high-coupon bond, the two curves will be further apart.
5.5.7 Rolling yield curve
The rolling yield curve is a plot of rolling yields against term to maturity (see Fig. 5.9).
The one-year rolling yield is the yield on a bond when the holding period is one year but the prices of bonds are assumed to remain constant during the year.
For example, an investor could buy a ten-year bond, hold it for one year and receive the coupon, and then sell it for the current price of a nine-year bond with the same coupon.
The rate of return on this investment would be the one-year rolling yield for a term to maturity of ten years.
The one-year rolling yield is given by    where rr T = one-year rolling yield on a T-year bond, P T = dirty price on a T-year bond, P T-1 = dirty price on a T -1 -year bond with the same coupon (d).
For example, suppose that the price of a ten-year 10 per cent bond is 107.25 and the price of a nine-year 10 per cent bond is 106.75.
The one-year rolling yield on a ten-year bond is .
5.6 Theories of the yield curve
In this section, we consider some theories underlying the yield curve or the term structure of interest rates.
As shown in Fig. 5.3, the yield curve can be rising, falling or humped, and there are three main theories to explain this.
5.6.1.
The expectations hypothesis
The expectations hypothesis argues that the long-term interest rate is a geometric average of expected future short-term rates.
This was the theory that was used to derive the forward yield curve in (5.33) and (5.34) above: or  where rs T is the spot yield on a T-year bond and  is the implied one-year rate t years ahead.
For example, if the current one-year rate is rs 1 = 6.5 per cent and the market is expecting the one-year rate in a year's time to be  = 7.5 per cent , then the market is expecting a 100 investment in two one-year bonds to yield 100 (1.065)(1.075) = 114.49 after two years.
To be equivalent to this, an investment in a two-year bond has to yield the same amount, implying that the current two-year rate is rs 2 = 7 per cent: 100(1.07) 2 = 114.49.
A rising yield curve is explained by investors expecting future short-term interest rates to rise, i.e. .
A falling yield curve is explained by investors expecting short-term rates to be lower in the future.
A humped yield curve is explained by investors expecting short-term interest rates to rise and long-term rates to fall.
The main component of these expectations is expected inflation (see Chapter 2).
If investors are expecting inflationary pressures in the future, the yield curve will be rising, while if they are anticipating disinflationary pressures, the yield curve will be falling.
The expectations hypothesis is discussed in more detail in Chapter 8.
5.6.2 The liquidity preference theory
When the inflation rate is expected to remain constant over time, the normal position of the yield curve is to be upward-sloping.
The expectations hypothesis by itself is insufficient to explain this, since under constant inflationary expectations, the expectations hypothesis predicts a flat yield curve.
A rising yield curve can be explained by liquidity preference theory.
A rising yield curve results from investors' preferences to stay liquid.
Since borrowers prefer to borrow long and lenders prefer to lend short, investors have to be compensated by a liquidity premium to forgo liquidity, and this increases with term to maturity.
A humped yield curve is explained by the combination of a descending yield curve plus an upward-sloping liquidity preference curve (see Fig. 5.10).
The expectations hypothesis assumes that forward rates are equal to expected future spot rates; in other words, where E () is the expectations operator for the current period.
This assumption implies that the forward rate is an unbiased predictor of the future spot rate.
Liquidity preference theory, on the other hand, recognizes the possibility that the forward rate may contain some element of liquidity premium which declines over time as the period approaches, so that .
It is also possible of course for there to be uncertainty attached to the forward rate, which could lead to the reverse inequality in (5.42) holding.
5.6.3 The segmentation or preferred habitat theory
This theory argues that the bond market is segmented by maturity range and that there are no spillover effects between each market segment.
The yield curve is therefore determined by supply and demand conditions in each market segment without reference to conditions in other segments.
For example, banks are active in demanding bonds with short maturities, pension funds are active in demanding bonds with long maturities, while few institutions are greatly interested in medium maturity bonds.
Such behaviour would lead to high prices (low yields) at both the short and long ends and low prices (high yields) in the middle of the maturity structure.
This provides an alternative explanation for the humped yield curve.
Another factor influencing the shape and level of the yield curve is government policy, especially in respect of public sector borrowing, debt management and open-market operations.
The public sector borrowing requirement can affect the level of the yield curve: an increase in the requirement can lead to an increase in yields at all maturities.
Open-market operations (the purchase and sale of money market securities by the Bank of England) can have a number of effects: in the short term it can have the effect of tilting the yield curve both upwards and downwards; in the longer term, by leading to changes in the money supply, it can influence inflationary expectations which in turn can affect the level of the yield curve.
Debt management policy can influence the shape of the yield curve.
Most government debt as it matures is rolled over, but the maturity of the replacement debt can have a significant influence on the yield curve in the form of humps in the market segment in which the debt is placed (i.e., the debt is placed at a relatively low price and a relatively high yield).
5.7 Fitting the yield curve
The term structure itself is a series of points on a graph of yield against maturity.
The yield curve is a smooth curve through those points.
There are several methods of fitting this curve.
5.7.1 Polynomial curve fitting
One of the simplest approaches is to fit a single polynomial in time.
For example, an N-order polynomial could be used: where rm i = yield to maturity on ith bond, T i = term to maturity on ith bond.
α, β = coeffficients of the polynomial, u i = residual error on the ith bond.
The coeffficients of the polynomial are determined by minimizing the sum of squared residual errors (, for M bonds used) as shown in Fig. 5.11.
The resulting curve depends on the order of the polynomial N. If N is too high, the curve will not be sufficiently smooth.
(Indeed, if N = M -1, the curve will go through every point and will be over-fitted.)
If N is too low, the curve will be under-fitted.
A more sophisticated approach fits different polynomials over different but overlapping terms to maturity.
The fitted curves are then spliced together to produce a single smooth curve (called a spline.curve) over the entire range.
5.7.2 Regression analysis
An alternative approach is to use regression analysis, with bond prices as the dependent variable and coupon payments and principal as the independent variables: where P di = dirty price of ith bond, d ji = coupon on ith bond in period, β j = coeffficients of the regression equation, u i = residual error on the ith bond.
It is clear from (5.29) that the coefficients in (5.44) are estimates of the discount factors  and hence can be used to generate the spot yield curve.
The problem with (5.44), of course, from the point of view of estimation, is that the coupon payment dates differ for different bonds and that there are more coupon payment dates than the number of bonds available, so that (5.44) as it stands cannot in fact be estimated.
The solution is to divide the entire maturity spectrum into grid dates (denoted ) and to allocate coupon payments between two grid dates in a way that preserves either the present value of the bond's cash flows or the duration of the bond (duration is defined in the next section).
This is illustrated in Fig. 5.12, which allows for more grid dates at the short end of the maturity spectrum relative to the long end because of the greater difficulty of fitting the yield curve at the short end.
The regression equation that is estimated is .
5.7.3 Matrix modelling
Matrix modelling (or matrix pricing or pricing by analogy) extends the multiple regression model (5.46) by taking into account other factors that can influence bond prices apart from term to   maturity.
It is known as matrix modelling because it assumes that the price of a bond is made up from each component of relative value taken separately.
Besides term to maturity, the other components of relative value that have been added to (5.46) are as follows.
1.
Coupon as measured by current yield Since high-coupon bonds trade at a discount relative to low-coupon bonds, we would expect the coefficient on current yield to be negative.
2.
Liquidity as measured by bid-offer spread, volume at issue, annual percentage turnover or number of market-makers in the bond The coefficient on the liquidity measure would be positive if liquidity and bond marketability were valued characteristics.
If, however, liquidity were regarded as a scarce commodity, then the bond price would fall as the degree of liquidity rose, in which case the coefficient on the liquidity measure would be negative.
3.
Default risk in the form of sector risk (e.g. UK government v. World Bank, bank sector v. oil sector), quality risk (e.g. AAA rating v. AA rating), etc.
Default risk will be measured by the price spread on the two bonds being compared.
The coefficient on the default risk measure is expected to be negative, so that higher default risk reduces prices and increases yields.
4.
Call effect This is always to the disadvantage of the bond-holder and will have a negative effect on price.
5.
Sinking fund or purchase fund effect This also has a negative effect on price.
6.
Convertibility This is an attractive feature and has a positive effect on price.
7.
Warrant attachments This is also an attractive feature and has a positive effect on price.
The last four features involve an implied option, and this option has to be priced.
The pricing of options is discussed in Chapter 9.
Once we have price adjustment factors for a given set of bonds, we can use them to price different bonds with different amounts of the factors embodied in them.
The price adjustments can also be converted into yield adjustments or yield spreads to give, for example, the difference in yield between bonds with and without a particular sector characteristic.
To illustrate this pricing by analogy, we will compare a low-coupon UK government bond with a high-coupon UK bank corporate bond with the same maturity:
Taking into account all the adjustments, we can see that the bank bond ought to be trading at 5.61 lower than or at a yield to maturity of 1.14 per cent higher than the comparable government bond.
If the bank bond is trading at a discount to the government bond of more than 5.61 (YTM of more than 1.14 per cent), then the bank bond is cheap relative to the government bond.
Alternatively, the matrix pricing model can be used to determine the fair price of a newly issued bond.
5.8 Interest rate risk
Having discussed various ways of measuring the returns on bonds, the next step is to discuss different ways of measuring the risk from holding bonds.
We have discussed earlier (Chapter 2) inflation risk, which is common to all bonds, and specific risk in the form of either business risk or financial risk, which depends on the industry or corporation that issues the bond.
The required yield on a bond will have loadings for all these kinds of risk, and the greater the risk, the greater the risk loading.
However, there is another type of risk that is common to all types of fixed-interest securities and which has an important effect on bond values.
This is interest rate risk, the risk that bond prices will fall if market interest rates rise.
Interest rate risk is the main form of market risk for bonds paying fixed coupons.
There are a number of measures of interest rate risk that we will consider: duration, convexity and dispersion.
5.8.1 Duration
The measure of interest rate risk typically used by bond analysts is called duration.
(It was invented by Macaulay (1938).)
Duration is defined as the weighted average maturity of a bond using the relative discounted cash flows in each period as weights (we assume annual coupons): where D = duration measured in years, d = annual coupon, B = par value of bond, P d = dirty price of bond, t = time in years to tth cash flows, T= time in years to maturity, rm = yield to maturity.
In (5.47), is the discounted value of the tth cash flow and so  is the relative discounted value of the tth cash flow; similarly with the terminal value.
EXAMPLE OF DURATION
A 10 per cent annual coupon bond is trading at par with three years to maturity, so ,, T = 3 years.
Therefore duration is given by  = 2.74 years, which implies that the average time taken to receive the cash flows on this bond is 2.74 years.
We can examine some of the properties of duration.
Duration is always less than (or equal to) maturity.
This is because some weight is given to the cash flows in early years of the bond's life and this helps to bring forward the average time at which cash flows are received.
In the above example, the coupon element contributes 0.5 years to duration, while the principal element contributes 2.24 years.
Duration also varies with coupon, yield and maturity.
For a zero-coupon bond, duration equals the term to maturity.
This is obvious from the definition of a zero-coupon bond and also from (5.47) given that d = 0 and .
For a perpetual bond, duration is given by  where  is the current yield (see (5.5)).
This follows from (5.47) as  recognizing that for a perpetual bond rm = rc (see (5.5) and (5.7)).
Equation (5.48) provides the limiting value to duration.
For bonds trading at or above par (so that), duration increases with maturity and approaches this limit from below.
For bonds trading at a discount to par (so that rm ), duration increases to a maximum at around 20 years and then declines towards the limit given by (5.48).
So in general, duration increases with maturity (see Fig. 5.13).
Duration increases as coupon and yield decrease as shown in Fig. 5.14.
As the coupon falls, more of the relative weight of the cash flows is transferred to the maturity date and this causes duration to rise.
Because the coupon on index-linked gilts is much lower than on conventional gilts, this means that the duration of index-linked gilts will be much higher than for conventional gilts with the same maturity.
As yield increases, the present values of all future cash flows fall, but the present values of the more distant cash flows fall relatively more than those of the nearer cash flows.
This has the effect of increasing the relative weight given to nearer cash flows and hence of reducing duration.
That duration is a measure of interest rate risk is demonstrated as follows.
The present value equation for an annual coupon bond is given by .
Differentiating this equation with respect to(1 + rm) gives  (where  means ‘a change in’).
Multiplying both sides of (5.50) by  gives .
The LHS of (5.51) is the elasticity of the bond price with respect to(one plus) the yield to maturity,, where .
The RHS of (5.51) is (the negative of) duration.
So duration measures the interest rate elasticity of the bond price, and is therefore a measure of interest rate risk.
The lower the duration, the less responsive is the bond's value to interest rate fluctuations.
Figure 5.15 shows the present-value profile for a bond.
There is a negative-sloping and convex relationship between (the natural logarithm of) the price of the bond and (the natural logarithm of) one plus the yield to maturity.
The slope of the present-value profile at the current bond price and yield to maturity is equal to the (negative of the) duration of the bond.
The flatter the present-value profile, the lower the duration and the less the interest rate risk.
EXAMPLE OF FIRST-ORDER INTEREST RATE RISK
A 10 per cent annual coupon bond is trading at par with a duration of 2.74 years.
If yields rise from 10 to 10.5 per cent, then the price of the bond will fall by    to 98.75.
The UK markets use a concept called modified duration (also known as volatility), which is related to duration as follows: where MD = modified duration in years.
This means that the following relationship holds between modified duration and bond prices .
For example, if D = 2.74 years and yields are 10 per cent then .
5.8.2 Convexity
Duration can be regarded as a first-order measure of interest rate risk: it measures the slope of the present-value profile.
Convexity, on the other hand, can be regarded as a second-order measure of interest rate risk: it measures the curvature of the present-value profile.
The second-order differential of the present value equation (5.49) with respect to rm is  where MD = modified duration, C = convexity.
From (5.55), convexity is the rate at which price variation to yield changes with respect to yield.
It can be approximated by the following expression: where  = change in dirty bond price if yield increases by 1 basis point (0.01), = change in dirty bond price if yield decreases by 1 basis point (0.01).
EXAMPLE OF CONVEXITY
A 10 per cent annual coupon bond is trading at par with three years to maturity.
If the yield increases from 10.00 to 10.01 per cent, the price of the bond will fall to (using (5.1)) or by .
If the yield falls to 9.99 per cent, the price of the bond will rise to  or by .
Therefore .
It can be shown that convexity increases with the square of maturity.
It decreases with both coupon and yield.
Index-linked bonds are more convex than conventional bonds.
That convexity is a second-order measure of interest rate risk is demonstrated in Fig. 5.16.
This shows the present-value profiles for two bonds A and B, trading at the same price and yield to maturity, and having the same duration.
Bond B however is more convex than bond A. B is clearly more desirable than A since B will out-perform A whatever happens to market interest rates.
If yields rise the price of B falls by less than the price of A, while if yields fall the price of B rises by more than that of A. High convexity is therefore a desirable property for bonds to have.
When convexity is high, the first-order approximation for interest rate risk,(5.51) or (5.52), will become increasingly less accurate as the change in yields becomes large.
This is clear from Fig. 5.16.
Duration is a linear approximation to the present-value profile.
For small changes in yield, the   linear approximation will be reasonably good.
But for large jumps in yield, the linear approximation will become very poor if convexity is high.
It will overestimate the risk (i.e. overestimate the price adjustment) when convexity is positive and underestimate risk and price adjustment when convexity is negative (which is the case, for example, with callable bonds near par).
So for large jumps in yield, the quadratic approximation to the present-value profile given by (5.55) is preferred.
EXAMPLE OF SECOND-ORDER INTEREST RATE RISK
A 10 per cent annual coupon bond is trading at par with a modified duration of 2.49 and convexity of 8.76.
If yields rise from 10 to 12 per cent, the price of the bond will fall by  to 95.20.
The first-order approximation overestimates the fall by 0.18.
5.8.3 Dispersion
The final measure of interest rate that we will consider is called dispersion.
It measures the variance in the timing of the bond's cash flows around its duration date, using the cash flows' present values as weights: where M 2 = dispersion.
When cash flows are widely dispersed, M 2 will be a large number.
Duration, convexity and dispersion are all related as follows:.
5.9 Floating rate notes
So far, we have considered bonds with coupons that are fixed in nominal terms (conventional bonds) or real terms (index-linked bonds).
In this section we discuss floating rate notes (FRNs).
FRNs are capital market securities, generally issued at par, in which the coupon payments are variable and depend on market rates of interest.
The UK government has issued FRNs under the name of variable-rate gilts.
With variable-rate gilts, interest was paid semi-annually at 0.5 per cent above the average weekly 3-month Treasury bill rate between the preceding ex-dividend dates.
With more general FRNs, the reference interest rate is one of the London interbank rates, either LIBOR (offered rate) LIBID (bid rate) or LIMID (mid rate) plus a quoted margin.
The interest rate is fixed for a three- or six-month period and is reset using a set of reference banks at 11 am two business days before the new rate is implemented.
For example, the reference interest rate might be six months LIBOR plus a quoted margin of 0.25 per cent .
There might be four reference banks with the following LIBOR rates on the reference day:
Adding the quoted margin to the average gives a coupon for the next six months of 7.78125 per cent.
Accrued interest is based on the actual number of days in a six-month period and (FRNs being mainly US or euromarket securities) a 360-day year.
This means that, in the above example, for every 100 nominal bond, interest accrues at the daily rate of 0.021614583.
Features that have been attached to FRNs include floors (the coupon cannot fall below a minimum rate), caps (the coupon cannot rise above a maximum rate), droplocks (if the coupon falls below a certain minimum the FRN converts to a fixed-rate instrument for the remainder of its life), convertibility (into a fixed-rate instrument at the option of the issuer or investor), callability, and a sinking or purchase fund.
Some FRNs have been perpetual.
Perpetual FRNs were popular with banks during 1986 because the regulatory authorities permitted them to be a source of bank primary capital; i.e., they ranked pari passu with equity capital.
But the Brazilian debt crisis in December 1986 led to a collapse in the perpetual FRN market.
On the coupon reset date, the FRN should be priced exactly at par.
At other times, the FRN should be priced very close to par because of the manner in which the coupon is reset.
If market rates rise between coupon reset periods, the FRN will be trading slightly below par, while if market rates fall they will be trading slightly above.
This makes FRNs very similar in behaviour (although not in maturity) to money market securities traded on a yield basis.
European investors have traditionally taken this view of FRNs and have regarded them as close substitutes for money market securities.
US investors, on the other hand, simply treat them as alternatives to  conventional bonds.
These two different approaches have led to two different ways of evaluating FRNs: the margin method and the yield to maturity spread method.
The margin method calculates the difference between the return on an FRN and that on an equivalent money market security.
There are two variations on this: simple margin and discounted margin.
The simple margin method has the virtue of avoiding any forecasting of future interest rates and coupon values.
Simple margin is defined as the average return on the FRN throughout its life compared with the reference rate of interest.
It has two components: a quoted margin above (although sometimes below) the reference rate, and a capital gain or loss element which is calculated under the assumption that the difference between the current price of the FRN and the maturity value is spread evenly over the remaining life of the FRN.
Thus we get  where P d = P + Al = dirty price of FRN, B= par value of FRN, T= number of years from settlement date to maturity of FRN, QM = quoted margin.
If this is positive, the FRN offers a higher yield than the corresponding money market security.
EXAMPLE OF SIMPLE MARGIN
An FRN with a par value of 100, a quoted margin of 0.25 per cent over six-month LIBOR, is currently trading with a clean price of 99.
At the previous setting, LIBOR was 7.78125 per cent.
There are 10 days of accrued interest, 171 days until the next coupon payment and 10 years from the next coupon payment before maturity.
This means that  and .
Therefore .
Sometimes the simple margin formula is adjusted to take account of any change in the reference interest rate since the last coupon reset date.
This is done by defining an adjusted price, either  or   where AP d = adjusted dirty price of FRN, rr = current value of reference interest rate (e.g. LIBOR), d/2 = next coupon payment (i.e. d = reference interest rate on last coupon reset date plus QM), N sc = number of days between settlement and next coupon payment date.
Equation (5.60) ignores the current yield effect: all payments are assumed to be received on the basis of par, and this understates the value of the coupon for FRNs trading below par and overstates the value when they are trading above par.
Equation (5.61) takes the current yield effect into account.
The adjusted price AP d replaces the current price Pd in (5.59) to give an adjusted simple margin.
The simple margin method has the disadvantage of amortizing the discount or premium on the FRN in a straight line over the remaining life of the bond rather than at a constantly compounded rate.
The discounted margin method uses the latter approach.
The distinction between simple margin and discounted margin is precisely the same as that between simple yield to maturity and yield to maturity (cf. (5.6) and (5.7)).
However, the discounted margin method has the disadvantage of needing a forecast of the reference interest rate over the remaining life of the bond.
The discounted margin (DM) is the solution to the following equation: where DM = discounted margin, rr = current value of reference interest rate, rr  = assumed (or forecast) value of reference interest rate over remaining life of bond, QM = quoted margin, d/2 = next coupon payment (i.e. d = reference interest rate on last coupon reset date plus QM), N tc = number of days between current date and next coupon payment date, S = number of coupon payments before redemption.
For perpetual FRNs,(5.62) becomes  and on a coupon payment date  if, as is expected on a coupon payment date, P= 100.
The yield to maturity spread method of evaluating FRNs is designed to allow direct comparison between FRNs and fixed-rate bonds.
The yield to maturity on the FRN (rmf) is calculated using (5.62) with both  and  replaced with rmf.
The yield to maturity on a reference bond (rmb) is calculated using (5.7).
The yield to maturity spread is defined as Yield to maturity spread = rmf -rmb. (5.65)
If this is positive, the FRN offers a higher yield than the reference bond.
5.10 Recent innovations in the bond market: event risk
We have discussed interest rate risk (which affects all bonds) and default risk (which affects mainly corporate bonds).
But there is another type of risk affecting corporate bonds that has recently come to prominence and is known as event risk (or restructuring risk).
Event risk is the risk of an unanticipated and dramatic fall in the credit quality of different classes of bonds following a leveraged buyout, takeover or other restructuring of a corporation's balance sheet.
Event risk results from the potential conflict of interest between different claimants on the firm's assets, that is, different classes of bondholder and shareholder.
It is possible for corporate restructuring to benefit one class of claimants and to harm another class.
The latter class of claimants, generally bondholders, will suffer a fall in the market value of their claims.
Corporate restructuring on a large scale began with the development of the junk bond market in the USA in the 1980s.
Junk bonds were used to finance leveraged buyouts and takeovers, with the aim of extracting value from existing bondholders and shareholders.
Shareholders can protect themselves from hostile takeovers and leveraged buyouts by not agreeing to sell their shareholdings at a discount.
Bondholders have begun demanding event risk protection or greater security in the form of asset-backing.
Event risk protection has generally taken the form of either protective covenants or a put-at-par option, which is exercisable if specific designated events occur that lead to a deterioration of credit quality rating to non-investment grade level.
In the euromarkets, there appears to be a difference in preferences between eurosterling and eurodollar bondholders.
Eurosterling bondholders tend to prefer protective covenants that prevent a deterioration in credit quality, whereas eurodollar bondholders prefer the put-at-par option.
The alternative to event risk protection is to secure the bonds against the firm's assets.
The most important examples of asset-backed securities in the UK are fixed- or floating-charge debentures, first mortgage debentures, and sterling mortgage-backed floating-rate notes; in the US, the best examples are secured lease bonds (SLOBs) and collateralized mortgage obligations (CMOs).
Additionally, bondholders might demand credit enhancement in the form of an insurance contract, letters of credit, recourse to the issuer, subordination of a second tranche which absorbs losses first, over-collateralization or a reserve fund.
So prevalent has event risk become, that, in July 1989, Standard and Poor's introduced event risk rankings, ranging from E-1 (strong) to E-5 (insignificant).
The most common ranking is E-3 which means ‘some protection against event risk: protection may not be provided against some anticipated events, or the effectiveness of protective provisions is questionable, or the benefits of protection are modest’.
Selected references
Exercises
1
A UK government bond with a coupon of 7 ½ per cent will be redeemed at par on 15 May 1999.
What is the price of the bond on 16 May 1990 if the yield to maturity is 9 per cent?
2
What is the dirty price of a bond?
How is it calculated?
3
Consider a UK government bond with a 9.25 per cent coupon.
The bond is trading at 95 16 per 100 nominal.
How much will an investor have to pay for the bond if he buys it
a)
10 days following the ex dividend date?
b)
37 days following the ex dividend date?
c)
100 days following the ex dividend date?
4
A bond with a coupon of 12 per cent and three years to maturity is trading at 102–08.
What is
a)
the current yield?
b)
the simple yield to maturity?
5
If the semi-annual yield to maturity on a bond is 12.38 per cent, what is
a)
the equivalent annual yield to maturity?
b)
the equivalent quarterly yield to maturity?
6
What are the main disadvantages of the yield to maturity as a measure of the return from holding a bond?
7
The yield on a UK government bond is 11.5 per cent while the yield on a eurobond is 11.75 per cent.
Which bond is offering the better return?
8
What is the ‘break-even inflation rate’?
How is it used in bond markets?
9
You are given the following information about the retail price index in the UK:
If an index-linked bond with a coupon of 2 ½ per cent was issued on 15 October 1990, calculate the first three coupon payments.
10
The yield to maturity on a conventional gilt is 9.78 per cent and the real yield on an indexlinked gilt is 2.5 per cent.
What is the break-even inflation rate?
If the expected rate of inflation is 10 per cent, which gilt is the better buy?
11
What is the par yield curve?
How might the par yield curve for UK government bonds be useful to an investment bank seeking a eurobond mandate?
12
a)
You are given the following par yields:
Calculate the corresponding spot yields and forward yields.
Comment on the relationship between the three yield curves.
b)
To what purpose are par yields, spot yields and forward yields put?
13
Using the following information about three government bonds with the same maturity date (in 10 years' time), calculate the spot yield for year 10 (assuming annual coupon payments):
14
You are given the following set of government bond prices, where the bonds pay coupons annually:
Calculate the issue price of a new two-year bond with a 10 per cent coupon.
15
A bond is priced at 80 per 100 nominal.
It has a duration of 12 years and the current yield to maturity is 10 per cent.
By how much will the price change if the yield to maturity falls to 9.5 per cent?
16
Discuss the main theories explaining the shape of the yield curve.
17
What is ‘duration’?
Why is it a measure of interest rate risk?
18
Prove that the duration of a perpetual bond is equal to the inverse of the current yield on the bond.
19
What does the convexity of a bond measure?
20
It is 12 April 1990.
A 12 per cent annual coupon bond will mature on 11 April 2000.
The bond is currently priced at 98–16 per 100 nominal with a yield to maturity of 12.50 per cent.
What is the duration of the bond?
21
What is the rolling yield on a bond?
Illustrate the concept with an example.
22
What are the differences between a sterling bond and a eurosterling bond?
6
Shares
In comparison with bonds, the evaluation of shares is a nightmare.
With bonds, the coupon payments are contractual and known with certainty (or at least, the promised payments on fixed interest bonds are), the maturity date is known with certainty (at least for bonds with a fixed maturity date), the maturity value is known with certainty, and the appropriate discount rate is relatively easy to calculate, given the ease of comparability with similar bonds.
All this renders the valuation and analysis of bonds relatively easy.
In contrast, the valuation and analysis of shares is much more complicated.
This is because (1) the future earnings of and dividend payments on shares are unknown and have to be forecast;(2) there is no maturity date and hence no maturity value; and (3) shares are the riskiest investments to hold, having the residual claim on the firm's assets and the net income generated by these assets, so that the appropriate discount rate is very difficult to calculate.
If bond analysis is a science, then share analysis is very much an art.
The main approach to analysing and valuing shares is known as fundamental analysis.
Fundamental analysis is also known as investment analysis in the UK, while in the USA it is known as financial analysis or securities analysis.
This approach examines the fundamental behaviour of the firm and also the economy in which the firm operates.
It makes a detailed analysis of the firm's earnings and dividend policy, beginning with an analysis of the firm's financial structure.
In this chapter we start by examining the types of shares issued by a firm.
We then examine in detail the firm's financial structure, and look at two methods of valuing shares, one based on expected dividends and the other on expected earnings.
We go on to examine the firm's dividend policy and how this affects the value of shares.
The ability of the firm to pay dividends will depend on its ability to generate earnings, so we next analyse the sources of the firm's earnings growth.
Finally, we examine the value of the firm as a whole.
Most firms finance their assets using leverage, i.e. a combination of share and bond finance.
So the value of the firm depends not only on the value of the shares and the bonds issued by the firm, but also on the combination of shares and bonds, i.e. on the degree of leverage.
6.1 Types of shares in the firm
There are several types of shares that can be issued by the firm as specified in the memorandum and articles of association.
The most important type is ordinary shares (also called common stock or equity).
Ordinary shareholders have voting privileges, the right to receive dividends, and subscription privileges in the event of new shares being issued.
When a firm is first established, a certain number of shares will be authorized.
They will have a par value, which in the UK is typically 25p.
Some or all of the authorized shares will be issued to shareholders (and are called issued shares or called-up shares), with an issue price which can exceed the par value but cannot be less than the par value.
Any shares that are authorized but not issued are called unissued shares.
All the issued shares will remain outstanding unless they are repurchased by the firm.
Firms in the UK have been able to repurchase their shares since the 1981 Companies Act, provided that shareholders are willing to sell and that the firm is left with some issue of share capital following the repurchase.
If a firm repurchases its own shares these shares are cancelled.
Thus a firm could have the following  equity structure:
The par value of a share has no real significance, expect in the event of insolvency.
(The par value represents the nominal claim of shareholders if insolvency occurs.)
What is important however is the market value of the share, and it is the determination of the fair market price of the share that occupies most of this chapter.
The other important class of shares is preferred shares.
These have many of the characteristics of bonds.
In particular, preferred shares offer a fixed dividend, like bonds and unlike ordinary shares.
But preferred shares do not guarantee to deliver the dividend payment, and a preferred dividend need not be paid if the firm's earnings are insufficient to fund it.
If this situation arises, however, preferred shareholders do not have the right to have the firm declared insolvent, unlike bondholders.
It is this fact that makes preference shareholders legal owners of the firm and explains why preference shares are included with ordinary shares in the analysis of the firm: if preferred shareholders do not receive dividends, then neither will ordinary shareholders.
There are several types of preferred shares.
With cumulative preferred shares, all unpaid dividend payments cumulate and are paid when earnings are sufficient, unlike standard preferred shares, where a dividend is lost if it is not paid in any year.
Participating preferred shareholders have the right to have their shares converted to ordinary shares if the dividend is passed for a given number of years.
There are also redeemable preferred, convertible preferred and callable preferred shares.
6.2 The financial structure of the firm
It is important to understand the financial structure of the firm before we look at share pricing.
This is because shareholders are residual claimants to the value of the firm.
Bondholders, on the other hand, have a prior claim on the firm.
They have a contractual relationship with the firm, and as long as the contract is honoured they have no additional claim.
They will therefore be interested in the firm only in so far as its activities and financial structure influence the risk class of the bonds.
Shareholders, however, own the firm and generally appoint managers to run it, and as residual claimants they will want to ensure that the value of the firm is maximized.
Therefore they will be much more interested in the firm and its structure.
In order to analyse the effect of the firm's financial structure on the value of its shares, we have to examine the firm's financial statements: its income statement, its statement of retained earnings and its balance sheet.
6.2.1 The income statement and statement of retained earnings
The income statement of the firm is given in Table 6.1, while the statement of retained earnings is given in Table 6.2.
While all firms have income and retained earnings statements similar to these tables, it is possible for two identical firms with identical cash flows to end up with different reported earnings because they use different accounting conventions.
The following kinds of different accounting conventions can arise.
The two firms could have different accounting years.
One could use cash accounting (so that revenue and expenditure are recorded only when cash receipts and payments are made), while the other could use accrual accounting (so that revenue and expenditure are recorded as they accrue).
The two firms could make different adjustments for inflation.
Non-cash fixed costs such as depreciation could be treated differently.
Finally, the corporation tax liability could differ between the two firms, not just as a result of the above   differences, but because one firm has income from abroad, whereas the other does not; similarly, capital gains tax liabilities can cause reported earnings to differ.
We can examine the effects of inflation, depreciation and tax in more detail.
6.2.2 Inflation accounting
Inflation affects the income statement because of the way in which inventories are valued in the production process.
A manufacturing firm buys inventories of raw materials which are used to produce finished goods which are subsequently sold.
Because of time lags in the production process, the cost of replacing inventories may well have risen by the time that the raw materials are used to make finished goods and then sold.
Sales revenues will be recorded at the actual prices at the time of sale.
But how should expenditures on inventories be recorded?
Should they be recorded at the original historical cost, or should they be recorded at the current replacement cost?
The first method is known as FIFO (first in, first out) while the second method is known as LIFO (last in, first out).
To illustrate the different methods, consider two firms (A and B) which have identical production processes and identical sales.
They buy their inventories of raw materials at the same times and at the same prices.
The first batch of 50 units costs 10 per unit and the second batch of 50 identical units costs 20 per unit because of inflation.
However, firm A uses FIFO while firm B uses LIFO.
The income statements of the two firms are as follows:
So firm A reports earnings of 1000 while firm B has earnings of only 500.
Which is the better measure of costs?
While FIFO corresponds most closely to the way in which firms actually use their inventories (i.e. the oldest stock is used first) and corresponds to the actual cost paid for inventories, it ignores the fact that to replace the inventories now costs a great deal more.
And since   the firm's value depends on future cash flows, LIFO is the better measure for valuing inventories (in terms of the income statement).
In other words, using FIFO overstates firm A's earnings.
6.2.3 Depreciation
Depreciation is the way in which the deterioration in the capital assets (i.e. plant, equipment, buildings) owned by the firm is taken into account in the income statement.
If a firm is to be successful, it will have to generate sufficient income to cover the cost not only of financing a capital asset but of replacing it when it is worn out.
Ideally, depreciation should be measured at market value (i.e. as the difference between the current second-hand market value of the asset and its second-hand market value in the previous year).
However, since the market value of second-hand assets is difficult to determine, depreciation is recorded at book value (i.e. as the difference between the book values of the asset in consecutive years).
In practice, a mechanical formula is used to measure depreciation.
The simplest one is the straight-line method, in which depreciation is recorded as a constant proportion of the original cost of the asset over its anticipated life; for example, the depreciation on an asset costing 100 and expected to last five years will be 20 per year.
All other methods involve what is known as accelerated depreciation because the depreciation is greater in the early years than the later years.
One example of this is the declining balance method, in which depreciation is recorded as a constant proportion of the depreciated book value (or written-down value) over the anticipated life of the asset.
For example if the writing-down allowance (rate of depreciation) is 25 per cent, the depreciation on an asset costing 100 and expected to last five years is determined as follows:
So reported earnings would be lower in the first year and higher in the remaining four years with the declining balance method compared with the straight-line method.
6.2.4 Corporation tax and corporate capital gains tax
Corporation tax is the tax paid by all companies in the UK if they have sufficient taxable earnings.
(Trading losses can be brought forward to offset taxable earnings in future years.)
The rate of tax is currently 35 per cent for large companies and 25 per cent(equal to the basic income tax rate) for small companies.
Corporation tax is based on an imputation system, which means that in  most cases the liability to corporation tax is the same whether the firm pays dividends or not, and that shareholders do not face double taxation on their dividends.
The reported after-tax earnings in the case where no dividends are distributed are called nil earnings, while in the case where dividends are distributed they are called net earnings.
In most cases the imputation system ensures that nil and net earnings are the same.
To achieve this outcome, corporation tax has two components: advance corporation tax (ACT), and mainstream corporation tax (MCT).
To illustrate, we consider two firms with 500,000 taxable earnings, one of which (firm A) pays no dividends while the other (firm B) distributes the entire amount as dividends.
Firm A, because it pays no dividends, simply has an MCT liability of 175,000.
Firm B on the other hand also has an overall corporation tax liability of175,000, but pays out its entire after-tax earnings of325,000 as dividends.
These dividends are treated by the Inland Revenue as net dividends to shareholders.
They therefore receive an imputed tax credit evaluated at the basic rate of personal tax (currently 25 per cent).
This is calculated as  ths (i.e. ) of the net dividend paid,, which is, of course, the same as  ths of the gross dividend paid..
Only shareholders liable to the higher rate of personal tax (currently 40 per cent) have to pay any more tax on their dividends.
Firm B pays 108,330 in tax equal to the imputed tax credit as ACT.
At a later date it pays the difference as MCT.
The nil earnings of firm A are equal to the net earnings of firm B:
The situation would be different, however, if firm B decided to pay greater dividends than its reported earnings, i.e. if it paid dividends out of retained earnings from previous years.
Suppose it decided to pay out twice the amount of dividends as before.
The tax for the two companies is determined as follows:
In this case firm B has unrelievable ACT of 41,670 (i.e. 216,670 -175,000), which cannot be offset against MCT.
Its reported net earnings are therefore lower than the reported nil earnings of firm A even though its taxable earnings are the same.
Another feature of the tax system is the capital allowances that can offset any liability.
The system of capital allowances is the system of depreciation permitted by the Inland Revenue in arriving at taxable earnings.
But it may not be the same as the system of depreciation used by firms in arriving at their reported earnings.
The income statement in Table 6.1 can be drawn up using depreciation to give reported earnings or using capital allowances to give taxable earnings.
The capital allowances differ for different classes of capital assets.
For example, with industrial buildings the writing-down allowance is determined by the straight-line method (at the rate of 4 per cent per year over 25 years).
But with office buildings there is no allowance at all.
With plant and equipment, the capital allowance is determined using the 25 per cent declining balance method (over 8 years); i.e., the writing-down allowance is 25 per cent of the written-down value, as illustrated above.
If the capital asset is sold before the end of its useful life, there may be a gain or loss relative to its written-down value.
A gain is taxed as a balancing charge, while a loss gives rise to a balancing allowance that can be used to reduce taxable earnings.
This ensures that the sum of capital allowances is equal to the real depreciation incurred.
This is the case if the firm treats its capital assets separately.
However, the firm can elect to have its capital assets collected in a pool.
In this  case, the cost of a new asset is added to the accumulated written-down values of the firm's existing assets and the writing-down allowances are determined by the aggregate of the written-down values.
With pooling, the proceeds from the sale of an asset are deducted from the written-down value of the pool and there is no balancing allowance.
However, if the sale proceeds exceed the value of the pool, the balance of the pool is reduced to zero and a balancing charge arises on the excess.
The difference between pooling and no pooling is illustrated below for two firms (A and B), both of which purchase the same two capital assets (Y and Z) over consecutive years, but where firm B elects to pool the assets whereas firm A does not:
Before disposal of an asset, pooling makes no difference to the written-down values of the assets compared with no pooling.
However, differences arise when the assets are sold in years 3 and 4.
Firm A has a balancing allowance in year 3 of 26.25 and so has its corporation tax reduced by 9.19 (i.e. 26.25 × 35%) in that year but ends up with a balancing charge of 23.75 in year 4 and so has an additional tax liability of 8.31 (i.e. 23.75 × 35%) in year 4.
Firm B, on the other hand, has no balancing allowance in year 3 and has an additional corporation tax liability of 1.42 (i.e. 4.06 × 35%) in year 4.
So two identical firms can end up with different reported earnings purely as a result of the way in which they elect to treat their capital assets.
From Table 6.1, it can be seen that interest payments on bonds and loans are an allowable deduction from earnings before tax but that dividends on both preferred shares and ordinary shares are not.
This means that the net cost of raising bond finance is lower than the net cost of raising finance via a share issue.
If a firm raises 1 million from issuing a bond with a coupon of 10 per cent, it makes annual interest payments of 100,000 at a net cost to itself of 65,000 per annum (i.e. 100,000 (1 -0.35)).
But the net cost of 1 million raised from selling shares with a 10 per cent dividend is 100,000 per annum.
The implications of this are discussed in greater detail in Section 6.6.
If, on the other hand, the firm holds shares in another company resident in the UK and itself receives dividends on those shares (this is called franked investment income), the dividends are exempt from further corporation tax because they have been paid out of earnings on which corporation tax has already been paid.
If a firm has earnings from overseas, it will generally have to pay overseas taxation on them.
If a double taxation relief agreement exists between the UK and the overseas country, relief is given in the form of a tax credit on the overseas earnings calculated on the lower of the UK and overseas corporate tax rates.
For example, suppose that two firms have earnings abroad of 100,000 before tax.
Firm A faces an overseas tax rate of 30 per cent whereas firm B faces an overseas tax rate of 50 per cent.
The UK corporation tax for the two companies is determined as follows:
So even though both firms have identical gross overseas earnings, they end up with different net overseas earnings as a result of the combination of different overseas tax rates and the system of double taxation relief.
Corporation tax is not the only tax that a firm may be liable to pay.
It may also have a capital gains tax (CGT) liability if it sells a capital asset in excess of its original purchase price.
However, the original purchase price is indexed for increases in the retail price index since 1 April 1982 and capital gains made prior to this date are exempt from the tax.
In addition, any CGT liability can be offset against ACT payments.
This again is designed to avoid (or at least reduce) the double taxation of shareholders when the capital gain is distributed to shareholders as dividends.
The CGT rate is the same as the corporation tax rate.
To illustrate, we will consider a firm that purchases a factory for 30,000 (after 1982).
It is intended to be depreciated over 30 years using the straight-line method.
The rate of inflation in the retail price index is 5 per cent per annum.
The factory is sold after three years for 50,000.
The firm has to pay 1050 in corporation tax on the balancing charge and 5340 in capital gains tax.
If all the nominal capital gains are distributed as dividends, the following situation emerges:
ACT is reduced from 6670 to 1330 as a result of the capital gains tax offset.
6.2.5 The effect of accounting conventions on reported earnings
So the reported earnings of two otherwise identical firms can differ as a result of different accounting conventions.
And since, as we shall see, reported earnings form the basis of share evaluation, such differences make it extremely difficult for the investment analyst to estimate the  fair price of shares.
We will illustrate the problem using a number of summary measures of the state of the firm typically used by analysts.
These summary measures are earnings per share, the price-earnings ratio and the dividend yield.
Earnings per share (EPS) is defined as .
The price-earnings (PE) ratio is defined as .
It measures the number of years taken for a shareholder to recover his initial investment (assuming that all earnings are distributed); alternatively, it measures the price an investor has to pay to buy 1 worth of income in the company.
The net dividend yield is defined as , using Table 6.2.
This is the net dividend yield because the firm has already paid corporation tax on its earnings.
But other securities such as government bonds have their yields quoted before income tax.
To make comparisons with other securities, the dividend yield on shares is generally quoted gross.
The net dividend yield is grossed up as follows:, where T p = basic rate of personal tax (e.g. 25 per cent).
(Note that (6.3) and (6.4) are valid for preference shares as well as ordinary shares.)
We will now consider two identical firms with identical operations and cash flows but employing different accounting conventions.
The combined income and retained earnings statement of the two firms is as follows:
Firm A has reported earnings of 850,000 while firm B has a reported loss of 540,000, yet both firms have identical cash flows.
Firm A has an EPS of 8.5p while firm B declares a loss per share of 5.4p.
Firm A has a PE of 9.41 and firm B has one of -14.81.
But both firms happen to have the same dividends and the same share price, so that the net and gross dividend yields are the same at 5.31 and 7.08 per cent respectively.
What does an investment analyst make of all this?
It is clear that both earnings per share and PE ratios can be dubious quantities, yet investment analysts make extensive use of both in attempting to estimate the true values of firms and in making comparisons between firms.
However, it is clear that two identical firms with identical operations and cash flows should have identical values, whatever accounting conventions the two firms use.
In the above example, the analysts and the market are doing their jobs properly because both firms have the same share price of 80p and hence indeed have the came value.
6.2.6 The balance sheet
Having examined the income and retained earnings statements of the firm, the final way to look at the firm's financial structure is to examine its balance sheet.
A typical balance sheet is presented in Table 6.3.
A balance sheet can be drawn up in three different ways.
It can be drawn up on the basis of historic-cost book values, current-cost book values or market values.
The balance sheet that would be most useful to an investment analyst would be the market value balance sheet.
This is the balance sheet in which both assets and liabilities are recorded at their current market values.
If the firm has its long-term liabilities traded on a stock exchange, the market value of the liabilities is relatively easy to determine.
The market values of current liabilities will be close to their book values, and the market values of the long-term liabilities can simply be taken from the Financial Times.
The firm's net worth is simply the difference between the market value of the ordinary shares and the book value of the ordinary shares (which equals par value plus premium value plus accumulated retained earnings).
The market values of the assets, on the other hand, is much more difficult to determine because there is not an efficient market in second-hand assets.
What for example is the market value of a three-year old mainframe computer, or a seven-year old fork-lift truck?
However, most firms in the UK do not have their securities traded on the stock exchange, and so the market value balance sheet is never formally presented.
The next most useful balance sheet is the one based on current-cost book values.
This is the balance sheet in which both inventories and long-term assets are valued at current replacement cost.
For example, with inventories this means that the FIFO valuation method is the best method to use.
This method is the opposite to that which is most appropriate for the income statement.
Using LIFO in the income statement means that the older units remain in the inventory.
These will therefore be valued effectively at historic-cost when the balance sheet is drawn up.
Liabilities are recorded at book value so that the book value of net worth is zero.
Most firms in the UK still present their balance sheets based on historic-cost book values, the least useful method from the viewpoint of investment analysis.
With this balance sheet, both assets and liabilities are recorded at their original (i.e. historical) costs, and again the book value of net worth is zero.
To illustrate the difference between the historic-cost and the current-cost balance sheets, we will reconsider the two firms A and B which used FIFO and LIFO to value their inventories in the production process.
Firm A used FIFO and reported earnings of 1000, whereas firm B used LIFO and reported earnings of 500.
The asset side of their balance sheets follow:
Firm B's assets are undervalued compared with firm A's.
The overall effect of the distortions to both the income statement and balance sheet is to give firm A a return on assets of 16.67 per cent and firm B a return on assets of 9.09 per cent even though both firms are identical in every way except for the inventory valuation method used.
So it is clear that the financial statements of the firm, which are the only publicly available sources of financial information about the firm, are fraught with problems from beginning to end.
This is what makes the job of the share analyst much more difficult than that of the bond analyst, because it makes a fair comparison between two firms extremely difficult.
6.3 The fair pricing of shares
The primary objective of fundamental analysis is to find the fair price of a share.
This can then be compared with the market price of the share to determine whether it is underpriced or overpriced.
There are two commonly used approaches to finding this fair price, one based on expected dividends and one based on expected earnings.
6.3.1 Valuation based on expected dividends
Suppose that a firm pays dividends once a year.
In reality, they usually make two dividend payments per year, an interim and a final dividend.
Suppose also that an investor intends to buy the share, hold it for one year and then sell it at the end of the year.
He expects to receive a dividend at the end of the year as well as the price for the share at that time.
In order to make this return, he will be prepared to pay the following fair price for the share today: where P o = fair price of the share, E (d 1 ) = expected annual dividend per share at the end of year 1, E (P 1 ) = expected price of the share at the end of year 1, E () = expectations (or forecast) operator based on all current information (the average across all market participants), r = market-determined discount rate or cost of capital or required rate of return on a firm with this risk class.
In (6.5), the return on the shareholding comprises an income element (d 1 ) and a capital gain element (P 1 -P o ).
Clearly, if the return is constant, then the higher the income element, the lower the capital gain and vice versa.
It must also he the case that .
By substituting (6.6) into (6.5) we get .
By substituting equations like (6.6) for E (P 2 ), E (P 3 ), etc., into (6.7), we get   where d t is the dividend per share in year t.
As ,(6.8) becomes  since we assume that the second term on the right-hand side of (6.8) vanishes at , which will occur if  is finite (i.e., we rule out speculative bubbles).
For preferred shares where the preferred dividend is known,(6.9) becomes  which is identical to the formula for valuing perpetual bonds (cf(5.3)).
The model in (6.9) is known as the dividend discount model of share evaluation.
This model is the one that is most readily comparable with the model of bond evaluation developed in the last chapter.
The holder of the share or bond receives a stream of (expected) payments that are discounted at an appropriate rate over the remaining life of the security.
However, for exact comparability between bonds and shares, both coupons and dividends must be on a net-of-tax basis since this is what recipients actually receive.
Dividends are automatically calculated net of tax, but coupons are calculated gross and have to be adjusted.
There are several problems with (6.9) as it stands, however.
First, it assumes that the market determined discount rate is constant for all future time periods.
We know from our study of bonds, however, that the appropriate discount rate for cash flows in different periods is the spot or zero coupon rate.
Using spot rates,(6.9) becomes  where rs t is the spot rate on a t-year risk-free zero-coupon bond plus a risk premium for the firm.
However, we will disregard this refinement for the remainder of the chapter and assume that the discount rate is constant.
A second problem is that (6.9) is an infinite sum which might diverge.
However, we will shortly use an economic rationality argument to rule out divergence in (6.9) and hence to rule out an infinite share price.
A third and more serious problem with (6.9) is that it is not operational because it involves expectations of dividend payments into the infinite future.
To render the model operational, we need a theory of dividends.
But before discussing dividend policy, we will examine an alternative theory of share evaluation, namely that based on expected earnings.
6.3.2 Valuation based on expected earnings
A second commonly used share evaluation model is based on the expected earnings of the firm.
The stream of expected earnings is discounted in precisely the same way as the stream of expected dividends using the same discount rate (because the discount rate applies to the risk class of the activities of the entire firm).
However, a firm's reported earnings (also called accounting income) are usually larger than the firm's dividends, which would seem to suggest that the value of the firm based on earnings will be higher than the value based on dividends.
Yet it must be the case that the two valuation methods lead to the same fair price, otherwise there is an inconsistency.
To avoid any inconsistency, it is economic earnings (also called economic income or permanent income) and not reported earnings that is the appropriate measure of earnings for share valuation.
Economic income is simply the maximum amount of real income that can be consumed out of real wealth during a given period without impairing the ability of that stock of real wealth to deliver real income and hence real consumption in the future.
Since a share is a financial claim on the firm's real   wealth in the form of its physical assets, the economic earnings of a share are defined as the maximum amount of real resources that can be withdrawn from the share and used for real consumption without impairing the ability of the share to deliver real consumption in the future.
Reported earnings can be converted into economic earnings using the sources and uses of funds statement given in Table 6.4.
(Note this is a net sources and uses statement; a gross statement would add depreciation to the sources column and replace net investment with gross investment in the uses column.)
The sources and uses of funds statement can be written in per-share form as the following identity: where y t = reported earnings per share in year t, f t = new external funds per share in year t, d t = dividends per share in year t, x t = net investment per share in year t.
It is clear from 6.12 that, if the firm is able to raise new external funds (i.e. if ), then the investment decision (x t ) can be determined independently of the funding decision (f t ).
Only if all new investment in the firm has to be financed from retained earnings is it possible for an increase in dividends to reduce net investment and thereby reduce the ability of the firm to deliver real income in the future.
If the firm has to reinvest some of its earnings to survive, then those retained earnings are not true economic income that could be consumed by the shareholder without reducing the share's consumption-generating power in the future.
This leads to the following definition of economic earnings per share: subject to the restriction  which implies that the present value of new external funds must sum to zero over the life of the firm, otherwise the firm would not effectively have a budget constraint.
Economic earnings are therefore equal to reported earnings plus new external funds less net investment.
The fair value of the share using economic earnings is given by  using (6.14).
Equations (6.9) and (6.15) will give exactly the same value for the share price.
This is because from (6.12) and (6.13) dividends and economic earnings are identical.
The explanation for this is simple.
Suppose that dividends (and therefore economic earnings) are constant for all future periods.
In this case (6.9) becomes  or .
Equation (6.17) implies that dividends are a constant proportion of share wealth (P0) and are set at exactly the level necessary to enable that share wealth to deliver the same dividend in all future periods.
But this is precisely what economic income is.
It is the amount that can be consumed out of wealth and leave sufficient wealth to deliver a constant economic income in all future periods.
This is why economic income is sometimes called permanent income, and it is also why economic earnings and dividends are equivalent.
If dividends were higher than d in (6.17) because net investment was too low, then this would be equivalent to capital consumption and the future income-generating capacity of the share wealth would be reduced.
So, if earnings are defined correctly, there is absolutely no distinction between the dividend valuation model and the earnings valuation model.
6.4 Dividend policy
Equation (6.12) appears to indicate that, as long as the firm can raise new external funds (i.e. ), the dividend policy chosen by a firm will not affect the value of the firm.
In other words, dividend policy appears to be irrelevant.
But even theoretically, there are problems with this proposition.
Suppose that a firm decided never to pay dividends, preferring instead to reward shareholders entirely through capital gains.
What would be the price of the share in this case?
By putting  into (6.9) we get .
In other words, a non-dividend-paying share is worthless.
The reason is simple.
The entire value of the share is concentrated at , but the present value of this is zero, in exactly the same way that the present value of a perpetual zero-coupon bond is zero.
In other words, the value of a share comes from its ability to pay dividends, because it is dividends that finance consumption.
Even if a share does not pay dividends temporarily, it must eventually pay dividends to have any value.
In practice also, the dividend policy chosen by the firm is important.
Most firms appear to have a target payout ratio of dividends to long-run reported earnings.
Earnings can fluctuate quite widely from one year to the next, but if long-run earnings are calculated as a moving average of short-run earnings, this will be a much more stable measure.
For example, long-run earnings per share () could be calculated as a three-year moving average .
Given this measure, dividends per share are determined by  where  is the target dividend payout ratio.
Why is the paying of dividends so important, when there are so many advantages to not paying them?
From the shareholder's point of view, dividends are taxed at higher rate than capital gains (even though the marginal rates are identical).
From the firm's point of view, retained earnings are generally regarded as a cheaper source of funds than new external funds, given the costs of raising external finance.
There have been three main explanations for the payments of dividends.
The first explanation involves the principal agent problem.
In theory, shareholders own the firm  but appoint managers to run the firm in their best interests.
Thus, the shareholders are principals and the managers are agents.
But there is a potential conflict of interest in this relationship.
The managers might behave in a way that benefits themselves and does not maximize shareholders' wealth.
Because of this possibility, shareholders will have to incur monitoring costs or agency costs to ensure that managers behave properly.
These costs are reduced when new external funds are raised, because the firm is placed under greater financial scrutiny at this time.
But flotation costs are higher, the more frequently new external funds are raised.
The payment of dividends therefore represents a trade-off between agency costs and flotation costs.
The higher the level of dividends, the more frequently new external funds have to be raised and the higher the flotation costs, but the lower the agency costs.
The optimal dividend policy will minimize the sum of the two sets of costs.
The second explanation involves signalling.
With this explanation, dividend announcements are regarded as important information signals to the market.
Managers have more inside information about the state of the firm than shareholders and other outsiders.
Clearly, managers with good information about the firm will want to transmit that information to the market, while managers with bad information might want to conceal it and might also be tempted to transmit false ‘good’ information to the market.
An announcement that a firm is increasing its dividends is a good signal because it suggests that the managers believe that future earnings will be sufficient to sustain the higher level of dividends.
But is this a true ‘good’ signal or a false ‘good’signal?
For dividend announcements to be treated unambiguously as good signals, managers must be given the correct incentive to transmit a true signal even if the information is bad.
In other words, managers' salaries have to be made incentive-compatible, so that the penalty for sending a false ‘good’ signal is always greater than the penalty for sending a true ‘bad’signal.
In addition, the signal has to be correlated with observable future events (e.g., a ‘bad’ signal has to be correlated with future insolvency while a ‘good’signal has to be correlated with future survival), and the cost of sending a false ‘good’signal has to be greater than the cost of sending a ‘true’bad signal for the firm as well as the manager.
That is, if an unsuccessful firm attempts to send a false ‘good’ signal by announcing an increase in dividends, this increases the risk of insolvency even more than would be the case if the firm sent a true ‘bad’signal by not announcing a dividend increase.
If these conditions hold, then dividends and dividend changes have important signalling effects.
The third explanation for paying dividends involves the tax clientele effect.
Dividends can be used to influence the class of shareholder attracted to a particular firm.
Shareholders with high tax rates will be attracted to firms paying low dividends, while shareholders with low or zero tax rates will be attracted to firms paying high dividends.
If firms prefer a certain class of investor, they can use their dividend policy to achieve this.
So we can conclude this section by arguing that, for one reason or another, dividends are important and that a dividend of the kind indicated by (6.19) is one that many firms are likely to pursue.
The next question is: given that dividends depend on earnings, what determines earnings?
We answer this question in the next section.
6.5 Earnings analysis
Earnings analysis is concerned with forecasting the future earnings patterns of firms.
6.5.1 Constant or normal growth models
We begin with the dividend discount model (6.9), and assume that there is a desired payout ratio of dividends to long-run earnings,.
If  is constant over time, then the expectations or forecasts about future dividends in (6.9) are really expectations or forecasts about future earnings in (6.20), and in particular about the growth rate of those earnings over time.
The simplest models assume that earnings grow at a constant rate of g per cent per year.
This means that the relationship between y t earnings in year t, and y o , earnings in the current year, is given by , while the relationship between dividends in year t and earnings in year t is given by  where , if a three-year moving average of current earnings is used to determine long-run earnings.
Substituting the last line of (6.22) into (6.9) gives .
The infinite sum in (6.23) will diverge unless r > g.
We will assume that the sum converges and define .
Using the compound sum formula, we get .
The limit of this as  is (using(6.24)).
Substituting (6.26) into (6.23) gives  
Equation (6.27) is known as the Gordon growth model (after Gordon, 1962).
The fair price of the share is found by discounting next period's forecast dividend by (r-g), the difference between the discount rate and the growth rate.
We know that r must exceed g, otherwise the share price would be infinite.
But what guarantees that r exceeds g?
Suppose the opposite were true and g exceeded r for a particular firm.
This would mean that the firm's growth rate would exceed its cost of capital.
This is a very attractive position to be in and the firm would begin to expand very quickly, using more and more investment capital.
But sooner or later the firm's demand for investment capital would become so large that this demand could not be met at a fixed cost of capital and r would begin to rise.
On the other hand, the fact that initially g exceeded r would attract other competitors into the industry.
But the expansion of output by both the firm and its competitors would sooner or later exhaust demand at existing prices.
Prices and profitability would fall and the growth rate would begin to fall.
Eventually, with r rising and g falling, r would exceed g, which is the only sustainable long-run equilibrium position.
Equation 16.27) can be rearranged to yield .
This shows that, in equilibrium, the required or expected rate of return is equal to the dividend yield plus the growth rate (i.e., the cost of capital equals the return on capital).
If the payout ratio  is constant, then earnings, dividends and the share price all grow at the same rate g, so g in (6.28) is also equal to the rate of capital gains.
The importance of (6.28) is to show that the return from holding a share is the sum of the dividend yield and the rate of capital gains.
In the absence of differential income and capital gains taxes, transaction costs, etc., shareholders will be indifferent as to whether they receive their return in the form of dividends or capital gains.
A lower dividend yield can be compensated for with higher capital gains and vice versa.
It is also instructive to examine the sources of earnings growth, g.
On the assumption that net investment, x t , is financed entirely from retained earnings, net investment is determined as follows: where () is the retention ratio (i.e. one minus the payout ratio).
If the investment generates a return p per year, this will add px t , to the earnings generated in the previous year.
Hence  by definition.
Therefore  i.e., the growth rate is the product of the return on the investment and the retention ratio.
The higher the retention ratio (i.e. the lower the dividend payout ratio), the higher the growth rate and vice versa.
Substituting (6.31) into (6.27) provides an alternative formula for the fair share price:.
If, instead, we chose to express the fair share price formula in terms of earnings rather than dividends, we would get (using the second line of (6.22),(6.27) and (6.31)).
Yet another formulation expresses the fair share price not in the form of a price level but in the form of the price-earnings ratio (PE).
From (6.33), this version yields  where  = fair price earnings ratio.
(Note that published PE ratios use last year's earnings per share, not an estimate of next year's earning per share.)
If we know the firm's PE ratio and its earnings per share (EPS), then we can recover the fair share price very simply using .
This implies that a share should sell for PE o times its earnings per share if it is fairly priced.
In long-run equilibrium, we would expect the real return on a firm's investments to equal its cost of capital, i.e. r= p.
This is the case in which the firm has reached maturity and has no more supernormal projects to invest in (see below).
In this case (6.34) becomes  i.e. the inverse of the discount rate.
Similarly, the earnings yield will equal the discount rate .
6.5.2 Differential growth models
No firm grows at a constant rate throughout its life, so while the earnings model in the last subsection gives simple and convenient formulae for the share price, it is not very realistic.
A slightly more realistic approach recognizes that firms have life-cycles and that during different stages in their life-cycles they grow at different rates.
One of the simplest differential growth models assumes that a firm has two stages: a growth stage and a mature stage.
Typically, a new firm is established to exploit an attractive set of investment opportunities.
The first stage in its life-cycle is therefore a period of very fast or supernormal growth.
Sooner or later, however, these investment opportunities are fully exploited and the firm enters the second and final stage in its life-cycle, namely one of constant or normal growth.
If there are T years of supernormal growth at the rate g s per cent after which the growth rate reverts to a normal g per cent, then, using the dividend discount model, the fair share price is determined by .
The first part of the right-hand side of (6.38) is the present value of dividends during the  supernormal growth stage, while the second part is the present value of the share in year T (at the end of the supernormal growth phase and assuming constant growth thereafter), which is then discounted back to the present.
At this stage it will be instructive to consider the effects of different growth assumptions on a firm's share price, its dividend yield, its PE ratio and its total rate of return.
EXAMPLE OF THE DIVIDEND DISCOUNT MODEL UNDER DIFFERENT GROWTH ASSUMPTIONS
We will consider four different firms in the same risk class and therefore having the same required discount rate (r = 15%), and the same initial dividend and earnings (d o = 1, y o = 2), but with four different growth assumptions:
a)
declining firm: constant growth rate g = -5% p.a.
b)
no growth firm: constant growth rate g = 0% p.a.
c)
normal growth firm: constant growth rate g = 7% p.a.
d)
supernormal growth firm: supernormal growth for 10 years at the rate g s = 25% p.a., followed by constant growth at the rate g = 7% p.a.
All firms are entirely equity-financed and have the same balance sheets: assuming that there are 100,000 shares outstanding.
For the first three firms we can use the Gordon growth model (6.27), while for the last firm we use the supernormal growth model (6.38).
These results can be summarized in the following table:
The first point to note is that, whatever their growth rates, all firms generate the same total rate of return on assets of 15 per cent, and that this is the same as the cost of capital or discount rate.
This is the case because all firms are in the same risk class and because in equilibrium the rate of return on assets must equal the cost of capital.
However, the composition of the rate of return differs for different firms.
For example, the declining firm needs an annual dividend yield of 20 per cent to compensate for the capital loss of 5 per cent per annum , whereas the supernormal growth firm has a dividend yield of only 2.66 per cent , but this is compensated for by an average annual growth in the share price of 12.34 per cent .
Similarly, the declining firm has a share price of only 4.75 and sells at a multiple to earnings of only 2.50, whereas the supernormal growth firm has a share price of 47.07 and sells at a multiple to earnings of nearly 19.
Another measure of the effect of differential growth is the market-to-book ratio.
This measures the ratio of the fair price of the share to the book price taken from the balance sheet.
It increases with the growth rate.
Static or declining firms are likely to be valued at less than the book value of their assets, while rapidly growing firms can be priced at many times the book value of their assets, reflecting the fact that growth adds value to the initial investment outlay.
But despite this, all firms generate the same return on assets, as we have seen.
6.5.3 Forecasting earnings
So far we have simply assumed a particular growth rate for the firm's earnings over future periods.
But in practice, the growth rate in earnings is extremely difficult to determine and has to be forecast.
There are two main ways of forecasting earnings: the bottom-up approach and the top-down approach.
In the bottom-up approach, investment analysts produce earnings forecasts on the basis of detailed research into the firm's activities.
The analyst might start with a base-line figure g o which is determined from (6.31) as .
This base-line figure is then modified in the light of the analyst's detailed research to give growth forecasts over the next two years, say, g 1 and g 2 .
In the top-down approach, the effects of the wider macroeconomy on the firm's earnings are taken into account.
This requires forecasts of the growth in GDP (gross domestic product) as well as forecasts of the share of dividends in GDP.
If there is a stable relationship between the firm's earnings and GDP (where the relationship is estimated using regression techniques, for example), then the firm's earnings can be forecast given the forecasts of GDP.
Alternatively, the firm's dividends could be forecast given forecasts of the share of dividends in GDP, assuming that a stable relationship exists between the firm's dividends, the share of dividends in GDP and GDP growth.
Again, suppose that this analysis provides us with earnings growth forecasts over the next two years of g 1 and g 2 .
Both the bottom-up and top-down methods used by analysts usually provide growth forecasts only for two years ahead.
Beyond two years, neither method produces forecasts in which analysts have much confidence.
They therefore tend to assume that after two years the firm (if it is not a supernormal growth firm) simply grows in line with GDP, on the grounds that, in the long run, the share of dividends or earnings in GDP does not trend in any significant way.
Since the long-run real growth rate in GDP in the UK is between 2.5 and 3 per cent, and if we additionally assume that the long-run inflation rate is 5 per cent , then a realistic estimate of the long-run nominal growth rate in earnings is around 8 per cent per annum .
EXAMPLE OF DIVIDEND DISCOUNT MODEL WITH DIFFERENT EARNINGS FORECASTS
To illustrate, consider a firm with earnings of 2 per share and a stable payout ratio of 50 per cent.
Its required return on equity capital is 15 per cent.
Investment analysts have come up with the following forecasts for earnings growth:
The dividend discount model in this case is .
Using the bottom-up earnings forecast, we get .
Using the more optimistic earnings forecasts, we get .
If the actual share price is 15.20, it is clear how investment advisers can give conflicting buy and sell recommendations!
6.6 The value of the firm: the effect of leverage
So far we have examined different ways of valuing a single share in the firm.
We end this chapter with a brief consideration of how to value the entire firm.
If the firm is entirely financed by ordinary shares, i.e. if the firm is unlevered (or ungeared), the value of the firm is simply the product of the fair price of the share and the number of shares outstanding,, where P o = fair price of the share, V U = fair value of an unlevered firm, V SU = fair value of the shares in an unlevered firm, N o = number of shares outstanding.
If the firm pays out all its reported earnings as dividends and so has zero growth, the value of the firm will be (using (6.27) with g = 0), where Y o = earnings per share before interest and tax, T c = rate of corporation tax, =  = earnings of the firm before interest and tax, r U = cost of capital (required rate of return) for an unlevered firm.
This in turn means that the cost of (equity) capital for an unlevered firm is given by .
If the firm is financed by both equity and debt, i.e. if the firm is levered (or geared), then the fair value of the firm is the sum of the fair value of the shares and the fair value of the bonds, where V L = fair value of a levered firm, V SL = fair value of the shares in a levered firm, V B = fair value of the bonds.
In fact, to be completely accurate, the fair value of the firm is the sum of the fair values of the individual liabilities listed in Table 6.3.
But why do we value a firm in terms of its liabilities rather than its assets?
It is certainly true that the value of the firm is equal to the sum of its assets.
However, because the market value of the liabilities is more easily determined than the market value of the assets, we generally prefer to estimate value on the basis of liabilities, not assets.
What is the connection between the value of the levered firm and the value of the unlevered firm?
In other words, what is the effect of leverage on the value of the shareholders' wealth?
To answer these questions, we will examine two firms with identical cash flows and therefore identical risks.
The first (firm A) is a levered firm and the second (firm B) is an unlevered firm which decides to take on some leverage by issuing a bond.
Suppose that there is only one type of bond available.
It is a perpetual bond with coupon d and a required rate of return r B .
The fair value of this bond is  so that .
The value of shares in firm A is V SL and the return to shareholders, assuming that all earnings are distributed, is  which is earnings before tax but after debt interest has been deducted as an allowable expense, less corporation tax.
(Note the calculation of debt interest uses (6.45).)
Firm B is an unlevered firm with shares valued at V SU and with reported earnings of .
The firm decides to repurchase some of its shares in the market with the proceeds from the issue of a bond with the face value  in other words, it substitutes debt for equity on its balance sheet.
Because the firm is incorporated, the interest it pays on the bond is tax-deductible.
Having issued the bonds, the value of the shares must be .
The return to shareholders, assuming that all earnings are distributed, is .
Because the return to shareholders and the risks in the two firms are identical, the value of the shares in the two firms must also be identical; i.e., which by rearranging becomes  or, using (6.43) and the fact that , we get .
The value of the levered firm therefore exceeds the value of the unlevered by an amount , which is known as the gain from leverage (or the tax shield).
The gain from leverage arises because the interest payments on bonds are tax-deductible whereas the dividend payments on shares are not.
From (6.50), it is clear that the value of the shareholders' wealth increases by ; i.e., the entire gain from leverage accrues to shareholders.
We can also calculate the cost of equity capital in a leveraged firm, r SL .
In equilibrium, the cost of equity capital will equal the return on equity capital; i.e. (using (6.46)), The cost of equity capital in a levered firm is equal to the cost of equity capital in an unlevered firm plus the post-tax difference between the cost of equity capital in an unlevered firm and the cost of debt, weighted by the leverage ratio ().
The cost of equity capital increases with the leverage ratio because of the greater risk of not being able to meet the fixed-interest payments on the bonds.
The weighted average cost of capital for a levered firm is the weighted average of the post-tax costs of equity and debt using the proportions of equity and debt in the balance sheet as weights:.
Using (6.52), we can derive the value of the levered firm as follows: where as before  is earnings before interest and tax.
The value of the levered firm, V L (given by (6.50)), and the cost of equity capital in the levered firm (given by (6.52)) were first derived by Modigliani and Miller (1958).
EXAMPLE OF THE VALUATION OF THE FIRM
Firm B is unlevered with the following balance sheet:
Firm A is levered with the following balance sheet:
The two firms' income statements are as follows:
We have the following additional information:
Note that, because the required return on the bonds is the same as the coupon on the bonds, the bonds are selling at par so that V B = 300,000.
Given this information, we can calculate the value of the unlevered firm B using (6.41):.
This is also equal to the value of the equity in the unlevered firm.
The value of firm A is given by (using (6.50))
So the value of firm A exceeds that of firm B by 105,000, the amount of the tax shield.
The value of the equity in firm A is determined from (6.43) as follows:
The cost of equity in firm A is, using (6.51),
while its weighted average cost of capital is 
An alternative way to value the levered firm is to use (6.53):.
Exercises
1
Can share valuation models help us determine whether or not dividend policy affects share prices?
2
Examine the relevance of PE ratios for the fundamental analysis of shares.
3
What are the main problems facing investment analysts when they analyse company reports?
4
Distinguish between ‘accounting earnings’ and ‘economic earnings’.
Which concept is more useful for share evaluation?
Why?
5
Describe and critically appraise the dividend discount model.
6
Why do firms pay dividends?
7
Describe and critically appraise the Gordon growth model.
8
Why in long-run equilibrium will a company's cost of capital exceed its growth rate?
What ensures this result?
9
In equilibrium, a firm's cost of capital equals the sum of its dividend yield and growth rate.
Why?
10
Analyse the sources of a company's earnings growth.
11
Why, in equilibrium, will all firms in the same risk class generate the same rate of return on assets regardless of their growth rates?
12
You are given the following information about four firms:.
If the rate of return on assets is 17 per cent for all firms, what does this imply about the dividend yields of the four firms?
13
Compare and contrast the ‘top-down’ and ‘bottom-up’approaches to forecasting corporate earnings.
14
You are told by your investment adviser that ABC PLC is expected to earn 50p per share next year, 60p per share the following year and that thereafter earnings are expected to grow by 8 per cent per year.
The dividend payout is 60 per cent and the required rate of return on ABC shares is 15 per cent.
If the current share price is 4.00, would you expect your adviser to make a buy, hold or sell recommendation?
If transactions costs are 25p per share, would you follow his advice?
15
A firm has just paid a dividend of 40p.
The firm's earnings and dividends have grown in the past at the rate of 10 per cent per year and are expected to grow at the same rate indefinitely into the future.
If the current share price is 8.80, what is the equilibrium rate of return on an investment in the shares of this firm?
16
The shares in DEF PLC are trading at 80p.
The last dividend paid was 8p and the required return on shares in this risk class is 17 per cent.
What is the expected future growth rate in dividends?
17
How much does the Gordon growth model tell us about the determinants of the price — earnings ratio?
7
Foreign currency
An investor can invest in either domestic securities or foreign securities if there are no foreign exchange control restrictions preventing him from doing so.
In order to invest abroad he first has to acquire foreign currency (i.e. foreign exchange), which can then be used to purchase overseas bonds and shares.
UK residents have been able to invest freely abroad since October 1979 when foreign exchange control restrictions were fully lifted.
However, since the early 1970s exchange rates have been floating instead of fixed; this means that, if the investor ultimately intends to liquidate the investment and repatriate the proceeds, he must take into account not only the risk associated with investing in overseas securities markets, but also the exchange rate risk: the risk of adverse movements in the exchange rate.
In this chapter, we cover the market for foreign currency, exchange rate risk, and the fair pricing of foreign currency.
7.1 Foreign currency
Foreign currency is not traded in a physical market-place.
Rather, the market for foreign currency in London is composed of a number of international banks linked by electronic information screens such as Reuters.
In total there are about 300 participants (including 50 large international banks) in the foreign currency market.
The banks operate as principals (operating their own accounts) and as agents for their own customers.
They therefore earn both dealing spreads and commission.
The market also contains around 10–12 foreign exchange brokers who link buyers and sellers of foreign currency.
Currency transactions are cleared through the International Commodities Clearing House (ICCH).
The largest volume of business is in US dollars and Deutschmarks.
There is both a spot market and a forward market in most currencies.
The settlement period for spot transactions is two business days (excluding public holidays in the countries of both currencies).
7.2 Exchange rate risk
When investing abroad, an investor has to take into account a number of factors that are not relevant when investing in the domestic economy.
Examples of these are transaction costs, taxes and political risk.
Transaction costs may be higher than in the domestic economy.
For example, the costs involved in trading in futures and options in the USA for a UK (or other overseas) resident are higher than the costs involved for a US resident.
There are also transaction costs involved in acquiring and/or disposing of the requisite foreign exchange.
Similarly, an investor may be liable for both income and capital gains tax in two countries: the country of residence and the country where the investment is held.
Generally, however, double taxation treaties exist between countries which permit overseas residents to purchase their securities.
Under such treaties, UK investors will pay income tax on, say, foreign share dividends at the higher of the investor's marginal income tax rates in the UK and the country in which the investment is held.
This means that, where the investor's marginal rate of income tax is higher abroad than in the UK, he will not be liable to  additional income tax in the UK, but nevertheless will suffer a higher tax burden on an overseas investment than with a comparable UK investment.
Political risk is the risk that an investment abroad may be expropriated by the overseas government.
Less severely, the overseas government might unexpectedly introduce factors that render an overseas investment less attractive, e.g. the imposition of capital controls, additional taxes or transaction costs.
However, the most important factor influencing overseas investments is exchange rate risk.
This is the risk that adverse movements in the exchange rate (between the country where the investment is held and the country where the investor is domiciled) will reduce the return from an investment, when the return is measured in the domestic currency.
To illustrate, suppose that at the beginning of the year a UK investor exchanges sterling for dollars to invest in US securities.
The spot exchange rate is e o = $2 per.
He requires $50,000 to purchase 2000 shares at $25 per share.
The sterling equivalent is 12.50 per share or 25,000 for the investment.
The shares are held for a year and then sold for $27 each.
In addition, a $2 dividend is paid.
The holding period return in US dollars, r S , is therefore .
However, the return when measured in sterling depends on what has happened to the exchange rate during the course of the year.
The sterling return, r, is determined as follows:, where P o = beginning-of-year dollar price of security, P 1 = end-of-year dollar price of security (including dividend), e o = beginning-of-year exchange rate ($ per) e 1 = end-of-year exchange rate ($ per) s =  = rate of appreciation of the exchange rate (i.e. appreciation of sterling against the dollar)
The beginning-of-year exchange rate was e o = $2 per.
Suppose that the end-of-year exchange rate was e 1 = $1.50 per.
This implies that s = -0.25 (i.e. (1.50/2.00) -1); in other words, the exchange rate has depreciated by 25 per cent.
In this case .
The sterling rate of return is 54.7 per cent, nearly three times the dollar rate of return.
However, suppose instead that the end-of-year exchange rate was e 1 = $2.50 per.
This implies that s = 0.25 (i.e. (2.50/2.00) -1), so that the exchange rate has appreciated by 25 per cent.
In this case  
The sterling rate of return is negative.
Even though the dollar investment was a good one, the adverse movement in the exchange rate (from the view point of a dollar investor) has resulted in the investor making a loss in terms of sterling.
This demonstrates precisely the nature of exchange rate risk.
7.3 The fair pricing of foreign currency
There are a number of ways in which to consider whether or not foreign currency or the exchange rate is fairly priced.
We will consider five of them.
7.3.1 Consistent cross exchange rates
In equilibrium, there should be a consistent relationship between exchange rates.
This means that, if e ij is the exchange rate between currency 1 and currency j (units of j per unit of i), the following relationship should hold between any three currencies:.
For example, suppose that currency 1 is sterling, currency 2 is dollars and currency 3 is Deutschmarks.
If  = 1.50 (i.e. DM 1.50 per $) and  = 0.33 (i.e. 0.33 per DM), then in equilibrium, we must have  that, is .
Equation (7.2) therefore provides one method of determining the fair exchange rate between sterling and dollars, on the assumption that an equilibrium relationship already exists between, say, sterling and Deutschmarks and between dollars and Deutschmarks.
If the actual sterling-dollar exchange rate differs from 2.00, then an arbitrage opportunity exists.
Suppose, for example that the actual sterling-dollar exchange rate were 1.90 instead of 2.00.
This means that 1 would buy $1.90 by directly exchanging sterling for dollars.
But by exchanging sterling for Deutschmarks and then Deutschmarks for dollars, 1 would buy $2.00.
Therefore an arbitrageur could make virtually riskless profits by exchanging sterling for Deutschmarks, Deutschmarks for dollars and dollars for sterling:.
This arbitrage opportunity raises the attractiveness of sterling and reduces the attractiveness of dollars.
Hence the sterling-dollar exchange rate will appreciate until equilibrium is restored at e o = $2 per.
7.3.2 Purchasing power parity
The relationship given in (7.2) is a valid way of determining the fair sterling-dollar exchange rate only if the sterling-Deutschmark and Deutschmark-dollar relationships are already fair.
It would  be useful to have a way of determining the fair sterling-dollar exchange rate independently of knowing whether these other relationships were equilibrium ones.
One way of doing this is to use the purchasing power parity (PPP) theory, also known as the law of one price.
This states that individuals will value currencies for the bundle of goods that can be purchased with them.
With this theory, exchange rates will adjust so that the same bundle of goods costs the same in all countries.
This implies that the exchange rate between two countries (e.g. the UK and USA) will equal the ratio of price levels between the two countries: where P o; = beginning-of-year price level in the UK, P $o; = beginning-of-year price level in the USA.
So, for example, if the price level were twice as high in the USA as in the UK, we would need 1 in order to buy $2 worth of US goods:.
In practice, the PPP theory is not usually expressed as in (7.4) in terms of price levels, mainly because of the difficulties involved in determining an appropriate base year for computing the price-level indices.
Instead, the theory is usually expressed in terms of changes in price levels in different countries, that is, in terms of differential inflation rates.
With this version of the theory, the change in the exchange rate over a period will equal the differential inflation rates between the two countries.
Taking (7.4) for the end of the year and dividing by (7.4) for the beginning of the year gives  or  or  where  = inflation rate in the UK, = inflation rate in the USA.
In other words, the rate of appreciation of the exchange rate, s (expressed in $ per), increases with the US inflation rate and decreases with the UK inflation rate.
Equation (7.6) assumes that we know what the UK and US inflation rates will be over the course of the year.
However, at the beginning of the year we cannot know for certain what the inflation rates will be; we can only have expectations about what they will be.
The version of (7.6) using expectations is (where E(s) is the expected value of s and so on).
This says that the expected rate of appreciation of the exchange rate increases with the expected US inflation rate and decreases with the expected UK inflation rate.
Equation (7.7) is a theory explaining the expected rate of appreciation of the exchange rate.
Alternatively, for a given expected future spot exchange rate it is a theory explaining the current spot rate; or for a given current spot rate it is a theory explaining the expected future spot rate.
Under the expectations hypothesis, the forward exchange rate is equal to the expected future spot rate; i.e., where f 1 is the current forward exchange rate for one year ahead.
Substituting (7.8) in (7.7) provides us with another version of the PPP theory:.
Equation (7.9) says that the percentage forward premium () increases with the expected US inflation rate and decreases with the expected UK inflation rate.
To illustrate, suppose that , and .
In this case, the implied forward rate is (rearranging (7.9)) and the implied forward premium is  i.e., sterling is expected to depreciate against the dollar by 4.5 per cent to reflect the differential inflation rates between the UK and the USA.
There are a number of problems with the PPP theory.
For instance, most price-level indices include goods and services that are not traded internationally.
Also, transport costs, tariffs, sluggish price adjustments, and so on, reduce the degree to which exchange rates reflect relative price levels in the short run.
We can think of PPP as being a theory of the long-run determination of exchange rates.
In the short run, however, other factors are likely to have a more important influence on the course of exchange rates.
7.3.3 International Fisher effect
The most important factor that is likely to affect the exchange rate in the short term is interest rates.
This is because capital flows tend to respond more rapidly to changes in relative interest rates than trade flows tend to respond to changes in relative prices.
One method of demonstrating this is known as the international Eisher effect.
This states that, in the absence of transaction costs and restrictions on capital movements, real rates of interest will be equal in all countries; arbitrage will ensure that this is the case.
The Fisher equations for the UK and the USA are as follows (see also Chapter 2): and  where ; = real interest rate in the UK, $; = real interest rate in the USA.
The international Fisher effect says that .
Substituting (7.12) into (7.10) and equating to (7.11) yields , which on rearranging yields .
Substituting (7.14) into (7.9) gives .
Equation (7.15) says that the percentage forward premium increases with the US nominal interest rate and decreases with the UK nominal interest rate.
Alternatively, for a given forward exchange rate, it is a theory explaining the current spot rate; or for a given current spot rate, it is a theory explaining the forward rate.
To illustrate, suppose that r = 0.1330 (13.30%), r$ = 0.0815 (8.15%) and e o = 2.0.
In this case, the implied forward rate (rearranging (7.15)) is  and the implied forward premium is   i.e., sterling is expected to depreciate against the dollar by 4.5 per cent to compensate for the lower US interest rate.
In this example, the implied forward rate and implied forward premium are the same as in the last example.
This followed because the expected inflation rates in the two examples were identical, namely  and .
Using the nominal interest rates and the expected inflation rates given, the two Fisher equations (7.10) and (7.11) imply that  and .
The real rates of interest are the same in both countries at 3 per cent.
The nominal interest rate in the UK is higher than in the USA because the expected inflation rate is higher.
But the nominal rate is just sufficiently higher than in the USA to equate the real rates, via the two Fisher equations (7.10) and (7.11).
Thus the international Fisher effect holds in this example.
7.3.4 Covered interest rate parity
If the international Fisher effect holds, then so does covered interest rate parity.
This states that nominal interest rates from investments that are hedged (or covered) for exchange rate risk will be equal in all countries.
Again, arbitrage will ensure that this is the case.
Consider, for example, the following two investments.
The first is an investment of 1 in the UK at r.
At the end of the year,.
The second is an investment of 1 in the USA.
The 1 is exchanged at the spot exchange rate e o , into $e o and invested at r$.
At the same time, the dollar proceeds from the investment are sold forward at 1, the forward exchange rate, thereby protecting the US investment from adverse movements in the exchange rate.
At the end of the year,.
Equating the two returns and rearranging gives .
Equation (7.18) says that, when covered interest parity holds, the ratio of the forward to the spot rate equals the ratio of (one plus) relative interest rates.
That covered interest rate parity is a variant of the international Fisher effect is very easily demonstrated as follows.
If we subtract unity from each side of (7.18) and rearrange, we arrive at (7.15), the relevant exchange rate equation if the international Fisher effect holds.
7.3.5 Uncovered interest rate parity
If both PPP and the international Fisher effect hold simultaneously, then so does uncovered interest rate parity.
This states that nominal interest rates from investments that are unhedged (or uncovered) for exchange rate risk will be equal in all countries.
In other words, if uncovered interest rate parity holds, then there is no exchange rate risk to be concerned about: international investment does not provide an additional source of risk compared with domestic investment.
We can illustrate uncovered interest rate parity as follows.
Suppose that the spot exchange rate is e o = 2.0, the real interest rate in all countries is  = 3%, = 0.10 and  = 0.05.
If PPP holds (cf. (7.5)), then  where e 1 is the end of year exchange rate; that is,, i.e., the actual end-of-year exchange rate (not just the forward rate) will equal 1.91.
If the international Fisher effect holds, then we can derive the nominal interest rates using  that is, and  that is ,.
An investment of 1 in the UK will return 1.133 after one year.
If, instead, the investment of 1 is converted into dollars at the spot exchange rate, we will get $2.
If this is invested, we get a return of $2.1630 (i.e. $2 (1 + 0.0815)) after one year.
If this is then converted back to sterling at the end of the year at the spot rate e 1 = 1.91, we get 1.133.
So the two investments generate the same return if both PPP and the international Fisher effect hold, in which case exchange rate risk is unimportant.
But in practice, these two effects do not hold exactly.
This leaves exchange rate risk as a feature that remains to be hedged.
Hedging exchange rate risks is considered in Chapter 16.
Selected references
Exercises
1
What are the main risks involved with investing outside your country of residence?
2
What is exchange rate risk?
3
Compare and contrast purchasing power parity and covered interest rate parity as theories determining the exchange rate.
8
Forwards and futures
In this chapter, we consider forward contracts and futures contracts, the differences between them and how they are priced.
8.1 Forward and futures contracts
8.1.1 Forward contracts
A forward contract is an agreement between two counterparties that fixes the terms of an exchange that will take place between them at some future date.
The contract specifies: what is being exchanged (e.g. cash for a good, cash for a service, a good for a good, a good for a service, cash for cash, etc.), the price at which the exchange takes place, and the date (or range of dates) in the future at which the exchange takes place.
In other words, a forward contract locks in the price today of an exchange that will take place at some future date.
A forward contract is therefore a contract for forward delivery rather than a contract for immediate or spot or cash delivery, and generally no money is exchanged between the counterparties until delivery.
Forward contracts have the advantage of being tailor-made to meet the requirements of the two counterparties, in terms of both the size of the transaction and the date of forward delivery.
However, one disadvantage of a forward contract is that it cannot be cancelled without the agreement of both counterparties.
Similarly, the obligations of one counterparty under the contract cannot generally be transferred to a third party.
In short, the forward contract is neither very liquid nor very marketable.
Another disadvantage is that there is no guarantee that one counterparty will not default and fail to deliver his obligations under the contract.
This is more likely to occur the further away the spot price is at the time of delivery from the price that was agreed at the time the contract was negotiated (i.e. the forward price).
It will always be the case that it would have been better for one of the counterparties not to have taken out the forward contract but to have waited and transacted in the spot or cash market at the time called for delivery.
If the spot price is higher than the forward price, the counterparty taking delivery (the buyer) gains and the counterparty making delivery (the seller) loses, and vice versa when the spot price is below the forward price.
The greater the difference between the spot and forward prices, the greater the incentive for the losing counterparty to renege (i.e. the greater the credit risk).
8.1.2 Futures contracts
A futures contract is also an agreement between two counterparties that fixes the terms of an exchange that will take place between them at some future date.
But it is very different from a forward contract and has been designed to remove many of the disadvantages of forward contracts.
However, the cost of achieving this has been to remove some of the advantages of forward contracts as well.
Futures contracts are standardized agreements to exchange specific types of good, in specific amounts and at specific future delivery or maturity dates.
For example, there might be only four contracts traded per year, with the following delivery months: March, June, September and  December.
This means that the details of the contracts are not negotiable as with forward contracts.
The big advantage of having a standardized contract is that it can be exchanged between counterparties very easily.
Futures contracts are traded on a central regulated exchange by open outcry, whereby traders congregate periodically in a pit on the floor of the exchange to buy and sell contracts, with every negotiated price being heard by other traders.
When an order is executed, the two traders fill out clearing slips, which are then matched by the exchange.
The order is confirmed with customers, and a futures contract exists.
The number of contracts outstanding at any time is known as the open interest at that time.
Futures contracts eliminate the problems of illiquidity and credit risk associated with forward contracts by introducing a clearing house, a system of marking to market and margin payments, and a system of price limits.
The clearing house guarantees fulfilment of all contracts by intervening in all transactions and becoming the formal counterparty to every transaction.
The only credit risk is therefore with the clearing house.
It is also possible to unwind a futures contract at any time by performing a reversing trade, so futures contracts are generally extremely liquid (at least for the near maturing contracts).
The clearing house withstands all the credit risk involved in being the counterparty to every transaction, by using the system of daily marking to market.
At the end of every day's trading, the profits or losses accruing to the counterparties as a result of that day's change in the futures price have to be received or paid.
Failure to pay the daily loss results in default and the closure of the contract against the defaulting party.
The credit risk to the clearing house has now disappeared because accumulated losses are not allowed to build up.
Even a single day's loss is covered by a deposit that each counterparty must make when the contract is first taken out.
This deposit is known as initial margin and is set equal to the maximum daily loss that is likely to arise on the contract.
As the price of the contract goes against one of the counterparties, the resulting loss is met from that counterparty's initial margin and is paid over to the other counterparty as profit.
As the margin account falls below a particular threshold (the maintenance margin level), it has to be topped up with additional payments known as variation margin.
(Such payments have to be made immediately.) futures price falls.
In the example, both counterparties put up initial margin on day 1 of 200, which is 20 per cent of the value of the contract at the beginning of day 1.
At the close of business on day 1, the futures price has risen to 1100.
The buyer of the contract has made 100 profit which he receives from the seller of the contract.
The seller can take only 50 from the margin account, which cannot fall below 150, the maintenance margin level; the other 50 comes in the form of a variation margin payment.
At the end of day 2, the futures price has risen to 1200.
The buyer receives a further 100 from the seller who has to pay an equivalent amount as variation margin.
However, by the end of day 3, the futures price has fallen to 1050 and the buyer has to pay 150 over to the seller.
By the end of day 5, when the buyer closes the contract, the buyer's accumulated net loss is 100 while the seller's accumulated net gain is also 100.
This means that the seller has made a return of 50 per cent on his initial investment of 200 in just five days while the buyer has lost 50 per cent of his initial investment.
But during the same period the futures price has fallen by just 10 per cent.
This demonstrates the effect of leverage in futures contracts.
Because the initial margin payments are a small fraction of the value of the contract, the percentage gains or losses to the counterparties are magnified in comparison with the changes in the futures price.
Futures trading is exactly like betting with a bookmaker (in this case the clearing house) on the price of the underlying good, with daily clearing of bets.
The clearing house is also protected from excessive credit risk through the operation of a system of daily price limits.
During any trading day, the futures price can lie within a band centred on the settlement price at the close of business on the previous trading day.
If the futures price rises above the upper limit of the band, the market will close limit-up.
If the futures price falls below the lower limit of the band, the market will close limit-down.
The market can close for the remainder of the trading day or for a much shorter period such as half an hour, depending on the exchange.
The idea is to ensure an orderly market by giving market participants a cooling-off period with a chance to reassess their positions.
The problem with price limits, of course, is that futures contracts are rendered completely illiquid: a position cannot be closed out at any price when trading is suspended.
The use of limit pricing can lead to considerable differences between the settlement price of a futures contract and the underlying equilibrium price.
If the equilibrium price has moved substantially and suddenly, the limit pricing system could mean that the market is effectively closed for several days at a time.
The market will open each day but will close immediately limit-up or limit-down, and this pattern will repeat itself daily until the settlement price has reached the equilibrium price.
It is because of these distortions that many exchanges will not operate price limits during the delivery month of the contract.
The explanation for the futures price jumping suddenly lies in what is happening in the market for the underlying good, i.e. in the spot or cash market.
There is a close relationship between futures prices and spot prices, especially as the delivery date approaches.
On the delivery date itself, the settlement price of the futures contract is determined by the spot price.
This is why futures contracts are known as derivative securities, because they are derivative on the underlying cash market good.
Before the delivery date, the futures price could be above or below the spot price.
The difference between the two prices is known as the basis: Basis = Futures price -Spot price.
(8.1).
(Note that some authors define the basis as spot price minus futures price.)
If the futures price exceeds the spot price, the basis is positive (a situation known as contango).
The futures price tends to fall over time towards the spot price, equalling the spot price on the delivery day, at which time the basis is zero.
If the futures price is less than the spot price, the basis is negative (a situation known as backwardation).
The futures price tends to rise over time towards the spot price, equalling the spot price on the delivery day, so again the basis is zero at delivery.
These relationships are shown in Fig. 8.1.
Similar relationships hold for cycles of futures contracts with different delivery dates, as shown in Fig. 8.2.
If the spot price is not expected to change over time, then in contracts with a positive basis the futures price in the contracts with nearby delivery dates will be lower than the futures price in the contracts with distant delivery dates (a situation known as normal contango).
On the other hand, when the basis is negative, near maturing contracts will have higher futures prices than distant maturing contracts (a situation known as normal backwardation).
A final feature of futures contracts to be considered is the delivery (or settlement) process.
Most open futures positions are closed out before delivery by taking out an offsetting position (e.g. the   seller of a contract buys an equivalent contract), but the delivery process is important in ensuring that the futures price converges on the spot price on the delivery date.
If it were not for the possibility of physical delivery of the underlying cash market good by the seller of the futures contract to the buyer, there would be no mechanism to guarantee convergence of futures and spot prices.
If the basis were significantly positive just prior to the delivery day, it would be possible to make substantial arbitrage profits by selling futures contracts and at the same time buying the underlying cash market goods in order to deliver them to the buyers of the contracts.
On the other hand, if the basis were significantly negative just prior to the delivery day, it would be possible to make arbitrage profits by buying futures contracts, taking delivery and then selling the goods in the cash market.
So to avoid significant arbitrage profits, the futures and spot prices must converge.
The delivery process itself is determined by the futures exchange and involves a sequence of steps that must be completed in a specific order and at specific times.
Because the clearing house is the counterparty to every transaction, it is also involved in the delivery process.
The delivery process is initiated by either the buyer (the long) or the seller (the short)(depending on the contract) notifying the clearing house that he intends to take or make delivery.
The clearing house then matches long and short positions and assigns a short to make delivery to a long.
The delivery process is completed or settled by the short delivering an eligible cash market good to the long and the long making payment to the short at the invoice price or amount.
If there is more than one type of eligible cash market good that can be delivered against the contract, then the short will choose the one that is cheapest to deliver.
This means that the futures price will always be priced off the cheapest-to-deliver eligible cash market good.
However, not all futures contracts are settled by the delivery of a cash market good; some are settled for cash.
So far, we have discussed futures contracts in general terms and have referred to contracts being defined in terms of‘goods’.
It is certainly true that most futures contracts deal with commodities (e.g. aluminium, barley, cattle, citrus, cocoa, coffee, copper, corn, cotton, crude oil, gasoline, gold, heating oil, hogs, lead, lumber, nickel, oats, palladium, palm oil, plywood, pork bellies, potatoes, propane, rapeseed, rice, rubber, rye, silver, soybeans, sugar, tin, wheat, wool and zinc).
But we are mostly interested in futures contracts related to financial instruments, i.e. in financial futures contracts.
8.2 Financial futures contracts
In the UK, all financial futures contracts are traded on the London International Financial Futures Exchange (LIFFE) which opened in 1982.
Members of LIFFE include banks, member firms of the ISE, money and commodity brokers, discount houses and individual traders (known as locals) who trade on their own account.
Almost half the membership of LIFFE is based outside the UK.
All members will have met stringent capital adequacy requirements before being accepted.
Trading on LIFFE takes place as follows.
On receiving a customer order in a member's office, the order is phoned to the member's booth on the LIFFE trading floor, specifying sale or purchase, contract type, delivery month and quantity.
The order slip is carried by a runner to a trader in the pit.
Runners are identified by the gold jackets that they wear, while traders are identified by their scarlet jackets or house jackets together with badges carrying the trading initials of their firm.
The trader gives his orders by open outcry and officially sanctioned hand signals.
A LIFFE official is responsible for ensuring an orderly pit and for arbitrating in the case of disputed trades.
Once executed, the details of the order (including the trading counterparty) are confirmed with the client and recorded on a clearing slip.
Clearing slips are collected by LIFFE officials and the details entered on to a computerized matching system.
Matched deals are then registered with LIFFE's clearing house, the International Commodities Clearing House (ICCH).
All clearing of LIFFE  futures contracts is made through ICCH.
Once a trade has been registered, each party has a contractual obligation with ICCH and not with the original counterparty.
There are four classes of financial futures contracts traded on LIFFE: short-term interest rate contracts, long-term interest rate contracts, currency contracts, and a stock index contract.
(Note: LIFFE is constantly introducing new contracts, deleting contracts, and changing the specifications of existing contracts.)
8.2.1 Short-term interest rate futures
There are four short-term deposit (or short-term interest rate) contracts traded on LIFFE: a three-month sterling time deposit contract, a three-month eurodollar time deposit contract a three-month eurodeutschmark time deposit contract, and a three-month ECU (European Currency Unit) time deposit contract.
The specifications of two of the contracts are shown in Tables 8.1 and 8.2 respectively.
We shall concentrate attention on the sterling deposit contract.
The three-month sterling time deposit contract (denoted ST3) has a face value of 500,000.
This means that the buyer of one contract (the long) is expecting to be allocated a 500,000 sterling time deposit at an eligible bank on the delivery date.
(Note that this contract also allows for cash settlement at the option of the long.)
The delivery day is the first business day after the last trading day which is the third Wednesday of the delivery month.
There are four delivery months per year (the same for all LIFFE futures contracts): March, June, September and December.
As with all short-term interest rate contracts, the ST3 contract is quoted on an index basis; i.e., the futures price is given as (100.00 -interest rate (%)).
This preserves the standard inverse relationship between prices and interest rates: the lower the interest rate, the higher the futures price.
For example, if the price of a June ST3 contract is 90.50, this means that an interest rate of 9.5 per cent (100.00 — 90.50) can be locked-in for three-months on a June sterling time deposit.
The minimum price movement (or tick size) on a ST3 contract is one basis point (i.e. 1/100 of l per cent or 0.01 per cent):.
This implies a tick value of .
This means that, because the smallest permissible amount by which interest rates can move is 0.01 per cent(i.e. 0.0001), the smallest change in the price of ST3 contract is 12.50.
To illustrate, if an individual buys 10 ST3 contracts at 90.50 and closes the position 20 days later with a reversing sale of 10 contracts at 90.55, the profit is , where the number of ticks gain is 5 (i.e. (90.55 — 90.50) /0.01, where 0.01 is the tick size).
The maximum daily price movement in the ST3 contract before the market closes limit-up or limit-down is 100 basis points above or below the settlement price on the previous day.
This means that the value of the contract will have changed by 1250 when the price limit operates.
The initial margin on the ST3 contract is 750.
With all LIFFE contracts, the maintenance margin level is set at the initial margin level.
This means that, if the margin account on the ST3 contract falls below 750, variation margin payments have to be made.
In the last example, at the time of the sale of the 10 contracts on day 20, the individual will have 7500 (10 contracts x 750) in his margin account as initial margin and 625 as variation margin.
The profit of 625 has therefore been made with capital of 7500, a return over 20 days of 8.33 per cent, and an effective return (re) of .
There is a lower level of initial margin on straddle positions.
A straddle position is a simultaneous long and short position in different months of the same futures contract, e.g. long one June ST3 contract and short one September ST3 contract.
Because the daily price movements in a straddle are likely to be lower than in the individual contracts, the initial margin is lower.
If the ST3 contract goes to delivery, the long can choose whether to take physical delivery or cash settlement.
If he opts for physical delivery, he will be allocated one of a number of prime banks whose sterling time deposits are accepted by LIFFE as being of deliverable quality.
We will consider the two cases of physical delivery and cash settlement for a June ST3 contract purchased at 90.50.
In both cases, the clearing house announces the final settlement or the exchange delivery settlement price (EDSP) on the last trading day.
The EDSP is determined as follows.
Between 9.30 am and 11.00 am on the last trading day, the clearing house contacts a random sample of 16 banks from a list of designated banks offering three-month sterling time deposits.
It takes the interest rates offered on those deposits, eliminates the top three and bottom three quotes, and takes the average of the remaining ten interest rates to give the settlement interest rate.
The EDSP is equal to 100.00 minus the settlement interest rate.
Suppose that the settlement interest rate is 8.75 per cent.
In this case the EDSP is 91.25.
Since the contract was initially purchased at 90.50, this implies that the long's margin account contains 750 initial margin plus 937.50 in variation margin (i.e. [(91.25 -90.50) /0.01;]ticks × 12.50 per tick), totalling 1687.50.
In the case where the long elects for physical delivery, the delivery procedure is as follows.
On the last trading day (the third Wednesday in June), the short will arrange time deposit facilities at an eligible bank.
Suppose the yield on this time deposit is 8.65 per cent.
The short informs the clearing house of these arrangements.
On the delivery day (the day after the last trading day), the long transfers 500,000 to the allocated bank.
He receives his 1687.50 in margin plus an invoice (or settlement) amount to compensate him for being allocated a time deposit yielding less than the settlement interest rate.
The invoice amount is given by  where F = nominal value of futures contract 500,000), N = number of days to maturity of time deposit (e.g. 91 days), rd = interest rate on time deposit (0.0865), rs = settlement interest rate (0.0875).
In this case, the long gets .
Thus his total payment is 1809.50 (i.e. 1687.50 + 122.00).
In the case where the long elects for cash settlement, he simply receives the sum of money in his margin account as final settlement.
This is based on the EDSP and equals 1687.50.
When the long originally bought the June futures contract at 90.50, he was expecting to lock in a three-month sterling interest rate of 9.50 per cent.
We can demonstrate that this is indeed the case.
The spot interest rate in June is only 8.75 per cent but the long's variation margin equals 937.50, so his net worth has increased by 937.50.
Thus the implied futures rate (rf) is   In this case we get  as required.
Even when the long elects to take the deposit, he is still locking in a rate of interest of 9.50 per cent.
This follows because he gets an additional 122.00 as an invoice amount.
In this case the implied futures rate is  so that again as required.
8.2.2 Long-term interest rate futures
There are six bond contracts (or long-term interest rate contracts) traded on LIFFE: a short-gilt contract, a medium-gilt contract, a long-gilt contract, a US Treasury bond contract, a German   government bond contract and a Japanese government bond contract.
The specifications of three of the contracts are shown in Tables 8.3 8.5.
We shall concentrate attention on the long-gilt contract.
The long-gilt contract trades an imaginary or notional 20-year gilt with a yield to maturity (YTM) of 9 per cent.
The face value of the contract is 50,000 nominal and the value of a tick (minimum price movement of  of 1 per cent) is 15.625 (i.e.  × 0.01 × 50,000).
This means that the price of the long-gilt futures contract is quoted in 32nds of 1.
(Note that long gilts are also quoted in 32nds of 1.)
Both futures prices and gilts are quoted clean (i.e. without making allowance for accrued interest).
So, for example, the price of a contract might be quoted as 92–12 which means 92  per 100 nominal.
If an individual buys a futures contract at this price and later sells a contract at 91–23, then he will have made a loss of 328.13 (i.e. 21 ticks x 15.625 per tick).
The contract requires physical delivery of a real gilt, and any eligible gilt with a maturity of between 15 and 25 years can be delivered.
(Table 8.6 shows a list of deliverable gilts for a typical LIFFE June long-gilt contract.)
However, only the bond that is cheapest to deliver (CTD) from the point of view of the short will be delivered.
The CTD bond can be delivered on any business day of the delivery month, but in practice only two days are ever used.
If the current yield on the CTD bond exceeds the money market interest rate, the bond will be delivered on the last business day of the month, because the short earns more by holding on to the bond than by delivering it and investing the proceeds in the money market; otherwise the bond will be delivered on the first    business day of the month.
Note that a gilt that is special ex dividend on the proposed delivery day would not be eligible for delivery.
(Certain gilts can be traded special ex dividend three weeks prior to the normal ex dividend date, which means that they can be bought or sold with or without the next coupon during this period.)
Other bonds that are not eligible are index-linked, partly paid, convertible or variable-rate bonds.
When the bond is delivered, the long pays the short an invoice amount:.
The settlement price (or the exchange delivery settlement price, EDSP) is the trading price (per 100 nominal) for the futures contract on the last day of trading.
The price factor (or conversion factor) determines the appropriate price of the bond that is delivered.
It is calculated as being the price per 1 nominal at which the bond delivered has a yield to maturity of 9 per cent.
The price factors are calculated for the first day of the delivery month, and adjustments have to be made for accrued interest where the first day of the delivery month does not coincide with a coupon payment date.
Ignoring accrued interest, the price that a bond has to have    to give a yield to maturity of 9 per cent is given by .
This is the price that a bond with a 9 per cent YTM will have on the next coupon payment date.
The following adjustments to (8.8) have to be made for accrued interest: where N 1 = Number of days between first day of delivery month and next coupon payment date, N 2 = Number of days between last coupon payment date and next coupon payment date.
First the next coupon payment is added to (8.8) and then the whole sum is discounted back to the first day of the delivery month.
This gives the dirty price on that day.
To get the clean price we subtract the interest that has been accruing at the rate of d per cent up to that day.
The price factor (PF) is then given by .
There is a different price factor for each eligible bond and for each delivery month.
The price factors are published by LIFFE (see Table 8.6).
The invoice amount also includes interest accrued from the previous coupon payment.
This arises because the futures contract is traded at a clean price and does not include accrued interest payments.
However, gilts trade at a clean price but have accrued interest added on.
We will calculate the CTD for the June long-gilt contract.
We will assume that the date is 1 April.
We will also assume that on 1 April the money market rate of interest is 10 per cent and the long-gilt future is trading at 91–21, i.e. 91.66 (per 100 nominal).
Table 8.6 also gives the dirty prices of the eligible bonds on 1 April.
From this we can determine current yields.
All bonds with current yields exceeding the money market rate of 10 per cent would be delivered at the end of June (i.e. in 90 days from 1 April), otherwise they would be delivered at the beginning of June (i.e. in 61 days from 1 April).
The Treasury 74 per cent 2012–15 would be delivered on 1 June but becomes ineligible because June 1 falls during the special ex dividend period for that bond.
The cheapest to deliver of these bonds is the bond that gives the greatest implied repo rate to the short from a cash-and-carry (or cost-of-carry) transaction, i.e. a strategy of buying the bond (with borrowed funds) in the cash market and selling it into the futures market.
Consider the Treasury 10 per cent 2004.
The cash outflow (per 100 nominal) from this strategy is as follows:.
The bond (whose price includes 137 days' accrued interest on 1 April) has to be financed at the money market rate of 10 per cent for the 90 days between 1 April and 30 June, when the bond (if it happens to be the CTD) is delivered into the futures market.
The cash inflow (per 100 nominal) as a result of the strategy is .
The implied price of the bond on 30 June equals the futures price on 1 April multiplied by the price factor for the bond.
Because the futures price is quoted clean, accrued interest has to be added to get the implied dirty price on 30 June.
This cash-and-carry transaction which operates for 90 days from 1 April to 30 June generates a rate of return or implied repo rate of return or implied repo rate of .
It is known as a repo rate because it is equivalent to a repurchase agreement with the futures market.
A repurchase agreement provides a means for the short to lend money to the futures market: the short agrees to buy a bond with a provision to sell it back to the market at a predetermined price and to receive a rate of interest, the repo rate.
The implied repo rates for all the remaining eligible bonds can be calculated in the same way.
The only slight modification to the above formulation is that, if a bond is declared ex dividend between 1 April and 30 June, the interest accrued is negative during the ex dividend period.
The repo rates are shown in the final column of Table 8.6.
The CTD bond is the Treasury 122 per cent 2003 05, which has the largest implied repo rate of 5.44 per cent.
When 50,000 nominal of this bond is delivered on 30 June, the invoice amount, assuming a futures settlement price of 91–08, i.e. 91.25, will be .
By paying this amount to the short, the long gets a yield to maturity of 9 per cent on his holding of Treasury 12' per cent 2003 05 as required by the futures contract.
8.2.3 Currency futures
There are five exchange rate or currency contracts traded on LIFFE: sterling, Deutschmark (DM), Swiss franc and Japanese yen, all of which are traded against the US dollar; and the dollar-mark contract, which is traded against the DM.
The specifications of four of the contracts are shown in Table 8.7.
We shall concentrate our attention on the sterling contract.
The sterling contract has a face value of 25,000 and is traded against the US dollar.
This means that the buyer of one contract (the long) is expecting to receive 25,000 and to make payment for this in US dollars.
The seller (the short), on the other hand, is expecting to receive a sum of US dollars (which depends on the price of the contract) and to pay 25,000 for this.
The price of the contract is quoted in exactly the same way as foreign exchange is quoted.
For example, if the EDSP is 1.7812 (i.e. if 1 = $ 1.7812), then the invoice amount for the contract is    The long pays $44,530 to the short and in return receives 25,000.
Delivery takes place two business days after the last trading day, the standard settlement period in the foreign exchange market.
The tick size on the sterling contract is 0.01 cents per pound sterling (i.e. $0.0001 per).
This implies a tick value for the contract of $2.50 (i.e. $0.0001 × 25,000).
To illustrate, suppose an individual buys one sterling contract at a price of 1.7215 and later closes his position at 1.7263.
The exchange rate change is $0.0048 (i.e. $1.7263 -$1.7215).
The number of ticks gain is 48 (i.e. $0.0048/$0.0001; where $0.0001 is the tick size).
The profit on the deal is therefore $ 120 (i.e. 48 ticks ×$2.50 per tick).
8.2.4 Stock index futures
There is one stock index contract traded on LIFFE, namely that on the FTSE100 index.
The specification of this contract is shown in Table 8.8.
The face value of the contract is 25 per full index point and the futures price is quoted in index points.
So a futures price of 1825.0 implies that the index is being traded at 1825.0 and the value of the contract is 45,625 (i.e. 1825.0 ×25 per index point).
The tick size on the contract is 0.5 and the value of a tick is 12.50.
(Hence two ticks are equivalent to one full index point, and this is valued at 25 (2 ×12.50).)
There are no price limits on the contract throughout its entire duration.
To illustrate, consider an individual buying 20 contracts at 1825.0 and closing his position five days later by selling 20 contracts at 1812.5.
The futures price has fallen by 12.5 (i.e.1825.0 -1812.5) which is equivalent to 25 ticks (i.e. 12.5/0.5 where 0.5 is the tick size).
The individual's loss is .
If the contract goes to delivery, it clearly has to be settled for cash since it is not possible to deliver a physical index.
The invoice amount is determined by the difference between the EDSP and the settlement price on the day before the last trading day.
This is because all the variation margin payments due will have been up to the penultimate trading day.
All that remains to be settled is the effect of the movement in the cash index between 9.05 am and 11.20 am on the last trading day.
To illustrate, we will reconsider the last example and assume that the individual did not close his position after five days but waited for the last trading day which was the following day.
His variation margin payments of 6250 have been paid and the average FTSE100 index during the last ten minutes of trading is 1810.5, implying an EDSP of 1810.5.
The futures price has fallen between the previous close and last trade by 2.0 (i.e.1812.5 -1810.5) or by 4 ticks (i.e. 2.0/0.5).
The invoice amount is therefore .
This sum is handed over by the long to the short in final settlement.
8.3 The fair pricing of forward and financial futures contracts
Forward contracts and financial futures contracts perform exactly the same function.
Therefore we would expect a forward contract and a financial futures contract with the same specifications to have the same price.
We shall therefore concentrate on the pricing of financial futures contracts.
8.3.1 Fair pricing with no uncertainty
If there is no uncertainty, the fair price of a financial futures contract can be determined very simply using the cost-of-carry (or the cash-and-carry) model (the same model that was used to find the CTD bond).
Suppose that an individual can undertake one of the following two investments, one in the cash market and one in the futures market.
He could borrow enough to buy an asset in the cash market, hold on to it for T years (earning any income but bearing any carrying costs including interest on borrowed funds involved), and then sell it in the cash market and also repay the loan with interest.
Alternatively, he could sell a futures contract at the current futures price and, at the end of T years, buy the asset in the cash market to deliver it into the futures market to fulfil the contract.
The profit under the second strategy is  where P f = current futures price, P S T = spot price in year T.
Clearly, in a world with complete certainty p f = P S T the futures price must equal the actual future spot price.
So the profit from this strategy will be zero.
Note that because of complete certainty there will be no need for either initial margin or variation margin, so strategy 2 involves neither cash inflows nor cash outflows during the life of the contract.
Note also, that there are no carrying costs with a futures contract; all the carrying costs are associated with the cash market transactions, but they are not incurred until the end of the period.
The profit under the first strategy is  where P S = current spot price, P S T = spot price in year T, r = annual carry costs (including interest on loan)(as a proportion), d = gross annual return from holding cash asset (as a proportion).
In (8.12) we assume that simple interest and not compound interest is used (otherwise we would need to use (1 + r)T ) and that carry costs in the cash market are proportional to price.
Carry costs can include such items as insurance, storage and deterioration as well as borrowing costs.
The cost-of-carry is (r-d) and this can be positive or negative.
Both strategies achieve the same outcome, namely the sale of an asset in T years' time; both strategies use none of the individual's own wealth; and both strategies are riskless.
Two identical strategies using no wealth and involving no risk (such strategies are known as arbitrage strategies) should, in equilibrium, generate the same profit, and that profit should be zero.
We know that strategy 2 generates zero profit, and strategy 1 should generate the same zero profit.
By equating (8.11) and (8.12), we can derive the fair futures price P f o :.
The fair futures prices is equal to the current spot price plus the cost of carry.
It is clear from  (8.1) and (8.13) that the basis is equal to the cost of carry:.
The basis will be positive (contango) if the cost of carry is positive and negative (backwardation) otherwise.
A similar relationship holds between the prices of futures contracts with different delivery months: where P f 1 = current price of futures contract with delivery in year T 1 , P f 2 = current price of futures contract with delivery in year T 2 (T 1 < T 2 ).
The difference between the two futures prices is known as the spread, and it is clear from (8.15) that the spread is equal to cost-of-carry:.
If the cost-of-carry (or the spread) is positive, then  (normal contango), while if the cost-of-carry is negative, then  (normal backwardation).
If P f 2 exceeded the right-hand side of (8.15), a riskless arbitrage would exist.
By holding a long contract for delivery at T 1 and a short contract for delivery at T 2 , it would be possible to take delivery at T 1 for P f 1 and keep the asset for making delivery at T 2 for P f 2 and to make a sure profit.
If futures contracts were fairly priced, however, this could not happen.
8.3.2 Futures prices and expected spot prices
In a world with uncertainty, the future spot price will not be known with certainty.
This means that the futures price is likely to differ from the realized spot price.
But the question is: how will it differ?
According to the expectations hypothesis (see Chapters 2 and 5), which assumes rational behaviour by risk-neutral investors, the futures price will not differ systematically from the realized spot price.
In other words, the current futures price will equal the market average expectation of the future spot price; i.e.,, where P f = current price of futures contract with delivery in year T, P S T = spot price in year T, E () = market average expectations operator based on all current information.
The actual rate of return on a futures position depends both on whether the position is long or short, and on the amount of margin that has to be paid.
Suppose that an individual has to put up 100 per cent margin (i.e. has to pay the full amount of the investment Pf from the start) but that this can be invested at the riskless rate r.
If the individual has a long position, his actual rate of return  over the one-year holding period (rh)(assuming T= I) is .
The first term on the right-hand side of (8.18) is the return on the margin payments.
The second term is the return on the futures position.
If  the long position makes a profit on his futures position.
If the individual has a short position, his holding period return is .
If  the short makes a loss on his futures position.
If the expectations hypothesis is valid, the expected return from the futures position is zero for both the long and the short (see (8.17)).
Therefore the overall rate of return is simply the risk-free rate of interest.
The expectations hypothesis may be a good starting point, but it assumes that individuals who take unhedged positions in futures markets (i.e. speculators) expect on average to earn only the risk-free rate.
This is rational behaviour only if speculators are risk-neutral and are willing to accommodate the demands of hedgers without additional compensation in the form of a risk premium in excess of the risk-free rate.
Diagrammatically, the expectations hypothesis is given by the horizontal line in Fig. 8.1 (assuming that the expected spot price does not change over time).
There are two other explanations of the relationship between futures prices and expected future spot prices, one consistent with the backwardation relationship and the other consistent with the contango relationship.
Both allow for the possibility that speculators might be risk-averse.
The backwardation pattern is consistent with the following relationship between speculators and hedgers.
Suppose that, on average, hedgers hold long cash market positions and short futures positions.
If risk-averse hedgers are going to transfer risks effectively to risk-averse speculators, speculators will on average have to hold long futures positions.
To induce speculators to take on net long positions, they have to be compensated with an expected return from the long position that exceeds the risk-free rate; i.e., their return must include a risk premium.
From (8.18) above, this requires the futures price to be less than the expecked spot price.
And because the basis tends to zero as the delivery date of the futures contract approaches, it also requires the futures price to increase over time.
This backwardation relationship is shown in Fig. 8.1 (assuming that the expected spot price does not change over time).
The contango pattern is consistent with the following relationship between speculators and hedgers.
If hedgers on average hold short market positions and long futures positions, risk-averse speculators will have to be induced to take short futures positions on average.
This requires that the expected return from the short position exceeds the riskless rate.
From (8.19) above, this means that the futures price has to be greater than the expected spot price and to decline over time.
The contango relationship is shown in Fig. 8.1 (again assuming that the expected spot price does not change over time).
8.3.3 Fair pricing of the short-term interest rate contract
We are now in a position to find the fair price of the futures contracts trading on LIFFE.
We will assume for simplicity that the expectations hypothesis holds, so that there is no risk premium in the  futures rate.
Therefore the formula given by (8.13) is appropriate, although the derivations below involve slight variations on that used to derive (8.13).
We begin with the short-term sterling deposit contract.
The current spot price (or present value) of each 100 worth of deposit at maturity is given by  where N 1 = number of days between current date and delivery date of futures contract (period 1), N 2 = number of days to maturity of time deposit, e.g. 91 days (period 2), rs 1 = spot interest rate for period 1, rs 2 = spot interest rate for periods 1 and 2,1 rf 2 = forward/futures rate for period 2.
In (8.20) the spot interest rate for both periods (the period over which the futures contract operates and the period over which the deposit operates) is rs 2 .
This spot rate can be decomposed into the interest rates relevant for each period: rs 1 , the spot rate over the period of the operation of the futures contract, and 1rf 2 , the forward or futures interest rate over the period for which the deposit exists.
What the futures market is trying to do is to get an unbiased estimate of 1rs 2 the spot interest rate over period 2.
In other words,.
In addition, the carrying or financing costs in the cash market for period 1 are rs 1 .
From (8.13), this implies that the fair futures price is (assuming d = 0).
Now the futures price of the three-month deposit contract on LIFFE is not quoted as in (8.22).
In practice, two adjustments are made.
First, the futures price is quoted on the basis of an annual interest rate (1rf 2 ), not the quarterly interest rate given in (8.22).
Second, the following approximation to the discount factor is used:.
Thus, we get the LIFFE quote for the futures price:.
For example, if the futures rate is 9.25 per cent , then the fair futures price is 90.75.
8.3.4 Fair pricing of the long-term interest rate contract
The cash-and-carry transactions used to determine the CTD bond for a given futures price can also be used to determine the fair price of the futures contract once the price of the CTD bond is known.
The fair futures price is that which gives a zero arbitrage profit relative to the CTD bond from a cash-and-carry transaction involving the purchase of the CTD bond in the cash market (with borrowed funds) and selling it into the futures market on the delivery day.
The cash outflow (per 100 nominal) from the transactions is  and the cash flow (per 100 nominal) is  where p f = current futures price, P CTD = current dirty price of CTD bond (including accrued interest), d CTD = annual coupon on CTD bond, PF CTD = price factor for the CTD bond, r = annual money market rate of interest (as a proportion), N 1 = number of days between current date and delivery date of futures contract.
The cash outflow covers the cost of borrowed funds at the money market interest rate.
The cash inflow covers the implied clean price of the bond on the delivery day (futures price ×price factor), plus the amount of accrued interest on the CTD bond between the current date and the delivery date.
The fair futures price (per 100 nominal) is found by equating cash inflow and cash outflow and solving  where  = current dirty yield on the bond.
Comparing with (8.13), we again see that the fair futures prices equals the current price of the CTD bond (divided by the price factor) plus the cost-of-carry.
The cost-of-carry equals the interest cost of holding the cash bond less the accrued interest earned on the cash bond before it is delivered into the futures market on the delivery day (i.e., d = rc).
To illustrate, we will estimate the fair price of the long-gilt future on 1 April.
The CTD bond is the Treasury 122% 2003–05.
Its dirty price on 1 April is 118.00 (per 100 nominal), and its price factor is 1.3032131.
The delivery date for the futures contract is 30 June.
This means that there are 90 days of accrued interest between 1 April and 30 June.
The money market interest rate is 10 per cent.
Therefore from (8.27),.
The fair futures price is 90–13.
When we calculated the CTD gilt, the long-gilt futures price was 91–21, which is slightly overpriced compared with the fair price.
8.3.5 Fair pricing of the currency contract
The fair price of an exchange rate or currency contract can also be determined using arbitrage strategies.
Suppose the objective is to receive sterling in one year's time.
Strategy 1 involves the purchase of a futures contract.
If the futures price ($ per 1) is P f , this means that the individual will exchange P f dollars for 1 at the end of the year.
Strategy 2 involves borrowing dollars at the beginning of the year (at US interest rates, r $;), exchanging them into sterling at the spot exchange rate ($P s per), investing the proceeds at UK interest rates (r), and at the end of the year keeping 1 and repaying the dollars with interest.
In other words, at the beginning of the year the individual would
1
borrow ;
2
exchange the dollars in the spot market for ;
3
lend this sum at UK interest rates for one year.
Then at the end of the year, he would
1
receive the proceeds of the UK loan:.
2
Pay of the US loan:.
The net effect of strategy 2 is to exchange  dollars for 1 at the end of the year.
The two strategies involve identical outcomes, namely the exchange of dollars for sterling at the end of the year.
In both cases, the individual's own money is not involved until the end of the year.
The two strategies are therefore identical and in equilibrium will have the same value.
In other words, the number of dollars exchanged for 1 at the end of the year will be the same: or rearranging, and ignoring small-order terms,.
Once again, the futures price equals the spot price plus the net cost-of-carry, the difference between US and UK interest rates (i.e. r = r $;, d = r;).
Equation (8.29) can be written in the more familiar form,.
This is the covered interest parity equation.
It says that the rate of exchange rate appreciation implied by the futures market will equal the difference between US and UK interest rates.
If r; = 10% r $; = 6% and P s = $ 1.75 per, then from (8.29) we estimate the fair futures price to be .
From (8.30), this implies that .
The futures market is expecting sterling to depreciate by 4 per cent against the dollar over the year.
8.3.6 Fair pricing of the stock index contract
The fair price of the stock index futures contract can be calculated in precisely the same way as with the other contracts.
Consider the following two investment strategies.
Strategy 1 involves the purchase at the beginning of the year of all the shares in the stock index (i.e. all the shares in the FTSE100 index with the appropriate weights).
At the end of the year, all the shares are sold.
The return on this strategy is the change in the value of the cash index over the year plus the dividend yield on the shares: where P s = value of cash index at beginning of the year, p s 1 = value of cash index at end of the year, d= annual dividend yield on shares.
Strategy 2 involves the purchase of a futures contract and the investment of a sum of money equal to the value of the cash index purchased under strategy 1 (i.e. P s ) at the money market rate of interest.
The return on this strategy is the difference between the value of the cash index at the end of the year and the futures price plus the interest earned on the money market investment:.
Both strategies involve the same cost and have the same risk (resulting from the unknown value of the cash index at the end of the year).
They should therefore have the same return.
Equating (8.31) and (8.32) yields the fair futures price,.
Yet again, the futures price equals the spot price plus the cost-of-carry, the difference between money market rates and the dividend yield on the stock index.
To illustrate, consider the case where the spot FTSE100 index is standing at 1820.0, the money market interest rate is 10 per cent and the dividend yield is 4 per cent.
This means that the fair futures price is expected to be  implying a year-end index value of 1929.2.
In reality, the calculation is not as simple as it appears in (8.33).
Firstly, there are transaction costs involved in setting up the cash index required for strategy 1.
These may be sufficiently high to make strategy 1 an infeasible way of replicating the return of strategy 2.
Second, the payment of dividends under strategy 1 is neither regular nor certain, unlike the payment of interest under strategy 2.
This is because the timing of dividend payments on the 100 shares in the FTSE 100 index is not even throughout the year, and also, the amount of the dividend payments is not known at the beginning of the year.
This leads to the futures price being more volatile than the cash index.
To illustrate, suppose that all dividend payments are concentrated on a single day in each quarter.
If the dividend yield is 4 per cent per annum, then the quarterly dividend payment is 1 per cent .
It is clear from (8.33) that the futures index will rise by 1 per cent on the day the shares go ex dividend, whereas the cash index (which makes no allowances for dividends) will be unchanged.