

5 Self-Evaluation Linked With Inspection: A Case Study
Glenn Turner
Introduction
This case study concerns a school which has undertaken a self-evaluation exercise followed by an LEA inspection, both being a mandatory requirement of the LEA concerned.
We were able to study all stages of the exercise, starting with the preliminary visits of the director and the advisers to the school, followed by the self-evaluation activities, the inspection itself, feedback from the advisers and then the presentation of the report to governors.
I would like to thank the headteacher and staff of the school and the local advisers for making this study possible.
The LEA Scheme
The LEA scheme concerned is an unusual one in that it combines school self-evaluation with an inspection which provides something of an external evaluation of the exercise.
In this way it deals with a very important weakness of many schemes which employ school self-evaluation alone — subjectiveness and inability to draw comparison with other schools.
Of course the scheme is expensive to operate and has problems of its own.
The extent to which local advisers can undertake an objective evaluation of a school already familiar to them is one consideration.
There might also be problems if there is any disagreement between teachers and advisers over the agenda of the evaluation or the report produced.
Obviously such disagreement would render the question of any follow-up and change somewhat problematic.
However the benefit of having the view of fellow professionals who are qualified to make an assessment of a  school's performance would seem to offer many advantages.
The scheme requires schools to produce a self-evaluation report which must cover aspects of the school laid out in a set of guidelines.
There are eight general headings in the guidelines:
1
The school background — the philosophy of the school, its aims and objectives and the local community.
2
The staff generally — their responsibilities, qualifications, classes, communication procedures and policies for induction and  in-service training.
3
The curriculum and school organisation — including examination results, careers education, health education, provision for children with special needs, provision for equal opportunities and education for a multicultural society.
4
Pastoral care.
5
Capitation and financial matters.
6
Accommodation.
7
Health and safety.
8
Reports from each department — including staffing, aims and objectives, assessment of pupils, examination results, accommodation, capitation, resources and policies and procedures within the department.
The scheme also includes a sheet explaining the procedure for the inspection.
Basically this document stresses that the inspection is intended to be a positive event and should not alter normal relationships that exist between teachers and advisers.
Eleven specific points of procedure are included:
1
The adviser in charge of the inspection shall meet the head and teaching staff and discuss with them the aim of the inspection.
2
The head and staff shall be informed of the areas proposed for inspection.
3
The terms of reference for the inspection should be decided and defined at meetings to be held before the inspection takes place.
4
Visits to observe lessons should only be made by prior appointment with the headteacher, all concerned knowing of the visit well in advance.
5
No discussion should take place during a lesson without first obtaining the permission of the teacher concerned.
6
The adviser's advice shall be no more than advice.
Advisers should have no power to press their suggestions or to determine the curriculum.
7
Before the preparation of the final report, the person in charge of the inspection should meet the head and staff and discuss the outcome of the inspection.
Copies of the initial draft of the report should be made available and time allowed for observations and objections to be made which could be incorporated in the final report.
8
Copies of the final report should be provided for the head and each member of staff.
9
Comments identifying individual teachers should not form part of a general report.
10
If an adviser proposes to comment adversely upon the work of an individual teacher at a meeting he should inform the teacher and give him an opportunity to reply.
Only the head should have access to any adverse report.
11
The report should be confidential to the staff of the school, the governing body and the Education Committee.
The School
The case study school is an 11–18 mixed comprehensive of around 900 pupils, which I have called ‘Northend’.
It has had a changing intake and many staff believed that recently the ability range of pupils had fallen somewhat.
The intake also includes pupils from different ethnic groups, particularly Afro-Caribbean.
Staff turnover had traditionally been high but has slowed down more recently.
However the senior management team is relatively new.
The headteacher had been appointed in November 1981 and the deputy head and senior master had both arrived since.
Research Strategy
This case study was undertaken by several visits made mostly by myself, but some also by Desmond Nuttall.
It is a longitudinal study — the initial visit being in February 1983 and the final visit in January 1985.
Over this period I visited the school more than 30 times, chiefly to conduct interviews and attend meetings.
The interviews were semi-structured and tape-recorded in many cases.
At meetings I adopted a ‘fly on the wall’ role.
Over half of the staff of 62 were interviewed at some point, many more than once — a total of 66 interviews altogether.
We also interviewed some of the advisers and a pupil who was ‘shadowed’ during the inspection.
The meetings attended were: the director's visit to meet the staff; an adviser's initial visit; three staff meetings; ten advisers' feedback sessions; the governors' meeting to receive the self-appraisal and the governors' meeting to receive the final report.
There was also a full staff meeting where the draft report was discussed with the director.
Although I could not claim to have made a detailed ethnographic study of the school, the many visits enabled me to gain a fairly broad picture of its ‘ethos’.
I made visits at the most relevant times during the appraisal, in particular whilst the inspection was  under way , so that I could observe the effect it was having on staff.
In addition to conducting this particular case study I made some visits to  another school (which I have called ‘Southend’) in the same LEA which had gone through an identical appraisal exercise a year earlier.
At this school I conducted interviews with 25 per cent of the staff, mostly those in senior positions and with responsibility for producing parts of the self-appraisal document.
I also spoke to the head about his meeting with the LEA evaluation panel.
This study was retrospective, rather than an investigation of the processes of evaluation in the school, but it did enable me to have a comparative dimension and to discuss some of the long-term effects of the process.
I shall refer to this comparative study where appropriate in this report.
In May 1983 the head first introduced the appraisal at a meeting of senior staff and I attended this meeting so that the research project could be explained and I could answer any questions staff might have.
Few questions were asked and assent was given to the research project.
At the same time we spoke to the director and the principal adviser.
We were invited to attend the director's visit to the school where the appraisal was to be outlined.
Inspection or Self-Appraisal
The Director's Visit
The director's visit took place in July 1983 and the principal adviser was also present.
Staff had seen the written guidelines of the scheme, mentioned above, and the director expanded on these to say that the exercise was:
a self-evaluation followed by visits by advisers to see if staff are performing up to their own perception and to look into the objectives of the school.
The object is to bring to light everything that is good and anything that is bad.
The director went on to say:
It is important that it is not a whitewash in this school as there are things which need uncovering.
The objective is to remedy anything bad…
The school can discuss possible changes with advisers.
If anything is not changed I will still report on it.
The objective is not to report on an individual teacher, but appraisals have highlighted teachers whose performance does leave a lot to be desired.
If this does occur advisers will report this to me.
Disciplinary measures are not part of the package — they will be dealt with separately.
If people don't like the message they can discuss it, but the report must not be seen as a whitewash.
Many people (in this authority) are critical of the education system and of comprehensive schools, we must not give an opportunity for them to be  critical.
After the report advisers are expected to carry out follow-up work and proposals for improvement acted on.
There is very little finance for improvement of resources.
Small sums might be available for certain needs, such as redecorating parts of the school, and the appraisal might result in some changed priorities.
Most important is discussion of curriculum planning and curriculum carrying-out by you and your governing body.
The Education Committee will look in governors' minutes for evidence of this.
The director concluded that the authority takes a whole-school perspective in its appraisal exercises.
After this brief introduction the head, who was chairing the meeting, asked staff for comments and questions.
As there were none he himself asked if the report was to be a public report.
The director responded that this was still being decided.
There were no other questions.
A teacher sitting next to me said, ‘what is there to ask?’ whilst another teacher commented that they were ‘condemned already’.
One teacher asked if there would be any extra time given to produce the self-appraisal reports but the director argued that the information should be available already — that it was a matter of taking something on aims and objectives and ‘dusting them down’.
This point was not argued any further but afterwards it was clear that this teacher was not satisfied with the response.
This visit made apparent the dual purpose of the scheme — of accountability and professional development.
However, although the director had talked about curriculum development the emphasis was very much on the accountability dimension.
Indeed the self-appraisal aspect was never mentioned.
That there would be little support for the self-appraisal in terms of any provision of time perhaps emphasized the low priority accorded to it.
The question of how far the report would be a public document remained unanswered and therefore the extent to which it was an accountability exercise was not made clear to staff.
The Advisers' Initial Visits
Before the end of term several advisers made visits to the school to outline the operation of the scheme in more depth and to expand on the written guidelines for producing the self-appraisal documents.
I was present when one subject adviser made a visit, first to see the head, then the head of department and finally the whole department.
The adviser described to the head the purpose of the visit as ‘to get on the right wavelength — that the self-appraisal needs some talking through’.
It was evident in the meeting between the adviser and the head of department that there  were some anxieties in the department about the appraisal.
The adviser stressed that the appraisal could have positive spin-offs.
However, concern over the accountability aspect of the appraisal led the head of department to point out that he was torn between being brutally honest and papering over the cracks.
The adviser claimed to be in favour of an honest report and promised to give definite feedback at every stage of the appraisal.
The adviser then spoke to the whole department, pointing out to them that, ‘the appraisal is a thing we as advisers are required to do.
I will try to do it in as full and responsible a way as possible.
I try to do it in a way that isn't too threatening and allows the opportunity to discuss things.’
Concern was immediately expressed by the staff about the nature of the exercise and the points made by the director.
The adviser spelt out the details of the scheme, saying that the self-appraisal consisted of providing factual information, looking at what they were doing and describing it so that advisers could understand what they are trying to do.
How they go about this is entirely up to them.
Confidential matters would not be used in the report — material which goes into the end report will only be what can be publicly known.
The adviser stressed that it needed to be a constructive exercise.
It was apparent that the department felt rather less threatened by the prospect of the appraisal after the process had been described in more detail.
Despite allaying concerns felt by some teachers, the adviser did not play down the accountability purpose to the exercise, nor was the self-appraisal presented as much more than providing factual information and describing their policy and practice.
An interview with this adviser subsequently confirmed that the self-appraisal was not accorded great importance: ‘On the role of the self-appraisal, it seems to me that the whole thing has been made into a very big deal and ought not to be.
It's too much of a big show and once it's over people forget it.’
Another adviser saw the purpose of the self-appraisal chiefly in terms of providing documentation and allowing schools to explain what they are doing:
R: To what extent is the inspection based on the self-appraisal?
A: They are complementary in the sense that you couldn't really do an inspection without some documentation.
Even HMI require documentation.
We couldn't operate without it.
We have also asked schools to try to tell us how they think they are operating and carrying out what they say they are doing.
Other advisers placed much more emphasis on the self-appraisal, some arguing that it is the most important part of the process.
The adviser responsible for multicultural education took this view.
In his feedback meeting he told teachers: ‘I see it as a self-appraisal and not an inspection.
I see the school writing a self-appraisal and want to see how far it is doing what it said in practice.’
The chief adviser claimed that the advisory team saw the self-appraisal  document to be extremely important.
However, its purpose seems to be viewed as one of providing information.
It was pointed out that some advisers had wanted there to be a period of  in-service training across the borough in order to familiarise teachers with the principles and procedures of self-appraisal.
This did not take place, however, because schools would be required to go through the process at different times and such training would probably be of limited value for schools which were not to undertake an appraisal for some time.
The Self-Appraisal
Involvement in the Self-Appraisal
It was during the Autumn term that certain staff had responsibility for contributing towards the self-appraisal report.
Not only were heads of department required to produce departmental appraisals but other staff had to contribute towards pastoral and other sections of the report.
The head himself chose to write many parts of the self-appraisal.
He wrote the section on the history of the school in order to discuss the implications of himself being a recent appointment and why he had seen the need to make certain changes.
Since there were two new staff at deputy head level, there were many things the head took on because they knew little about them, in particular the changes in the curriculum that he had made.
He also dealt with the issues of multicultural education and equal opportunities.
There was some diversity in the ways in which departmental self-appraisals were undertaken.
Some heads of department involved other staff in producing their self-appraisal reports, either through discussing what was to be written at department meetings and/or asking members of the department to write parts of it.
In the case of some of the larger departments, delegation of sections of the self-appraisal was inevitable.
However, in some cases there was little consultation and the report was produced solely by the head of department.
For some staff, therefore, the self-appraisal was a non-event:
I haven't been involved as far as the self-appraisal is concerned.
(Scale 1 Teacher)
The heads of year weren't asked to write anything on their particular year.
I think it was done by the head or somebody else.
(Head of Year)
I fell through everybody for the report.
They didn't want me for pastoral and I'm not head of department.
I didn't write anything.
(Senior Teacher)
I didn't write anything for pastoral in the report.
My total involvement has been nil!
(Head of Year)
Some teachers were involved only very marginally:
Our head of department put it all together and then let us read it to see if there was anything we wished to change and add and then submitted it…
There was little consultation really.
Some heads of department believed that the self-appraisal report was the product of departmental discussion, but that it was discussion which had taken place over the last few years rather than during the time specifically set aside for the self-appraisal.
A similar pattern emerged at Southend — the school which had completed the exercise a year earlier.
Staff in some departments discussed the appraisal but the writing of reports was in most cases undertaken solely by the head of department:
I discussed it with my department but basically I ended up doing it.
(Head of Department)
I did show it to one of the department and he read it through…
Now the other person in the department, I didn't get a chance to show it to him.
I mean I mentioned it to him afterwards but it was the sudden notice of the deadline…and I had to get it down on paper very quickly.
(Head of Department)
As with Northend School, then, for many staff the self-appraisal was very much a non-event.
If a teacher had no direct responsibility for ensuring that anything was produced it tended to involve them only marginally:
When (the HoD) was writing the self-appraisal we weren't that involved to be honest.
We gave a few outlines of schemes of work and bits and pieces of information, but I wouldn't have said that it caused any great feeling of self-analysis.
We didn't sit down thinking deeply about what we had been doing or anything like that, largely because we were teaching at the same time.
There was no specific period set aside.
It's not as if one went on a week's course and sat around specifically thinking about one's courses.
It was something that had to be done at the same time as teaching, and was seen more, I suppose, as a chore rather than as something which would have any sort of positive spin-off for us.
(Scale 2 teacher)
The Extent to Which It Was a Self-Appraisal
The head of Northend claimed that he thought the self-appraisal to be the most important aspect of the exercise for the school.
As a consequence he placed considerable emphasis in meeting the deadline for the submission of the self-assessment document.
This was to allow it to be produced by 7th December and to be able to discuss any changes needed in any individual contributions.
The early deadline gave little time for meetings and collaborative effort, or a very considered response to the new timetabling arrangements.
Some heads of departments had used the summer vacation to write the bulk of their reports but sometimes advisers requested additional information in subsequent visits.
Nor could reports be produced necessarily with much consultation in the holiday period.
One effect of the early deadline was that some teachers claimed that their reports had to be rushed and that there was little opportunity for a considered appraisal:
It had to be in on the 7th October and we came back the beginning of September, so it was a bit of a rush, and that's really one of my feelings about it — I sat down and wrote it off the top of my head and not an awful lot is very considered.
(Head of Department)
I would have liked to have had more departmental meetings where we could all have sat down and discussed it.
(Two of us) have just simply had to find time to do it in our own time.
(Head of Department)
There was considerable diversity in the style and presentation of the departmental reports and in the type and amount of detail provided.
Obviously the larger departments tended to produce longer reports, but there was considerable variation in the amount of information provided.
Some reports from quite small departments were rather lengthy whilst one report took up only one page.
The head thought that many reports were highly descriptive and rather thin on evaluative comment and most of the heads of department I interviewed accepted that there was a tendency for reports to be largely or entirely descriptive:
In all honesty, on reflecting what I've done…
I'd admit, I think, it's a purely factual report of the department.
(Head of Department)
I didn't do a self-evaluation — an evaluation of myself — for the simple reason that we really didn't have time to sit down and think it out, and its a bit difficult doing it objectively…because you have no standard to compare.
(Head of Department)
Since a very large amount of material was required on staffing, syllabuses and in some cases resources, it was easy for reports to end up a pure description of a department's programme.
One teacher believed that the guidelines themselves demanded too much information of a descriptive kind:
It is most demanding in terms of irrelevant information — the information I think is irrelevant, all the extras — bits and pieces…
We should be concentrating on particular aspects of school life, not producing information which already exists and duplicating it.
(Senior Teacher)
Another reason for the lack of evaluative comment in self-appraisal reports was, paradoxically, the fact that there would be an ensuing inspection and therefore  that things could be brought up orally with advisers rather than put in black and white:
I didn't put an evaluation in because I wanted to discuss it orally with my adviser.
What I really wanted to say I didn't want to put in writing.
(Head of Department)
Some heads of department claimed that they had done a lot of thinking about policies and practices in anticipation of the appraisal.
In terms of content, however, reports varied in what they concentrated on.
Some dealt at length with aims and objectives, others focused on organisation and communication.
One dealt with the issue of mixed ability teaching as a separate issue.
Few described teaching methods in much detail and multicultural education and equal opportunities rarely received much attention.
In fact, only one department devoted a separate section of its report to these two issues.
Whilst teachers seemed to be fairly happy to comment on provision for equal opportunities, some heads of department had misgivings about commenting on provision for multicultural education.
There was a feeling that this was being imposed on them by the LEA.
In many cases departments did not have an explicit policy on multicultural education and did not see it as something they should be forced to go into in their appraisal reports.
Interviews at Southend School revealed a similar tendency — that the self-appraisal had not been perceived as a significant part of the process and it is questionable to what extent it was in fact an appraisal.
Some senior staff were critical of the stance taken by the school with regard to the self-appraisal:
The self-appraisal was not taken seriously overall.
Certain individuals did — I don't want you to think that nobody took it seriously, but my feeling was that in the school there was no great sort of feeling that there was something important going on during the self-appraisal.
(Deputy Head)
Interviews with other staff reinforced this impression and it seemed that in many departments the self-appraisal did not receive much considered attention.
Some heads of department simply concentrated on making sure that their departmental contribution was descriptively correct:
I just concentrated on making sure that it was comprehensive in terms of description and it was obvious from that description that certain choices and evaluations had been made.
(Head of Department)
As far as the head of Southend was concerned, staff were not on the whole self-critical during the self-appraisal.
The Perceived Value of the Exercise
The head of Northend saw the appraisal as an opportunity to present to the LEA a case for extra staff to be appointed.
He felt that the appraisal would highlight some of the problems the school was faced with, in particular the change in the intake from white middle class to  multi-ethnic and with a growing proportion of pupils with learning difficulties.
He also wanted to emphasize in the appraisal two issues he had already brought to the attention of staff: assessment of pupils — with which there had already been some changes — and language across the curriculum, which he felt required a more positive policy.
Most heads of departments and senior staff were favourable to the idea of the appraisal, even if they had been put-off initially.
There was hope that it would be a two-way process and that it would have benefits for the school.
Some departmental heads had found the discussions within their departments to be very useful and two new heads of departments had found the appraisal to be very worthwhile in terms of taking stock of their situation — as something they had to do as of necessity.
Clearly many heads of department saw the appraisal as an opportunity to stress many of their needs in terms of resources and in many reports there was a plea for improved resources, accommodation, staffing or capitation.
One head of department claimed that, ‘Most of my appraisal is my justification for asking next year for a tremendous increase in my capitation.’
Many concerns were raised at a staff meeting in November.
Although it was stressed at this meeting by one speaker that the school should make the appraisal a valuable exercise, other teachers expressed concern over whether their reports would actually be read.
This was emphasised by those heads of department who had taken a lot of time over their self-appraisal and who claimed that as a consequence other things had had to suffer.
In order to make the most of the exercise, some teachers thought that it would be very valuable to be able to read other departmental self-appraisals and for there to be general discussion of the appraisal.
However, the head had at a previous meeting made the point that the self-appraisal reports were confidential and could not be read by other departments.
Once again the tension between accountability and the desire to make the appraisal a valuable exercise created a dilemma.
Whilst departmental reports could have been discussed and a broad evaluation of curriculum strategy discussed by staff as a whole, it seems reasonable that reports which contained confidential matters were not circulating round the school.
Much information provided in self-appraisal documents could not be used in any final report, either because of its delicate nature or because individual teachers could be identified from it.
Advisers had in many cases given guarantees that the only information that they would use in the final report would be that which could be used in a public document.
However the requirement for confidentiality in an exercise oriented in part to  accountability, mitigated against the possibility of a whole-school evaluation which could involve all staff.
The departmental appraisals took up the bulk of the self-evaluation report.
There was also a general section, written by senior management, which dealt with whole-school issues, such as the history of the school, its philosophy and broad curriculum.
It was mentioned in this section that the staff had a commitment to combat racism in any manifestation but it was acknowledged that this was not the same thing as multicultural education.
The main part of this general report was concerned with staffing — details of the staff and their responsibilities — and examination results for 1983.
The philosophy and system of pastoral care were spelt out at some length and a few pages were devoted to the issue of pupils' individual needs.
This whole-school section was not seen by the vast majority of staff, again for reasons of confidentiality.
However this restriction of information left staff as a whole unclear as to what the self-appraisal stated were the general aims and policies of the school.
The view that little of value would emerge from the appraisal was also a common view among staff at Southend School:
I think I basically saw it as something that had to be done for the authority and not as something that was going to lead to any change.
(Scale 2 teacher)
I regarded it as a nuisance, regarded it as something totally unnecessary.
(HoD)
The Self-Appraisal — A Summary
Throughout the period of the self-appraisal at Northend School the conflicting purposes of accountability and professional development led to divergent perspectives among teachers as to what they were trying to do.
On the one hand some teachers saw the process as a hindrance — as something they had to do for the LEA and which would have little consequence for themselves.
Others wanted to reconceptualise it as a process which could be of benefit to the school, and their department in particular.
Thus some teachers, including the head, saw an opportunity in the self-appraisal for special pleading on staffing and resources.
The extent to which any thorough evaluation took place within the school is questionable.
Methods of conducting evaluation such as classroom observation and surveys of opinion within school were entirely absent from the appraisal and perhaps the only wide-scale method used was that of departmental discussion.
However, in many cases even this did not take place and the self-appraisal amounted to reflecting on past events and reproducing information for the benefit of advisers.
This might appear to be a criticism of the school in how it undertook its appraisal, but one must question whether it was really in the school's interests to produce an evaluation in which its weaknesses were openly admitted.
Rather than highlighting is internal problems — procedures, policies and matters of individual performance — the school tended to place the spotlight on external matters — the changing intake and the increase in the number of pupils with learning difficulties — and matters which reflected on the LEA's own accountabilities — over staffing and resources.
In the light of the accountability angle of the LEA scheme, to have avoided subjecting school policies and personnel to critical scrutiny whilst at the same time taking advantage of the appraisal to engage in special pleading over staffing and resources, seems to have been a sensible and shrewd strategy.
The Governors' Meeting to Discuss the Self-Appraisal
The governors of Northend School met to discuss the self-appraisal report in March 1984.
It should be noted that it was unprecedented in the borough for self-appraisal reports to be considered by governors.
However, the chairman of governors argued that it should be put before governors in light of the possible need to fight staff cuts in the school.
It seems that in this respect the governors themselves considered the appraisal principally from the point of view of trying to bring about improvements for the school.
The chairman requested that the departmental reports be considered one by one and the governors went through it section by section, specific comments being made at particular stages.
This was in many cases brief and some departmental reports were skipped through with little comment being made.
It soon became apparent that the whole report could not be considered in a single meeting and it was suggested that another meeting be arranged to continue with it.
This was generally agreed and the session was closed and another meeting arranged.
However the final report was prepared earlier than expected and for this reason consideration of the rest of the self-appraisal by governors was abandoned.
The Inspection
As a preliminary to the inspection, the advisers had received the school's self-appraisal document and were expected to have read it, or the relevant sections of it, before visits began.
The first stage of the inspection consisted of the shadowing pupils by advisers.
Six pupils were selected — one from every year.
The object of this exercise was for advisers to gain a view of the school from the eyes of a pupil — to experience the school day as a particular pupil would.
After the shadowing, regular visits began by all advisers to observe subject teachers at work and to look into the policies and procedures of the school.
This visits period lasted for half a term, although for some subject departments it was completed during four weeks.
Some teachers described the inspection as a very artificial set-up and claimed that in general people were not giving ‘normal’ lessons.
For example, it was pointed out to me that some teachers were making lesson notes for the first time in years!
However, the majority of teachers who were interviewed claimed that they had not done anything different from what they would have done were they not being observed, but that they had probably prepared lessons more carefully and thought things through more.
Teacher Perceptions of the Inspection
Teachers' perceptions of the inspection varied.
There were considerable differences in the attitudes of staff regarding the value of the exercise.
This to some extent depended on the relationship teachers had with their subject advisers.
Usually, if relations were good before the inspection, they remained good throughout.
Many teachers thought that their subject advisers were very constructive and fair in any comments they made after lessons.
Others saw little value in the exercise and either received no personal feedback after visits or found the comments made to be unhelpful.
Some teachers resented criticism.
As one teacher said, ‘I rather resent people coming in and criticising when they haven't been in on a regular basis’.
Another said, ‘I don't like the implication that the only time we ever think about what we are doing is when we've got an appraisal’.
Many teachers were unsure that they would get much out of the appraisal and felt that it would change little, especially in the light of probable cuts in spending in education.
The head, however, felt that in general the inspection had been conducted in a professional manner and claimed that he was willing to take constructive criticism in a constructive way.
He saw the purpose of it to be for advisers to gain a general view of the school — not to pick up on bad points.
Individual teachers clearly experienced the inspection in different ways.
Some were observed with every group they taught whilst others had very few visits to lessons.
Senior staff in some cases had interviews with several advisers whilst other teachers were never interviewed.
Many, however, did have an opportunity to talk to the advisers responsible for multicultural education, provision for equal opportunities and children with special needs.
Again perceptions of the value of these interviews differed, but one teacher went so far as to say that if it needed an appraisal to bring these advisers into the school then it was worth it.
The Feedback Sessions
Most advisers arranged feedback sessions immediately after the inspection (before the report was submitted to governors) and gave oral reports to particular  departments.
On some of the whole-school matters, such as equal opportunities provision, the adviser provided feedback to the head only, although the adviser responsible for multicultural education spoke to all the senior staff.
On the whole these sessions were characterized by a friendly, fairly informal but professional atmosphere and many advisers had much praise to offer.
By and large advisers thought that teachers were providing a sound education and preparing lessons well.
However, many departments were criticized for concentrating heavily on ‘chalk and talk’ and for providing little opportunity for pupil participation.
At some of the sessions teachers protested that the methods used when being observed were a product of the artificiality of the situation and that in some cases pupils seemed to be reluctant to participate orally when advisers were present.
The advisers did not always accept these arguments and pointed to the fact that they were comparing what they had seen with other schools.
The head did in many cases establish, however, that many of the criticisms were not untypical of other schools in the borough — or indeed of comprehensive schools in general.
Some departments were, of course, more heavily criticized than others.
In some cases the organization of departments was thought to require improvements, such as more formal meetings and more policy centrally laid down.
In few cases was the curriculum criticized adversely, but in one or two cases a particular course was questioned in terms of how appropriate it was for the pupils, or because an aspect of the curriculum was underdeveloped.
Quite often curricular problems were related to inadequacies in materials and some advisers went so far as to suggest radical changes in resourcing and accommodation.
In particular, the use of the library as a classroom was questioned.
Many issues brought up in sessions related to general school policies and practices.
The school timetable came in for a lot of criticism, especially in cases where arrangements resulted in classes split between two teachers.
In some cases setting was criticized because it was argued that it was producing underachievement in certain pupils, although many teachers did not accept this.
Provision for equal opportunities was generally praised as ‘a good basis to start from’, but multicultural education was the subject of rather impassive debate.
The adviser argued that the school as a whole did not seem to be discussing, or have any explicit policy on multicultural education.
Whilst this was not denied there seemed to be general confusion among teachers about the nature of ‘multicultural education’ and the nature of the school's problems with respect to this issue.
Another issue which seemed to lead to few concrete proposals was language across the curriculum, where the school was also criticized for having few clear policies.
The Inspection — A Summary
Consideration of the inspection and the feedback sessions raises the question of  how far the inspection was a follow-on from the self-appraisal and of how far the school's own review was evaluated by professional outsiders.
This is a difficult question to deal with partly because of the dual purpose of the entire exercise.
Whilst the self-appraisal might be viewed as the school's attempt to defend its policies and practices, rather than to appraise itself, and to make a special case for extra resources and improved staffing, the inspection could be seen as a process of ensuring that the school was performing to an acceptable standard and that no serious problems existed in terms of teacher performance and in terms of resources needed to carry out the curriculum.
The inspection and the self-appraisal seemed to be two entirely different processes: each operated with quite a different agenda and entirely different methods were used in each case.
Activities for the self-appraisal consisted of individual reflection on practice, consultation with individual staff and departmental discussion.
For the inspection on the other hand the methods consisted of interviews with staff, observation of lessons and observation of meetings and important procedures, as well as consideration of the general ‘ethos’ of the school.
The different agenda and methodology for each process meant that there was little in common between them.
Advisers in feedback sessions made few references to the self-appraisal and mostly reported on their own visits.
A notable exception to this was the adviser responsible for multicultural education who argued that since the school did not seem to have developed an overall policy for multicultural education he could not conduct an appraisal of it.
The emphasis here was placed on the need for a thorough self-appraisal of this issue before an outsider could make any assessment.
However the accountability aspect of the appraisal scheme had produced reluctance on the part of many teachers to grapple with controversial matters such as this in the self-appraisal and led teachers into producing reports for a public audience.
The overall effect of the system therefore, it could be argued, was to produce a rather impotent self-evaluation which took few risks followed by a local inspection little different from that of any other LEA.
Changes and Developments Subsequent to the Inspection
The advisers attached particular importance to the feedback sessions so that recommendations could be acted on without the delay anticipated in the production of the final report.
Most departments received a number of suggestions for changes which they could implement immediately and, consequently, I visited the school towards the end of the summer term to interview many of the staff, particularly heads of department, about any changes which had resulted.
Perhaps a major inhibitor of change was the teacher action that term over the teachers' pay claim.
Withdrawal of support for activities not contractually required meant that some changes which teachers had been willing to make had  not yet been realized.
For example, departments which had been recommended to have more formal meetings were unable to proceed with this.
One recommendation made to a large number of departments, however, was for changes in teaching methods, notably the introduction of more oral work.
Such changes would not have been inhibited necessarily by the teacher action, but none of the teachers I interviewed claimed that they had changed their methods to any great extent.
The reason given usually was that oral work was so difficult to do.
Some teachers felt that the advisers were out of touch with the problems they were having in this respect and saw more oral work as an unrealistic expectation — that pupils did not consider oral as work and were often not prepared to listen, thus to try to do it would only be creating problems.
On some issues teachers had not agreed with advisers in their diagnosis of problems and therefore were reluctant to put into practice suggested changes.
This was perhaps the main single reason why changes in teaching methods were not implemented.
At the time of my visits there had already been considerable changes in terms of staffing and resources in line with advisers' recommendations.
A new head of History had been appointed for next term to release the pastoral coordinator from a ‘caretaker’ role as head of History, a scale 3 second in department for English had been appointed by promoting an existing member of the department and an early retirement application had been granted.
Moreover, the head claimed that he had been able to use the appraisal to make a strong case against a proposed reduction of 7.4 staff, in line with cutbacks planned by the LEA due to falling rolls and reductions in spending.
The outcome was that the school was to lose only one member of staff and consequently would have an improved pupil-teacher ratio.
The head said that he was ‘highly delighted’ with the results of the appraisal and claimed that the complacency of the LEA towards the school had now been broken.
As a result of the appraisal some departments had also gained material resources.
For example the head of Craft, Design and Technology had received money to replace inadequate stock and an increase in capitation, whilst the head of Home Economics was in the process of gaining badly-needed equipment — although much of this was still in the ‘pipeline’ at the time of the interview.
Nevertheless, some teachers claimed that the appraisal had produced little in the way of changes and some had difficulty in remembering quite what the adviser had proposed at their own feedback session.
Some of the changes were felt to be long overdue, such as a scale 3 second in department for English, and it was not always clear whether the appraisal had been the driving force behind a particular change or whether it had simply brought some  long-standing problems to urgent attention.
However, in general teachers did seem to be pleased with the outcome and many expressed approval at the improved pupil-teacher ratio for the coming year.
The Report
The production of the draft report actually took less time than anticipated and was available by October 1984 — some seven months after the appraisal.
Twenty copies were issued to the school and all staff were to have a copy or have access to a copy.
The heads of department and heads of year discussed the draft report initially and a meeting of all staff with the director and principal adviser was also arranged.
In the main, the report consisted of what advisers had already presented orally in feedback sessions, in some cases briefer and without any reference to actual individuals.
The first part of the report dealt briefly with the school's history, philosophy, environment and accommodation, parents and community, capitation, staffing, policy and decision-making structure, curriculum, multicultural education, equal opportunities, language across the curriculum, assessment of pupils and personal and social education.
Much of this information was drawn from the self-appraisal report.
Departmental sections then followed, each with a list of recommendations and a short section containing the principal recommendations was included at the end.
The aspect most criticized, in the view of the head and the teachers I spoke to, was multicultural education, although this had been expected.
The head said he thought that on the whole it was a very fair report — he had not expected it to be without criticisms.
The deputy head took a similar view, saying that it was constructive, that good points had come out — for example, that relationships were good — and that it had been taken constructively by staff in general because all the things that had been criticized had already been criticized by them in the self-appraisal.
Staff had the opportunity to present their views at a meeting on 12th November.
At this meeting the director, the principal adviser, the head and forty-three of the staff were present.
The principal adviser said that any factual errors would be put right as a matter of course and if there was a professional disagreement they could perhaps discuss how to change the wording of the report.
If there was a serious disagreement the report would still contain the point but it would say that the school disagreed with it for whatever reason.
From many heads of department written comments were received, especially in cases of errors of fact, and the head summarized these.
He suggested a few changes in wording in places and concluded that on the whole the staff felt that the report was pretty fair.
Some staff added other minor errors or disagreements but it soon emerged that some departments did not think that the report was fair and they criticized the general conclusion relating to their department.
In particular, the issue of the lack of oral work was brought up again, the argument being made that a particular adviser had not seen enough lessons to make this  conclusion.
The principal adviser said that the advisers could only comment on what they had seen — or not seen.
At the end of the meeting the principal adviser explained what would happen to the report next: that it would be presented to governors and to the appraisal subcommittee, and that any teacher could attend these meetings.
He then thanked them for their help during the appraisal period.
The Governors' Meeting to Discuss the Final Report.
The director and an adviser attended the governors' meeting which received the final report, the director stressing that follow-up to the report was as important as the exercise itself.
Like with the previous meeting to discuss the self-appraisal, the report was considered page by page, but at the end the chairperson asked the head to make some recommendations.
The head responded with a plea for further improvements in staffing, improvements in the fabric of the school buildings, the need for additional resources, particularly money to strengthen some departments, and improvements in the school library.
The governors decided to give all these matters priority and to consider them in detail at the next meeting.
The director, however, stressed the need for constraint due to cuts in spending anticipated over the next year, and suggested that the governors select particular matters for  prioritization .
However, the governors were unwilling to leave out any of the head's recommendations and they decided to treat them all as priorities.
Like with the previous meeting, the accountability aspect of the appraisal seemed to be underplayed and the governors considered the appraisal from the perspective of trying to bring about improvements in the school, and to make a special case to the authority to facilitate improvement by making available additional resources.
Conclusion
It is not easy to reach a general conclusion on how valuable the process of appraisal was in the school as a whole.
In theory the self-appraisal and inspection are complementary exercises and the value of the latter depends on the quality of the former.
However, there was considerable diversity in the scope of individual contributions to the self-evaluation.
For many teachers the self-appraisal failed to be a major event, either because they were not required to participate in any review activities or because they were unable or unwilling to devote much time to it.
Perhaps the scheme could operate with much greater success in this sense if a special  in-service provision was made — but this, of course, depends on whether time and money can be found for it.
It follows, however, that the inspection could not provide much in the way of  external evaluation of those sections of the self-appraisal which were merely descriptive.
In such circumstances the inspection was little different from any other local inspection.
Clearly many staff had found the self-appraisal to be a valuable exercise and it was such staff, it seems, that were most positive about the process as a whole and who were most willing to take seriously the advisers' recommendations.
It does seem that the inspection provided a dimension in the appraisal process which otherwise would have been lacking.
Many of the points on curriculum, organization, staffing, finance and teaching methods would not have been raised otherwise.
Even in cases where teachers clearly disagreed with advisers' recommendations, they had at least been forced to reconsider their existing practices.
However, whilst it is easy to criticize teachers for failing to embark on a thorough and methodical appraisal of their practice it should be remembered that the LEA scheme was introduced to them initially very much in terms of accountability rather than professional development, and for this reason some caution over what to reveal in the self-appraisal document is understandable.
Despite assurances from advisers over the confidentiality of information presented in the self-appraisal, it seems that most staff were unwilling to produce anything more than a public type of document, providing little more than factual information.
In a sense this tendency was enhanced by the nature of the LEA guidelines, which requested a great deal of factual information in addition to an appraisal, and the advisers themselves who in some cases presented the purpose of the self-appraisal in terms of explaining their practices rather than appraising them.
Undoubtedly the appraisal brought considerable material benefit to the school.
The head and senior staff had made a case for extra staffing and were successful in gaining an improved pupil-teacher ratio.
In this sense the exercise was of general value to staff in improving their situation.
It was also evident that those departments which had made a strong case for improved resourcing had gained from the appraisal.
Thus it can hardly be argued that the LEA had not taken steps to facilitate improvements in the school.
It remains to be seen whether a clear policy on multicultural education will emerge in the future or whether staff will make any headway in terms of changing their teaching methods.
However, it was apparent that the staff needed much more guidance from advisers in terms of practically implementing such recommendations.
Identifying weaknesses is a far cry from facilitating their solution and here the LEA scheme runs into the same difficulties as many others.
Given cutbacks in education budgets, the question remains as to whether any LEA could provide the resources required to make significant and lasting changes in school practice.
6 Self-Evaluation using Video
Lesley Holly
Introduction
This is a case study of self-evaluation in a school using procedures of its own devising, rather than ones suggested by an LEA.
The school was selected for further study from a register of such schools, the preparation of which is described in Chapter 10.
The School
The case study school is an 11–16 boys inner-city comprehensive.
The buildings are old — 1890–1900 school board vintage — and bleak.
The school is closing down and pupil numbers have fallen from 700 to 300 over ten years.
Situated in an area of falling population and high unemployment, the school has a racially mixed intake.
Staff turnover has been high in the last few years as school closure has loomed closer.
Methodology
This case study was undertaken over a period of two months through a series of day visits to the school.
I visited the local teacher's centre where I discussed this self-evaluation project and other similar projects with the warden.
At the LEA offices I interviewed research officers about the scheme.
I also talked to school advisers.
Within the school I interviewed all teachers involved in the self-evaluation scheme.
Two had left so I visited them at home.
The interviews were unstructured, but specifically on the subject of the self-evaluation scheme.
I interviewed  the deputy head who had been instrumental in initiating the scheme and gained the school's consent for the study.
Most of the staff were interviewed twice or more.
Inevitably I spent long periods sitting in the  staff room waiting for staff to find time for an interview.
This enabled me to gain an impression of the school and while falling short of a full ‘ethnography’, I was aware of tensions, problems and the atmosphere in which the self-evaluation project was launched.
The Beginnings of School-Based Self-Evaluation
There had been a policy of raising academic standards within the school over the last few years.
It was not until 1981 that school closure seemed the inevitable solution to falling rolls.
Before that time the school was to be amalgamated with another local comprehensive.
Until 1981, therefore, interest in the curriculum was still very much alive.
Mary Law was appointed head of Humanities in September 1978 with the specific task of reorganizing that area of the curriculum.
The department was changed from Social Studies to a full Humanities department teaching ‘O’ Level and CSE in History, Geography and Social Studies.
The rewriting of the syllabus began when Mary arrived and it was completed by 1980.
For work which did not lead to examinations there was always the problem of assessment and standardizing that assessment between a number of teachers.
Mary Law explains:
The problem was how to assess effort or commitment or end result of one or a series of lessons like discussions or role play or simulations?
You can't just say ‘I can't mark it’.
Not that it's ‘the mark’ in a register that's important but if you're teaching something that's worthwhile there's progress presumably being made.
Skills are being learnt, greater or lesser amounts of efforts are being made by individuals.
And when you're starting to talk like that, everyone is discussing it according to their own experience or the last lesson they taught when this came up.
From this debate about assessment came the idea of videoing lessons.
This was to give teachers a greater understanding of the dynamics of their classroom and to enable interdepartmental discussion about how the new Humanities course was working.
Mary Law:
It was felt one of the reasons for doing the video originally, was that if we had the film of the lesson we'd all have a common ground, didn't matter whose lesson it was.
And we could say, ‘all right, now, watching that, which kids are trying and which kids are doing it?’
Is the teacher getting  it across?…
‘. You'd all at least have seen the same thing and not getting one person's narrative of what happened across the school last week.
Because of these discussions Mary Law went to the local teachers’ centre to find out about borrowing video equipment.
Kate Kennett, the warden, was very encouraging.
At this time the LEA had set aside funds from the INSET budget, specifically for schools who wanted to undertake self-evaluation projects.
This was the first year that the money was available and the warden suggested that the Humanities department at this school might apply.
Warden:
Quite a large sum of money was created partly out of existing funds (of LEA) which were to support  in-service in schools that had been identified by some kind of functional group in the school…
It was difficult to tell at that point how many people in the department wanted to be included, but it did seem likely that some would.
So we put in a bid for equipment, software and a person.
This money would convert the small video project into an LEA INSET project in the school centring on the Humanities department.
The warden herself was very interested in extending the work of the teacher's centre into the area of self-evaluation of classroom practice.
Warden:
We as a centre have been developing our skills…in that area of classroom observation.
We are particularly interested in how you support people to become self-monitoring, self-objective and the kind of tools and techniques they have available to them.
Giving themselves feedback on various aspects of teaching and learning.
Bidding and planning was rushed because the deadline for the application was very close.
The proposal was written out by the deputy head in a great hurry over one weekend and was supported by the inspector for the school.
The inspector had to recommend the proposal to the selection committee of the LEA.
The inspector for the school explained her support for this proposal.
Inspector:
I supported it partly on the recommendation of the warden of the teachers' centre and partly because I felt that they needed something positive because of the merger.
The merger was very demoralizing and I put it, if I remember rightly, top of my list of priorities which means that gets it.
(The merger, as noted, did not come about; instead it was decided to close  the school.)
The school succeeded in their bid which was £7000 in all.
£5000 was set aside to pay a replacement teacher.
In the original submission the deputy head felt that the impending school closure was a strong argument for receiving the money.
This quote from the original submission explains:
This school will close in August 1982.
The time between May 1980 and August 1982 is very important to pupils and staff at the school.
If development ceases, the pupils will not benefit as much as they should at a time in their education which will never be repeated and one which therefore could never be made up.
If a development ceases, staff morale and confidence would tend to decrease.
This would have the two-fold effect of lowering pupil achievement as well as adversely affecting staff career prospects.
If development continues with positive support, then the pupils will benefit to a greater extent during what will be for many an unsettling time.
This will be due to maintained staff morale and increasing confidence in themselves and their abilities to do well in their professional careers in the future beyond 1982.
In the research branch of the Local Education Office a different opinion was expressed.
Research Officer:
…it was very odd that they got the money in the first place…however they had thought a great deal and had a viable project…and may be a certain amount of guilt.
I mean now I'm sort of psychoanalyzing the authority about the school closing.
Perhaps they felt that the school had enough things going against them and they should be supported in doing something constructive…
LH: So what is your ideal type of INSET in that situation?
RO: I wouldn't have put it into a closing school…
Inevitably whole-school effect was more difficult to achieve in a closing school as the Research Officer explained:
I would have thought that the point of school-focused INSET is certainly for individual teachers and effects in the classrooms, but mainly for effects on whole school groups.
You won't have a whole-school group in a dissipating school…there can't be any organizational impact, there can only be individual impact.
And I think that the strongest school-focused INSET is that which aims to do both.
These reservations turned out to be justified as the project progressed.
Obviously a whole-school effect is more problematic in a school which is closing.
 In-service training for teachers is essentially about working within their  own school.
In a closing school morale may be low, and the future uncertain for the staff.
It is a difficult time to inject enthusiasm about teaching methods.
This INSET scheme centred on the Humanities department but the effect there was minimized because of the loss of experienced staff to other schools.
There is a certain inevitability about high turnover of staff in a school that is closing.
The Purpose of the Project
In their original submission for finance the deputy head explained the aims of the project.
Initially the use of video equipment was clearly a self-monitoring project in the Humanities department.
Aims
The aim of the self-monitoring project is to provide the tool with which staff of the Humanities department may evaluate their own teaching performance and practice.
In the short term
The project will enable members of the Department to analyze the practice of teaching within their own experience, thus encouraging individual development.
By providing the means of sensitive self-assessment it will encourage continuous self-monitoring and progress.
In the longer term
School-wide, to enable all staff in the school to be aware of further methods of questioning their own teaching practice and developing more appropriate or more effective means of teaching and educating the pupils.
To enable all departments within the school to develop their syllabuses and associated teaching methods and materials to the fullest possible extent.
(Original submission to the LEA)
This document specifically suggests that the project will have some whole school effect beyond the Humanities department.
Recruitment of Other Teachers to the INSET Video Project
Having received the money and begun the video work herself, Mary Law had to recruit other members of staff to the scheme because the Humanities department had lost staff.
Kate Kennett saw the problem when she was first invited to the school before the scheme had received any finance:
…
I got the impression…that there were some reservations in many  quarters to the actual videoing and other people videoing their own classrooms.
They were quite happy for Mary to get on with it.
And some people were not disinterested but wanted to see how it went with Mary before going over to one side or another.
Mary Law had felt she might refuse the money because of this problem:
It turned out that several people in the department were moving.
Somebody moved to primary, another to community work.
So there were big gaps in the department.
I found myself starting the INSET scheme with probationers which was quite different from what I envisaged.
Of course, there was the option to extend it in the school.
For that reason I suppose when I first heard about the money my first reaction was to say ‘No.
I don't want to know.’
But still we kept saying if only we could see ourselves on the video, that would help us.
Michael Walsh had taught in the school for six years, and had been involved in meetings in the Humanities department when the idea was discussed:
We had a meeting.
She (Mary) would use it first and anybody else was free to use it…three or four signified they would be interested.
I didn't know if it would have any value…
I thought I'd like to see how I looked teaching rather than how I thought I looked.
Doug Green was asked about taking part in the INSET course soon after he started teaching at the school.
It was his first London teaching job and he was working in the Humanities department: ‘It was right in the beginning I suppose and there was about two months before I actually started.’
The INSET work was very individualistic.
There were individual meetings between tutors and teachers but no general meetings for all the staff involved: ‘There was a meeting with me.
There never was one General meeting.’
Because there was not an INSET group as such it remained a very individual undertaking throughout.
Doug Green suggests that it was too much for a teacher working in London for the first time:
I don't think that London first appointments should really attempt something like this.
Because of the technical problems, because of the time that people had to give to do it and because they have got other things like induction meetings to go to.
Jane Dubar was also new to teaching.
She had taken supply teaching for a term at a nearby school and moved here to this school as a replacement teacher for the remainder of the year.
Jane also felt she was not really in a position to refuse: ‘I was missing the fifth years, which meant I had lots of ‘free time’, so I was in a position where really I couldn't refuse to do it.’
Jane explained the circumstances  in which she was working:
…what had in fact happened was I worked at…
H.G. school for a term on supply, which, you know what supply is.
It's assertion, assertion, assertion.
It's really tiring.
I went over there and I stepped into this guy's shoes who had really a difficult fourth year class.
A really bubbly noisy fourth year class.
I mean he wasn't very strict with them.
I mean they were pretty shambly when I got to them and I made a supreme effort to get everything going the way I wanted it to go.
And when they hit me with the INSET thing it was the summer term, the first half of the summer term and I was beginning to fray at the edges, as far as I'd just got things going, and it was just like something else on top of a lot of pressure already.
Nigel Barnes, the drama teacher, also joined the project.
Again, he was teaching in London for the first time although he had taught before:
I was coming back to teach in England after teaching in Nigeria, so I had to get used to the whole thing again.
And this isn't the easiest of schools to teach in.
It's a very idiosyncratic place, and it relies on idiosyncrasies to establish discipline or control.
It's very much you, because for various reasons, external factors will not make it easy for you.
And I felt that I didn't really want to do this at a time when I was still floundering about and not having very disciplined classes and so on.
And then I was called in and nothing was ever said ‘Well do this because’, but it felt that ‘if you don't do this…you know?’
It was left like that.
Nigel was teaching drama so the project had already moved out of the Humanities department in a rather unsystematic way.
Nigel felt the project was a strain on him:
In yourself you've got to be very clear about where you're going and what you're doing before you start to do it, in a sense for it to happen.
Your organization has got to be just right you know.
And last year I couldn't say well this is my long-term objective.
Long-term objectives weren't working at that particular stage…
Yes, it really was a question of surviving.
These three teachers were struggling to survive in an inner-city school and could not give the evaluation project the kind of commitment it really deserved.
Especially as it was potentially very time consuming.
It was unfortunate for Mary that she had to raise enthusiasm in new members of staff and there was no INSET teachers' group and no support team.
Michael Walsh was interested as an experienced teacher who had the confidence to experiment with the video and the professional security to use it effectively.
Doug Green, Jane Dubar and Nigel Barnes all experienced their recruitment to the  INSET course as part of the politics of the school whereby it is difficult for new teachers to refuse to take part in educational research.
They were all ‘on probation’.
The Contract
Before they started to work with the video all the teachers were shown the contract which was drawn up by Kate Kennett.
It deals with confidentiality, negotiation and impartiality of the ‘friendly critic’.
This is reproduced below in full because the work on the INSET project relied on the contract as a guarantee of teacher's rights of control over their material.
Draft Contract Between School and the Teachers' Centre
This contract aims to clarify the procedures and principles for monitoring classroom work.
It may be renegotiated in the light of experience.
Participants will be referred to as ‘the teacher’.
Confidentiality and Control
1
Conversations are confidential to the teacher until such time as she releases them.
2
No tapes will be transcribed without the teacher's consent.
3
 Transcripts will be returned as soon as possible with no comment until/unless requested.
4
Interviews, discussion, meetings, reports etc. are all potential data.
None of these will be documented without prior consent.
Documentation will be confidential to the teacher or group until it has been agreed to release it.
5
Release is negotiable and may be restricted.
6
Feedback will be delivered by hand unless previously agreed otherwise.
7
One of the Centre team will be available to discuss feedback within a week of return, preferably earlier, should this be wanted.
8
Interviews or recordings etc. with pupils will be confidential to the pupil until released by them, when it will be released to the teacher (see 4)
9
No attempt will be made to press teacher or pupil to discuss or provide data if they do not wish to.
10
Feedback will be classroom/issue orientated, not person orientated.
The teacher may negotiate modification to the feedback, to correct or improve statements made.
12
The teacher will be asked to comment on the usefulness of feedback.
13
Access to any data must be negotiated with the contributors to the data.
14
Modification of data should be based on arguments of fairness, accuracy and relevancy.
Impartiality — The Service-Observer/Visitor
1
should withhold personal judgment but aim to reflect the views and judgment of others on policy and classroom activity;
2
should aim to inform decisions, not recommend;
3
should present options, alternatives, without prescriptions.
Negotiation & clarification Is Needed On
1
Aims of the monitoring exercise:
a)
to assess whether curriculum content matches pupils' needs;
b)
to assess whether curriculum process matches pupils' needs;
c)
to assess whether curriculum organization matches pupils' needs;
d)
to enable the teacher to reflect on her classroom practice;
e)
to enable pupils to reflect on their learning.
2
The monitoring exercise should be responsive to the school and department's policy concerns.
3
The monitoring should be open to internal criticism and external assessment from time to time if this is agreed on.
Mary Law felt that the contract was very important:
Everybody had a contract that was made specific to them saying this material, these audio tapes are your property.
They are nobody else's and no-one else will see them, if you don't want anybody else to see them.
Now a lot of people when that was first mentioned said ‘I don't need that, it's all right you can look at them if you want to’, but afterwards, half-way through their course, they wanted to know that they were theirs and other people wouldn't see them and have this reassurance that if they wanted to watch it and then wipe it blank, or if they wanted to wipe it blank without ever having seen it themselves, they could do that and no-one was going to ask ‘What's going on?’.
The contract was drawn up to safeguard the teachers' rights in the situation.
This is most appropriate for research situations where the teachers themselves are strongly motivated and committed to the research.
If the teachers have joined the course of their own volition and their tutor is as impartial as is possible, with no  power over their career or future prospects, then the contract drawn up by Kate Kennett is very thorough.
However, no contract can nullify a power imbalance between the parties and any hint of coercion in participation in the course greatly reduces the effectiveness of the contract.
This is because the contract related to a limited context which is the research situation.
However, the teacher is working in the context of the whole school and the politics of the school and any research or evaluation has to be understood in relationship to the teacher's position in the school.
This contract did not reduce the level of tension experienced by the three London first appointment teachers on the course.
They had not felt they had the right to refuse to participate, and video recordings are very threatening in their very nature, and in Doug Green's case his Head of Department, Mary Law, was his ‘friendly critic’.
She was also the person who would decide on the success or failure of Doug's probationary period.
For that reason Doug decided that he would be the only person to watch the videos he made although he discussed the issues arising from them with Mary.
Mary Law was aware that videoing lessons was difficult for probationary teachers:
It makes you vulnerable because you start seeing all your mistakes and all the bad things that you do and all the things that need improvement.
If I'm making a film of myself and I'm on probation, at the end of the year I can pass or fail or have my probation extended because I'm not successful enough to be called a qualified teacher, then I'm opening myself up for people to come and look at my mistakes.
Does this mean I'm more likely to fail my probation?
That's a very real issue.
LH: So how did you deal with that issue?
ML: It's real in the minds of the people at the time.
But in fact no-one would see anyone who was participating in the course like this, anything they got out of it is positive.
The sheer fact that they want to have a go, they want to improve; they want to look at their work is a very good thing.
A very good sign and so that would be one up for them.
It would be a good mark, not a black mark.
And so there was all that reassurance and reliance on things like the contract.
It is easy to see from Mary's comments how the three new teachers felt that passing their probation depended on agreeing to participate in the INSET course.
The Use of Video Equipment
There was trial and error in the use of video equipment because in the classroom the camera and microphones are a considerable intrusion.
Kate Kennett explains:
Mary felt that it was too much of an intervention, operators and technicians floating around trying to get mikes here and that it was distracting…she decided it might be more useful to try and fix the camera.
There were all sorts of disadvantages to that, but she did want to look at her own presentation and movement in the classroom.
There were all sorts of practical problems which Nigel Barnes, the drama teacher faced.
One was that the microphones were stolen from the school during a burglary which made the recording process more difficult and less rewarding.
Nigel Barnes:
The first problem was where did I film?
The hall wasn't very big, and the individual microphones had been stolen, so that we couldn't have individual chats, so you couldn't hear what was going on.
And then getting hold of the camera and the machine at the same time seemed to be a problem.
You were supposed to do a long build-up.
I never did that in fact…
I went into filming, straight away.
It was a problem to get the camera set up, because I had two classes, one before the other, I had to think about putting it up there and the set up.
The lighting was a problem in the hall, if you had it pointed towards the window it was too bright, if you pointed it into the interior, it was too dark.
Both pupils and teachers initially performed for the camera.
Dummy running was important to get everybody used to the camera so that the film is a reasonably authentic representation of a lesson.
Mary Law was the first teacher to face this issue:
There's a process getting the kids used to it with dummy running so that the picture you get is a realistic one.
You know it's a naive idea that you put the camera in the classroom and you get a real picture of a real lesson and you could then talk about it.
When you start doing it you find that isn't the case.
It takes longer than that.
Michael Walsh also had problems with the camera:
None of us really knew what we were going to see, and in the early days the tapes were rather artificial because the lessons were all so well prepared, the kids knew they were going to have a video in the classes, it didn't mean that they were always well behaved!
There were large noses sticking into the lens, and people waving at the camera.
Then we'd just put the camera in the room and leave it running.
No tape was put in it.
Then one particular lesson we'd switch it on.
The disadvantage of that was you couldn't have somebody in with the class for five or six lessons just standing there pretending to film.
So initially, I  used the camera without anybody in the class…then they don't know exactly what is going to happen.
For that reason Michael Walsh used a fixed video.
If it is fixed it gives a limited picture only but is less intrusive.
If it is hand operated somebody needs to be operating it and focusing on agreed events in the classroom.
The potential is great but it is more difficult to manage.
Furthermore, teachers must get used to seeing themselves on film.
Mary pointed out that it takes a while to become objective and to look at yourself without flinching.
Initially it can be demoralizing.
Selecting what to look for is very important, and that has to be decided in advance.
The Friendly Critic
The INSET project depended on the videos being viewed and then analyzed in a constructive way.
A video would be made of a lesson and then in theory the teacher and their tutor or ‘friendly critic’ would watch the recording together.
The teacher ideally would already have decided which issues to study.
If not, the issues may emerge from viewing the film.
The role of the friendly critic was another area which was more complicated in reality than in theory.
The right person to work as a tutor was important and the right person would have to be both non-threatening and have experience in the technique.
For those reasons Kate Kennett, Warden of the Teacher's Centre was a good choice.
As she explained:
We tend to work from the Centre in the friendly critic role.
In other words I won't say it's non-threatening or doesn't have any kind of value judgment behind it because I don't think that can be true and if anybody is monitoring their classroom practice, it's got to be threatening in some way, almost inevitably.
But we do have a fairly neutral stance at the Teacher's Centre…
We can often go in on the basis that if somebody has a problem that they want to look at that, just as frequently somebody has an interest that they want to develop, to know more about.
Kate explained how the ‘friendly critic’ role worked for her:
There is a structure.
I like to know what their intentions are, what they are hoping to achieve in that lesson and that cumulatively becomes more specific because it's based on what we said last time.
Through the video you ask questions ‘What are you doing now?
Why are you doing that?…
It's the first session when they have actually identified some of the strands that you are going to pursue and then subsequently looking is framed by that decision.
To work really well, the ‘friendly critic’ system must be based on trust.
Kate was Mary's tutor and she encouraged Mary to clarify what she wanted to get out of the videos and work through questions to identify issues which Mary could then pursue.
As Mary admitted she liked to see the videos first alone — she also may have found the situation rather threatening.
Mary acted as tutor to Doug Green.
Although she did not watch the videos he made, through discussion she was able to help him to gain control of a class which had initially been ‘unteachable’ and to design a workcard and organize lessons in a planned way.
However, this relationship was problematic.
Doug felt that, as his head of department, Mary was setting the agenda of the meetings, even though she had not seen the videos he made while teaching: ‘There may be conflict there.
If anything I wanted to sort out my ideas through watching the lessons on video.
Not take on somebody else's.’
It is more difficult to allow a teacher to develop his own themes if the head of department is the tutor.
Inevitably, Mary had a vested interest in the smooth running of her department and in helping Doug out of his difficulties as a new teacher in Humanities.
This brings out a fundamental issue in such work.
If the video project is undertaken as a genuine self-evaluation exercise the tutor must see her role as helping the teacher to perceive and evaluate his own aims.
Thus the teacher's own agenda is gradually revealed.
It is a delicate balance between making such a project a self-evaluation exercise and it becoming an evaluation by another teacher.
Ideally the tutor should have no vested interest in specific outcomes of the project.
Doug Green went on to tutor Jane Dubar: ‘Actually I think I learnt as actually part of the INSET course more from being a tutor than as a teacher participant.’
Jane appreciated Doug's perseverance but she still found it difficult to raise the necessary enthusiasm.
The burglary was instrumental in that:
There wasn't a great deal of discussion between Doug and me…
I mean he did persevere but I was always rushing around saying ‘Oh I've got this to do, I've got that to do’.
A lot of that was also due to the fact that we just didn't get into it, because of all the stuff got stolen after we'd started and there was a big break of about five or six weeks when we couldn't do anything.
So it was just kind of what ever enthusiasm there was washed away with that.
Really I just didn't feel strong enough to take it in as well and do it properly you know.
I just felt my mind rebelling against it all the time.
It was just something else to think about.
Nigel Barnes had Kate Kennett as a tutor, but he did not get very far with the evaluative work:
Meeting her was always a problem.
I think I met her once, I said, ‘Look I don't really know what I'm doing’.
She said, ‘Don't worry just go ahead and think about it, and things will happen’.
So anyway I eventually  decided I still didn't know what I wanted to do, but I was aware that the beginnings and ends of lessons were a bit of a mess, so the idea was to film that.
The problem which Jane and Nigel experienced over finding time to meet their tutors are fundamental to such projects.
They can only be solved by a commitment, built into the timetable for the length of the project to give participating teachers the time to view the video and meet their friendly critic.
Mary Law was aware of these problems:
The project should be formalized in the school.
The course wasn't necessarily seen as all that important at first— it got fitted in.
The timetable problems were enormous.
It needed to be agreed and regularised.
Regular times or meetings on the timetable…
It should be very clear who is running the course and the methods.
Teachers feel exposed…
It's difficult to separate INSET from the rest of teaching.
Michael Walsh avoided some of these problems by deciding not to work with a ‘friendly critic’.
He watched the videos alone and extracted the issues he wanted to consider.
For Michael Walsh, working alone on his videos it was totally a ‘self-evaluation’, sacrificing the stimulation of another teacher's ideas and perceptions to benefit from the security of working alone.
Did Teachers Benefit from the Project?
Despite criticisms of the project, nearly all the teachers discovered something about their classroom performance.
For Mary Law, seeing herself on the video was ‘an eye-opener’:
For me it was such an eye-opener.
That was very early on in my filming if anyone had asked me I would have said ‘I'm always on the move, you know I never sit down in a lesson, and I don't sit down but where I was on the move was in a very limited space so just having the camera at the back on that table, just having it still showed me so much about what was going on in the room and how you use the time…
LH: Can you see that on the video?
ML: You can see it without a video.
It was having the camera there that made us aware of those questions.
What the camera did was help you phrase questions.
It didn't give you answers.
It just made you ask different sorts of questions.
You can see amazing things.
There was a Vietnamese boy.
I'd been having a bit of a go about putting your hand up but every time he put his hand up I'm bending over somebody or I'm in a different part of the  room.
I never saw him.
After about half an hour he picked up his book and came over to me — and I told him off.
Michael Walsh also found the video work very valuable:
…
I began to see ways in which I could improve.
I don't know if it was totally successful but I enjoyed it.
I learnt something about myself, I learnt a little bit about how members of the class view me, certain physical characteristics which are habits which I try to stop.
I've tried to slow down my pattern of speech, I've tried to simplify my vocabulary, and certain methods of when you're talking to someone you don't tower over them, you try and squat to his level or you give instructions in certain ways to certain classes.
It's just basically classroom technique I have refined because of watching the programme.
Michael also felt that there were spin-offs for the content of lessons:
To the extent that talking and trying hard to talk for less time and have more tasks to do which are to a certain extent self-explanatory, rather than having long involved tasks which two or three get on with and the rest opt out.
There were things that I knew, but the programme brought it home more to me.
It made me realize I'd actually have to work on these aspects.
Rather than just muddle on as I was before it was highlighted and said well these need watching.
I knew they needed watching but you don't push yourself till you actually see that it needs a lot of watching!
You're inclined to know things need to be done, to say ‘Oh they're alright, it's not that bad, there are other things I must look at’.
While there are problems in the class,…when I looked at the programme I could see that problems that are caused because you are not explaining yourself, you are not getting them down to work, they don't understand what they're doing.
For Doug Green classroom management was one of many issues:
…
I had found myself staggering from one situation to the next…we decided then that I was doing the same thing wrong you see, and so we looked at the actual practice…
Before without really knowing it, I was just preparing for that one lesson to get through that one lesson, but partly I think as a matter of survival in this situation, because I had never taught children before and really didn't have an overview at that point.
But I didn't really have time or the ability to sit down and think about their whole term's work which is what I had to do really.
That group progressed quite a lot that year, from being almost unteachable in the  beginning, to being at least teachable, and I was getting some fair work out of them…but it was very time consuming.
Jane Dubar gained some insights into problems in the classroom but felt she started the project too late in the year:
The first term I would have had lots of energy, even though I was tired from working here.
It was a new situation.
It was the first teaching situation I'd been in, and I'd got lots of energy and I was devising ways of getting classroom control and class management and all that kind of thing…
But by the time I'd got to the summer term the things that had failed had failed and I knew why, and I wasn't feeling too inclined to change them particularly at the time because they hadn't failed to the point where the class was in chaos.
I mean there were obviously a lot of things I could criticize.
There were certain things about myself in the classroom I noticed.
About my tendency to repeat things…kids arriving late in class and how they affected it.
Whereas I would not be so aware of it at the time.
I'd just say ‘Oh do come in sit down.
Where have you been?’
And it would just completely throw the lesson, and then I would find myself repeating it for them, and in one lesson I must have done that about three times, and I didn't make enough fuss to get those kids to the lesson on time.
Jane also derived new understanding about her classroom practice:
I do insist on silence and things like that, when I'm talking.
And I just won't talk if kids are talking.
And I found that in some respects that became negative you know…in some ways that also screwed the lesson
However, Jane felt that many of the problems highlighted by the videos were a result of her inexperience as a first year teacher:
…
I was still where I was going in and having to fight.
You know being in that kind of fighting feeling.
The other thing I noticed was my mood and the way it affected the lesson, from the videos, like if I was wound up, or tense or upset, the lessons were a real shambles.
I mean my mood so affected the way the class was but that was something that I didn't think could be helped at all…and the difference was amazing you know, when you're feeling OK and you're being relaxed.
Nigel Barnes agreed with this point.
Being organized as a probationary teacher took all his time:
Again, I mean you know just the bothering with doing that when there's so many thousands of other things as a teacher you've got to do.
To say I  didn't have time would not be true, but that I didn't really want to make time.
I mean, it did make me realize that for large parts of a drama lesson when the kids were supposed to be working on their own they weren't probably doing an awful lot.
Just sitting and looking into space, or just carrying about on their own.
I think probably I knew that anyway.
It was something you could see, you know, I mean a lot of the things I knew anyway and knowing them is a different problem from actually putting them right.
Knowing what you do wrong from the start of the lesson is a very different matter from actually being able to sort of say to yourself, right I'm going to do that this time.
But then actually, the things you do and putting them right are different things.
Conclusion
Looking back to the initial aims of the study as delineated by the deputy head, he envisaged both short-term and long-term aims.
In some senses the short-term aims were realized by some members of the Humanities department.
Video did reveal insights into teaching practice although these insights tended to be limited to issues of classroom management.
Michael Walsh:
It helped with how it was presented and may be cutting down on what was presented.
It simplified things…but the thought never even entered my head, that I could use this as a way of altering the course.
The use of video can be a more sensitive tool in the classroom if the individual teacher is committed to the method and feels entirely confident with their friendly critic.
Then there could be an impact on the material taught in a more dynamic way.
The video work at this school revealed to some teachers the gap between their perception of what is happening and what really happens in the classroom.
Most of the value in video work remained in the area of classroom organization and the teacher gaining control over the class and facilitating day to day survival.
This can be useful but it is limited.
A further problem in this school arose because there was no group support.
The videos focused on individuals and their themes and this did not feed back into departmental meetings and certainly not into a whole-school context.
It was not possible to transcend the anecdotal because the structure of the INSET programme was not sufficiently supportive.
The use of video itself can be very problematic because of the exposing nature of the whole procedure.
The probationary teachers, who had felt pressurized into the project, found the scheme rather threatening.
The contract was not able to dissipate these fears.
In that situation, a lack of trust in the tutors' role was inevitable.
A further issue which this study has touched upon briefly is the nature of the involvement of the LEA.
In this case money was given to a school probably because it was closing.
As it transpired this was not the best way to support the staff with their problems of low morale.
7 The Art Department
Philip Clift
Introduction
This is a case study of a departmental review at a large Comprehensive school in the West Midlands.
The review, of the Art Department, began in September 1981 and ended in January 1982 with the formal presentation, by the Senior Management Team, of a written report to the teachers concerned.
The report was brief (only three sides of A4) and in three parts: a general description and evaluation of the department: a list of recommendations for actions to be taken by the teachers and a list of recommendations for actions to be taken by the Senior Management Team.
This case study is also in three parts: a brief introduction to the school and the review procedure: a descriptive account of the review procedure and an evaluation of the effectiveness of the review procedure in validly determining what were the salient strengths and weaknesses in the work of the department and in bringing about changes.
The School
The school is a coeducational school of over 1900 pupils of age 11 to 18 years, of 100 teachers and over one hundred ancillary staff.
At the time of this review, the Senior Management Team consisted of the Head, the three Deputy Heads (First Deputy Head (Staff), Second Deputy Head (Curriculum), Third Deputy Head (Administration), and a Senior Teacher, the Director of Studies.
The Art Teachers
The Art Department was quite small.
There were four teachers fully committed to  teaching Art, and one whose main responsibility was teaching Needlework but who also taught some Art.
The four full-time Art teachers were
the Head of Department Scale 3)
First Art teacher (AT1) Scale 2) at the time of the review
Second Art teacher (AT2) Scale 1)
Third Art teacher (AT3) Scale 1)
The part-time Art teacher did not feature in the review.
Methodology
The role which I adopted for studying the process was that of non-participant observer.
After considering the nature of the exercise and the people involved, I decided against asking to use a tape-recorder and instead noted the events in longhand as they occurred and, where it seemed to me to be significant, noted what was said, verbatim.
I wrote up these notes immediately after each occasion and as soon as they were typed, sent copies to those involved with the request that they verify that the substance and the spirit of each occasion were accurately and adequately recorded.
Prior to and during the review, I collected copies of all the relevant documents produced by the school.
Before the review began, and immediately after the agreed report had been presented, I interviewed the various participants in order to find out what were their feelings about the review.
The same procedure for verification was followed as for the records of the meetings.
One month and again one year after the presentation of the final report, I revisited the school to find out what changes had occurred as a result of the review.
Outline of the Review
This was the first departmental review under new procedure agreed with Heads of Departments earlier in the year.
The new style review consisted of three components:
a Head of Department questionnaire concerning departmental matters as a preliminary to a series of meetings between members of the Senior Management Team and the Head of Department;
the observation, by members of the Senior Management Team, of lessons taught by members of the department;
Staff Appraisal interviews.
Based on these components, a draft report on the department was prepared by the Senior Management Team and presented to the Head of Department.
After  negotiation about its substance, a revised, agreed version was presented to the departmental team at a formal meeting.
Formal minutes of the various meetings and appraisal interviews were not kept, although informal personal notes were sometimes made by members of the Senior Management Team.
The review procedure being studied was new at the school, but similar reviews are not.
Much of a seven page appendix to  the Head's progress report on his Five Year Plan 1974 to 1979 had been devoted to commenting on these earlier departmental reviews.
It concluded that: ‘Existing procedures do not go far enough.
It should be turned into a dynamic activity.’
Aims and Objectives of the Review
The revised procedure was set out in a discussion document and presented to the Heads of Department.
It set out the following aims and objectives:
Document 1
The Aims of a Departmental Review
To investigate thoroughly the work of all departments within the school in order to encourage optimum performance.
1
To study the effectiveness of the teaching within a department and to assist in improving this if necessary.
2
To develop effective leadership in the department where necessary.
3
To improve the standards of work produced in the department where necessary.
4
To help to evaluate the syllabus of the department.
5
To provide a vehicle for an individual staff development programme within the bounds of their departmental work.
6
To help staff develop their own professional expertise and competence.
7
To study the assessment and evaluation procedure of pupils and assist in its improvement if necessary.
8
To help to improve stock and budgetary control within the department where appropriate.
9
To help with the planning of future strategies within the department.
The Objectives of a Departmental Review
As recorded in the minutes of the meeting of the Heads of Department held on the 11th March 1981, reaction to this document was anxious and ambivalent, with several threads of concern emerging.
The Head stressed the benefits of ‘insiders’ versus ‘outsiders’in the evaluation of their work.
The Deputy Head (Staff) emphasized the staff development element.
The minutes record a feeling amongst Heads of Department that the proposal was for ‘inspection’ and that  evaluation should be confined solely to institutional matters, avoiding the evaluation of teachers.
There was anxiety that judgments would be made about teachers' handling of classes, based on too few visits.
The detailed discussion of the review procedure at this meeting and the lengthy minutes devoted to it are in marked contrast to the brevity of its mention in the next meeting, under ‘matters arising’.
Assurances were given about the number of lesson visits on which judgments about teachers' competence would be based, and an attempt to make the procedure more ‘egalitarian’, or ‘fraternal’ was blocked.
It was accepted that the review should go ahead as proposed.
The Review
Just before the review began, I met the members of the Art Department to discuss their anticipations.
The Head of Department said he expected that the review would ‘follow them through the normal day’, looking at ‘the way we run the department; the way we work according to the syllabus — how we relate to it; the stock control; the use of resources; the teaching content and the skills taught’(verified note of meeting).
He professed not to be worried about it and his colleagues agreed.
The department's ‘O’ Level results had been very good the previous year and he had had a letter of congratulation from the Assistant Education Officer responsible for the school.
He and his colleagues were all aware, however, that the context in which the review would take place was one of potential teacher redundancy.
He hoped for positive outcomes, favourable, even: an increased share of the school's capitation: a reallocation to rooms in closer proximity to one another and to the Craft Department; improved storage facilities.
As to the evaluation of their individual skills of pupil management by members of the Senior Management Team, the Head of Department commented, ‘we have never known them as teachers…but we do see them conducting assemblies’.
Based upon his evaluation of the Senior Management Team conduct of assemblies, the Head of Department said that he would take any criticism of teaching skills very much to heart if it came from the DHS.
He went on to say that the Head characteristically had ‘preconceived ideas’ and was ‘somewhat biased towards and against certain individuals’and that the reviews were not likely to affect the Head's preconceptions very much.
Given the lack of expertise amongst members of the Senior Management Team in the teaching of Art, he regretted that it was not possible to involve the LEA Art Inspector in the review.
Apart from reservations from AT2, the teachers anticipated no sense of intrusion from visits from the Senior Management Team, other than the Head, whose arrival AT3 expected to produce ‘an entirely artificial atmosphere’.
The Meeting Between the Head of Department and the Senior Management Team
The questionnaire addressed to the Head of Department asked for information under five headings:
1
Syllabus
2
Departmental Resources
3
Accommodation
4
Pupil Matters
5
Staff Matters
To most of the questions the Head of Department answered ‘Yes’ or ‘No’, with an occasional phrase or short sentence either offered in amplification, or as demanded by the question.
In all, five meetings were held between members of the Senior Management Team (Deputy Head (Curriculum) and the Director of Studies) and the Head of the Art Department.
For the first, Parts 2 to 4 of the Head of Department Questionnaire provided the agenda.
Part 1 was deferred to the second meeting.
As the meetings progressed, issues arising from the lesson observations, particularly perceived discrepancies between what the syllabus indicated and actual practices, increasingly were raised by the Senior Management Team.
It quickly became apparent that the major purpose which the questionnaire was to serve was as an agenda for the formal meetings between the Head of the Art Department and two of the members of the Senior Management Team (Deputy Head (Curriculum) and the Director of Studies).
Explanations and justifications were not always readily accepted, for example:
Concerning videotapes, the Head of Department said that he only held two which were shared with another department (i.e. were constantly reused) and that he could not afford to build up a library of them.
The Director of Studies demurred at this, citing the cost as only £8 each.
(verified note of meeting)
Usually, however, the Senior Management Team seemed more concerned to expand upon questionnaire topics, for example:
The Deputy Head (Curriculum) asked what the film strips and slides were used for.
The Head of Department replied that they were used mainly for the Sixth Form, for example, the History of Art'…my predecessor bought them for departmental use, but my belief is that kids should be actively involved in creative work, not passively looking at film — and we have difficulty with blackout, too'. (verified note of meeting)The balance of the enquiries tended to be towards matters over which the  department had control, but matters beyond their immediate control, such as the blackout mentioned above, often arose spontaneously and were generally given proper and serious consideration by the Senior Management Team.
As this first meeting went on, the issue which was increasingly to feature in the review was raised: performance in public examinations.
Examination entry policies were queried and the Head of Department replied: ‘any kid who has a chance of passing ‘O’ Level takes it, often against the better judgment of his teachers'.
The Deputy Head (Curriculum) then asked if he was pleased with the results (he had answered Yes/No to this question in the Questionnaire) and was he happy about his departmental predictions of results.
Head of Department said that theoretically there should be a 100 per cent‘O’ Level pass rate ‘if our judgments were invariably accepted but we're soft, we accept parents’money for double entry (i.e. ‘O’Level and CSE) against our better judgment.
All the E grades come from this tender mindedness.’
But on second thoughts he said, ‘Where we felt a chance existed of a pass if the questions ‘fell out well’.’
(verified note of meeting)
The question of the grades attained was then raised:
Head of Department said that this was the inevitable outcome of the school's option choice system, that ‘the most able pupils do Chemistry instead…that you can't substitute for talent…for creative imaginations, though you can teach technique’.
(verified note of meeting)
With regard to access to Art as a subject in the school curriculum, the Head of Department pointed out that he and his colleagues made special provision for some pupils, asking it if was generally known that pupils who opted not to do Art (i.e. whose option choices precluded Art) could still do it after school as an additional subject and that we do get some of them through (verified note of meeting).
This point apparently passed unnoticed, and the practice was never mentioned again in the review, nor was any acknowledgement of it included in the final report despite  protestations by the Head of Department when its contents were being negotiated.
The syllabus was the topic for the second meeting.
The Deputy Head (Curriculum) was absent and the discussion was thus between the Head of Department and the Director of Studies only.
The focus of the discussion was the extent to which the actual Art experiences of the pupils reflected the syllabus: Director of Studies: ‘What do the kids do in year one?’
Head of Department: ‘First year: paint brush, pencil, appreciation of colour — properly!— drawing and painting, pattern, texture, how to mix…tones, subtle changes — 2-dimensional surfaces — texture’.
Director of Studies: ‘That's a series of behavioural objectives…why not draw up a checklist?’.
Head of Department: ‘…resist this!…don't want to say to my colleagues ‘you must do this’.
Second year…full classes is the problem…this (syllabus) was written when we had half-classes.’
Director of Studies: ‘Stop…go back to what they do…(reading out from the syllabus)…
Pottery?
Head of Department: ‘No.’
Director of Studies: ‘Plaster?’
Head of Department: ‘Occasionally.’
Director of Studies: ‘Fabric?’
Head of Department: ‘Occasionally.’
Director of Studies: ‘Nails?’
Head of Department: ‘No’.
Director of Studies: ‘Tie and dye?’
Head of Department: ‘No’.
Director of Studies: ‘Lino?’
Head of Department: ‘No’.
Director of Studies: ‘Batik?’
Head of Department: ‘No.’
Director of Studies: ‘What are they doing?’
Head of Department: ‘Psychomotor skills…scissors, cut-out design, tissue paper, cellophane — only 2D, continue with picture making process.’
Director of Studies: ‘Why aren't you doing what the syllabus says?’(verified note of meeting)
The Director of Studies expressed an interest in how much three dimensional (3D) work was included in pupils' experience and was dissatisfied with what he was told.
He concluded the meeting:
Children who come to this school are limited to a Fine Arts base, and possibly Graphics.
Wouldn't you take the view that it's your job to broaden…?
The syllabus talks about ‘should’.
What we have to look for is ways of realizing they should — in practice.
(verified note of meeting)
The Director of Studies was absent from the third meeting and the discussion, which concerned the staffing of the Art Department, was between the Deputy Head (Curriculum) and the Head of Department.
The specific responsibilities of each teacher and their particular talents were discussed.
The issue of the lack of variety in the Art curriculum, which had been raised in earlier meetings was raised again.
This led to a discussion of timetabling and the constraints imposed by group sizes, and how these constraints might be eased.
The Head of Department remarked that an overall criticism of the department was that there  was not enough variety.
This was due to two reasons: large group sizes make it very difficult, ‘you can't organize 30 kids to do clay very easily’; that the type of training of the staff was all very similar, but that training was not the real problem, it was group sizes and lack of resources.
The Deputy Head (Curriculum) noted that Head of Department was not happy with the timetable:
Head of Department: ‘Quadruple sessions are needed, particularly for ‘O’ Level groups, as they must pace themselves for a 3 hour drawing exam.’
He remarked that this might be a reason for not getting more A grades.
(verified note of meeting)
The quality and quantity of pupils' work was questioned at the fourth meeting.
The Head of Department was first asked to specify how he and his colleagues assessed their pupils' work, illustrating the process by assessing a pencil drawing which was mounted on the wall.
Head of Department: ‘We make an assessment on three criteria, then combine them to give a mark out of 10.’
Director of Studies: ‘Could you relate these 3 criteria to the objectives set down in the syllabus…show us how the objectives fit them?’
The Head of Department then went through the objectives one at a time and satisfied the Deputy Head (Curriculum) and the Director of Studies that, with different emphases, the objectives were all subsumed in the 3 criteria for the assessment of pupils' work.
(verified note of meeting)
The Director of Studies then asked why the syllabus did not set out the relationship between assessment criteria and objectives more explicitly.
The Head of Department replied that to do so might be counterproductive in terms of artistic creativity and ultimately counter to the spirit of ‘Art’.
As a result of several sessions of classroom observation, homework now emerged as a source of dissatisfaction to the Senior Management Team, in terms both of the amount done and marked, and its quality and scope.
Director of Studies: I have an uneasy feeling about the output of your department.
I'd like you to be thinking about the output of homework…teacher expectations of homework…the targets are not high enough…not enough quantity…not a high enough standard.’
Deputy Head (Curriculum): ‘We're not Art specialists…we need to have an explanation of Art staff expectations in terms of the nature of the tasks set and the quality of the final output…the class I saw was practising observational skills for homework…limited to the use of pencil.’
Director of Studies: ‘Do we have to accept this limitation to pencil?’
Head of Department: ‘We already make them purchase a pad plus two HB  pencils — total £1·50 for Art for the parents.
They can choose to use felt or crayons if they have them, but we can't really tell them to buy them.’
Director of Studies: ‘What are you actually trying to do with homework…have you limited aims…what about quality?
The ‘top end’, the most able, are they being extended?
For me this is most directly related to homework.’
Head of Department: ‘I think we extend them.’
(verified note of meeting).
This session ended with the Head of Department visibly upset by the criticisms over output, particularly homework, and it was decided that an extra session should be arranged in order further to explore issues in evaluation and assessment.
It was to the vexed matter of homework that enquiry immediately turned again, however, in the fifth meeting.
Deputy Head (Curriculum): ‘Homework!’
Director of Studies: ‘Are you satisfied with the amount set in your department?’
Head of Department: ‘Yes.’
Director of Studies: ‘Lower Sixth ‘O’ Level group has had only one homework set since September?’
Head of Department: ‘Yes, true.’
Deputy Head (Curriculum): ‘Is this sufficient?’
Head of Department: ‘No.’
Director of Studies: ‘I observed a class of AT2's, a very able examination class.
One week's homework was a single drawing.
I don't think that's enough for pupils doing ‘O’ Level.
Is that enough?— Convince me!’
Deputy Head (Curriculum): ‘They should have two homeworks, about one and a half hours.’
Director of Studies: ‘The demand is not sufficient.’
The Director of Studies then produced a folder of his son's Art (from another school).
Each piece was one week's work.
For comparison, he asked the Head of Department to comment on it in terms of variety and amount.
(verified note of meeting).
The Head of Department asked about group size and who had provided the paints (the parents had) and whether the parents at this school would.
The Director of Studies remained critical:
Director of Studies: ‘There's no way your pupils reflect this sort of effort.’
Head of Department: ‘The only real difference is that it includes paint.
You're assuming that painting takes longer, is more effort.
I dispute that.
Paint spreads easily, covers the area quicker than pencil.’
Director of Studies: ‘I tie this in with the lack of high ‘O’ and ‘A’Level grades.
We've already complimented you on the general pass rate.’
Head of Department: ‘Your son's at a selective school.
The pupils all come from a good social background.’
Deputy Head (Curriculum): ‘The point Director of Studies is making is, are our good pupils pushed enough…is it not worth saying to them, ‘invest in paints’?’
Head of Department: ‘We try to operate a true comprehensive principle…’
Director of Studies: ‘Disagree!— the true comprehensive principle is to maximize each child's performance, realize each child's potential.
The best are losing out!
Director of Studies: ‘Setting high standards for the best will pull the others along.’
(verified note of meeting)
The Head of Department accepted this dictum with evident reluctance, and that concerning paints for all:
Head of Department: ‘Do we ask them all to buy paints?’
Director of Studies: ‘Yes.’
Head of Department: ‘This will pose severe problems for some…may put off rather than motivate them…may backfire on us!’(verified note of meeting)
Attention then turned to ‘A’ Level matters:
Director of Studies: ‘What about ‘A’ Level Upper Sixth homework?’
Head of Department: ‘None is set.
They are all working on their personal study.’
Director of Studies: ‘Whole academic year, no creative Art work set as homework, are you happy  with,this?’
Head of Department: ‘…could change this…’
Director of Studies: ‘Is this the reason for the very few high exam results at’ A’Level?’
Head of Department: ‘…good point…
I'll act on this, try it out with the Lower Sixth…see if it upsets them…see if they complain about the load vis à vis English, etc…’
Director of Studies: ‘The load they should accept is 5 hours minimum per subject — in some 10 hours.
That's how high ‘A’ Level grades are obtained.’
Head of Department: ‘I'll sound out the department on paint and the pupils on homework and think about setting more creative work over the two year ‘A’ Level course.’
(verified note of meeting)
The Head of Department then said that he considered that the criticism had been constructive, that he accepted most of it and would try out various changes.
The Lesson Visits
Lesson observation by members of the Senior Management Team was semi-structured following the format set out in Document 2 below.
Each teacher was observed on three separate occasions by different members of the Senior Management Team.
I was able to ‘double-up’ once each with the Head and the Director of Studies.
My main interests were how intrusive was the presence of the senior members of staff and how far I agreed with their evaluation of the lessons observed.
Document 2
Proposed Format for Lesson Report
Timing Did pupils and staff arrive on time?
Did the timing of the lesson provide suitable division?
Lesson content: was the lesson well prepared?
Was there variety?
Was the work suitable for the ability of the group?
Was the lesson imaginative?
Did the lesson deviate from the plan?
Materials Used What materials and equipment were used?
How were they distributed and collected?
Communications What contact was made with pupils?
How were the pupils involved in the lesson?
Was there any link with with previous work, recap and/or repetition?
Was the questioning structured?
What kind of rapport was there?
Pupil Learning What skills were taught?
What knowledge was gained?
Did they enjoy the lesson?
Contingencies How were any unplanned contingencies dealt with?
Marking and Were the books satisfactorily marked?
Were comments Records made on previous work?
Was the mark book complete?
Was the mark book used in the lesson?
Were the records of work up to date?
Other Comments What was the state of the classroom?
How was it arranged?
Is this the teacher's normal room?
Any other points to be made?
Summary of apparent strengths and weaknesses.
I ‘doubled-up’ on lesson visits with two members of the Senior Management Team.
Neither took notes during their observation.
One was the Head.
He had the intrusive effect on the class predicted by AT3 in our initial discussion.
Further, he failed to get satisfactory answers to questions which he asked pupils about the work in hand and why they were doing certain things.
In his absence, I afterwards asked them the same questions, and they were able to explain quite adequately.
Thus his ‘perceived significance’ biased the lesson evaluation.
However, when I later discussed the matter with him, he agreed and presumably was able to make  due allowance.
The other lesson where I ‘doubled-up’ was observed by the Director of Studies, whose presence did not seem to be at all intrusive and distorting in effect.
The Staff Appraisal Interviews
The staff appraisal interviews were conducted by the Head and the Deputy Head (Staff), who claimed that the main benefits were: a report on individual teachers, agreed with them, on their personal file (to which the Head added ‘they're helping to write their own references’), and clarification for the Senior Management Team as to what INSET actions they ought to take on the individual teacher's behalf.
Prior to their appraisal interviews, the teachers were asked to consider the questions set out in Document 3 (below).
These questions were then used to structure the interviews.
Document 3
Departmental Review Professional Development Questions
As part of the departmental review, you are invited to attend an interview with the Headmaster and Deputy Head responsible for Staff Development.
This is arranged at…on…in the Headmaster' office.
Before the meeting you are asked to consider the questions listed below which will form the basis of our discussions.
1
Have you identified clearly defined objectives related to:
a)
your own development,
b)
your contribution to objectives of your department/School?
2
What to do you consider to be your achievements:
a)
in relation to your own development,
b)
in relation to the objectives of your department/school?
3
What appear to be your particular strengths and weaknesses?
4
Do you consider your job specification (the functions you are expected to carry out) exploit your strengths?
Do any problems exist in relation to your job specification?
5
What modifications should be agreed to your job specification?
6
What other help/support is needed, for example, training:
a)
at departmental level
b)
at school level?
7
What objectives must now be set related to:
a)
your own development,
b)
your contribution to achieving the objectives of your department/school?
8
What would be a reasonable time span before we should review your position?
(Signed: Deputy Head (Staff))
November, 1981 
The appraisal interviews, with the Head and the Deputy Head (Staff), took place after the lesson visits.
The Head of Department was first.
He is professionally ambitious, and is active in local politics.
Originally a three-year trained teacher, by 1976 he had successfully completed a part time B.Phil degree and subsequently had tried, unsuccessfully, to obtain the pastoral experience which he considered to be necessary in order to move up the comprehensive school hierarchy.
In response to Q1a (of Document 3) he said:
Head of Department: ‘In 1976 I had a clear idea where I would like to be going:
1.
get my degree;
2.
get promoted to Head of Lower School, or Head of House.
The second has not yet been achieved…
I'm beginning to wonder’
Head: ‘We're talking about professional development only.
What about your political life?
What are your objectives there, is it relevant to ask?’
Head of Department: ‘I've achieved, or at any rate I'm likely to, a position of authority.
But my ambitions are for local government only.’
Head: ‘Are we saying that you get more personal satisfaction out of your political than professional life?’
Head of Department (hesitates): ‘Yes, moving towards that.’
Head: ‘Much of what we're discussing is going round the roundabout for the second time.
We had a chat after the Head of House appointment about the Head of House role.
I suggested then that you look rather into the Art department…‘.
Deputy Head (Staff): ‘I discern less professional commitment than 3 years ago…incentives lacking?…opportunities not there?’
Head of Department: ‘I'm happy as Head of Department Art.’
(verified note of meeting)
The interview then moved on to the consideration of the Head of Department's departmental work, but kept drifting back to his ambition for wider experience.
Deputy Head (Staff): ‘Your desire for a pastoral commitment…problem?’
Head of Department: ‘Yes, I'd have liked a deputy Head of House, without increment…disappointed over that.’
Head: ‘Question 6 (Document 3)…worries us…teachers going nowhere…need to provide a challenge, broaden experience, maximize job satisfactions.
Are there any ways that we can support you: on the job training opportunities over the next twelve months?’
Head of Department: ‘Head of House role?’
Head: ‘Suppose you could be released for five half days, what area of experience would you like to explore?
Don't be blinkered on Head of House.’
Head of Department: ‘I'd be capable of doing that well!’
Deputy Head (Staff): ‘in harness with Head of House already.
You can do that…no need to train you for that.’
(verified note of meeting)
The Head of Department's persistence appeared to win a somewhat grudging concession from the Head:
Head: ‘Head of House…not fully explored.
The role is narrowly conceived by the present incumbent.
What about considering counselling: relations, with outside agencies; parents, worried, angry; record keeping?’(verified note of meeting)
The Senior Management Team quickly returned to their former stance, however, pointing out the possibility of the Head of Department achieving status within the Art teaching fraternity in the LEA:
Head: ‘How can we help you to get job satisfaction within the Art department?’
Deputy Head (Staff): ‘Or you as Head of Department Art: of this school within the LEA…should this be the objective for the future?…are you a trend setter?’
Head of Department: ‘We're not trend setting, otherwise people would be coming here already.’
Deputy Head (Staff): ‘All visitors to the school invariably comment on the display of splendid painting here.
Ought we to put up an exhibition in the local library, or outside the CEO's office?’
Deputy Head (Staff): ‘There's a brick wall on promotion.
What's our duty to you?
Lots of little things have been suggested.
How long until we review how much movement has occurred?’(verified note of meeting)
After the Head of Department had gone, the Head said that it was interesting and pleasing that the interview had identified an objective for the Head of Department which was congruent with the institutional needs of the school: to extend the range of his activities with Art.
The Head of Department was subsequently regraded as Scale 4 Head of Department.
He continued to regret the limitation on his career development imposed by what he saw as his confinement to Art teaching.
Head of Department (a year after the review): ‘Scale 4 is probably my limit.
I should have transferred to pastoral a while back.
It's a bit late now and opportunities are very limited.
(verified note of meeting)
For AT2, who held a Scale 1 appointment, promotion within Art was the aim:
Deputy Head (Staff): ‘How would you define your objectives, so that we can give you opportunity to improve?’
AT2: ‘I've had to rethink.
Originally I'd hoped to apply for Scale 2 posts…but there are very few jobs, now.
Had I applied earlier…but then perhaps I'd have stood very little chance, but at least I'd have had interviews.
I'm annoyed to see Head of Department for Art offered on Scale 2 nowadays, within Arts Faculties.’
(verified note of meeting)
She was asked what she had done to merit promotion and what she might like to do:
AT2: ‘In this school, in Art rather than outside it.
There's not enough emphasis on the History of Art outside Sixth Form Work.
I have suggested teaching it lower down the school to the Head of Department, who always says ‘Go ahead’.’
Head: ‘What about your achievements in relation to your own professional development?’
AT2: ‘Well…do you mean how far have I approached my Scale 2?’
Head: ‘No, how far are you a better teacher?’
AT2: ‘I can cope with kids…get the best out of pupils…motivate them…too much towards exams perhaps, but that's partly their fault!’
Head (as revealed by the classroom observations): ‘You're a lot better than we thought!’(verified note of meeting)
Unlike the Head of Department, AT2 denied any interest in broadening her role beyond Art teaching:
Head: ‘Had we ought to be looking for courses to send you on?’
Deputy Head (Staff): ‘Provide a broader base for you to gain satisfaction until promotion becomes possible?’
Head: ‘Or broaden into a pastoral role?’
AT2: ‘If that's the way, but my main interest is in Art.’
Deputy Head (Staff): ‘Scale 2 is for additional responsibility, not just for services rendered over time.’
Head: ‘Question 4 (of Document 3): does the job specification exploit your strengths?’
AT2: ‘No written specification…’
Head: ‘Should we have one?
What should we write for you?’
Deputy Head (Staff): ‘The development of the History of Art?’
AT2: ‘To gain a Scale 2?’
Head: ‘Not that alone…responsibility for job satisfaction.’
(verified note of meeting)
Before the end of the interview, the Senior Management Team again referred to their new found knowledge of AT2's good qualities.
For her part, she expressed much satisfaction with the review procedure and the extent to which, she felt, the  Senior Management Team had obtained a valid picture of her work.
She was subsequently promoted to Scale 2, with specific responsibility for Graphics for school publications and the display of Art throughout the school.
AT1 had a Scale 2 post.
At the beginning of her appraisal interview, she expressed a general satisfaction with her status and responsibilities.
The Senior Management Team were not pleased with this complacency:
Deputy Head (Staff): ‘Scale 2 has to have some element of special responsibility!’
AT1: ‘Agree!
Pottery is mine; anything to do with it…can't say why I'm Scale 2 and the others are not.’
Deputy Head (Staff): ‘Job spec. is out of date: inaccurate.
We must revise it…a little more involvement on the environment side.
(verified note of meeting)
Deputy Head (Staff) pressed her about personal ambitions and about what difference the review might have made to her:
Deputy Head (Staff): ‘Should you have any objectives now?
Personal?
Departmental?
What should you be doing?’
AT1: ‘Making it a pleasant place; Art is pleasant.
I've been reinspired!’
Deputy Head (Staff): ‘Tongue in cheek!
Has this exercise helped?’
AT1: ‘Brought me back a bit.
Very useful exercise; haven't talked to the Head since I came here.’
Deputy Head (Staff): ‘Anything else you want to say?’
AT1: ‘I did wonder what was going to come out of this review.’
Head: ‘Departmental development, individual development, what we ought to be doing, awareness of your needs, give people new lease of life, new motivation.’
(verified note of meeting)
AT3 had experienced great difficulty in finding a job in teaching and from time to time expressed thankfulness for the one he had now.
This attitude tended to colour his replies to the questions about professional objectives:
Deputy Head (Staff): ‘How long would you continue to be happy to simply do what you're doing now, before you wanted a new challenge?’
AT3: ‘To promotion?
Different?
I'm doing different things here all the time!’
Deputy Head (Staff): ‘Promotion, then.’
AT3: ‘I've thought it over; cuts; lucky to have a job!’
Head: ‘Nevertheless the time will come.
You're young.
In your time there will be a period of expansion again.’
(verified note of meeting)
He saw himself as a good Art teacher:
Head: ‘What are your strengths?’
AT3: ‘What I consider?
Really good Art room, good class organisation, get on well with kids.’
But the Senior Management Team saw him as a somewhat shy and introverted person and sought to persuade him to be more outward-looking and to be the teacher in the Art department to liaise with the Needlecraft department, a development which they were keen to see.
AT3 was much keener on the notion of cooperation with the Music department, with whom he was hoping to collaborate in the production of cartoon videos, using the school's newly acquired colour video camera.
The Head, however reasserted his notion of congruence:
Head: ‘Try to anticipate, for instance the negotiation with the Needlecraft department…our hopes for you fit in well with our hopes for the department.’
and the Deputy Head (Staff) reaffirmed the need for AT3 to be more outward looking:
Deputy Head (Staff): ‘Firm up on objectives set: for the department, for the school.
Move out of your den, negotiating, working out objectives for integrating.’
(verified note of meeting)
The Report
A draft of the report of the review, not including any recommendations, was given to the Head of the Art Department so that his views could be taken into account before producing the final version.
He sought to negotiate over the following issues:
his ‘dominance’;
the discrepancy between what was set out in his syllabus and what was actually happening in the classrooms, particularly with regard to three dimensional work;
his department's examination results, which included too few ‘high fliers’ due to low teacher-expectations;
the teachers' failure adequately to communicate teaching objectives to the pupils;
the unsatisfactory state of the Pottery Hut, and the department's responsibility for this;
the lack of extra assigned responsibility for the extra pay (Scale 2) of one of the assistant Art teachers.
He also asked to have added the problems associated with the dispersal of the department around the school.
The Head of Department's ‘dominance’ was noted as the cause of his colleagues' over-reliance and lack of enterprise.
The draft was amended to read that his strong leadership ‘may be’ rather than‘is’counter-productive.
After much argument the Head conceded that the Art department ‘did not get the pick of the bunch’ when pupils were making option selections.
However, the assertion that the poor examination results were largely attributable to the low expectations of the department went forward unamended.
The Head of Department accepted that the department had some responsibility for the  insalubrious state of the Pottery Hut and that it was possible to do more 3D work, although the problem of group size in this should be recognised in the report.
The final version of the report, as agreed with the Head of Department, was then presented to the whole Art department at a formal meeting and discussed a paragraph at a time.
Extracts from the report are set in italic type: salient comments follow, verbatim.
Members of the department do what they are asked but we wonder if they are all as innovative as they might be.
AT2: ‘true to some extent, but too strong.
We do do a lot of things but don't go it on our own; work as a department.’
Head: ‘Does the closeness stilt initiative, stultify?’
Head of Department: ‘Take the case of the play.
AT1 has designed the sets, the rest of us will paint them.’
Head: ‘That's an induced piece of work.
What about spontaneous things; AT3 and his 3D work, AT2 and her History of Art?’
Deputy Head (Staff): ‘Exactly what we're saying: Head of Department lays it all out, members of the department merely follow.’
By far the largest portion of time in Art teaching is taken up with painting.
Head of Department: ‘Quite right, but there is some work in the 3D and Craft line.
Group work within classes is possible, particularly if we were geographically close and could give one another support.’
It is felt by the Senior Management Team that the number of pupils achieving a very good standard of work which is reflected in high examination results could, in fact, be greater if the department were prepared to expect more of their pupils.
Whilst it is accepted that the department has done exceptionally well in getting every member of the school who does Art to provide themselves with pencils, rubbers and sketch pads, it is felt that the time is now right for the department to expand this and push for pupils to provide paints for themselves.
AT2: ‘The notion of children being asked to provide their own paints makes me very anxious.’
Head: ‘We need to consider this because of the decline in the value of the per capita allowance.’
Head of Department: ‘It needs to be set out in the Options Book.’
Deputy Head (Staff): ‘What would the cost be?’
Head of Department: ‘About £5.
Could we buy sets for resale through the School Fund?’
There was general agreement to this idea.
There was a feeling that in some areas the members of staff in the department had not communicated their aims and objectives to their pupils.
As a result the progression of work outlined in the syllabus is open to question.
Head of Department: ‘We need to discuss our response to this amongst ourselves’.
The environment for teaching Art is enriched or otherwise by the personality of the staff doing the teaching and the way in which they develop their environment.
The Art rooms vary quite considerably.
The physical condition of the Pottery Hut is not conducive to a pleasant working atmosphere.
However, it is felt that the department does not make full use of its obvious potential.
Deputy Head (Curriculum): ‘Not the most beautiful room!’
AT1: ‘It's never properly cleaned.’
Deputy Head (Staff): ‘Pottery is messy, but the shelves aren't aesthetically arranged.’
AT1: ‘Agreed: stacking; looks horrible!’
Head of Department: ‘waiting to be glazed and fired.
There's a problem with the location of the shelves, near the door and vulnerable.
We need a room with a ceramic tiled floor, a central drain, so that we could hose it down.’
Director of Studies: ‘A depressing room.
Can't you improve it?’
Deputy Head (Curriculum): ‘I'll look into cleaning and maintenance.’
Head of Department: ‘Pottery equals dust.
We're probably breaking Health and Safety regulations: there should be extractor fans.
The department ‘s syllabus has not been revised for five years and perhaps is ready for a revision.
The Head of Department felt that his syllabus is not a working document, but was there as a guide to the members of his department.
However, the syllabus does provide a clear outline of the department's philosophy and aims and objectives.
The relationship between objectives and evaluation and assessment is clearly stated and is practically based.
As such it is felt that this method could be used as a model for other departmental syllabi.
Deputy Head (Curriculum): ‘The syllabus should be a working document  throughout, in the same way that it is in the section on assessment and objectives.
This is not a major criticism.’
Head of Department: ‘Internal departmental matter.
We'll discuss it and decide what to do.’
The syllabus gives indications that skills other than in painting should be developed in the teaching, but this is not the case in practice.
The Head of Department admits that his syllabus states that pupils should have experience to develop the 3D skills, but this is far from the case.
His argument is that the department cannot do this because of the numbers now being taught in Art (group sizes of up to 32), which the Head of Department stands by.
There must, however, be ongoing discussions as to how we can achieve this necessary experience.
Head of Department: ‘We'll see what we can do about this.’
The syllabus specifically states that homework…
‘Will be set once per week…
The work set will be directly related to the classwork and take each child approximately 40 minutes, although some tasks might take longer by the very nature of the work.’
It was found that this was not the case, generally homework was set only once a fortnight.
Head of Department: ‘Homework is now set once a week.
There's a problem with colour still.
It's the shabby kid who has no colours and gets two marks docked!’
Director of Studies: ‘Lack of colours reflects parents’ priorities and values rather than relative affluence.’
Director of Studies: ‘We need to start with high expectations, identify who hasn't, or can't provide colours, then offer to provide them out of School Fund.
Head of Department: ‘Be careful, one in eight are out of work!’(verified note of meeting)
The meeting then turned to considering the various recommendations, firstly those to the Art department:
An investigation to be made as to whether links can be made with the Craft and Needlecraft departments.
Deputy Head (Staff): ‘Liaison demands effort.
Can be cost-effective, but only when there's a genuine rationale and it doesn't have to be bureaucratic.’
To look at the place of ‘Design’ in the Art department.
Head of Department: ‘We'll have a look at this.’
The department to examine their homework policy and look at what is being set to all pupils but especially the examination candidates.
An explanation needs to be made to these pupils as to the benefits of providing their own paints and thereby gaining more experience with a wider range of materials.
A careful analysis needs to be made of the work of the Sixth Form Art students, ‘O’ and ‘A’Level, and methods considered to improve this course.
Head of Department: ‘I understand what's implied: more homework, a continuation of Creative Art throughout.’
Deputy Head (Staff): ‘Someone in the department ought to mark ‘O’ Level Art, in order to become familiar with standards.
Head of Department: ‘Difficult to get in.
Art teachers three a penny!’
A member of the department should attend the Active Tutorial Work course next Summer term which promotes the notion of the teacher as an ‘enabler and resource’.
Deputy Head (Staff): ‘Fine.
I'll arrange it.’
The department could look at the value of making use of the local environment as a resource for its teaching.
That the members of the department consider the value of using all the resources of the department, when, where and if necessary, for example, use of slides with groups lower down the school.
Head of Department: ‘Need to discuss these within the department.
There's a problem over blackout.’
(verified note of meeting)
They then considered the recommendations to the Senior Management Team contained in the report:
The Deputy Head (Staff) to draft individual reports to members of the department as a result of their interviews with him and the Headmaster.
Deputy Head (Staff): ‘Working on this.’
To investigate ways ln which certain improvements can be made for storage space and blackout.
Deputy Head (Curriculum): ‘Working on this.’
To discuss with the Caretaker the problems with the Pottery Hut and make improvements if possible.
Deputy Head (Curriculum): ‘Deputy Head (Administration) will try again on this.’
To meet with the department to discuss how objectives can be passed on to pupils.
Deputy Head (Curriculum): ‘We'll discuss this again after the department has had time to consider it.’
To investigate the movement of the department into adjoining areas.
The final comment in the report was attributable to the Head:
It seems to the Senior Management Team that the personal objectives of individual members of the department and institutional and departmental objectives are very largely congruent and that our recommendations are a way of achieving, we hope, both.
Retrospective Views
About a month after the presentation of the final report, I met the members of the Art department to discuss their retrospective feelings about the review.
They were noticeably more outspoken than at the outset.
The Head of Department said that they had already started to implement the recommendations to them.
Some scepticism was expressed, however, about the extent to which the recommendations in the report addressed to the Senior Management Team would be implemented:
AT1: ‘Where's the money coming from to do all the things recommended in the report?
Will the Senior Management Team become so preoccupied with other departments that they will forget all about us?’(verified note of meeting)
The Head of Department said that he was concerned that the recommendations for action by the Senior Management Team would be overlooked as a result of their going on to review the Maths department, ‘which has 15 teachers’.
At a personal level, AT2 said that she now found the Head's attitude much pleasanter when she met him round the school.
Indeed, it seemed to her that he now went out of his way to be pleasant and, on her part, she was ‘no longer afraid of him’.
AT1 said that she did not notice any difference in this regard but was nevertheless glad of the opportunity which the review had afforded to meet the Head personally, as she had not done so since her interview on appointment some years previously.
Both AT2 and AT3 thought that the Senior Management Team had been pleasantly surprised at what the review had revealed: that all the pupils liked Art and that classroom organisation was so efficient.
Consequent Changes
A year was allowed to elapse to allow time for the recommendations made in the report to be put into effect.
In February 1983 I again met the Head of the Art Department.
In retrospect he said that he felt that the review had been a good thing for the department.
The report had been generally very favourable and his and his colleagues' morale had improved as a direct consequence.
Two of the four teachers had been promoted: himself to Scale 4 and AT2 to Scale 2.
The appearance of AT1's room was  noticeably improved (evidence in his view of her improved morale).
We went through the recommendations from the report one by one.
Those addressed to the Art department had all been effected.
Visibly evident was the profusion of 3D work.
I then asked him to comment on the extent to which recommendations to the Senior Management Team contained in the report appeared to have been implemented.
The Deputy Head (Staff) to draft individual reports to members of the department as a result of their interview with him and the Headmaster.
Head of Department: ‘Not done (because the Deputy Head (Staff) left?).’
A member of the department should attend the Active Tutorial Work course next Summer Term which promotes the notion of the teacher as an enabler or resource.
Head of Department: ‘No.’
To investigate ways in which certain improvements can be made for storage space and blackout.
Head of Department: ‘Nothing done.
Whose responsibility is this?
I quote it to the Head whenever suitable occasions arise.
We did however receive a £400 special grant from the Art Inspector, which I imagine is connected with the review…bought two sewing machines (swing needle) for textile work, creative embroidery, and sewing costumes for giant puppets.’
To discuss with the Caretaker the problems of the Pottery Hut and make improvements if possible.
Head of Department: ‘No, the roof still leaks, but the heating has been improved.’
To meet with the department to discuss with them how objectives can be passed on to the pupils.
Head of Department: ‘No, probably because the Deputy Head (Staff) left.’
To investigate the movement of the department into adjoining areas.
Head of Department: ‘No, occasionally I mention it to the Head: problems — no capital.
It's possible that the change of the school to the Sixth Form Centre for the area may facilitate this.’
(verified note of meeting)
Evaluation of the Review
The review may be evaluated generally by how effectively and efficiently it met the objectives set out in Document 1, on the basis of which it had been negotiated.
It may also be evaluated more specifically in terms of: how effectively and efficiently it produced evidence about the state of Art teaching in the school; how reliable and valid that evidence was; how validly that evidence was interpreted in arriving at the conclusions embodied in the final report; and the extent to which the review process was an effective means of motivating those involved to act upon its conclusions.
The review of the Art department met Objectives 1, 3, 4 and 7 (Document 1) in the latter and in the spirit for the pupils, with the exception of the questionable assumption that the interests of the majority were best served by what best served the interests of pupils following ‘O’ and ‘A’Level courses:
Director of Studies: ‘Setting high standards for the best will pull the others along.’
(verified note of meeting, op. cit.)
With regard to the objectives which related to the teachers (5 and 6), the assistant teachers were perhaps better served than their Head of Department, despite his promotion.
His aspirations for career development lie beyond the confines of Art teaching.
The meetings between the Head of Department and the members of the Senior Management Team, and the classroom visits produced reliable evidence about several matters of concern, in particular discrepancies between the curriculum-on-offer in Art, as set out in the syllabus, and the curriculum-in-action.
The validity of this evidence is less certain.
Scrutiny of the relevant case records reveals a number of questionable assumptions on the part of the Senior Management Team about the nature of Art teaching and a definite bias of concern towards the perceived needs of the more able pupils and towards performance in public examinations, particularly GCE ‘O’ and ‘A’Level: a minority concern.
Little serious attempt to evaluate the Art curriculum for the majority of pupils is evident in the case records, except by extension from the perceived needs of the more able.
For the assistant teachers, the lesson visits were of crucial importance.
Whereas for the Head of Department, evidence concerning professional competence was additionally available from two other sources (examination results, curriculum management), for them the lesson visits constituted the only source of ‘objective’ evidence.
They had access to the schedule to be used (Document 2) and thus were in a position to know what criteria would be used to observe and evaluate them.
However, most of the criteria required the observers to make subjective judgments, for example:
Did the timing of the lesson provide a suitable division?
Was the lesson well prepared?
Was the work suitable for the ability of the group?
Was the lesson imaginative? etc.
(Document 2, my italics)
The lesson observation proforma ends with an open-ended section, ‘Summary of apparent strengths and weaknesses’.
The subjectivity of the whole procedure and particularly of this last section was alleviated to some extent by each teacher being observed by more than one member of the Senior Management Team and this aspect of the review may be deemed to be reasonably reliable.
Its validity can only be judged in conjunction with Senior Management Team assumptions about the nature of Art teaching evident elsewhere in the review.
The appraisal of the assistant teachers was based on these classroom observations and what emerged in their interviews and on any preconceptions on the part of the Senior Management Team.
The relative importance of these components is difficult to estimate.
Careful perusal of the records of the interviews suggests that, as with the meetings with the Head of Department, preconceptions were very influential.
Several of the questions in Document 3 seemed to imply that ‘professional development’ included aspects and aspirations outside the department, whereas the objectives of the departmental review set out in Document 1 generally seem to be restricted to development within the department.
However, the general managerial principle which the appraisal interviews seemed aimed to serve was the harmonizing of teachers' professional development with the institutional needs of the school.
During the interviews it became clear that the latter had primacy.
The Head was constantly on the alert for the emergence of what he termed ‘congruence’.
This congruence took a somewhat arbitrary and procrustean form and led to conflicts of interest, particularly in the case of the Head of the Art Department.
It is noteworthy that the teachers in the Art department acted promptly upon most of the recommendations addressed to them.
Thus much three-dimensional work was evident in the Art rooms a year later, homework had been given greater emphasis, a tentative start had been made to interdepartmental links with Craft and Needlecraft and the ‘O’ and ‘A’Level courses were being revised.
In marked contrast with this ready compliance, virtually none of the recommendations for action to be taken by members of the Senior Management Team had borne fruit a year later.
Individual reports to the Art teachers based on their appraisals had not been drafted, the problems of storage space, blackout, and the inadequate cleaning of the Pottery Hut remained unresolved, and the hoped-for move to adjacent rooms had not occurred.
Even the modest recommendation that a member of the department should go on the Active Tutorial course had not been acted upon.
The Head of the Art Department supposed that  the promotion of the Deputy Head (Staff) to a Headship in another LEA might excuse some of this inaction.
However, some six months had elapsed between the presentation of the report and his departure: time enough to have acted.
In the light of his comments on the value of this aspect of the review (para 2.3), not to have dealt with the professional reports on the individual teachers might be seen as a serious breach of faith.
Closer consideration of the other recommendations to the Senior Management Team suggests that they imply substantial resources, probably beyond the sanction of the Senior Management Team.
Perhaps the one exception to this concerns the unsatisfactory cleaning of the Pottery Hut.
Overall, the review may be judged to have been effective in that it produced valid and reliable evidence of how things were in the Art department, on the basis of which prescriptions for institutional changes might be made, and it provided the necessary motivation for those changes of the most direct importance to the pupils to be acted upon.
That some of the recommendations were for actions which were beyond the means of the school does not deny the effectiveness of the review procedure.
Views differed as to whether the review procedure was also an efficient means of arriving at prescriptions for changes and motivating their implementation.
The Director of Studies expressed strong misgivings over the amount of his time (he claimed that it has ‘cost’ him 32 periods) which the review of this small department had taken.
The Head of Department, however, said that he thought that the effort had been worthwhile and that he could not imagine any other means as effective.
Finally, a footnote on methodology.
The process which I adopted for validating my accounts of the various meetings I attended, may have undermined my stance as a non-participant.
The notes which I kept, and sent systematically for verification to those involved, amounted to a form of very detailed minutes.
Remarks made by the Senior Management Team about the value of these ‘minutes’ in the absence of their own, points to the possibility that I may have slightly biased the proceedings by asserting my interpretation of events.
8 The Solihull Survey
Glenn Turner and Philip Clift
Introduction
Solihull is one of the forty or more LEAs which, over the past seven years or so, have developed schemes for school self-evaluation (SSE).
A booklet for secondary schools (Solihull, 1979) was published in 1979, and one for primary schools (Solihull, 1980) the following year.
A limited number of these booklets was distributed free to each school in the borough.
Details of the secondary booklet and of how it is intended to be used are given in Chapter 4, which presents case studies of two secondary schools making use of it.
In order to ascertain how far conclusions drawn from the case studies concerning teachers' perceptions of their LEA's scheme for SSE might be applicable generally throughout the LEA, it was decided to survey a representative sample of Solihull teachers.
Secondary teachers only were included, since the case studies about which the survey seeks to generalize were of secondary schools.
The Survey: Sample and Questionnaire
We designed a questionnaire in two parts.
Part one was concerned with the Solihull booklet specifically and part two with school self-evaluation generally.
Because the case studies had indicated that institutional and contextual factors are significant in shaping perceptions of SSE, we asked teachers to tell us:
their status in the school;
their years in teaching;
the subject(s) they teach.
We also asked them to name their school and to name themselves so that follow-up interviews might be arranged and reminders sent to non-respondents, as necessary.
It was noted in the covering letter which accompanied each questionnaire that the information given by respondents would be treated as confidential.
Concerns were expressed, nevertheless, notably by one of the teacher unions, about how the information would be used.
These were allayed by sending a formal letter to all teachers in the sample stating categorically that no information from which it would be possible to identify individuals would be published.
We had had intimations from the case studies that, despite its fame nationally within the ‘school self-evaluation movement’, the booklet was not universally well known amongst the LEA's teaching force.
The questionnaire was therefore designed in such a way that teachers who had not seen the Solihull booklet would not complete part one.
The problem arose of how best to characterize the booklet for teachers.
Since only a limited number of booklets had been issued to each school, it seemed possible that many teachers might well have seen and used it, a section at a time, in the form of photocopied sheets.
After trials in the pilot schools (see below) the following form of identification was adopted in the first question in part one:
1
Solihull has published and distributed a booklet entitled Evaluating the School: A Guide for Secondary Schools in the Metropolitan Borough of Solihull.
This question went on to ask respondents whether they had seen the booklet, or any part of it.
Those who claimed to have seen it were then asked what they could recall of its contents, and to what uses it had been put.
A 15 item Likert-type attitude scale followed, developed from comments made by teachers during case study interviews.
It included statements about: the booklet overall, as an evaluative instrument; the ease and flexibility with which the booklet might be used; how effectively the booklet probes existing practice and prompts new developments.
Finally in part one we asked about actions taken as a consequence of the use of the booklet and the overall acceptability of a scheme of this kind.
Part two of the questionnaire consisted mainly of a 24 item Likert-type attitude scale developed from comments, also made by case study teachers, about SSE as a general notion (i.e. not linked specifically to the Solihull booklet).
It included statements comparing SSE with inspection; suggesting what aspects of school and schooling should come under scrutiny (for example, observation by teachers of one another 's classroom performance); questioning the capacity of SSE for probing institutional processes in depth, and whether it motivates change.
Scoring the Attitude Statements
Responses to the Likert-type items in the questionnaire were on a five point scale, ranging from ‘strongly agree’, to ‘strongly disagree’, with ‘uncertain' as the  mid-point.
We scored ‘strongly agree’ as 5 for statements which expressed positive attitudes towards the Solihull booklet and towards SSE generally and as 1 for statements which expressed negative attitudes.
‘Strongly disagree’ was scored vice-versa.
‘Uncertain', the neutral mid-point, was scored as 3 in either instance.
The following example is offered to illustrate the scoring procedure:
The responses to these statements were subsequently factor analyzed to reveal teachers’ latent attitudes towards the Solihull booklet and towards SSE.
Factor analysis is a statistical technique for data clarification and reduction.
Used as in this instance, it helps one to ‘see the wood for the trees’.
It is assumed that the statements made by a small number of teachers during the case study interviews each refer to one or more underlying attitudes, towards the Solihull scheme or towards SSE as a general notion.
In the questionnaire, a large number of teachers are asked how far they agree or disagree with the statements.
The pattern of this agreement and disagreement is what indicates the underlying attitudes.
Factor analysis is the statistical process then used to discover the pattern.
From these factors, two types of attitude scores were then derived: factor scores and mean attitude scale scores.
The mean attitude scale scores were used to present the attitudes of the Solihull secondary school teachers overall and the factor scores were used in a series of analyses of variance (ANOVA) to test the significance of differences between the attitudes of the various subgroups, towards the Solihull scheme and towards SSE generally.
(For a more detailed technical account of these factor analytic and other statistical procedures used, see Turner and Clift, 1985.)
Finally we asked respondents whether they individually, their department, or their school had undertaken any self-evaluation exercise not based on the LEA scheme, and whether their school had a staff-appraisal scheme.
They were invited to add any further comments on SSE generally.
A draft questionnaire as described was assembled and piloted in the summer term of 1983 with 50 per cent of the teachers in two secondary schools.
These schools were chosen on the advice of the Chief Inspector to represent schools which  had made use of the booklet and schools which had not.
Teachers were invited to comment on the draft questionnaire.
Thirty-one teachers responded.
From their responses, slight alterations to some of the questions were made and the response categories were refined.
Since the modifications were only slight, data from the piloting stage were included in the final analysis.
There are 18 secondary schools in Solihull.
Two of these had earlier been the subject of the intensive case studies (see Chapter 4); two had been involved in piloting the questionnaire and the head of another declined to take part in the survey on the grounds that he was just then attempting to introduce a scheme of SSE of his own devising.
Thirteen schools were thus included in the survey.
A 50 per cent sample of teachers was drawn from these schools by reference to their staff lists, selecting alternate names, the total in the sample, including the pilot schools, being 408.
Copies of the questionnaire and covering letter were sent to teachers individually.
Initially the response was sparse, but following the sending of reminder letters, by the end of 1983 (the ‘closing date’), just over a 50 per cent response rate was reached.
This rate differed from school to school, ranging from 5 per cent to 80 per cent.
With so low a response rate, two questions arose concerning the representativeness of the data: whether any particular subgroup of teachers, for example, deputy heads, heads of departments, assistant teachers, were over-represented; and whether the non-respondents as a subgroup held views about SSE which systematically differed from those of the respondents.
With regard to the possibility of the former, information obtained from the LEA allowed us to establish that the proportion of the different categories of teachers responding corresponded closely with their prevalence in the population of Solihull secondary teachers as a whole.
In order to investigate the latter, five schools were chosen at random and from these a random sample of non-respondents (N = 11) was asked to complete the questionnaire orally.
None refused.
The pattern of their answers was then compared with that of the respondents as a whole.
No significant difference was found, suggesting that with due caution, the views on SSE expressed by the respondents might legitimately be extrapolated to Solihull secondary teachers generally and the oral responses were added to those of the rest of the sample for analysis.
Presentation of the Results
For each factor, the results of the survey are presented firstly as they apply to Solihull secondary teachers as a whole.
Contrasts in the attitudes of the following subgroups are then presented in cases where the differences are of sufficient magnitude to be statistically significant:
teachers' status (for example, deputy heads, heads of department, scale 1 teachers);
length of teaching experience (1 to 5 years, 6 to 15 years, 16 years and over);
subject taught (grouped under three broad headings: Humanities; Maths and Science; Craft, Design and Technology);
by whether teachers have actually used the Solihull booklet;
how well teachers can recall the Solihull booklet;
whether teachers have used the Solihull booklet for INSET purposes;
whether teachers associate subsequent change in school with use of the booklet;
the geographical location of their school (‘north' and ‘south’).
Results: The Solihull Booklet
By the end of 1983 (i.e. four years after its publication), less than half of the Solihull secondary school teachers claimed to have actually seen the Solihull booklet.
Less than a quarter claimed to have read all of it or to remember the topics it dealt with.
Only around 10 per cent claimed to recall the contents well and even fewer had made use of the response sheets provided on it.
It is with the perceptions of those teachers who claimed to have seen the booklet that this part is concerned.
The sections of the booklet which seem most commonly to have been used concerned: the pastoral system; school ‘climate’ and discipline; pupil assessment and record keeping; and the section on evaluating a lesson.
Few teachers could remember what year they had undertaken any of the evaluation exercises, but the information from those who could suggests that the booklet had been used mostly by schools in 1980 and 1981.
Just over half of the teachers claiming to have seen the booklet said they had used it for  in-service training in their school.
However, less than a third claimed that any changes had resulted from its use, despite the positive attitudes generally expressed towards its general utility (see below).
A space had been provided in the questionnaire for teachers to describe what changes had occurred, but few noted any.
Some teachers pointed out that they could not remember whether any changes had resulted, whilst others mentioned minor changes such as‘tightening up’ in certain areas, greater awareness of scale post responsibilities, clearer definition of roles, and an improvement in communication processes.
Such information hardly gives the impression that the booklet has had much overall impact on the secondary schools in the borough.
Nevertheless, despite having thus declared its relative impotence, more than three-quarters of the teachers who had seen the booklet said that they were in favour of self-evaluation schemes of this kind.
Only a limited number of the booklets were issued to schools.
We hypothesized that heads would have tended to draw them to the attention of their more senior colleagues in the first instance and that the booklets might not subsequently have been passed on to the ‘rank and file’.
We therefore divided respondents into four categories:
deputy heads, heads of upper and lower school, heads of faculties, and scale 4  post-holders ;
heads of departments, heads of years, scale 3  post-holders ;
second in departments, scale 2  post-holders ;
form tutors, scale 1 teachers.
We then cross-tabulated status as thus categorized against whether or not teachers had seen the booklet and found our assumption to be correct.
About three-quarters of the most senior teachers had seen at least part of the booklet, whereas only 15 per cent of the most junior had, with 60 per cent and 40 per cent for the upper and lower middle status categories respectively.
Fewer of course had seen all of it: 71 per cent, 49 per cent , 19 per cent and 5 per cent , respectively.
Attitudes towards the Solihull Booklet
Five factors, attitudes towards the general utility, flexibility and effectiveness, frankness and balance, efficiency and threat of the Solihull scheme emerged from the factor analyses of statements about the Solihull booklet.
General Utility
Solihull secondary school teachers as a whole are moderately positive in their attitude towards the general utility of the booklet for SSE.
They believe that it is a good scheme as a whole, composed of clear and straightforward unambiguous statements; that it is professionally stimulating and effective at evaluating institutional practices and motivating institutional change.
Having actually used the booklet reinforces this positive attitude.
Teachers who recall the booklet well are more positive about its general utility than those who do not; teachers reporting actual changes following its use are also more positive in their attitude than those who do not.
Flexibility and Effectiveness
Whilst still positive, Solihull secondary school teachers are somewhat less so with regard to the flexibility and effectiveness of the booklet than with its general  utility.
On balance, they believe it to be a flexible enough approach to SSE to be applicable to different school circumstances, to be institutionally penetrating and to be capable of bringing about changes in schools using it.
Again, how well teachers can recall the booklet is significantly associated with positive attitudes towards its flexibility and effectiveness as a tool for SSE.
Considering the nature of this attitude factor, with its stress on effectiveness it is perhaps surprising that reported changes in schools are not differentially associated with it.
Frankness and Balance
Attitudes concerning the frankness and balance in evaluation likely to result from the use of the scheme were generally slightly negative.
Thus in general, Solihull secondary teachers believe that staff would be more honest if names were kept off the response sheets; that the scheme focuses on weaknesses rather than strengths and that generalizing about schools as a whole is difficult.
However, this generally slightly negative attitude embraces widely divergent views amongst teachers as categorized by their length of service.
Those with the least service (1 to 5 years) are strongly positive concerning the frankness and balance of SSE using the booklet.
Those with the most service (15 plus years) are strongly negative, and the middle group (6 to 15 years) are about neutral.
Efficiency
In general, Solihull secondary school teachers also have a slightly negative attitude towards the efficiency of SSE using the booklet, believing that it leads to rationalization rather than criticism and as a method of SSE is too time-consuming.
The case studies (Chapter 4), on the basis of which the questionnaire had been developed, had contrasted a school in the more prosperous southern half of the borough with one in the north, an area consisting largely of council estates with relatively high levels of unemployment.
Teachers in the northern school openly admitted the social problems of their pupils and their consequent educational difficulties, whereas teachers in the southern school expressed much satisfaction with their particular status quo.
On the basis of these expressed views we hypothesized that attitudes towards the use of the booklet, with the attendant possibility of consequent change, would generally be more favourable in the northern than in the southern schools.
This assumption turned out to be correct with regard to teachers' attitudes towards the efficiency of the scheme, about which teachers in the northern schools are much more positive.
Finally, Solihull teachers generally do not consider that the use of the scheme constitutes any threat to them, believing it to be capable of showing cause for praise as well as blame.
There was no significant differentiation amongst teachers with regard to the attitudes towards the booklet measured by this factor.
Summary: The Solihull Booklet
Less than half of the teachers in secondary schools in Solihull are in any degree familiar with their authority's booklet for SSE and only one-tenth claim to know it well.
Only about one quarter claim that it has been used for INSET purposes in their schools and even fewer claim that its use has resulted in any changes.
Familiarity is associated with teachers' status: the more senior they are, the more familiar.
Factor analysis of statements in the questionnaire derived from two earlier case studies indicates that teachers' attitudes towards the booklet may be classified under five headings: towards its general utility about which they were moderately positive; its flexibility and effectiveness, about which they were still positive but slightly less so; the frankness and balance of the SSE likely to result from its use about which they were generally slightly negative.
They were somewhat more negative in respect of its efficiency, generally believing that its use leads to rationalization rather than criticism and that its use is too time-consuming.
Finally they do not generally consider that its use constitutes any threat to them.
The less teaching experience they have had, the more positive teachers are about frankness and balance.
To have used the booklet is associated with more positive attitudes towards its general utility; teachers who recall it well hold more positive attitudes towards its general utility and flexibility and effectiveness than those who have not; as might be expected, teachers who associate changes in school with the use of the booklet hold more positive attitudes towards its general utility than those who do not; teachers in schools in the less prosperous northern part of the borough are less negative with respect to its efficiency.
Neither teachers' status in school, the subject they teach, nor the use made of the booklet for INSET purposes are associated with differential attitudes towards the Solihull booklet.
Results: School Self-Evaluation Generally
This part deals with the attitudes of Solihull secondary school teachers towards SSE as a general notion, rather than as one linked specifically to the Solihull booklet.
Five factors, attitudes towards the collegiality and openness, professionality , efficiency and threat, professional development and formality of SSE, emerged from the factor analyses.
Collegiality and Openness
Solihull secondary school teachers generally have a collegial and open attitude towards SSE.
They believe that SSE should include mutual lesson observation; that SSE should be conducted in a fraternal, egalitarian and self-critical spirit.
It might be expected that the main means by which teachers would become acquainted with the concept of SSE would be through their own LEA scheme.
We therefore hypothesized that there would be significant differences between the attitudes towards SSE generally of teachers who had, and who had not, seen the Solihull booklet.
This proved to be the case.
Significant differences in teachers' attitudes towards the collegiality and openness of SSE are associated with whether they have seen the Solihull booklet, how well they can recall it, and whether changes in schools occurred as a consequence of its use.
To have seen it is associated with a more positive attitude towards SSE, not to have seen it with a neutral attitude; to recall it well is associated with an even more positive attitude towards SSE, not to recall it well with only a mildly positive attitude; to associate changes with its use with a very positive attitude; not to do so with only a mildly positive attitude.
 Professionality 
In general, Solihull teachers have a strongly positive attitude towards the  professionality of SSE.
The attitudes measured by this factor represent the ideals of the school self-evaluation movement, in which SSE is seen as professionally creative and stimulating, effective as a means of promoting institutional change and in close accord with a sense of individual professional responsibility.
The same pattern of attitude differentiation is evident with regard to the  professionality of SSE as was evident for its collegiality and openness.
Again familiarity with the Solihull booklet, to have used it, and to report changes in school consequent upon its use are all associated with significantly more positive attitudes.
Efficiency and Threat
Overall, Solihull teachers are neutral concerning the efficiency of SSE as a means of bringing about changes in school and its potential as a professional threat to them.
Thus they are doubtful as to whether or not SSE is likely to be superficial; about whether it is too time-consuming; about the extent to which it would reveal matters which could threaten professional reputations or harm relationships and whether any evidence produced as a result of SSE would be sufficiently objective.
As with collegiality and openness and  professionality , teachers' attitudes towards the efficiency of SSE and the threat it poses are significantly differentiated by how well they recall the Solihull booklet.
Those who recall it well are positive, those who do not are negative, believing SSE to be inefficient and professionally threatening.
Teachers' status and length of teaching experience are also associated with sharp differences in the attitudes represented by this factor.
The most junior in status are positive; those in ‘middle management’(Scale 2 and 3) are the most negative; the most senior are neutral.
The least experienced are positive, the most experienced negative, and those in between are neutral.
Professional Development
In general Solihull secondary teachers have a neutral attitude towards professional development in connection with SSE.
They are uncertain as to whether they should make their involvement in SSE conditional upon the possibility of promotion, uncertain about whether they need more information and debate about SSE, uncertain about whether SSE should be made compulsory and whether it is preferable to inspection.
Attitudes towards professional development are also differentiated according to length of teaching experience.
The pattern differs from that associated with efficiency and threat: the least experienced teachers are more or less neutral, the most experienced are negative, feeling that there should be personal professional benefit (i.e., promotion) in return for involvement in SSE; that more information and debate are needed about it and that it should not be made compulsory.
Those in between(i.e., 6 to 15 years service), who are perhaps at the point in their careers when promotion in teaching is most keenly sought, are positive, expressing willingness to take part in SSE irrespective of direct personal benefit and considering that SSE should be made compulsory in school.
Formality
Solihull secondary school teachers tend generally to favour formality in SSE.
Thus they consider that SSE should include a written report; that teachers are not likely to be reluctant to take part in SSE if a written report plays a part in the scheme.
There is no significant differentiation amongst Solihull teachers with regard to the attitude represented by this factor.
Summary: School Self-Evaluation Generally
This part of the survey deals with teachers' attitudes towards SSE generally, and is not therefore restricted in its application only to that minority of Solihull secondary teachers who have actually seen the booklet.
Factor analysis of statements in the questionnaire derived from the earlier case study indicates that attitudes towards SSE may be classified under five headings: collegiality and openness, professionality (which seems to reflect the ideals of the school self-evaluation movement) and formality about which Solihull secondary teachers have firmly positive attitudes, and efficiency and threat and professional development about which they are neutral.
The Solihull booklet seems to have had a powerfully benign effect on the attitudes towards SSE of Solihull secondary teachers in general.
Those who have seen the booklet are more positive about the collegiality and openness and  professionality of SSE than those who have not; those who have used it are much more positive about the  professionality of SSE than those who have not; those who recall it well are much more positive about the collegiality and openness and the efficiency and (non) threat of SSE than those who do not; those who report changes in schools following its use are much more positive about the collegiality and openness and the  professionality of SSE.
It should be recalled, however, that earlier it was noted that the changes were few and of a relatively trivial nature, and in the case studies it was reported that changes following the use of the booklet tended to be  shortlived.
Nevertheless, the positive attitudes towards SSE which are associated with teachers' contact with the booklet augur well for its continued use for review purposes by Solihull schools.
The nature of the attitudes suggests a willingness on the part of many Solihull secondary teachers to undertake institutional self-reviews and to consider self-generated institutional improvements.
That it tends to be the lower status, less experienced teachers whose attitudes are most positive and the longest serving, institutionally most powerful teachers who are the most negative may explain why this willingness apparently bears so little fruit.
Length of service is also significantly associated with attitudes towards the efficiency and threat of SSE and towards professional development.
Teachers' status in school is also significantly associated with efficiency and threat.
In both cases it is again the least experienced, lower status teachers who have the most positive attitudes.
None of the other categorizations of teachers (by location of school (‘north' and ‘south’); by subject(s) taught; by use of the booklet for INSET) are associated with significant differentiation of teachers' attitudes towards SSE.
Other Information
In addition to attempting to assess attitudes, in this part of the questionnaire we also sought information about routine evaluation.
First, we asked if teachers had produced a system of their own for evaluating their teaching.
Roughly half of Solihull teachers claim that they have, and not surprisingly a greater proportion of these are the most senior ones.
Secondly we asked, ‘does your school or department have a staff appraisal scheme?’
Only one in five teachers believe that they have and much the greater proportion of these are scale 3 teachers and above.
Finally we asked teachers if their school or department had undertaken any kind of SSE exercise without using the Solihull booklet.
About one quarter of Solihull teachers say they have, again mostly those in the more senior positions.
Given that these questions ask for purely factual information about the schools in which they work, it seems that the more junior teachers in many cases simply do not know about what their school is doing about such matters.
This accords with the way in which the Solihull booklet is differentially familiar to teachers of different status positions.
In our follow-up work we asked about other kinds of self-evaluation and other evaluation schemes.
It seems that in Solihull schools recently, a considerable amount of thinking has gone into developing schemes for teacher-appraisal: perhaps SSE in the form taken by the Solihull booklet is gradually giving way to more personally focused types of staff appraisal.
Teachers' Overall Comments
Although this questionnaire was based upon insights from case studies of self-evaluation in Solihull secondary schools, it was of course inevitable that some Solihull teachers might not consider that it asked what were, for them, the most pertinent questions.
To allow for this we provided several opportunities in the questionnaire for teachers to make additional individual observations.
In particular, at the very end of the questionnaire we invited general comments about SSE and one-third of the teachers who responded availed themselves of this opportunity.
We also carried out a number of follow-up interviews with respondents and non-respondents in order to explore some issues further.
In many cases the additional information simply added weight to what has already been dealt with in the attitude scales.
Some points were raised repeatedly, the most significant perhaps being the lack of time in school in which to undertake any formal evaluation.
Some teachers did say that time ought to be made for SSE but many raised doubts about whether such time would be well spent.
As one teacher said, ‘I am still to be convinced whether the energy and time required to  do effective evaluation would balance the increased efficiency in teaching which might follow.’
Other teachers were very sceptical about SSE, given the trend towards economies in education, both nationally and in Solihull.
A quotation from one teacher serves to illustrate this attitude: ‘Nowadays when education is under attack, and survival is the watchword, there is just not enough time or willpower for such peripheral activities.’
Discussion and Conclusions
The rationale for school self-evaluation is that the most effective means of improving the quality of the education provided by schools is to give them the responsibility for reviewing their own performance and for carrying out any reforms which seem necessary in consequence.
The publication by an LEA of a scheme such as Solihull's is implicitly intended to signal this newly emphasized responsibility to teachers, to persuade them to accept it and to provide them with an agreed agenda for the review.
Its value must therefore be judged by how well generally it achieves these intentions.
This survey points to two major weaknesses in the Solihull voluntary scheme.
The first is of familiarity.
Three years after its publication, less than half of Solihull's secondary school teachers claim to have seen the booklet, and a much smaller proportion claim to have read it all, or to recall it at all well.
Thus for the majority, it has neither communicated their newly emphasized professional responsibility, nor has it provided an agenda for school improvement.
Despite its general popularity amongst teachers in schools where the Solihull booklet had been used, the evidence from the survey is that little or nothing changed in consequence.
It is a reasonable assumption that improvements can be made even to the best of schools.
The second failing is thus of effectiveness, of failure to guide and motivate change.
It may well be that this is a weakness inherent in any scheme for SSE, with its characteristic assumptions of egalitarianism and fraternity.
There is bound always to be a considerable vested interest in the status quo, particularly amongst the most entrenched and powerful individuals in any institution: the way things are generally suits them well enough.
The evidence from this survey tends to support this view.
The most consistently positive attitudes, towards the booklet and towards SSE in general, are held by the most junior teachers.
It may be that, for them, the attraction of SSE in general and of this scheme in particular lies in the opportunity it appears to offer for them to take part in decisions about school policy.
Its non-threatening nature, being focused at an institutional rather than a personal level, is a further attraction.
Institutional review and participation in policy decisions which are then  not acted upon are, however, largely sterile occupations and the time consumed by what, on the evidence of this survey is an ineffective process is wholly unjustifiable.
The evidence provided by this survey suggests that to offer an external agenda for reform, such as the Solihull booklet, in a spirit of laissez faire is doubly insufficient.
As well as ensuring its widest possible dissemination, external means are also needed to encourage and support its use and to support the reforms its use suggests.
9 The Oxfordshire Survey
Philip Clift and Glenn Turner
Introduction
In Chapters 2 and 3 of this book, case studies of the response of an Oxfordshire primary and secondary school to the Oxfordshire scheme for school self-evaluation (SSE) are presented.
It is not, however, possible to draw valid conclusions about the way in which the scheme works generally in the authority's schools solely on the basis of just two case studies.
In the winter of 1984, therefore, we carried out a survey of a representative sample of Oxfordshire teachers in primary, middle and secondary schools.
By including in the survey questionnaire certain of the items from the Solihull survey (see Chapter 8) concerning school self-evaluation as a general notion (i.e. not associated with a specific scheme), we were also able to contrast the attitudes towards SSE of the teachers in the two LEAs, the one operating a voluntary scheme, the other a mandatory one.
The Oxfordshire scheme for school self-evaluation is described in Chapter 2.
The Questionnaire
In order to decide what to include in the questionnaire we drew first of all on issues which had emerged in the two case studies.
In addition, visits were made to a number of schools, both primary and secondary, which had already submitted reports, in order to interview staff about their experiences in connection with the scheme.
A questionnaire was then drafted and sent to a random sample of headteachers for their and their staff's comments.
At this stage the LEA officer responsible for the administration of the scheme was visited to discuss what additional questions the administration might wish to ask.
This activity resulted in an eight page questionnaire arranged in two sections.
The questions in the first section concerned the Oxfordshire scheme specifically.
Those in the second section asked about teachers' general perceptions of school self-evaluation and were virtually identical to those asked earlier in Solihull (Turner and Clift, 1985).
We were thus able to compare the responses of teachers to the contrasting schemes of these two LEAs.
Section One began by asking for demographic information: gender, school, subject(s) taught, years in teaching and status in school.
Teachers were also asked to give their names so that non-respondents could be followed up.
This section went on to ask whether the respondent had had direct experience of a whole school review in accordance with the Oxfordshire scheme.
If they had not, they were told to ignore the rest of this first section and go on to complete Section Two only.
Those who had were then asked for details of their involvement in the review and the preparation of the report and about the outcomes of the whole procedure.
The issues raised thus included:
how well had they understood what was required by the review, how adequate was their guidance, how much preliminary discussion there had been and how competent they had felt to conduct a review;
how well they recalled the review activities, how involved they had been and how far outsiders to the school had been involved;
how much prior formal review activity had they been accustomed to and how threatened had they felt;
what methods had been used in the review;
how thorough the review had been, whether they considered any matters of importance had been ignored, how far it had been an effort involving the whole school;
how useful the review had been in producing proposals for institutional c change.
About the Four Yearly Report they were asked:
how much of it they had contributed to directly;
the extent to which they considered their report to be descriptive, judgmental;
the extent to which the school as a whole had felt threatened by having to submit a report to the LEA.
Respondents were than asked whether their school's report had been submitted to the LEA yet.
If it had not, they were asked to ignore the next set of questions.
If it had, they were asked:
how much feedback they had had from the recipients (the governors, the LEA panel);
how useful they had found the feedback;
what (if any) changes they considered the review and report had brought about.
They were then asked to complete a short Likert-type scale concerning their attitudes towards Oxfordshire's review and reporting process.
The items included in this scale each summarised sentiments frequently expressed by teachers during the school visits.
Finally respondents were asked:
whether they were in favour of going on to a second cycle of review and reporting and if so whether reports should deal only with a particular aspect of the school;
whether reports should be made public;
and for their opinions as to how worthwhile overall was the exercise of review and reporting.
The Sample
Initially it was intended to select a sample of 800 teachers, 400 from primary and 400 from secondary schools.
The schools from which the sample was to be drawn were those which had submitted reports, or were scheduled to do so, between the autumn of 1981 and the summer of 1985.
This was to ensure that, as far as possible, the teachers in the sample included only those who had either experienced the entire process of review, reporting and feedback or who had at least been involved in the review component.
Because we had evidence that memories of the exercise tended to fade quickly, it was decided to exclude schools which had submitted reports at the very earliest stage (autumn 1980 to summer 1981), and schools which were not due to submit reports until the last stage of the first cycle (autumn 1985 to early 1986) were also excluded because they could not be expected to have made much of a start on the process.
Forty primary and twenty secondary schools were selected at random from those thus eligible.
Their headteachers were approached early in 1984 and asked if they and their staff were willing to take part in the survey.
At this stage, at the request of the LEA, the middle schools were also included.
Only nine middle schools fell into the specified reporting period.
In order to obtain a visible sample of teachers, the heads of all nine were therefore approached.
Many schools declined to take part in the survey, however, for a variety of reasons: pressure of work, involvement in too many recent research projects and in some cases because, despite the LEA schedule, they had either not yet started on their review or had made only minimal progress.
This delay was partly due to the teachers' industrial action in the summer term of 1984.
The coincidence with union action boded ill for the survey; response rates to the questionnaire seemed likely to be very low.
We sought advice on the matter from officers of the main teacher unions and were told that, although it was not the policy of any union to place an embargo on questionnaires from bodies separate from the LEA, nevertheless attitudes and morale might at that time be such as to produce little willingness to respond.
It was decided to postpone the survey until the autumn term.
Owing to the reluctance of many heads to involve their schools in the survey, we found it difficult to reach a sample of the size intended.
Even with the inclusion of additional primary and secondary schools and of the middle schools, the total sample eventually consisted of only 716 teachers, instead of the intended 800.
The total number of schools in the final sample was 63.
Of these, 12 were secondary schools, 6 middle schools and 45 primaries.
The 716 teachers were made up of 357 from secondary schools, 100 from middle schools and 259 from primary schools.
Of these, 191 secondary teachers, 54 middle and 134 primary teachers responded, in many cases only after several reminders; a response rate of just over 52 per cent, a rate very similar to that in the earlier survey in Solihull (op. cit .).
From figures provided by the LEA, we were able to establish that the proportions of respondents on the different Burnham scale positions was similar to that in the county.
With such a low response, however, it was necessary to select some of the non-respondents in order to find out why they had not completed and returned the questionnaire, and whether their views and experiences of the Oxfordshire scheme differed significantly from those who had responded.
Consequently, early in 1985 we made a number of visits to schools in order to interview non-respondents and to request them to fill in the questionnaire orally.
This proved difficult.
Many teachers were simply not available at the time we visited and some who were approached refused to go through the questionnaire with us.
In one particular primary school four out of five non-respondents refused.
When asked why, one of them said, ‘we didn't know what it (the questionnaire) was for and why it was being done.
We have an uneasy feeling about where it's going.
There is a lack of trust between the LEA and teachers in Oxfordshire.’
In fact the nature of the survey had been very carefully explained in the letter which accompanied each copy of the questionnaire.
Some teachers said that they would have completed the questionnaire had they been asked to do so anonymously.
In most cases, however, it seemed that the questionnaire had not been returned because of pressure of work and ‘simply not getting round to it’.
It was quite a lengthy questionnaire and because it had to cater for teachers whose experiences of SSE had differed considerably, for some teachers was not easy to complete.
Many teachers, whose schools had been early in the reporting cycle, also said that they had considerable difficulty in remembering their review and its outcome or had been so little involved that they felt unable to say much about it.
Finally, some teachers did not return the questionnaire because they had not been in the school at the time of the review and felt that their knowledge of SSE as a general notion was too limited even to enable them to complete the section on general attitudes.
It took many visits to reach our self-set target of non-respondents: thirty  primary and thirty secondary teachers willing to discuss the Oxfordshire scheme and to go through the questionnaire orally with us.
From the middle schools, because of the limited size of the initial sample, thirty non-respondents would have been impossible to obtain.
We were able finally to reach six.
Our first assumption, that non-respondents would tend to be teachers who had not been involved in a review, proved to be unfounded.
A series of discriminant analyses were then run to test whether and, if so, in what ways the views of these non-respondents differed significantly from those of the respondents.
As might be expected, overall (i.e. for primary, middle, secondary teachers combined), the non-respondents were significantly more negative towards the LEA scheme.
In order of importance in discriminating between them and the respondents, they differed in their views in the following ways:
they strongly disagreed with the proposition that the review had improved staff relations;
they did not think that it had been a whole school effort;
they considered the report to have been more judgmental than descriptive;
they did not feel that they had made any substantial contribution to the report;
they did not consider that the process had led to any improvement in resources;
 they did not consider that the process had led to any improvement fin resources;
they were very dissatisfied with the amount of feedback they had had following the presentation of the report;
they did not consider that the process had led to changes of any note in the school;
they did not consider that their governors would have learned much about the school from the report;
they did not consider that there had been enough preliminary discussion in their school prior to the review.
It is interesting to note that the aspects of SSE which discriminated most strongly between respondents and non-respondents were to do specifically with the Oxfordshire scheme as it had operated in their school rather than with SSE as a general notion.
Taking teachers in the different phases separately, a similar tendency towards being negative about the Oxfordshire scheme was evident amongst the non-respondents.
The particular items in the questionnaire which discriminated secondary non-respondents most clearly from their (secondary) colleagues were:
that they felt that the exercise as a whole was definitely not worthwhile;
that it rendered schools more accountable;
that the scheme constituted a ‘threat’ to them professionally
The particular items which discriminated between primary school non-respondents and their colleagues were:
that they had had insufficient feedback;
that the LEA guidelines had been inadequate;
that the review had been insufficiently thorough;
that it had not provided them with an opportunity to confront their problems, to gain insights into how other parts of the school operated;
that it had taken up far too much time.
There were too few middle school non-respondents for a meaningful discriminant analysis.
In summary, it would appear that the non-respondents as a group differed from the respondents mainly with regard to the more negative feelings they had towards the Oxfordshire scheme.
This should be borne in mind when considering the conclusions of that part of the survey relating specifically to the scheme.
Analysis of the Data and Presentation of the Results
Responses to the single item ‘factual’ questions in the first part of the questionnaire were analysed firstly for all teachers combined.
On the basis of what the case studies had suggested, we hypothesised that perceptions of the Oxfordshire scheme would be affected by certain demographic, institutional and other matters, so we then cross-tabulated the responses to the questions by:
phase (primary, middle, secondary);
gender of teachers;
subject(s) taught;
years in teaching;
status in school (for example, Headteacher, Deputy Head, Head of Department, Head of Year, Subject Coordinator, Class teacher);
Scale post;
how far teachers felt that they had been involved in the review;
the extent to which they claimed to have felt personally threatened by the review;
how far the review had been useful in producing proposals for change;
whether teachers were in favour of producing a second report;
how worthwhile teachers claimed the exercise to be.
The results of the survey are reported firstly for all Oxfordshire teachers combined, then, where the differences are statistically significant, for different subgroups of teachers as thus defined.
Attitudes
Responses to the Likert-type attitude items in the questionnaire were on a five point scale, ranging from ‘strongly agree’, to ‘strongly disagree’, with ‘uncertain' as the mid-point.
We scored ‘strongly agree’ as 5 for statements which expressed positive attitudes towards the Oxfordshire scheme and towards SSE generally and as 1 for statements which expressed negative attitudes.
‘Strongly disagree’ was scored vice versa.
‘Uncertain', the neutral mid-point, was scored as 3 in either instance.
The responses to the attitude statements, scored as indicated above, were factor analyzed and the resulting factors rotated to an orthogonal solution (Varimax).
The factors were then interpreted by reference to statements with loadings on them of 0·30 or more.
Mean attitude scale scores for the different sub-groups of teachers, derived from the factor analyses for each phase, were then used to test whether any of the institutional and demographic matters listed above had a statistically significant effect on these attitudes.
Results Sections One: The Oxfordshire Scheme
Reactions to the Review
The proportions and percentages reported in this section apply only to teachers who have actually been involved in the preparation of a Four Yearly Report.
Despite the restriction of the survey to schools which had been scheduled at least to have made a start on the review, only  four-fifths of the teachers included actually had.
Virtually all of these had done so in their present school.
Delays brought about by the teachers’ industrial action in the summer of 1984 and normal staff turnover probably account for the remainder.
Of those who have been involved, two thirds recall the review well or very well.
The majority (76 per cent) claim to have understood what was required of them well or very well, and that the introduction of the scheme in their school had been fairly to very adequate,(78 per cent ).
A similar majority (76 per cent), however, deemed the LEA guidelines to have been only reasonably adequate.
There was evidently a lot of preliminary discussion about the scheme among staff in schools, with only 5 per cent saying that there was only little.
The degree of involvement in the reviews has generally been high, nearly half the teachers feeling very involved, a further third fairly involved, and only 5 per cent feeling not involved at all.
Prior to their preparing a Four Yearly Report, however, for the majority, formal review of this kind has been unusual: more than half claim that little or very little formal review activity took place in their school before the LEA scheme was introduced.
The threatening nature of school self-evaluation, especially in the case of mandatory LEA schemes which require schools to submit a report, is often commented upon in the literature on school self-evaluation.
Only a small proportion, however,(12 per cent) of Oxfordshire teachers say they felt personally threatened to any great extent by the requirement to undertake their review.
Four-fifths of Oxfordshire teachers feel competent to conduct their review, and only a minimal 3 per cent declare themselves not at all competent.
The issue of competence to carry out a review is critical considering that in only a quarter of all cases were outsiders much involved.
For half of Oxfordshire teachers, outsiders were not very involved and for a further quarter not involved at all.
In a review which is intended to operate at an institutional level, it is of considerable importance that it should be seen that way by those taking part.
For over half of the respondents, their review was very much a whole-school effort and for another third it was fairly so.
In fact for only 13 per cent was it not much of a whole-school effort, suggesting that mostly it did operate in the way intended.
Nearly half think that their school review was very thorough, almost another half think it was fairly so, with a mere 6 per cent thinking it not.
Significantly, given this generally positive response to the Oxfordshire scheme, it is perhaps surprising that only a fifth judge that it was very useful in producing proposals for improvements in educational practice: one of its prime purposes.
Nearly a half consider it to be fairly useful in this respect but a quarter to be not very useful, and 10 per cent not at all.
Review Methods
Over the past two decades a substantial literature on the evaluation of educational activities have emerged.
The case studies of school self-evaluation which the Open University has carried out in Oxfordshire and elsewhere suggest that teachers are for the most part ignorant of this literature and of the various research strategies, mainly derived from social science, by which valid and reliable evidence about their professional activities might be gathered and judged.
It was this ignorance which had led one of the officers of the LEA to criticize one of the earliest reports submitted as being mainly descriptive and not sufficiently ‘evaluative’(Clift, Chapter 2 in this volume).
In the questionnaire a number of strategies were listed which had been cited by the teachers interviewed during its development, together with some included at the request of the LEA.
Respondents were asked to say to what extent (if at all) each of these had been used in their own review.
A space was also provided in the questionnaire for teachers to note strategies used but not listed.
As expected from the case studies in Oxfordshire schools (Open University, 1982a; West, Chapter 3 in this volume), the most popular strategies were ‘staff  collaboration and discussion’ and ‘individual reflection or introspection’.
The claim to competence in carrying out school evaluation made by four fifths of Oxfordshire teachers should be seen in the light of these limited strategies, espoused also by four-fifths of them.
Two-thirds, however, claim also to have made much use of information routinely available and to have collected information especially for the purpose of the review.
More than half claim to have made considerable use of the LEA booklet, Starting Points in Self-Evaluation.
This was not expected from the case studies, in which the ‘pink booklet’ was seen to play no part whatsoever.
The other methods listed have been used much less.
Lesson observation has been used, but not to a great extent, by half of Oxfordshire teachers.
Staff questionnaires have also been used to a limited extent in many schools, but only a third of teachers had made considerable use of this method.
One third of teachers say that they have had the use of INSET days to conduct their review: the same proportion have undertaken assessment of pupils especially for this purpose and have kept a diary as part of the review process.
A quarter of all Oxfordshire teachers claim to have developed and used a questionnaire on pupils.
Only 14 per cent of teachers wrote anything in the section provided for adding strategies used, but not already listed.
In almost all cases such additions were simply variations on those already provided.
Others made comments about the listed methods or provided more details.
One strategy added by teachers was reference to curriculum publications, for example, the DES document The School Curriculum (DES, 1981), in connection with their review.
This strategy is particularly interesting in that it implies an awareness of a lack in the Oxfordshire scheme, which provides neither guidance on strategies for looking at the curriculum nor criteria for judging its appropriateness and adequacy, but merely requires teachers to do it.
The Report
Two thirds of teachers claim to have contributed directly to some of their schools' report, a further quarter have contributed to most of it and 7 per cent to all of it.
Only 12 per cent had not contributed directly to any of it.
Over half of teachers found the LEA guidelines to be useful for writing the report; a quarter had found them not very useful and a fifth were unsure about this.
The content of reports seems mainly to have been descriptive, as opposed to judgmental, 90 per cent of teachers thinking their reports to be fairly, or very descriptive.
Teachers generally thought their reports to be much less judgmental than descriptive.
A third of teachers thought their report was not very judgmental, about a half thought them fairly judgmental and only 9 per cent thought them very judgmental, a further 10 per cent being unsure on this.
Perhaps as a consequence of this, few seemed to  find having to submit a report a threatening prospect, only a fifth of teachers believing that their school had felt threatened in any way.
As a direct consequence of our sampling decision (see above), most of the schools in the survey had already submitted their reports to the Education Committee.
However, about one tenth of teachers were unsure as to whether it had been submitted.
Three-quarters felt that there had been little feedback following its presentation.
The same proportion thought that the feedback had not been very useful or of no use at all.
Two-fifths of teachers were not aware of their governors' response to the report and over half were not aware of the response of the LEA.
Changes Produced by the Review and Report
Two thirds of Oxfordshire teachers consider that the scheme is useful in producing proposals for change in schools.
On the questionnaire, we exhaustively listed the kinds of changes that had occurred in the case study schools and in the schools which we had earlier visited, and asked teachers whether any of these had occurred in their school.
We also left a space for teachers to add any others which had occurred in their school.
By far the most common claim is that the review has helped to clarify aims and objectives.
Three-quarters of Oxfordshire teachers think that it has achieved this.
The next most common change, an improvement in staff communication, is claimed by only half of the teachers.
Only a quarter say that it led to  in-service training and a fifth think that it improved staff relations and improved teaching methods.
Thirteen per cent think that it improved resources; 12 per cent that it changed priorities, 9 per cent that it changed allocation of resources and 7 per cent think that it improved teacher-pupil relations.
About one quarter of Oxfordshire teachers are unsure as to whether their review and report had led directly to any change at all and with regard to whether it had improved teaching methods, over a third were unsure.
Some teachers pointed out that many of these aspects of their school were good anyway and therefore the review could hardly be expected to bring about any dramatic improvement.
Despite the lukewarm view of what the scheme achieves, there is majority support amongst teachers to continue with it: 60 per cent are in favour and 40 per cent against.
Opinions about whether the reports should be made public in future were almost evenly divided, with a tiny majority (52 per cent) against.
Less than a quarter of Oxfordshire teachers believe that any important matters have been omitted from their report.
A space was provided in the questionnaire for teachers to give details.
Some of the things typically thought to be left out were:
the shortcomings and defects which it is important to conceal!;
relationships between senior staff and the rest;
teachers' workload;
lack of time and money to facilitate change;
multicultural education;
any comment on the machinery for internal promotion.
Two thirds of teachers think that the next five-yearly report should deal with the whole school, the other third that some part or aspect only should be dealt with.
Some of the typical issues teachers wanted to give priority to were:
staff tasks and time allocated;
the subject areas omitted in the first place;
changes proposed — have they occurred, and if not, why not?;
effects of race and gender on learning;
community and industrial links;
areas where there have been changes.
Finally on the Oxfordshire scheme, we asked how worthwhile teachers had found the whole process.
A quarter consider it very worthwhile and almost another half consider it to be fairly, a quarter found it to be not very but only 5 per cent thought it was not at all worthwhile.
Differences Amongst Teachers
Phase
Teachers working in the three phases of education (primary, middle, secondary) seem to have experienced the review differently and have different attitudes towards it and towards SSE in general.
Primary school teachers recall the review best; have been most involved in the review process; have experienced more formal review activity before the scheme was set up, most preliminary discussion and individually have reflected more on their reviews.
In virtually all cases secondary teachers have experienced least activity, although they have made most use of  in-service days, staff questionnaires and pupil questionnaires to conduct the review.
Middle school teachers fall into mid-position on all items except use of staff collaboration and discussion where they experienced least change or improvement in resources consequent upon the review.
Primary schools make most use of pupil assessment in the review, most use of information routinely available and most use of the LEA booklet Starting Points in Self-Evaluation.
Secondary schools make least use of all of these, with the middle schools again occupying the middle position.
For primary schools the review is also more of a whole-school effort, is more thorough and more useful in terms of producing proposals for change than middle schools and secondary schools (the least).
Primary school teachers contribute most directly to their school reports, find the LEA guidelines for writing the report most useful and think their reports most judgmental, secondary teachers again least on all these items.
Secondary schools seem to find the prospect of having to produce a report most threatening (least, primary), with the greatest degree of uncertainty as to the stage reached in presentation: a quarter of secondary school teachers were unsure whether their school report had yet been submitted to the LEA whilst only 5 per cent of middle school teachers and no primary school teachers were unsure about this.
In terms of feedback from the report, primary teachers seem to have had most and secondary teachers least.
Primary teachers are also the most aware of the response of the governors and the LEA to the report, with secondary teachers least aware.
The pattern of changes claimed to have resulted from the scheme differs sharply between the phases.
Primary teachers seem to have found the review of most value in clarifying aims and objectives (least, secondary), improving resources (least, middle), improving staff communication and staff relations (least, secondary).
Secondary teachers find it of most use in changing priorities (least, primary).
However, a greater proportion of secondary school teachers than either of the other two phases tend to be unsure about whether any of these changes have come about as a direct result of the review and report.
Gender
There are relatively few issues to do with school self-evaluation in respect of which teachers differ significantly according to their gender.
Men teachers claim to understand what was required for the review slightly better than women, to experience slightly more preliminary discussion about the review and to take more part in staff questionnaires as a review strategy.
They also believe their reviews to be less thorough than their female colleagues and believe more strongly that reviews require more help and advice from outsiders.
Status in school, scale post and years in teaching
The pattern of differences between the views of teachers when analysed by these three criteria was almost exactly similar.
There is a significant tendency for staff in more senior positions (who tend also to have more years of service) to recall the review better, to believe the introduction of the review to have been more adequate, to be more involved in the review activities, more likely to keep a special diary as part of the review and more likely to make use of information routinely available for the review.
The more senior staff also say they feel more competent to conduct the review, have contributed to more of the report directly, found the LEA guidelines more useful, report that outsiders were more involved in their schools' review and consider their reports to be more judgmental.
Perhaps not surprisingly in view of the hierarchical nature of schools, they also are more  aware of the response of the governors and the LEA and consider that they have had more feedback to the report than their more junior colleagues.
There is a tendency also for staff in the most senior positions to believe that the review changes priorities, improves staff communication and leads to  in-service training, whereas their more junior colleagues are much less sure.
There is a tendency for more junior staff to believe that reports should be made public and that the next report should again deal with the whole school rather than some part or aspect only.
Involvement in the review process
On the basis of what is revealed in this survey, there seems to be a very good case for ensuring a maximum involvement of all the teachers in a school in the whole process.
The more involved that teachers feel, the greater is the tendency for them to understand what is required for the review, to consider the LEA guidelines to be adequate and to recall the review.
Teachers who claim to have been highly involved also claim to have used a wider variety of methods and feel more competent to conduct the review, believing it to have been more of a whole-school effort, more thorough and more useful in producing proposals for change.
Not surprisingly they have contributed to more of the report directly, found the LEA guidelines more useful for preparing the report, believe the report to be more descriptive and judgmental and think that their schools were less threatened about the review process.
Those most involved also experience most feedback and are more aware of the governors' and the LEA's response to the report.
In terms of changes, they more strongly believe that the review has changed allocation of resources, improved resources and led to  in-service training.
Finally those most involved are more likely to change their view of the scheme after the review had taken place and to consider that the review process has been more worthwhile.
Threat
As noted above, only a relatively small proportion of Oxfordshire teachers seem to feel threatened to any extent by the scheme.
It is nevertheless of interest to see from their reaction to the various issues raised in the questionnaire, just what it is about the scheme (and about SSE generally), which they feel is threatening.
This was done by cross-tabulating the answer to the question: ‘To what extent did you personally feel threatened by the review?’ against all the other items in the questionnaire.
For quite a large number of items, the relationship with the answer to this question was statistically significant.
Interestingly, threat is not significantly linked with teachers' status position in school.
It is perceived to be linked with:
the extent of teachers' understanding of what is required by the scheme and their feelings of competence to meet these requirements.
The better they understand, the more competent they feel, the less they feel threatened;
the extent to which they feel exposed by the scheme, to the governors, the LEA, to other teachers, by the requirement for a written report.
The more they feel exposed, the more they feel threatened;
the extent to which they feel that the exercise as a whole is worthwhile.
The more the threat the less worthwhile, the more time consuming and subjective;
the extent to which the report is considered to be ‘judgmental’.
The more judgmental, the more threatening.
Teachers who feel threatened by the scheme consider that it should not be compulsory and that it is not a source of motivation for them.
Change
As might be expected, there is almost total differentiation amongst teachers with respect to the potential of the scheme for inducing schools to change.
A positive view of the potential of the scheme in this is related to positive views about virtually all of the other issues raised in the questionnaire and vice versa.
A second report
As noted above, a majority of Oxfordshire teachers are in favour of going on to second round of reviews and reports.
Clearly for this majority, this suggests a positive view of the various issues raised in the questionnaire.
Cross-tabulation confirms this, with relatively few items not positively related to this issue.
There is perhaps only one point worthy of note: where the observation of teachers had featured in the review, teachers tend not to be in favour of a second round.
Attitudes Towards the Oxfordshire Scheme
As noted earlier, the first part of the questionnaire included a short Likert-type attitude scale asking about attitudes towards the Oxfordshire scheme.
Open University (1982b) distinguishes between three types of teacher-accountability:
moral accountability, to act always in the best interests of their pupils;
professional accountability, to act always to uphold the standards of their profession;
contractual accountability, in a strict sense towards their employers.
He notes that ‘moral accountability clearly denies the possibility of externally imposed sanctions while contractual accountability clearly implies the existence of sanctions.
With professional accountability, there may or may not be sanctions, according to the degree to which the profession can impose them.’
Responses to the attitude items were factor analyzed and the factors rotated  to an orthogonal solution.
Three factors took up 52 per cent of the variance in these responses.
These appeared to represent attitudes towards professional accountability, contractual accountability, and time taken.
Difference in Attitudes amongst Teachers
It was noted earlier that certain demographic and institutional considerations appear to affect teachers' reactions to the LEA scheme.
Mean attitudes are also significantly affected in respect of some of these considerations.
Oxfordshire teachers as a whole appear to have slightly negative attitudes towards the LEA scheme with respect to professional accountability.
There is a statistically significant difference between teachers' attitudes as represented by this factor in the different phases of education, with the primary teachers almost neutral, the secondary teachers the most negative and the middle school teachers slightly less so.
Teachers' status position in the school hierarchy also significantly affects these attitudes, the most senior (heads and deputies) being almost neutral, the most junior the most negative and ‘middle management’(heads of faculties, departments, years) slightly less so.
The extent of teachers' involvement in the review and the extent to which they see the scheme as a professional threat has no significant effect on the attitudes measured by this factor.
As might be expected, how useful the process of review is in proposing changes, and the extent to which teachers favoured going on to a second round of the scheme are both significant, those thinking that it is very or fairly useful being slightly positive and those thinking it not very or not at all useful, being slightly negative.
Those willing to repeat the experience are slightly positive, those not being neutral.
Oxfordshire teachers who have been involved with their LEA's scheme appear to have slightly negative attitudes towards contractual accountability.
Secondary and middle school teachers are more negative, junior staff are the most negative with senior staff neutral and middle management occupying the middle ground between them.
Again, neither involvement nor perceptions of threat has any significant association with the attitudes measured by this factor.
Teachers who see the scheme as useful in producing proposals for changes were again significantly positive in their attitudes whereas those not doing so were negative.
Willingness to repeat the process is not significantly associated with attitudes towards contractual accountability.
Oxfordshire teachers who have been involved are negative about the amount of time that the scheme takes.
In this the middle school teachers are the most negative, with the primary teachers least negative and the secondary teachers occupying the middle ground.
Again the most senior teachers in schools are the least negative in this regard and the most junior the most negative.
The perceived usefulness of the scheme as a means of promoting change and willingness to  repeat the exercise are associated with attitudes towards the time that the scheme takes; involvement and perceptions of professional threat are not.
Perhaps the only surprise in these data is the lack of association between involvement in the review and attitudes towards it, in the light of the positive association reported earlier between involvement and various aspects of the review process.
We asked if attitudes to SSE had changed after the review had been conducted.
A third of the teachers think they have.
Again, space was provided for them to say in what ways and the following typify what was written:
not as threatening as first thought;
was more valuable than I expected it to be;
not in favour of another;
a waste of time.
I had hopes for it initially;
too time consuming — uncertain about its usefulness;
I now know that we are largely on our own — no LEA follow-up;
still believe that SSE is important but I don't believe that those who devised the scheme have got it right yet — feedback to the LEA, etc. will only be what senior staff within the school wish to discuss;
more aware of the school as a whole.
Note of Caution
It is appropriate here to recall the attitudes expressed by the non-respondents to the survey.
The generally bland (neutral to moderately negative) feelings towards the Oxfordshire scheme for school self-evaluation which emerge from the survey data may underestimate the hostility of Oxfordshire teachers, generally.
Section Two: Attitudes Towards School Self-Evaluation Generally
The second part of the questionnaire consisted entirely of a Likert-type scale designed to investigate attitudes towards school self-evaluation as a general topic.
It had been developed earlier in Solihull and its use with the Oxfordshire teachers allowed us to compare their attitudes with those of the Solihull teachers.
Any differences might be attributed, in part at any rate, to contrasts between the two schemes, the most obvious of which, of course, is compulsion.
The results of the factor analysis of the responses of the Oxfordshire teachers were very similar to those of the Solihull secondary school teachers (Turner and Clift, 1985), despite the inclusion in the former of teachers working in the primary and middle phases.
The number of factors with an eigen value of more than one  was the same (5), the proportion of the variance accounted for was very similar (56 per cent and 58 per cent, respectively).
The factor structure was also similar, though, as might be expected from their exposure to different schemes (mandatory and voluntary), not exactly so.
The Attitudes of Oxfordshire Teachers
Five factors account for 56 per cent of the variance in the attitudes of Oxfordshire teachers towards SSE.
They are: professionalism; efficiency; potency; collegiality and openness; and enthusiasm.
The first factor is made up of attitudes towards the professionalism of SSE.
Oxfordshire secondary teachers are moderately positive in their attitudes towards this aspect of SSE.
It is interesting to note that attitudes towards the outcomes of SSE, in terms of the promotion of change in schools, are only minimally correlated to attitudes towards the processes.
This dissociation of process and outcome was evident also amongst Solihull secondary teachers, whose attitudes towards this aspect of SSE was also moderately positive.
The second factor is made up of attitudes towards the efficiency of SSE, about which Oxfordshire teachers are generally slightly negative.
Efficiency is seen to be associated with threat and with enthusiasm for the process: the more efficient, the more threatening, and the less the enthusiasm.
Solihull teachers were neutral in their attitudes towards this aspect of SSE.
Oxfordshire teachers are moderately positive in their attitudes towards the potency of SSE.
Solihull teachers were strongly so, but it should be recalled that only a relatively small proportion of them had had any direct experience of the process.
Oxfordshire teachers are generally moderately negative in their attitudes towards the collegiality and openness of SSE, associating them with attitudes towards career prospects and a need for a better understanding of the process.
Solihull teachers' attitudes towards this aspect of SSE were moderately positive.
The attitudes represented by factor 5 are of enthusiasm towards SSE, in which regard Oxfordshire teachers are generally moderately positive.
There was no close equivalent to ‘enthusiasm’, in the attitudes of Solihull teachers.
Differences in Attitudes Amongst Oxfordshire Teachers
Phase
The phase of education in which Oxfordshire teachers are working is significantly associated with the attitudes represented by two of these factors: the efficiency and the potency of SSE, the teachers in the primary schools being the most positive, those in the secondary schools the least and those in the middle schools occupying a middle position.
Gender
The gender of teachers is not significantly associated with their attitudes as represented by these factors.
Status position in school
Teachers' status position in school is significantly associated with their attitudes towards the professionalism of SSE, its potency, and enthusiasm towards it.
The most senior teachers are the most positive about each, the ‘middle management’ the least, with the most junior teachers occupying the middle ground between them.
Years of teaching experience
There was no significant association between teachers' years in the profession and any of the attitudes represented by these factors.
Threat
The level of threat perceived by teachers in connection with the process of SSE as experienced in their involvement in the Oxfordshire scheme was associated with attitudes represented by only one of these factors: efficiency.
This association is to be expected in the light of the composition of this factor, which includes ‘threat’ as one of its components.
A second report
As might be expected from data reported earlier, positive attitudes as measured by all five factors were significantly associated with willingness to go on to a second round of review and reporting.
Summary and Discussion
This part of the survey deals with the attitudes of Oxfordshire teachers towards SSE as a general notion (i.e. not restricted to the scheme operated by their LEA).
Factor analysis indicates a structure of attitudes similar to that reported earlier (Turner and Clift, 1985, op. cit.) for Solihull teachers: that attitudes might be classified under five headings, towards the professionalism, potency and enthusiasm for SSE, about all of which Oxfordshire teachers are moderately positive and towards the efficiency and collegiality of SSE about which they are moderately negative.
Solihull teachers, most of whom had had no direct experience of SSE were generally more positive in their attitudes than were their  Oxfordshire colleagues, most of whom had.
Solihull teachers were positive about the professionalism, potency and collegiality of SSE and neutral about its efficiency.
(There was no direct equivalent for enthusiasm for SSE in Solihull.)
Differences amongst Oxfordshire teachers working in the different phases of education were only significant with regard to the efficiency and potency of SSE.
It will be recalled that only secondary teachers had been involved in the survey in Solihull.
Secondary teachers were the most negative in Oxfordshire in their attitudes towards the efficiency of SSE, and thus contrasted strongly with their counterparts in Solihull, who were neutral.
First-hand experience of SSE in secondary schools clearly does nothing to convince teachers of its efficiency.
Direct experience does however seem to have convinced the most senior teachers in Oxfordshire of its professionalism and potency, whereas in Solihull the most senior were the least convinced.
It is interesting to note the relative antagonism of the ‘middle managers’ in Oxfordshire schools.
A possible explanation for this is suggested by the secondary case study (West, Chapter 3 in this volume) where it was reported that there were indications that heads of departments and years tended to bear the brunt of the review activities.
The most junior teachers in both Solihull and Oxfordshire were in agreement in generally being positive towards most aspects of SSE.
There were also obvious similarities between teachers in the two LEAs in the way that positive attitudes towards SSE were associated with its potential for proposing change and with willingness to repeat the exercise.
Conclusions
At the time of writing the first cycle of review and reporting by Oxfordshire's schools is now virtually complete and a second cycle is planned.
It is therefore timely to consider what the impact of this mandatory scheme for school self-evaluation has been on the teachers, recalling what the stated intentions were at the outset:
to promote greater accountability of schools by requiring them to report on their practice to their governing bodies and to the LEA; to promote the improvement of educational practice by requiring schools to undertake a review of their activities.
In marked contrast to Solihull, where, a similar period after its launch by the LEA, less than half of the teachers could claim even to have seen the scheme booklet (Turner and Clift, op. cit.), in Oxfordshire, by the end of 1984 four-fifths of teachers had already been involved in a whole-school review.
This mass acquaintance with Oxfordshire's scheme must be counted to the considerable credit of its mandatory nature.
However, knowledge of a scheme, and indeed making use of it, does not necessarily demonstrate that it is of any particular value.
This may best be done in terms of the LEA's stated intentions and it is to this purpose that the results of this survey will now be reviewed.
Contractual Accountability
In principle, the first of the LEA's stated intentions has certainly been fulfilled.
At the time when the survey was conducted, the vast majority of Oxfordshire's schools had already reported the results of a whole school review to their governors and to the LEA, and the rest were about to follow suit.
Beyond this fulfilment of the letter of the scheme, however, lie questions about how thorough were these reviews, how competent were the reviewers, how comprehensive was the reporting.
The vast majority of Oxfordshire's teachers claim that they were involved or very involved in their school's review, an equally large majority (four-fifths) feel competent to carry out a review and that theirs was thorough or very thorough.
But their inexperience in these matters is revealed by their admission that, prior to the introduction of the scheme, little or very little formal review activity had ever  taken place in their school.
The impression of a general lack of expertise is heightened by the data on review methods, the main ones used being ‘staff discussion’ and ‘individual introspection’.
Methods derived from educational or social science research are conspicuously absent.
At best the thoroughness of the reviews must be in doubt.
Perhaps a realisation of this led teachers overwhelmingly to characterise their reports as ‘descriptive’ rather than‘judgmental’.
In all this the teachers can scarcely be blamed: the LEA offers no advice or help anywhere in its published scheme on how to collect valid and reliable data about a school, how such data might be judged or any standards against which such judgments might be made.
Some teachers were aware of this lack and had turned to curriculum publications such as The School Curriculum (DES, 1981) for guidance.
Given their view of the reports as generally descriptive, it is hardly surprising that few teachers felt that having to submit a written report on their school was in any measure a professional threat to them.
The case studies had indicated that, in the schools studied, the Oxfordshire scheme for SSE was relatively ineffective as a means of increasing contractual accountability.
This survey suggests that this conclusion is generally true of schools in the county.
Institutional Development
This term subsumes professional and moral accountability, and expresses the spirit of the second of the LEA's intentions.
It is even more doubtful whether this second intention of the LEA (to promote the development of educational practice) has been fulfilled by the implementation of the scheme.
Although two thirds of Oxfordshire teachers consider that the scheme has been useful in producing proposals for change in schools, the actual changes claimed are rather nebulous and a quarter of all teachers are unsure as to whether their review has led to any changes at all.
Despite this perceived impotence, a majority of teachers are in favour of going on to another round of reviews and reports.
Clues as to why may be found in the factor analysis of their attitudes towards SSE as a general notion (that is not specifically linked to the LEA scheme).
The factor which accounts for the bulk of the variance in responses (27 per cent) is composed of attitudes towards the process of SSE, with its product, the bringing about of changes in schools, being only weakly correlated, suggesting that teachers simply do not see evaluation as necessarily linked to subsequent action.
This suggests a possible failure in communication on the part of the LEA with regard to its second intention.
Attitudes amongst Oxfordshire teachers towards SSE as a general notion are for the most part moderately positive, but towards the LEA scheme moderately negative, particularly so with regard to the time it takes.
There is a tendency for the most positive attitudes to be held by the primary school teachers, and the least positive by the secondary school teachers.
However, these positive views should be treated with some caution.
Evidence from the study of the non-respondents to the survey questionnaire suggests that attitudes amongst Oxfordshire teachers towards the LEA scheme may be more negative than the survey data indicate.
The general conclusions drawn from the case studies in Oxfordshire schools were that teachers were responding ritualistically to the scheme by conducting relatively superficial reviews of their schools, and presenting reports which were mainly descriptive in their nature.
On the evidence of this survey, these conclusions appear to apply generally in Oxfordshire.
To date, the Oxfordshire scheme has at best only partially met its intention to promote a greater (contractual) accountability in schools.
It has done little either to develop in Oxfordshire teachers an awareness of the knowledge and skills necessary in order to conduct a searching and objective evaluation of their school and the attitudes necessary to follow evaluation with action and change.
It has therefore also done little to promote professional and moral accountability: the improvement of educational practice.