

Steve Hinson got a sinking feeling when he arrived at the Acorn Resource Centre for the physically disabled in West Berkshire.
He was taken into the centre's new laundry and presented with a bowl and washing powder!
But the Wimpey Homes Southampton regional director was happy to get his hands wet for a good cause.
He was there to hand over a cheque to the charity.
The cheque for £1,200 will be put towards the cost of converting part of the centre into the special laundry which will teach washing and ironing skills as part of Acorn's independent living skills programme.
SEARCHING THE DEPTHS TO SOLVE AIR CRASH MYSTERY
On a spring evening in 1980 an Italian DC9 aircraft carrying 77 passengers and four crew disappeared from radar screens and crashed into the Tyrrhenian Sea.
To this day, investigators are still trying to piece together the evidence which will reveal precisely what went wrong.
If they succeed it will, in part, be thanks to Wimpol.
The company has played an important part in the operation by utilising its deep water surveying expertise to locate and recover what remains of the aircraft from the seabed.
It wasn't until 10 years after the crash that Wimpol was first approached to advise on suitable vessels and equipment for salvaging the wreckage from the ocean floor — a depth of three-and-a-half kilometres.
‘The Commission appointed to investigate the disaster came to us after an earlier attempt to prove the cause of the crash had failed,’ explains senior project manager Steve Jackman.
Sections of the aircraft had already been recovered and tests revealed traces of explosives in seat cushions and luggage.
The findings pointed towards a missile explosion outside the forward section of the fuselage.
But nothing could be proved.
A second investigation began.
‘And that's when I flew to Rome with Ed Danson, a fellow project manager.
We had to answer technical questions put forward by the new investigating judge, Dr Rosario Priore and his appointed Commission of experts made up of 10 Italian, British, German and Swedish avionics and radar experts,’ says Steve.
After extensive negotiations, Wimpol was awarded the location and recovery contract.
March, 1991 saw the support vessel ‘Valiant Service’ arrive in the port of Naples for mobilisation of specialist positioning equipment, project management and survey personnel as well as subcontractor, Eastport's deep water sonar systems, remotely operated vehicle (ROV) and recovery equipment.
First, the recovery site was methodically mapped and searched using the Explorer 6000 sonar system and QMIPS processing system.
Sonar contacts were then photographed in order that the Commission could assign recovery priorities.
‘We used an interesting piece of equipment to do the job,’ says Steve.
‘The Magellan 725 ROV is equipped with sonar, video, stills cameras and high powered lights.
It allowed us to take hours of video film and hundreds of photographs in the pitch black depths.’
The shots revealed piles of debris on the seabed, sections of aircraft wreckage and personal effects were scattered all around.
Surprise finds by the team included ‘a World War 2 German bomber and two wooden hulled sailing ships complete with cannons.’
A special highlight was the recovery of the aircraft's missing flight data recorder which was lying partially buried in the silt.
The recorder was raised to the surface -in the presence of Judge Priore and the technical head of the Commission -and then sent to the Air Accident Investigation Branch at Farnborough to be decoded.
Recovery operations continued and hundreds of items were finally brought to the surface so that the plane could be painstakingly pieced back together again.
The first phase of work was completed in December 1991.
A further operation began the following spring in order to find further sections of the fuselage which were still missing.
The ‘Sea Mussel’ was mobilised and an ROV search took place to the north east of the previous recovery site, some 13km from the main wreckage field.
Throughout that summer more vital pieces of the rear fuselage were recovered along the downwind wreckage trail.
Hopefully the Commission is now close to proving the cause of the crash.
But as Judge Priore's investigation continues, more mysteries come to light.
Steve explains: ‘Vital evidence has been stolen, official records lost or destroyed, the deck log book of an American vessel in the area at the time of the disaster has been rewritten, and six people linked to the disaster, including one witness, have died in unusual circumstances.’
It all reads like an Agatha Christie novel.
But with Wimpol on board the Commission may shortly be in a position to announce what really happened.
WIMPEY MINERALS UK
A review by managing director Ross Ancell
The trading conditions experienced by Wimpey Minerals UK during 1992 can only be described as horrendous.
We budgeted an improvement to 1991's poor results in anticipation of a recovery in the economy which never materialised.
Throughout the year we continued to fall further behind budget with an extremely disappointing overall result for both Wimpey Asphalt and Wimpey Hobbs, our two major UK units, losing money.
Sadly 1992 became a year of retrenchment and consolidation to reduce the scale of activities to levels required to suit the prevailing market conditions.
OPERATIONAL PERFORMANCE
In 1992 results were disappointing throughout Wimpey Asphalt and Wimpey Hobbs, with exceptions of South Wales and Central Scotland.
The results from Wimpey Asphalt Hong Kong, Springfield Disposal and Overseas Contracting — all of which exceeded their budgets — served to give some respectability to the overall figures of Wimpey Minerals UK.
A brief comment on each of these areas will confirm the point made last year that areas with strong market positions and fixed supply situations held up reasonably well.
Weaker areas are exposed dramatically when the market turns down as it did during 1992.
The Highlands Area traded below budgeted levels due to poor contracting workload in the area as the Scottish office diverted funds towards the M74.
Central Area held up well, despite a lack of major motorway works, with good performances from Boards Quarry and Cairngryffe.
The Area successfully tendered for another section of the M74 (Elvanfoot) which will be mostly carried out in 1993.
The old Midlands Area, now re-named Wimpey Building Products, also suffered during 1992, but for different reasons.
An important product, Retardmac, is coming under increasing pressure due to the Government's desire for permanent re-instatement of roads after patching and this does not bode well for the long-term future of the product.
The performance of the North West and North Wales was lamentable and a repeat of last year's comments of being held back by plant breakdowns, low sales, a series of problem contracts and of bad debts does not explain the situation.
Many of these problems were self-inflicted and steps are being taken to correct matters.
Wimpey Hobbs, Cambrian Stone and South Wales generally produced good results from its tied customers and an active contracting workload in the area.
The results of the quarries in Northern Ireland was again undermined by a reduction in contracting workload due to altered Government spending priorities.
Exports of stone from Craigantlet Quarry are a premium development in Northern Ireland.
The Western Area was increasingly focussed towards London and the Thames corridor where markets also suffered.
The Eastern Area was a major problem with contracting losses and supply problems at Greenwich due to the new plant (now fully operational).
Wimpey Asphalt Hong Kong had a record year both in tonnage and profitability.
Overseas Contracting performed well due to the Kosice contract in Slovakia where we laid 118,000 tonnes of asphalt from July to November and successfully completed our first asphalt runway in Eastern Europe.
Springfield Disposal completed its first full year of trading favourably, exceeding its budget with a significant contribution from electricity generation for the first time.
STRUCTURE
The trading conditions which we experienced during the year with no recovery in prospect required a radical look at the costs and overheads structure of the UK activities.
A major rationalisation exercise was carried out and resulted in the creation of a single Head Office at Nailsea which now undertakes all the accounting and administration for Wimpey Hobbs, Wimpey Asphalt and the Overseas Contracting activities.
This exercise, unfortunately, resulted in the closure of Edinburgh as a Head Office and the transfer of the functions and some staff to Nailsea.
In addition we were forced to reduce the total workforce by almost a third during the course of the year due to market conditions.
Other changes in the year were the creation of a new division — Wimpey Building Products — from the previous activities based at Darlton and all the concrete products business within Wimpey Asphalt and including our mastic asphalt activity — Pure Asphalt at Bolton.
It is also becoming increasingly obvious that the company is needing to meet onerous legal requirements and indeed, our own commitment to better standards in areas such as Health & Safety, Quality Management, environmental matters, transport and training.
It is felt that these require the full-time attention of a senior director to ensure complete compliance, that our company is at the forefront in this area and is proactive in improving our standards.
Alf Windmill appointed compliance director, relinquishing his P&L responsibilities to Joe Pearse (Scotland and the North) and Brian Hunt (Building Products) in order to concentrate on all these activities.
INVESTMENT AND NEW DEVELOPMENT
During the year new capital schemes were completed.
These included the re-plant of Pant Quarry and the installation of a new coating plant at Greenwich.
Indeed, a number of other schemes are being undertaken such as the new granulator at Cambrian Stone's Llanwern site, due to be completed several weeks ahead of programme, and the new screens and bins at Craigantlet.
In addition, we ordered a new Parker 240 tonne per hour coating plant for the M74 contract.
These capital schemes, though extremely welcome, are only going a part of the way towards the complete overhaul of the majority of the fixed plant which is required within Wimpey Minerals.
The appointment of Chris Edwards as engineering director will aid this process.
We have, however, been somewhat haphazard in our plans in that we have not progressed all of the key issues in parallel and we are in the process of preparing detailed quarry plans for each location progressing estate issues, planning requirements, confirming geological and hydro geological aspects and setting all of this against market requirements.
These may seem obvious steps but in many cases aspects of the detailed planning for quarry development have been missing and delaying progress.
This major exercise, coupled with the preparation of Area Strategy Plans, will be th cornerstone for new development in the future.
George Wimpey PLC remains committed to future expansion of its Minerals activities, albeit that the current performance of Wimpey Minerals in this trading environment sell well short of the desired levels of return on the Group's investment.
During 1992 we were able to make two small acquisitions.
HR Evans — coating plant near Winchester — was purchased for £2 million to secure an outlet for dry stone from halecombe and Bantry Bay.
The second acquisition was Esk Manufacturing Company Limited in Cumbria giving a series of high quality asphalt sand, and as a plant for manufacturing calcium silicate bricks.
FUTURE PROSPECTS
Last year I set an agenda which said that’ we needed eighteen months to get in shape for the eventual economic upturn’.
This remains the objective and, in fact, a lot of the getting into shape has already been done in that similar tonnages of both dry and coated stone were produced and sold in 1992 as compared to 1991 with significant reductions in staffing and investment.
The objective in 1993 is to make our budget, which is achievable providing we stop scoring own goals as we have done in th Northern Area of Wimpey Asphalt and the Eastern Area of Wimpey Hobbs over the last two years.
Commitment to getting this right first time will improve our short-term results and help to set the business on the right footing for future investment and development.
Although the gentle Mendip Hills and the magnificent Andes Mountains have little in common, Wimpey Homes’ Redcliffe Mews development at Cheddar have provided an unexpected connection.
In May, the development, which enjoys views of the Mendips, played host to folk group Chan Chan from Peru when they dropped in to play their distinctive type of Andes folk music.
Wimpey Homes sponsored the group to play at the Cheddar Folk Festival and May Fair.
All proceeds go to local charities.
WIMPEY NEWS
Housing Minister Sir George Young struck the first blow for the renovation of a run-down area of Liverpool when he took control of a giant digger.
The minister's visit marked the start of an £8.4 million redevelopment scheme which is being undertaken by Wimpey Construction UK Liverpool at St Andrews Gardens.
The contract is divided into three phases.
In phase one, Wimpey is building 63 new homes and refurbishing nine flats.
Phase two calls for 20 new homes and the refurbishment of 12 flats and phase three for 20 new homes and the refurbishment of a Grade 2 listed building into student accommodation.
Bed spaces will be provided for 365 students along with creche and laundry facilities.
Work on the contract will be completed in summer 1995.
PEOPLE/AWARDS
Eleven successful delegates have received awards after completing the Wimpey Postgraduate Certificate in Management at Thames Valley University.
At a special presentation in the Hammersmith Main Board Room the delegates received their certificates from Wimpey Group Services' chairman, David Penton.
Mr Penton took the opportunity to stress the importance of the Group's many links with higher education and he confirmed that the company would continue to place great emphasis on the development of its staff — even in the present, extremely difficult, economic circumstances.
Professor Graham Hankinson, the Wimpey Professsor of Business at Thames Valley University said that even though companies were drastically curtailing their training and development activities, this initiative by Wimpey was a positive reflection of the company's commitment to staff training at every level.
Congratulations to the following delegates who received awards: Jonathan Bukht, environmental co-ordinator, Wimpey Hobbs, Nailsea; Stuart Dow, site manager, WHH, Edinburgh; Gavin Horto, marketing assistant, WCUK Eastern; Mark Lidiard, project finance analyst, T&PF, Hammersmith; Raymond Lindsay, estates manager, WHH Glasgow; Lindsay Pepperell, regional business development manager, Wimpey Environmental, Warrington; Sarah Raper, assistant to partnership manager, WHH Manchester; Derek Rees and David Rivers, Group graduate trainees, WGS Hammersmith; Heather Stockwell, office administration supervisor, WHH Bristol; Anne Wallace, field sales supervisor, WHH, Birmingham.
WIMPEY NEWS
Summer trippers to Penarth Beach, near Cardiff will find it a cleaner, pleasanter place — thanks to Wimpey Environmental and the Marine Conservation Society (MCS).
Penarth was just one of 30 sites around the country being cleaned up by the MCS on a National Beach Clean day in April.
Hundreds of people took part and tonnes of rubbish were collected.
At Penarth alone the discarded items collected ranged from timber and aluminium cans to an old pushchair frame.
John Evans, manager of Wimpey Environmental's Cardiff office presented Dr Madeleine Havard, vice chairman of the MCS with £3,000 to help the charity continue its conservation efforts.
‘You really can see the difference that the beach clean efforts have made.
This is an excellent example of the way that conservation can directly benefit the public,’ says John.
Meet Jonathan Berney in 18 months time and the likelihood is he'll greet you with a bow.
That's because Jonathan will have just returned from Japan where he will have been learning how business is done in the Far East.
Jonathan, who works for WEC's International Business Development Unit, has been given the opportunity to sample Japanese working life and culture as part of the European Commission's Executive Training Programme.
The programme involves a year of intensive language study and business exposure as well as six months secondment to two major Japanese organisations.
‘I'll be staying with a number of Japanese families so will have to learn how to communicate and become less of a gaijin (foreigner),’ he says.
‘It's going to be a very different life with a lot of new challenges.
Hopefully my experiences will make the business of doing business in Japan far easier and will pave the way for WEC to work with Japanese companies in the future.’
Jonathan will report on his Japanese adventure in a forthcoming issue of Wimpey News.
Four urban regeneration projects by Wimpey Homes are set to provide affordable new homes for more than 400 families in east Scotland.
The housing authority, Scottish Homes has provided grants worth £3.6 million for the housing projects in Dundee, Grangemouth, Edinburgh and Bowness.
Wimpey Homes partnership and urban renewal manager, Andy Wyles, is elated: ‘These grant awards represent a major breakthrough for Wimpey Homes’ Edinburgh region.
’ Scottish Homes has had its budget for rent and ownership building programmes more than doubled for 1993/4.
So Wimpey's commitment to providing affordable social housing should ensure that many further opportunities will arise.’
The largest development is at Mid Craigie in Dundee where Wimpey will erect 255 new family houses.
Work has already started at the Bowness development in Grangemouth to provide 65 two and three bedroom houses and to refurbish 18 council flats.
At Niddrie House in Edinburgh Wimpey Homes will build 43 homes as part of a wider package which includes the demolition of two multi-storey blocks of flats.
And at Carringden in Bowness, the company will be providing ‘new homes and 12 refurbished flats for sale.
WIMPEY WINNERS
In Scotland, WCUK has cemented its name in bricks and mortar by winning a top national honour for quality workmanship.
The Brick Development Association has judged the brickwork at the New Cross Crescent housing development in Glasgow to be the best in Scotland.
And as a result has awarded it top marks and a prestigious regional Quality Brickwork Award.
The competition was tough with 304 UK projects competing for the honours.
Guild of Bricklayers’ judges visited over half of the original projects entered taking into account technical quality, cleanliness of the face, correct use of coloured bricks and particularly the quality of any special features, such as arches.
‘Our judges are looking for perfection,’ says a spokeswoman for the Brick Development Association.
‘New Cross Crescent is an outstanding project and a great credit to all involved.’
It's not the first time that Wimpey has taken the lead in Scotland.
It was only two years ago that the region received similar recognition for its Dalian House office development in Glasgow — an impressive record which is a fitting testament of the standards being set by our teams on site.
Completed last October, New Cross Crescent is an impressive crescent-shaped development of 73 homes built in a circular terrace.
Foundation work began in early 1991.
The concrete block shell was in place by early 1992 ready for the 25-week facing brickwork stage to begin.
The building's shape provided a real technical challenge for the 16 bricklayers who worked in teams of four to complete the job.
‘Building curved walls — without curved bricks — is no easy thing to do,’ says senior site agent, Willie Mathieson.
To overcome this templates were made and a structural engineer took constant vertical and horizontal measurements to plot the path of construction.
As Willie explains: ‘Initially there was extensive setting out to be done.
Then, as we built up through the storeys we were checking continually by plumbing and levelling the brickwork at regular intervals to keep the curvature constant.’
He has every good reason to be proud of the smooth, artistic lines of the completed building.
Its front facing brick facade is finished in Throckley smooth buff brick interspersed with glazed blue bricks and horizontal bands of red.
The rear of the building is finished in Redland mixed straw textured buff brick with bands of red.
A pleasing picture and the type of challenge that Willie, for one, would be happy to tackle again.
‘There was a lot of tricky brickwork to complete,’ he says.
‘But the skills of our workforce won the day — and the prize at the end of it.’
They're ringing in the changes at British Telecom's new residential training centre in Milton Keynes.
Wimpey Construction UK, Eastern has just completed the £25 million centre, the largest building project to be completed in Milton Keynes in the last years.
Set on a 25-acre site overlooking the town, the scheme comprises eight, two-storey buildings with a total floor space of more than xxxxx sq ft.
Six of the buildings are linked by attractive glazed walkways.
There is a separate sports hall with a 25m swimming pool, two squash courts and a gym.
The new facility can accommodate up to 330 residential and 300 visiting management trainees at any one time.
Completing the two-year project to time and budget called on the skills of a first-class management team This included project manager Richard Smyth; project coordinator, Peter Green; senior agents Robert Vickers, Paul Cadman and Neil Sheddon and agent Barry Kingscote.
Keith Mills and Mike Timothy took to the water, made waves and generally splashed out for charity when they took part in the BT Swimathon in March.
Keith, a senior engineer with Wimpey Construction UK London & South East, and Mike, a graduate trainee, are both working on the £xx million Nurdin & Peacock contract in Didcot.
The Swimathon is a national event with swims held all around the country.
Keith and Tim took part at the Central Pool in Reading.
‘The total course was 5,000 metres, divided into 100 lengths each,’ explains Keith.
‘It didn't hurt too much because we had been training twice a week for over two months.
We started off swimming 20 — 30 lengths and worked our way up to the 100.
When we had the distance we started working on our times.’
Both men completed their 2,500 metres in under an hour.
‘I finished in 55 minutes and 40 seconds and Tim came in at 59 minutes.
Not bad considering I'm 10 years older than he is!’
Keith and Tim's efforts have raised over £225 to be divided amongst various charities including the NSPCC, the Spastic Society, Sports Council and the British Red Cross.
The swim has also raised money for Tim's Operation Raleigh expedition to Chile in September.
There were no half measures when Wimpey Minerals UK's Chris Chalkley agreed to take part in a charity ‘Shave-a-thon’.
It was simply a case of going, going and then gone for the Information Technology manager as Wimpey Hobbs’ Alice Richards — a trained first aider — got to work with the razor.
‘I'd been growing that beard for 10 years and had grown quite accustomed to it,’ says the now clean shaven Chris.
But the event was all in a good cause.
Wimpey Minerals UK staff raised over £350 for the Paul O'Gorman Foundation and Great Ormond Street Hospital for children.
The distinctive facade of an Edwardian warehouse is set to be the focal point of a magnificent new office and retail development in Chelsea.
WCUK, London & South East has started work on the £13.7 million scheme which will feature a three storey development of offices and shops built behind the restored terracotta facade of the old warehouse.
FORCIBLE APPROACH TO HOME SECURITY
There was cause for an alarm when Loughborough police officers visited Wimpey Homes’ Beaumanor development in Leicester.
But only because they were there as part of a special home security training programme.
Wimpey Homes had agreed that the police could use a show home on the site to give local officers a practical demonstration on home security.
Crime Prevention Officer, PC Farleigh looked at all aspects of security: doors and window locks, provision for burglar alarms and security lights.
He went even further and discussed how the general layout of the houses could deter crime.
‘Safety is a major consideration when it comes to buying a Wimpey home.
It was interesting to receive a positive reaction from the police to the measures we are taking to crime prevention,’ says regional manager John Hibbert.
FITTING SEND OFF FOR FOREMAN RONNIE
Ronnie Sales has helped to brighten up the lives of residents living on the Cosy Estate in Sunderland — in more ways than one!
While working on Wimpey Construction UK, Northern's contract to refurbish homes on the estate — a notorious inner city blackspot — the likeable foreman went out of his way to ensure that relationships with the local community would run smoothly.
And his genuine concern and friendly approach soon won him lots of friends.
When the householders learned that the completion of the contract marked the start of Ron's retirement after 35 years, they clubbed together to buy him a carriage clock and bottle of whisky as a thank you gift to remember them by.
‘It's a refreshing change to hear of an act of goodwill rather than yet another tale of violence and vandalism,’ says marketing manager Ken James.
The £1.4 million contract to renovate 66 homes and bungalows was awarded by Sunderland City Council.
Works included installing central heating, rewiring, kitchen replanning, providing roof/wall insulation, new roofs, doors, windows and external works.
Singing Wimpey's praises at the Coundon Care Centre in Birmingham.
Residents at the charity home really hit the high notes when marketing manager, Richard Howard, dropped in to present a £2,000 donation on behalf of the Midlands, West & Wales region.
The money will go towards the cost of running the centre which looks after 90 elderly, disabled and house bound residents each week.
Dear Editor
I was delighted to see the photograph of the staff from Department One, published in the January/February issue of Wimpey News.
I worked for Department One from 1943 until 1957 when I left the company.
One of the major contracts we were responsible for during that time was the construction of the Wemmershoek Dam for Cape Town City Council.
Last year I visited Cape Town and took the opportunity to visit the Dam.
It was pleasing to see the commemorative plaque recording the fact that George Wimpey was the main contractor and the works manager was A I Meek.
It is a splendid monument to the skills and endeavours of earlier Wimpey personnel.
Incidentally, my father Jack Rowe — who at 90 was, I believe, the oldest Wimpey pensioner, until his death in January — was delighted to see Vera Golding's photograph.
He remembered her very well, as indeed, he remembered nearly everyone he came in contact with during his 37 years with Wimpey.
Our connection with Wimpey continues as my son Richard has worked with the company for the past 17 years.
Yours sincerely  
CRICKET
The Wimpey cricket team is finding life tough at the top.
Promoted at the end of last season to Division 1 of the West Middlesex Midweek Cricket League, the team is searching for new blood to add to the pool of players to make sure they stay there.
You don't have to be a Mike Gatting to play for the Wimpey cricket team.
But it does help if you have had experience of playing the game at school, college or club level.
Team organiser, Grove Projects’ Robin Williams, explains that he would like to hear from players in the London area who would be keen and willing to turn out for regular league and cup matches.
The side uses the British Gas sports ground at Acton for home matches and normally plays on a Wednesday or Thursday evening during the season.
‘We're finding it tough going this year,’ says Robin.
‘But this time last year we were in a similar position.
We lost matches at the start of the season and then managed to turn it around.’
So if you are a keen cricketer and would like to play, Robin Williams can be contacted at Hammersmith on 081 846 2892.
CROATIA
When Mlanenko and Fran Mravak arrived in Cornwall from war-torn Crotia they had a battered car and just £400 to their names.
Luckily, they took positive action straight away.
And with Wimpey Homes’ expert guidance were able to secure finance to buy the two-bedroom showhome at the Trenethick Farm development in Helston.
As a gift to the family, Wimpey Homes has given them some furniture to help make their new house feel more like home.
Site negotiator, Richard Stokes, says that the sale was one of his most memorable.
‘The family have been through very difficult times.
As I handed them the keys to their new home it was like unlocking the door to their future happiness.’
IT'S THE THRILL OF THE CHASE FOR MIDDLESBROUGH'S FLYING LADY
Margaret Cullinane is hooked on the horse world's daredevil past-time — team chasing.
The sport which is fast becoming a popular competitive alternative to the more traditional sports like eventing and hunter trials.
It's a far cry from the security and comfort of Wimpey's Middlesbrough office where Margaret has worked for as assistant legal manager.
Team chasing is definitely not for the faint hearted.
Four horses and riders set out to complete the cross-country course, although only three must finish to score.
In Open events there can be up to 36 fences — a combination of natural hazards such as water, rails and ditches of up to four feet six inches high; hedges of up to six feet high and specially built fences like steps and tyres.
‘There's really nothing like it, says Margaret.
‘I took up the sport six years ago when my local team, the Darlington Dawdlers, were short of a fourth rider.
We've gone from strength to strength from there qualifying for last year's UK Team Chase Championships.
Margaret bought her first horse, Willowbeck, a 16.3hh Thoroughbred in 1981.
He was sold on to make way for two show jumpers — Lady Touchwood, a 15.3hh Thoroughbred and Floyd, a part Thoroughbred.
Then came Ellie, her much-loved 16.3hh threequarter Thoroughbred, quarter Clydesdale.
‘I bought Ellie to show jump but we began team chasing together,’ says Margaret.
‘She is 12-years-old now and expecting her first foal.
The sire is one of the country's top Thoroughbred stallions and his sire was the great Nijinsky.
Ellie is due to foal any day and naturally Margaret is on tenderhooks.
‘I'm extremely nervous,’ she says, ‘I'll be relieved when it's all over.’
As well as bringing on the new foal, Margaret has taken on another exciting challenge.
With Ellie out of action she will shortly be welcoming a new team chasing prospect to her stable — a 16. lhh black Thoroughbred racehorse called Badger.
‘But,’ she says, ‘more than anything it's dear Ellie that has achieved so much for me.
I was thrilled when we won through to the UK team chase finals — many people thought she wasn't capable and we proved them wrong.’
Ever wished you could jive?
Or be able to take to the floor for the last waltz?
Well, now's your chance to step out in style and dazzle your friends.
Ballroom and Latin American Dance classes are now on the Sports & Social Club agenda at Hammersmith.
And judging by the initial reaction, instructor, Group trainee Chris Speck, is confident that they are going to flourish.
The classes are suitable for complete beginners.
No experience is necessary, although a sense of rhythm does help.
And you don't need any special clothing: ‘Just wear what you would wear to work,’ says Chris.
‘But don't wear training shoes — they stick to the floor!’
Construction and dance may seem far removed but Chris has been dancing since the age of seven.
It was whilst at Manchester University studying for his BSc in construction management that he began to take his lifelong hobby a little more seriously and started to enter competitions.
Chris was chairman of his university society and competed regularly in Inter Varsity Dancing Association competitions around the country, helping to win last year's team competition and coming third individually in the Rock and Roll competition.
Through teaching he enjoys being able to pass his skills on to others and is confident that he will soon have his new pupils rocking and rolling, quickstepping and cha-cha-chaaing the night away.
Lessons will take place in the 6th floor table tennis room from 5.30pm to 6.30pm on a Thursday night and cost £1.50.
Contact Chris on Hammersmith 2097 if you would like further details.
Wimpey Homes staff from the Luton office ‘zoo'med around Whipsnade when they took part in a special fund raising ‘fun run’ for charity at the beginning of June.
The world famous zoo provided the perfect backdrop for the ten kilometre dash.
And the animals were certainly in for a few surprises as our team of ten raced by wearing bright yellow ‘Wimpey Worldwide’ T-shirts and hard hats.
Congratulations go to everyone who participated — they all stayed the course and helped to raise a staggering £2,180 for Cancer Research.
When Martin Davidson decided to aim for gold in the Duke of Edinburgh's Award scheme he was 13-years-old.
Since then he has fulfilled many ambitions, learned new skills and tested his courage and physical fitness to the limit.
In March, the 21-year-old collected his Gold Award certificate from Falklands war veteran, Simon Weston at a special ceremony at St James's Palace attended by HRH The Prince Philip.
Martin's route to the top began when he joined the Bradford Duke of Edinburgh's Award Centre — the only centre of its kind in the country — and gained his bronze and silver awards.
After that going for gold involves participating in a wide range of activities over a period of at least 18 months.
There are four main achievement sections to complete: Community Service; Skill; Expeditions & Exploration and Physical Recreation as well as a Residential Project which can be taken in Britian or abroad.
‘My residential project was one of the most demanding things I had to do,’ says Martin.
’ I was a member of the crew on a 75 ft yacht sailing from the Thames, across the North Sea to Scheveningen in Holland with the Ocean Youth Club.
There were 12 of us on the boat and three full time crew.
It was extremely rough and cold.
We had to work in shifts — four hours on and four off — which was quite exhausting, especially at 4am in the morning.’
His expedition proved to be a further test of character and team leadership.
Martin had organised to spend five days hill walking in North Wales.
His group of four aimed to cover 15 miles a day — carrying tents and provisions for the journey.
‘It rained non-stop,’ remembers Martin.
‘Except for a brief half hour when the sun came through.
That was one of the most memorable moments of all my award activities!
Everyone went mad, stripping off their tops to soak up the sun, doing handstands and laying out tents and kit to dry — until the rain started again!’
In the Community Service section Martin helped to set up and run a bronze award training scheme at the Bradford centre.
By passing on his skills he has given other youngsters the incentive to go on to achieve greater things.
Martin learned to drive as his Skill project and improved on his swimming ability in the Physical Recreation section.
He is quick to point out that it's not just enough to turn up in any of these activities: ‘You have to prove to the examiners — and to yourself — that you can are willing to put in the effort to improve and better your standards.
After all, that's what these Awards are all about.’
There was a welcome boost to morale at the Sussex-based charity Friends of the Young Deaf when WCUK Maidstone marketing manager, Kim Taylor, presented a cheque for £1,000 on behalf of the George Wimpey Charitable Trust.
The charity plays a vital role within the community by running training and leadership programmes for young people — both deaf and hearing — designed to encourage everyone to mix and learn together.
The Wimpey donation will be put towards the cost of one of these projects.
Kim Taylor says: ‘This support scheme is particularly valuable.
It helps young deaf people to gain confidence and become active members of the hearing world.’
There aren't many daredevil sports that Peter Dew hasn't tried his hand at.
He is a British Parachute Association instructor, and regularly enjoys water and downhill skiing, yachting and scuba diving.
But when he teamed up with Dave Barnetson and Paul Bowers to spend a testing weekend with the Territorial Army this spring, he was taken to the limit.
They joined other men and women from British industry to tackle Exercise Executive Stretch, which has been designed by the TA to encourage problem-solving and leadership skills.
Peter is a project manager at Wimpey Wessex Water's Poole Sewage Treatment Works.
His colleague, Dave Barnetson is the sub agent and Paul Bowers is a trainee engineer at Durleigh Water Treatment Works in Somerset.
The saga began on Friday evening at the TA's Duke of York's Barracks.
It was there that the London Regiment welcomed the 100 candidates who were split into teams of 10, issued with kit and briefed.
The following day they travelled to the Army's training ground at Pirbright in Surrey.
Peter Dew takes up the story: ‘Throughout the weekend we worked in our teams to complete a whole range of physical and mental challenges from negotiating the longest assault course in Britain, going on night manoeuvres to rifle shooting.
‘I particularly enjoyed learning to shoot an SA20 rifle and 9mm pistol which is something I've never done before.’
The groups took part in a number of incident simulations — attending to accident victims at the scene of an air crash, getting to the roof of a four storey burning building using an ariel slide to get down and rescuing a pilot from the bottom of a swimming pool.
Then, came Peter's most frightening moment: ‘We were sent out in a Land Rover and told we were driving through enemy territory.’
Racing at 60mph down rutted tracks the wheels of the landrover rarely made contact with the ground.
‘Suddenly we screeched to a halt at a checkpoint.
Pandemonium reigned, guns were firing and grenades going off.
Then a group of paras in full combat gear and blackened faces began firing at us.
Nobody knew what was happening.
It was extremely realistic and quite nerve wracking.
We ran flat out for half a mile before we could throw them off.’
On the Saturday night everyone slept rough.
Already worn out after their day's activities, the hope was for an early night.
But no.
‘We were woken at 10.30pm and told to put our kit on for three hours of night-time navigation exercises,’ says Peter.
He continues: What was so surprising about Executive Stretch was that after just two days a group of 10 people from different backgrounds could gel into a team.
The exercises taught me that when things go wrong you need to take a step back and think things through before acting.’
Peter says that the weekend has left him with a lasting impression of the professionalism of the TA.
‘It was a brilliant weekend — definitely one of the best.’
The long hot days of summer are with us again — or they were at the time of writing, and long may they continue.
For some Wimpey people it's a time of hectic activity.
Swimming, sailing, bike-riding — time to lose kilos before hitting the beach.
Margaret Cullinane will be team chasing for the UK (page 21) and the Wimpey cricket team (same page) will be hoping to make a better fist of it than the British squad.
Others will take it easier, relax in the garden and soak up the sun.
Wimpey physician, Doctor Phelan recommends a combination of the two if you want to be in tip-top condition.
He has a few sharp words to say about smoking on page 18 — definitely NOT an ingredient of a healthy lifestyle in his professional book.
It's a similarly dual picture on the business front.
For Minerals it's a time to press ahead, free of the bad weather handicaps which, in North America particularly, have dogged production longer than usual this year.
Construction tends to plough on regardless of the weather, but the long hours of daylight are a big plus and sunshine is a decided improvement over icy winds.
For Homes, it's a different story.
Their potential customers have holidays on their minds — not house moves.
So, while it's a dull spot for sales, it's time to prepare the ground so that, when the holiday-makers return, Wimpey will get the lion's share of the Autumn buyers.
One Wimpey business carries the sun with it, whatever the weather.
Friendly rivalry with underground workers has earned our opencast miners the coal industry nickname: ‘the sunshine miners’-(features, pages 10/11).
A dubious label, they'd tell you, in the middle of winter, but at this time of year it comes into its own.
WIMPEY ENVIRONMENTAL LTD
A review by managing director Mike Lynch
We have just come through one of the most difficult trading years for the UK economy in recent history, and to have achieved our budgeted turnover was in itself a praiseworthy effort.
But, although the business generally had to be won at lower margins in the face of stiffer competition, our performance should have been very much better, and would have been had we responded more promptly to market fluctuations.
We did, in the end, get the balance right, but at a serious cost to profitability, and with a result well below budget.
We cannot afford to postpone necessary actions, however difficult, in the future.
The positive result has been to emerge from 1992 fitter and better organised to win work in what will be another very tough year.
One of the most exciting events towards the year end was the transfer of the Geotech site investigation team at Uphall to Environmental, giving us not only a stronger resource in geology and land assessment, but also a well established presence in Scotland from which we hope to offer all our other services in future.
This development has given us the opportunity to organise our business to focus again on the changing needs of our customers.
Our management structure now reflects four main marketing streams, namely Water Assessment, Land Assessment, Environmental Sciences and Major Contracts, and I shall be considering them each in turn.
But before that, a word about the underlying management principles.
We are essentially a project-oriented technical organisation offering scientific and technical expertise in given fields.
It therefore follows that technical personnel are assigned to divisions on the basis of discipline, and for the purpose of accountability, control and maintenance of professional standards.
That corporate structure can however cause problems where the disciplines are spread geographically, such as in regional offices.
The aim has to be to offer all the services of the company to any client at any location.
This can only be done successfully through central control of the resources.
However, this central control can conflict with the operations of the regions, unless good relations and communications exist between the operations directors and their staff and the regional managers.
Here we are fortunate in that John Evans in Cardiff, Graham Hillier in Plymouth and Tony Elliott in Singapore have been committed to promoting the company, and its capabilities, whilst supervising the locally based staff and discharging the responsibilities of the senior company representative in their geographical area.
This dual role of senior representative and local manager is not without its difficulties, particularly when staff are redirected to or from other geographic centres, an I am therefore particularly grateful to the regional managers for ensuring that the system continues to work smoothly.
Water Assessment
1992 was an excellent year for oceanographic and water related work, with a gross profit significantly ahead of budget.
The success was based on good utilisation of staff and equipment, particularly during periods that have been seasonally affected in previous years.
This was brought about by the award of a number of complimentary contracts in the UK and overseas.
This resulted in a highly successful first quarter despite the delay in the award of the Shell Miri contract.
The successful resolution of the
Transmediterranean Pipeline problems, and th completion of the Seychelles fieldwork, were enhanced by the mobilisation of the Sellafield Nuclear Power Station contract and the award of contracts for Mobil and BP.
The Shell Miri contract was awarded in May, together with further work for the Port of Singapore Authority and for Shell Singapore.
The nature of the Shell Miri contract is such that we can be called upon to do further work outside the basic contract for instrumentation systems on the offshore structure.
Already two such pieces of work have been identified, namely the Barum Delta Studies an a study of waste water discharges at Binulu an Labuan.
The main contract is progressing well, following the successful if frantic mobilisation period, which reflects great credit on those involved, particularly Jan van Smirran who has since been transferred too Singapore to manage this and other contracts.
Further prospects are being pursued by Tony Elliott in Malaysia, Indonesia, Vietnam and the Philippines, with a view t consolidating our position in South East Asia.
We are also establishing a regional presence in the Middle East and Graham Hillier is soon to be taking up residence in Dubai to promote our activities in this region.
In the UK the water scene has been dominated by our good relationship with South West Water, with whom a sole supplier arrangement is now in place.
Three major projects completed in the year were the Exmouth and Salcombe site specific field
studies, and the Dart Environmental Studies project that resulted in over 20 reports and seemed to have input from just about everybody at Swindon Plymouth and Hayes!
In November, an excellent demonstration of the OSCR System was put on in Plymouth by Andy Talbot, Arthur Shrimpton and Robin Stephens, raising considerable interest in this new acquisition.
This was followed by the opportunistic deployment in the Shetlands following the Braer disaster.
Prospects for its future use will have been considerably enhanced by this initiative, and reflects well on those involved.
Land Assessment
It was in Geo-related work that we experienced our greatest problems during the year, leading to the closure of our Scottish and Billingham offices, and the reduction of Warrington from two offices to one.
This inevitably led to a reduction in staff at those locations and in Hayes.
The situation was brought about by a combination of factors, with two in particular causing us the greatest damage: the postponement of the Registers of Land that might have been subject to contaminative use, and the fall in construction activity.
To deal with the problem the Contaminated Land Unit was transferred to Swindon where a combination of management and water related skills were perceived necessary to rebuild this aspect of our business.
Staff are to be congratulated for the way they accepted the move, and on their commitment to making the new arrangements work.
From January 1993, the Land Assessment business has been under the operational control of Iain Ferrier, supported by Nigel Board and Peter Constantine in the South.
The Geoprobe work has been picking up, and there are strong prospects for site investigation work for property management companies and businesses needing risk assessments, such as banks and insurance companies.
The addition of Uphall will greatly enhance our capabilities in this area of business, the development of which is being masterminded by Peter Witherington.
Environmental Sciences
The division had a good year in 1992, with results coming close to budget.
Energy and Building Technology has again proved to be the most profitable activity in the division and apart from its traditional clients, namely BRECSU, BRE and Wimpey Homes and Construction, has secured new with the DOE.
Wimlas Limited was formed in October, and now awaits an audit from the NACCB which will precede a letter of authorisation to act as an assessor for European Technical Approvals.
The prospects for this operation are extremely good.
Air Quality work has gathered pace, after the disastrous loss of our mobile unit at the beginning of the year.
The replacement unit is now performing well, and prospects for 1993 look excellent.
Our first venture into the CIS took place in late 1992 with an award to undertake an ambient air quality study of the world's largest gas field in Kazakhstan.
Despite limited resources, the Environmental assessment, audit and management systems work has progressed very satisfactorily, and a preacquisition audit of quarries in Czechoslovakia was managed on behalf of Wimpey Minerals.
The Building Water Quality service has also had an excellent year and now numbers 7 staff.
Through a series of in-hour seminars and persistent marketing effort, we are securing good quality leads, which should lead to further growth in 1993.
The noise and vibration team led by Bill Stubbs has worked on a diverse range of projects from planning permissions for private opencast coal mining companies to th study of noise from Hartlepool Rugby Club.
The most significant project in the year was for the proposed BNFL Nuclear Power Station at Sellafield which was won against strong opposition.
Against expectations the asbestos work is continuing to flourish, as is occupational hygiene, both particularly strong in the Cardiff region, although the volumes of work are increasing everywhere.
Major Projects
The BNFL contract has continued to set the pace for all other sections of business, finishing the year well above budget.
With current staff numbers (22) expected to rise to more than 40 in 1993, the prospects are very encouraging.
A great deal of the success is in the way in which the contract has been handled, and all staff are to be congratulated on a thoroughly professional job in trying and often fraught conditions.
Particular mention must be made of Colin Bennett, Tony Jones, Ron Edwards and latterly Clive Killick, in this respect.
The LWRA contract is also very demanding and, again, a committed team organised by Audrey MacIntyre has overcome a number of difficulties through the year.
The contract was extended for a third year and we shall be endeavouring to obtain a further extension beyond its current time limit (October).
Proposals are in hand to replicate the formula in other major cities in the UK.
The Future
There remains considerable work to be done in rationalising our working methods throughout the company.
Peter Wood's brief is to guide us to an acceptable quality management system that genuinely reflects our practices.
When we have achieved this we will consider applying for third party certification.
Wimpey Environmental has built its reputation on the quality of its measurement work, and it is this element that distinguishes us from our rivals.
However, being known for measurement does not necessarily help when tendering for consultancy work, but given that the reputation of most of our rivals was built on the interpretive reports prepared by companies such as ours, the transition should simply be one of perception.
For this reason I am deeply committed to the cause of raising our profile, and you will all be aware of the initiatives that are under way to promote us in a wider role.
I am particularly grateful to Richard Radnor and Clare Dugdale for their work on this.
We must continue to build on our strengths, and exploit the markets where they give us an edge.
I do not propose that we enter new markets at this stage, but rather that we seek strategic alliances with practices that offer professional services that we do not, and can bring to us the benefits of their expertise and client base on a reciprocal basis.
I sense a growing self-confidence in our mood and a more purposeful attitude towards clients and our future prospects.
If we can take full advantage of the limited opportunities presented in a depressed market, we shall create a springboard for our future prosperity.
Winning a major prize in a competition is something people only dream of.
But winning a honeymoon just months before your wedding is a dream come true.
For Emma Sparks it was just that.
It happened when she won a national competition in Brides Magazine.
The prize?
A magical honeymoon holiday in the beautiful Cayman Islands in the sunny Carribean.
After the Corporate Relations’ press officer's wedding in August, Emma and new husband Tim Godfrey will jet off on the nine and a half hour flight from Heathrow to Grand Cayman via Miami.
And it will be champagne all the way for the newlyweds.
Their holiday of a lifetime will include a two-week stay at one of the island's most prestigious hotels, the five star Hyatt Regency.
As well as soaking up the sun, Emma says she's particularly looking forward to scuba diving and swimming in Stingray City.
And perhaps a little bit to spending the £750 which was also part of the prize.
A ‘BBC Question Time’ style debate was the highlight of Wimpey Environmental's presence at the Environmental Technology Exhibition in Birmingham last month.
Drawing a large invited audience of, the debate was chaired by Hugh Rossi, former chairman of the House of Commons Environmental Committee and now a consultant with Wimpey Environmental.
But the stars of the show were panellists Julie Hill, director of Green Alliance, Roy Harrison, professor of environmental health at Birmingham University and David Wood, director of environmental affairs at Severn Trent Water.
They took the hot seat, answering questions on issues ranging from to.
‘We knew people would be interested in the debate but the level of enthusiasm and the depth of knowledge shown by both the audience and the panel was extremely impressive,’ says Wimpey Environmental managing director, Mike Lynch.
‘Our role as sponsors of the debate helps ensure that our name is associated, in a very concrete way, with the most knowledgeable in the field.’
Pensioners living in and around London should be sure to keep Thursday 30 September free in their diaries.
This is the date of the annual Pensioners Get-Together at Hammersmith.
Invitations are being sent out now.
If yours hasn't reached you by the end of July, or you live outside the London area but fancy coming up for the occasion, please phone Pensions Department on freefone 0800 262 072.
Spend, spend, spend may have been the order of the day when Jean Roberts won a luxury shopping weekend in Manchester.
But afterwards it was all relaxation as her prize also including the chance to spend the Saturday night at Wimpey Homes’ prestigious Granby Village development.
Jean won the pampering weekend for two in a local newspaper competition and opted to share her luck with her daughter, Sally.
With Granby Village conveniently situated in the City centre close to shops and local amenities, it provided an ideal start for a shopping spree to spend the first part of the prize — £100 in cash.
Then it was back to relax in the Granby Village leisure complex with its swimming pool, Jacuzzi, sauna and gymnasium before going out on the town to enjoy a slap-up meal.
The evening ended back at Granby Village where mother and daughter enjoyed a one-night stay in one of the luxurious apartments.
It will be something of a milestone when WCUK, North East completes the refurbishment of 48 homes in Grangetown, Cleveland this autumn.
The £1.4 million contract, awarded by Langbaurgh on Tees Borough Council last November, represents WCUK's 500th local authority refurbishment contract in the UK.
Few, if any companies, can match that record.
‘This latest project brings with it a new lease of life to a formerly run down area.
Better housing means a better quality of life for the new residents,’ says marketing manager Ken James ‘The work spells excellent news for the community as well as for Wimpey.’
The refurbished homes will have new roofs and plumbing, modern kitchens and bathrooms.
A special feature is a cantilevered bay window which is designed to create more space and to give plenty of natural light.
External walls will be re rendered and tiled.
GROVE PROJECTS
A review by Bill Martin, managing director, Management Division and Mike Plant, director and general manager, Consultancy Division.
The restructuring of the Group's Technology division in l992 an the subsequent move of Grove Consultants into the Construction Division presented a unique opportunity to regroup the consultancy businesses of WCL to match the needs of the future.
Accordingly, Wimpey Construction Management and Grove Consultants Limited will in future operate as GROVE PROJECTS Limited, the consulting arm of WCL providing fee-earning professional services comprising project management, consulting engineering and construction management to external and Group clients.
The prospect of an integrated consultancy business, able to provide a wide range of management and engineering services, is very exciting and very relevant to the changing construction procurement methods of the nineties.
The skills demanded in future will call for a more broadly based approach by management built upon specialist technical skills and GROVE PROJECTS will provide an enhanced working environment in which these skills can flourish.
From March 1993 the project and construction management activities of Wimpey Construction Management will operate in the UK under the Grove name as the Management Division of GROVE PROJECTS.
This new identity will enable us to offer project and construction management services to clients through a consultancy business which can be seen as separate from the Group's Contracting arm.
An increasing level of activity is evident in these markets compared with a year ago and the new name is expected to reduce barriers to entry for these services.
Overseas, in Portugal, where a branch office is currently being established, project and construction management activities will continue to operate as Wimpey Construction Management as in these overseas situations the Wimpey name is usually a benefit not a barrier to market entry.
1992 was a particularly difficult and frustrating year on the whole for the management business as it struggled to replace the loss of business from the private commercial sector, the mainstay in the past, and re-orientate its services to the public sector.
However progress was made in some areas and the latter part of the year saw much effort to integrate the management contracting activity within WCUK regions which is now essentially complete.
On the home front the major Little Britain project for Wimpey Property Holdings and the Criterion project at Piccadilly Circus were completed in the early part of the year, with the £7 million Astra Pharmaceuticals Project at Corby, Northants handed over at the year end.
Overseas, Wimpey Construction Management is carrying out fee-based technical and management services for the £200 million Colombo Centre project for Sonae Group in Lisbon, Portugal and will vigorously attempt to develop further this market in 1993, a market which will also provide opportunities for the consultancy arm of GROVE PROJECTS.
In many ways the consulting arm of GROVE PROJECTS is stronger as a specialist engineering and surveying consultancy than it was as a multi-discipline practice.
We are now including architectural practices on our list of potential clients and can choose to work with architects with a particular skill, appropriate to the project.
The computer aided design and draughting facilities have been enhanced throughout the year with additional GDS work stations and appropriate staff training.
Laptop computers have been acquired for calculation work both in the office and in the field, and the output from our new electro-static colour plotter is impressive, providing many work opportunities as well as enhancing the presentation of our drawings.
1992 will be remembered by the consultancy arm for many projects, including the successful completion of the aircraft hangars at St Athan, Cardiff, and the buildings at Lower Shakespeare Cliff for TML.
Major land surveys were carried out for Wimpey Minerals at Isley and Newark and a further contract of 1/2500 maps for the Ordnance Survey was successfully completed.
The aluminium smelter at Bandar Abbas employed 40 staff at its peak during the summer, some of whom are now working on the major refurbishment of the News International printworks at Wapping which is in its early stages.
Housing of all types has been a significant source of work for Grove in 1992, ranging from the Housing Association project at St James’ Hospital, London to the infrastructure at Maidenbower Village in Crawley where the design of the major relief road in the town centre is now about complete.
1993 itself will undoubtedly be equally as difficult a year in many ways at 1992 but we are better equipped now that new foundations have been laid for building an effective and successful engineering and construction consultancy business for the nineties.
We must use every opportunity to present our skills effectively in our expanded marketplace and convey to customers that GROVE PROJECTS can work with them to create cost-effective facilities which will improve efficiencies, lower costs and ad value.
Our strength is you, the staff, with your professional skills and capabilities combined with your energies and team spirit, which is vital for success.
We thank you for all your hard work during 1992 and we look forward with renewed enthusiasm to working with you all in 1993 and beyond.
GEORGE WIMPEY INC/GEORGE WIMPEY CANADA
A review by David Heppell, president, George Wimpey Inc chairman and chief executive, George Wimpey Canada.
In my review last year I said that 1992 was likely to be as difficult a year as 1991 for our North America Homes businesses.
In the event, it proved to be even tougher, dominated for us by the worsening situation in California.
As other areas reported improving new homes sales, California continued to experience declining land values and sluggish sales except in the low priced starter homes market.
Despite these difficulties, the new house types which we introduced too the market were well receive everywhere and will provide the cornerstone of our sales successes in 1993.
Working through these difficult times is a challenge for all our staff who have maintained their integrity, application and cheerfulness.
It is always a pleasure to meet you in the field and I appreciate your commitment to creating a better housing business and providing greater satisfaction for our customers.
I particularly wish to commend those staff in our discontinued businesses who have the task of selling surplus assets; they have an unenviable job but always approach it with enthusiasm and diligence.
House closings in 1992 amounted to 695 units, marginally lower than the number in 1991.
Ontario Homes continued to make a useful contribution to profits although elsewhere the combination of thin trading and year-end provisions against land values created operating losses.
Good progress was again made in disposing of surplus assets in Alberta, Texas and Wimpey Commercial.
Ontario Homes sold 120 homes and closed 81 homes, as well as some significant land sales, to achieve a 7 per cent return on its assets.
Our Canadian housing business continues to rely on a limited number of sites for its housing activity and Millcroft and Creditview subdivisions were the main sources of that activity in the later months of the year.
Whilst the Ontario housing market remain hesitant owing to economic problems which are exacerbated by frustrating political decisions, our business hopes to see enough improvement in the market to support further development of our activities in the Toronto area.
Morrison East with sales of $41 million, closed 312 homes an sold 427 reflecting a substantial improvement in its sales rates and the popularity of its products.
The improving trend that was detected in 1991 therefore continued through 1992.
The performance of the homes sits in the Orlando area -Davenport Glen and Chatham Park — exceeded our expectations, whilst Monterey in Dade County produced a range of homes which appealed very strongly to local residents including some whose motivation to purchase had been prompted by the hurricane while swept through southern Florida last year.
The two large developments at Mount Dora and Beverly Hills, as well as our sites in Atlanta, also experienced improved traffic and sales activity as our marketing plans started to bite more effectively.
Morrison East is now well poised to make a profitable contribution to our business for the first time.
Morrison North with sales of $4.6 million closed 251 homes in 1992.
The Division sold the balance of its homes in Victoria Faire, Las Hadas, Almondwood and Amberwood, thus completing a number of subdivisions which had marked the success of the pre-recession period.
The new developments of Morningside and Chelsea in the Antelope area of Sacramento clearly met the demands of today's buyer in terms of value and quality, but other subdivisions had mixed results.
The weaknesses in the executive homes market and the rural move-up market led to lower sales than anticipated in Bryncliffe and Garland Ranch, whilst at Thornbury it was necessary to add incentives to a successful product in order to maintain sales momentum.
This business is encumbered by a large portfolio of undeveloped residential land which will dilute its ability to make a reasonable return on its assets for some time to come.
As a result it enters 1993 with the twin objectives of expanding its home sales and divesting some of its landholdings.
Morrison South was the subject of our most disappointing decision of the year when it became apparent that our continuing effort to sell homes from a few geographically diverse sites in southern California into a very weak market was proving too expensive a strategy.
We therefore elected to close down our homebuilding operations based in Escondido and concentrate on selling out our inventory and ultimately disposing of our land bank.
The decision was communicated to our staff late in 1992 and I am pleased to say that the wind-down has been handled as efficiently as could be wished.
1992 was clearly a painful year for our operations in California in both trading terms and job losses.
In reducing the scale of our businesses to match reduced markets, we lost many colleagues and friends.
Our on-going employees have also had to participate in the task of keeping costs under control as we freeze salary levels and restructure staff benefits.
However unpalatable, these actions are necessary for the health of our future business.
George Wimpey of Texas, with sales of $6 million, had a good year.
It introduced its Aberdeen Trails development to the market and generated considerable interest in its lot program there; this program complements the Westlake development which is also in Houston.
In addition, the business continued to sell surplus properties as opportunities arose.
The Alberta Land business achieved a turnover of $12.3 million as a result of the sales of properties in the Calgary and Edmonton areas.
We closed down the Calgary office during the year as part of our planned withdrawal from thee Alberta market.
Wimpey Commercial, selling properties in a declining industrial and commercial market in Southern California, achieved a commendable turnover of $5.7 million.
Excellent progress was made in disposing of properties in Arizona when the market was considerably more bullish.
On a broader front, I have been impressed by the various initiatives which have been taken locally to manage costs.
In this highly competitive business, cost control is a major aspect of good management.
I am aware that reducing costs, particularly in the area of construction and materials, has become a key goal throughout the organisation and I support the various task forces which have been set up to explore this aspect of our business.
I anticipate that 1993 will continue to see further improvements in new home sales in most parts of North America, but that our business will still face difficulties, along with the rest of the industry in California.
We continue to explore alternative ways of managing our operations more effectively and generating better returns on the residential landholdings which we control.
I continue to be encouraged by the progress which has been made in maintaining our homebuilding capabilities, and look forward to visiting our sites and local office in order to participate in your successes during 1993.
When children from Juniper Primary School in Edinburgh needed information to complete a special project on building, who better for the school to turn to than Wimpey.
And what better project to visit than the Gyle Centre, WCUK's biggest ever shopping centre contract in Scotland.
The inquisitive 10 and 12 year olds were given a guided tour of the £33 million centre, a joint development between Marks & Spencer, Safeway and Edinburgh District Council.
Due for completion later this year, the precinct will also include 63 individual shop units along with an upper food court with seating for 420 people.
Adjacent is a car park for 2,600 vehicles.
‘The visit was a valuable lesson for the children — and taught us a thing or two at the same time,’ says marketing manager, Jock Miller.
In June, the new centre took a major step towards completion when the Rt Hon Norman Irons, Lord Provost of Edinburgh, attended a special ceremony to fit the last reflective glass panel into place.
The centre is scheduled to open in October.
When Britain's Neil Thomas won a silver medal in the World Gymnastics Championships at Birmingham's National Exhibition Centre in April there were few people cheering louder than Paul Garber.
That's because Paul, Wimpey Homes’ chief planner, plays an extremely active part in the development of gymnastics in this country.
He attended the World Championships as Head of Delegation to the GB team: ‘To see Neil win Britain's first ever medal at this level, competing against gymnasts from the world's strongest nations, can only go to prove that we're getting it right,’ says Paul.
As a member of the Board and Executive of the British Amateur Gymnastics Association which is responsible for shaping the sport in this country, chairman of the Women's Technical Committee and the Commonweath Games Council for England gymnastics representative, Paul takes a high profile role.
‘Our aim is to develop gymnasts from grass roots to top level, paying particular attention to coaching standards, setting the rules and standards for competitions and criteria for team selection.’
The Wimpey connection at the Championships was further strengthened when WCUK Birmingham held a special welcome dinner for the British gymnasts and guests which was attended by regional director, Jeff Adams.
The region also provided the team with stylish Wimpey Worldwide t-shirts to practice in.
There are BAGA affiliated clubs all over Britain.
And surprisingly the sport has no age restrictions.
Children as young as 18 months start with pre school gymnastics activity and at the other end of the scale adults of 60 plus are still competing in veterans competitions.
‘It's an amateur sport in the true sense of the word but one that takes a very professional approach particularly to coaching and judging,’ says Paul.
‘It'a sport which can teach agility and movement at a basic level through to the very high skill levels required to compete at the top.
It is also a sport which is open to disabled people who, in turn, can work towards a place in the Special Olympics.’
East Londoners are set to benefit when Wimpey Homes’ Housing Initiatives London unit starts work on its latest partnership project — a joint venture agreement to build 75 affordable flats and homes on Crown Estate land in Hackney.
The Wimpey team will be working in partnership with the Newlon Housing Trust and New Islington and Hackney Housing Association in conjunction with The Housing Corporation to create the 34 homes for rent and shared ownership.
The remaining homes will be sold on the open market.
When complete Grand Union Place will offer a mixture of one and two bedroom flats and two to four bedroom homes, some with canal-side frontages.
Tony Clipson, Housing Initiatives London's regional manager says: ‘This development is an excellent example of the public and private sectors working together to supply vital social housing in the area.
‘We are meeting urgent local housing needs by providing affordable, high quality new homes and thus an improved quality of life.’
HIBERNIA POUR PUTS PROJECT BACK ON STREAM
The first our of concrete for the massive 106m diameter base slab of the Hibernia oil and gas platform in June marked the start of the construction phase for this, the largest concrete gravity base structure in the world.
And it said, in no uncertain terms, that the uncertainties of the pre-production phase of the project are well and truly over.
Work was halted in 1992 when one of the oil company partners investing in the development pulled out.
It was only this January that the Canadian government stepped in to prop up the project taking a 6.5 per cent share which has subsequently been sold to the Murphy Oil Company of Arkansas.
McNamara is a 29 per cent partner in the joint venture company, Nodeco, which was awarded the £511 million contract in 1990 to build the support structure.
Work will continue around the clock for the next seven months.
Then the ‘ha dock created for the platform will be flooded and the structure towed into deep water.
Once in position the structure will support oil production facilities and will have a holding capacity of 1.3 million barrels of oil a day.
Dear Mr Higham
Thank you for your letter.
I am afraid, however, that I am going to have to give you a disappointing reply.
I have checked with our Information Services manager and he tells me that Wimpey did not take any photographs of military airfields prior to or during the war years.
This must obviously be because of MOD publicity restrictions.
Sorry I couldn't be of more help.
Yours sincerely
HOW IT ALL BEGAN
It was just after the Second World War that Wimpey first established a local presence in the Middle East.
The hope was to take advantage of work opportunities in the road, airfield and oil sectors.
Offices were opened in Bagdad (Iraq) and Cairo (Egypt) and small contracts were quickly won for road and airfield work.
They oil was discovered in Kuwait.
Shortly afterwards Wimpey won its first big oil-related job -a £10 million project to build 500 homes, a shopping centre, hospital, club house and industrial area.
In addition were contracts for the plant, jetty, oil tank foundations and pipelines linked by 150 miles of asphalted roads.
By 1950 the order book was full to overflowing.
Two major contracts had been won in joint venture with the Bechtel International Corporation of America.
The first, to lay a 560 mile pipeline from Kirkuk in Iraq to Banias in Syria.
And the second, a massive £40 million oil refinery development at Aden in South Yemen.
In 1954 work began on the deserted Das Island to build a base for personnel working on a mobile drilling platform in the Arabian Gulf.
In 18 months the 50 man team built an airstrip, camp and water desalination unit.
Wimpey pulled out of Egypt in 1956 and in 1959 a revolution in Iraq terminated operations in Baghdad.
The 1960s was the age of tanker terminals and oil production platforms and during the latter part of the decade Wimpey built its first aluminium smelter in Bahrain.
And in the '70s came an even faster period of great expansion.
Oil prices trebled in 1973 and the resulting revenue fuelled massive development, particularly in Oman.
Wimpey became heavily involved in Oman's drive for modernisation and through Wimpey Alawi has made a major contribution to the fabric of the State by building roads, prestigious offices and government buildings, a police training college, hospitals — including the magnificent £150 million Royal Hospital — and hotels.
In the UAE two companies were formed — Al Futtaim-Wimpey in Dubai and Al-Wimpey Roads and Construction in Abu Dhabi.
One of Al-Futtaim's major contracts was the multi-million pound smelter and desalination plant for the Dubai Aluminium Company completed in 1983.
HM The Queen visited the site in 1979 to inaugurate the first evaporator.
And the performance was repeated in 1989 when Wimpey was contracted to complete an extension to the original Dubai smelter.
Since a Wimpey presence was first established in Jordan in 1979, the company has undertaken many prestigious contracts in the Heshemite Kingdom, including building palaces for the King.
Potash is one of the country's main exports and in 1979 work began on a £65 million extraction plant in Amman.
Further contracts were then awarded in 1981 for a £7.9 million potash handling terminal at Aquaba and for a township adjacent to the plant complete with 24 homes, a hospital, guesthouse and mosque.
Preparing for the off in the London Marathon last April, WCUK Nottingham project manager, John Holder, got his running shoes on to complete the 26 mile 394 yard distance for the first time.
Before the big day John had trained six nights a week to get himself fit.
‘I've been running for several years but only up to half marathon distance,’ he says.
‘Everyone talks about hitting a wall at the 24 mile mark.
And that's just what happened to me.
Those last two miles were the longest I've ever had to run!’
He got through and completed the event in a very respectable three hours 57 minutes.
But the hard work was all in a good cause.
John's efforts raised over £700 for Asthma Research.
DREAM HOLIDAYS IN KENYA, THAILAND OR EGYPT — FROM JUST £489
Wimpey News has teamed up with Kuoni, one of the world's leading travel companies, to offer readers the chance of visiting one of three exotic holiday destinations for little more than the cost of a European holiday.
KENYA — the magic of Africa's wildlife coupled with stunning tropical beaches.
You will depart from Heathrow on a scheduled Kenya Airways flight to Mombasa via Nairobi where you will be met by the Kuoni representative and transferred to the Travellers Beach Hotel.
The 250 bedroom hotel has spacious, air-conditioned rooms with dressing and sitting areas, bath, shower and tv with in-house movies.
Also an angled balcony or terrace.
The hotel has two main restaurants, pizzeria, pool snack bar.
Two freeform swimming pools wind their way through the hotel complex.
There is also a children's pool, shops and a tennis court.
Watersports are available.
For an additional £145 visitors can opt to vacate their hotel rooms for a two-night safari.
The price includes two game drives and full board accommodation at Voi and Ngulia Lodges.
A full valid passport will be required which should not expire for at least three months after your return to the UK.
The average daily temperature from October to December is around 88 degrees Farenheit with nine hours of sunshine per day.
THAILAND — from colourful city centre Bangkok to Pattaya's paradise beaches.
You will depart from Heathrow on a Thai International flight to Bangkok where you will be met by the Kuoni representative and transferred to the Jade Pavilion Hotel for your three night stay.
This modern three-star hotel is conveniently located in the city.
The 255 rooms are air conditioned and have a bath and shower, radio, television with in-house movies, telephone, minibar and hairdryer.
Facilities include a coffee shop, restaurant, lobby bar, shops and small swimming pool.
On day five you depart by road for the three-and-a-half hour journey to the lively resort of Pattaya at the Gulf of Siam.
The excellent three-star Nipa Lodge hotel is set in five acres of tropical gardens.
The 148 rooms are air-conditioned with a shower, music, telephone and minibar.
Other hotel facilities include four restaurants, coffee shop, swimming pool, children's pool and babysitting services.
There are two free tennis courts.
Watersports and golf are available nearby.
A full valid passport will be required which should not expire for at least three months after your return to the UK.
The average daily temperature in October/November is around 88 degrees Farenheit with six/eight hours of sunshine per day.
Rainfall is around 8mm per month in October reducing to 3mm per month in November.
EGYPT — cruise the Nile, soak up the sun and take in 5,000 years of history as you visit the famous sights.
You depart from Gatwick or Manchester for Luxor where you will be met by the Kuoni representative and transferred to the King Tut which will sail from Luxor or Aswan.
The ship has 45 cabins and is fully air-conditioned.
Cabins include a toilet, shower and two lower deck beds.
Three bedroom cabins have one upper berth.
On board facilities include a shop, lounge, bar and dining room.
There is a jacuzzi on deck.
During the week you will stop at a different location each day for an organised excursion.
There are so many historical sights to take in from the ancient temples, the Valley of the Kings on the West Bank to the High Dam at Aswan.
Optional extras: An excursion to the temples of Abu Simbel by air from Luxor via Aswan — £114.
A full valid passport will be required which should not expire for at least six months after your return to the UK.
The average daily temperature is around 86 degrees Farenheit in November reducing to 76 degrees Farenheit in December with up to nine hours of sunshine per day.
HOW TO BOOK
If you would like to book any of the above holidays, require further information or brochures contact Kuoni on 0306 744198 or 0306 744230 and state you are replying to the Wimpey News reader offer.
WIMPEY HOMES
A review by chief executive David Holland
As I am sure you are all well aware 1992 was yet another very difficult trading year for Wimpey Homes.
The general economic uncertainties, and particularly high unemployment damaged the confidence of prospective house buyers.
Despite substantial reductions in mortgage interest rates confidence did not return to the marketplace.
Our businesses held up in Scotland and the North of England with legal completions of 2439, only seven per cent down from 1991.
Completions in the Midlands and South of England were 3103, 17 per cent down from 1991 figures, which reflected both reduced sales outlets as well as the more difficult market.
Throughout our business units staff continued to display enthusiasm, energy and commitment, for which I thank you.
I am confident that during 1993 we are going to achieve significant growth in our business and its profitability despite the probability of continuing difficult trading conditions.
We are now the acknowledged leader in Urban Renewal and Partnership activity and expect to achieve close to 2500 completions this year.
The Government remains committed to using Housing Associations as the principal provider of rented accommodation and our long established links with both Local Authorities and Housing Associations should enable us to continue to enjoy a substantial share of this market.
We have worked hard in ‘92 to examine every facet of our business to see where efficiencies can be made in our working practices.
This has already resulted in substantial savings in our construction costs, selling expenses and overheads.
The process is ongoing and is not just an exercise for ‘management’.
All of you can make a significant contribution by using your experience from your own workplace to improve our efficiency further and help us do the job ‘right first time’.
Of course our cost reductions are not being achieved at the expense of quality in our building standards.
Once again our site managers have won numerous awards in the NHBC Pride in the Job competition.
In December we also won the Daily Express ‘Housebuilder of the Year’ award.
This particular accolade results from opinions given by our own buyers and coming as it does after four years of recession speaks volumes for our commitment to quality and customer care.
Wimpey Homes Overseas and Wimpey Leisure
The French housing market has been as difficult as the UK throughout 1992 resulting in only 150 sales and 241 legal completions.
Predictions for 1993 are only marginally better, hence the emphasis on efficiency and cost reduction will be stronger than ever.
The divisional reorganisation, linking France with Southampton and Witham will lead to greater integration.
When market conditions improve our businesses in France and Spain will provide excellent footholds to the larger European market.
Despite the economy in Australia being much th same as for our businesses in other parts of the world, we still managed to achieve our budget with over 500 lot sales.
The market now seems to be improving and we are anticipating a substantial increase in our volumes during 1993.
The leisure business continues to be once again seriously affected by the recession.
We have again looked hard at our working practices and cost base and have made substantial changes.
We will continue to do this so that we can trade as efficiently as possible on our resorts in Spain and the Canary Islands.
The Year Ahead
I hope that these very brief summaries of our business do not leave you feeling depressed after the fourth year of recession in our industry because we all have a good deal to be optimistic about.
I referred earlier to the effort that we made during 1992 to make ourselves both more efficient and more profitable.
We are also implementing strategies that will strengthen our position in the market, leading to a profitable expansion of our business in the future.
Great emphasis is being placed upon local decision making thereby giving regional management much more direct control and financial responsibility for their business.
We have set up a new company, Strategic Land Management Limited which will manage and add value to all longer term land within Wimpey Homes.
This will leave regions too concentrate primarily on short-term trading objectives.
I do not expect that in the short-term we will see our industry producing 200,000 new houses a year, but I do expect that Wimpey Homes will take an increasing market share of a more stable total market.
We will achieve this be exceeding our customers’ expectations not just leaving them ‘satisfied’.
We intend to focus much more on our customers and their needs so that in all we do, from land purchase to after-sales service, we recognise that we need to be a customer driven company.
In order for us to maximise our returns to our shareholders we must continue to examine every facet of our business, question our way of working and look for greater efficiency.
There must be no ‘sacred cows’ an I hope all of you will assist and will recognise that everyone can make a contribution.
Our business is budgeted to expand by 25 per cent in 1993 and I expect trading conditions to improve as buyers appreciate current values and the affordability of our new homes.
I am confident of our ability to meet any challenge and opportunity we meet during the year and I wish you all every success.
There was a loud cheer when three Wimpey yellow mobile cabins arrived at Hythe County Infants school in Kent.
Straight away the units were fixed into place at the back of the school building.
They will provide a permanent base for a new community centre for local parents with young children.
The facility, provided by Wimpey Plant & Transport, will be transformed into the new ‘pop in’ facility, the brainchild of the Hythe Education Liaison Programme (HELP).
The unit will have a private consultation room and open plan area for social activities as well as kitchen and toilet facilities.
Importantly, it will provide a base for education and health professionals to meet with parents.
There will also be a service for parents with pre-school children.
A liaison officer will be on hand every afternoon to advise.
Peter Rosie, Wimpey Plant & Transport manager says: ‘We are delighted to be able to help in this important education liaison project.
It will enable staff to assist and accompany parents in the overall development of their children.’
With summer on its way, the last thing you'd expect to find anywhere in Britain is an igloo.
And that puts Wimpey's Liverpool training centre in a unique position.
Because the centre can boast its very own igloo — although admittedly it's made out of bricks and not ice!
The igloo has a domed roof inside as well as out.
Building it was be no easy task but one which was undertaken with great enthusiasm by Employment Training bricklaying trainees Ian Gannon, Mark Pendleton and Neil Gregson.
As their instructor, Leo Shore, is the first to admit: ‘If you can build an igloo out of bricks you can build anything.
There's nothing more difficult — it's a real feat of engineering.’
The igloo idea was Leo's: ‘It was designed to put the trainees’ skills to the test while at the same time motivating them and holding their interest.’
WIMPEY CONSTRUCTION UK
MIDLANDS, WEST & WALES has won a £1 million contract to refurbish 324 houses and flats on the Pool Farm Estate in Birmingham for Birmingham City Council.
NORTHERN region has won a £3.2 million contract for the North Western Regional Health Authority to build a three storey building linking to the Royal Albert Edward Infirmary in Lancashire.
The ground floor of the new building will accommodate physiotherapy and hydrotherapy departments, orthopaedic clinic and an x-ray room.
The upper floors will be for two 50 bed adult acute wards and accommodation.
A £4.5 million contract has been awarded by ADT Auctions to construct a new vehicle auction centre in Nottingham.
The building will include an auction hall, valeting and inspection areas, a wash bay and entry control.
Work has started on a £17.6 million project to build a five storey office headquarters in Rochdale for Co-operative Retail Services.
The development is due for completion in December, 1994.
SCOTLAND has won a £1.1 million contract for Strathclyde Regional Council to build the St John The Baptist Primary School for 495 pupils in Uddingston.
A £1.3 million contract has been awarded by Williamsburgh HA to build the second phase of new housing at Fergislie Park
LONDON & SOUTH EAST has won a £3.9 million contract to build student accommodation for the University of Hertfordshire.
Works comprise eleven blocks of six bedroom apartments and two warden flats.
A £4.1 million project has been awarded to design and build a new South Stand at West Ham United's Upton Park football ground in east London.
The scheme will nearly double the seating capacity of the stadium, creating an additional 7,650 seats.
The two tier stand has been specially designed to give fans a clear view of the pitch.
Situated between the two levels will be 19 hospitality boxes with full catering facilities for up to 200 people together with a club lounge and offices.
The region has won a £4.1 million contract from News International for refurbishment work at the existing printworks in Virginia Street, London EC1.
Grove Projects is the consulting engineer.
Work has started on a £5.3 million project for Netherhall Educational Association to demolish existing premises at Netherhall Gardens and build a school building, two accommodation blocks and a conference centre.
WIMPEY ENGINEERING & CONSTRUCTION
Wimpey Alawi has been awarded a £2.4 million project by
Internal Security Services to build a three storey office extension at its Oman headquarters.
WIMPEY WESSEX WATER
A £7.5 million project has been awarded by Wessex Water Engineering Services for the design and construction of a new water treatment works in Bridgwater, Somerset.
WIMPEY CANADA
McNamara Construction has won paving contracts worth £8.7 million for the Canadian Government's Department of Works, Services & Transportation.
The first is for road upgrading and paving of Route 92 from North Harbour to Branch, a distance of around 23 km.
The second contract is for paving 12km of Route 212 between Little Bay East and Harbour Mille.
Also recapping, shouldering and paving 4km of Route ‘0-10 from Little Bay to Beau Bois.
Three separate paving contracts have been won for work on the Trans Canada highway which runs from Lake Superior in Ontario to Vancouver in British Colombia.
These include work on 13km of highway from Riverside Drive to Massey Drive, from Salmonier Line to Middle Gull Pond including ramps and secondary roads and the 7.7km of highway between Middle Gull Pond to Brigus Junction.
Wimpey Construction UK
Midlands, West & Wales has been awarded a £1.4 million contract by the Ministry of Education to build a two-storey extension to the Pates Grammar School in Cheltenham.
A £10.3 million contract has been awarded by C&G Property Holdings to construct a three-storey office block in Barnwood, Gloucester.
The region has won a £3 million contract awarded by Birmingham City Council to repair and redecorate 7078 council homes.
A £1.1 million contract has been awarded by Defence Works Services to build portal frame and mono pitch structures at the School of Infantry in Wiltshire.
London & South East has started work on a £3.1 million contract to design and build 105 residential units in Norwich.
Northern region has been awarded an £8.4 million contract by Merseyside Improved Houses to build three phases of housing (subject to funding) at Brownlow Hill, Liverpool.
The first phase, to build 63 new homes and refurbish nine flats, is under way.
Work has begun on a £13.3 million development for Foss Development Corporation to build three, four and five storey office buildings and three storey car park in York.
The project is expected to be completed by September, 1994.
Wimpey Engineering & Construction
Wimpey International has been awarded a US$38 million contract by the Arab Potash Company for new plant and facilities at the company's refinery in Jordan.
Works include the provision of a slurry transport system, processing plant, crystallization and dewatering plant, storage and loading facilities, sewage lagoons, control, laboratory and electrical switch room buildings.
The work is expected to be completed by February, 1994.
The company has won a £24 million contract awarded by the United Overseas Bank for an extension and extensive alterations to its 38-storey Plaza 2 offices in Singapore.
Work will include demolition and reconstruction of the building's first six storeys, demolition of the existing roof to create five further storeys, demolition and reconstruction of basements, alterations and reconstruction of office floors, demolition of internal walls, floors, ceiling finishes, plant rooms and all existing mechanical and electrical services, installation of new services stripping external glazed panels and mosaic tiles and re-cladding with granite/glass curtain walling.
Grove Projects
An £8 million contract has been awarded by Astra Pharmaceuticals for the refurbishment of the company's headquarters building and construction of a new research facility in King's Langley.
Grove Projects will also act as consulting engineer.
IN FOCUS
SMOKING BAN IN SHARED WORK AREAS
The railways have done it, the airlines have done it — even the French Government has done it!
And now Wimpey…from
September this year the Group is introducing a no-smoking policy for all communal areas, with decisions for individual offices to be agreed by consensus on a departmental basis.
The move is not designed to penalise smokers or to force them to change.
It is to protect non-smokers from the health risks of passive smoking — risks which all those concerned with the welfare of employees, or the public at large, are having to face up to .
Group physician, Doctor Mike Phelan, applauds the decision.
‘Within the next few weeks it is proposed, as a first step, to ban smoking in large areas of Wimpey offices.
Maybe at a later date a total ban will be introduced.
That has already happened in many major companies, at The Midland Bank and Marks & Spencer for example.
But why ban smoking?
Why should we at Wimpey be bothered about the general health of the staff?
Are we restricting the freedom of the individual?
In answer is that we are banning smoking because smoking in any form is bad for you.
We are concerned for many reasons about the health of staff, but particularly when we know that illness and disease can be greatly lessened when smoking is reduced or stopped altogether.
The freedom of the individual is important; everyone is entitled to a smoke-free environment.
In fact, only a minority of people now smoke in Wimpey offices.
But perhaps the following data will encourage some of this minority to stop:
For those who do smoke 25 or more cigarettes a day, the death rate from lung cancer is increased 20 times.
For all cardiovascular diseases, the increase is two to three times.
For chronic bronchitis, 20 times.
And for peptic ulceration — four to five times.
Smokers really should take this opportunity to give up this addictive habit once and for all.
It will be hard, as only one in ten succeed in abstaining for more than a year.
But please try and be one of the winners.
You will be the loser if you do not.’
AND AGAINST…
‘I have been smoking cigarettes for years.
Obviously, I am aware of the health risks but believe the choice to smoke is mine, and mine alone.
Smokers today are quite often made to feel like social outcasts by the moral majority.
I agree that nobody should be forced to breathe in other people's cigarette smoke.
But this should be a matter of manners rather than draconian policies.
I think it is right that everyone should be given the freedom to choose whether or not they want to work in a smoking or non-smoking office and separate areas created to cater for both factions.
For one thing this would prevent people from leaving their desks to find a more private area where they can light up.
The smoking issue is a highly emotive one.
There are always going to be people who will come out strongly for or against it.
But as long as tobacco continues to be readily available there is never going to be an easy answer.’
IN FOCUS
Hampered by a lack of guidelines the Chancellor's initiative to encourage private investment in public projects is off to a slow start.
Mike Moseling, project finance manager, discusses how such joint ventures could work for Wimpey in the future.
The Government is responsible for providing a wide range of services from railways and roads to hospitals and clinics.
Traditionally it has managed projects itself.
But more recently there has been a limited amount of private sector involvement.
Projects such as the Channel Tunnel and the Dartford Bridge are prominent examples.
Wimpey is currently negotiating to provide private finance to build a conference centre for a Government training establishment.
We have also been in negotiation to privately finance a port facility in joint venture with Central Government and the Local Authority.
The Chancellor announced in last November's Autumn Statement that he wished to enhance this private sector involvement.
He wants to make it easier for Government Departments to carry out projects using private investors and the commercial banks.
How is this to be done?
The Government is the most credit-worthy (!) body in the country and so can borrow more cheaply than any other institution.
In the past a private sector proposal had to demonstrate that funding costs would be less than if it was carried out by the Government.
Now it is easier as all that has to be shown is value for money and that the private sector is shouldering the risk of not being paid.
The application of finance to projects is not a unique idea (take your mortgage, for example).
Many opportunities apply in both the private as well as the public sector and can be employed to help Wimpey obtain a competitive advantage in markets from power and water to education.
It would be nice to think that a rapid flow of projects will be generated by this initiative and in due course this may be so.
Wimpey has regular meetings with senior officials from the Treasury and other departments and we have every expectation that the Government will provide the commercial support necessary to make such projects financially viable.
But there are political problems to be overcome especially with the major projects.
The development of projects with private finance will not guarantee profit because of the additional risks involved, some of which are outside Wimpey's control.
In addition, competition may mean that we are unable to recoup our initial investment even if we win the contract.
However, there will be projects worth pursuing and in which Wimpey may have an advantage by using its ability to present proposals with finance from the private sector.
Steeped in history and glamour, rich in oil and gas, the Middle East has provided Wimpey with a steady stream of work.
A major player in the Middle East market over the last 45 years, Wimpey has experience a resurgence in workload during the last two years, with over £100 million of contracts awarded in the building, civil engineering and oil sectors.
It's an upward trend that Wimpey International managing director Roddy MacIver wants to see continue.
‘We aim to increase the flow of work in our areas of traditional strength — like Oman, Dubai and Abu Dhabi,’ he says.
‘But we also expect to benefit from longer term opportunities in other potential markets.
In Kuwait for instance.
And Lebanon which will shortly be coming back on stream after 20 years of civil unrest.’
More excellent news is the company's return to Jordan after a six year absence to construct an extension to the Arab Potash plant.
There are further work opportunities on the horizon in Kuwait, where Wimpey expects the future to be in joint ventures.
‘It makes sense to pool resources and can only increase our opportunities of winning a share of the work,’ Roddy MacIver says.
The first joint venture began in July 1991 at the start of the post-war reconstruction of Kuwait's damaged infrastructure.
Wimpey joined forces with Taylor Woodrow and Amec to form the Kuwaiti British Fire Group and the consortium successfully completed a major contract for damage assessment and subsequent refurbishment of two oil fields.
Now Wimpey and Taylor Woodrow have formed a new partnership — the Kuwait Anglo Defence Group.
The new company is already working on its first major contract, worth £20 million, to rebuild the country's naval base.
Our order book in the Middle East reflects the first-class reputation Wimpey has built over the years for the scope of its expertise and excellence of its workforce.
It is these factors which are helping to secure contracts in what is a highly competitive market.
In the not so distant future Wimpey's decision to run its Middle East operation from Dubai under the directorship of Hugh Hayden will give a massive fillip to our ability to secure work in the region.
Our current and future workload in the Middle East does more than just spell good news for the company.
It also offers the ideal opportunity for employees to expand their work experience.
Already more than 80 Wimpey expatriates are working in the Middle East.
Roddy MacIver says: ‘Working overseas is a marvellous opportunity for career development.
The work broadens people's horizons because not only will they have to turn their hand to many different jobs but they will also get used to working in different environments and with other people with new ideas and traditions.
This invaluable experience and can only stand people in good stead for when they return to the UK.’
But many don't return and become hooked on the overseas lifestyle!
Long hours are often needed but there are many bonuses — year round sunshine for one, and a tax efficient salary package for another.
If this article has whetted your appetite you can find out more about working overseas for Wimpey by ringing personnel manager Kitty McBain on 081-846 2970.
In the Jon Hollingworth Inter-Departmental cup finals at Hammersmith, ITD took on Environmental in a battle for this year's honours.
And the communications specialists came out on top — by just seven points — 55-47.
Twelve teams made up of staff from 20 departments entered the competition to compete in five sports — squash, snooker, darts, pool and table-tennis.
The teams were split into three groups and played each other in a round-robin.
The winners from each group — ITD, Wimpey Construction Technical Services; Environmental and Wimpey Group Services — played for a place in the finals.
Winning team captain Mike Kemp says: ‘It was all good fun and every game was played in the right spirit.
Luckily we had a strong team and managed to gain a lot of points which ultimately clinched it for us.’
JORDAN
The hills shouldering the Dead Sea Valley in Jordan are echoing the sound of Welcome Back — Shurikat Wimpey.
To some of the Wimpey International team working on the Arab Potash Expansion plant it is a trip down memory lane.
To others it is a new experience in a country rich in religious history.
Either way, the contract represents a repeat performance for Wimpey International returning to construct an extension to the original plant built by the company in 1979.
‘It's heartening to know that the refinery has stood the test of time despite the harsh climate,’ reports chief engineer Tony Ferdinand.
‘So much so that the client wants to retain many of its original features.’
Originally Wimpey constructed the dykes, pumping stations, canal and Aquaba facilities at the plant where Potash, a valuable fertilizer, is produced.
Salt from sea water, pumped from the Dead Sea nearby is collected in a structure rather like a swimming pool which is contained within a series of dykes.
The natural drying action of the sun leaves a Carnallite solution which is rich in Potassium Chloride.
This is processed and after various chemical stages is converted into Potash powder and transported, in bulk, to the Port of Aquaba where it is exported to Third World nations.
Returning to the site to work on the current $38 million contract is project director Ray Hodgson and Charles Stewart, construction manager.
Ray says: ‘It seems that life has changed very little in the area since the initial contract completion.
The only difference is that this time the scope of our work is civil, mechanical and electrical.
Completing the team in Jordan are: Matt Dolan, managing the Civil and Building section who joins the project from WEC's Mere to Wincanton by-pass contract in Somerset.
And Dave Fowler, mechanical supervisor; Billy Bunn, office manager; John Flint, electrical supervisor and Hugh Chisholm, piping supervisor who have been working on the ENRON power station contract in Teesside.
Other team members include Alan Torrence, Mick McKenna, John O'Brien, Richard Torah, Gordon Standerwick, Alan Fox, Dave Jefferson, Richard Golke and Watty Sutherland — all long-term Wimpey employees redeployed from Middle East contracts.
Civils work is now under way with the construction of the massive foundations for the bases for the steelwork structures that house all the mechanical plant.
That is just the start.
By the time the contract is completed in February 1994 over 10,000 cubic metres of concrete, 3000 tons of structure steelwork, 500 items of mechanical plant, 44km of pipe, 30 tanks and vessels, and a new conveyor system at the Port of Aquaba, 200km south, will have been put into place.
A staggering challenge in such a short period.
KATE'S GREEN TOUCHES GIVE A COLOURFUL FINISH
Ask Kate Bridger how she'd apply the finishing touches to a new Wimpey Homes development and the chances are she'll give you a colourful answer.
That's because Kate is employed by Wimpey Homes as a landscape architect responsible for all developments in the North East.
And it's her job to ensure that each and every one of them is blooming lovely.
‘It's all a matter of mixing and matching,’ she says.
‘The exhibition areas have to look good summer and winter alike.
I will use evergreens like laurels, holly and juniper for year round interest coupled, in summer, with deciduous shrubs like modern shrub roses which need little maintenance and flower throughout the summer.
‘Daffodil, tulip, snowdrop and crocus bulbs are inexpensive and, planted in the autumn, give a mass of spring colour.
And summer and winter bedding plants complement the finished effect.
I also like to make use of climbers like honeysuckle, clemetis and jasmine to draw attention away from walls and fences.’
But it's not just the type of plants used in a garden that matters.
‘I like to pick colour schemes for each different area maybe concentrating on pinks in one road and yellows and whites in another,’ says Kate.
‘Every new development gets an individual approach — I don't stick to any formula.
But I will take such things as the brickwork, or maybe the roof tiles into account, and work to achieve a complementary landscape.’
Kate joined Wimpey Homes nine years ago and now works out of the Middlesbrough office although covers the entire region from Berwick-upon-Tweed in the North down to Sheffield.
She holds a diploma in Landscape Architecture from Manchester Polytechnic.
She lists her personal favourite plant as Mexican Orange Blossom, an evergreen shrub.
it grows to around two metres in height and has glossy aromatic foliage with fragrant start-shaped flowers.
The exotic influence may stem from the fact that her dream garden would be one of the Moorish gardens of Southern Spain such as The Alhambra in Granada.
But down to business…
She admits that when it comes to perfecting a job out on site it's definitely teamwork that wins the day:
It's the secret of a successful show home landscape.
I work closely with Wimpey's architects, engineers and the sales force to achieve the best results for each new development.’
This attention to detail begins at the initial planning stage when Kate will work with the architects and engineers on the proposed layout.
From her meetings she will formulate a landscape plan.
As part of this she has to determine what type of landscaping is required according to the style of development and the buyers it will attract — from first-time buyers through to the luxury end of the market.
With plans formulated, Kate is then allocated a budget to cover all aspects of the landscaping.
As well as buying the necessary trees, shrubs, paving, fencing and seating required, Kate also gives attention to retaining the character of each site by ensuring that any existing trees or features of natural beauty
are preserved and incorporated into the design.
This was the case at The Belfy near Leeds which, last year, won a Greenleaf Housing Award for conservation.
It's all part of Wimpey's commitment to caring for the environment.
This year, two further developments are up for environmental honours — Northumberland Village in Whitley Bay and The Paddocks near Hull.
Kate says she would like to be able to take more of a hands-on approach to her job.
‘Although the heavy work is carried out by landscape contractors I love it when I can get out and add a few personal touches,’ she says.
‘At the end of the day the ability to be able to bring paper plans to life in the garden gives me a lot of job satisfaction.’
RIVERBANK SCHEME NETS NORTHERN MAJOR CATCH
A £13 million scheme to create an imaginative river-front office development in York gained its first ground in March when the Lord Mayor of York, Councillor Bernard Bell climbed aboard a JCB to cut the first sod.
WCUK Northern is now busy preparing the groundwork for the three office buildings and three storey car park which will be built at the three acre site just outside the city centre.
When completed next autumn, the King's Pool offices, being built for the Foss Development Corporation, will house 600 administration staff from the Ministry of Agriculture Fisheries and Food.
I don't suppose you will remember me, but I was the winner of second prize in last year's Wimpey News Photo Competition — a Spa Day at Ragdale Hall Health Hydro.
When I received your ‘phone call telling me I had won I was dumbfounded.
Me — at a health farm — it's the last place I could see myself, especially with my build which resembles that of a heavyweight wrestler but without the muscles!
My family and friends all had a good laugh at my expense.
And with those echoes ringing in my ears I booked up my day — and contemplated my fate.
I arrived at Ragdale Hall in a somewhat frenzied condition after a horrendous journey in which I encountered over 20 major roadworks and the JCBs’ annual day out!
But my bad mood soon disappeared in the relaxed, carefree and friendly atmosphere that greeted me.
What a place!
After my health check I opted to use the fully equipped gym for my first workout followed by a cycle ride to the local village and back.
I returned to the gym for a second workout and really pushed myself.
After all, it was nearly lunch time.
Lunch was excellent with a variety of dishes to choose from.
I decided on a further session in the gym before making my grand entry to the spa complex.
Twelve lengths of the pool and it was time for my aquatone class — which turned out to be aerobics in water.
I was glad when that was over and swam a further four lengths to unwind.
The steam room was bliss.
Then I gave the Jacuzzi a try.
After a spell in the sauna I had to make a choice.
Whether to take a warm shower or jump into the plunge pool filled with ice cold water.
I made my choice and went for it.
I jumped in, let out a few expletives and was out again just as quickly.
Feeling really invigorated I decided to spend my remaining time in the gym and let those machines really know that I meant business!
I had a really great time.
When Iarrived home that night I fell into bed and went straight to sleep.
I'm sure you can imagine how I felt the next morning — I couldn't move a muscle!
Everytime I receive Wimpey News I look for a mention of where I work.
But alas one never appears.
I mention it to staff and they say ‘Oh, we won't be in it, we don't do any building.’
I therefore thought I would write to let your readers know about Brantridge Park — a beautiful mansion house once owned by Queen Victoria's grand-daughter, Princess Alice, which is set in the heart of the Sussex countryside.
At Brantridge we all work very hard to make Wimpey timeshare and RCI members’ holidays a memorable one.
In fact we have been so good at it that we have been awarded the RCI Gold Star for the second year running.
And that's quite an achievement because the Gold Star award is only given to five per cent of resorts in the world.
It would be a lovely surprise if the Brantridge staff could get a mention in Wimpey News.
I am pleased to be able to write with the news that Wimpey Homes’ Luton and Southampton offices are joint winners of Wimpey's Lewis Cup for safety.
The competition is judged on accident statistics.
Ours were both nil — the lowest recorded throughout the country.
The cup was handed over to our regional director, Mike Mann by safety director, Brian Cowie at a special presentation attended by all staff.
As the honours have been shared, Luton will hold the cup for six months and then it will go to Southampton.
Mike Mann praised the site agents out in the field, saying that the accident figures achieved weren't just luck.
He said that they were a result of a positive and concerted effort by all managers and subcontractors to identify and control risks before an accident could occur.
The charity Living Earth is dedicated to creating a new generation of environmentally aware consumers, producers and decision makers.
It shares many of the values of Wimpey Environmental and needed help to produce an educational leaflet for schools, the charity approached Wimpey Environmental for help.
‘Living Earth believes in the power of education.
By developing high quality, exciting and unbiased educational materials we aim to encourage children to analyse environmental issues carefully and to understand the options available for protecting the environment,’ explains corporate fundraiser, Elizabeth Walker.
Wimpey Environmental managing director Mike Lynch presented a cheque for £2,000 from the George Wimpey Charitable Trust to charity chief executive Roger Hammond.
‘We are pleased to be able to help Living Earth continue its valuable work and we are already looking at ways of continuing our association,’ said Mike Lynch.
THIRD TIME LUCKY FOR ENVIRONMENTAL
Wimpey Environmental's consultancy contract with the London Waste Regulatory Authority has been extended to a third year — bringing the total value of the work to over £1 million since 1991.
The contract involves sampling, analysis and assessment at more than 200 waste disposal points throughout central London and its surrounding boroughs, including existing and former landfills, transfer stations and public tipping sites
‘London has the same waste disposal problems as any other city, but, because of the capital's size and the density of its population, any difficulties are on a much larger scale,’ says Wimpey Environmental project manager, Phil Ellis.
‘Because of changes in the law, we are now required to place much greater emphasis on how waste is disposed of and the risk of contamination through inadequate control.
It is vital that our site work and written reports are of the highest standards because if there were a transgression they may be used as legal evidence.’
As part of its contract Wimpey is developing a database on groundwater and landfill gas in the London area.
HOSPITAL WATCH
‘Working in an environment like a hospital, pre-planning is vital to ensure the least possible disturbance,’ says Dave Lomas, senior project manager.
‘Where patient health can be at risk, you simply cannot afford to be out of line with the programme of works.’
That was the case at North Manchester General Hospital, where Wimpey Construction UK Northern worked alongside staff and patients to build a new £18 million wing to the existing hospital.
Disturbance to the day-to-day activities therefore had to be kept to a minimum.
Building out of hours was not an option as the hospital operates around the clock.
The result for the North Manchester Regional Health Authority — despite the difficulties — is a striking addition to its health care provision in Manchester.
The new 160 bed hospital wing has been completed to the highest standards.
Wall, ceiling and floor finishes all fall within minimum tolerance levels of 3mm.
The brickwork in the x-ray theatre is crossed, bonded and covered with a barium rich plaster which ensures that the room is sealed from radiation leakage.
Gone are the cavernous corridors of Victorian days which still characterise so many hospitals.
Instead, life in the hospital is centred along streets which run the length of the three floors of the development.
Even ward names, such as Ancoats and Monsall — the names of nearby districts — inject a local feel to emphasise its connection with the neighbouring community.
Some of the most unusual features are in the infectious disease ward.
Each of the 50 rooms is completely sealed to prevent contact with the outside world.
Even the water taps have been replaced by electromagnetic sensors which spring into action when a hand is waved within 100 mm of the sensor.
One of the critical points of construction came when the new wing was connected with the main body of the hospital.
The link was adjacent to the neurological ward and special care baby unit.
A wall had to be demolished, and patients on these wards could not be subjected to the unavoidable dust and noise which would result.
For months, the WCUK team worked in tandem with staff nurses to ensure that when the programme reached the breakthrough stage, the patients could be evacuated to another part of the hospital.
‘We were able to give the staff a fixed date well in advance of the work starting on the link,’ says Dave Lomas.
‘THis gave the nurses and doctors plenty of time to plan patient treatment — delaying or bringing forward operations.
Special measures were taken from the outset to control noise, dust and fumes.
Even during piling an compacting, ‘silent’ plant equipment was selected to keep the noise down to an acceptable sound level.
The necessary planning, the tight scheduling and the quality control brought together all the right ingredients to complete the contract on time and to budget.
WIMPEY MINING
A review by managing director John Chance
In 1992 we continued to expand our coal production, and mined 1.7 million tonnes by the year end.
A splendid team effort!
PEOPLE
In the year we had a large number of retirements; Danny Davies, Gwyn Bowen, Dudley Powell and Harry Nelson from Ffos Las; George Collis, Ritchie Williams and Vernon Williams from Gilfach Iago and John Kilkenny from Potatopot.
I would particularly like to note the retirements of some long service colleagues, Jim Brennan 44 years; Tom Dunleavy, 40 years; Del Rees, 35 years and Tom Matthews, 31 years; they were all key members of the team which rebuilt the mining business of Wimpey during the last ten years.
May I wish all our new pensioners, along with the existing ones, and all their families, good health and a long retirement.
Special mention is also due for Dorothy TeeBoon, John Rowlands and Hughie Maguire with 30 years’ service.
Ifan Lewis with 25 years and Roger Williams with 21 years.
FIFTY YEARS IN OPENCAST MINING
Last year the British opencast industry celebrated its 50th anniversary.
Wimpey came into the business a year later, and our birthday is in 1993.
AROUND THE SITES
During the year we completed operations at Foxhouse and Trinity sites.
Potatopot has continued efficiently despite ever increasing geological difficulties.
We have now finished coaling at Chapmans Well, but had to wait right to the very end for the best coal.
Ffos Las continues as a well run and efficient operation, and coal input is set to climb.
Gilfach Iago and Inclino Top continued like clockwork and gave us no surprises.
NEW WORK
In late summer we won the contract from Ryehill, a major reclamation scheme just east of Durham.
Here we will recover over one million tonnes of coal, partially by washing, and get rid of a major eyesore left by deep mining.
Christmas Eve brought us the good news that we had also been awarded Phase II of the East Merthyr Reclamation Scheme, known as Great White Tip.
This is just across the road from Incline Top and should produce 650,000 tonnes of coal.
THE FUTURE
When privatising electricity, the Government ‘rigged’ the energy market by giving a hugh share of the coal business to more expensive gas, and heavily subsidised nuclear plants.
This means that British Coal has to shut down a large amount of its production capacity, and this they attempted last autumn.
Their intention was to close 31 pits immediately, and leave a coal industry of about 20 pits and opencast at its present level.
Due to public outcry and a revolt from their own MPs, the Government instituted several enquiries into the coal industry.
The important one for us has just reported back.
It recommends halving opencast within five years and subsidising deep mines by over £5 per tonne to produce the coal instead of us!
If the Government accepts this ridiculous advice, half of us will be put on the dole.
And to rub salt into the wounds, we will have to pay more for our electricity in order to subsidise nuclear and deep mined coal.
We can't let it happen.
Wimpey and the other opencast producers are fighting this, but you have to do your part.
I hope that by the time you read this report we will have got several protests off the ground.
Give them your support if you want a job.
Don't think that because you are on a long term site you are secure; one has already closed in Cumbria and more could follow.
The Government has not yet made its mind up, and so we have all to play for.
Thanks to you for your hard work in 1992 and my best wishes to you and your families in 1993.
Wimpey's ‘Sunshine Miners’ celebrate 50 years of opencast coal production this year.
Managing director John Chance pays tribute to the teams who have built Wimpey Mining into one of the UK's largest mining contractors and examines the prospects for the industry following privatisation.
Modern miners no longer slip comfortably into a scene from ‘How Green Was My Valley’.
New equipment and working practices have made coal recovery easier and safer.
And the transformation has not just taken place underground.
Since it first started 51 years ago, opencast mining, too, has seen remarkable changes.
The opencast industry was developed during World War II as a way of increasing coal production by using machines and fewer men.
Wimpey was one of the first contractors to take part, carrying out mining as a subdivision of its contracting activities and using non specialist equipment.
‘The equipment and methods of production have improved out of all recognition since that time,’ says John Chance.
‘In the environmental field especially, opencast mining companies have developed a reputation for minimum disruption and scrupulous site restoration.
What has not changed is the industry's ability to produce good quality coal at an affordable price.’
Fifty years on, Wimpey Mining (which was formed into a separate company in 1984) has evolved to become one of British Coal's largest contractors, with production exceeding 1.7 million tonnes in 1992.
It is also one of the major voices in the industry, with John Chance acting as chairman of the Federation of Civil Engineering Contractors’ Opencast Coal Committee for the last two years.
The company is currently operating eight sites and has just moved to a new office in South Normanton, Derbyshire.
In Durham, work on a £20 million contract secured in 1992 is just commencing at Rye Hill.
Meanwhile the nearby Chapman's Well site is being restored.
In Cumbria the Potato Pot site is to finish coal extraction this year, after which it will, in turn, be restored.
South Wales contains four sites: Ffos Las, Gilfach Iago, Incline Top and Great White Tip all of which are in full production.
The South Wales mines include two western European record breakers.
Ffoss Las is the deepest opencast mine going to a depth of 650 feet.
The East Merthyr Scheme is the largest area of land reclamation and includes both the Incline Top and Great White Tip sites.
Work at Merthyr is being undertaken in conjunction with the local borough and county councils and also the Welsh Development Agency and will result in a major regeneration of the area — including new homes and community facilities.
The latest site is at Bleak House in Staffordshire.
This £30 million contract, won this Spring, is the first site the company has worked in the South Midlands.
‘We have moved against the trend in opencast mining, which has tended to shrink in response to the general recession and hiatus in the underground coal mining industry.
Next year we will extract over 2.5 million tonnes of coal and could well be British Coal's largest contract supplier by 1994,’ claims John Chance, ‘but there is no room for complacency in an industry which is very much at a watershed.’
He continues: ‘We have guaranteed work until the 21st century.
But our future as a business depends on us playing a full role in privatisation in whatever form that takes.
To some extent that means waiting on events.
To move forward we are laying plans now so that we are in a position to take advantage of whatever the future offers.’
The 600 staff and operatives are well aware that they have everything to play for.
The management team includes commercial director Ifan Lewis, production manager Mike Jenkins and plant manager David Toft.
All have had extensive experience of opencast mining both in the UK and overseas.
‘Ultimately we will have to substitute contract work with privately-owned operations.
We are looking at several opportunities and will benefit from our involvement with the quarrying side of Wimpey Minerals which has always been involved in marketing its products on a free-market basis,’ says John Chance.
Along with the rest of the team he is looking forward to the challenge.
WIMPEY MINERALS INTERNATIONAL
An introduction by managing director Andrew Panter
1992 was, for all our businesses, probably the most difficult trading year in recent memory and, with some limited exceptions, the effects of the recession were reflected in our results.
In the USA, notwithstanding our expectations of an improving workload in an election year, the recession in the construction industry deepened.
As a result margins suffered from competitive price pressures despite improved lime sales and increased tonnages of drystone from our Pennsylvania quarries, due primarily to our expanding rail distribution network.
In order to improve competitiveness Wimpey Minerals in the USA has now been rationalised into one operating company and the resulting increased efficiencies, together with production costs reductions being introduced, will begin to show in 1993.
Our Canadian business, which underwent an organisational restructuring the previous year, was able to benefit in 1992 and both drystone and coated tonnages were significantly higher enabling the business to offset price weakness in the marketplace and exceed its budget.
1992 also saw the establishment of two new aggregate businesses serving the European market with the opening of the new Wimpey Fleming joint venture coastal quarry in Bantry Bay, Ireland and the acquisition of a controlling interest in Severokamen, the first state owned quarrying business in the Czech Republic to be privatised.
Although the markets served by those businesses remained at a low level throughout 1992, it is believed that our European aggregates businesses will become a significant contributor to the Group in the medium term.
Once again Mining traded profitably and exceeded its budget during 1992 although the opencast coal business faces an uncertain future with the Government Review of the Coal Industry under way.
We are, however, well placed to capitalise on any developments arising this year, especially in view of our success in securing two further contracts during 1992.
Wimpol, the newest member of the Division, although trading profitably also suffered fierce competition in its traditional markets of the North Sea and Gulf of Mexico.
Nevertheless, 1993 will see a number of opportunities opening out in both new geographical markets in South East Asia and West Africa and also as a result of our recently introduced Orion satellite positioning system.
In all of our businesses 1993 looks like being another challenging year in which we will have to concentrate on improving the efficiency and profitability of our operating companies in a depressed and competitive trading environment.
We are, however, well positioned to take advantage of any opportunities that might arise to develop our various businesses during the coming year and can continue to look forward to the future with some confidence.
What's in a name?
For Wimpey Homes the answer is a lot of research, a touch of imagination and a great deal of care.
Traditionally, housing sites have often been named after local water such as Bishop's Wharf overlooking the River Ouse in York.
Others take their names from nearby towns.
Or are perhaps named after geographical or historical facts.
For example, The Spires has views of St Margarets Church in Gloucester.
The Old Forge Mews development in Arundel, Sussex takes its name from the old Grade 11 listed forge building on the original site.
And Shakespeare Court in Alcester is a stone's throw from the bard's birthplace.
But developments can also be named on a whim.
The Masters at Collingtree Park in Northampton is a good example.
This site of Classic Collection homes overlooks the Island Green Golf course.
In the UK, it is Wimpey Homes’ market researchers or sales managers who come up with a list of alternative suggestions for each new development.
Then the final choice lies with their regional directors.
In the United States, choosing a name for each new site tends to involve a whole series of different people — including the division manager, advertising group, marketing department and the company president.
Take Chatham Park in Kissimmee, Florida.
‘We chose an English name because we are targeting buyers from the UK,’ says Diane Morrison, George Wimpey of Florida's marketing sales director.
At Chatham Park the model home styles also have English names such as The Andover, Pembroke, Windsor, Dover and Chelsea.
The Country Club of Mount Dora takes its name from the quaint local town in which it is situated.
And the fact that it is the first true country club in the area.
There, the model home styles are named after lakes, springs and, more recently, famous golf courses.
Aloma Woods is a new community in Orlando so named because of its location — Aloma Avenue is the main street in front of the site.
And the environment in which it is situated — a heavily wooded area.
Diane says: ‘Quite often we build within an existing community and will retain its name.
This is the case with our Georgetown and Davenport Glen developments at Tuscanvilla, Beverly Hills, MonteRey and Southport at Wyngate.
The key is that we take the issue seriously.
We are all involved in throwing the ideas around.’
In the UK, market researcher Andy Ryman says: ‘The name of any new development obviously cannot clash with any other competitor developments in the area.
‘It must also be thoroughly researched locally to ensure that it is not being called after an undesirable part of town.
And it must be appropriate and sum up the style of the development and its location.’
A local map is usually a good starting point when it comes to picking a list of possibilities.
As in the US, house styles in the UK are also sometimes given names unique to the development — to reflect local interest.
Ross Coverseck, Southampton's market researcher uses Romans Mead in Chichester as a good example.
‘All the house styles have a Roman theme — like The Centurian and The Apollo,’ he says.
But as Ross explains, renaming house styles can be a costly business.
‘Special brochures and promotional literature need to be produced.
That's why this sort of treatment is usually reserved for our upmarket style developments,’ he says.
At Witham's Victoria Gardens development in Chelmer Village there's a further sprinkling of imagination.
The house types named after Queen Victoria's sons and daughters.
And at Priory Grove in Colchester, a development sited next to an old priory, the homes are named after parts of a church such as The Manse and The Belfry.
Moving up the country to Bristol, the Lady Byron Park development in Exmouth has been given an all-American flavour with the apartments and homes named after US cities.
And Glasgow's luxurious Lancefield Quay on the banks of the Clyde gives the names of its apartment styles to the great sailors and adventurers like Drake and Nelson.
The chances are that home buyers at Meggetland View in Edinburgh will be rugby fans.
That's because the development of 48 two bedroom flats enjoys prime views over Meggetland playing fields, famous for being the home of Boroughmuir Rugby Club.
At Meggetland View the home styles take the name of other well-known rugby grounds like Riverside, Poynder and Mansfield.
Once a development and its house styles have been given their identity there's one final area that needs addressing — naming the roads.
This is down to a local council's Engineers Department who provide the street names for new developments.
On occasion, these can also depict a relevant theme.
For instance the proximity of Middlesbrough's St Mary's Mews development of two bedroom apartments and two/three bedroom homes in Whitley Bay to a local golf course inspired the use of more famous courses to be used as street names.
The development itself also takes its name from the St Mary's lighthouse at Whitley Bay which, according to sales negotiator, Doreen xxxxxxx ‘you can just about see from a top floor window.’
And it's not hard to guess the local sports facility adjacent to Ski View Road at Vicarage Farm in Sunderland!
In the past there have been roads named after Shakespeare characters, famous painters and even Nottingham Forest footballers!
But how does all this affect the buying public?
There's no evidence to suggest that an unusual names increase the selling rate.
But they certainly catch local attention and make people sit up and take a look.
So next time you see a sign board advertising a new Wimpey development look at the name.
There may well be more to it than meets the eye.
WIMPEY PROPERTY HOLDINGS
Michael Bird (47) FCA, has been appointed financial controller of Wimpey Property Holdings.
He joined the company in 1990 from Macarthy PLC where he was Group financial controller.
Michael is married with two children.
His hobbies include walking, gardening, the theatre and reading.
WIMPEY MINERALS
Niven Greenhalf (41) ACA, has been appointed finance director of the Minerals division.
He joined Wimpey in 1981 as development accountant for the accounting systems project team in Hammersmith.
In 1985 he moved to Corporate Finance as Group management accountant.
He was appointed financial controller of Wimpey Waste in 1988.
In 1990 he moved to work for Wimpey Minerals in the US as chief financial officer.
Niven has a science degree in chemical physics.
He is married with three children and enjoys gardening and cricket.
Andrew Chater (32) MICA (Aust) has been appointed financial controller of Wimpey Minerals International.
Andrew joined Wimpey Group Accounts as a management accountant in 1987.
In 1989 he was appointed assistant Group accountant and in 1990 became Group accountant.
In 1992 he also assumed responsibility for Wimpey Group Services Accounts.
He has a Bachelor of Commerce degree from the University of Western Australia.
Andrew is married with a daughter.
He enjoys most sports, especially cricket and golf.
WIMPEY GROUP SERVICES
Ian Fleming (39) FCA, has been appointed Group financial controller.
He joins the company from Redland Bricks where he was financial director.
Ian has a Masters degree in physics from Christchurch, Oxford.
He is married with three young children and enjoys golf, football, gardening and the theatre.
OMAN
Wimpey has built an enviable reputation for the quality and scope of its work in Oman through Wimpey Alawi, Wimpey International's local operating company.
The company's current order book demonstrates why its diverse skills and expertise have made it one of the country's most sought after building, civil engineering and mechanical and electrical engineering contractors in recent years.
Hospital buildings in particular take a high profile role in the history of Wimpey Alawi.
And the £13 million, 100-bed Buraimi general hospital due for completion later this year is endorsement that Wimpey can build the very best.
Project manager Jim Berry and his team and currently working on the new complex which will include an 18,000 sq m main building complete with operating theatres, outpatients, accident and emergency and x-ray departments as well as kitchen and laundry facilities.
Adjacent is a 9,500 sq m staff accommodation building.
Wimpey Alawi was chosen to complete the £7.2 million Royal Oman Symphony Orchestra complex.
This prestigious building, due for completion in December, will include 140 accommodation units, a practice block with acoustically insulated floating rooms, a classroom block, dining hall, mosque, leisure facilities and staff quarters as well as infrastructure and services.
David Skinner heads up the project team.
In Muscat, project manager David Dines and his team are nearing completion on a £4.5 headquarters for the Oman International Bank.
The five storey building features a circular atrium topped by a stained glass dome.
Inside the quality finishes include cherry wood panelling, decorative plaster ceilings and marble floors.
Building excellence apart, the company's civils expertise is being put to the test in a £20 million project to extend Oman's main port of Mina Qaboos.
The job involves installing new dockside container crane tracks, a 180 metre by 40 metre berth — constructed using precast concrete blocks of up to 40 tonnes in weight — and a 470 metres sea wall across the entrance to a bay adjacent to the existing port.
Jim Roberts is project manager.
This encouraging workload is undertaken by Wimpey Alawi from its headquarters and depot at Azaiba on the outskirts of Muscat.
Managing director, George Sneddon heads up the regional management team of 24 UK staff who are supported by 123 Omani, Indian and Sri Lankan staff and a labour force of 1500 men.
Eastenders actress Nicola Stapleton helped with plans to cement a more secure future for London's homeless when she visited a special housing scheme being built by Wimpey in Southwark.
Her role as homeless teenager, Mandy, in the TV Soap has made Nicola very aware of the vicious circle of joblessness and homelessness which so many young people have to face.
The £5.1 million Gateway project being built for the Peabody Trust could set the pattern for the future.
When complete this autumn it will be the first purpose-built amenity to offer homeless youngsters short-stay accommodation coupled with skills training.
The scheme is being funded by the Peabody Trust in association with Look Ahead Housing Association, the London Enterprise Agency, Grandmet Trust and a number of agencies.
Wimpey Plant and Transport
A review by general manager Bob Wykes
In spite of the reduced and indeed reducing turnover that we have had in the past 12 months, 1992 provided a better financial result than the previous year.
This was due to the hard work put in at all levels and in all parts of the country by the Wimpey Plant and Transport team.
We improve our operating margins, reduced our bad debts, and even though we had to make some reductions in numbers, the reorganisation costs were down on 1991.
These improvements were achieved in a market where hire rates have not improved and where contracts became even harder to win with margins further reduced.
The year saw the enhanced Luton Depot begin to operate properly with its normal workload, but also supporting the Special Plant and Electrical Installation Departments which had also relocated from their previous Southall base.
Two aspects of Wimpey Construction's business were of benefit to us.
The high level of activity at Enron gas fired power station contract — which we serviced from the Middlesbrough Depot — and the increasing tempo of work in the Gulf where we deployed a significant amount of our special plant, tower cranes and hoists to Dubai, and heavy crawler cranes to the Mina Qaboos harbour job in Muscat.
We also installed and operated the concrete batching and mixing set up for St Mawgan with a site presence backed up from the Plymouth Depot.
Overall we benefited directly from the difficult decisions taken in 1991 to reduce our operating size and numbers.
PROSPECTS FOR 1993
The trading conditions for the Group's business will continue to be just as difficult in the coming year as they were in 1992, and will continue to provide us all with significant challenges and problems.
We have realised these in our budgets by a reduced turnover, but on a more positive note we have also planned a slight increase in our capital replacement spend to retain the capabilities of our fleet of plant and vehicles to be able to take account of any upturn in the overall UK market which could well show through towards the end of the year.
It will be essential for all of us to maintain the efforts to contain operating costs and to maximise our incomes.
A significant aspect will be to improve even further our liaison with all our customers within the group.
And indeed with our external ones also who have continued to provide a significant source of income to our business.
You can all see that it is imperative that we all maintain the efforts that have been successful in 1992 right through 1993.
This will ensure that we help the Group come through the worse recession in our industry for many years, and that we are in place and able to contribute to the future upturn in the market.
I thank you all again for the very hard work and real effort put into our business at all levels through 1992 without which we would not be able to have the confidence to face the coming year.
SECOND ROUND ORDER FROM NOTTINGHAM BREWER
There was a spirited start to work on WCUK's second ever pub contract in the Midlands for brewer Hardys and Hansons.
To mark the start of work the first earth was dug by the client's retail director, Tim Bonham (right), ably assisted by WCUK area manager Paul Baxter.
In just six months a new Hardys & Hansons traditional style pub will have been built on the spot.
It's a repeat order for Wimpey which completed a similar public house — The Snipe — in the Nottingham area for the same client last November.
It's a contract which the community is well aware of as the brewer has invited local people to come up with a name for the new pub.
When complete, £900,000 pub will offer a good sized bar and restaurant facilities and will also be fitted out by Wimpey.
Work will also include the construction of manager's accommodation, car parking and children's play areas.
WE WANT YOU AS A RALEIGH RECRUIT
Are you aged between 17 and 25 with a sense of adventure and a strong desire to face tough challenges?
If so, a Raleigh International overseas expedition could provide you with the opportunity of a lifetime.
Wimpey is looking for five young people who would be excited by the idea of travelling to far flung destinations — like Panama, Chile or Malaysia.
Once there, you would work on community, and scientific land and water-based projects — with lots of opportunity for adventure in between times.
Expeditions typically last for a three months.
You must be able to swim 500 yards and should not be in full time education at the time of the expedition.
Interested?
Can't wait to start?
Then the first step is to complete an application form (available from the address below).
Then you have to hope you get selected by Wimpey as one of a number of applicants who will go forward.
And finally you have to complete the gruelling selection weekend run by Raleigh International on 16/17 October!
Following the weekend, you will be given a further challenge if you are successful.
Each company sponsored venturer has to raise £2250 to enable unsponsored and underprivileged youngsters to take part in a Raleigh International expedition as well.
You can apply for an application form from Joan Palmer, PIR Department, Hammersmith (tel: 081 846 2066).
Closing date for entries is 13 August.
As the £38 million Redbridge District Hospital in Essex welcomes its first patients, WCUK can reflect on the first-class treatment it has been able to give to this important health care project.
A long experience of working in the health care market puts Wimpey on top of the waiting list when it comes to hospital projects.
As well as Redbridge, WCUK has six schemes under way at present bringing the total value of its work in this sector to £60 million.
The new 470 bed hospital, built as a joint venture with Drake & Scull, the mechanical and electrical engineer, will offer treatment to the people of Redbridge and Barking.
The hospital features a full range of facilities including a special care baby unit, maternity block and children's wards.
The medical and surgical complex is housed within six, two-storey wings which are linked by a network of attractive ‘streets’ designed to reflect the neighbouring residential location.
London regional director, Mike Godfrey says: ‘Redbridge is proving to be just what the doctor ordered.
It's a quality project and is further endorsement that our wide and deep rooted experience in building and refurbishing hospitals is giving us the advantage in this sector of the market.’
Southampton region went back in time to welcome retired staff to its annual pensioners reunion.
Over 40 former staff took the opportunity to catch up with old friends and discuss their pension queries with Beryl Aldridge from Pensions Department, Hammersmith.
The event was rounded off with a showing of Wimpey's Employee Report Video and drinks in the social club.
*Bill Cullen from Department 9 (Luton) would like to hear from any other Wimpey pensioners who have retired in Ireland, with a view to holding a reunion.
You can write to Bill c/o Wimpey News, Hammersmith Grove, London, W6 7EN.
When TV presenter Anne Diamond lost her baby through cot death she started a nationwide awareness campaign.
For the first time people began to sit up and listen to the facts about a problem which used to be swept silently aside.
Although the number of cot deaths is now falling, three babies still die unaccountably each day in the United Kingdom.
As a new father I am only too aware of the importance of expert guidance through the first months of parenthood.
The type of excellent information provided by the charity, The Foundation for the Study of Infant Deaths (FSID).
The FSID was founded in 1971 with the aim of raising funds for research into the causes of cot death, to support bereaved parents and to provide information for health professionals and the public.
I try to raise money for a worthy cause each year and plan to support the charity in its work by collecting used stamps.
I know people don't have any spare cash at the moment so thought this would be a good alternative.
If you would like to help, please send your used stamps to me c/o Catering Department, Hammersmith Grove, W6 7EN.
Information leaflets on cot death and how to prevent it can be obtained from the Foundation for the Study of Infant Death, 35 Belgrave Square, London SWlX 8QB.
WIMPEY MAKES CASH CALL
June 1993 saw a new Wimpey landmark with the announcement of the first ever rights issue in the Group's history.
The issue, offering shareholders one new share, at 148p, for every four held, aims to raise approximately £104 million after expenses.
Proceeds from the issue will help fund the Group's investment programme in UK Homes and Minerals, and will give the financial flexibility needed to take advantage of the opportunities likely to emerge as the economy recovers.
Group chief executive, Joe Dwyer said: ‘The strong advance in homes sales we have experienced this year gives us confidence that the UK housing cycle is turning towards recovery.
‘The rights issue will substantially increase our ability to fund recovery and to set the Group on course for long-term growth.
‘Our strengthened balance sheet will enable us to benefit fully from the opportunities which the recovery will offer across our range of activities.’
Following the announcement, the issue got the thumbs up from several City commentators.
NatWest Securities analysts said: ‘Good management deserves the support of shareholders: we would take up the rights.’
A striking flash of yellow drew crowds to the River Ouse in April when the Bedford Rowing Club launched its second Wimpey sponsored boat.
The colourful addition to the Bedford fleet has been refurbished and repainted in Wimpey colours to mark the second year of sponsorship by WCUK Eastern.
The two Wimpey boats, affectionately nicknamed ‘banana boats’, will be used for competitive rowing events such as the Henley Regatta later in the season.
The thought of running to catch a bus may be enough to set your heart racing.
Imagine then, running a 26 mile marathon — twice — and then adding 10 miles more for luck!
This is ultra running and it is the latest athletic challenge to hit Britain.
And runners like Wimpey Homes site manager Paul Hatfield are turning their attention to the 30 mile, 50km, 40/50 mile and 100km (62.1 mile) distances — for fun!
Paul has completed 16 conventional marathons — racing in London, New York and Majorca along the way.
But it was when he began finding the 26 mile 385 yard distance — which he can complete in two hours and 57 minutes —‘about right for starters’, that he began to look for a new challenge.
Ultra running has gained worldwide popularity in the last 15 years, especially in the US.
‘Now it's becoming a big sport here,’ says Paul.
‘And there are races taking place all over the country.’
To qualify for an ultra race, runners must have completed a full marathon in under three hours 30 minutes.
Paul completed the 54 mile London to Brighton race last year and qualified for his first 100km Track Race which took place in Nottingham.
He finished in 10 hours 15 minutes — around four hours off world record pace.
‘Bettering my time is the challenge,’ he says.
‘Now I've really got something to aim at.’
And when he's fulfilled his latest ambition?
Paul says he'd like to go on and run in 12 and 24 hour events.
After that there are ever greater distances still to conquer in 48 hour, 6 day and the ultimate 1,000 mile races.
When he's not on the track competing, you will find Paul out pounding the pavements.
As well as fine-tuning his own stamina and fitness by clocking up to 70 miles in training each week, Paul has been helping his 12-year-old daughter Sacha in her bid to compete her first four-mile London mini-marathon.
If any readers would like more information about 100km races contact the 100km Association on 0322 ‘5828.
Just around the corner from Wimpey's headquarters in Hammersmith, London & South East region has successfully combined old with new in a £ project to build a new science block and refurbish existing facilities at the Sacred Heart School.
With term time in full swing, thoughtful planning was necessary to ensure that pupils’ lessons would not be interrupted during construction.
This was achieved by splitting the work into two phases.
The first was to complete the new science block next to the existing school in a design which mirrors its Grade 11 listed architecture.
Work then began inside the main school to refurbish classrooms, staff rooms and toilets.
Any disruption was kept to a minimum by making use of space inside the new building for the relocation of classes while work was in progress.
WIMPEY WINNERS
By autumn of this year shoppers in Edinburgh will be treading the polished granite flooring of the city's newest shopping mall.
At £32 million, the project is Wimpey Construction UK's largest current contract in Scotland.
But the site team is determined to make it a winner in another way — as one of the safest sites in operation.
The Gyle centre is a joint development between Marks & Spencer, Safeway and Edinburgh District Council.
It is being built to a ‘fast track’ programme with just 18 months between the first excavations and the first shop openings.
‘Safety can never be pulled out and examined as an issue in isolation from the project.
So Wimpey takes a pro-active approach to safety and it is taken into account from project planning stage onwards,’ says construction manager, Mike Stringer.
The Gyle project not only has a permanent site safety supervisor, Stewart Adam, but also receives regular visits from a regional health and safety advisor.
But it is the responsibility of every person on site to make sure that they are operating in a safe manner.
‘Every project has to be considered on its own merits but when it comes to safety there are certain common denominators — that's why there are so many do's and don'ts in place — to protect us,’ explains regional health and safety advisor, John Fegan who, together with colleague David Scott is responsible for all of Wimpey's Contracting and Homes sites in Scotland.
Before work started on the Gyle project the Wimpey team identified the health and safety risk factors and then prepared a thorough safety plan detailing the company's proposed safety management and working practices.
This approach was extended to cover the activities of all works contractors who had to prepare detailed statements for discussion and approval.
Safety is a regular item for discussion at the weekly site progress and co-ordination meetings.
Formal meetings are held held bi-monthly when all the main contractors are represented.
But where the Gyle project goes beyond standard requirements is in the introduction on site earlier this year of a regular safety audit for all sub-contractors.
The aim of the audit is to select one contractor every two weeks and to check such things as the implementation of health and safety plans, to ensure that all documentation is in order and that safety training programmes are being undertaken on an ongoing basis.
’ We are a safe site, but I wanted to keep the momentum going,’says Mike.
‘It isn't enough to have all the safety plans in the world if you don't ensure that people are adhering to them.’
It is planned that these audits will become standard practice on all Wimpey contracts during the coming year.
On any building site, falling is the most frequent type of accident.
The laws about wearing hard hats and regularly inspecting scaffolding and erecting guard rails aren's just petty bureaucracy, these precautions have saved lives.
There are certain stages of the building process which are inherently more dangerous than others.
For example the ground works where improperly shored up trenches and excavations can collapse.
And the steelworks and the roof works where men are working at heights.
As well as the usual precautions that apply when running a site with more than 300 people on it, Wimpey has had to be especially careful in a number of areas on the Gyle project.
The site is located on a peat bog which needed to be compressed and filled before construction could begin.
This was done by bringing in large quantities of fill.
Itwas applied in a ‘rolling pin’ action to flatten the peat and remove the water.
Because one of the by products of peat is methane, careful monitoring had to be carried out throughout the operation to ensure that there was no gas build up or migration.
One of the most striking features of the Gyle shopping mall is its glass roof.
From the steelworks stage of this section of work Wimpey adopted the use of power operated platforms to eliminate the need for men to be constantly climbing up and down ladders.
‘There is a lot of safety documentation on this project,’ admits Mike.
‘But these aren't bits of paper chasing each other for no purpose.
It is this kind of attention to detail that keeps Wimpey in the forefront of the fight to reduce injury and damage accidents on construction sites.’
What links a music publisher, a leading supermarket chain and a north London suburb?
The answer is Wimpey.
WCUK's London & South East region is working on a major contract worth £9.5 million to build a warehouse and offices for Boosey & Hawkes and a new Sainsbury's superstore in Hendon.
The double tendering success came about because the offices of Boosey & Hawkes were located on the site of the planned new Sainsbury's superstore in Hendon.
Wimpey was contracted to build alternative premises for Boosey & Hawkes and the new supermarket development for Sainsbury's.
The music company's new 24,000 sq ft warehouse and office building has already been completed and the Sainsbury's store is scheduled to open in early 1994.
Getting down to the bare bones: There was nothing but a skeleton staff to assist him when Brian Chappill, marketing manager, Midlands West & Wales, handed over a Wimpey Construction UK cheque for £l, 000 to Linda Edwards of Bath-based charity the National Osteoporosis Society.
Although Napoleon was not much use on this occasion, the full-size skeleton has an important role to play in the future.
It was purchased with part of Wimpey's donation and will be used as a teaching aid for nurses when explaining the causes of osteoporosis — the fragile bone disease — to patients.
The money will also go towards providing support for sufferers, funding an education programme for nurses and towards improving diagnosis, treatment and prevention.
A unique new processing system is set to add further value to Wimpey Hobbs’ joint venture operation at Llanwern Steelworks in South Wales.
The new £4 million ‘granulation’ plant from Luxembourg is one of the first of its kind to be installed in Britain.
Brought in from Luxenbourg, it will process the slag created as a by-product of the metal smelting process and transform it into a valuable type of cement.
Anthony Morgan, Wimpey Hobbs’ assistant area manager for South Wales explains the benefits of the new system and how it works:
‘At Llanwern we previously operated an air cooling system on the slag and this was then used as road aggregate.
The new granulator enables us to produce a more valuable product which can be used as a replacement for Portland Cement.
‘It works by cooling the liquid slag with a water jet and turning it into granulated slag.
Then the mixture flows via a receiving hopper to a revolving drum where the water is filtered out.
This results in a cake-like compound which is dried and ground to a fine powder ready for distribution to ready-mix concrete plants.’
Ogwr Borough Council has awarded Springfield Disposal the management contract for its public waste disposal site in Bridgend, Mid-Glamorgan.
Springfield Disposal's regional depot at Stormy West landfill site will be in charge of the day to day running of the site.
The management contract runs for three years and includes provision for the recycling of clothes, paper, glass, metals, oils and the removal of CFCs from refrigerators.
‘We're extremely pleased to have won this contract,’ says Stormy West manager, Paul Wintle.
‘We've had a lot of positive feedback from the people of the Borough and even a letter of thanks — something which is almost unheard of in our business!’
When you're 15 and working in an office for the first time it is a new world and a big challenge — especially when all your colleagues are speaking a foreign language.
But German exchange students Bjorn Dittrich and Nina Roth rose to the occasion admirably on their recent placement at Wimpey Homes Witham.
The two students come from Witham's twin town, Waldbrol, and were in Britain on an exchange scheme organised by the local Rickstones School.
‘Bjorn and Nina worked in our engineering and architects departments,’ explains Wimpey Homes architectural assistant, Homa Cherry,’Obviously there is a limit to the amount that can be achieved in two weeks but both were willing to help wherever needed and coped tremendously well with speaking English.’
A party of students from Rickstones will make a return visit to Waldbrol in the summer to gain work experience with German companies.
Homes built in 10, 20 or even 100 years time are likely to have more similarities than differences to the houses of today, with technological advances incorporated unobtrusively into the design.
As they have been at Wimpey Homes’ first development of Superspec houses at West Moor in Newcastle upon Tyne.
‘The Superspec houses are a response to two very strong areas of demand in the homes market,’ says Wimpey Homes Middlesbrough's regional director, Euan Cresswell.
‘First, an increased environmental awareness has led customers to call for products that are energy efficient and made with environmentally friendly materials.
Secondly people want a home which is economical to run — especially now that they will be liable to pay VAT on fuel!
‘The homes at West Moor are ideal — externally they look terrific, conforming to the same high standards as Wimpey's other developments in the region and nationally.
And although you can't see the special energy efficient features inside, you can certainly feel the benefit.’
The original Superspec was designed and built in the late 80s in a joint venture between Wimpey Homes, Wimpey Environmental and the Building Research Energy Conservation Support Unit (BRECSU) to look at ways of reducing the amount of energy needed to run a home.
A three-bedroom prototype was built in Colchester and officially opened by former Energy Secretary John Wakeham.
‘I've been watching over this project since its inception.
It's great to see how the prototype has been developed into a commercially viable design.
I firmly believe that one day the features built into the houses at West Moor will become standard in all new homes,’ says Wimpey Homes technical manager, Ken Maynard.
Considerable research was undertaken into the original Superspec home at Colchester.
Performance monitoring showed that the in-built energy efficient features were extremely successful and could reduce fuel bills by as much as 40 per cent.
However, consumer questionnaires found that while the Superspec concept appealed to 91 per cent of people, only a third were willing to pay a premium for energy efficiency.
Others would like their homes to be energy efficient but wanted the features to be incorporated into the basic house price.
As a result Wimpey's architects have incorporated the Superspec characteristics into two of the company's existing four-bedroom house types — the Blyth and the Farndale — both of which are available at West Moor.
So what makes these homes so special?
The houses have been built to incorporate as many energy saving features as possible.
Both the Blyth and the Farndale have achieved a first class rating from the National Energy Foundation.
The average rating for all UK housing is between 3 and 5.
Generally, brand new homes are rated around 6 or 7.
Wimpey's homes at West Moor have achieved a staggering 9.1 rating.
The roof contains double the thickness of insulation normally included in a new home, the ground floors are thermally insulated and the traditional brick/block external cavity wall insulation has been increased.
The gas central heating system is built around a highly efficient condensing boiler which removes extra heat from flue gases and converts this otherwise wasted energy into usable warmth.
As a result, the homes at West Moor are among the first in the country to be awarded the critical acclaim of a Gas Warm Award from British Gas.
Windows are double glazed and draught proofed throughout.
And Wimpey has gone one stage further to ensure that even the openings to which the windows are fitted reduce air leakage.
The same applies to external doors which are metal insulated with double-glazed panels and pre-hung in fully draught proofed frames.
Ventilation is controlled through ‘trickle vents’ which provide fresh air to each room.
Standard air pressure tests have identified a national average air change rate of 12.5 changes per hour.
Superspecs produce only 6.5 — an important feature when buyers consider that a large percentage of heat loss can be attributed to air leakage or draughts.
‘The homes have generated a great deal of interest.
Visitors are extremely impressed with the way we have incorporated the special design features,’ says sales negotiator Helen Cosimini.
While sales manager Bob Sinclair adds simply, ‘We're delighted!’.
Buyers Barbara and Tom Mason are looking forward to moving in to their new Blyth home this summer.
‘Both my husband and I like to keep warm.
This house is ideal as we will be able to keep the temperature high without running up huge fuel bills,’ says Barbara.
‘The best thing is that all these features do not spoil the look of, or even dominate, the appearance of the house.
The exterior is attractive and we liked the internal layout with its large kitchen and walk through lounge and dining room.’
There was a traditional end to construction at the Three Lamps housing development at Totterdown in Bristol when WCUK stepped back in time to top out a new home at the site.
A rather odd concoction of wine, oil, salt and corn was sprinkled on to the house by Midlands, West & Wales director, Martin Smout who performed the ancient ‘topping out’ ceremony.
It is said that each of these elements has a symbolic meaning.
Wine brings fertility and wisdom, oil preserves liberty and prosperity, corn ensures that the prosperity ripens and salt instils purity and hospitality.
Martin Smout says: ‘Wimpey is a company with a long history of fine traditions.
They give us a head start on the competition when it comes to building quality projects like this one.’
The £4 million scheme to build 97 one to three bedroom homes for shared ownership is the second contract Wimpey has undertaken at the site for the North British Housing Association.
Two-thirds of the homes have been constructed and the remainder are on target for an autumn completion.
WIMPEY JOINS THE FORCES FOR THE ROYAL TOURNAMENT
It's all hands on deck for the most exciting show in London as the Royal Navy introduces this year's action packed Royal Tournament at Earl's Court.
Featuring a cast of 2,000 there are feats of strength, trials of skill, plus nail biting competition for all the family to enjoy.
Wimpey News has teamed up with the tournament organisers to offer readers the chance of special offer rates for the afternoon and evening performances on Tuesday, 27 July.
Please complete the coupon below, stating clearly how many tickets you require in each box, and return it to The Box Office, Earls Court Exhibition Centre, Warwick Road, London SW5 9TA.
One successful career is an achievement.
But 26-year-old Vanessa Curtis is juggling three — and doing well at all of them.
By day, Vanessa works as a secretary at the Treasury Department in Hammersmith.
In the evenings and weekends she plays the piano professionally.
In her spare time she writes.
‘I started playing the piano when I was three and graduated from the Royal Academy of Music,’ she says.
‘I play professionally whenever I can, mostly doing function work at a London club, The Ivy, and entertaining diners at the Victoria & Albert museum.’
The writing has been a hobby for Vanessa for as long as she can remember but she has recently started trying to turn it to profit.
‘I've been writing short stories and poems for years but last year I decided to try and get something published.
I studied the market and was lucky.
The first thing I sent to London magazine Girl About Town, a light-hearted article about computer dating, was accepted.
Seeing my work in print was great — as was getting the royalty cheque — I still haven't cashed it!’
Not content with writing for magazines Vanessa is currently working on her first novel, a humorous look at xxxxx xxxxx.
She says her ultimate ambition is to get that published too.
Judging by her performance so far this can only be a matter of time.
It wasn't an April Fool's Day joke when engineers working on WCUK's VAT building in Liverpool announced to colleagues that they could walk on water!
They proved it could be done when they were faced with the task of building a glass conservatory restaurant over the water in the Queen's Graving Dock underneath the new building.
The team hired a massive floating platform which was craned in separate segments into the dock.
And this provided a firm work base from which the concrete could be poured to form the 100ft long terrace.
‘Maybe working on water would have been a better description,’ says Wimpey marketing manager Phil Cusack.
‘But it did prove to be a very safe option — and the team didn't even have to get their feet wet!’
The £24 million project is due for completion in the summer.
It was a first-class kick-off at Wimpey Homes’ Vicarage Farm development in Sunderland when the Howeys moved in.
That's because Steve Howey is a Newcastle United defender.
Steve and his wife, Angela, have chosen to make one of the attractive four-bedroom, Farndale-style detached houses their future home.
It comes complete with full gas central heating, double glazing, a fully fitted kitchen and integral garage.
Dear Editor
Enclosed is a photograph of my late father Bert Wakefield on site just after the war.
He absolutely loved his digger and was a driver all of his working life.
My father joined Wimpey in 1939 and was employed on building aerodromes.
When he retired in 1971 his manager, Mr Barrett said that he was the best digger driver they had ever had.
My parents collected all their copies of Wimpey News and we have back numbers going back to the 1940s.
They provide a fascinating history of the company.
WIMPEY CONSTRUCTION UK
A review by managing director David Anderson
The hoped for recovery in the UK economy in 1992 failed to materialise, but the last few months have seen several actions by the Government intended to prevent 1993 becoming the third consecutive year of recession.
Interest rates have been reduced several times with a significant shift in economic policy giving priority to growth.
Despite some encouraging economic trends there is as yet no confirmed upturn in activity, and any recovery will be fragile.
However, an improvement in the economic environment is still expected in 1993 and an end to the decline in total construction work available, so bringing about an expected modest growth in our workload towards the end of 1993.
During 1993 the expansion of the social housing market will continue to provide construction opportunities as will spending on health and education facilities and urban regeneration.
As the year progresses it is hoped that companies will begin to feel confident enough to invest in new production and distribution facilities but the construction of new offices will remain subdued reflecting the stock of vacant buildings which still exist.
The major food retailers are still planning to expand their chains of stores and will therefore remain important clients.
Wimpey Healthcare was launched successfully in September of last year at the Hospital and Care Premises Management Exhibition and we are now beginning to see the benefits with the company's profile and reputation being enhanced considerably in this area.
Significant progress is also being made in developing relationships with healthcare key clients both in relation to specific projects and the progressing of longer term objectives.
We are confident that the health sector will remain an important market for WCUK in 1993 and are optimistic that, in the light of the latest Autumn Statement, increased opportunities will exist with the wider involvement of the private sector in the delivery of healthcare.
In social housing we are working alongside our colleagues in Wimpey Homes and, by presenting a combined capability to the marketplace, we believe that 1993 will see us both reinforce Wimpey's position as market leader in the provision of social housing in the United Kingdom.
Marketing initiatives are currently under way in the food industry where legislative change is creating opportunities for WCUK to deliver a range of extended services designed to assist clients in this sector to manage and implement change.
The higher education sector continues to provide opportunities for WCUK, particularly in student accommodation with a number of projects under way throughout the UK.
Further marketing initiatives are planned for this sector with enhancement of our financial engineering skills, WCUK will be well placed to win work in this sector in 1993.
As a result of our extensive review of the design and build business in the early part of last year we have reinforced our operational and management capabilities in this area with the appointment of a number of experienced design and build professionals.
This will greatly assist our efforts to win work in this important market during the current tough times and ensure that we maximise opportunities as the country comes out of recession.
In terms of the future of design and build, much greater emphasis is being placed in extending the services we offer — both at the front end, with planning development and funding expertise being marketed, and in terms of aftercare where new services in planned maintenance and facilities management are being developed.
We have maintained a high level of marketing activity in the traditional areas of our work with the result that we brought in a greater value of tender enquiries in 1992 than we did in the previous year, and this we achieved against the backcloth of a continually reducing market.
This is quite contrary to the trends experienced by our competitors and all involved should be congratulated.
The high level of enquiries resulted in another intensive year's effort by the tendering teams which enabled us to submit more tenders by number and value than we did in 1991.
There has, however, been no easing in the fierceness of the competition, with no improvements in margins expected in the medium term.
This, together with the dearth of negotiated work resulted in a declining turnover in 1992 but there is no doubt that our policy of not buying work to satisfy turnover will be to the advantage of the business and its people in the long term.
Notable successes in 1992 were the £21 million redevelopment of the Royal Devon and Exeter hospital, the £21 million development for BAT and the £29 million Oceanography Centre, both at Southampton.
All are now successfully under way.
In April 1992 we achieved registration to BS 5750: Part 2 with BSI Quality Assurance after company-wide assessment by their audit teams.
During the course of the year, as a condition of registration, BSI carried out a series of surveillances.
The result of these indicated the ongoing commitment by regional office and site staff with all regions returning either a very small number of minor non-conformances or none at all.
The ongoing commitment can only hold us in good stead in the eyes of our established and potential clients as a company of recognised capability.
Despite the effects of recession on our business we have not lost our long-term focus on the training and development of our employees.
WCUK will continue to recruit and develop young people as the seed corn management of the future.
Our recruitment numbers were lower in 1992 as we have insisted on excellence before appointments are confirmed.
Our Job Review and Management Review schemes are fully supported by directors and management.
In addition, our determination to provide broad based training in safety, quality management and technical competence remains a priority for 1993.
The reduction in turnover, tight margins and the necessity to cut costs has made it necessary to restructure the business.
The final stage of the reorganisation which is currently in hand will bring together the service departments at four regional centres.
Regrettably this has resulted in a number of job losses but there was no alternative given the length and depth of the recession.
The restructuring has not only provided the opportunity to gather the best of our expertise at the new centres and better serve our clients through local offices but will also provide for much greater efficiency and make us better placed to meet the ever changing demands of the 90s.
1992 REPORT TO EMPLOYEES
Wimpey Engineering and Construction
A review by managing director Frank Kennedy
I am pleased to tell you that WEC had a successful year in 1992 despite the extremely difficult trading conditions in the United Kingdom.
Turnover increased by 10 per cent over 1991 and exceeded £200 million for the first time, despite the suspension of the Hibernia project.
Net profits were ahead of budget.
International Operations had a very good year, and the recently announced re-start of Hibernia is indeed welcome news.
International Operations
1992 saw a substantial increase in both tendering activity and value of work obtained, provided outstanding low bids become firm contracts.
The Middle East was the most successful region and a three-fold increase in activity is in prospect there in 1993.
It is particularly encouraging to note the successes in Jordan and Kuwait.
In the Caribbean and the Far East, activity is also on the increase and it is pleasing to record the low bid for the Trintoc refinery refurbishment contract in Trinidad, and our recent competitiveness on major bids in the Far East.
Wimpey Construction Canada, now part of International Operations, and McNamara Construction, processed an increased level of enquiries in 1992, but the value of work awarded remained at the same level as 1991.
When more normal trading conditions return, it is our intention to broaden the scope of our Canadian operations to cover most sectors of construction activity.
International turnover was slightly down on budget, due to the suspension of the Hibernia project, but net profit was ahead of budget.
Our priorities in 1993 are to establish a regional organisation in the Far East and to continue the identification and pursuit of major multi-discipline prospects.
UK Operations
The UK market remained in recession throughout 1992 and tender enquiries were 20 per cent lower than 1991.
WEC failed to obtain new work in both the roads and multi-discipline sectors, and whilst some success was achieved in procuring water treatment contracts, conditions in all sectors of the market remain intensely competitive.
Our most significant contract, at Teesside for Enron Power, is now nearing completion and the amount of work carried out on this project under extremely difficult conditions is a credit to all concerned.
Thanks to the volume of work carried out on the Enron project, UK turnover last year was ahead of budget, with net profit being more or less on budget.
Prospects for 1993 depend on an early go-ahead for the Jubilee Line and an increase in the number of prospects in the water sector.
European Operations
As you are aware, we have created a new operations unit to concentrate on developing business opportunities firstly in Germany, and at a later stage, further east.
I take this opportunity of welcoming Mike Clarke, managing director of European Operations, and also Richard Borger, managing director of our newly registered German company, Wimpey GmbH.
Establishing ourselves as a credible force in Germany and further east is not a simple task, but I am confident that we are gradually putting the team in place who will achieve this objective.
Hibernia
1992 was an eventful year for the Hibernia project.
Work was suspended in February, following the withdrawal of Gulf Oil, but design work recommenced in June and construction work restarted in a limited way, in September.
After a number of false starts, the client's search for new partners was eventually successful, with the Canadian Federal Government and Murphy Oil of Arkansas joining the client joint venture.
Design work is now progressing rapidly and the GBS is gradually taking shape within the dry dock constructed by McNamara, and the first concrete to the base slab will be placed in late March or early April.
Hibernia is a complex, challenging and difficult contract, and I am delighted that it has restarted and we look forward to making a significant contribution to this major international project.
Channel Tunnel
Mechanical and electrical installation work is now nearing completion and will be substantially complete in the United Kingdom in March and in France by the middle of the year.
The permanent rail track has been installed between France and England, and to mark this achievement, a joint TML and Eurotunnel party is due to travel through the Tunnel, albeit in a borrowed train, in the middle of March.
The most significant element of TML's work still to be completed is commissioning, which includes the design and installation of a complex and comprehensive software system for all data control and transmissions networks.
It is interesting to note that TML's obligation under the contract is to hand over to Eurotunnel a completely functioning transport system which has been fully commissioned, an unusual and demanding requirement.
Rolling stock deliveries have now commenced and the first diesel and electric locos are already on site, along with a number of heavy goods vehicle shuttles.
Tourist shuttle delivery should commence shortly and all rolling stock is due to be on site by the end of this year.
Negotiations with Eurotunnel continue intermittently, but hopefully agreement will be reached shortly and allow all energies to be concentrated on completing this challenging project.
Training
Despite the present state of the market, an extensive programme of training and management development continued throughout 1992.
Job Reviews for staff are now well established, and the training development programmes implemented following the reviews are intended to help all WEC staff become better able to deal with the difficult and competitive trading conditions we face in all markets.
Training priorities for this year will concentrate on Safety, Quality Management and Communications.
We will also continue to support the recruitment and development of trainees to provide a firm foundation for our future development.
Quality Management
The certification to BS 5750 for Design and Construction which followed the successful assessment by BSI last autumn, was fitting reward for the hard work and efforts of all WEC staff in establishing a first class Quality Management System.
Congratulations and well done — especially to Peter Oram and his small team.
We now have in place an extensive set of management procedures covering all operations, and we must build upon this success and make our business more efficient.
During 1993, some of you will be asked to participate in a series of initiatives aimed at improving performance in all aspects of our business.
Safety
In January 1992, WEC UK introduced the Positive Safety Management System.
The system puts great emphasis on self management by implementing preventative measures, and includes three specific requirements:
A pre-contract risk assessment and the creation of a Safety Plan.
The monitoring of safety by site management.
Safety auditing by regional safety advisors.
Site Safety Plans consist of an induction process, a series of safety committees, a systematic approach to the identification of hazards and the communication of advice to employees.
The objective is to ensure that all employees accept their individual responsibilities within the context of the law as it stands at the time.
Congratulations go to project manager Alwyn Bowden and his team at RAF St Mawgan who are the first winners of the WEC Site Safety Award, by demonstrating the most thorough implementation of the Positive Safety Management System.
Future Prospects
I anticipate a continuation of difficult trading conditions in the United Kingdom for most of this year, but I am confident that we will continue to grow internationally and commence growing in Europe.
We are fortunate to be working in a part of the Group which has the opportunity to expand its activities, both in existing markets and into new ones.
We also have the opportunity to develop our engineering and project management skills through our participation in major engineering projects worldwide.
I know that it is not always easy to maintain enthusiasm and commitment in the midst of a severe recession with the inevitable consequences of financial restraint, colleagues being made redundant, and this year, losses at Group level.
I am confident, however, that with the level of commitment you have shown in the past year, WEC will continue to develop successfully in all its markets.
I thank you all for your efforts in 1992.
‘I never had it so good,’ says newly-wed Jerzy Mustajew.
London based pensioner Jerzy, 81, married Misia in January.
‘We'd been friends for 30 years but ‘discovered’ each other when Misia became a widow.
Our combined age is 151 so we think we can cope with any problems life may throw at us!’ he jokes.
The Mustajews are theatre fans and are supporter members of the Questers Theatre in Ealing.
Jerzy retired in 1987 from the planning services department.
‘Wimpey was a great company and I was lucky to take part in many interesting jobs,’ he says.
‘The two I particularly remember are building the new stand at Ascot and the construction of Central Point in London.’
No prizes for guessing where Bob Robertson comes from.
Bob, who retired from xxxxxx xxxxxx at the end of 1992 is seen escorting his daughter Wendy to her wedding last October.
‘Since the turn of the year — and not before!— I've been concentrating on my retirement, while my wife Irene continues part-time mid-wifery,’ says Bob.
‘Our son, Andrew, is an RAF pilot so following Wendy's wedding we have the house to ourselves.
I've made Andrew's room my den cum office and Wendy's room has become the guest room.’
Bob lives next to an adult activity centre and he is now fully-occupied with swimming, photography and language classes.
WGS
A review by chairman David Penton.
As you are all too well aware, last year continued in the same dire vein as 1991 and got tougher as the months went on.
It seemed that every day the papers carried more reports of companies collapsing bringing inevitable job losses and their knock-on effects.
It was one of the worst years ever for the construction industry and many a card this Christmas carried a message that 1992 was a good year to see the back of and the hope that in 1993 things may start to look brighter.
The slimming down of the Group continued and is still going on.
The operating departments have been restructured to make them more in keeping with the state of the present market.
Group Services has had to reflect these changes resulting in a cutback on staff numbers with the loss of many valued colleagues.
However, this does not mean we are any less efficient or offer any less of a service than before.
During the last 12 months I have been very encouraged with the way you have continued to work effectively — meeting deadlines that seemed impossible and coming up with ideas for cost savings within your own departments.
We need to carry on in our supporting role, offering a reliable, efficient and friendly service.
Our mission in Group Services remains ‘to help make Wimpey's performance better — and better.’
As well as keeping to the forefront our themes of quality and cost, this means coming forward with ideas on how things can be improved and I intend to introduce new initiatives during the coming year to help us focus on this.
As part of this, we must all remember that each one of us is indirectly a salesperson for the Group.
By the very fact that we work for Wimpey we give an image of the Company to everyone who knows that.
The way we speak about Wimpey and the impression we give may influence someone who is thinking of buying a Wimpey home, negotiating with Wimpey Construction, buying materials from Wimpey Minerals or applying for a course in one of our craft training centres.
It is in all our interests that the impression we give is the right one.
There is much talk of green shoots and perhaps an improvement in the next 12 months.
I am sure you will join me in hoping that the pundits have got it right.
However, whether there is an upturn or not, we will still have a tough year and there is no room for complacency.
It is essential that the teamwork and positive approach to our work continues so that we can cope with any increase which may be generated from an improvement in trading.
I would like to thank you all for your continued hard work and commitment and send my best wishes to you and your families.
WIMPOL
A review by managing director Alastair MacDonald
Against a background of recession it is good to be able to report that, in 1992, Wimpol had another profitable year with a positive cash flow and the second highest ever level of sales.
The recession in the Gulf of Mexico did hit our US based business however, and with increased competition in the North Sea our overall profitability was reduced.
It was disappointing that the positive achievements of some activities were undermined by some less than satisfactory results and commercial and technical contract performances in others.
However, there continued to be successes from individual business units which resulted from another year of good effort, team work and commitment by Wimpol staff throughout the Group.
Thank you for your contribution during 1992.
UK Based Operations
As expected, the decline in Syledis navigation was hastened by DGPS but Ray Morgan and his team in Aberdeen secured higher activity levels with DGPS on both a service and project basis.
A market downturn in rig moves was more than compensated for by a significant increase in supporting offshore construction projects.
These activities were consolidated in Aberdeen and achieved our best sales yet in this market sector in the North Sea.
But it is clear we need to improve some aspects of our operations management if we are to increase profitability and capitalise on the good reputation achieved so far.
With the establishing in Aberdeen in 1993 of the Hub for the new ORION Satellite DGPS positioning system there are additional opportunities to grow this business unit further.
The cable survey operations had another busy year and contracts were well executed across the world.
With the downturn in North Sea drilling rig activity there was a corresponding reduction in site survey activities and this became one of the most fiercely competitive business sectors of 1992.
In the lower specification sector the BE2 did not achieve sufficient utilisation and the charter was terminated.
In the high specification sector the HV Fox achieved major successes.
The vessel's reputation for excellent data acquisition was well matched by a significant upgrade in our seismic data processing capabilities.
Wimpol is clearly a leader in the quality geophysical survey market, a position we will strengthen in 1993 by the enhancement of offshore based data processing systems and the geographic expansion of our overall geophysical capability.
Navigation and survey project work run from Swindon was dominated by a second season working for the Italian Government on search and salvage of aircraft wreckage deep offshore Italy.
The contract extension was, once again, highly successful and Wimpol has a unique track record in this activity which will be exploited further in 1993.
Chris Erni and his team in Yarmouth had their best year so far in sales and, despite low levels of work in the Southern North Sea, continued to secure rig move, seismic positioning and other project work on the back of expanded DGPS and Syledis networks.
In Norway the company secured a greater variety of work as a result of record tendering levels and a higher local profile.
However, the market was, and remains, very competitive.
We expect to secure more work in 1993 for specialist areas of activity in particular with HV Fox and Satellite DGPS and there will be closer operational links with Aberdeen.
US Based Operations
Seismic positioning was scarce throughout the Gulf of Mexico in 1992.
A modest upturn in rig move activity did not occur until towards the year end and competition was aggressive.
However, Richard Williams and his team achieved notable success in survey support services to major pipeline construction work in the Gulf.
Good support was provided to WOS with positioning services for its major cable route surveys in the region.
The ESP pipeline survey capabilities made real progress.
WINC was successful in securing major positioning work for the construction sector in the Caribbean and has good prospects for further success there.
In keeping with our strategy to support our customers on a worldwide basis, WINC began preparations for work in West Africa in 1993, and supported sales and marketing activities in South East Asia.
South East Asia
Mark Wimshurst relocated to Singapore in January to strengthen local management in keeping with our strategy for expansion in this region.
We moved into new offices in Singapore and overall our local operations based on extended DGPS networks and radio positioning services had record sales.
We are making a significant investment to establish a major Wimpol presence throughout South East Asia.
This is a positive response to the globalisation of our industry and to provide our customers, particularly those from our established Gulf of Mexico and North Sea regions, with the complete package of Wimpol's services wherever they operate throughout the world.
Worldwide Ocean Surveying
Despite performing major cable route surveys from Argentina to the USA totalling over 11,000 kilometres, WOS had very quiet first and last quarters.
As a result profitability was reduced and this was aggravated by the arrival of a number of new competitors.
However, with the best track record in swathe surveying and as the world leader in swathe data processing facilities and capabilities, WOS is well placed to capitalise profitably on the significant opportunities that are available in 1993.
Resources and Support Services
Our surveyors, geophysicists and engineers provided excellent support on contracts and satisfactory utilisation of field staff was achieved.
With our rapid geographical expansion in South East Asia, there were opportunities for UK based staff to assist in a number of areas in Malaysia, Singapore and Indonesia and staff from Wimpol Inc ventured into West Africa in preparation for this year's work.
The commercial, financial and logistics staff in all parts of the company also enjoyed variety and challenge as a result of the expanding geographic spread and, once again, gave good support to the business units.
As Wimpol becomes increasingly international in technology and operations I intend that interchange of personnel of all disciplines will increase between the regional bases of USA, UK and Singapore.
Progress was achieved in improving further our quality management systems in line with market trends and our changing business.
Our commitment to high quality standards is key to maintaining Wimpol's reputation.
Everyone has a personal responsibility to carry out their duties in a manner which puts this corporate commitment into practice.
Development and Software Groups
1992 saw a major increase in software expertise to enhance our computing capabilities and hasten the arrival of our new field software in 1993.
Excellent support was provided to business units and on contracts, and to the Development Group in the new activity of ORION Satellite DGPS.
ORION is a key growth opportunity for Wimpol, taking us to the forefront of satellite DGPS positioning on a global level.
Regional Hubs are being established in Aberdeen and Singapore and, with a high degree of customer support already committed, we can now expand cost effectively our positioning capabilities into related markets and on a far wider geographic basis.
Outlook for 1993
This year is not going to be any less challenging than 1992.
We share the objectives of our customers to control and reduce costs.
The competitive pressures we saw in 1992 as a result of the continuing over capacity in our industry will remain.
But Wimpol has major strengths and exciting new activities for 1993 which, with your involvement, will keep the company ahead of the competition.
Wimpol has an excellent reputation, quality resources in people and equipment an major market share of the important North Sea and Gulf of Mexico regions.
We will gain further market share by promoting the unique Wimpol package of services to new market sectors and by working in new locations in those regions.
We have four key expansion activities ongoing in 1993.
We will implement ORION, the worldwide satellite DGPS service, and establish the complementary KU-band regional satellite services in both the North Sea and Gulf of Mexico.
We will thus address profitably both local and global navigation market opportunities in addition to our mainstream precise positioning markets.
We will expand our geographic spread further in the Far East and West Africa in response to market demand.
In keeping with our policy of a sustained level of capital expenditure irrespective of industry cycles, we will be investing further in latest generation hardware and will speed up the introduction of new field software.
But these developments will only succeed if you continue to play your part.
During the last recession, in the mid 1980s, Wimpol out-performed all other survey companies.
We did it by being competent, ultra competitive, flexible and by taking fast, but informed management decisions and action.
In the coming year, every one of us must raise the level of our performance, enhance our personal skills and ensure that we meet successfully the challenges of the current market and our planned expansion.
There will be reorganisations within business units to adjust to operational demands and to maximise our success.
Review with your line manager your own training requirements to meet this challenge.
Wimpol remains totally committed to supporting you in the development of your career and, through suitable training, to ensuring that you play a full part in the company's continued growth.
Thank you again everyone for your individual efforts last year.
We enter 1993 positively, knowing that the technology and geographic opportunities for profitable expansion I have mentioned above enhance a focused and balanced business.
With this foundation, a commitment to deliver to our clients a top quality and responsive service, and your continued dedication, we will ensure that in these tough times Wimpol once again succeeds where the competition fails.
Let's get to it!
A year has seen dramatic changes on Kirkland Avenue in Woking.
In just nine months, Wimpey Construction UK's London and South East region has transformed a derelict site into a thriving residential community — and helped ease the shortage of rented accommodation in Surrey.
The new development comprises 54 two and three-bedroom family homes, designed and built by Wimpey in a £1.8 million contract for the United Kingdom Housing Trust.
Six of the properties have been specially designed for people with disabilities.
Funding for the project was provided by the Housing Corporation.
The site was purchased from Woking Borough Council which has nomination rights on the properties.
170 YEARS ON THE CLOCK
Although it is impossible to sum up 170 years’ service in just a few sentences, I would like to congratulate five members of Wimpey Plant and Transport staff who, between them, have given this many years of loyal service to the company.
Wimpey Plant and Transport took the opportunity to celebrate this achievement on the occasion of the retirement of George Maisey as chief buyer.
George has completed 40 years’ service with the company working in various locations and all his friends and colleagues gathered at Southall to wish him a long and happy retirement.
It was also a fitting occasion to present long-service awards to Mick Browne, plant co-ordinator (30 years); Pat Cunningham, administration manager (30 years); Dave Smith, administration assistant (40 years) and John Cremmins, tower crane supervisor (30 years).