

SHORT BIOGRAPHIES FOR DIRECTORS SPREAD
CHAIRMAN
Lord Ashburton KCVO (64) became Chairman of BP on 25 June 1992.
He joined the board, as The Hon. Sir John Baring, in 1982.
He is a director and former chairman of Barings and chairman of Stratton Investment Trust.
MANAGING DIRECTORS
D A G Simon CBE (53) was appointed Group Chief Executive on 25 June 1992.
He has been a managing director since 1986 and Deputy Chairman since 1990.
He is a non-executive director of Grand Metropolitan and a member of the Advisory Board of Deutsche Bank and of the International Council of the European Institute of Business Administration (INSEAD).
S J Ahearne (53) was appointed a managing director on 21 March 1992.
He is the group's Chief Financial Officer, chairman of BP Nutrition and is responsible for the corporate centre.
E J P Browne (44) became a managing director in September 1991.
He is chief executive of BP Exploration and is also responsible for research & engineering and investments for the pension fund.
R F Chase (49) was appointed a managing director on 21 March 1992.
He is chairman and chief executive officer of BP America and is also responsible for Western Hemisphere region and health, safety and the environment.
H E Norton (56) became a managing director in 1989.
Based in Singapore, he is responsible for the Asia Pacific and Middle East regions, and retains corporate responsibility for information systems and insurance.
B K Sanderson (52) was appointed a managing director on 17 April 1992.
He is chief executive of BP Chemicals and is also responsible for Kaldair, BP Solar and the pension council.
K R Seal (50) became a managing director in September 1991.
He is chief executive of BP Oil and is also responsible for community affairs and education, Africa and the pension trust.
Non-Executive Directors
Sir James Glover KCB, MBE (63) joined BP's board in 1987 after a career in the British Army, in which his last appointment was the Commander-in-Chief, UK Land Forces.
Dr C H Hahn (66) became a director of BP in 1990.
He is a former chairman of the board of management of Volkswagen.
Dr K N Horn (49) was appointed a non-executive director of BP on 21 March 1992.
She is chairman and chief executive officer of Bank One, Cleveland, USA, and a director of Eli Lilly, Rubbermaid and TRW.
C F Knight (57) has been a BP director since 1987.
He is chairman of Emerson Electric and is a director of Anheuser-Busch, Southwestern Bell Corporation, Caterpillar and Baxter International
Sir Robin Nicholson F.Eng, FRS (58) joined BP's board in 1987.
He is an executive director of Pilkington and a non-executive director of Rolls Royce.
Sir Patrick Sheehy (62) joined BP's board in 1984.
He is chairman of B.A.T Industries and is a member of the President's Committee of the CBI.
P D Sutherland SC (46) became a BP director in 1990.
A former EC Commissioner, he is chairman of Allied Irish Banks and Chairman of the Board of Governors of the European Institute of Public Administration.
Sir Patrick Wright GCMG (61) joined BP's board in 1991, having been Permanent Under-Secretary of State at the Foreign and Commonwealth Office and Head of the Diplomatic Service.
He is a non-executive director of Barclays Bank and De La Rue and an advisory director of Unilever.
Chief executive: Bryan Sanderson
Highlights 1992
Performance affected by adverse trading environment
Major cost reductions and refocusing of portfolio
Investments to secure the future
Improved HSE performance and greater disclosure of information
In the face of continuing economic recession, 1992 proved to be a tough year for BP Chemicals.
[The operating result was a loss of £xx million, compared with a loss of £7 million in 1991].
There were strong performances in some of our key business sectors, although theses were offset by poor results elsewhere.
Industry-wide overcapacity and severe price competition squeezed margins in our petrochemicals and polymers businesses.
On the other hand, even in the current environment, we have areas of strength.
These include acrylonitrile, where our technology is used in 95% of the world's manufacturing capacity for this product, and in acetic acid where, again, we are a worldwide player.
Our polyethylene licensing business continues to be successful in marketing BP Chemicals’ gas phase technology, so providing a steady income from royalty payments.
Our specialities and solvents businesses further strengthened their positions, making good contributions to the overall result.
Improving performance
In response to the difficult trading environment, we have accelerated our drive to increase productivity, with the aim of improving our competitive position and becoming a leader in each of our chosen sectors: petrochemicals, polymers, acetyls/solvents, acrylonitrile, specialities and advanced materials and Carborundum.
We have three inter-related programmes under way to sustain continuous improvement.
Profit improvement.
We are aiming for a $300-million improvement in pre-tax profits by 1995.
Our initiatives include cost reduction and operating efficiency programmes and changes to our portfolio of assets.
One regrettable consequence of our cost-saving measures is a reduction in employee numbers.
In 1990, BP Chemicals had a total of nearly 20,500 employees worldwide, but 3,500 of them had left by the end of 1992.
Our continuing efforts to improve plant performance resulted in an increase of 2% in the reliability of our manufacturing plant in 1992.
This was achieved after a similar increase in 1991, and we are seeking a further improvement in 1993.
[Graphics: Ethylene Cracker Margins or RCOP?]
Benchmarking.
Key factors in reducing our costs and improving operating practices are our use of value improvement and benchmarking processes.
These are designed to promote greater effectiveness and productivity and to eliminate low value work.
The processes require extensive measurement of our performance against internal and external criteria, so enabling us to identify, and then implement, good practices, with the aim of achieving ‘best in class’ status.
Alliances We are seeking opportunities for alliances with other companies to strengthen individual business sectors and so position ourselves to maximise profitability in the future.
Managing the portfolio
Having reviewed our chemicals portfolio, we have embarked on a process of selective growth and divestment, concentrating on our core businesses to build a strong base from which to exploit future opportunities.
We aim to preserve our leading positions in polymers, acetyls, acrylonitrile, and in parts of our speciality products businesses and Carborundum.
Our growth projects will be in sectors where we enjoy the advantage of efficient technology and low-cost feedstocks.
There will be a bias towards the high-growth Asia-Pacific region.
Some of our business sectors, notably nitrogen and solvents, are expected to continue to perform well and will be operated to generate cash to help fund growth sectors elsewhere.
We are tackling our problem areas and are divesting those assets which no longer have a strategic fit.
In 1992, our divestments included: Fine Chemicals (including the Hythe Chemicals site), Diktene Derivatives, the foams business and the polyethylene films business at Bromborough.
We also sold our 50% interest in the French polychloroprene rubber producer, Distugil.
In January 1993, Finland's Neste bought our Antwerp-based low density polyethylene business and the performance polymers business in New Jersey, USA.
Securing the future
A major landmark in 1992 was the completion of the new ethylene plant at our Grangemouth factory in Scotland.
The unit, commissioned in [month]1993, expands Grangemouth's production capacity for ethylene — the basic building block for many petrochemicals — from 270,000 to 600,000 tonnes a year.
The new cracker uses gases from the North Sea as its feedstock, which help make it one of Europe's lowest cost ethylene operations.
The gases are processed at BP Exploration's nearby plant at Kinneil.
As part of the strategy to shift more of our activity to the rapidly-growing Asia-Pacific region, we are building, in a joint venture, a 200,000-tonnes-a-year polyethylene plant in Indonesia.
We are also developing a scheme for building an ethylene and polyethylene complex in Malaysia in 1995.
In Korea, we officially opened with our partner, Samsung General Chemicals, an acetic acid plant.
Employing BP Chemicals’ world-leading proprietary technology, this plant provides us with a strong partner and a platform for attaining growth for our products in this region.
Our guiding principle remains our commitment to the Total Quality Management process.
Through this we seek to satisfy the needs of our customers by improving the efficiency of our management systems and manufacturing processes.
Accreditation to ISO9000, the international standard for quality of products and services, has now been extended to almost all our operations.
Health, safety and the environment
During the year, BP Chemicals made important progress in the sphere of HSE.
Our record on time lost because of accidents continues to improve.
We support the chemical industy's Responsible Care initiative, which recognises the need for continuous improvement in HSE performance and the communication of more information on these activities.
In May, we published, for the first time, data on the emissions at our major sites worldwide.
We also discussed the implications with our employees and many of the local communities in which we operate.
We have set targets that, from a 1990 base, BP Chemicals will halve its hydrocarbon emissions to the atmosphere and reduce by two-thirds its emissions to water by 1997.
We now publish an annual review of our HSE performance and of progress towards those targets.
Research and technology
Science and technology play a vital role in developing BP Chemicals’ products and processes.
Among the new products we launched in 1992 were low toxicity, biodegradable additives for use in offshore, water-based drilling muds, and Prozone, used in cleaning printed circuit boards.
Based on oxygenated solvents, it replaces the ozone-depleting CFC solvents previously used in the electronics industry.
Reducing emissions not only makes good sense environmentally, it can also yield cost savings.
We are therefore constantly looking for ways both to reduce the amount of waste we produce and to upgrade that which remains.
Our new nitric acid unit at our Lima plant in Ohio is designed to reduce nitrous oxide emissions by 95% and we are also developing the technology to use polymer waste as feedstock in petrochemical production.
We are maintaining our successful record of licensing modern technology to other companies around the world.
We agreed terms for Enichem of Italy to use the BP Fluid Bed Process for producing polyethylene.
This technology has proven successful in our licence to Chevron at Cedar Bayou in the USA.
BP EXPLORATION
Chief Executive: John Browne
Highlights 1993
[600]million barrels of oil equivalent added to reserves [(excluding
divestments)]-more than replacing the year's production
Net margin increased by more than 50 cents a barrel
Finding and development costs reduced to $xx a barrel
Appraisal of world class discovery in Colombia
1992 was a year of substantial progress for BP Exploration despite a difficult operating environment.
Operating profits had increased in 1990, when crude oil prices rose steeply in the wake of the Iraqi invasion of Kuwait.
Since then, profits have held up well despite lower oil prices and the loss of 180,000 barrels a day in oil equivalent production (oil and gas combined) through our programme of divestments.
Because of the increased efficiency of our exploration programme, our spending on this activity has fallen from £744 million in 1990 to £xxx million in 1992.
We expect a further reduction in 1993.
Performance improvement
The cost of producing every barrel of oil, and of finding and developing every new barrel of reserves, are key performance measures because they directly affect our profitability.
[Graphics: F&D costs, Lifting costs?]
At the end of the 1980s, our production costs were rising because of the need to spend more on our ageing facilities and on measures to enhance safety and environmental protection.
Today, we have not only halted the upward trend but have in fact reversed it, so that our costs are declining in real terms.
In the past, our finding and development costs were also high.
To reduce them, we are improving our capital efficiency (the return on every dollar invested), increasing our recovery from existing fields and focusing our exploration expenditure more sharply on areas likely to yield substantial volumes of hydrocarbons at low cost.
The benefits of these efforts are now being realised.
Last year, our finding and development costs fell from $x per barrel of oil equivalent (boe) to $y per boe.
For our portfolio of potential projects, the estimated development costs now average $3.4 per boe real and are still falling.
In 1992, excluding divestments, we added [600]million boe to our reserves at an average cost of $x per boe.
This included an initial ‘5 million barrels at the Cusiana oilfield in Colombia (BP: x%) and 125 million barrels for improved recovery at our existing fields in Alaska.
These additions more than replaced our production in 1992 of yy million boe.
Our aim is to maintain this balance.
These cost reductions are improving our margins and profitability.
In the past two years, the margin realised on every barrel we produce has improved by 50 cents.
Strategy and objectives.
The strategy we put in place in 1989 is proving itself robust during a period of great volatility in the industry.
Between 1989 and 1992, we have sold $4-billion-worth of non-core assets at a value equivalent to a $25 a barrel constant real oil price.
Our largest divestment in 1992 was the sale of our interest in BP Canada.
We also sold our remaining onshore interests in Canada and the USA's Lower 48 states.
At the same time, we gained access to several new prospective areas and made some significant discoveries.
Our gas business is now concentrated on regions where the price realised is closest to the oil equivalent, notably Europe and the Far East.
1992 saw the launch, in the UK, of Alliance Gas (BP 50%) which markets gas to the industrial and commercial sectors.
Our capital efficiency has risen substantially and will continue to improve as a result of our cost savings and more effective use of technology.
Two years ago, we were spending $4 billion a year on exploration and development to sustain our production of about 1.5 billion boe/d.
Today, we need to spend just $3 billion.
Moreover, this lower level of spending is still sufficient to give us the flexibility to take up opportunities in new areas.
Maintaining production
We expect BP Exploration's production to remain broadly at 1992's level for the next few years and then to rise after 1995.
The improvements in performance over the last two years provide us with a secure base from which to move forward.
Although our activities are spread across the world in [20]countries, the North Sea and Alaska still predominate — two areas which provided [90%]of the profit in 1992.
[Graphic on Historical F&D costs or NI/boe or Production Profile?]
We expect to maintain into the next century our North Sea production of more than half a million boe/d.
Two fields that came on stream in 1992 are helping maintain this level of output: Miller (BP: 40%) now produces xx barrels of oil a day (b/d) and yy million cubic feet of gas a day (cf/d), while Donan (BP: 100%) produces yy b/d.
We have a steady flow of new developments in hand to compensate for the declining production from our older North Sea fields, notably Forties (BP: 83.1%) and Clyde (BP: 51%).
The Bruce field (BP: 37%) will start producing in 1993 and will soon provide almost 10% of the UK's gas needs.
Also due on stream in 1993 are East Brae (BP: x%), the offshore portion of Wytch Farm (BP: 50%) and Norway's Draugen field (BP: 14%).
Together, they should produce xx, xxx b/d by 19xx.
Our future production will also come from incremental projects, linked to existing fields and using the infrastructure already in place.
The approach to these projects differs from the earlier generation of higher cost ventures.
For instance, our plans for developing the North Sea's Forth field (BP: 70%) have been transformed by careful planning and the use of techniques such as horizontal drilling.
As a result, the field now has one of the lowest per-barrel development costs of any in the North Sea.
In addition, a new generation of North Sea developments is in prospect — the Clair field (BP: x%), for instance ; and our inventory of discoveries has been enlarged by two years of heavy exploration activity.
In Alaska, although the output of Prudhoe Bay has passed its peak, our production in 1992 of xxx b/d was higher than the expectations of two years ago.
The first stage of the gas handling project, which boosts production, is performing well and the costs of the next phase are running below the original estimate.
The period of plateau production from Kuparuk (BP: 39.2%) and Endicott (BP: 56.8%) is also being extended.
Still in Alaska, development work on the Point McIntyre field is well advanced and a total field production of 25,000 b/d should be achieved by the end of 1993.
Our major objective in Alaska is to unlock some of the large volumes of non-proven reserves at Prudhoe Bay and elsewhere.
Potential profit centres.
To add to our established production areas, we have begun operating in new areas and are negotiating terms for entering others.
In 1992, we produced xxx boe/d in the Gulf of Mexico, where we also hold significant acreage in the deep water tracts.
We are developing the VK 989 field (BP: xx%) which lies in 1,300 feet of water.
Later in 1993, we expect to announce a scheme for developing the Mars field (BP: x%) and the area around it, which is estimated to contain about one billion barrels of proved and unproved reserves.
Mars, which lies in 3,100 feet of water, is just one project in a highly prospective area that could become one of our major profit centres in the future.
Another area of great potential is Colombia.
Here, reserves of at least 2 billion barrels are estimated to exist in two fields, Cusiana and Cupiagua (BP: 40%).
We have completed x wells on our acreage and more are being drilled and planned.
One well at Cusiana has been producing 10,000 b/d on a long-term test and the development phase is about to begin.
The economics of the project are very encouraging, thanks to the planned use of low-cost modules of development facilities of about 40,000 b/d capacity, which can be built and put in place within a year.
In the Azerbaijani sector of the Caspian Sea, we are part of a consortium that has a 20% interest in the Azeri field, where about 1.8 billion barrels of recoverable oil are thought to exist.
We are negotiating terms for the field's development.
In the same area, we have, with our alliance partner, Statoil, exclusive negotiating rights over the Chirag field and prospective exploration acreage at Shak Deniz.
Offshore Vietnam, we have recently started an extensive exploration drilling programme.
Health, safety and environment
BP Exploration is committed to the continuous improvement of its already high HSE performance, despite the tough economic climate.
In 1992, the number of injuries worldwide that caused employees to lose working time fell by [10%].
At the Endicott field in Alaska, more than one million hours were worked without any time being lost because of injury by either BP staff or contractors.
Similarly, the number of spills has fallen by [20%]and the impact of our operations in sensitive areas is being reduced by the application of technology.
We have, for example, pioneered the re-injection of drilling wastes, so reducing their release at production sites.
One of the most significant HSE challenges is the completion of the recommendations of the Cullen enquiry on improving safety in North Sea operations.
However, through the application of good engineering we have minimized the potentially high cost increases.
Recognition of our achievements continued in 1992.
For example, we received the Royal Society of Arts Better Environment award for our work on the Wytch Farm oilfield in Dorset.
Within BP, a Chairman's Award gold medal was given for BP Exploration's community health programmes in Papua New Guinea.
Research and technology
We have closely aligned our research and development work with our business needs.
R&D is now integrated with BP Exploration's operations.
It provides the appropriate level of technology at each of our operating sites and ensures that ‘best practice’ is shared across the business.
Technology also plays a key role in lowering our costs.
For instance, the use of onshore horizontal drilling to develop the offshore portion of the Wytch Farm oilfield in Dorset will save [£100 million], compared with the alternative development option of an artificial island.
In the North Sea, the same technique will halve the number of wells required to develop the Forth field.
our developments in hydraulic fracturing techniques, which improve the flow of crude oil into the well, were recognised when we were presented with the Royal Acadamy of Engineering's MacRobert award — the UK's premier accolade for innovation in engineering.
The techniques are now widely used and contributed to the increased production from the Prudhoe Bay field during the Gulf war.
The future
BP Exploration has a secure level of production, a number of significant discoveries, costs that are under strict control and plans for developing a series of fields for renewal and future growth.
It is well positioned to deliver further improvements in its operating performance in both the short and the longer term.
BP IN THE COMMUNITY
We believe the best contribution we can make to the community is to create wealth by carrying on our business ethically, safely and profitably.
But in the long run, a company's reputation and success depend heavily on its being a responsible citizen and caring neighbour.
This not only reinforces our licence to operate in established areas but also supports our being welcomed to new areas where we are developing our business.
From Vietnam to Colombia and from Scotland to New Zealand all BP's businesses are involved in local communities and education, in a manner that suits local needs and circumstances.
Wherever we operate, we place great emphasis on talking to our community partners about what they expect of us and what we can contribute to them.
Several BP sites, notably our plants at Lima and Toledo in Ohio, have established citizens’ advisory committees to encourage this dialogue, and these have proved very worthwhile.
Our employees are our best ambassadors and their involvement is crucial to the success of our strategy of community partnership.
Their expertise, particularly in management, science and technology, and environmental protection, is frequently put to good use in local schools and in voluntary sector organisations.
BP's international communications network adds further value to our work with local communities.
For example, through our Science across the World programme, any BP site can offer to a science class at a neighbouring school the chance to exchange data with other schools linked to BP almost anywhere in the world.
Also, more and more of our UK educational materials are now being adapted for use in countries, for instance Malaysia and Singapore, which are short of good English-language teaching resources on science and the environment.
Much of the responsibility for running our community and educational programmes has now been devolved to our business and operating sites.
Our spending on these activities is being subjected to ever-tighter business disciplines.
To help us and our community partners clarify priorities and objectives, we published Assessing the Value, a new manual in this field.
In 1992, BP's expenditure worldwide on community support, including education, totalled £24.6 million.
Of this, £7.8 was spent in the USA and £10.75 in the UK. £8.7 of the UK total went to charitable organisations.
These sums do not include the many hours given corporately by BP and privately by employees in support of this expenditure.
[As in previous years, BP group companies made no donations for political purposes, as defined in the Companies Act 1985.]
BP NUTRITION
Chief Executive: Robin Gourlay
Highlights 1992
Improvement in operating profit
Start of managed exit from the business in line with the group's strategy of focusing on hydrocarbon-based businesses
BP Nutrition's operating profit of £xx million was up by £xx million on 1991.
The result was a considerable achievement since it took place against a background of strong competition in mature markets and overcapacity in the European agricultural sector.
Several factors were behind the success: a company-wide programme to reduce operating costs, further steps to gain tighter control over working capital, the disposal of underperforming assets and new products that helped increase margins and market share.
In striving to improve BP Nutrition's profitability and capacity to generate cash, our managers have been careful not to undermine its longer-term prospects.
This is important in the light of the decision to seek a managed exit from the business, and the consequential need to ensure that a wide range of potential new owners see value in BP Nutrition.
During the year, we received proceeds of $97 million from a number of small divestments.
However, BP Nutrition's major divestment to date has been the [$xx-m]sale of its European charcuterie interests to the Sara Lee Corporation, which was concluded early in 1993.
[If proceeds cannot be disclosed, then to be consistent we should perhaps delete earlier reference to $97m for small divestments?]
A particular success this year has been our range of new animal and fish feeds.
These combine improved nutritional and health value with less animal waste.
A result of our own R&D, these have not only enabled us to increase margins but have also raised our market share in Europe and the USA.
BP Nutrition will give priority in 1993 to achieving further improvements in its performance.
We shall continue to increase the value of our business sectors, while adjusting the structure of BP Nutrition to achieve an efficient exit from the BP group.
BP OIL
Chief executive: Russell Seal
Highlights of 1992
Performance affected by weak margins, particularly in refining
Major drive to improve productivity under way Programme to upgrade our refineries continues
Successful retail developments in SE Asia and Eastern Europe
Continuing emphasis on improving HSE performance
The year's operating profit of £xxx million was £xx million down on 1991's result.
Our performance suffered mainly because of a sharp, industry-wide downturn in refining margins in the USA and Europe,[resulting from lower demand and overcapacity].
Marketing margins in the USA showed some signs of recovery but are still lower than they were in the late 1980s.
Our marketing operations in Europe performed well, as did all our operations in Australasia, SE Asia and southern Africa.
[Graphic on refinery margins by region?]
Improving productivity
Our response to the poor performance has been to accelerate our programmes for reducing costs and raising productivity.
The improving trend in the year's quarterly results is evidence that our efforts are bearing fruit.
Capital investment has fallen from the abnormal peak in 1991, when we acquired Petromed in Spain.
We expect it to fall again in 1993, although $200 million has been earmarked for growth projects.
During the year, BP Oil achieved a $200-million reduction in its planned level of costs.
We expect to save a further $300 million in 1993.
Cost reduction targets are now devolved to local operating levels and we believe this is a key factor in encouraging cost-consciousness throughout BP Oil.
To assist us in our drive to improve productivity, we are ‘benchmarking’ our performance against external criteria, particularly in the areas of fixed costs in refining, throughputs at our retail sites and unit delivery costs.
We are streamlining our office procedures and business systems.
For example, nearly all our downstream operations in Europe have now adopted the same computer systems for their accounting.
Unfortunately, the major changes in work practices, although greatly improving our efficiency, have meant a reduction in the number of jobs.
Since 1990, the number of people employed by BP Oil worldwide (excluding service station staff) has fallen by about 4,800 to xx, xxx.
Marketing
BP Oil's strategy is to focus primarily on the market for transport fuels, both in the private and commercial sectors, and to support and add value to its marketing operations by running an efficient refining and distribution system.
Our re-imaged and rebranded service stations continue to reinforce BP's position as a major brand marketer that supplies high quality products and services.
Allowing for [market movement?], surveys at BP retail sites in Europe, the USA and Singapore show that sales remain 6% higher than they were before we started our re-imaging programme — completed 18 months ago in many countries.
We are maintaining our policy of improving the competitive efficiency of our retail networks.
While still investing in efficient, high volume outlets, we have, over the past four years, shed 2,800 of our less profitable stations, so lifting our average throughput per site by 38%.
[At the end of 1992, there were about xx, xxx BP service stations worldwide.
Total needed, to give scale to the 2,800 reduction?]
[Graphic on retail site volumes v. costs?]
During the year, we acquired a network of 62 service stations in the Seattle-Tacoma region of Washington state, USA.
This consolidates our marketing network in the Puget Sound area, where we are among the market leaders.
Where our competitive position is weak, we have continued to divest assets to help fund more profitable ventures elsewhere and build on our areas of strength.
During the year, we sold marketing interests in West Africa, Eire and Hong Kong.
We also sold the flooring business of Gerland in France, but have retained an interest in that company's road paving business, which provides an outlet for bitumen sales.
One of the keys to our long-term profitability is to be a truly customer-responsive organisation.
Each of BP Oil's business units is developing a performance targetting system, designed to improve its ability to satisfy customers’ needs.
Our International Trading business is a leader in applying risk management techniques to the buying and selling of crude oil and products.
It works with our marketing businesses to offer customers ways to reduce their exposure to oil price volatility.
Refining
We are not assuming that refining margins will improve significantly in the near future.
Because of this, our priority is to achieve even greater cost-effectiveness in our operations.
Our refining costs remain lower than those of the industry and we are taking steps to improve on this advantaged position.
Our aim is to bring BP Oil's refining capacity more into line with its sales in core markets.
Over the next three years we shall continue to upgrade the technology at our refineries to increase the production of motor fuels.
For example, projects totalling $200 million are already under way at our Grangemouth refinery in Scotland and at our joint-venture refineries in Bavaria and Rotterdam.
We are also making investments to improve the quality of our fuels.
Early in 1992, we commissioned the new $130-million isomerisation plant at our Lavera refinery in France, on time and under budget.
The unit increases our ability to manufacture unleaded motor spirit.
In the USA, investments totalling $260 million are under way at our Ferndale, Alliance and Toledo refineries to reduce the sulphur content of diesel fuel, now required by US legislation.
Capital expenditure on our refineries, including environmental and mandatory investments to improve product quality, now accounts for about half of BP Oil's capital budget.
Shipping
BP Shipping manages most of the group's owned and chartered ships.
During the year, one crude oil carrier and three product carriers were sold and five new crude carriers were chartered-in.
As part of our continuing drive for quality, we are refurbishing our fleet of very large crude oil carriers (VLCCs).
Investments for future growth
Opportunities for growth lie both in BP Oil's existing markets and in new markets.
Investments in existing markets in 1992 included the expansion of motor spirit production at Durban refinery in South Africa (BP: 50%).
A project to produce more motor spirit at Singapore refinery (BP: 33.3% equity) will start in 1993.
One of our new markets is Spain.
After acquiring Petromed in 1991, we have consolidated our position in the country and now enjoy a 9% share of its retail market.
We are building a $50-million isomerisation unit at our Castellon refinery to produce more unleaded motor spirit.
By disposing of Petromed's investment portfolio, we have reduced the cost of the acquisition by about $300 million.
We are active in the fast-growing markets of South East Asia.
In Thailand, we doubled the size of our retail fuels and lubricants operations, while in Malaysia our sales volumes increased by 14% in 1992.
In a joint venture with Petrolimex, the Vietnamese state oil company, BP became the first major oil company to build a lubricants blending plant and to market lubricants in that country.
We are continuing to expand in Eastern Europe.
At the end of the year, BP Oil had 17 service stations operating in Hungary, giving us a significant market share in the Budapest area.
In eastern Germany, we have consolidated our retail network by building a further 19 retail outlets.
At the end of 1992, there were 36 BP stations in this part of Germany.
Our sales volumes at these sites are five times our European average.
Also in Eastern Europe, Air BP has continued to expand its network of fuelling services, notably in Hungary and Bulgaria.
Health, safety and environment
Maintaining high HSE standards is a major priority in BP Oil.
It aims to comply with all relevant legislation and be among the industry leaders in its sphere of operation.
BP Oil spent $xxx million on HSE activities in 1992.
During the year, there was a further encouraging improvement in our safety performance.
The number of serious accidents and time lost through injuries were reduced significantly.
We introduced league tables to record employee injury rates in our operating units, all with the aim of encouraging further learning and improvement in performance across BP Oil.
A good example of our expenditure to protect the environment is a £45-million project at our Grangemouth refinery in Scotland, designed to reduce by 80% the the oil contained in waste water.
The new treatment facilities should be commissioned in late 1993.
BP was one of a consortium of international oil companies that set up an oil spill response base in Singapore.
The centre is capable of tackling major oil spills in East Asia and Australasia.
We continue to manage the Oil Spill Service Centre at Southampton in England.
Research and development
BP Oil spent $165 million on research and engineering in 1992.
We have formed a new unit to integrate our development engineering and research resources more closely with the needs of the business.
A major part of the research programme is the study of fuel formulations and the associated changes in engine design to achieve a cost-effective reduction in exhaust emissions from road vehicles.
We are participating in a number of oil and motor industry programmes that are addressing key environmental issues in our markets.
In the USA, the Clean Air Act requires modified motor fuels, which may help reduce carbon monoxide emissions from cars.
This has imposed new demands on refineries.
In conjunction with partners, we have developed two new processes which help produce the modified (oxygenated) fuel cost-effectively.
Chairman's Letter to Shareholders
Dear Shareholder,
Although 1992 contained a number of positive features, overall the year was not a good one, either for BP or for the industry.
Excess capacity and weak demand continued to undermine performance in the downstream oil and chemicals sectors.
As a result, profit margins have been slender, particularly in refining in Europe and the USA, and in petrochemicals and polymers.
Moreover, until demand accelerates or capacity is adjusted, few in the industry will be counting on any substantial improvement in the returns from those quarters.
For BP, the 1992 figures speak for themselves.
Our underlying profit of £xxx million became a £yyy million loss after taking account of write-offs and provisions made during the year.
This below-par performance was partly reflected in our share price, which fell sharply in the summer,[though in line with the market it had recovered some ground by the year-end]If, by Feb 11, the price is on the way down, omit words in []
Until recently we have pursued an expansionary policy, investing through the recession and financing our investment by borrowing — for BP the most cost-effective form of funding.
However, the prospect of the difficult trading conditions continuing, when taken together with our heavy debt position, led us at the mid-year to conclude that we had to put the group's finances onto a more sustainable basis.
After careful consideration, we decided to halve our quarterly dividend to a level we believe we can sustain, even if trading conditions remain as they are, given the achievement of our current profit improvement targets.
In due course, we expect to improve our performance beyond those targets, which will allow us to return to delivering a growing dividend.
For the fourth quarter, we are proposing a dividend of x pence a share, making a total of y pence for 1992.
Strategy and targets
To get us to the sustainable financial position I have just referred to, we have accelerated the pace of implementing our strategy of focusing our assets, increasing our cost-efficiency and improving our performance.
As you might expect, our approach has two main elements: reducing our cost-base and using our assets more effectively.
We have also set some demanding but attainable financial targets.
In the Group Chief Executive's Review you will find them discussed more fully, and in subsequent pages we report on the progress being made toward them by each of our businesses.
Because of these measures, we are confident that we will weather today's hostile economic conditions and that, as we progressively meet our targets, the company will be in good shape to prosper.
Profits, people and teamwork
Higher productivity is a crucial component of our drive to improve profitability.
We are fortunate in BP to have a highly skilled and dedicated workforce.
Each part of the company has been asked to look for ways of doing more, with less, and the performance improvements now happening all over the company are starting to feed through to the bottom line.
Sadly, though, we have in the past year been through the painful process of shedding a large number of jobs.
Yet without fairly radical surgery, the long-term health of the company might have been in jeopardy.
Of course, understanding the need for the cuts is one thing, but it does little to mitigate the pain felt by those affected.
I should like to thank all our workforce, the majority of whom are of course remaining with the company, for their impressive commitment to getting on with the job in hand, despite the company's problems.
For those leaving, we believe we have offered good separation terms, and we have, in many cases, been able to back them up with independent, professional job-counselling.
A return to profitability and, with it, BP's traditionally high reputation will come from successful teamwork.
A belief in the value of good teamwork begins, and is put into practice, at the top of the company.
But the benefits of the team approach and of sharing ‘best practice’ are more and more to be found throughout BP.
Corporate governance
The past year has seen much debate in the UK about the duties of company directors, both executive and non-executive, and about the structure and functioning of boards.
This culminated in the publication of the Cadbury report on corporate governance in May.
BP was among the many leading companies and other organisations that contributed to deliberations of the committee.
In June, in a new departure for BP, the functions of chairman and chief executive were split.
As part-time chairman, I am responsible for the managing of board affairs and am closely involved in the development of strategy.
For his part, David Simon, the group chief executive, and his six fellow executive managing directors, are responsible for formulating strategy for the board as a whole to consider, as well as for the conduct of BP's day-to-day business.
We have a wealth and diversity of outside experience represented in the non-executive group of directors.
Our current team of eight make a particularly important contribution through the committees of the board — Audit; Compensation; Health, Safety and Environment; External Affairs; with a Nominations Committee to advise on board membership.
Already, after only eight months of the new arrangement, I believe the management of BP's affairs is benefiting from it.
Board changes
In the interim report sent to shareholders in August I paid tribute to the achievements of my predecessor, Robert Horton, who left the board in June.
His energetic commitment to the idea of openness and cutting through bureaucracy to give employees more responsibility will be an enduring legacy.
We are grateful, too, for his pivotal role in reshaping BP Shipping, BP Chemicals and the BP/Sohio relationship in the USA.
Since the date of last year's report, we have also seen the retirement from the board of Ray Knowland, Sir Campbell Fraser and James Ross.
I should like to thank them for their outstanding contribution to BP, extending over many years.
Elected to the board in the past twelve months have been Steve Ahearne, Rodney Chase and Bryan Sanderson (managing directors) and Dr Karen Horn (non-executive).
Accounting standards
This year, in line with the recommendations of the Accounting Standards Board, we have adopted the new Financial Reporting Standard No 3: ‘Reporting Financial Performance’.
Because exceptional items, such as the profit on the sale of assets or the cost of fundamental restructuring, are disclosed separately, the underlying profits from a company's operations may be seen more clearly.
The future
BP is a great company with a distinguished history and good prospects.
I count it a privilege to have been asked to become its chairman — though naturally I would wish it had been in happier circumstances.
BP ran into some rough weather in 1992 but the company is too strong and resilient to allow itself to be blown off course by the recent squalls.
When I write again in twelve months’ time I shall be extremely disappointed if, world events permitting, we have not met our targets and are not looking at an improved set of results.
GROUP
CHIEF EXECUTIVE'S REVIEW
Our overall results in 1992 were poor, though there were encouraging features in the underlying performance of some of the businesses.
The oil price averaged only $xx per barrel,
compared with $yy in 1991, notwithstanding Opec's published stance that a higher price is needed.
In addition, the impact of economic recession
in key markets affected margins in our downstream oil and chemicals businesses.
BP Exploration, in particular, did well, turning in a robust performance and contributing xx% of the group's profits.
A net margin increase of over 50 cents a barrel contributed to this good short-term performance.
And, encouragingly for the future, our costs of producing, finding and development all fell, on a per-barrel basis.
Again
, for the benefit of future performance, we more than replaced the year's production, adding more than 600 million barrels of oil equivalent to our reserves.
Appraisal of our world-class oil discovery in Colombia began.
BP Oil's results were seriously affected by over-capacity and low margins in the refining industry,
notably in the USA.
However, in the particularly important marketing sector where we can provide customer service, the retail network's results improved, benefiting from the cost cutting, design and efficiency improvements under way throughout BP Oil.
These measures will also benefit the refining sector, once capacity is reduced and industry margins recover.
BP Chemicals also suffered from the recession in Europe, its difficulties being exacerbated by its predominantly UK manufacturing base.
The acceleration of a major cost reduction exercise initiated in 1991 and an active portfolio re-focusing programme helped to limit losses.
Large-scale investments in Scotland and Indonesia are approaching completion.
BP Nutrition turned in an improved operating profit.
Revised targets
Early in the year, it had become apparent that the combination of recession and low growth was having a punishing effect on our downstream businesses and that we could no longer continue investing at our previously high levels.
Under such weak economic conditions, we had to trim our growth aspirations.
We therefore revised BP's financial strategy to adapt to a lower growth rate and a more conservative series of margin assumptions, which for planning purposes we took as being unlikely to improve in the early nineties.
The objective was to put BP onto a ‘sustainable’ base — in essence, cash generated from operations should cover the dividend, permit sufficient capital spending to maintain the group's value and allow us to meet all our other financial obligations without recourse to increased borrowing.
We decided to accelerate the measures already under way to improve efficiency and reduce costs, and this resulted in the exceptional charges we took at the half-year.
At the same time, we cut back on proposed capital expenditure and made plans to repay borrowings.
That process involves a refocusing of our assets — deciding which businesses, and which sectors within each business, we wish to stay in, and leaving those we did not.
We are committed to maintain our clear vision of BP's long-term business objective — as an integrated international hydrocarbons business, with a well balanced portfolio in regional terms and underpinned by technology.
This recognises that our strength is, and always has been, in oil and gas, and in the allied field of petrochemicals.
And it is in these areas that we are going to concentrate.
This means that BP Nutrition, a sound, profitable business in its own right, does not sit comfortably with our declared hydrocarbons focus.
We are therefore exploring opportunities for divesting it from the group and have already successfully negotiated a number of disposals, including the sale of its processed meats division.
For the future, we have set ourselves a series of targets, spelled out below, which are designed to restore BP's profitability and build a stronger balance sheet.
They are exacting but attainable and are achievable without support from an improved commercial environment.
Implementing them means we have to resort to some tough measures in the short and medium term.
The dollar targets reflect the fact that oil trades worldwide at a dollar price:
Increase replacement cost profit to $2 billion a year by 1995
Aim for capital expenditure of $5 billion in 1993 and 1994
Divest assets of $1.5-$2.0 billion in 1993
Reduce debt by about $1 billion a year
I can already report good progress against these targets.
Divestment proceeds of $1.9 billion pre-tax (£xxx million) were achieved in 1992.
Capital expenditure was held at $xxx million (£yyy million), compared with $xxx million (£4,509 million) in 1991.
The need for additional financing was significantly reduced after the first quarter of 1992 and, partly by using cash balances, we repaid borrowings in both the third and fourth quarters.
Resolute action to reduce our cost base is also well in hand.
We have a clear target agreed with all the businesses.
Outlook
Oil price sentiment remains uncertain because stock levels worldwide are comfortable and there is uncertainty over future OPEC production levels and the timing and extent of any recovery in leading western economies.
Possible energy taxation and environmental legislation in the USA could also affect our markets.
Upstream, production in 1993 is likely to remain at current levels, as a series of new fields come into production and offset the older declining fields.
Looking further ahead, we have a secure production profile which is capable of future growth.
Downstream, in light of high product stocks, industry refining margins in the USA and Europe are expected to be lower in the first quarter of 1993 than in the fourth quarter of 1992.
We also expect marketing margins to be weaker in the first quarter because of the effect on demand of the generally mild weather.
Within BP, further cost savings should result in compensating margin improvements later in the year.
Chemicals trading results are likely to remain depressed, particularly in the European cracking and polyethylene businesses, as the low margins seen at the end of 1992 persist into 1993.
Although the oil price and economic outlook is uncertain, the productivity increases and cost cutting measures we put in motion in 1992 mean we can expect to see further benefits showing through in our results in 1993.
Research and engineering
Technology is a key element of our strategy, and in 1992 we carried out a major review of our research and engineering activities.
We are now integrating them more closely into the businesses, which will in future pay for all the research and engineering they require.
We shall in future also be making greater use of external sources of technology.
An advisory group, which includes distinguished engineers and scientists from outside BP, has been formed to advise on the effectiveness of the new research and engineering structure as it evolves, as well as on the relevance and potential value of emerging technologies.
Significant achievements in technology in 1992 are covered later in the individual business reports.
Integration of research and engineering into businesses; corporate funding ceases
Increased use of external technology and advice
Health, safety and the environment (HSE)
In BP, we consider HSE to be an integral part of good business management.
Under a corporately developed policy, each business is accountable for its specific performance targets.
An HSE audit committee, comprising four non-executive directors, also regularly reviews BP's performance.
We are proud of our HSE record but not complacent about it.
We aim to react effectively and rapidly to any HSE incident.
Specific examples of our actions and achievements appear in the business sections of this report.
A fuller account of our performance, policies and objectives will be published in a special report, New Horizons, in April 1993.
The public's HSE expectations are continually rising and a progressive improvement in industry's performance will clearly be called for.
But the costs of meeting society's expectations is rising, too, and in the long run those costs must be reflected in the prices of our products.
Wherever the balance between expectations and cost may ultimately be struck, industry, and within it BP, must be part of the solution.
Our aim is to:
Operate safely and to high health standards
Produce and market products that can be used safely
Progressively improve our environmental performance
Respect the interests of our neighbours and the world community
BP and the community
Our support for the community changed its emphasis during 1992.
Increasingly, we feel the main objective should be to give support where we have a significant local presence — a refinery or chemicals plant, for example.
We are accordingly cutting back central funding, but at the same time encouraging an increased local spend.
This helps devolve decisions to local management.
In all cases, however, community spending is being subjected to ever tighter business disciplines.
Conclusion
I should like to conclude by making to you, our shareholders, the three crucial points I made to our staff on assuming the role of Group Chief Executive.
First and foremost, we have to improve the profitability of BP.
This will lead to a strengthening of the balance sheet.
We have set very clear targets which will return us to a basic level of performance in the next two years.
Secondly, we need to maintain, and build on, BP's known reputation as a good business and a good neighbour.
And my third objective is to encourage teamwork.
Good teamwork is built on openness.
But it is openness now allied to personal responsibility.
‘Project 1990’, which we started two years ago, is a great help here and is a process that must and will continue.
1992 has not been an easy year, but both the underlying business performance, BP's general high reputation, and a tremendous buy-in by all of our people to the concept of teamworking makes me confident about 1993, without expecting too much in the way of improvement in the overall economic environment.
FINANCIAL REVIEW
Summary
Demand weakness and industry overcapacity adversely affected downstream oil and chemicals margins and overall group profitability, despite a good upstream performance.
Exceptional restructuring costs resulted in an overall loss for the year on both an historical and a replacement cost basis.
Measures taken at the half year have cut the financing requirement, and small debt repayments were made in the second half.
In 1993, with further reduced capital spending and our still strong underlying cash flows, proceeds from divestments will be directed to reduce debt levels and restore our financial strength.
Accounting Standards
In this report we have adopted the new Financial Reporting Standard, FRS 3 ‘Reporting Financial Performance’.
It introduces major changes to financial reporting in the UK.
Of particular relevance in BP's case is the separate disclosure of profits and losses from sales of operations, and of fundamental restructuring costs, as exceptional items on the face of the profit and loss account.
To allow the trends in underlying profits to be followed easily, two more profit measures are being highlighted in our reporting, both before such exceptional items.
These are replacement cost operating profit, which is before interest and tax and is the basis on which our Businesses’ results are reported, and replacement cost profit after interest and tax.
These are in addition to the traditional historical cost and replacement cost results, both after exceptional items.
Previous years’ results have been restated to conform with the standard.
Commentary on the 1992 Results
Our profit before exceptional items, on a replacement cost basis, was £xxx million compared with £928 million in 1991.
The decline in earnings reflected the more difficult trading environment experienced by our downstream oil and chemicals businesses.
However, after exceptional items we reported losses on both an historical and a replacement cost basis in 1992.
Our replacement cost loss for 1992 was £xxx million compared with a profit of £1,035 million in 1991.
This deterioration reflected exceptional items of £994 million (£888 million after tax), which were mainly a result of the provisions for employee severance costs and asset write-downs announced at the half year.
Only limited taxation relief is currently available on these costs.
By contrast, exceptional items in 1991 increased profits by £184 million (£107 million after tax) when the profit on sale of operations exceeded a much lower level of restructuring costs.
Our historical cost loss of £xxx million was recorded after stock holding losses of £xxx million.
This compared with an historical cost profit of £415 million in 1991, when much heavier stock holding losses of £629 million were recorded because of a substantial fall in oil prices with the end of the Gulf war.
Our replacement cost operating profit, before tax and interest as well as exceptional items, was £1x, xxx million compared with £2,371 million in 1991:
BP Exploration's replacement cost operating profit for 1992 was £x, xxx million, at a similar level to 1991.
Lower oil prices (down by an average of some 50 cents a barrel) and lower production levels (as a result primarily of divestments) were offset by the benefit of a continually improving cost structure and smaller exploration write-offs.
BP Oil's replacement cost operating profit of £xxx million was £xxx million below that of the previous year.
Despite productivity gains and cost savings, margins were much lower than in 1991, a year which saw exceptional results in the first quarter because of strong product demand and supply disruptions in the Middle East.
BP Chemicals' replacement cost operating loss in 1992 was £2xxmillion, compared with a profit of £32 million the year before.
1991 had benefited from a temporary lag in the fall of product prices compared with feedstock costs, in the period immediately following the Gulf crisis.
Results in 1992 reflected significant losses in the cracking and polymers markets, which were partly offset by profit improvement in specialities, bulk chemicals and the US based businesses.
BP Nutrition's replacement cost operating profit of £xx million was up by £39 million compared with 1991, thanks to the measures it had put in place to improve performance and its progress in focusing on key activities.
Other businesses and corporate comprises BP Finance, BP Solar, Kaldair, the group's remaining minerals and coal assets, interest income and costs relating to corporate activities worldwide.
The overall net cost of these activities in 1992 was £xxx million, compared with £185 million in 1991, with significant savings in corporate costs now being realised.
The profit on sale of operations was £70 million before tax compared with £242 million in 1991.
In 1992 sales of non-strategic assets included BP Exploration's assets in Egypt and Canada, BP Oil's assets in West Africa and Eire, together with some of their activities in France, and certain BP Chemicals’ assets in the UK and Europe.
Profits on these sales were, however, to a large extent offset by provision for the expected loss on disposal of the group's remaining minerals interest, Olympic Dam in Australia, and on the closure and disposal of certain retail sites in the United States.
Restructuring costs of £1,064 million before tax were largely a result of the provisions for employee reductions and asset write-downs announced at the end of the second quarter of 1992.
Interest expense, which is primarily on US dollar debt, was £672 million, compared with £723 million in 1991.
Lower interest rates in 1992 more than compensated for the effect of higher average debt levels.
Taxation The charge for corporation taxes amounted to £xxx million, compared with £820 million in 1991.
There was still a material tax charge despite the significant exceptional charges recorded in 1992.
This is because only limited tax relief is currently available for restructuring costs and asset write-downs in certain fiscal jurisdictions.
The overseas tax charge was down by $346 million to £300 million in 1992, mainly as a result of lower profits but also because what relief was available on the exceptional charges was largely in overseas jurisdictions.
By contrast the tax charge increased in the UK, mainly becuase of the inability to set off UK losses outside the ring-fence against ring-fenced North Sea income.
In addition, production taxes not included in this heading but treated as an operating expense of BP Exploration amounted to £995 million, compared with £1,001 million in 1991.
Cash Flow and Components
Cash flow from operations was £x, xxx million, compared with £4,240 million in 1991.
Although it was adversely affected by the difficult trading environment, it nonetheless demonstrated the considerable cash generating capability of our businesses.
Capital expenditure and acquisitions totalled £x, xxx million in 1992, compared with £4,509 million in 1991, a year which included £ million spent to acquire Petromed, the Spanish refining and distribution company.
The reduction also reflected lower levels of expenditure in both BP Exploration and BP Chemicals, where significant projects such as the Miller field and the Grangemouth cracker expansion were completed in 1992.
Planned capital expenditure for 1993 has been set at $5 billion.
Of this, about 60% will be for BP Exploration, 28% for BP Oil and 8% for BP Chemicals.
Divestment proceeds of £1,058 million were achieved, a similar level to 1991, as asset sales were progressed to better focus our portfolio and cut our borrowing requirement.
A similar scale of divestment is planned for 1993.
After outflows of £x, xxx million on the servicing of both our debt and equity, and £xxxmillion for taxation, we had a net cash outflow of £xxx million in 1992.
This cash outflow occurred in the first half of the year.
Subsequently borrowings were repaid in both the third and fourth quarters, from a combination of a reduction in liquid resources and the measures taken to return to a positive cash flow.
Financing the Group Activities
Our principal commodity, oil, is priced internationally in US dollars.
Our policy on managing foreign exchange has been to minimise our economic exposure to currency movements by financing our operations with US dollar debt, wherever possible, achieving this by currency swaps when funds have been raised in other currencies.
As a result of the net cash outflow, partly offset by the reduction in liquid resources, the group's underlying borrowings rose by $0.5 billion in 1992.
The increase in borrowings had been $1.1 billion at the mid-year, with $0.6 billion being repaid in the second half of the year.
However, there was also a steep fall in sterling in the latter months of 1992, which caused the sterling expression of our predominantly US dollar debt to rise by £2.0 billion.
Together, these two factors resulted in our debt to debt-plus-equity ratio at the end of 1992 rising to 50%, compared with 43% at the end of 1991.
As already indicated, we now intend to use divestment proceeds and surplus operating cash flow to pay down debt by about $1 billion per year.
In addition to the increase in debt it was necessary to refinance substantial maturing debt in 1992.
These needs were largely met by 10 new debt issues in the international capital markets, totalling $1.5 billion.
In order to benefit from lower US dollar short-term interest rates in 1992, we also increased the use of US dollar commercial paper.
No new equity was issued in 1992 to fund operations, and neither is any assumed in our forward plans.
However £14 million of equity was issued in respect of the share dividend plan and employee share schemes.
We actively manage currency risk.
Our policy of maximising US dollar debt has been explained above.
As most of our revenues are recorded in dollars, we also operate hedging programmes in relation to significant non-dollar cash requirements.
Fluctuations in exchange rates can have significant effects on the group's results.
Many of these are subsumed within our business operating profits through changing cost competitiveness, or lags in market adjustment to movements in prices.
Exchange gains on currency trading activities and management are, however, separately recorded, and were £113 million in 1992, compared with £165 million in 1991.
As we have extensive overseas operations, particularly in the USA, there can also be exchange effects when we consolidate our results, assets and liabilities into sterling.
As discussed above, the dramatic weakening of sterling in the second half of 1992 had a significant effect on the end year sterling expression in our balance sheet of US assets and liabilities, including our US dollar debt.
With the average sterling/dollar exchange rate unchanged from the previous year, there were no special impacts on the translation of our US results for the year into sterling.
In the fourth quarter, however, with the specific weakening of sterling, results benefited from the translation of non-UK profits to sterling.
We manage interest rate risk as well as currency risk.
Our approach to interest rate risk has been to manage actively the balance between floating-rate and fixed-rate debt.
In June, because of the group's recent financial performance and higher debt levels, our debt rating was downgraded by Moody's from Aa3 to A1 (the rating in 1990) and by Standard and Poor's from AA to AA-.
PEOPLE IN BP
Productivity improvement
Our priority has been the improvement of BP's performance by setting clearer business targets, aligning more closely the reward and recognition of individuals’ and teams’contributions with performance, and encouraging greater teamwork.
New ways of working that more closely match the needs of different parts of the company have led to higher productivity and significant cost savings.
Regrettably, the severe external trading conditions have meant that BP, like many other companies, has had to eliminate a number of jobs.
During 1992, the average number of people employed by group companies was xxx, xxx, a reduction of x, xxx on 1991.
A breakdown of these totals by business and region is shown on page xx.
As the contraction programmes already announced take effect, we expect that employee numbers will continue to fall.
For those who lose their job, we are making every effort to provide high quality support, through both generous severance terms and counselling services to help identify suitable opportunities outside BP.
Team building
Good teamwork is at the heart of BP's revival plan.
Right across the company there has been a series of initiatives to make it even more effective.
Leadership training programmes are being set up to strengthen team building and the working skills that go with it.
BP Oil is introducing ‘upward feedback’ worldwide as part of the two-way communication between managers and their staff.
BP Exploration has been using the process for three years and is finding it popular and productive.
BP Chemicals is introducing team reward and recognition schemes, based on improved business performance, of which the Quality Incentive Plan of its Nitriles and Nitrogen division is the first example.
In 1992, personal development plans have formed a major part of the career development process in all parts of BP.
The plans provide employees with a structured basis to help them evaluate their aspirations and capabilities and to identify needs and opportunities for training and for broadening of experience.
Employee ownership
The BP share schemes are evidence of the importance we attach to our employees being stakeholders in the company.
Eligible employees in the UK were invited in May to participate once again in the BP share schemes.
At the end of 1992, xx, xxx current and former employees in the UK held shares under these schemes, an inc/dec on the previous year.
In 1992, we established similar share schemes in BP companies in Austria, Germany, Japan, Malaysia, Singapore, Southern Africa and the USA, bringing to 14 the number of countries where we operate share schemes for employees.
Equal opportunity
Our aim is to ensure that all BP employees have equal opportunities for career advancement.
BP Oil supports Opportunity 2000, a campaign to promote the progress of women at work in the UK, and has appointed its own equal opportunities ‘champion’.
In Europe, advisory groups which concentrate on women's issues have been set up.
An initiative in BP Exploration has led to the launching of a code of conduct against harassment in the workplace.
And in the London area, we have introduced an information service to provide employees with advice on childcare options.
It is BP's policy to employ suitably qualified disabled people and to help them in overcoming their handicaps at work.
Pensions in the UK
As a result of the Maxwell affair, we have reviewed, in conjunction with the trustees, the security of the benefits arising from the UK Pension Fund.
We are satisfied that our procedures meet the requirements of the Financial Services Act and that they continue to follow best practice to minimise the risk of fraud or unauthorised transactions.
We have been able to reassure our pensioners and serving members accordingly.