

BOARD OF DIRECTORS
Committees of the Board
A Audit Committee
M Management Development and Remuneration
Standing: D G Titcombe, J N Sheldrick, I G Thorburn, C R N Clark.
Sitting: D J Davies, R K A Wakeling
Standing: H E Fitzgibbons, J A Stevenson, H M P Miles OBE.
Sitting: The Hon G H Wilson.
March 1990.
Chairman of Delta plc since 1982 and Southern Electric plc from June 1993.
Non-executive director of Blue Circle Industries and Drayton English and International Trust plc.
A
H E Fitzgibbons JD
P F Retief
P F Retief
Age 60; appointed a non-executive director on 7th June 1993.
Chairman of Johannesburg Consolidated Investment Company, Ltd, Rustenburg Platinum Mines Ltd and Times Media Ltd.
Non-executive director of Anglo American Corporation Ltd, South African Breweries Ltd, Premier Group Ltd and other companies.
P C D Burnell
Age 56; appointed a non-executive director in May 1990.
Managing Director of Top Technology Ltd and Hambros Advanced Technology Trust PLC, Chairman of the Prince of Wales Award for Innovation.
M
CATALYTIC SYSTEMS DIVISION
Catalytic Systems Division increased its operating profits by 20% to £27.1 million, boosted particularly by the introduction of catalytic converters on all new petrol engined cars sold throughout the European Community.
European car sales in 1992 sustained previous record levels but declined in the first quarter of calendar year 1993.
In the USA car sales were flat although light duty truck sales increased.
Car sales in Japan declined but Johnson Matthey increased its market share with Japanese manufacturers by winning additional business with ‘transplants’ in North America and in the United Kingdom.
Autocatalysts
Johnson Matthey continued to lead the market, selling over a third of the autocatalysts fitted to new cars sold around the world.
More countries than ever now have emissions legislation requiring the fitment of autocatalysts and our manufacturing operations enjoyed record volumes.
The year saw continued progress in setting tighter standards on emissions and in-use testing around the world.
The USA adopted new Inspection and Maintenance procedures during the year that will allow more meaningful checks on the performance of emission controls and autocatalysts in use.
This will help to protect our continuous investment in new autocatalyst technology by ensuring that only high quality, durable catalysts are specified by car makers.
The Californian Low Emission Vehicle regulations have now also been adopted by New York and Massachusetts so that from 1997 some 20% of US car sales will have to be fitted with improved catalytic emission control systems.
A further 11 States are at various stages of adopting these tougher regulations and this will lead to the benefits of cleaner exhausts being extended to a further 15% of the US car market.
Ken Arnold, Division Director Catalytic Systems, discusses plans for the new Technology Centre at Kitsuregawa, Japan with managers from Johnson Matthey Japan and CSD North America.
Johnson Matthey Catalytic Systems Division was one of only three winners of Queens Awards in two categories in 1993, including the new award for Environmental Achievement.
 substances led to over 600,000 of these cars being fitted with oxidation catalysts.
These catalysts control carbon monoxide, hydrocarbons and associated smell and, to a limited extent, smoke levels.
In March, legislation in the United States confirmed further regulations that will halve the permitted levels of particulate, or smoke, emissions from diesel urban buses by 1996.
This means that the total reduction in particulate emissions will be 90% compared to an untreated engine.
The US Environmental Protection Agency envisages that engine manufacturers will use particulate filters or catalytic converters to effect this control.
During the year we have combined the sales and marketing strengths of Johnson Matthey and Emissionsteknik to promote diesel control systems for use on road vehicles and for off-road applications.
In Europe Johnson Matthey, through Emissionsteknik, is working with Eminox, a leading company in exhaust systems, to offer the benefits of particulate filters and catalytic converter technology on heavy duty vehicles.
The car markets to which Johnson Matthey supplies autocatalysts held up well during the year in spite of recession.
Total North American light-duty vehicle sales increased 3.6% to 14.1 million in 1992.
Early signs of recovery from recession in the United States were first evident in a 12.4% increase in sales of light-duty trucks and vans, to which autocatalysts are also fitted.
The US vehicle manufacturers increased their market share by 2% to 72%, at the expense of imports.
This benefited Johnson Matthey sales because of our large market share with the ‘Big 3’ US makers.
In Europe, 1992 car sales continued at record levels.
Although there are clear signs that vehicle sales will fall in some important European markets in 1993, the increased use of catalysts following the introduction of legislation will ensure continuous growth in autocatalyst sales.
In Japan sales of cars were still depressed and fell by a further 8.5%.
During the year exhaust emission standards, requiring the fitment of catalytic converters, were introduced in Mexico, the Czech and Slovak Republics and Thailand.
Further legislation is proposed for introduction in other countries, particularly in Latin America, Eastern Europe and South East Asia.
Johnson Matthey continues to set and maintain the highest quality standards which have been recognised by quality audits and awards by our customers worldwide.
Johnson Matthey Catalytic Systems Division won two Queen's Awards in 1993.
We are especially pleased to be one of only twelve winners of The Queen's Award for Environmental Achievement, a new award introduced in 1993 in recognition of outstanding contribution to environmental improvement.
The European Autocatalyst operation gained The Queens Award for Export Achievement, making Johnson Matthey one of only three companies to achieve an award in two categories.
Both Queen's Awards result from our consistent world leadership in autocatalysts.
Environmental Products
Johnson Matthey's business in the supply of both catalysts and complete engineered systems to control noxious emissions from industrial plants has benefited from the tightening of emission standards in our major markets and from the first signs of recovery from the recession.
The new US administration is expected to focus on key areas of enforcement of emission regulations and in the UK the 1990 Environmental Protection Act is being implemented industry by industry.
This thermal regenerative incinerator, recently installed at Betacolor in The Republic of San Marino, treats polluted gases from the painting of aluminium components.
CHAIRMAN'S STATEMENT
Financial Results
I am pleased to report a record performance for the year ended 31st March 1993.
Operating profits were strongly ahead at £71.6 million, despite recessionary conditions in a number of our major markets.
Profits before tax were even higher at £73.8 million benefiting from the sale of the balance of the investment in our Japanese joint venture.
Both profits after  tax and earnings per share were also higher than last year at £50.1 million and 27.1 pence respectively.
The Board is recommending to shareholders a final dividend of 7.1 pence per ordinary share making a total dividend for the year of 10.3 pence compared with 9.65 pence last year.
An enhanced scrip dividend will also be offered.
This should be attractive to virtually all shareholders.
It will also save Johnson Matthey advance corporation tax and provide funds for expansion.
Johnson Matthey has adopted FRS 3, a new accounting standard that will shortly become mandatory for all United Kingdom companies.
Previous years' results have been restated accordingly.
I would draw your attention to the financial review on pages 28 and 29, which gives a detailed account of the major factors influencing this year's results.
Summary of Operations
Catalytic Systems Division proved to be one of the main engines for growth in the year and was the largest contributor to group profits for the second year running.
Its operating profits have increased by 20% from £22.5 million to £27.1 million.
Growth was fuelled by the introduction of mandatory emissions standards for all new cars sold throughout the EC, although European car sales declined markedly in the last quarter of our financial year.
Autocatalyst sales in the United States were affected by generally flat car sales although there was increased demand for light duty trucks, where our major customers have their largest market share.
Materials Technology Division showed significant advances over last year which are particularly gratifying given the management attention focused on this business.
Operating profits have increased by 17.5% from £17.7 million to £20.8 million with all the growth coming in the second half.
The Division's North American operations have benefited from excellent results in Electronic Materials, including The Alta Group which we acquired during the year.
While MTD's European operations are more dependent on its traditional fabrication and refining businesses, the benefits from the final phase of the group's rationalisation programme have sustained performance despite depressed market conditions.
Precious Metals Division's performance was impacted by precious metal prices which were either flat or in the case of rhodium significantly lower.
The average price of platinum was £215 in the year as compared with £211 in 1991–92, whereas the average rhodium price declined from £1,773 in 1992 to £1,253.
Given these circumstances, the Division did well to achieve an operating profit of £20.5 million, virtually identical to last year's contribution.
This was due to good performances by the gold and silver refineries.
Colour and Print Division increased operating profits slightly to £11.3 million.
This was achieved in the face of deteriorating conditions in the UK.
The Colour operation at Maastricht saw good growth in its automotive glass enamels business as did the Print operation at Limoges.
Rationalisation Remits — A Success Story
The year has seen the virtual completion of the final phase of the rationalisation remits announced shortly after my appointment as Chairman three years ago.
The rationalisation remits have been a notable success enabling Johnson Matthey to maintain growth in profits during a long and deep worldwide recession.
It is worth recording some of the statistics.
During the three year programme we set ourselves a total of 33 remits, of which only 5 remain to be completed.
Provisions to undertake these remits have been substantial but we estimate that without them our costs in 1992–93 would have been some £25 million higher.
The groups total number of employees has declined from 7,358 in 1990 to 6,142 at 31st March 1993.
This includes the effect of acquisitions which added nearly 350.
Profit per employee has increased from £5,800 in 1989–90 to £11,800 in 1992–93.
As a result of the remits we have ensured that growth in net revenues, inevitably small given the recession of the last three years, has outpaced growth in costs, thus reversing the unacceptable trend seen prior to the programme.
The following figures have been extracted from our management accounts, are calculated at constant exchange rates and take account of the effect of UK Refining:
An important factor in achieving this success has been the requirement that management should report progress against financial targets on a monthly basis to a Committee which I chair and also at regular meetings of the Board.
A Winning Year
I am pleased to record that Johnson Matthey's world leading position in many important areas of activity has been recognised during the year by three prestigious awards.
Our Catalytic Systems Division was one of the first winners of The Queen's Award for Environmental Achievement.
It also gained The Queen's Award for Export Achievement, making us one of only three winners of Queen's Awards in two categories in 1993.
In addition Johnson Matthey Technology Centre was one of the winners of the 1993 Prince of Wales Award for Innovation.
This success serves to underline Johnson Matthey's pioneering research and development activities and our commitment to innovation.
Investment for Growth
The year has witnessed continued investment in our autocatalyst business.
A new highly flexible manufacturing line employing leading production technology has been completed at our main plant in Wayne, PA, increasing our capacity to serve customers in both the US and Japan.
Our technical facility at Kitsuregawa, Japan is on budget and on time for opening later this year.
In Europe we have almost completed our diesel catalyst development centre at Emissionsteknik in Sweden and a diesel catalyst production facility at Royston in the United Kingdom to meet demand from this important growth sector.
These facilities represent a total investment of £17 million within the last 2 years and when completed we will have invested £28 million.
In addition to expanding our production capabilities, Johnson Matthey continues to make a major investment in autocatalyst research and development, working closely with the world's motor industry to reduce engine emissions and to develop catalyst systems for new engine designs.
New products currently under development and in clinical trials in our biomedical business offer exciting potential for future growth.
We have doubled the size of our biomedical manufacturing facilities in North America.
Our electronic materials business has made excellent progress this year.
Commitment to quality and customer service has allowed Johnson Matthey to forge key supplier relationships with many of the world's leading semiconductor manufacturers and has led to steady growth in our market share.
The acquisition in October 1992 of The Alta Group Inc., a leading supplier of high purity titanium, has made a significant contribution to operating profit.
Johnson Matthey's investment in research and development is vital to the future growth of the company and the maintenance of our world leadership in many important areas of activity.
These are set out on page 6.
Our total expenditure on research and development in the past year amounted to £25.0 million.
This represents approximately one third of our profit before tax and maintains our leading position among UK corporations in this respect.
In The Independents Research and Development Scoreboard published in June 1993, Johnson Matthey continued to lead its industrial sector and our investment in R&D compares favourably with leading technology companies on a worldwide basis.
Capital expenditure continues at a high level, amounting to £54.9 million which compares with depreciation of £31.2 million.
I believe there is always room to improve the return on such expenditure and we have set clear targets for management, taking into account whether expenditure is for maintenance or for expansion.
Performance will continue to be thoroughly reviewed on an annual basis.
Shareholders, Board and Staff
In January 1993, Charter Consolidated PLC (‘Charter’) announced its intention to sell its shareholding in Johnson Matthey.
As I have stated on many occasions, Charter has been a most supportive shareholder, most recently under the Chairmanship of Sir Michael Edwardes.
This was demonstrated not least in the constructive relationship between our two companies in the sensitive area relating to the disposal of a controlling block of shares.
The subsequent agreement with Johannesburg Consolidated Investment Company, Limited (‘JCI’) and Minorco who acquired 20% of Johnson Mattheys issued ordinary share capital through a 50/50 joint venture company Garrick Investments, and  the placing of the 18.3% balance of Charter's shareholding with institutional investors, was a most satisfactory outcome.
It served to broaden our shareholder base significantly.
I am especially pleased to welcome JCI back as a shareholder, a position they held from 1918 until 1979, cementing the close relationship between our two companies dating back to the last century.
We anticipate considerable strategic benefits to accrue for both companies as we examine the opportunities available.
The recent announcement of a long term collaboration agreement with JCI on the development of fuel cells is, I believe, only the first example of this.
Following the sale of Charter's shareholding, Mr Charles Parker has retired as a non-executive director of Johnson Matthey.
I would like to thank him for his considerable contribution to the company's success over the last three years.
Mr Pat Retief, Chairman of JCI, and Mr Peter Burnell, an executive director of Minorco, have been appointed as non-executive directors of Johnson Matthey.
I welcome them both to the Board.
Finally, as announced last year, Mr Brian Cooper retired from the Board on 31st December 1992.
We are deeply grateful for his 40 years of service to Johnson Matthey.
I should like to take this opportunity to thank all the employees of Johnson Matthey for the skilled and dedicated service that resulted in this year's record performance
Johnson Matthey in the Community
Johnson Matthey places high priority on the health, safety and welfare of its employees and on its responsibilities to the environment and the community.
Our corporate Environmental Policy and Health and Safety Policy are featured on page 7.
These policies are constantly reviewed, communicated to all employees and form a firm foundation for our worldwide operations.
Johnson Matthey is involved in a number of wider community issues.
Since becoming a primary sponsor of The Prince of Wales Business Leaders Forum, the company has played a leading role in helping to educate managers from the emerging market economies of Eastern Europe.
We have also been involved in the trips made by the Prince of Wales to promote British industry abroad, most recently in Hong Kong, Korea and Mexico.
To mark Johnson Matthey's 175th Anniversary in 1992, a donation of £175,000 has recently been made to the Johnson Matthey Educational Trust which provides annual scholarships to children of persons working in the precious metals industry.
Johnson Matthey has adopted Cancer Relief Macmillan Fund as its Charity of the Year for 1993.
I hope you will join me in supporting this initiative.
The Future
As I write to you there are some signs that the economies of the United States and the United Kingdom have started to emerge from recession.
However, business confidence in the rest of the world, with the exception of South East Asia, remains weak.
In addition gold and platinum prices have shown some improvement, but rhodium remains depressed.
During the year we renegotiated the Rustenburg agreement securing this important contract into the next century.
This is a vital strategic move for Johnson Matthey.
The actions we have taken with our poor performing businesses over the last three years have protected the company in a difficult economic climate.
The benefits that will accrue following economic recovery are self-evident.
We are encouraged by the prospects for our growth businesses led by autocatalysts, electronic materials and biomedical products.
David J Davies, Chairman
WORLD LEADERSHIP
Listed below are some of the important areas of activity in which Johnson Matthey holds a pre-eminent position built on unrivalled specialist knowledge and technical excellence.
Autocatalysts
Johnson Matthey is the worlds leading producer of autocatalysts, supplying more than one third of total world demand.
Precious Metals Refining and Marketing
Johnson Matthey is the sole marketing agent and joint refiner for Rustenburg Platinum Mines, the world's largest source of platinum group metals, and is world leader in the sales and marketing of these metals.
JM is the world's largest refiner of gold outside South Africa; it is also the world's largest producer of high purity small gold bars for jewellery manufacture and investment.
Electronic Materials
JM is the world leader in die attach materials for ceramic packaged integrated circuits and sputtering target materials for electronic applications.
Platinum Anti-cancer Drugs
JM is the supplier of the metal-based bulk pharmaceuticals used in the world's top selling platinum anti-cancer drugs.
Fuel Cell Catalysts
JM is the world's largest manufacturer of precious metal fuel cell catalysts and a world leader in the development of fuel cell catalyst technology.
Catalyst Gauzes
JM is the world's leading producer of platinum alloy catalysts for fertiliser and chemical production.
Ceramic Transfers
JM is the world's biggest manufacturer of decorative ceramic transfers.
COLOUR AND PRINT DIVISION
Colour and Print Division's operating profits increased by 2% during the year to £11.3 million despite significantly more difficult worldwide market conditions.
The introduction of new products, continuous improvements in productivity, and customer service and cost reduction initiatives have all helped to sustain performance in a year dominated by recession in our principal markets around the world.
Colour
The Colour operation is an international business supplying the ceramic, glass, plastic, ink and surface coatings industries worldwide.
During the year the reshaping of our UK Colour operations to form two separate, but complementary worldwide businesses, Decorative Ceramics and Pigments and Dispersions, was completed.
This will enable the Division to focus its resources and skills on the specific market requirements of both of these sectors.
The Pigments and Dispersions business now has its headquarters at Kidsgrove, Stoke-on-Trent, from where dedicated management, sales and technical staff combine Johnson Matthey's traditional pigment and masterbatch activities with the speciality dispersions and additive products of The Shear Company.
The year has seen exciting progress in the development of transparent iron oxide pigments and dispersions, taking us towards our goal of world leadership in key sectors within this market.
Product and process technology investments made by Decorative Ceramics over the last two years have confirmed Johnson Matthey as a world leader in onglaze colour technology.
New business continues to be gained through the availability of technically advanced decorative systems and an ongoing research and development programme will ensure that future legislative requirements are satisfied.
Automotive glass enamels and associated silver pastes make a major contribution to the success of our operation in Maastricht.
The potential for expanding our market share of these advanced products has been further secured by the establishing of new production and laboratory facilities in the USA and South Korea.
An innovative approach to wall tile glaze development at Maastricht has resulted in an exclusive award from one of the  world's largest tile manufacturers, the Inax Corporation of Japan.
Johnson Matthey's Cerene glaze formulation has enabled Inax to commercialise a new series of high gloss, super white tile glazes .
Johnson Matthey is one of Europe's leading producers of coloured masterbatch materials for pigmenting plastics.
Testing automotive glass enamels and silver pastes at our Colour operation in Maastricht, the Netherlands.
The year has seen success in the development and commercialisation of a new series of fast fire glazes for the previously unavailable from less sophisticated systems.
The market not only drives our product development but also our business culture.
Our mission is ‘to become the worlds number one colour manufacturer by establishing a world class colour operation within which product quality is absolutely dependable…’.
In order to achieve this we are further increasing our focus on customer service and quality systems.
The year has seen further growth in Far East markets together with a rapid expansion of our business in the Middle East, whilst new product ranges have provided opportunities in traditional European markets.
1993–94 will see further expansion of silver paste, automotive and flat glass enamel production and reflect a continuing awareness of environmental, technological, legal and social considerations in all our products.
This awareness will in turn result in further new product ranges; unleaded toughened glass enamels, unleaded inglaze and underglaze colours, dispersed pigments suitable for water based systems and environmentally friendly decorative precious metal preparations.
Print
Our Print operation is the worlds largest producer of decorative ceramic transfers.
The two main manufacturing units, based in Stoke-on-Trent, UK and Limoges, France, supply the world's leading ceramic and glass manufacturers and have continued to enjoy growth in target markets in spite of the European recession.
Print UK was particularly affected by instability in key overseas markets in the first half of the year.
However, substantial investment in new technology together with an increased market share in the UK and the North American markets helped them to offset these initial setbacks and produce a stronger finish to the year.
Print France had a good year, despite the poor European economic situation, and enjoyed significant growth in key sectors of the North American market.
Technical advances have helped them to achieve world leadership in the supply of transfers for the collectors' plate industry whilst providing a solid foundation for
Johnson Matthey is the world's biggest manufacturer of decorative ceramic transfers.
CORPORATE POLICIES
Johnson Matthey has consistently placed high emphasis on its responsibilities for the environment and on the health and safety of its employees and the community.
It is with this in mind that Mr Chris Clark, Executive Director, Materials Technology Division, has assumed overall responsibility for the implementation and monitoring of our corporate environmental and health and safety policies.
Environmental Policy
We are committed to conducting our business in a manner which avoids adverse effects on the environment and public health.
The care of the environment is of prime importance to our business and is the responsibility of all employees.
We organise reviews and evaluations to ensure compliance with statutory obligations and group and local policies, although it is our aim to work to higher standards.
Each operating division formulates its own detailed arrangements to meet the following goals:
Design and manufacture products so as to optimise their environmental performance, including considering the environmental effects when sourcing raw materials.
Train all employees to identify and achieve their environmental responsibilities.
Promote the efficient usage of all forms of energy to reduce consumption.
Recover and recycle surplus and waste process materials.
Eliminate or reduce polluting releases and all forms of waste for disposal to ensure the minimum interference with the environment.
Provide waste management programmes for the safe disposal of waste so that it does not adversely affect the health and safety of employees, the public, or the environment.
Minimise the environmental effects of new developments and projects through forward planning.
Facilities are to be environmentally efficient and visually attractive.
Communicate our environmental policy to employees, customers and the community.
Health and Safety Policy
We are committed to applying the best practicable health and safety standards in our business to protect our employees, contractors, visitors, customers, shareholders and the community.
It is our aim to prevent all accidents, injuries and occupational health problems.
Health and Safety is a major management function ranking in importance with others that lead to efficient operation.
Line managers are responsible for health and safety and have a duty to implement statutory obligations and group and local policies.
They are also responsible for endeavouring to eliminate or safely manage the risks inherent in our business.
This is achieved by the effective implementation of the group health and safety policy and by formulating and applying a local health and safety policy to meet the following goals:
Organise and establish controls for effective compliance with health and safety policies and work closely with official authorities responsible for health and safety.
Design and maintain processes, facilities and equipment to ensure a safe working environment.
Train all employees to perform their duties in a safe and competent manner in order to protect themselves, the company's property and the community.
Advise all employees, contractors and visitors
DIRECTORS' REPORT
The directors submit to shareholders their one hundred and second annual report, together with the audited accounts of the group for the year ended 31st March 1993.
Pages 1 to 30 are an integral part of the report.
Results, dividends and investment
These items are covered in detail in the financial review on pages 28 and 29.
The interim dividend of 3.2 pence per share, up 0.2 pence, was paid in February.
A final dividend of 7.1 pence per share, up 0.45 pence, is being proposed to shareholders as Resolution No. 2 at the Annual General Meeting, making a total for the year of 10.3 pence, an increase of 6.7% over last year.
Dividends for the year total £19.1 million.
The directors propose to transfer the retained profits of £31.0 million to reserves.
The directors also propose to offer shareholders an enhanced scrip dividend together with a cash offer from BZW as an alternative to the final cash dividend.
The scrip offer is subject to the approval by shareholders of resolution number 5 at the  AGM .
More details are given on pages 28 and 29 and in the documents being sent to shareholders with the annual report.
Employment Policies
It is the policy of the group to train and develop employees at all levels so that group objectives can be met.
We recruit, train and manage our employees regardless of sex, ethnic origin or religion.
Disabled people are offered employment consistent with their capabilities.
Team briefing is our main vehicle for communicating information about the company and for obtaining feed-back through the organisation.
34.8% of employees worldwide are shareholders in Johnson Matthey through the companys Employee Share Participation Schemes which held 3,575,516 shares (1.9%) at 31st May 1993. 180 current and former executives hold options over 3,096,125 shares through the companys executive share option schemes.
The Group's environmental, health and safety policies, which are printed on page 7, are given close attention at all locations.
Directors
Details of the directors of the company are shown on pages 8 and 9.
Of the directors standing for re-election at the Annual General Meeting, Mr J N Sheldrick and Mr I G Thorburn have two year service contracts.
Mr P F Retief and Mr P C D Burnell were appointed directors of the company on 7th June 1993.
In accordance with Article 115 of the Articles of Association they hold office until the Annual General Meeting when they offer themselves for election.
Mr B S Cooper retired from the Board on 31st December 1992 and Mr C H Parker on 7th June 1993.
Directors' interests in the company's shares are detailed in note 11(a) on page 43.
Other than service contracts, no director had any interest in any material contract with any group company at any time during the year.
The company has taken out insurance for the directors and officers of group companies in respect of their duties as directors and officers of the group.
Substantial Shareholdings
The company has been advised of the following notifiable interests in its ordinary share capital as at 31st May 1993.
Garrick Investments Ltd (‘Garrick’) holds its interest through its wholly owned subsidiaries, Tygon Investments Ltd and Jaguar Investments Ltd.
In terms of Section 203(2) (b) of the Companies Act 1985, Minorco and Johannesburg Consolidated Investment Company, Limited (‘JCI’), by virtue of their joint (50/50) interest in the equity share capital of Garrick, are taken to have an interest in all the shares in which Garrick is interested.
Anglo American Corporation of South Africa Limited (‘Anglo’) and De Beers Consolidated Mines Limited (‘De Beers’) by virtue of Anglo's interest of more than one third of the equity share capital of Minorco and JCI, and De Beers' interest of more than one third in the equity share capital of Anglo, are also taken to have an interest in these same shares.
Charter Consolidated PLC disposed of its entire holding of shares (38.3%) in Johnson Matthey on 4th March 1993. 20% were acquired by Garrick.
The remaining 18.3% were placed with institutions by the company's brokers, Barclays de Zoete Wedd and UBS.
The directors are not aware of any other holdings of 3% or more of the ordinary share capital of the company.
Authority to Allot Shares
At last year's Annual General Meeting (‘AGM’), the directors were given authority under Section 80 of the Companies Act 1985, until 15th July 1997 to allot shares up to a maximum of the authorised but unissued share capital of the company.
Under Resolution No.6 to be put forward at the AGM the directors propose that the authority should be extended so that it applies for five years from the date of this year's AGM.
In addition, at last years AGM, the directors were given authority under Section 95 of the Companies Act 1985, until the conclusion of the 1993 AGM, to allot equity securities for cash, other than to existing shareholders in proportion to their holdings, up to an aggregate nominal amount of £9,234,276 being equal to 5% of the then issued ordinary share capital.
The directors propose, as Resolution No.7, that this authority be renewed for a further year up to an aggregate nominal amount of £9,260,761.
A further 3,617,026 ordinary shares are reserved for possible issue under the companys share option schemes approved by the company in General Meeting, as well as in consequence of the conversion of convertible preference shares.
Executive Share Option Scheme
The company's Executive Share Option Scheme (‘the Scheme’) contains various limits on the maximum ordinary shares over which options may be granted.
These vary in accordance with changes in the company's issued share capital, subject to an absolute limit which was set at 6,661,855 ordinary shares in August 1985, representing 5% of the issued share  capital at that time.
Since then the issued share capital has been increased so that the absolute limit represents just under 3.6% of the current issued share capital.
options over 6 million ordinary shares have been issued to date and the scheme still has a further 2 years to run.
The directors therefore propose, as resolution No. 8 that authority be given at this years AGM to amend the rules of the Scheme so that the absolute limit will be increased to 9,260,761 shares representing 5% of the current issued share capital.
This absolute limit will include any options granted under the company's US Stock
AUDITORS' REPORT to the members of Johnson Matthey Public Limited Company
We have audited the financial statements on pages 34 to 54 in accordance with Auditing Standards.
In our opinion the financial statements give a true and fair view of the state of affairs of the company and the group at 31st March 1993 and of the profit and cash flows of the group for the year then ended and have been properly prepared in accordance with the Companies Act 1985.
8th June 1993 London
KPMG Peat Marwick Chartered Accountants Registered Auditors
FINANCIAL REVIEW
Operating Results
This year's accounts have been prepared in accordance with FRS 3, a new accounting standard which will shortly become mandatory for all UK companies.
The changes which arise as a result of the new standard are described on page 39.
Turnover grew by 6% to £1,854m.
This figure includes precious metals trading.
Net revenues, which exclude direct materials costs, also increased by 6% in 1993.
Operating profit grew by 14%, excluding exceptional items.
Most of this growth came in Catalytic Systems Division, where  autocatalyst sales increased rapidly in Europe to meet the new emission standards for all new cars sold in the European Community, and in Materials Technology Division which benefited from cost rationalisation and a strong performance from the electronic materials business.
Profit before tax benefited by £0.9m from more favourable exchange translation following the devaluation of sterling in the second half of the year.
The average rate used to translate the group's US dollar profits for 1993 was $1.68/£ (1992 $1.74/£).
The benefit of favourable exchange rates was more than offset by the adverse impact of weaker precious metal prices, particularly rhodium (see page 21).
Interest
The group had a net interest charge in 1993 of £1.5m after recording a net credit in 1992.
This charge reflects the increase in the group's borrowings detailed below and the fall in sterling interest rates, particularly in the second half of the year.
Net interest includes interest payable on precious metal loans (often referred to as metal ‘leases’) where rates are usually lower than money loans.
Johnson Matthey borrows precious metals (such as gold and platinum) to finance its inventory.
These loans are shown as metal borrowings in the group's balance sheet.
Since the metal is borrowed the group is not exposed to price fluctuations on these stocks.
In order to eliminate price exposure on other precious metal stocks we hedge the price wherever possible by forward sales.
This hedging usually gives rise to interest income in the form of ‘contangos’ which reflect the difference between metal interest rates and US dollar rates.
In addition, the dollar price is hedged into sterling to avoid currency exposure.
This also produces interest income in the form of swap premiums.
The overall effect of this hedging activity in recent years has been to reduce the group's interest charge.
However, in 1993 the benefit from hedging was less than in 1992 as the gap between sterling interest rates and precious metal interest rates narrowed.
All of Johnson Matthey's money borrowings are in foreign currency to finance the groups overseas subsidiaries.
The group's largest currency borrowings are in US dollars and Belgian francs.
The group has no net sterling borrowing.
Taxation
The group's tax charge for the year was £23.7m which includes £1.3m (1992 £2.0m) relating to the sale of Johnson Matthey's shares in Tanaka Matthey KK.
Last year's tax charge of £19.2m also includes a credit of £4.8m (restated as exceptional and included in earnings per share under FRS 3) which related to the favourable House of Lords verdict in the Johnson Matthey Bankers case.
Dividends
A final dividend of 7.1p is proposed for this year giving an overall dividend for the year of 10.3p an increase of 6.7%.
This would be covered 2.6 times by earnings (excluding additional tax) or 2.3 times after fully allowing for additional Advance Corporation Tax (‘ACT’).
As an alternative to the cash dividend the Board is proposing that an enhanced scrip dividend is offered to shareholders whereby they may elect to receive new ordinary shares with a value of 10.65 pence per share, an increase of 50% over the proposed final cash dividend.
This offer will be subject to approval of shareholders at Johnson Mattheys AGM on 13th July 1993.
The scrip alternative should be beneficial to nearly all shareholders.
Details of the scrip and the offer to buy the scrip shares by Barclays de Zoete Wedd Securities Limited (‘BZW’) are contained in separate documents being sent out to shareholders with the annual report.
The scrip alternative has no impact on the 1993 accounts.
If the scrip alternative is taken up by all shareholders it would result in a saving of £3.8m of ACT.
This would enhance earnings for the year ending 31st March 1994.
At the same time the company's balance sheet would be strengthened.
The Board's intention is that the cash retained by the company from the dividend and related ACT will be used to fund future capital investment and possible small acquisitions.
Cash Flow /Borrowings
Borrowings rose by £78.3m in the year.
Capital expenditure of £54.9m was more than covered by cash flow generated from  operati 
FINANCIAL HIGHLIGHTS
OPERATIONS OVERVIEW
CATALYTIC SYSTEMS
Principal products:
automotive exhaust emission control catalysts
catalytic industrial air pollution control systems
chemical and metallurgical products
MATERIALS TECHNOLOGY
Principal products and services:
fabricated precious metals
precious metal chemicals and refining
process catalysts
electronic materials
pharmaceutical intermediates
fuel cell catalysts
rare earth products
jewellery materials
engineering materials and metal joining products
PRECIOUS METALS
Principal products and services:
sole marketing agency for Rustenburg Platinum Mines
pure platinum, palladium, rhodium, ruthenium, iridium and osmium metal
gold and silver refining
platinum investment bars
gold and silver high purity bars and grain for industrial applications and investment
platinum, gold and silver pricing and metal account services
COLOUR AND PRINT
Principal products:
colours and stains for ceramics and glass
enamels and conductive pastes for automotive glass
pigments and dispersions for plastics, inks and surface coatings
liquid precious metal preparations for pottery and glass
lithographic and screenprinted ceramic transfers
MATERIALS TECHNOLOGY DIVISION
Materials Technology Division increased its operating profits by 17.5% to £20.8 million.
This improvement came through entirely in the second half and was predominantly in the USA where we saw the beginnings of economic recovery.
Trading continues to be difficult in all the major European markets, but our cost cutting programmes have positioned us well for recovery.
We have continued to invest in Asia — particularly in Japan — since we regard this region as strategically vital.
The Division's businesses are reviewed on a regional basis.
MTD Europe
The programme of rationalisation remits, which was begun in this region three years ago, has been essentially completed and manning levels have been reduced by 1,000 (40%) since March 1990.
The resulting reduction in costs has been coincident with a focus on customer service and manufacturing excellence and the operation is now ready to take the opportunities that economic recovery will bring.
Noble Metals
The platinum fabrication operations previously carried out in Brussels have been successfully moved to Royston, where we now have a single manufacturing site able to serve the whole of Europe.
The reduction in costs which this has achieved has enabled the business to perform most satisfactorily in what has been a very difficult year in all its major markets.
The knitted gauze products for the nitric acid industry which were introduced by Johnson Matthey last year, have been well received by customers and are capturing a growing share of the European market.
Chemicals
The restructuring of the UK Refining and Chemicals businesses was the most extensive of all the rationalisation remits, but has now been brought to a successful conclusion.
The refinery has effectively eliminated all its metal backlogs and is using improved service and faster lead times to win increased market shares.
The integration of the refining and the chemicals operations has allowed us to improve the quality of service to customers who require both fabrication and refining and the benefits are already being seen.
Both the process catalyst and the precious metals chemicals businesses achieved good results despite the continued recession in the European chemical industry.
Jewellery
Knitted catalyst gauze products for the nitric acid industry are produced at our European Noble Metals facility at Royston, UK.
The UK jewellery market has had a very tough year and many customers and competitors have experienced difficulties.
Nonetheless our own business remained profitable and has succeeded in growing its market share to the point where it supplies over one third of the gold jewellery materials used in the UK.
Costs have also been the focus of attention and all manufacturing activities have been consolidated in newly refurbished premises in Birmingham.
This combination of lower costs and increased market share makes the business well placed to benefit from any improvement in trading conditions.
Italy
The year has not been an easy one for our Italian business.
In response to the prevailing economic conditions it has withdrawn from peripheral businesses and has focused on the core activities represented by its silver products.
This action, which has seen a 22% reduction in the workforce in the past twelve months, has brought costs under control and the recent devaluation of the Italian Lira is bringing new export opportunities.
However, the economic outlook in Italy remains uncertain.
European Selling Operations
Historically, Johnson Matthey has operated in continental Europe through a network of selling companies in each of the major markets.
The advent of the Single European Market has presented an opportunity to streamline these activities.
Administrative and warehousing functions are now performed by a central unit in Paris, whilst operations in other countries have been replaced by customer service centres which can concentrate on the needs of local customers.
MTD North America
Overall, North America had an excellent year.
The general improvement in the economy of the United States brought increased demand in most of our market sectors and there was rapid growth in the semiconductor industry which boosted our electronic materials business.
Operating profit growth was strengthened further by the acquisition of The Alta Group Inc. on 1st October 1992.
Electronic Materials
Our electronic materials business has had an outstanding year.
Recent investment in manufacturing capacity and quality systems has paid off with an increased share in the markets for sputtering targets, metal seal lids for semiconductor packages and fabricated metal products for electronic applications.
This, coupled with growth in the overall market, has been a major factor behind the increase in profit for the division as a whole.
Metal seal lids for semiconductor packages and sputtering targets produced by our electronic materials business in Spokane, USA, have this year achieved increased market share.
Platinum marker bands and electrodes, used in the treatment of cardiac and neurological disorders, are produced by our US Noble Metals operation.
The investment in quality has also been reflected in top supplier awards from Texas Instruments, Philips, Motorola and many other semiconductor houses.
The Spokane site in Washington State was certified to ISO 9001 joining an elite group of electronic materials suppliers around the world to achieve this status.
On 1st October 1992, Johnson Matthey acquired The Alta Group Inc., a specialist materials company located near Pittsburgh, Pennsylvania.
Alta manufactures high purity titanium principally for use in the production of sputtering targets for the electronics industry.
Ultra-high purity titanium is critical to the manufacture of a wide variety of semiconductor devices and, allied to the other metals and alloys produced by Alta, offers further exciting growth opportunities in the coming years.
Our market leading ‘gold sub’(AuSub©) range of silver glass die attach pastes has been augmented by a new range of polymer based materials which can be used to attach semi-conductor chips in both ceramic and plastic packages.
These offer unique technical advantages over existing materials and will provide new market opportunities for our San Diego facility.
The commitment to quality which is the cornerstone of our electronic materials businesses has also maintained our lead in the market for precious metal thermocouple temperature sensors, infra-red sensing materials and sapphire based materials for military and commercial markets.
Biomedical
Johnson Matthey's pharmaceutical business has seen continued growth and has made a strong contribution to group profits during the year.
Cisplatin and carboplatin continue to be the world's top selling platinum anti-cancer drugs and exciting opportunities for further growth in this important sector are being pursued.
New manufacturing facilities for biomedical products have been opened at our West Deptford site.
These provide expanded capacity for platinum anti-cancer drugs and specialised organic pharmaceutical products.
Good progress is being made in new drug research and development and early clinical trials of an orally administered anti-cancer drug and a new diagnostic agent are giving encouraging results.
There has also been continued success in the development of compounds for the treatment of specific viral diseases.
Chemicals
The sharply lower rhodium price depressed revenues in the chemicals and refining business and profits for the year were down on the previous period.
Much emphasis is now being placed on reducing lead times and improving manufacturing procedures with the expectation that this will improve profitability in the coming years.
There is also some cause for optimism in the record number of new product qualifications achieved by the supported catalyst business.
To provide even greater precision in temperature measurement, Johnson Matthey has introduced a line of temperature sensors based on patented optical fibre
A Computer Aided Design impression of Johnson Matthey's new technical facility currently under construction at  Kitsuregawa,
FINANCIAL CALENDAR
Notice is hereby given to the ordinary shareholders of Johnson Matthey Public Limited Company that the one hundred and second Annual General Meeting of the Company will be held in the Sainsbury Wing Lecture Theatre, The National Gallery, Trafalgar Square, London WC2N 5DN on Tuesday, 13th July 1993 at 12.00 noon for the following purposes:
As Ordinary Business
1.
To receive and adopt the accounts of the Company for the year ended 31st March 1993 and the reports of the directors and auditors thereon.
2.
To declare a final dividend of 7.1 pence per share on the ordinary shares of the Company in respect of the year ended 31st March 1993.
3.
To elect or re-elect the undermentioned directors: H E Fitzgibbons P F Retief I G Thorburn P C D Burnell J N Sheldrick
4.
To reappoint KPMG Peat Marwick as auditors and authorise the directors to fix their remuneration.
As Special Business
5.
To consider the following resolution which will be proposed as a special resolution: THAT the directors be and they are hereby generally and unconditionally authorised:
(i)
to offer to the holders of ordinary shares of £1 each in the capital of the Company (‘Ordinary Shares’) the right to elect to receive an allotment of new Ordinary Shares, credited as fully paid, in lieu of all or part of the final cash dividend in respect of the financial year of the Company ended on 31st March 1993 in all respects in such manner as may be determined by the directors on the basis and subject to the conditions of the circular dated 21st June 1993 sent to the members of the Company by the Company and, in particular, such that the aggregate nominal value of the new Ordinary Shares which such holders may elect to receive may exceed the aggregate cash dividend which they would otherwise be entitled to receive; and
(ii)
to capitalise the appropriate nominal amount of the new Ordinary Shares falling to be allotted pursuant to any elections made as aforesaid out of the amount standing to the credit of any reserve or fund (including the profit and loss account, share premium account, capital redemption reserve or any other reserve), whether or not the same is available for distribution, as the directors may determine, to apply such sum in paying up in full such Ordinary Shares and to allot such Ordinary Shares to the shareholders of the company validly making such elections in accordance with their respective entitlements…
6.
To consider the following resolution which will be proposed as an ordinary resolution: THAT in accordance with Article 9(C) (i) the Prescribed Period as defined in Article 9(B) (iii)(a) be from the date of the passing of this resolution up to and including 13th July 1998 and that the Section 80 amount as defined by Article 9(B) (iv) be £34,604,067…
7.
To consider the following resolution which will be proposed as a special resolution: THAT  subject to the passing of the Resolution in 6. above and pursuant to the authority therein contained and in accordance with Article 9(C) (ii) the Prescribed Period as defined in Article 9(B) (iii)(b) be from the date of the passing of this resolution until the conclusion of the next Annual General Meeting and that the Section 89 amount as defined in Article 9(B) (v) be £9,260,761 (being 5% of the issued ordinary share capital of the Company at 31st May 1993)…
The word ‘Article’ in the above resolutions means the relevant paragraph of the Articles of Association of the Company.
8.
To consider the following resolution which will be proposed as an ordinary resolution: THAT 
PRECIOUS METALS DIVISION
Precious Metals Division's operating profits were virtually unchanged from last year at £20.5 million.
The economic recession around the world was not generally helpful to precious metal prices.
Although platinum traded in a narrow band close to the depressed levels of 1991, rhodium fell steadily throughout the year to finish at a three year low.
The devaluation of the pound sterling in September 1992, however, helped the Division to offset part of the dollar revenue shortfall.
Gold and silver operations performed well with primary refining intakes higher than the prior year and demand for bullion products at record levels.
Platinum Group Metals
Despite the generally poor economic climate, physical demand for platinum in 1992 was only 6 per cent lower than in 1991.
Although world car sales were not buoyant, the spread of clean air legislation, particularly in Europe, increased the consumption of platinum group metals in the automobile industry.
Jewellery markets for platinum also displayed great resilience and, once again led by the Japanese, offtake of platinum reached 1.5 million ounces for the first time.
Platinum demand in general industrial sectors was however affected by the recession and investors in the metal were absent from the market for much of the year.
Overall, supply and demand were closely in balance and the price of platinum averaged $360 per ounce in 1992–93 compared to  per ounce in 1991–92.
Public transport of the future may use fuel cells to achieve zero emissions.
Rhodium sales slipped back during the year as car companies utilised strategic stocks rather than purchase new metal.
Since the market for this metal is dominated by the automotive industry there was an inevitable decline in price which ended the year at $1,350 per ounce, over 55% down from the year's high point.
As already mentioned in the Chairman's Statement on page 6 a particular highlight of the year was the renewal of Johnson Matthey's long established contractual relationship with Rustenburg Platinum Mines.
The Division continues to actively seek new uses for the platinum group metals both through R&D programmes and marketing campaigns.
Fuel cells are a particularly important area of activity and several collaboration agreements were signed during the year.
These are aimed at achieving early commercialisation of fuel cells and significantly increasing demand for platinum.
Motor vehicles powered by diesel engines are scheduled for tighter emissions legislation over the next few years.
Catalysts using platinum group metals have already been identified as the most likely technology to meet these requirements, providing an exciting growth opportunity.
In the jewellery and fashion industries, platinum continues to extend its appeal beyond just the very important market of Japan.
Already there are signs of a strong resurgence of interest in North America and 1993 production of platinum watches in Switzerland is anticipated to show a 10 fold increase compared to just 5 years ago.
Gold and Silver Operations
The gold market in 1992–93 was quite lacklustre with prices in the doldrums for most of the year.
Yellow metal spent the majority of this 12 month period locked in a narrow range between $329 and $352 and the average of $338 was $19 lower than the previous year.
However, Johnson Matthey earned increased profits from its refineries for three reasons:
Firstly, despite the depressed gold price, mine production rose in most areas of the world and JM retained its leading share of this primary market.
Our four modern refineries, located in the USA, Canada, Australia and the United Kingdom, convert primary and secondary gold into a wide range of internationally  recognise 
PRINCIPAL SUBSIDIARY AND ASSOCIATED COMPANIES
RESEARCH AND DEVELOPMENT
In 1992–93, Johnson Matthey spent £25.0 million gross on Research and Development, compared with £23.1 million in the previous year.
This continuing and growing investment reflects Johnson Matthey's commitment to R&D as a vital element in its strategy for future growth and profitability.
These figures are particularly significant when viewed in the light of a recent Confederation of British Industry survey.
This found that in UK manufacturing industry, only one company in ten currently regards research as a high priority.
Overall Research and Development spending by British chemical, pharmaceutical and electronics companies has declined by 10–12% since 1990.
The quality and reputation of Johnson Matthey Research and Development is demonstrated by the amount of external funding it has generated.
This represents 13% of our gross expenditure and is derived mostly from commercial partners.
A record 5-year high in the number of published patent applications is indicative of the increased level of innovation throughout the company.
Johnson Mattheys leadership in technical innovation was recently highlighted by success in the Innovation Stage of the 1993 Prince of Wales Award for Innovation.
This was in recognition of our pioneering work on new materials for the production of microelectronic circuits.
Over 50% of our total R&D spend is devoted to environmentally beneficial products.
Johnson Matthey's R&D activities are organised and co-ordinated on a worldwide basis.
The corporate Technology Centre at Sonning Common in the United Kingdom is complemented by a pharmaceutical research group in the USA and by development groups and technical centres within each division.
Biomedical
Johnson Matthey has had a long and important involvement in the development of cisplatin and carboplatin, the platinum-based anti-tumour drugs used in the treatment of testicular and ovarian cancer.
This work has been carried out in collaboration with The Institute of Cancer Research, The Royal Marsden Hospital, and Bristol-Myers Squibb.
Both drugs, however, are administered intravenously which requires the treatment to be given in hospital.
Out-patient treatment with an orally-administered drug would be a major benefit for patients undergoing cancer chemotherapy.
A new oral drug has been selected for clinical trials which are progressing well at The Royal Marsden Hospital.
Our interests in biomedical technology extend beyond platinum-based cancer chemotherapy to areas such as the treatment of specific viral diseases and advanced medical diagnostics.
In this latter area Johnson Matthey has developed a number of technetium-labelled agents for medical imaging.
One of these diagnostic agents is now in clinical trials.
Refining
Work on innovative solvent extraction
The latest computer modelling techniques are used to optimise refining process improvements.
Distribution of elements on autocatalysts is highlighted in false colours in this electron microprobe image.
 technology to further improve the efficiency of Johnson Mattheys secondary precious metal refining operations has continued throughout the year.
Advanced computer modelling techniques have been developed to simulate the refining  process.
This work is consolidating Johnson Matthey's position as a world leader in precious metal refining.
Autocatalysts
Research on new and improved catalysts is vital to the future of our world leading autocatalyst business.
The goal of improved fuel efficiency through the use of lean-burn, two-stroke and diesel engines has stimulated interest in catalysts which can reduce nitrogen oxides (NOx) under lean conditions.
Through the use of our TAP (Temporal Analysis of Products) reactor and other advanced analytical techniques, detailed information has now been obtained on the mechanism of lean-NOx reduction.
This places Johnson Matthey in a strong position to design and develop improved catalysts.
Such technical advances, combined with a sound understanding of fundamental catalyst chemistry, will ensure that Johnson Matthey retains its position at the forefront of autocatalyst technology.
Fuel Cells
Johnson Matthey is the worlds leading supplier of platinum based catalysts for phosphoric acid fuel cells.
At present, hundreds of this type of fuel cell power plant are undergoing field trials around the world as the final stage in their development.
We are now focusing our research efforts, however, on second-generation proton exchange membrane (PEM) fuel cells.
PEM fuel cells offer high power density and low pollution, and are thus the most suitable fuel cell for the ‘zero emission’ automobiles proposed for California.
Our research programme has led to the development of high-performance electrodes and poison resistant catalysts, both of which are critical factors in the development of a practical system.
Collaborative programmes with major fuel cell stack and system developers are complementing our Research and Development efforts on PEM catalysts and electrodes.
Materials Technology
The materials research programme encompasses a range of technologies aimed not only at supporting existing businesses, but also at the development of new ones.
Overall these efforts will consolidate Johnson Matthey's position as a leading supplier of high-technology materials.
Specific areas of research activity include:
Platinum-cobalt multilayer films for high-density magneto-optic recording.
This programme has yielded excellent results and the technology has attracted considerable interest from the data storage industry.
Advanced coating technology.
This programme aims to use platinum group metal coatings for high temperature corrosion protection.
Initial applications in the glass melting industry have been well received by customers.
Materials for high-density interconnect packaging.
This represents a new area for Johnson Matthey.
Prototype platinum-cobalt re-writable magneto-optic storage discs produced by Johnson Matthey.
A gathering ball using advanced platinum coating technology in operation in molten glass at temperatures over 1000°C.
Catalytic Systems
Diesel smoke and smell is virtually eliminated using Johnson Matthey and Emissionsteknik technology.
This Royal Mail vehicle is fitted with a catalytic filter behind the cab.
ACCOUNTING POLICIES
1.
Accounting convention
The accounts are prepared in accordance with applicable accounting standards including FRS3 under the historical cost convention as modified by the revaluation of certain land and buildings.
2.
Basis of consolidation
The consolidated accounts comprise the accounts of the parent company and all its subsidiary undertakings and include the groups interest in associated undertakings.
The results of companies acquired or disposed of in the year are dealt with from or up to the effective date of acquisition or disposal respectively.
The net assets of companies acquired are incorporated in the consolidated accounts at their fair values to the group at the date of acquisition.
Goodwill arising on acquisitions is taken to reserves.
The parent company has not presented its own profit and loss account as permitted by Section 230 of the Companies Act 1985.
3.
Foreign currencies
Profit and loss accounts in foreign currencies and cash flows included in the cash flow statement are translated into sterling at average exchange rates for the year.
Foreign currency assets and liabilities are translated into sterling at the rates of exchange at the balance sheet date.
Gains or losses arising on the translation of the net assets of overseas subsidiaries and associated undertakings are taken to reserves, less exchange differences arising on related foreign currency borrowings.
Other exchange differences are taken to the profit and loss account.
4.
Stocks
(i) Precious metal stocks:
Stocks of gold, silver and platinum group metals are valued according to the source from which the metal is obtained.
Metal which has been purchased and committed to future sales to customers or hedged in metal markets is valued at the price at which it is contractually committed or hedged, adjusted for unexpired contango.
Borrowed metal is valued at market prices at the balance sheet date.
Other precious metal stocks owned by the group, which are unhedged, are valued at the lower of cost and net realisable value.
Because of the volatility of precious metal prices, net realisable value is generally taken to be the lower of market prices and average prices ruling over the last five years.
(ii) Other stocks:
These are valued at the lower of cost, including attributable overheads, and net realisable value.
5.
Research and development
Research and development expenditure is charged against profits in the year it is incurred.
6.
Forward contracts
Commitments arising from forward contracts entered into in the ordinary course of business are not included in the balance sheet.
7.
Tangible fixed assets
(i) Depreciation:
Freehold land and certain office buildings are not depreciated.
These office buildings are maintained in such condition that their value does not diminish and the cost of maintenance is charged to operating profit.
Other fixed assets are depreciated on a straight line basis at annual rates which vary according to the class of asset, but are typically:
(ii) Leases:
The cost of assets held under finance leases is included under tangible fixed assets and the capital element of future lease payments is included in creditors.
Depreciation is provided in accordance with the group's accounting policy for the class of asset concerned.
Lease payments are treated as consisting of capital and interest elements and the interest is charged to the profit and loss account using the annuity method.
Rentals under operating leases are expensed as incurred.
(iii) Grants in respect of capital expenditure:
Grants in respect of capital expenditure incurred after 31st March 1991 are included in creditors and released to the profit and loss account in equal instalments over the expected useful lives of the related assets.
8.
Deferred taxation
Deferred taxation is provided using the liability method on all timing differences to the extent that they are expected to reverse in the foreseeable future.
9.
Pensions and other retirement benefits
The group operates a number of contributory and non-contributory schemes, mainly of the defined benefit type, which require contributions to be made to separately administered funds.
The cost of these schemes is charged to profit and loss account over the service lives of employees in
CONSOLIDATED CASH FLOW STATEMENT for the year ended 31st March 1993
CONSOLIDATED PROFIT AND LOSS ACCOUNT for the year ended 31st March 1993
The movements on reserves are set out in note 22 on page 52.
The notes on pages 38 to 54 form an integral part of the accounts.
NOTES ON THE ACCOUNTS for the year ended 31st March 1993
1.
Adoption of new accounting standard
The accounts have been prepared in accordance with FRS 3, a new accounting standard which will shortly become mandatory for all UK companies.
Last years results have been restated on the new basis with the following consequences:
a)
The profit on sale of shares in Tanaka Matthey KK, previously classified as extraordinary, is now shown as exceptional and included in profit before tax and earnings per share.
b)
Last year's exceptional gain on the sale of surplus rhodium stocks and exceptional rationalisation costs are included in operating profit under the appropriate statutory headings.
Turnover, cost of materials sold, net revenues and administrative expenses have been adjusted accordingly.
The rationalisation costs have been restated to exclude £3.5 million of realised revaluation gains.
Historic cost profits shown on page 37 are not affected by this change.
c)
Last year's extraordinary tax credit of £4.8 million relating to the House of Lords judgement in May 1992 on the £50 million payment to Johnson Matthey Bankers Limited in 1984 has been reclassified as exceptional and is included in profit after tax and earnings per share.
There were no fundamental restructuring costs provided for in 1993 or 1992, and profits and losses on sale of fixed assets (1993 £0.2 million profit, 1992 £0.6 million loss) were not sufficiently material to warrant separate disclosure on the face of the profit and loss account.
2.
Acquisitions and discontinued operations
During the year the group made one acquisition: The Alta Group Inc.
The effect of this acquisition on the profit and loss account was as follows:
Further details of this acquisition are given in note 25 on page 54.
No businesses were discontinued during the year.
The disposal of the group's interest in Tanaka Matthey KK does not constitute the discontinuation of a business under FRS3 since the group is continuing operations in Japan through its wholly owned subsidiary, Johnson Matthey Japan Limited.
3.
Exceptional items included in operating profit
4.
Net interest
5.
Segmental information
6.
Profit on ordinary activities before taxation
7.
Profit on sale of investment in associated undertaking
8.
Taxation
In the United Kingdom the net effective rate for current taxation was 8% (1992 8%) after deduction of advance corporation tax of 25% (1992 25%).
In a judgement given on 14th May 1992, the House of Lords allowed Johnson Matthey's appeal that the £50 million payment in 1984 to its former subsidiary, Johnson Matthey Bankers Limited, was a revenue payment and eligible for tax relief.
The tax rebate relating to prior years' tax paid was recognised in last year's accounts as an extraordinary tax credit, but has been included in taxation on profit on ordinary activities in these accounts in accordance with FRS3.
9.
Dividends
The final ordinary dividend has been provided on the basis that all 8% preference shares will be converted.
As an alternative to the cash dividend the Board is proposing that an enhanced scrip dividend is offered to shareholders.
This is explained in the financial review on pages 28 and 29.
The scrip alternative has no impact on the 1993 accounts.
10.
Earnings per ordinary share
Profit for the financial year, less preference dividends, is £50.1 million (1992 £48.0 million as restated).
This is divided by the weighted average number of shares in issue calculated as 184,877,623 (1992 184,459,363) to give basic earnings per ordinary share of 27.1 pence (1992 26.0 pence as restated).
The effect on earnings per share of conversion of the remaining 8% convertible preference shares and the exercise of outstanding share options would not be material.
11.
Directors
11(a) Directors' interests
The interests of the directors in shares of the company, according to the register required to be kept by Section 325 of the Companies Act 1985, were: 31st March 1993 
Directors' shareholdings at 1st June 1993 were unchanged from those listed above except that Settlement Trustees Ltd, as trustee of the UK Employee Share Participation Scheme, has purchased on behalf of Messrs D J Davies, R K A  Wakeling, C R N Clark, J N Sheldrick, I G Thorburn and D G Titcombe a further 288, 286, 452, 442, 428, and 426 ordinary shares respectively and I G Thorburn sold 5,881 ordinary shares on 6th April 1993.
In addition to the above, D J Davies held stock appreciation rights in relation to 298,372 shares under a share-price related cash bonus scheme whose terms are similar to those of the share option scheme.
The options and the stock appreciation rights are generally exercisable at various times up to 2002 at prices between 220 pence and 432 pence per share.
During the year J A Stevenson exercised his options over 41,200 shares on 24th September 1992.
No director had an interest in the mortgage debenture stock, the 8% convertible cumulative preference shares or the 3.5% cumulative preference shares at 1st April 1992 or 31st March 1993.
11(b) Directors' emoluments
The emoluments of the directors including the Chairman and highest paid director fell within the following bands:
Directors' emoluments totalled £1,352,000 (1992 £1,335,000) which included bonuses of £234,000 (1992 £168,000).
Bonuses are determined by the Management Development and Remuneration Committee for the achievement of budgeted profit targets and personal objectives which are set at the beginning of the financial year.
They are disclosed above in the year in which they are paid rather than the one in which they are earned.
The executive directors are members of the companys UK pension scheme.
The cost of benefits provided by the scheme to all members averages 19% of basic salary although the company currently is not required to make any contributions.
Neither the Chairman nor the non-executive directors have any pension entitlement from the company, with the exception of Mr J A Stevenson who is a pensioner of the UK scheme.
12.
Employee information
12(b) Employee costs
12(c) Retirement benefits
(i) UK pension scheme
The group's UK pension scheme is of the defined benefit type which requires contributions to be made to a separately administered fund.
At 1st April 1991, the date of the latest actuarial valuation, the market value of the main UK scheme's assets was £277.4 million, the actuarial value of which represented 141% of the liability for benefits that had accrued to that date making full allowance for future salary and pension increases and after taking into account benefit changes introduced as of 1st April 1991.
This represents an actuarial surplus of £96.1 million which, following actuarial recommendations, has permitted the company to suspend contributions for the foreseeable future.
A surplus cannot be refunded to the company except by dissolution of the scheme in accordance with the rules of the scheme and relevant legislation.
The regular pension cost is assessed in accordance with the advice of an independent qualified actuary using the projected unit method.
Rates used at the last actuarial valuation at 1st April 1991 were as follows: per annum Long term rate of investment return 9.0% Dividend increase rate 4.5% General salary and wage inflation rate 7.0% Pension increase rate 5.0%
In accordance with the applicable accounting standard, the surplus on the group's UK pension fund has been spread over the average of the expected remaining service lives of current employees (12 years) as a variation from regular cost.
(ii) Foreign schemes
Pension costs relating to foreign schemes are charged in accordance with local best practice using different accounting policies.
The groups largest foreign scheme is in the US which is of the defined benefit type which requires contributions to be made to a separately administered fund.
This scheme is accounted for using the applicable US accounting standard.
The cost of obtaining actuarial valuations for purposes of adjusting to the applicable UK accounting standard is considered to be out of proportion to the benefits to be gained.
(iii) Other retirement benefits
In the US the group provides post-retirement medical benefits to pensioners.
The costs are charged on an accruals basis similar to that used for pensions.
The amount accrued in 1993 was lower than in 1992 as a result of changes to plan benefits for current employees.
(iv) Profit and loss account and balance sheet impact of providing retirement benefits
The effect of providing pensions and other retirement benefits on the profit and loss account was as follows:
The following prepayments and provisions relating to pension schemes and other post-retirement benefits are included in the group and parent company's balance sheets:
13.
Fixed assets — tangible assets
13(a) Group
The net book value of fixed assets includes £0.9 million (1992 £1.9 million) in respect of assets held under finance leases.
Freehold land and buildings of £27.6 million and £19.5 million of long leasehold properties included above are not depreciated.
13(b) Parent company
The net book value of fixed assets includes £0.4 million (1992 £0.8 million) in respect of assets held under finance leases.
Freehold land and buildings of £13.6 million and £19.5 million of long leasehold properties included above are not depreciated.
13(c) Asset revaluations
The property assets shown below were valued by independent professional valuers in the years shown on the basis of open market value for existing use or depreciated replacement cost whichever is considered the more appropriate basis of valuation.
Assets valued at depreciated replacement cost amounted to £54.3 million in the group and £24.1 million in the company (1992 £52.5 million and £24.1 million respectively).
14.
Fixed assets — investments
14(a) Group
Neither of the associated undertakings had any issued loan capital.
The principal operating country is also the country of incorporation for each associated undertaking.
14(b) Parent company
15.
Stocks
TOTAL RECOGNISED GAINS AND LOSSES for the year ended 31st March 1993
NOTE OF HISTORICAL COST PROFITS AND LOSSES for the year ended 31st March 1993
MOVEMENT IN SHAREHOLDERS' FUNDS for the year ended 31st March 1993
The notes on pages 38 to 54 form an integral part of the accounts.
CONSOLIDATED AND PARENT COMPANY BALANCE SHEETS as at 31st March 1993
The accounts were approved by the Board of Directors on 8th June 1993 and signed on its behalf by: R K A Wakeling Directors J N Sheldrick
The notes on pages 38 to 54 form an integral part of the accounts.