

Johnson Matthey's new Technical Centre
Editor: Ian D Godwin Deputy Editor: Frances C Retief Johnson Matthey Plc 2–4 Cockspur Street Trafalgar Square London SW1Y 5BQ
Next Copy Date
The next issue of Assay will be published in April 1994.
Copy for inclusion should reach the Editor not later than 14 February 1994.
Designed by DA Design, Twickenham, Middx and printed in England by Battley Brothers Limited.
Origination by Brookland Litho Services Ltd Assay is produced for and by the employees of the Johnson Matthey Group
Contents
3 Full of Eastern Promise Johnson Matthey's new Technical Centre at Kitsuregawa, Japan
6 Double Queen's Award ceremony at Royston CSD presented with Environmental Award and Export Award
8 ‘Johnnies’ a feature on Johannesburg Consolidated Investment Company, Ltd, who recently acquired a ten per cent holding in JM
13 Update news from here and there around the group
24 Johnson Matthey responds to The Call the progress made so far in fund raising for Cancer Relief Macmillan Fund
26 The 24hr Tour de Matthey David Jackson's 250 mile cycling challenge in aid of our Charity of the Year
29 Growing Noble Metals through Total Quality a look at how Noble Metals in Royston is growing in what continues to be a depressed marketplace
32 Chemicals manufacturing: change brings profit a fresh start in Teamwork and Personal Development
34 New Diesel Catalyst manufacturing facility at Royston tackling the problems associated with diesel engine vehicles
Frances Retief joined the Group Public Relations Department and the ‘Assay Team’ in May 1993.
Frances joined us from PMD where she worked in marketing Bullion Products for two years, prior to that she had worked in marketing at the Financial Times.
I would like to welcome Frances to the team and to thank her for ‘volunteering’ to promote the Johnson Matthey Mac Challenge personal fund raiser!!
(See article on page 26)
Johnson Mattheys new Technical Centre…
On the 5th of October Johnson Matthey formally opened its new Technology Centre in Japan with a traditional Shinto ceremony performed in front of 120 specially invited guests.
Alan Fullarton gives Assay readers some background to this exciting new facility and tells the story of the opening.
Full of Eastern Promise by Alan Fullarton, JM Japan.
Johnson Matthey's new technical centre at Kitsuregawa Japan, KITEC for short, is located in the rolling countryside of Tochigi prefecture some 170 kilometres to the north east of Tokyo.
It is a green field development of around four acres and the centre itself has two main buildings and a number of smaller buildings for services.
The main building, which has floor space of around 40,000 square feet on two stories, houses a pilot plant for the production of autocatalysts, a pilot plant for the production of fuel cell catalysts and a fabricated products area as well as full analytical capabilities to support these activities.
The separate ‘CVS building’ is also a two storey building of around 12,500 square feet and contains extensive autocatalyst evaluation facilities.
These include a dedicated engine test facility, rolling road and ageing and evaluation cells as well as SCAT (Simulated Catalytic Activity Testing) analytical benches.
At start up there are 30 people working at KITEC, all bar three were recruited from outside the company.
KITEC staff come from all over Japan and beyond!
There are two Brits, one Australian, one American and a Chinese, so the Technical Centre has a truly international flavour.
Exciting future
The Kitsuregawa Technical Centre will play a very important role in new product development and in the future growth of Johnson Matthey's worldwide businesses by working in partnership with our customers in this exciting market.
At a total cost of over £25 million, KITEC is Johnson Matthey's biggest single investment in Asia and it reflects our company's commitment of major human and financial resources to the development of its business in Asia.
Opening Day October 5th 1993
Some 10 months after breaking ground (see Spring 1993 issue of Assay), the newly completed Technical Centre was handed over to Johnson Matthey, by Taisei Kensetsu, the main engineering and construction contractor for the KITEC project.
There followed several weeks of feverish preparations as equipment and systems were installed and staff moved in to the facility.
With ‘the move’ completed and JM technology settled into its new Asian home, preparations began in earnest for the official opening.
The opening ceremony was managed for us by Cosmo PR in Tokyo and a specially selected audience of 120 people came to the event including around 70 customers from the four business areas represented at KITEC.
Those attending represented Honda, Mitsubishi Motors, Fuji Heavy Industries, TI Japan and many other companies and institutions who made KITEC possible including the Japan Development Bank and local officials from the town of Kitsuregawa.
The day began with a traditional Shinto ceremony to invite the ‘Kami’(gods) to ward off evil spirits and to bring good fortune and prosperity to KITEC.
Various offerings of Sake, branches and salt were made to the shrine that had been established on the site.
Some of the Sake was also consumed as I recall!
Mixing west with east, a ribbon cutting ceremony was held in front of the CVS building.
The ribbon was cut by JM Chairman David Davies, Yuichi Katoh, Chairman of Johnson Matthey Japan, the Mayor of Kitsuregawa, Adrian Thorpe, Minister of the British Embassy in Tokyo and myself.
After a tour of the facilities, our guests were fed and watered.
This most enjoyable stage in the proceedings began with a traditional ‘Kagamiwari’ ceremony — breaking open a celebratory barrel of sake with hammers.
This ceremony was performed with great enthusiasm by the VIP party!
Speeches were given by the Chairman, again in Japanese, the Minister and the Mayor of Kitsuregawa all of which were extremely positive for the future of the Centre.
A press conference was held by the Chairman, Chris Clark and senior management from JM Japan which resulted in a great deal of enthusiastic coverage in the Japanese and foreign press.
In his address during the opening ceremony, David Davies said ‘The opening of Johnson Matthey's Japanese Technology Centre is a major step in our strategic plan for Japan and for growth of our business in Asia.
It provides a world leading facility from which we can work in close partnership with our Japanese customers.’
The day was rounded off in Tokyo with a party for employees of Johnson Matthey Japan and their spouses as well as suppliers associated with the KITEC project.
Around 170 attended and, as you may imagine, a thoroughly good time was had by all!
Right: Manufacturing platinum catalyst for fuel cells.
Below: Catalysts sample manufacturing process.
Bottom right: Chassis dynamometer test for evaluation of catalysts.
Inset: Engine dynamometer test for evaluation of catalysts.
Above: JM Chairman, David Davies enjoying the tour of Kitsuregawa with VIP visitors.
Left: VIP visitors listening intently to a presentation during their tour of Kitsuregawa.
Below: KITEC is equipped with the very latest testing, evaluation and analytical equipment
l to r: Yuichi Katoh, Chairman of JM Japan, David Davies, Mr K Noguchi, General Manager International Purchasing Department, Toyota Motor and Ken Arnold enjoy a celebratory Sake during the opening festivities
JM Chairman, David Davies participating in the traditional Shinto dedication ceremony (Left) The traditional ‘Kagamiwari’ ceremony — breaking open a celebratory barrel of Sak with hammers.
This was performed with great enthusiasm by (l to r) The Mayor of Kitsuregawa, David Davies, Adrian Thorpe, Minister of the British Embassy in Tokyo, Yuichi Katoh and Alan Fullarton
Double Queen's Awards ceremony at Royston by F John Smith, CSD Royston
To have won either award would have been a major achievement; to have won both Environmental and Export Awards in the same year is remarkable and gives us great satisfaction.
Thus Dr David Evans summed up the reaction of Catalytic Systems Division to the double award in 1993 of the Queens Award for Environmental Achievement and the Queen's Award for Export Achievement to CSD in the UK.
The announcement of both awards was made on the Queen's Official Birthday on 21 April.
This was the first year that Environment Achievement Awards have been made, so Johnson Matthey was particularly proud to have been included among the 12 initial companies to be granted the new honour.
Although JM has won both Technology and Export Awards in the past, this was the first time that CSD has achieved the Export Award, which emphasises the success of our Autocatalyst Europe operation based at Royston.
The official presentation ceremony for the two Queen's Awards took place in the Staff Restaurant at Royston on Friday, 1 October.
All CSD staff based in the UK were invited, together with  representatives of other JM locations and Divisions who had provided support to CSD in its endeavours.
We were also pleased to welcome members of the Board of Johnson Matthey Plc and local civic dignitaries.
The Queen's representative, who presented the Award Scrolls and Emblems, was Simon Bowes-Lyon Esq, Lord Lieutenant of Hertfordshire.
He was accompanied by Lord Cobbold, who is one of the Deputy Lieutenants for the County.
On arrival, the Lord Lieutenant was greeted by Mr D G Titcombe, Executive Director with responsibility for Catalytic Systems Division, and by Dr W D J Evans, Managing Director, CSD Autocatalyst Europe.
Mr Titcombe introduced the Lord Lieutenant to Mr M Colne CC, Chairman of Hertfordshire County Council, Cllr R S Flatman, Chairman of North Hertfordshire District Council, and Cllr Mrs C M Evans, Town Mayor of Royston.
Further introductions were made to Mr R K A Wakeling, Group Chief Executive and to Executive Directors Mr I G Thorburn and Mr J N Sheldrick, followed by CSD Directors Mr P G Emmel, Mr R A Searles and Mr J M Shears.
Moving to the dais, the Lord Lieutenant then heard a speech of welcome by Mr D G Titcombe, in which reference was made to the development of autocatalysts since 1970, including the Queen's Award for Technological Achievement made to the Johnson Matthey Technology Centre in 1977.
Mr Titcombe welcomed the 150 guests, who included CSD personnel, colleagues from other Divisions, and some retired staff who had played important roles in making these two prestigious awards possible.
The Lord Lieutenant responded with his personal congratulations to all concerned and said that making a double presentation was a first for him too.
He stressed the importance of Johnson Matthey to the economy of Hertfordshire and mentioned his unofficial visit to Royston a week or so earlier to familiarise himself with what the production and development of autocatalyst entails.
Next he read the two Scrolls and then presented the Environmental insignia to Mr Titcombe and the Export insignia to Dr Evans.
Dr Evans thanked the Lord Lieutenant for coming to make the presentations.
In doing so he expressed thanks also to CSD staff and pointed to the construction work currently under way on the new European Technology Centre at Royston as a demonstration of our showing confidence in the future and JM's determined intention to maintain leadership.
The platform party mingled with the other guests before all sat down to an excellent table buffet luncheon.
At the conclusion of the meal the Lord Lieutenant took his leave and as the guests departed each was presented with a green umbrella bearing the JM and the Queens Awards logos.
As there was a tendency for it to rain outside this gift idea was doubly welcome!
Friday, 1 October was, of course, the day of the World's Biggest Coffee Morning in aid of Cancer Relief Macmillan Fund.
Guests at the Award ceremony were invited to arrive in good time so that they could take part in the fund raising.
As a result another 100 was sent to Johnson Matthey charity of the year.
Mr R L Leubner, Managing Director, Materials Technology Division Europe and Mr R K A Wakeling, Chief Executive, Johnson Matthey Plc, at the reception.
The Lord Lieutenant of Hertfordshire, Simon Bowes-Lyon Esq flanked by Graham Titcombe holding the Queen's Award for Environmental Achievement (right) and Dave Evans with the Queens Award for Export (left).
Rob Searles, Market Development Director, CSD and Peter Emmel, Managing Director, Johnson Matthey (Pty) Ltd, South Africa with the 1993 Queens Award for Export.
l to r: Debbie King, Sarah Gould and Vickie O'Dell putting their mementos of the day to good use!
Johannesburg Consolidated Investment Company, Limited ‘Johnnies’ by Frances C Retief Johannesburg Consolidated Investment Company, Ltd, recently acquired a ten per cent shareholding in Johnson Matthey.
This article aims to shed some light on JCI's history, its relationship with JM and its many diverse interests.
Johannesburg Consolidated Investment Company Limited, JCI, or ‘Johnnies’ as it is more affectionately known, is once again a major shareholder in Johnson Matthey.
JCI was a large shareholder in the Group from 1918 until 1979 and the re-establishment of the link between the two companies is significant given the long established contractual ties between JM and JCI's flagship company, Rustenburg Platinum Mines.
Platinum is central to the success of JCI, which is now ranked third in the table of top South African mining and finance houses.
Founded in Johannesburg, in 1889 by the flamboyant Englishman Barney Barnato, Johnnies' principal activities were investments in real estate and industry.
The very important interest JCI has in the diamond industry goes back to the days when Barney Barnato, together with Cecil Rhodes played an important role in the establishment of De Beers in Kimberley.
Participation in the Diamond Syndicate, set up in 1926, by Sir Ernst Oppenheimer to bring stability to the diamond industry, secured JCI's interest in this industry.
Since then JCI's diamond interests in De Beers Consolidated Mines Limited, and a number of unlisted diamond trading companies, have been a major source of investment income.
As well as being an early and important investor in the newspaper industry by procuring a stake in The Argus Printing and Publishing Company, Johnnies also acquired shares in South African Breweries.
It was only in the late 1890's that the company extended its activities into gold mining.
In 1898, the Anglo-Boer War resulted in the transfer of the offices to Cape Town and the closing down of virtually all the mines until 1902 when the gold mining companies of the group resumed operations.
In the ensuing years a great number of new mines came under the aegis of Johnnies and prior to the opening of the Rand Refinery in 1922, all the gold from JCI's mines on the Witwatersrand, was refined in the UK by JM.
The discovery of Platinum on the Merensky Reef and the Platreef in 1925 marked what was to become the mainstay of the business relationship between JM and JCI — the refining and marketing of Platinum Group Metals.
JCI played a major part in the early years of mining this precious metal and its group metals, but the technology for extraction of PGM's from the ore became a considerable problem for all the mining companies.
Bulk samples of ore for processing and refining quotations were sent to JM and Degussa amongst other overseas companies.
JM won the business which resulted in the signing of the first refining and marketing agreement between JM and JCI in 1930.
At this time, as a result of overproduction and inherent metallurgical problems experienced with the ore, most mining companies closed down.
In 1931 the only two surviving companies, Potgietersrust Platinums and Waterfal Platinum, amalgamated to form Rustenburg Platinum Mines (RPM), which became, and remains to this day, the largest primary producer of platinum in the world.
Rustenburg Platinum Holdings is the holding company which is listed on both the London and Johannesburg Stock Exchanges.
RPM operates three mines whose primary product is platinum, in addition to palladium, rhodium, iridium, ruthenium, osmium, gold, silver, copper, and nickel.
All processing and refining of mine output is now carried out in South Africa and its management vested in Matthey Rustenburg Refiners (MRR), a company set up in the 1960's by Johnson Matthey and RPM.
JCI's other Platinum assets include, a substantial stake in Lebowa Platinum Mines and most recently Potgietersrust (PP.Rus).
Interestingly enough, although Johnnies was incorporated in South Africa and its interests located predominantly in South Africa, it was only in 1962 that the Board of Johnnies, decided to transfer the registration of the company from the UK to South Africa.
JCI's investments in the UK were  taken over by Barnato Brothers Limited, a wholly-owned subsidiary of JCI.
Growth in gold mining activities during the 1930s continued, and by 1939, JCI was responsible for the administration of seven major gold mining companies producing on an annual basis, nearly 20 per cent of the total gold output in South Africa at that time.
One of these mines, Randfontein Estates, survives and is the largest of the gold mines, that JCI operates.
The others include Western Areas, H. J Joel, South Deep and Lindum which between them produce 51.7 tons of gold.
It is not surprising that an enterprising company such as JCI, would plan to diversify into other mining activities, and in the 1920's, the company acquired control of a number of collieries.
Today, JCI's coal mining activities are undertaken by its wholly-owned subsidiary Tavistock, which operates four producing collieries in the Witbank area close to Johannesburg.
At the same time as JCI diversified into coal, the company also established itself as an antimony producer when in 1934 a new company, Consolidated Murchison was formed.
In addition to producing antimony sulphide concentrate, gold and silver are produced as by-products.
To this day, this operation is one of the worlds biggest antimony producers.
Production of ferrochrome, an alloy of chromium and iron, takes place at Consolidated Metallurgical Industries (CMI), a facility in which JCI have a direct 49.9 per cent holding.
Ferrochrome is used as a basic raw material for the production of stainless and speciality steels whose performance is directly related to the steel industry, an industry which has grown enormously since 1988.
Although Johnnies, remains a big player in the property market and is involved in a wide range of activities including township, industrial, office and retail property developments, their business has expanded far beyond its original sphere of holding and administering property.
The Group, which now employs 70,000 personnel, is active in a number of diverse areas.
Among its other non-managed investments, JCI has a 14.8 per cent holding in South African Breweries Limited, a diversified consumer-oriented group, which is ranked among the top ten brewing companies in the world.
The Premier Group whose business focuses primarily on the manufacture and distribution of food, groceries and pharmaceuticals, has a 28.1 per cent stake held by JCI.
Johnnies' newspaper interests include two major South African newspaper groups, Argus Holdings Limited (22.3 per cent) and Times Media Limited (32.1 per cent ) which in turn have a large stake in South Africas only subscription TV station.
JCI's holdings include a 26.4 per cent interest in Toyota South Africa Limited, the largest motor car manufacturer in South Africa.
Most importantly, Johnnies remains committed to South Africa and continues to be proactive in its pursuit of equality for all in a democratic multi-party society.
As the Chairman, Pat Retief in his Annual Chairman's Review says, ‘we must continue to be a profitable company if we are to be a good employer in the fullest sense, capable of maintaining and enhancing our portfolio of assets and maximising the development of the Group's human resources.
But in South Africa today, and surely for a good many years to come, there are also additional considerations that demand from a large company actions and policies that go beyond its immediate business interests and seek to ameliorate the excessive social and economic imbalances that have developed in our society.
Johnnies has firmly committed itself to playing such a role.’
Offshore investments are held by JCI's wholly-owned subsidiary, JCI (Isle of Man) Limited.
While JCI diversified its interests in South Africa, it was at the same time increasing its shareholding in Johnson Matthey in the UK.
The original JCI stake of 11 per cent rose to 20 per cent in 1972, and further increased to 23 per cent a year later.
This was short-lived however, as in 1979 following the rearrangement of the shareholding in the Anglo American group, Charter Consolidated acquired JCI's shares in addition to those of Anglo to make up a 28 per cent holding in all.
Fourteen years later, the wheel has almost turned full circle as once again JM has become an important part of Johnnies' offshore investments.
Although the ten per cent holding is less than  the original JCI stake, it is a reflection of the close relationship that has continued between the two companies in the intervening years.
Since the beginning of the century, this relationship has weathered the sometimes stormy waters of the precious metals industry and I'm sure you will join me in welcoming the re-establishment of this long standing link between Johnnies and JM.
Above: Most of the world's gold supply is consumed in the form of jewellery.
JCI's gold mines produced 51.7 tons of gold in the past financial year Johnnies' diamond interests comprise of holdings in unlisted diamond trading companies and in De Beers Consolidated Mines Ltd/De Beers Centenary AG Johnnies' non-managed investments date as far back as 1895 when it became a founding shareholder of South African Breweries, one of the 10 largest breweries in the world
Above: Property investments include Steenberg, a 237 hectare wine estate located in the Cape Peninsula
Consolidated Building, Johnnies' Head Office dates back to 1905 and is a landmark in Johannesburg.
Left: Potgietersrus Platinums, the 200,000 ton a month open pit platinum mine was opened on 3 September 1993.
Right: The North Shaft of Western Areas Gold Mine uses a trackless mining system.
Top: The newest of JCIs Platinum Mines, Potgietersrus Platinums was officially opened by JCI's Chairman, Mr P F Retief
Above: Dusk at Rustenburg section of Rustenburg Platinum Mines.
Below: The Arthur Taylor Colliery at Witbank is a joint operation with Total Exploration South Africa An underground tunnel links Consolidated Building to JCI House, Johnnies' other Head Office building which won a major architectural award in 1985
As part of an entrepreneurial development programme, JCI has established Esdec, a skills training centre at Randfontein.
Overall, Johnnies' training budget for the year is approximately £9 million.
Chrome mining at Rustenburg.
Consolidated Metallurgical Industries is the world's second largest producer of high carbon ferrochrome
JCI's property investments date back to its establishment in 1889.
Dainfern is a residential and golfing estate developed by the Group's property division.
The Group has taken on more than 30 schools in the mining communities in an effort to improve the standard of education among the disadvantaged groups of the community.
Chemicals manufacturing: change brings profit A fresh start in Teamwork and Personal Development by Andrew Gillard, Royston
In Chemicals Manufacturing at Royston and Brimsdown it has been time for change.
The rationalisation of Refining was followed by the combining of the Chemicals and Refining businesses.
Headcount reductions were essential.
In refining, platinum salts production and a variety of speciality products and analytical work there was a problem — world renowned products and quality, a lack of profitability — an enormous target to achieve with uninvolved employees.
Now, we have a significant increase in employee communication, teamwork and personal development.
A loss had been turned to a profit and teamwork has led to empowered people with a commitment to the business.
Common thinking
From October to December 1992, careful research was conducted into best practice which included visits to other companies to show new ways of working.
Meetings between employees and managers established common thinking on how things needed to be changed:
less hierarchy and layers of management
better teamwork with clear targets
the opportunity for personal development for all
By January, plans were formulated and the action began.
A new manufacturing vision
by John Sykes, Manufacturing Director
We had a business losing money.
The losses have now been eliminated in a major reorganisation which involved many redundancies.
As a result we had a demoralised and demotivated workforce and needed a completely fresh start — a sign that things were going to work differently.
Most of all, we needed results: lower costs, radically shorter lead times and delivery-to-promise as a norm not as the exception.
This meant everyone pulling in the same direction, and I was convinced there was a win/win opportunity: for business objectives and for employees.
In Chemicals Manufacturing at Royston and Brimsdown, the normal hierarchy associated with production and support areas has been swept away, and replaced with teams and team leaders.
It is a fundamental change in the way we do business.
We are benefiting from a flatter organisation, improved teamwork, better communication and a more versatile workforce.
Every employee, for their part, has real responsibility, more job satisfaction and the personal opportunity to learn and grow in their skills and knowledge through proper training.
Now that the results of our efforts are showing in a return to profitability, everyone in Chemicals manufacturing knows that they have an important contribution to make in transforming the Chemicals business into a really successful part of Johnson Matthey.
Teamwork at Royston
David Stokes comments…
In the future we need to be quicker than the competition and totally focused on customer satisfaction and production requirements.
The need for change was reinforced by a series of briefings held with all the workforce which highlighted shortfalls in communication due to the management structure and the need to respond quicker to customers.
A crucial part of the change is a personal development plan which is being put together for every individual, so that they can grow their skills and knowledge gaining extra reward and externally recognised National Vocational Qualifications.
All the critical functions are within the teams, engineering, technical support, and after suitable training the teams are taking on many skills which would be normally contracted out.
The teams are performing as self managed units although the manager will agree clear objectives with the team.
These will include output, health and safety, costs and leadtime, but the team is in control.
Frequent reviews with the manager and directors take place, so that the teams are fully aware of the Business Unit objectives.
Brian Bevan of the Bullion Weighing Room comments…
One of the main causes for concern brought up by the employees was not being involved with a number of changes that were taking place.
Indeed they said they could even help, and make the changes for the better.
There has been a new type of enthusiasm injected into the workforce by management and workforce alike.
The days of leaving one's brains at the front gate and picking them up again when one leaves are firmly in the past.
A lot more responsibility has been handed down and readily being accepted.
A lot of our people were definitely underestimated in their ability to contribute towards making the company more competitive and profitable.
Team meetings and management reviews have already become a way  of life and a new breath of fresh air seems to have blown through the company.
These are exciting times and every day there seems to be something new and innovative happening.
If we carry on the way we are there can only be one outcome and that is success.
Keith Gypps in Dispensing adds
All this involvement has led people to question their abilities and outlook on their jobs and has made them see that they are capable of doing things (with a little training and encouragement) they never dreamed possible a few months ago.
and from Andy York in Insolubles.
Team members now have much more involvement in the running of their work places.
They now have responsibilities that formerly were not given or offered.
Members are encouraged to build on their skills and abilities — increasing the potential of their team.
One of the team members even said ‘I enjoy coming to work now’.
Bob Binney at Brimsdown sets the scene
Towards the end of 1992 managers and employees met several times to discuss our organisation structure, the new skills we needed and ways of improving our communication.
It was clear that there was massive scope for improving manufacturing efficiency by tapping the under-used expertise and involvement of employees.
But how?
Some interesting manufacturing articles coupled with a number of visits to blue chip companies helped considerably: we were not alone!
Many other companies were thinking along similar lines.
There were different variations but common themes:
delayering
team/cellular operation
personal development
In a series of discussions — some heated — we adapted these ideas to Brimsdown and forged our way forward.
In January we began to involve all employees in the plans.
Bert Crockett in the Melting House writes…
People have now started to accept the idea, and are getting more involved.
The sharing of the workload — decision making — knowledge and experience — has now started to make everyday working smoother and by more direct routes.
Housekeeping is vastly improving and people are becoming more responsible and responsive.
and Jim Saunders adds…
Since some of the restrictions have been taken off, team members are beginning to take on some of the old supervisors tasks — requesting stores, requesting maintenance, in general, being more responsible.
Some members have started to learn how to enter information into the computer.
Although this may seem only a small step forward, we envisage members taking on more important tasks in the future.
Training for Change by Peter Mottram, Personnel Manager
Key to Team-working is the maximum use of everyone's skills — and increasing those skills wherever we can.
A full analysis has shown us the way forward and detailed programmes of personal development are being drawn up for everyone in Chemicals Manufacturing.
The initiative on National Vocational Qualifications parallels our needs.
Already groups of Operators at both sites are studying for the Chemical Industries/City and Guilds NVQ designed for them.
By increasing our skills and knowledge we aim to meet the challenges of the future using the people we have today.
New Diesel Catalyst manufacturing facility installed at Royston by P N Hawker, CSD Royston
In this introductory article Pelham Hawker takes a look at some of the problems associated with diesel engine vehicles and outlines JM's new diesel catalyst production facility that will play a major role in tackling these issues.
Diesel Autocatalysts
This year saw the introduction of new EEC legislation which effectively requires all petrol cars to be fitted with catalysts to clean up exhaust pollution.
But what about diesel cars?
There has been an extraordinary rise in the sales of diesel cars in the UK over the past two years and diesel is proving more and more popular on the continent too.
Catalysts can help control pollution from such vehicles — an oxidation catalyst removes unburned fuel and carbon monoxide in much the same way as it does on a petrol car.
There are two important differences however.
The diesel combustion process produces soot or ‘particulate’ and this has received attention because of possible harmful health effects.
Catalysts remove most of the hydrocarbon component of this soot and so help to remove an area of risk.
Secondly, there is the question of odour, everyone knows how the familiar diesel smell can be a nuisance in towns and in closed spaces like tunnels or ferries.
Happily the smell is caused by exhaust hydrocarbons which are efficiently removed by catalysts.
Increasing Fitment
The diesel car offers more and more people the benefits of reliability, longevity and fuel economy and with the aid of a catalyst the diesel car is as environmentally ‘sound’ as a fully catalysed petrol car.
But how many diesel cars are fitted with catalysts?
Today's legislation does not require the use of catalysts and so the figure is around 30% of diesel car sales in Europe.
Volkswagen leads the way with its ‘Umwelt Diesel’(Environmental Diesel) engines and now fits catalysts to practically all models.
Opinions in the marketplace seem to point to the likelihood that in 1996; when the next stage of legislation is introduced, all small diesel engines will have to use catalysts.
This represents an attractive new market for Johnson Matthey.
New JM Facility
In order to take advantage of the opportunities offered by the diesel market, a new plant has been built in Royston to manufacture catalysts for diesel engines.
The process is slightly different than that for manufacturing catalysts for petrol cars.
Now fully commissioned, the plant is supplying catalysts to this new and growing market and represents an all important new investment in the future of Johnson Matthey environment businesses in Europe.
Whilst we can all look forward to cleaner (and less smelly) diesel car exhaust the situation is sadly not so clear for trucks and buses.
The technology exists to clean up truck and bus exhaust and JM has access to it through its controlling share of Svenska Emissionsteknik in Sweden.
However, to date this exciting new  technology has only adopted on a voluntary basis.
New legislation is ‘on the stocks’ and it is to be hoped that politicians will take note of the example of Gothenburg, Emissionsteknik's home city, where all the buses have recently been equipped with exhaust catalysts.
In the next issue of Assay we will be taking a look at some applications of diesel exhaust catalysts on city centre buses, trucks and other heavy duty diesel engines.
Opposite and this page: Manufacturing auto catalysts for the control of emissions from diesel engine vehicles at Johnson Matthey's new production facility in Royston
Opposite: Gothenburg City Bus fitted with an Emissionsteknik diesel exhaust catalyst system
New Diesel Catalyst manufacturing facility installed at Royston by P N Hawker, CSD Royston
Growing Noble Metals through Total Quality by Hank Splane and Ian Godwin
The current recession in Europe presents some major challenges for Johnson Matthey's more ‘traditional’ businesses which are particularly susceptible to economic conditions.
In this article we take a look at how a commitment to Total Quality Management is helping Noble Metals at Royston to grow in what continues to be a depressed marketplace…
The last eighteen months have witnessed a fundamental re-focusing on total quality excellence and customer satisfaction throughout MTD Europe and especially within Johnson Matthey's European Noble Metals operations.
Many of the products manufactured by Noble Metals are mature products with little difference between our product and that manufactured by our competitors.
If business growth is to be achieved, in what is essentially a depressed market, it is vital that we build our market share while aggressively pursuing the opportunities offered by new product developments.
These include the recent introduction of Advanced Coating Technology ACTTM which extends the application of Platinum group metals into areas where cost considerations currently rule out large scale use of the metals and new manufacturing technologies such as knitted gauze.
Customer Satisfaction
The customer is, without a doubt, the most important element in our business.
In order for our businesses to succeed, our customers must be successful and we must be profitable as suppliers.
There is an essential interdependency between businesses and we must strive to build a partnership with our customers and to establish long term relationships with them.
The ‘Key Supplier’ programmes operated by many companies in the electronics field, particularly in the United States, are an excellent example of this philosophy in action.
Such programmes not only allow us to expand our market share in today's tough world, but they also give us the opportunity of being involved in the very earliest stages of our customer's product development process, offering us exciting scope for new business.
In order to increase it's market share and to build exciting long term business prospects it was  quickly realised that Noble Metals would have to provide more value to it's customers that their competitors.
This ‘added value’ is to be achieved through customer satisfaction.
In order to ensure that their customers receive the highest standard of service in the marketplace Noble Metals adopted a Total Quality Management (TQM) approach to all aspects of their business.
Four key initiatives that are vital to success were identified:
Understand Customer Requirements
In order to fully understand the customer's needs a number of initiatives were launched, these included the use of a twice yearly customer survey to obtain feedback on customer perception of our products, service and performance.
An other major development was the establishing of a Key Account Executive position which is in daily contact with the customer and provides them with a voice within Johnson Matthey.
This is a vitally important position within the operation and a year long training course has been developed to educate and support Key Account Executives.
Other initiatives include regular meetings between customers and management and more frequent and focused sales and technical visits to customers.
Formal System
To provide initial focus to the implementation of TQM in Noble Metals the business Unit adopted the supplier quality programme operated by Ford, one of it's major customers.
Noble Metals have been supplying Ford for a number of years with high specification platinum/ iridium wire, used in the manufacture of high performance spark plugs.
Known as Ford Q1, the programme provides a formal system for implementing continuous improvement methods which is recognised and accepted worldwide.
The Q1 system promotes a manufacturing process which assures quality is maintained with statistical evidence of process control using a wide range of analytical techniques including Statistical Process Control (SPC).
Ford provided valuable help and guidance in implementing the Q1 system at Noble Metals.
Ford Q1 is a total quality commitment and in many ways is felt to be more difficult to achieve than BS 5750/ISO 9000.
Companies are assessed on twenty key areas covering Advanced Quality Planning, Engineering Change Control and the use of SPC, through Sub-supplier Control, Written Procedures and Instruction Sheets to Customer Concerns, Scrap and Rework, Packaging and Housekeeping.
Each area is scored out of 10 and the company is thus given an overall rating out of 200.
Overall ratings of 140 achieve the Ford Q101 award and scores of over 160 gain the prestigious Ford Q1 Award.
Less than 10 percent of Ford's suppliers are awarded Q1!
Eliminate Barriers
To ensure continuous improvement a culture change, from a top-down approach to a team driven system, had to be implemented within Noble Metals.
This required a great deal of management awareness and commitment.
and has been achieved via the implementation of a number of initiatives.
Communications have been improved to ensure that all employees clearly understand the goals and objectives of the Noble Metals organisation and the results that are being achieved.
All employees are being given the training and authority needed to solve problems and achieve results.
The organisation has been streamlined to eliminate bureaucratic barriers to getting things done.
Employees are directly involved in the operations and decisions of the business through Statistical Process Control, Corrective Action Teams and Team Oriented Problem Solving.
SPC empowers an employee to make a business decision and stop production when his process is going out of control.
In order to support all of these initiatives the reward system has been changed to encourage team players and innovators.
Improved Service
The Business Unit has a formal action plan for continuous improvement with Action Teams addressing very specific areas including all of the Ford Q1 criteria.
Current membership of these teams involves one in three of all Noble Metals employees on a permanent basis and the intention is to involve all employees in the teams by rotation.
Noble Metals is basing everything they do on ‘not just satisfying but surprising and delighting our customers’.
The results achieved so far have been most impressive.
On time deliveries have improved over the last 19 months from 40% to 98%.
The goal is to achieve and maintain 100% on time delivery and at the time of writing, Noble Metals had achieved a record of 277 straight on time deliveries!
Well over 95% of all sales quotes are now being submitted to the customer within 3 days of their enquiry.
Product lead times have been cut in half from 30 days to under 13 days.
Customer quality returns have also been halved over the period.
Metal borrowings, which have a major effect on the profitability of our businesses, have been slashed in half as a result of the process.
The results of the most recent Customer Survey show that our customers have noticed a marked improvement in Noble Metal's performance in relation to their requirements and compared to the best competitors!
In August the Business unit was awarded Ford Q1 joining an exclusive group of suppliers, an achievement of which we can all feel justly proud.
All of this has been achieved by the hard work, dedication and teamwork of all the staff of Noble Metals.
(Top) Pictured at a Working Quality Review meeting are l to r: Martin Mingay, Arthur Brennan, Neil Hollingdale, Neil O'Conner, Keith Welford, Kevin Mansell and Hank Splane (General Manager)
Top: Pictured at a Key Account Executive meeting are l to r: Pauline Collins, Mick Thomas, Nicci Barnett, Steve Little, Deanna Sharp, Martin Mingay, Marie Cronin, Mary Keran and Stan Spinks
Above: Nick Kemp and Mike Blackburn discussing SPC data in the knitted gauze production area
(Above) Noble Metals at Royston manufacture a wide range of fabricated platinum group metal products used in industries as diverse as glass, electronics, automotive and in advanced medical applications
A gathering ball using Advanced platinum Coating Technology (ACT) in operation in molten glass at temperatures over 1000°C
The 24 hr Tour de Matthey by Ian D Godwin and David Jackson
On the 19–20th August David Jackson, JM's well known accountant and trick cyclist, accompanied by Richard Smith, friend and fellow sufferer, took up the challenge and cycled a 250 mile route from Sonning, via Royston, Birmingham and Cresswell to Burslem.
All this was achieved within a mere 24 hours!
The following are some of our reflections on the day…
The primary objective of the 24 hour Tour de Matthey was to raise money for Cancer Relief Macmillan Fund, Johnson Matthey's Charity of the Year, by obtaining sponsorship for Daves race against the clock and test of physical and mental endurance!
We had a superb response to our requests for sponsorship from all over the JM group, all that remained was to do the dirty deed!
Cycle between and of course visit, as many JM sites as possible in 24 hours.
So it was with a confident heart that your reporter negotiated the challenges of the M25 and M4 en route to Sonning for the 10.30am rendezvous with fellow support crew member, Liz Roberts and of course our fearless  cyclists.
The long and winding road
After a fantastic send off by George McGuire and his staff at Sonning, Dave and Richard hit the road with great enthusiasm.
Liz and I followed in the support vehicle, a splendid Vauxhall Frontera turbo diesel which was kindly lent by our friends at Vauxhall Motors who have also adopted CRMF as their Charity of the Year.
The first stage from Sonning followed a leisurely and quite beautiful route along the Chilterns to Luton.
The cyclists then struck out in a north easterly direction up the A505 through Hitchin, Letchworth and Baldock to our first stage finish at Royston.
At this point I will come clean and admit that the cyclists beat the support vehicle to Royston!
However, this was not due to my map reading (which is impeccable by the way!), but was the result of a mad dash around the dubious delights of central Luton in search of cycling gloves for Mr Jackson.
After a most welcome visit to the Orchard Room we headed off into the dusk for the night stage to Birmingham.
This took us through Bedford, Northampton, Daventry and Leamington Spa to Solihull where we all managed to catch a couple of hours ‘shut eye’ before heading into Birmingham.
The cyclists received a marvellous reception from the staff of JM Birmingham at 6am on completing this most challenging stage and they provided us with an excellent cooked breakfast.
Reinvigorated by Birmingham's welcome and the feel of home turf, the boys made excellent time on the third stage between Birmingham and Cresswell.
At one stage they were seen in hot pursuit of a fully loaded M&B beer lorry!!
Once again we received a warm welcome at Cresswell and were treated to coffee and some rather nice chocky biscuits in the Board Room.
The final stage between Cresswell and Burslem gave us a few anxious moments when Dave and Richard became ensnared in City Centre traffic but they managed to complete the 24 hour Tour de Matthey with 5 minutes to spare!
Alan Parton, Ian Shepherd and the staff of JM Burslem treated us all to a wonderful welcome and an excellent buffet lunch which was most appreciated at the end of a long and winding road.
Before I hand over to Dave to tell his side of the story, I would like to take this opportunity to thank Dave, Richard, Liz and all the JM staff at sites around the country who helped to organise this event which has raised so much for our Charity of the Year.
Sausages at Dawn!
An account by Dave Jackson of his 24 Hour Charity Bike Ride
‘Time to wake up’ I said to the threesome snoring away in the back of the support car.
‘It's 5.15 a.m. and we have spent the last two hours asleep in a lay-by just outside Solihull and breakfast in Birmingham is the next item on the agenda.’
So what am I doing here, why am I not tucked safely up in bed like most sane people and why is there no prospect of any further rest until we get to Burslem in Stoke, more than 60 miles away?
The answers to these questions seemed to elude me in the small hours in dampest Solihull, my mind seemed to be preoccupied by the pain coming from my back, neck and yes my backside as well!
The only answer seemed to be an onset of total insanity.
However, a month later as I put pen to paper to record the events it all seems very clear (but no less stupid!).
Ian Catley, the National Fund-raising Manager for the Macmillan Nurse Appeal, which is Johnson Matthey's Charity of the Year asked what events we had planned in order to raise funds for this most worthy of charities.
‘What about a sponsored bike ride around some of the JM sites over 24 hours, say 250 miles?’
I heard a voice say, I then realised that the voice was mine, but before I had chance to retract the offer the JM publicity machine had roared into action and there were posters advertising the ride in every office.
It seemed only a matter of days before I was standing astride my bike at the gates of Sonning Common, together with my good friend Richard Smith (who I think was twice as mad as me as he didn't have to do it!)
We were being given a marvellous send off by the people there but I was not too sure about the starting pistol that George McGuire was wielding though, maybe I would be put  out of my misery sooner than I thought!
Along the road we were ably supported and cared for by the ubiquitous Ian Godwin (no, don't let him map read!) and the effervescent Liz Roberts (in charge of silliness and peanut butter and banana sandwiches).
The ride itself was reasonably uneventful, a marvellous tailwind pushing us all the way to Royston for the first seventy miles, then pushing us back to Royston for the next hundred miles.
No major incidents to report, except for a kamikaze lorry driver who almost bought our charity ride and our lives to a swift halt in Walsall.
We arrived at all of the locations in good time, although the traffic in Stoke did put us under a little pressure towards the end, we finished with a whole five minutes to spare!
Whilst the ride itself was uneventful, the reception we received as we visited each of the sites in turn was fantastic.
From the pasta brunch laid on by Sonning prior to our departure, through the several, most welcome pints in Royston's Orchard Bar to the morning coffee at Cresswell and the celebratory buffet lunch provided by Burslem, we were well fed and watered and made to feel most welcome.
This was especially so at Birmingham, where at 6.00 a.m. on Friday an ‘End of Stage 2’ banner was erected and more than twenty insomniacs gave us a great breakfast and a marvellous reception that we will not forget, thanks to everyone who turned up, you certainly made us feel very welcome.
After collecting all the cash, which is sometimes more difficult and more time consuming than doing the ride, I am pleased to report that the ‘24 hr Tour de Matthey’ has raised a total of £2,800 which is great news, a big thank you to everyone who contributed.
There is now talk of a similar ride next year doing the route in reverse, well this time, I'll cook the breakfast!
NEWS FROM J M COMPANIES
All aboard at Germiston by R A Simpson, South Africa
The 2nd September 1993 brought to a close a major chapter in the history of JMSA.
After four decades of operations in Wadeville, the doors of that plant were to close, the move to the new facility in Germiston South having finally been completed.
This clearly called for some celebration and the occasion was highlighted by the presence of John Shaw and John Darbyshire, former MD's of the company.
In 1953 both had travelled from England to set up Johnson Matthey's first operation in South Africa.
John Shaw now in his eighty fifth year managed the company until his retirement in 1972 to be followed by John Darbyshire.
He in turn relinquished the reins in 1985 — between them they had recorded some 95 years of service with JM!
The day commenced with a tour of the now almost deserted facility at Wadeville.
Whilst much had changed, particularly since John Shaw's retirement, the visit clearly brought back poignant memories of how it had all begun.
After the official closure it was with mixed emotions that we took our leave of Wadeville.
Whilst the company had grown significantly during the Wadeville years little could compare with the move to Germiston.
The advent of autocatalysts and the arrival of Peter Emmel as MD saw a dramatic change in the direction of the company.
It was therefore with some pride that we showed our visitors just how much JMSA had progressed since the company first opened all those years before.
To mark the occasion the visit commenced with a tree planting ceremony.
On entering the plant all visitors will now have to drive past two golden cypress trees, which will long commemorate  the efforts of the two Johns.
The tour of the Autocatalyst Plant, the Chemicals Manufacturing unit, our Noble Metals operation and the newly established Metal Joining unit (incorporating the large 850 ton extrusion press) as well as a visit to the Colour and Print operation clearly impressed our visitors.
It was a delight to see the pleasure, particularly of many of our older employees, once again meeting up with the former MD's of the company.
Following the extensive tour, our visitors joined all the JMSA employees for lunch which was held in a marquee overlooking our soccer field, where later in the afternoon a Wadeville team was to do battle against a team from the Germiston plant.
During luncheon Peter Emmel officially welcomed our guests, paying tribute to their efforts in establishing Johnson Matthey in South Africa.
In the absence of Ken Davies (who had succeeded John Darbyshire as Managing Director in 1985, and is now living in England) he expressed the hope that at some future date we might have the opportunity of planting a third tree!
He also thanked all employees for the tremendous efforts involved in building the new Johnson Matthey and on a day when South Africa was celebrating National Peace Day, he expressed hope that this may be a new beginning in a much broader sense.
In its last stand the Wadeville Soccer team defeated Germiston 2–1 and with storm clouds gathering, hopefully signalling the arrival of the summer rains and to the delight of their enthusiastic supporters, John Shaw presented the Wadeville Memorial Cup to Levi Mapena, captain of the winning team.
Indeed a fitting day to many great achievements.
At the closure of Wadeville (l to r): John Brooks, John Smith, John Darbyshire, Peter Emmel, John Shaw, Rob Simpson, Brian Potter
John Darbyshire (left) and John Shaw — locking the doors of Wadeville
JM raises £2,000 for Macmillan at Royston Fun Run by Rob Searles, CSD Royston
The annual Royston Fun Run is a winding 10 km route through the streets of the town, including the only hill in the area.
This year's run was on a sunny Sunday in early April and a record number of JM runners took part to raise money for the Cancer Relief Macmillan Fund.
The 24 runners included six from the site Fire Brigade, bravely running in their waterproof overtrousers and braces, and two from CSD's Brussels staff who came over for the occasion.
All 24 completed the course and raised an impressive £2,000 for Macmillan.
A cheque for that amount was handed over to CRMF by Julie Skillington who raised the highest individual sponsorship total of £178.
Well done to all those who took part and see you again next year — and thanks to F John Smith and Varina Tootell for their organisation.
Before the start — we didn't all look as fresh at the finish!
Ian Catley of Macmillan with (l to r) F John Smith, Julie Skillington, Rob Searles, Ray Leubner and Varina Tootell
Autocatalyst Europe does its bit for CRMF
A celebration whip-round after the football match raised £118 for the Cancer Relief Macmillan Fund.
Autocatalyst Europe topped up this figure with a further £1,000 and Dr David Evans (right) was very pleased to hand over the total amount of £1,118 to Ian Catley, Fund Raising Manager for CRMF.
Award for JM Holland ‘Cerene’ Glaze by Hannie Spronck, Maastricht
Each year, the Inax Corporation, Japan's biggest tile manufacturer, selects the best from among the many new materials on the market and presents an award to those companies who have facilitated the development of new product lines.
This year, Johnson Matthey Holland's ‘Cerene’ glaze received a commendation.
The ‘Cerene’ glaze has enabled Inax to commercialise a new series of tile glazes with a high degree of surface perfection and gloss.
On 1 February 1993, at the offices of agents Hayashi & co Ltd, the award was accepted on Johnson Matthey's behalf and subsequently sent to Maastricht.
Johnson Matthey Holland has introduced a range of white frits based on new opacification technology, which are designed to give high gloss and whiteness with an exceptional level of surface perfection.
Cerene white glazes will increase the percentage of first quality tiles from fast fire manufacturing processes — processes that involve a single rapid firing step.
Cerene white frits are lead-free and do not contain zirconium silicate as the opacifying agent.
They are resistant to acid attack and metal marking, and in combination with matting agents, will produce floor tile glazes with excellent abrasion resistance.
Mr Erim, General Manager Ceramics, and Mr Hellwig, Product Manager Ceramics, with the Inax Corporation Award.
Business Training Course tackles working capital by Andrew Gillard, Royston
The winning team in this year's Group Business Training Course Project included Alison Worboys of Autocatalyst sales and Donald Law, Ann Marie-Jones and Martin Goodier of Sonning.
Their challenge, in common with three other teams of course members, was to propose a specific opportunity to reduce working capital.
Presentations were made to a group of invited managers on 21st July at the Royston Training Centre.
Dr Bob Tait in presenting the cup complemented all the teams on the high standard of their project presentations which they had completed over a six week period.
Subjects chosen in conjunction with local managers were varied.
They included cutting the amount of gold tied up in the refining circuit, reducing batches of work in progress in colours and a new costing system to enable product rationalisation in Jewellery.
The winning presentation included recommendations on manufacturing, stock holdings of platinum, and for an integrated computer system in CSD.
Later, the Chairman, Mr David Davies, met with all the course members in the Royston Sports and Social Club and addressed them, together with others from the Royston site, at the course buffet dinner in the Royston Training Centre.
The Chairman talked of recent company progress and the part played by good management.
To ensure high standards for the future, a number of management development programmes are now in place, including the Business Training Course.
He briefly reviewed the course in which members had visited the major UK sites, met senior managers from all divisions, improved their writing and presentation skills and received introductions to marketing, manufacturing strategy and business finance.
The projects they had undertaken all had particular relevance to current group objectives, and Mr Davies wished them well in their career with Johnson Matthey.
Dr Bob Tait presents the cup to the winning team in the 1993 Business Training Course Project — l to r: Alison Worboys, Martin Goddier, Ann Marie-Jones, Donald Law
Chemistry Plus: Encouraging the Chemists of Tomorrow — Today by Brian Theobald, JM Technology Centre, Sonning
Johnson Matthey Technology Centre (JMTC) has always been committed to developing good relationships with local educational establishments and encouraging excellence in the teaching of science and technology.
This commitment has manifested itself in many ways, e.g. sending out people to speak at schools, inviting school groups to tour the centre, awarding business scholarships to sixth formers and taking on pupils for work experience.
Our latest excursion into the world of secondary education will hopefully benefit not only local schools but schools throughout the country.
JMTC and Gillotts School, Henley-on-Thames have worked together on an exciting project to develop new teaching materials describing an everyday or industrial application of chemistry.
The project known as Chemistry Plus — chemistry plus applications, linked teachers with over twenty organisations in order to create up to date resources for pupils studying the National Curriculum.
The project aims to increase the appeal of chemistry to young people aged 14–16.
The topics in the new 84 page illustrated booklet which resulted from the project include: sugar and its manufacture, nitrate and drinking water, the structure of crystals and the chemistry of soap.
Elizabeth Hayden, a chemistry teacher at Gillotts School, worked with Brian Harrison and Brian Theobald at the Technology Centre to contribute three topics:
Elizabeth is very grateful for the support and technical help given by Johnson Matthey and is sure the interest of pupils in chemistry will be stimulated.
Chemistry Plus is an SCSST (The Standing Conference on Schools Science and Technology) project.
The Chemical Industries Association, The Institution of Chemical Engineers, The Royal Society of Chemistry and The Society of Chemical Industry collaborated in sponsoring the project.
A copy of the publication can be ordered from Biblios PSD, Star Road, Partridge Green, West Sussex, RH13 8LD at £19.99 + VAT.
Clash of the CSD Titans: The Brussels v Royston football match, 20th March 1993 by Garry Tobiss, Brussels
The first session of our training began in February when the weather was freezing cold and there was a hail storm.
During the second session, the weather improved although we had a blizzard instead of the hail!
The third and final session was blessed with warm and sunny weather so we all got tired because of the heat!
We were now ready — apart from the fact that the team had still not played together!
Rumours abounded about the Royston side — they could not raise a team, then they could raise a team but it consisted entirely of old men!
Finally we were told that a team had been formed but that it contained no skilful players, we remained sceptical!
At last the great day arrived, and 17 players and supporters set off for England.
We arrived in Dover to a special reception from the English customs —‘1992?
Never heard of it!’
We struck out for Cambridge and although we made the odd wrong turn they were quickly rectified and with luck on our side we found the hotel.
An excellent evening meal was had by all, dispelling the myth that you cannot eat good food in the UK.
On our arrival at Royston all of the rumours about the Royston team were quickly dispelled; they seemed to be a very formidable lot.
A team photograph was taken and after that Barry Jewitt, who was refereeing, started off the match.
It was soon very apparent that English football was slightly different to the Belgian variety; pushing and shoving, together with hard tackling, were all part of the English game.
Attack turned out to be the best form of defence and as long as we pushed and shoved as much as the opposition, everyone was happy.
Richard Wilson opened the scoring for Royston after 10 minutes.
Brussels replied within 5 minutes with a thunderous shot from Alessandro.
Richard Wilson scored again for Royston before half time.
The second half saw Richard take apart the Brussels defence yet again to score.
After that, an excellent run down the right wing by Zaman led to a Royston player being penalised for hand ball in the area.
The resulting shot, taken by Pascal would have taken the goalkeeper to the back of the net as well had he got near to it.
The Brussels' supporters went wild.
A fourth goal by Gary Reeks for Royston followed soon afterwards but Patrice pulled one back for Brussels as a result of some fancy footwork from Hassan and Pascal.
The match was always very close, occasionally producing some fine football.
Both teams had some near misses and the score could have gone either way.
The final score was 4–3 to Royston with everyone content that they had given their best.
Drinks in the social club followed and then a guided tour of Royston CSD was given.
The social evening held at Royston was very enjoyable, a fine opportunity to meet our colleagues in a relaxed atmosphere.
A raffle was also held and this raised £110 (5000BF) for Cancer Relief Macmillan Fund.
The end result?
An excellent trip which had a great atmosphere.
It was a pleasure, not only to meet and have fun with people from all three shifts at Brussels, but also to do the same with our colleagues in Royston.
A great idea, shall we do it again soon?
CSD Titans — the Brussels and Royston teams prior to their ‘clash’ at Royston
‘Chemistry at Work’— in Cambridge by Peter Skinner, Royston
Each year for the past five years the South Cambridge Forum for Industry Education Liaison has organised a ‘Chemistry at Work’ exhibition for fifth and sixth formers from schools in its area.
The  1993 event, which included practical demonstrations, was held at the Anglia Polytechnic University in Cambridge.
Johnson Matthey was amongst the many companies with chemicals operations in the locality taking part.
Our exhibit consisted of a background stand of posters showing gold and platinum bars and other items, plus a table full of typical Johnson Matthey products and intermediates.
In addition, the JM video ‘Using Precious Metals for all their Worth’ was shown to interested visitors.
The theme stressed by Johnson Mattheys voluntary presenter, Peter Skinner, from the Chemicals and Process Development group at Royston, was that although precious metals are generally regarded as rare and costly their unique properties ensure that they are of surprising benefit to Society in many areas of everyday life.
Examples used to illustrate the theme included photographic film and a sectioned catalytic converter.
Even when flying to a holiday destination there is a strong possibility that the turbine powering the aircraft will have platinum aluminide coated blades for erosion and corrosion protection.
In all over six hundred school children participated over the three days of the event.
The energies of the Director of the South Cambs Forum, Alan Rowe, ensured that all ran smoothly, despite the many opportunities for chaos to ensue.
The event, which is also sponsored by the Royal Society of Chemistry, attracts local radio and press coverage.
Many favourable comments were received from teachers and pupils concerning the wide ranging applications and future work opportunities available in Chemistry.
Peter Skinner, Royston explains the working of a catalytic converter to interested pupils at the ‘Chemistry at Work’ exhibition in Cambridge
Continuing our series on Head Office Corporate Functions
Group Personnel by Liz Roberts, Trafalgar Square
The Group Personnel Department at Trafalgar Square is staffed by Terry Stock (Group Personnel Controller) and Liz Roberts (Head Office Personnel Officer).
Terry is a science graduate of Birmingham University and Imperial College, London and is a qualified Company Secretary and a member of the Institute of Personnel Management.
He has been with JM since September 1981 when he joined as Administrative Assistant in the Group Staff Department at the former Head Office in Southgate, North London.
Terry became Personnel and Training Officer at Wembley after 18 months or so and two years later he moved to Birmingham as Assistant Company Secretary of Johnson Matthey's UK jewellery companies.
Following restructuring of the Jewellery Operations he was appointed Personnel and Training Manager for its three UK sites and the Dublin sales office.
During his four years in Jewellery, Terry was responsible for Personnel, Training, Health and Safety, Purchasing, Security and Catering within Jewellery Operations.
Rejoining Head Office four years ago, within the Group Personnel Department, Terry was appointed Group Personnel Controller in July 1990.
He is also a Trustee of the JM Employees Pension Scheme in the UK.
Liz Roberts graduated from Durham University with a degree in Chinese and joined a small tours company specialising in holidays to China.
She also spent nine months working for the Sino-British Trade Council organising and accompanying Chinese commercial delegations visiting the UK.
Liz joined JM in January 1990 working for the former Personnel Director, in Hatton Garden.
In July 1990 she was appointed Personnel Assistant and in August 1990 Personnel Officer.
Whilst with JM  Liz has successfully completed the Institute of Personnel Management examinations and is currently taking the Open University Effective Manager course.
Both Liz and Terry claim to have ‘fallen’ into Personnel.
Neither set out with such a career in mind but, fortunately, both say they feel they are ‘reasonably well suited to it’.
The Group Personnel Department exists to support and advise the Executive Directors and the Board on any significant people issues in JM.
The Department has specific responsibility for senior management remuneration, management development and Group personnel policies which involves close liaison with Personnel colleagues and line managers throughout the world.
Liz assists Terry in this role in addition to providing Personnel support to Head Office employees.
Liz Roberts and Terry Stock
JM receives award of excellence from National Semiconductor Corporation by David Savage, Spokane
On 21st June 1993 National Semiconductor Corporation in Santa Clara, California presented Johnson Matthey Electronics of Spokane, Washington with an award recognising excellence in product quality, supplier commitment and service during the past year.
National Semiconductor is the fourth largest semiconductor company in the United States with sales of over US$ 2 billion in 1992.
It has extensive manufacturing facilities in the US, Singapore, Malaysia and Scotland.
Johnson Matthey provides the company with AuSub© silver glass die attach paste and gold preforms, used in attaching silicon die to semiconductor packages, for use in its semiconductor manufacturing process.
We also supply National Semiconductor with sputtering targets and thermocouple products.
Johnson Matthey was one of six companies that won bronze medals as part of National Semiconductors ‘Quest for Gold’ supplier program.
The Quest for Gold Program, initiated in April 1992, uses criteria from the Malcolm Baldrige National Quality Award and the Six Sigma Philosophy for quality to evaluate the 100 suppliers providing equipment and materials to National for its manufacturing processes.
The program's goal is to encourage and strengthen supplier relationships and improve communication by defining customer — supplier expectations.
David Savage accepts the National Semiconductor ‘Quest for Gold’ Award on behalf of Johnson Matthey Electronics
JM employee elected President of Canada Ceramic Society
Mike Burton of the Colour and Print Division of North America joined Johnson Matthey in 1973.
In 1977, he moved to the Canadian Colour and Print operation, Blythe Matthey, and was active in the Canadian Ceramic society for many years as the pottery and whitwares secretary and chairman and also membership chairman.
Mike transferred to the Colour and Print operation in West Whiteland, Pennsylvania.
Both Johnson Matthey and the Ceramic Society supported Mike through this transition, allowing him to become the first president of the Canadian Ceramic Society to reside outside of Canada.
Mike will maintain an active role with the Canadian Ceramic Society as both immediate Past President and USA Liaison.
Mike Burton receives the Past Presidents Jewel from immediate Past President Connie Barry.
JM Pensioner wins silver medal at International Exhibition
Roy Whiffin, who retired from Star Link Chains in Fleet just over 2 years ago, was awarded a silver medal at this year's 62nd International Model Engineer and Modelling Exhibition at Olympia in London.
The medal was awarded for this beautiful crystal wheel skeleton clock which is based on a 17th century design.
Roy modified the original design and made every single part of the clock in his own workshop.
One of the tools Roy manufactured for making parts for his clocks, a cutter grinder, won a bronze medal at the same show.
Matthey Beyrand presentation at the 3EMES Journees des CPIM de France by Jean Pierre Brissaud and Sandrine Eglizeaud
Matthey Beyrand presented the result of its work on Lead Time Control to delegates during the ‘3EMES JOURNEES DES CPIM DE FRANCE’ Paris 22nd September 1993
More than a year ago, Matthey Beyrand set up a programme which ensures total control of its lead times.
This has been achieved with the help of CAP SESA, a consultant agency specialising in production management.
CPIM, which stands for Certified in Production and Inventory Management is an association of industry professionals who have achieved a CPIM diploma.
The CPIM diploma is awarded by APICS (American Production and Inventory Control Society), which is the most important and the most active association for industrial management in the world.
Started in 1957, APICS has approximately 75,000 members in more than 20 countries.
The members of the Matthey Beyrand team are: Jean-Pierre Brissaud (responsible for Production Management), Evelyne Menut (Methods), Daniel Soler (Methods), Pascal Boussard (Methods)
At the recent CPIM France seminar, Jean-Pierre Brissaud, Project Manager for Matthey Beyrand, presented the results of the work achieved by the company with the assistance of François Schaal and Pierre-Marie Gallois from the consulting agency, CAP SESA.
The presentation dealt with:
In fact, the title of the lecture is self-explanatory because it is entitled: ‘Controlling Lead Times before knowing them’.
l to r: Daniel Soler, Evelyne Menut, Jean-Pierre Brissaud
Technology and good management: a winning combination — the Group Management Development Programme visits JMTC Sonning by Andrew Gillard
‘The full benefits of technology will be achieved only by good management’ said the Chairman Mr David Davies on his visit to this years Group Management Development Programme at JM Technology Centre, Sonning on 8th July.
The sharpening of management skills and getting things done through people is the focus of the 5 x 2 day modules which run from May to December each  year.
The modules are attended by fourteen managers from throughout Europe and are held at Royston, Sonning, Trafalgar Square and Cresswell.
Course members have the opportunity to exchange experience and knowledge from many parts of the Company, and apply fresh ideas when they return to their jobs.
They get to know each other well and such contacts last well beyond the Programme itself.
An Executive Director attends part of each module, and at Sonning both David Davies and Chris Clark sat in on a part of the seminar, and spoke with course members.
Mr Clark, in an extended informal evening session, talked through the issues behind MTD's recent results and the importance of leadership in management.
Later, Mr Davies at the course buffet dinner addressed course members on company progress and the crucial long term role of both Research and Management Development.
He outlined the Board strategy to ensure high calibre managers throughout the company, which includes the annual opportunity of the Group Management Development Programme attended by managers nominated from throughout Europe.
Delegates who attended the Group Management Programme at JMTC Sonning
Pensioners Obituaries
JM receives sponsorship award from the Department of National Heritage
At a glittering reception held on the evening of 20th May at Lancaster House, Johnson Matthey was presented with a certificate recognising its sponsorship of the arts.
The award, presented by the Rt Hon Peter Brooke CH MP, Secretary of State for National Heritage, to Gordon Thorburn, Executive Director, Administration, commemorated JM's success in the Business Sponsorship Incentive Scheme for our sponsorship of Glyndebourne.
The scheme, which is administered on behalf of the Department of National Heritage by ABSA (The Association for Business Sponsorship of the Arts), seeks to encourage business sponsorship of arts organisations by providing financial awards to arts organisations to add to funds raised through business sponsorship.
Johnson Matthey and Glyndebourne successfully applied for an award under the Business Sponsorship Incentive Scheme for our 1992 sponsorship of The Queen of Spades.
l to r: Ian Godwin, Gordon Thorburn, Rt Hon Peter Brooke MP, Sir George Christie and Mark Beddy (Glyndebourne)
Matthey Electronics, Burslem lifts top Gold award
Matthey Electronics Burslem has for the third successive year won the prestigious RoSPA Gold Award for Occupational Safety.
The Gold Award is made to organisations in recognition of achieving either a consistently good or continuously improving performance over a 4 year period.
Applicants must also provide evidence that the company operates a sound safety policy.
The award was presented at a ceremony staged at the NEC Birmingham, attended by Geoff Keates, Production Manager, Doreen Baddeley, Jean White and Eddie Walker, Safety Officer.
Geoff Keates Matthey Electronics receiving the Gold Occupational Safety Award from RoSPA President, Wing Commander Gordon Sinclair DFC
Visit by Investor Group by Rob Simpson, South Africa
On 15 March 1993 JMSA was visited by a group of 20 investment advisors, market analysts and portfolio managers.
The visit formed part of an annual international investment conference hosted in Johannesburg by Frankel Pollack Vinderine Inc. members of the Johannesburg Stock Exchange.
During their conference certain industry visits were arranged and following the opening of JM's newest autocatalyst plant in South Africa, together with the investment interest the product invokes, a visit to our plant was considered highly appropriate.
Following the arrival of the delegates, Peter Emmel, MD of JMSA, gave an in-depth presentation including an introduction to Johnson Matthey Plc, JMSA and the group's role in the world autocatalyst market, including the South African contribution.
This was followed by a conducted tour of the Autocatalyst plant where at strategic points JM staff provided our visitors with a basic understanding of autocatalyst production.
As the visit also presented an ideal opportunity of providing our guests with an in-depth view of JMSA's diverse activities, an exhibition was set up in which autocatalysts and products of our Metal Joining, Noble Metals and Colour and Print businesses were incorporated.
Following the plant tour, our visitors were taken in small groups through the exhibition and were clearly impressed with the interesting and informative array of products displayed and the diverse industries served by our company.
Their interest and appreciation of our efforts was further spelt out when, in concluding the visit, Peter Davey, Director and Head of Research at FPV Inc and leader of the group described it as an ‘outstanding visit’ which had provided all concerned with a greater appreciation of JM's activities.
Peter Emmel with the group of investment advisors at JMSA
At the exhibition — John Smith discussing autocatalyst
Environmental Technology ‘93 by F John Smith, CSD Royston
The annual Environmental Technology exhibition, held at the National Exhibition Centre in Birmingham, is the premier ‘green’ showplace for UK business.
At this year's exhibition which was held in March, Johnson Matthey Catalytic Systems Division was invited to join the Department of Trade and Industry's Technology Partnership Initiative.
In a large stand strategically placed at the entrance both Autocatalyst and Environmental products featured their systems.
The centrepiece of the exhibit was the central section of an ART 700 filter system for use on diesel powered buses and other heavy vehicles.
This was provided by Eminox Ltd, with whom JM is working on such devices.
Anne Buckland of Environmental Products explains the technology to a customer while F John Smith stands by the ART 700 exhibit.
Make it a better day II by Tim Wilson, Royston
Have you just travelled along the A10?
Bad luck my friends — you are off there again, Meldreth is your journeys end, An ear to the teacher you must lend.
All day long you will work and you will slave, Allowing wheelchairs to go where you pave, Just look at the kids to keep tiredness at bay, Because for them you are making it a better day.
About 24 teams from local businesses in the Cambridge area took up the Cambridge Regional College initiative, to complete a number of different challenges in support of the local community.
All the teams gathered in trepidation at the college to receive their respective challenges for the day.
The above poem describes the challenge that was allocated to the JM team very early on that rainy March morning.
The team made up from the Bullion and PGM refineries, made their way back to Royston loaded down with a boot-full of tools.
Their task was to build a wooden wheelchair pathway around a small pond in the grounds of Meldreth Manor.
The venue is home to about 200 mentally and physically handicapped students.
Throughout the day there was torrential rain, but despite this everybody mucked in (literally) and worked very hard until late in the afternoon when the weather finally forced us to stop the good work.
The project however had been virtually completed, a remarkable achievement considering the weather conditions.
We ended the evening in Cambridge with a late ‘breakfast’ and danced to the early hours to a very good band.
Everyone who took part in this charitable challenge thoroughly enjoyed the day, and we all felt we had contributed something worthwhile to the local community.
We all hope to go back soon and see the kids enjoying it.
The JM team for the 1993 ‘Make it a better day’ challenge.
Harry Ward, Dave Stokes, Tim Wilson, Clive Gilbert and Steve Danby.
‘When you weigh it up’ Johnson Matthey has the know how by Barry Connelly, Brimsdown
On 26 July, Johnson Matthey Weighing Technology Department at Brimsdown was presented with the prestigious accreditation certificate award as a National Measurement Accreditation Service (NAMAS) approved Test House for the calibration of weighing equipment.
The presentation was made by Mr David Hayward, a member of the NAMAS Executive.
This award is significant in that it is regarded as the highest accolade within the weighing equipment calibration field and is only the seventh certificate to be presented within the UK.
What is NAMAS?
NAMAS (National Measurement Accreditation Service) is part of the DTI and the National Physical Laboratory (NPL) which is the focus of the UK's National Measurement system and maintains the National Primary Standards.
The role of NAMAS is to assess, accredit and monitor calibration and testing laboratories.
These laboratories are then authorised to issue formal certificates and reports for specific types of measurement and tests.
In 1874 George Matthey supplied 250 kilos of platinum iridium to the conservatoire des Arts et  Metiers in Paris to be used in the manufacture of International Measurement Standards.
Since then Johnson Matthey has played a major part in the development of methods of refining and melting platinum and iridium in order to produce ingots of alloy able to meet the metric commission requirements.
Johnson Matthey Noble Metals produced 5 platinum/iridium kilogram cylinders during the early 1980s, both for the NPL and BIPM in France.
There are detailed records kept on all the weights made which are just becoming old enough to become ‘Working’ weights following controlled storage during the essential metal stabilisation period.
The Business Unit has been working closely with the Mass and Density Standards of the NPL since January 1992 to help update the manufacturing procedures utilised in modern day technology.
Recently, Noble Metals received an order to produce a large 10% Iridium/Platinum billet from which 10–1 kilo weights will be made.
The billet has to be highly dense and of high integrity and will be used to make new kilogram mass standards.
They will be used in research by the Mass Section of the NPL, into the effects of vacuum on such standards aimed at offering better traceability to the national standard of measurements made using Pt-Ir weights in vacuum.
As it is likely that these will be the last set of weights produced, the BBCs, ‘Tomorrow's World’ filmed some stages of their manufacture in the ‘Primary Metal Processing's’area of Noble Metals for a feature to be transmitted on television in February/ March 1994.
As a result of Johnson Matthey's unique involvement in international standards and its recent success in achieving NAMAS accreditation, I think one can conclude that: When you weight it up Johnson Matthey have the Know How.
Weighing Technology Service Team — l to r: Larry Cant, Anthony Wright, Peter Moran, Vince Burke
Original kilogram 18*
Typical range of high calibre test weights and equipment required to conduct NAMAS calibrations
Mr David Hayward, a member of the NAMAS Executive presents the NAMAS Accreditation certificate to Barry Connelly, Brimsdown
JM responds to The Call
Five year old Alicia Spivey is well and truly on the road to recovery after she was diagnosed with cancer as a baby.
She was featured on the back cover of the Spring edition of Assay.
Investing in your Company…
Johnson Matthey's Enhanced Scrip Dividend Alternative by Ian D Godwin, Trafalgar Square
On 21st June this year Johnson Matthey announced an Enhanced Scrip Dividend Alternative to its final cash dividend for the year ending 31st March 1993.
Under this offer shareholders could choose to receive an amount in new ordinary shares equivalent to 10.65 pence for each ordinary share they held, instead of the recommended final cash dividend of 7.1 pence per ordinary share.
The Scrip Dividend was accompanied by a Cash Offer from Barclays de Zoete Wedd Securities Limited (BZW) to buy the new ordinary shares.
Details of the Enhanced Scrip Dividend and BZW's Cash Offer were mailed to shareholders with the 1993 Annual Report and were distributed through the Employee Share Participation Scheme to all members.
Shareholders had until 12th July to elect to accept the Scrip Dividend offer, those that failed to do so received the cash dividend in the normal way.
The Enhanced Scrip Dividend Alternative offered important benefits to shareholders and to our company.
In his letter to shareholders introducing the Enhanced Scrip Dividend Alternative, JM Chairman David Davies said: ‘Your Directors are recommending this proposal because they believe it to be in your interests as well as those of the company.
Shareholders will benefit because the Enhanced Scrip Dividend Alternative has been set at a level which is 50 per cent higher than the recommended final cash dividend.
The degree to which each shareholder will benefit will depend on his or her tax position.
The Company will benefit because of the tax it saves and the resulting improvement in earnings in 1993–94.
At the same time the Company's balance sheet would be strengthened.
The Board's intention is that the cash retained as a result of the scrip dividend and related tax saving will be used to fund future capital investment and possible small acquisitions.’
Take-up
On 15th July the company announced that it had received elections accepting the Enhanced Scrip Dividend Alternative from the holders of 177,631,159 ordinary shares in Johnson Matthey.
This represented approximately 95.9 per cent of our issued ordinary share capital at that time.
BZW received acceptances of its Cash Offer in respect of 16,092,883 existing ordinary shares, representing approximately 9 per cent of the elections made under the Enhanced Scrip Dividend Alternative.
This excellent result meant that the final cash dividend paid for the year ended 31st March 1993 was £0.5 million, compared with the £13.2 million which would have been payable if all shareholders had received the cash dividend.
This resulted in a saving to the company in Advance Corporation Tax of 3.7 million.
Johnson Matthey Plc announced on 22nd July the reference price in respect of the Enhanced Scrip Dividend Alternative, calculated in accordance with the terms of the offer,(453 pence).
This resulted in the issue of approximately 4.2 million new ordinary shares in our company, representing an increase of approximately 2.3 per cent in its issued share capital.
Dealings in the new ordinary shares commenced on the London Stock Exchange on 28th July 1993.
Price for CGT purposes
The market value of the new ordinary shares issued under the Enhanced Scrip Dividend Offer was 462.5 pence on the first day of dealings in such shares (28th July 1993).
This value has been calculated in accordance with S.272 (3) of Part VIII of the Taxation of Chargeable Gains Act 1992.
(In ‘Investing in Your Company’ in the next issue of Assay we take a look at the JM Employee Share Participation Schemes.)
Johnson Matthey responds to The Call by Ian D Godwin, Trafalgar Square
There has been a wonderful response to the call to action in aid of Johnson Matthey's Charity of the Year featured in the last issue of Assay (Spring 1993).
We are now just over half way through our year long programme of fund raising in aid of Cancer Relief Macmillan Fund and the efforts of JM employees past and present and their families to raise money for this most worthwhile cause have been quite fantastic.
Progress so far
Fund raising activities undertaken by members of the ‘Johnson Matthey family’ have raised over £18,000 in the first six months of the programme.
When added to the £10,000 pledged by the company to the 1993–94 Charity of the Year, this brings the total raised so far for Cancer Relief Macmillan Fund (CRMF) to £28,000!
A truly remarkable achievement and one that demonstrates the enthusiasm with which Johnson Matthey has responded to the challenge.
However there is still a long way to go and I would like to ask all Assay readers to keep the fund raising ideas and, most importantly, the money coming in!
Money has been rolling in from a very wide range of fund raising activities undertaken by JM sites and individuals around the country.
We have also had support from our colleagues in Brussels (see article on page 21 of this issue) and I would like to take this opportunity to thank them for taking the lead and to appeal to Johnson Matthey sites around the world to take up the challenge.
Any contribution, no matter how small, is very much appreciated and I am sure that you and your colleagues will have a lot of fun at the same time!
It would not be practical to attempt to list all the fund raising activities that have been undertaken so far this year but I would like to pick out some highlights for you.
Most importantly I would like to thank all those involved both as ‘fund raisers’ and ‘sponsors’for their support and I hope that their sterling efforts will inspire you to undertake more new fund raising projects.
After all we are only half way through this year's Charity of the Year programme and there is still a long way to go if we are to raise enough to fully fund the training of a Macmillan Nurse.
Sporting achievements
Sporting endeavours have been a major feature of the activities undertaken so far (see Update).
The programme was ‘kicked off’ by a charity football match between CSD Brussels and CSD Royston which, along with a generous donation from the division, raised a total of £1,118.
The Johnson Matthey contingent in this year's Royston Fun Run raised a superb total of £2,000 and the four JM employees that entered this year's London Marathon have raised a total of well over £1,500.
David Jacksons 24 hour cycling marathon raised a total of £2,800 (the largest single contribution so far) and proved to be a lot of fun for all of us involved (see separate article).
Company Initiatives
A generous donation of £787 was received from the Brimsdown Health and Safety programme and the sale of one of the original prints by Lord Lichfield, featured at the launch of Platinum ‘93, raised a further £1,000.
Members of the Board, senior managers and their guests at this year's Open Golf raised an astonishing £1,300 by raffling two putters manufactured by Johnson Matthey Canada on each day and from a sweepstake on the final day.
The Open Day held at Cresswell in August raised a magnificent total of £2,111 and a thoroughly good time was had by all!
A ‘Platinum and Gold Award’ scheme aimed at encouraging donations to the JM Charity of the Year from suppliers has been extremely successful at Cresswell, raising over £2,700.
It is hoped that this scheme can be extended to other JM sites around the country and indeed around the world.
World's Biggest Coffee Morning
CRMF's major national fund raising event, The World's Biggest Coffee Morning on 1st October, was enthusiastically supported by Johnson Matthey staff and their families around the country.
A total of 19 JM Coffee Mornings were held involving over 1700 participants.
Our Coffee Mornings have raised a total of well over £2,200.
An excellent morning's work by anybody's standards and an achievement of which we can all feel justifiably proud.
Individual Efforts
I cannot stress the importance of individual fund raising efforts enough.
In August we sent a copy of the ‘JM MacChallenge individual fund raiser’ to all UK employees and pensioners.
This leaflet incorporated a sponsorship form and hopefully provided you with some inspiration for individual projects.
An excellent example of individuals ‘rising to The Challenge’ is the sponsored slim undertaken by Sarah Walley and Gill Considine of the accounts department at Burslem.
Sarah and Gill's JM MacChallenge raised a total of £43.50 towards our Charity of the Year programme.
Once again a big thank you to everyone involved in these projects and best of luck to you all for future fund raising activities.