

Di…the wing commander!
BNFL's showpiece Sellafield Visitors Centre continues to attract record numbers with over 77,000 people having already passed through its doors so far this year.
As well as the centre's fascinating nuclear power exhibition, a packed programme of special events has been arranged for visitors — which is how brave assistant information officer Diane Williams ended up getting the bird!
Your BNFL News was on the spot to cover the latest exciting events, so to find out more turn to the centre pages….
VICTORY FOR EP2 TASK FORCE
A KEY piece in BNFL's reprocessing strategy jigsaw has dropped into place with the completion of construction of Sellafield's second Encapsulation Plant.
EP2, built at a cost of £250 million, was begun in mid 1988 and employed a 1,000-strong contractor workforce at the project's peak.
It has been completed bang on time and within budget thanks to a special task force which was set up to lead the complex engineering job.
Drawn from several BNFL departments, this group fought and won a battle against time to hit the tightest of deadlines.
The plant is now in the hands of commissioning teams.
It goes ‘active’ in early 1993 and will operate well into the next century.
EP2 also has the distinction of being BNFL's first major ‘in house’ project with almost all the design and project management being undertaken within the Company.
The special EP2 Task Force set up to oversee the huge job combined people from both Sellafield and Risley sites.
The EP2 complex swallowed up 44,000 cubic metres of concrete, 14,500 tonnes of reinforced and structural steel, 26,000 metres of pipework and 14,500 metres of cabling.
Built next to the Magnox Encapsulation Plant [MEP], which was formally opened in November last year, EP2 will initially take intermediate-level waste from THORP when the flagship plant goes operational in 1993.
Both EP2 and MEP convert the waste into a more manageable form for interim storage pending final disposal in an underground repository.
they will do so for at least 30 years.
EP2, which can handle both solid and slurry wastes, will be run by a staff of around 170 BNFL personnel who are either in place or being recruited.
Project Manager  said: ‘EP2 can be described as being very much ‘all our own work’ due to the way so much was handled in house.
‘The task force, together with our major contractors, did a magnificent job working on an extremely tight design and construction programme and the commissioning teams continue to hit key target dates required to achieve the start of active commissioning in early 1993.
It has been a victory for teamwork.’
THORP Director  said: ‘Without EP2 THORP cannot operate.
integrated team have shown tremendous enthusiasm and commitment in completing the construction to time and money against what sometimes seemed an impossibly challenging programme.’
It's Philip the Fourth
THE Duke of Edinburgh showed he's still a master of horse at Scotland's largest carriage driving event.
Against world-class opposition he came fourth in the pony team event at the Drumlanrig Castle Horse Driving Trials, again sponsored by BNFL.
And the Prince took time out to visit the new BNFL exhibition trailer as the guest of Chapelcross Superintendent, Peter Jenkinson.
Set against the background of the 300-year old home of the Duke of Buccleuch, the event attracted top competitors from all over the world including British National champion, George Bowman of Penrith.
MORE ATOM FAITH
Poll boosts support for nuclear
THE British public have increasing faith in the future of nuclear power.
A survey by Gallup has shown almost half those polled supported nuclear generated electricity and the figure is almost level with support for coal and oil.
The findings of 47 per-cent who preferred nuclear compares with 50 per-cent for fossil fuels.
Thirty-eight per-cent believed more nuclear power plants should be built, either right now or subject to the government's proposed review in 1994.
The poll, taken at the same time as the Rio Earth Summit, picked up concern about the environment.
The findings showed that nine out of 10 people were concerned about pollution caused by carbon dioxide and sulpher dioxide emissions, much of which comes from burning coal and oil.
Support for nuclear was strongest among professional and managerial groups where the number in favour reached nearly 60 per-cent.
In administrative and skilled worker groups support was 50 per-cent.
The results come hard on the heels of a forecast by the Director General of the International Atomic Energy Agency, who says he is confident that a series of factors will lead to a ‘relaunch’ of nuclear power in a few years' time.
‘I predict that Western industrialised countries will return to nuclear power as an abundant environmentally benign energy source.
technical improvements will help bring this about,’ he said.
Workers lobby their MPs
CAMPAIGNING nuclear workers took their message to the top earlier this month when a party of 48 travelled to lobby MPs at Westminster.
The Capenhurst group [some pictured above]were led by members of the joint shop stewards committee.
They met seven North West MPs to ask for backing for a bid to get a change in legislation to allow workers to stay in the UKAEA pension scheme after the site's commercial uranium enrichment business is transferred to Urenco in September.
They also pressed MPs to support a call for more work to be brought to Capenhurst for those BNFL people who will remain on site.
Shop steward's chairman  who was one of a delegation of six who later had a meeting with Minister for Energy Tim Eggar, said: ‘We were encouraged by the promises of support we got from the MPs and the Minister has said he will look at the pension scheme position.’
WHAT THE PAPERS SAY ‘Science can save the world’
BNFL and the nuclear industry in general received some strong backing in two recent publications — and from the pen of two influential people.
First Sir Richard Doll, Emeritus Professor of Medicine at Oxford University, told Daily Mail]readers how science can save the world, and he criticised the attitude of the anti lobby.
‘They object to nuclear power on the grounds that it releases radioactive nuclides into the air.
similar radioactive atoms are already present naturally.
the amounts from nuclear power stations are, in comparison, tiny.’
And he added: ‘For those pressure groups, the tenets of logic do not seem important.’
The second supporter was Councillor Struan Stevenson from Kyle and Carrick District Council who gave a detailed account of spent fuel transport in the Municipal Journal.
He wrote: ‘Local authorities regularly assert that the conveyance of such material poses a serious threat to the public and that nuclear authorities should turn to on-site storage as a way of removing this hazard.
They are wrong on both counts.’
He stated: ‘It is somewhat bizarre that local authorities should single out the nuclear industry with its accident-free transport record for attack when the public is placed at far greater risk by the routine traffic in fuels and chemicals which seem to be of little interest to our councillors.’
I read, in The Guardian of all places, with some considerable interest that Greenpeace is in financial trouble.
According to the newspaper, the organisation has ‘cut its budget by $9 million, is to sell the biggest of its seven ships and make up to 25 per cent of its 500 campaigners redundant’.
Lord Melchett, Executive Director of Greenpeace UK, tried hard to bolster flagging Greenpeace spirits in a letter to the newspaper the next day, but he did not disagree with any of the financial points made.
Reuters Agency reported that Thilo Bode, manager of Greenpeace Germany, told reporters ‘that campaigns would have to be dropped because of a dramatic fall in donations from the public.’
At the risk of harping on about U2, as the entire legions of the media has recently, I must mention two reports from the Irish Press.
There was a wonderful piece by TPO'Mahony in the Cork evening Echo which really put Bono in his place.
He wrote: ‘To judge by a lot of the stuff written about bands like U2, you'd be forgiven for thinking that rock starts are the new Messiahs.
Gullible kids — and equally gullible media types — must bear a lot of the responsibility for this.’
‘But just who the hell is Bono anyway?
Will the real Paul Hewson please stand up!
Does he exist any more?’
He concluded: ‘The bottom line is — who cares what Bono [Hewson]thinks about Japan or The Bomb or Sellafield or the price of biscuits?
Nobody should, for the simple reason that he's just another rock singer.’
The second example came in another of those ‘guru-making’ eulogies in the Irish Independent.
‘Among a welter of brimming ashtrays sits a man in an old black suit.’
This is Bono…and he is concerned about the health of Ireland!
Even the Irish edition of the Daily Star said something positive about Sellafield recently when it reported that radon gas was to blame for 500 deaths every year.
Quoting Tony Golgan of the Radiological Protection Institute of Ireland, the paper reported: ‘Most of the radiation to which Irish people are exposed comes from radon seeping out of rocks in the ground — and not Britain's Sellafield nuclear plant.’
Finally a comment in the Whitehaven News gave the anti-BNFL brigade something to think about.
If it [Sellafield]was likely to leak and kill or disable us, the top BNFL people in Cumbria would not live near the place.
But they do, and they stay…some even after retirement.
‘So it is reasonable to assume those who control Sellafield will ensure their families are safe and, therefore, so will we be.’
RED-FACED GREENS ‘Sellasand’ stunt just a load of old barrels
GREENPEACE campaigners were left with red faces after a nuclear waste stunt backfired.
The group arrived at Dover harbour with what they said was a cargo of ‘deadly, highly radioactive sand’.
The sand — housed in what was claimed to be a mock-up of a nuclear flask [two old oil drums sporting radiation stickers and lined with plastic bags]— had been collected by Greenpeace from beaches near Sellafield.
However, after being refused passage by two ferry companies, they were forced to admit their load was not radioactive and were made to remove the stickers and signs before they could sail.
Even then their lorry had to drive some 70 miles up the coast to Harwich to board a ferry with a cargo of ‘sand’.
The two German drivers and their load had been booked to sail with Sealink and then tried P & O.
‘They tried to explain that it was only sand and it was all a stunt, but it was lit up with radioactivity signs and we take our environmental responsibilities very seriously.’
said a P & O spokesman.
The Sealink ship they attempted to board, the Nord Pas de Calais, was the same ferry which Greenpeace protesters in inflatable craft had held up for several hours during an attempt to stop it docking at Dover a few days earlier.
Greenpeace had planned to deliver their load to the German Environment Minister as part of a protest against German nuclear fuel being reprocessed in Britain.
BNFL press officer  who was at Dover for the arrival of a NTL flask of spent fuel on its way to Sellafield, said: ‘Greenpeace were at Dover for two days and finally had to admit the sand was harmless.
It was just another of their publicity stunts.
‘Dover Harbour Board officials checked over the ‘highly radioactive’ sand and could not get any reading from it,’she added.
A spokeswoman for Greenpeace said later that the group were considering suing Sealink over the incident.
Les all be pals, Ted
YOU may consider Les Dawson to be larger than life…but try his teddy bear George for size!
Les is loaning his huge teddy, complete with natty BNFL vest, to the Famous People's Teddy Bear exhibition to be held in Preston between Saturday, August 29 and September 2 to help raise money for the children's charity Barnardos.
Also pictured with funnyman Les is Barnardos' best-known bear and official mascot, Barnaby.
As part of Preston Guild's festivities, British Nuclear fuels at Springfields is sponsoring the event to raise money for Barnardos.
They hope to hit a target of £10,000.
Joining teddy bears of all shapes, colours and sizes which are flooding in from TV stars and personalities all over the country will be Prime Minister John Major's very own bear and those of his parliamentary colleagues.
The event, to be held at Evans-Halshaw's car showrooms on Port Way, Aston-on-Ribble, Preston, promises to be a fun-filled day for all the family.
Visitors can see Barnaby's bazaar of teddy bear souvenirs or try their luck at the tombola, where they could win one of the teddies donated by a celebrity.
And, if the weather is inclement, people can always retire to the specially erected marquee at the side of the showrooms.
Ample car parking is available close by.
Also on display will be bears from the St Annes Toy and Teddy Bear Museum, as well as those from the Ironbridge Teddy Bear Shop and Museum.
‘Frilled’ to win our top award
RISING stars in the world of industry and commerce were praised by the Duke of Westminster when he presented the annual BNFL award in the Chester and Deeside Young Enterprise Scheme.
The Duke, the scheme's patron, also complimented companies in the region, among them BNFL, British Aerospace, Shell Chemicals, TSB and British Steel, for their involvement in the venture.
Three Chester students who set up their own company — called ‘No Frills’— making everything from Jewellery to boxer shorts, took the BNFL award which is given annually to the operators of the best company.
And the girls were really ‘frilled’ to meet the Duke.
Capenhurst's involvement in the exercise goes back to its launch five years ago and the Company has given advice and training to scores of youngsters taking part.
This year's awards ceremony, at Chester College of Higher Education, featured 15 schools and 18 companies.
It gives them a good insight into the world of business,’ explained shift manager Peter Ketchell, who serves as vice-chairman of the organising committee alongside colleague  the site's schools liaison officer.
The students are encouraged to raise capital by selling shares and use it to plan and manufacture their own products.
‘They make anything from tee-shirts to toilet roll holders,’ said Peter, who believes the exercise is valuable not only in terms of production but in the finer points of accountancy and business.
OH, BROTHER — WE'RE THE BEST
TWO brothers at Chapelcross both won awards at a recent presentation by the Institution of Measurement & Control.
Russel Rome, who is being sponsored by the company and is studying at Glasgow University, received an award for the most outstanding HNC student and his brother Robert, a third year student instrument apprentice, won the most outstanding ONC student prize.
Chapelcross has won one of the awards before but the brothers' achievement was particularly pleasing, said Training Officer Willie Banks.
‘Robert and russell won against strong competition.
It demonstrates the high standards that our apprentices achieve,’ he added.
YOU CAN HELP
SPRINGFIELDS, noted for its reactor fuel expertise, is moving into a different kind of ‘canning’.
An appeal has been launched for old aluminium drinks cans to raise cash for Manchester Children's Hospital.
The empty cans can be left at a number of collection points which are located around the site.
People in the news
Dave has put together a real glass act
MEDIEVAL stained glass provides much of the inspiration for Dave Mason's colourful lamp-shades and plant holders.
Dave, a former time-served plumber who is now a fitter at Springfields, uses his soldering skills to painstakingly assemble the shapes.
He embarked on his hobby three years ago and sells examples at modest prices to recover the cost of materials, some of which he buys from America and Germany.
‘The idea came to me because as a 15-year-old I worked as a plumber in churches and was impressed by the windows,’ said Dave.
He works from a small workshop at his home in Blackpool and recently he exhibited at a craft fair in the resort, posing for our photographer with a collection of his work.
Prices start from as little as £7.50 and he told us: ‘The glass is very expensive so you have to practise on plain glass until you get the knack.
‘Everything I make is hand-cut from large pieces of glass and hand-soldered.
When it comes to mixing the colours it's totally different from mixing paints — but at least you can leave it for a while and come back to it later.’
His biggest piece was a vestibule door panel depicting a heron and measuring four feet by three feet.
And he is currently working on a kingfisher which he estimates will take him 12 months to complete.
FLYING ACE WITH HIS FEET ON THE GROUND
THEIR small engines sound like a squadron of amplified hornets and the planes are built from nothing more substantial than treated paper stretched over balsa wood.
But this, according to Peter Gorst, of the Capenhurst control Line Model Aero Club, is real flying.
‘It's just what you are in contact with the model via the control line.
It's totally different from radio-controlled flying where there isn't this link.
For me it's more rewarding,’ he said.
Peter, a 55-year-old distribution engineer at the plant, says his wife believes he is going through a second childhood.
But he and the five or six other aficionados of control line flying, a hobby which peaked in the 1950s and 60s and then declined when the more sophisticated radio control models appear on the scene, are hooked into a pure form of aeronautical nostalgia.
They build reproductions of popular fifties models and they use the authentic glow-plug or diesel engines — some of which have become collectors' items.
‘An Oliver Tiger, which cost £6 10 shillings new, is changing hands for about £160 these days,’ he added.
The Capenhurst control line flyers formed in 1985 in a bid to recreate the golden days of their youth.
The engines may appear tiny — between about 2.5 and 8.5cc — but they are capable of powering the planes at 90mph.
During team events, when several models are flying in unison and they have to drop out to refuel, the modellers wear crash helmets…just in case.
MAGIC MOMENT
CAPENHURST foreman John Albino found himself facing the cameras and some tough questions recently.
It wasn't anything to do with the nuclear industry, but a session on the TV game show Every Second Counts hosted by Paul Daniels [pictured right].
John and wife Pam had written off to appear on the programme only to discover there were 10,000 applicants.
Even so they made it through to take part in the fast-moving challenge of wits with ‘Mr Magic’ himself.
Unfortunately, as viewers discovered, John and Pam were pipped into second place, but they wouldn't have missed the experience for anything.
During exchanges with the magician, John confessed to appearing in a school play as a fairy and he has, not unexpectedly, taken a fair amount of stick back at work.
‘a somewhat uncomplimentary cartoon of me is now doing the rounds at Capenhurst,’ said John good-naturedly.
…
Another great FREE competition in your bumper BNFL news…
Ooh la la!
WIN a romantic weekend for two in Paris
GET an Eiffel of Paris — One of the most beautiful and exciting cities in the world.
From its famous tower to the imposing Sacre Coeur and Arc de Triomphe it has something for everyone.
so, if it's culture or just fun you want, Paris is the place for you.
YOUR best-in-Britain BNFL news has done it again — with yet another super FREE holiday to be won.
Together with a partner, one lucky reader will jet off for a luxury £600 Paris weekend.
The fabulous prize, courtesy of Thomas Cook, includes two nights bed and breakfast at a choice of hotels in the capital of romance, plus flights and airport transfers.
The winner can pick the hotel from Thomas Cook's current Paris/Amsterdam brochure, which also has on offer — at extra cost — a list of great excursions, including trips to Euro Disney, the Palace of Versailles, Montmartre and the Moulin Rouge.
This is the third terrific holiday prize BNFL News has given away so far this year…and we still have more superbreak prizes to come!
To be on your way all you have to do is answer the three simple questions [below]and fill out the entry coupon.
If your name is pulled out of the hat on Friday, August 28, it's gay Paree for you and a partner.
Entry forms should be sent to: Name; & address omitted.
The holiday prize has a maximum total value of £600 and must be taken before March 31, 1933.
Thomas Cook Travel Management, who have donated this month's great prize, have a staff of six based in Risley's Dalton House.
Using the latest computer travel technology they handle all sites' business travel as well as providing a complete foreign exchange service to BNFL personnel..
Wizard winner
GOBSMACKED Gail Hill was the lucky winner of our Wizard of Oz luxury mini-break holiday in the last issue.
Gail, 25 who works in Human Resources at risley and hubby Mark will be enjoying the £250, two-night holiday at one of Lancaster's top hotels, Lancaster House, plus tickets to the outdoor performance of the wizard of Oz by the Duke's Theatre company.
Gail, who is also looking forward to the birth of her first baby in November, said: ‘We have just come back from two wet weeks in Bournemouth and said we could do with spoiling ourselves with a stay in a luxury hotel then I was told I had won — it's amazing.,’
WIN a super family holiday next month
TOP PRESS Papers chase BNFL awards
The people who write the news were in the news when Chief Executive Neville Chamberlain presented prizes in the North West Newspaper Awards.
The competition, organised by the N W region of the Guild of British Newspaper Editors and sponsored by BNFL, attracted dozens of entries in search of the BNFL trophies for newspapers of the year.
A panel of senior journalists made their selection for awards which included prizes of £500 for individual winners.
Daily Newspaper of the Year was the Liverpool Daily Post whose deputy editor, John Williams, collected the trophy.
Weekly Newspaper of the Year was the Stockport Express and editor Peter Greenwood received the award.
News Reporter of the Year was Anthony Coppin of the West Lancashire Evening Gazette and the honour of being feature Writer of the Year was shared by Peter Richardson of the Lancashire Evening Post and Diane Robinson of the Manchester Evening News.
The title of Sports Reporter of the Year went to Oliver Holt of the Liverpool Daily Post and Martin Birchall of sister paper the Liverpool Echo took the title of Photographer of the Year.
Emerging talent in the form of Young Journalist of the Year was judged to be Dave Barnett, aged 22, of the Wigan Evening Post.
The overall standard of all the entries in the competition drew praise from the judges.
One of the panel, Keith Parker, editor of the Wolverhampton Express and Star, described the selection as ‘a very difficult job’.
BNFL's Information Services Director Jeffrey Preece added: ‘We were delighted at the response to the competition.
We always knew there were many first-class journalists in the region and this has been borne out by the contributions.’
A REAL FAMILY FAVOURITE
Proud people of THORP get a chance to show their relatives around the giant Sellafield complex.
BNFL; s flagship plant has thrown open its doors to some VIP visitors.
The proud people who designed, built, commissioned and operated THORP got the chance to show their families around the huge Sellafield complex.
Almost 2,000 took up the invitation during a two-day open house and were taken on a guided tour route which stretched over a mile through the £1.85 billion development.
Visitors — including four coach loads from Risley where THORP design teams are based — saw the space-age control room, feedpond, head end and chemical separation areas.
Many personnel were sporting T-shirts with the new THORP logo.
Its designer  from SEED at Risley, was presented with a £100 shopping voucher prize and a cut glass trophy for submitting the winning entry.
Director, also handed a £50 voucher prize to runner-up  from R&DD; at Sellafield.
Guests were presented with balloons, badges and pens all emblazoned with the distinctive new logo.
A creche and special facilities for the disabled were laid on.
Administration Manager  led the team which organised the open weekend.
He said: ‘It was an opportunity for everyone connected with the project, both BNFL staff and contractors, to bring in their families and explain what THORP is all about.
‘Everyone appeared very impressed with the complexity and size of the plant and its safety features.
‘I would like to thank all those who helped make the event such a success, everyone from the security people to the restaurant staff — who did a roaring trade.
We were delighted so many families decided to come.’
Head End commissioning Manager  said: ‘There are a lot of people who together are working tremendously hard to achieve THORP start-up.
‘We all rely heavily on our families and friends for support especially at this time, so the event was very much an occasion for families, to say thank you, and to allow visitors to experience the vast scale of the project.
Both days were a great success and it was good to see so many people looking round the plant and seeing for themselves where our effort is going and what is being achieved.’
THORP, which has been hailed as the ‘envy of the nuclear world’ by International Group Director  is one of Europe's largest and most complex engineering projects.
Operations will begin at the end of this year and the plant already has a £9,000 million order book which guarantees its capacity well beyond the year 2002.
It will reprocess spent fuel from nuclear power stations in the UK, Japan, Germany, Switzerland, Holland, Sweden, Italy, Canada and Spain.
Some 96 per cent of the spent fuel which goes in comes out as reusable material.
.
Thorp director & name presents & name with his award for winning the THORP logo competition
Staff at Sellafield's new THORP complex took a light hearted look at life when they welcomed their families and friends to the plant.
Everyone from security guards to nurses and secretaries helped make the day go with a buzz.
Seen in the group, with part of the massive plant towering above them are .
Showing members of his family the complexities of the main control room is  who works in the Basket Handling Cave area.
Sue and Lesley fill key posts
TWO senior strategic positions in BNFL have been filled by women.
Springfields-based Dr Sue Ion has been appointed Director of technology Development to succeed Dr Harry Allardice who retires at the end of August.
And newcomer Lesley Ottery, formerly with PowerGen, has taken over in the newly-created post of Director of Information Systems.
Both are based at risley.
Sue, who is well known for her contribution in Fuel Division, particularly in the field of Water Reactor and AGR fuel, and intermediate products such as UO2 powder and pellets, described her new post as a considerable challenge.
‘It involves a great deal more strategic work,’ she explained.
‘It's very important that the focus for development of technology within BNFL is well matched with the Company's business objectives and long-term aims.’
During her 12-year career with BNFL she spent two years as a business manager in Fuel Division's Commercial Department and this experience should prove invaluable in her new role.
Hiking
Sue, a graduate from London's Imperial College in 1979, has degrees in materials science and metallurgy.
She enjoys hiking and walking in her spare time, and also looks forward to her annual skiing expedition.
Her other recreation is playing the violin, something she took up at the age of 11 when she went on to become a member of the Preston Youth Orchestra.
Lesley Ottery, who shares Sue's interest in downhill skiing, is also an enthusiastic threatregoer.
While based at Solihull, near Birmingham — a location to which she still commutes at weekends — she was able to visit the RSC at Stratford quite regularly.
An Economics graduate, Lesley was Information Technology Strategy Manager with PowerGen and has also worked for ICL and the Ministry of Defence.
Originally from Plymouth, she was a very keen squash and tennis player before suffering a knee injury at skiing.
But her enthusiasm for this sport has not subsided and she continues to ski ‘from restaurant to restaurant’.
Her long experience with information systems should prove useful in her new job.
‘My aim is to establish a framework for the use of information technology in BNFL,’ she explained, ‘to raise its visibility in the Company and to establish the future roles of the Central IT Unit, CMS and the IT units at the sites.’
Michael W Westcott has been appointed as Deputy finance Director.
Mr. Westcott, who joins the Company from Hawker Siddeley Group, will report to Peter Phillips, Executive Director, Finance.
A great clean-up
SELLAFIELD'S new hi-tech laundry opened this month and is already attracting international interest.
The £3 million facility, which employs 20 people, has sufficient capacity for 20,000 lbs of laundry — 20 times more than the old one.
Said manager John Bell: ‘The Canadians are building a huge power plant in Ontario and already they have been in touch for guidance on how we operate our laundry system.’
Highway patrol
AFTER more than 12 months of training, Sellafield police officer Ray Bailey has qualified for his pilot; s licence with flying colours.
Ray completed his required 43 hours flying time out in the Algarve region of sunny Portugal, a far cry from the Cumbrian airstrip where he began his training.
The course included six written exams and 10 hours of solo flights, as well as a final conforming with Civil Aviation Authority standards.
‘I8m now hoping to get the CAA aerobatics certificate in addition to the Instruments course, which will qualify me to fly in bad weather,’ said Ray, whose other goal is to become part-owner of a light aircraft.
THEY'RE FLOCKING IN
Centre of attraction still pulls the crowds
THE Great British public are proving they're not sheepish about nuclear power with crowds flocking to the Sellafield Visitors Centre.
Far from getting in a flap over nuclear issues they are winging their way to what has become one of West Cumbria's top tourist attractions.
More than 77,000 people have visited the exhibition to find out for themselves already this year — that's almost 28,000 more than for the same period in 1991!
An extra attraction has been a whole programme of special events held at the showpiece centre and the BNFL News cameraman was on hand to catch the magic moments from the two latest happenings — a falconry display and sheepdog trials.
Crowds were entertained by  and his 15-year-old son, from the Seven Acres Falconry Centre at nearby Gosforth, who flew their birds.
In all, a dozen hawks, buzzards and other birds of prey, including a Steppe Eagle with a wingspan of over six feet, took part.
Visitors Centre assistant information officer  got in on the act when she bravely volunteered for a Harris Hawk to land on her arm.
said later: ‘It was quite an experience.’
The second event featured two local sheep shearers, and , and a New Zealand expert, showing just how fast they could part a sheep with its woolly coat.
Spectators were also treated to a display of sheepdog skills which saw & names , put their crafty canine sue through her paces, rounding up not only sheep but a few noisy geese as well.
And well-known local craftsman  was there to display his speciality — traditional, hand carved Lakeland walking sticks.
the events were just part of a programme of special attractions running until the end of September.
Future events include more appearances by the Seven Acres falcons as well as wrestling, model aircraft displays, dog handling and an antique and brick-a-brac fair.
BNFL publicity manager  said: ‘The Visitors Centre is bringing in more and more people, which is good news for BNFL and the West cumbria tourism industry.’
News round
As Sir Christopher holds the front page…
IT'S G00D KNIGHT FROM HIM
SIR Christopher Harding, the man who implemented BNFL's open door policy has said goodbye.
But he is leaving behind an enduring legacy of innovation.
‘You can be confident that the flywheel of change which you set in motion is resolutely turning,’ said  Director Engineering Group.
There were gifts and handshakes on the top floor of Hinton House as Sir christopher Bade farewell to some of the many friends he has made during his six-year chairmanship.
He said: ‘BNFL is all about people.
You can have the best technology, the most superior plant and the highest standard of equipment.
But it's people who convert that into a successful business.’
Pleasure
‘I believe that in BNFL we have the very highest calibre of people right through the organisation.
It has given me great pleasure and pride to have been part of that team.’
And Sir Christopher forecast that the Company would emerge in a stronger position from the 1994 review of the nuclear industry.
He added: ‘It's going to be tough, but I believe that BNFL is extremely well placed and superbly led by Neville Chamberlain.
I will watch your progress with the greatest of interest.’
Mr. Roberts presented Sir Christopher with a sterling silver penholder, a set of coasters in a silver case and a silverbound dictionary.
On a personal level there was an album signed by a host of well-wishers in the Company and a spoof edition of the front page of BNFL News with some revealing ‘facts’ about the man at the top.
KENNETH BOW WOWS OUT!
AFTER completing 33 years at Chapelcross Ken Johnston — who is office manager in the Accounts Department — decided to close his own working account and retire.
He began his career at Chapelcross in 1959 in the Project Planning and Inspection Department.
He has worked in the Plant Records Department, Pay Section, where he was group office assistant, and also cashier in the Cash Office.
‘I enjoyed working at chapelcross — the people are just great’, Ken said.
Little did he know that the ‘pottery’ he had chosen as a leaving gift, wasn't going to be the china dog he had expected.
Divisional accountant Lindsay Currie presented Ken with his surprise gift.
‘I just couldn't believe my eyes when I opened the box and a small white West Highland Terrier looking up at me.
I was quite touched — they are my favourite breed,’ said Ken, who named his dog Rhia.
His hobby is walking and he plans to take up bike riding.
He and wife Margaret have just enjoyed a holiday in America and hope to return in October.
ANOTHER long-serving employee to retire is senior design engineer Keith Ashcroft who has completed 36 years in the industry.
Keith started as a draughtsman with the UKAEA.
He later went on to the Fuel Element Design Office working on Springfields projects.
Later he was employed on the Decontamination Centre at Sellafield and also the site's Fuel Fabrication Plant.
Projects
In 1971 Keith transferred to BNFL where he worked on many projects including the Waste Treatment Plant, Fuel Fabrication Plant, Salt Evaporation Plant and the Sludge Retrieval Project.
His hobbies are stock car racing and motor bikes.
Now Keith and his wife, Joan, are looking forward to taking a holiday in Devon and Cornwall.
Tony Hadfield, Assistant Director, Projects BNFL Engineering Division presented Keith with a power drill.
Dorothy was the woman behind three top men
AFTER a total of 36 years' service in the nuclear industry — during which she has been personal secretary to no fewer than three chairmen — Dorothy Ashurst has retired.
Her record, marked in 1982 with the award of the MBE, was again recognised at a ceremony in Hinton House when two of the former chairmen turned up to wish her well.
It was in 1956 that Leigh-born Dorothy first joined the typing pool at the UKAEA and it wasn't long before she was promoted as secretary to Jim Stewart, then Head of the Authority.
Later she transferred to BNFL where she was secretary to Con Allday for more than 16 years and then to Sir Christopher Harding.
Dorothy says one of the biggest changes has been the development of the Risley site.
‘I remember in the early days there were only green fields and a few cottages and farmhouses.
People would walk up a line to buy flowers in the summer,’ she added.
Shock
News of her MBE ‘for service to the nuclear industry’ came completely out of the blue.
‘It was a big shock,’ admitted Dorothy who went to Buckingham Palace with her husband, Ron, to receive it from the Queen.
There were gifts of a different sort at her farewell gathering when Sir Christopher Harding presented her with a silver fronted clock and a Royal Doulton figurine.
‘Everyone has been so generous.
I would like to thank them all for their gifts and their good wishes,’ said Dorothy, who is looking forward to cultivating a few hobbies now that she has more time.
The next big event is a visit from her sister, who lives in Canada, in September.
Now she's set for a quiet life
HELPING other people has been a way of life for Vera Taylor who has retired from Capenhurst after almost 18 years.
Vera, office supervisor in the Enrichment Projects Design Department, has combined her career with service as an officer of the CPSA and has also been a long-serving member of the Benevolent Fund management committee.
She gave up the branch chairmanship of the Civil and Public Servants union in 1990 after 10 years and said of her multi-purpose role: ‘My husband used to say our lounge was like an office on Sunday nights when I was sorting through my paperwork for the week.’
Now life promises to be a little quieter for Vera, who lives in Plas Newton, near Chester.
But if hobbies like swimming, gardening and DIY fail to hold her attention she is threatening to help out at her local Citizens' Advice Bureau.
She met husband John at Capenhurst when he was a wages and salaries officer at the plant.
Their son, Paul, recently started back there after completing a Whitworth Scholarship at Salford University and emerging with a first class honours degree in electronic and electrical engineering.
Colleagues presented Vera, pictured above with head of Enrichment Projects Design, Tim Moore, with a number of gifts, including a Coalport figurine to add to her collection.
MOTORING News
TONY'S TRIUMPH Magnificent motor is a real one off!
‘EIGHTEEN months after a near divorce’ was Tony Hollman's assessment of the sacrifice needed to build his unique sports car.
It's hard to imagine that the smart two-seater started out as a Triumph Herald which failed its MoT.
But that was before Tony, a supervisor on Sellafield's THORP project, and his dad Jack, a former Seascale joiner, got to work.
They bought the scrap Herald for just £25 and salvaged the chassis, engine, gearbox and axles. then, using plans bought from a man in Sheffield, they set out to build the bodywork from plywood and aluminium.
Curves
‘The metal we used is from an old caravan roof which we bonded to the wood with Evostick,’ explained Tony.
‘I am a fitter by trade so between us we are quite handy.’
Some of the parts were more difficult to make than others — the curves of the bonnet, for instance, were achieved by shaping aluminium around a length of pipe — but a few, like the wind-screen, had to be bought at auto jumbles.
‘It's supposed to look like an open-top tourer of the 1930's,’ said Tony.
‘It's called a Midge, but my three-year-old daughter has christened it James.
So far James has never given a scrap of trouble and has passed his MoT test with flying colours.
The engine was reputed to have done 99,000 miles by the time it was extracted from the old Herald in 1988, but Tony is sceptical.
‘It runs like a dream,’ he said.
‘We have moved the engine back about 12 inches and that's improved the handling considerably.
It goes round corners as if it's on rails.’
Tony uses the Midge commuting to site each day and finds it gets waves from admirers.
During a visit to an airfield he clocked it at 95 mph.
Not bad for an old timer!
RACE ACES
THREE Sellafield bikers have roared to success in the recent Wirral 100 road races.
Vit Plant workers  and  and  of Mechanical Maintenance got five event wins, one second place and a third between them,
It's a very, very nice deal
THE AA, Europe's biggest motoring organisation, has teamed up with BNFL to bring a very, very nice offer to employees and retired staff.
A special discount membership deal gives 12.5 per cent off roadside assistance, Relay and Homestart.
There is also a 10 per cent discount voucher, when enrolling as a new member by post, redeemable at all AA shops if over £7.50 is spent.
The BNFL Group Membership scheme is also open to staff who are already AA members or members of other motoring organisations.
The AA, formed in 1905, has 7.6 million members in the UK, who are served by a uniformed patrol force of 3,600.
Spokesman  told the News Motoring Column: ‘On average AA members are back on the road within 62 minutes of making their call for help.’
LETTER BOX
We must hit back with the truth
I WOULD just like to say how much I agree with Bill Anderton's comments in his What the Papers Say column [June issue], with regard to the Daily Mirror.
I feel that the PR team have their work cut out at the best of times without the likes of Mr. Wigmore and his cheap, sensationalist style of so-called journalism.
Without all the hard work done by BNFL, NE, SN and the AEA with their Visitors Centres up and down the country, papers like the Daily Mirror and the Daily Star could threaten many thousands of jobs in the nuclear industry and many more thousands which are supported indirectly.
Another thing, I think the British public do not understand the pros and cons, the fors and againsts, of all the sources of energy in a balanced, unbiased debate.
We seem to be an unscientific nation.
Science has always been frowned upon as an evil, used by mad professors who seek world domination.
Since I started here in November 1990, as a hired staff computing technical assistant, I have steadily become familiar with the industry and its operations.
I have never before had the privilege to work for such an environmentally-conscious, safe, dynamic and forward-thinking company.
I would like to see more pro-nuclear articles in the press, and as for those which are blatantly lying, how about some more complaints to the Press Complaints Commission to get our own back?
Hit them for six [million pounds]?
Keep up the good work! & name ;
Kindness is a comfort
THANK YOU to all his BNFL friends and colleagues for your kind expressions of sympathy upon the recent death of our son, John.
We deeply appreciate your kindness.
It is of great comfort to know that John had so many friends and that our family has been in the thoughts and prayers of so many people.
A total of £427 was donated to Cancer Research in John's memory.
And names;
EDITOR
Although this month is only the third What The Papers Say, the column is already creating a lot of interest, both inside and outside BNFL.
Congratulations to  who collects this month's £25 best letter prize.
The Editor is always happy to receive your views and print them in BNFL news.
Send your correspondence, marked  And don't forget, there is a £25 prize for the letter of the month.
Three cash in on bright ideas
THEY say the best things come in threes and this was certainly true of the suggestion schemes at Sellafield, Chapelcross and Capenhurst.
For employees at all three sites have scooped some of the biggest-ever awards for their bright ideas to boost efficiency.
earning themselves a place in the ‘BNFL Book of records’ are Sellafield's & names .
who submitted THREE ideas, is more than £9,000 better off!
And name; and name; both benefit to the tune of £5,000 or more.
Coincidentally, two of the men came up with improvements concerning pumps.
who works in the B205 chemical separation plant, hit on a brainwave for a vacuum pump to transfer uranium trioxide from transportation drums.
His other suggestions were in respect of a chemical pump and an air pump.
Suggestion scheme secretary  said: ‘Suggestions are dealt with anonymously by a panel, so they were unaware that  had done so well’.
idea, which earned him £5,800 was for the more efficient use of pumps which supply cooling water in the E22 centrifuge plant and has led to a significant saving in energy costs.
‘Initially we were running with two large water pumps and I felt it didn't require full flow from both of them.
The obvious answer was to reduce the number of pumps we were using,’ he said.
At Chapelcross, assistant mechanical engineer  developed a plan in 1990 for smoothing the conversion of the power stations four reactor blowers from DC to AC power supply, currently in progress.
decided that by using a temporary coupler from the motor to the drive shaft some preparatory work for making the change could be carried out a year before the main change, reducing the delay.
He was awarded £5,000.
COUPLE SAY: ‘HIGH DO’
Zoe and Terry wed in a hot air balloon.
MOST couples feel they are walking on air on their wedding day — but for Sellafield's Zoe Whittle and Terry Madrick it was more than just imagination.
For the couple made their wedding vows while floating in a balloon 600 feet above the ground in Orlando, Florida, in a sensational start to their married life.
Zoe, a secretary in production services, is from Whitehaven and Terry, an instrument mechanic, comes from Cleator Moor.
They chose their high-flying ceremony after a blind date and party brought them together.
But it wasn't all plain flying when the wedding was postponed because of low cloud and it wasn't until four days had elapsed that they were able to tell a Florida State public notary: ‘I do’.
Then it was back down to ground level to celebrate over a bottle of champagne with Zoe's mum, Pat, and husband Joe.
‘I think my friends thought I was mad.
But I just wanted something novel and outrageous.
It was much better than I had anticipated — it was wonderful.’
The couple, who have made their home in Cleator Moor, later celebrated in a more formal manner with a reception for 100 guests at the Castle Inn, Bassenthwaite.
They're in the pink
BELTING out a number from that memorable film, the cast of Grease — alias those wacky lot on the Chapelcross Annan Festival float — sing their way to success.
Yet again the BNFL entry, which sported a mock-up of the film's famous pink car, took first prize for the annual procession's best entry.
The leading parts of Olivia Newton John and John Travolta were taken by float contest regulars  of purchasing and deputy reactor manager .
As they did last year, the big-hearted bunch have decided to donate their winnings to a local charity.
who played one of the Pink Ladies said: ‘the car was the real star of the show.
Our building and works lads did a terrific job.’
The procession was part of Annan's Riding of the Marches — an ancient ritual where riders visit the boundaries of Annan.
During the event riders were greeted at Chapelcross social club by site Superintendent 
TOKYO BOUND
PETER WINTER, senior commercial manager in THORP Division, is to become our new man in Tokyo.
He will take up the duties of Counsellor, Atomic Energy, on August 17 and succeeds Chris Loughlin, who has been appointed Director, Transport Division, from September 1
Scotland powers through
THE company which supplies more than 40 per cent of Scotland's electricity achieved an operating profit of £13.7 million during the last financial year.
Scottish Nuclear Ltd also increased output during 1991–92, said Chairman James Hann when he revealed news of the breakthrough in the firms annual report.
The profit compares with a loss of £32.5 million in the previous financial year and £189.9 million in the year before that.
Sport news
IT'S EASY BREEZY
Risley cruise home
RISLEY crews breezed to an easy victory to retain the Inter Site Sailing Trophy and left rivals trailing in their wake.
Eighteen boats, including crews from Capenhurst, Sellafield, Springfields and risley gathered at Belmont reservoir, home of Bolton Sailing Club, to contest each of the three races.
The first began with Risley's  and , in a GP14 racing dinghy, leading to the first marker.
But it wasn't going to be all plain sailing.
Half way round the first lap a short sharp guest of wind took them by surprise and they found themselves having an early bath.
This cost them the lead, and though they recovered well they couldn't stop a second Risley boat, crewed by husband and wife team  and , slipping through to take the chequered flag after five circuits.
The strong winds took their toll throughout the day with most competitors finding themselves going overboard at some point during the faces, which came under the control of Bolton Sailing Club officials.
and , who work in Risley's Effluent Plant Projects Office, were quick off the mark in the second race and were back in the boat house long before the second boat, crewed by  and , had completed the required four laps.
With limbs beginning to tire only eight boats took to the water for the final two-lap race.
The two head office teams battled it out for the top spot, but it was no surprise to see , a Bolton Sailing Club member along with his father , steer his craft over the line first.
The best of the rest were Capenhurst's  and  in their Enterprise dinghy and  in his Laser.
and  were the top Sellafield team.
Such was Risley's dominance of the competition that they took the trophy with 24.5 points, 14-and-a-half ahead of Capenhurst, 39, and Sellafield with 66.
All crews agreed it was a top-notch event and plan to meet next July for a re-match, when they hope to entice a couple of crews from Chapelcross onto the water to make it a truly inter-site event.
A tee-time triumph
THIS year's Sellafield Pro-Am Golf Tournament was a record breaker three times over.
An unprecedented entry of 43 teams brought in a charity bonanza with BNFL raising more than £10,000 — the best effort yet in eight years of competition.
On the fairways it was Formby driving range professional  who was the star.
He smashed the course record with a superb six-under-par 65.
The overall winning team was the Manchester firm Ove Arup and Partners who narrowly edged out the Sir Robert McAlpine squad on a card play-off over the last six holes.
The top BNFL team was the Risley grouping of , and , and their professional  of Windermere.
They shot a nine under par 133 to win the Gordon Steele Shield.
Sellafield's Assistant Director, Projects and Decommissioning,, presented the prizes and paid tribute to organisers   who had worked tirelessly from the first tee-off at 7.30 am to the presentation of the final raffle prize at 10.30 pm.
Celebrities out in force for BNFL golf contest
FAIRWAY TO THE STARS
THE stars turned out in force and the sun shone all day to ensure this year's BNFL sponsored Pro/Celebrity Golf Classic at Walton Hall was a soaraway success.
Family favourites, past and present, from the world of showbiz and sport teamed-up with players from more than 40 local firms and national organisations located throughout the North West to help raise funds for Warrington District General Hospital Heart Monitoring Unit Fund.
Snooker celebrities Alex ‘Hurricane’ Higgins and Dennis Taylor swapped their cues for clubs, while top soap stars Clive Horby — Jack Sugden in Emmerdale Farm — and Mike Byatt — Brookside shop owner Mike Dixon — also proved a big hit on the fairways.
BNFL teams played on all three days of the Walton Hall Classic.
the first two days' golf featured a Pro/Am event, but it was the third and final day which captured the attention of the public.
While hundreds tramped the course to study the progress of their favourite celebrities, many more crowded around the club house.
Raffles, stalls and a junior golf competition on the practice green ensured a great time was had by all.
The St. John Ambulance brigade were available to check people's blood pressure and offer health advice and also to ensure no one over-enjoyed the hospitality tent.
BNFL 1 — Ross Hackett, Gary Williams and Arthur Rollinson — were joined by Salford RL coach Kevin Tamati, while BNFL 2 — Angus Thorburn, Peter Hutchinson and Steve Dowling — teamed up with ex-Scottish rugby union international Colin Fisher.
Former Manchester United star Willie Morgan who, with tournament director Brian Thomas, secured the appearances of the big names, took the top individual prize on the day.
The team event was won by Crown House Engineering.