

FOREWORD
The ever present demand for an improved quality of life is continually met by developments in science and technology.
Despite the benefits which these developments bring, the public has concerns about the accompanying risks.
This is evidenced by a number of recent disasters which have made the headlines.
These Guidelines include an analysis of ‘lessons from recent disasters’ and examples of good practice gained from visits made to leading organisations.
The Guidelines will be of interest to owners, employers and managers, engineering Institutions, providers of education and training, trade unions, government, media and the public at large as well as to registered engineers and technicians.
These Guidelines can help you to:
learn more about risk issues
understand your role
understand the role of others
improve your knowledge of managing risk.
We wish to thank everyone who has contributed directly or indirectly to the preparation of this document.
WHAT IS RISK?
There are many definitions of risk.
Three are offered below:
RISK is the chance of an adverse event.
RiSK is the likelihood of a hazard being realised.
A technical definition:
RISK is the combination of the probability, or frequency of occurrence of a defined hazard and the magnitude of the consequences of the occurrence.
It is therefore a measure of the likelihood of a specific undesired event and its unwanted consequences or loss.
INTRODUCTION
The Code of Professional Practice on Engineers and Risk Issues (the Code), which became effective from 1 March 1993, applies to the 290,000 registrants of The Engineering Council.
It is reproduced in Appendix 8 for information.
These Guidelines on Risk Issues will however, be of assistance to everyone interested in risk (see Figure 1).
They contain background information to help engineers and all interested parties to gain a fuller understanding of the Code and how it can be implemented.
It should be noted that the Guidelines do not form part of the Code and are not enforceable under the Bye–Laws of The Engineering Council.
A complementary initiative on Engineers and the Environment is currently being developed by The Engineering Council.
The Guidelines are written as an overview to some of the issues raised in the Code for those who may be less familiar with recent developments.
The intention is to provide practical and ethical guidance on risk issues.
The Guidelines are neither a technical code of practice nor a manual for risk management.
The Bibliography includes a list of relevant publications from individual Institutions and organisations which contain a more detailed treatment of the subject.
It is recognised that the levels of understanding, practice and responsibility for risk issues vary widely.
The Engineering Council's booklet Recommended Roles and Responsibilities may also be helpful.
The structure of the Guidelines follows that of the code itself.
It starts with an overview of the legal and professional constraints on the engineer, followed by an introduction to the concepts underlying risk management, and finishes with a discussion of the implications for education and public awareness.
However, before the 10 points of the Code are discussed in turn, there is a general discussion of the perception of risk which is followed by a list of suggested implementation actions.
II PERCEPTION OF RISK
Any hazard may to some degree present a risk to the health and safety of people, the environment or the activity (see Figure 2).
Risks to the health and safety of people include personal injury and in the extreme, loss of life.
Thus ‘safety’ in this context is taken to be freedom from unacceptable risks of personal harm.
Risks to the environment include pollution, damage to flora and fauna (plants and animals) and soil erosion.
Risks to the activity include damage to equipment, loss of output, resultant contractual delays and penalties.
These three different risk factors are connected together by a cost factor.
This determines how much money, time and effort should be spent to bring them to acceptable levels.
Engineers therefore have the challenging role of balancing these risk factors.
Engineering risk assessment is based on objective consideration of likelihood and consequences.
However, individuals and often organisations have to make judgements based on their perceptions of likelihood and consequences.
Thus, the absence of a common framework for evaluating risks can make it difficult to arrive at consensus decisions.
Risks are perceived differently according to their scale and nature, and not by simply multiplying the frequency and consequences.
A 1 in 100 chance per year of a major accident injuring 100 people has a different significance from 1 fall per year injuring 1 person, for instance, even though the average injury rate per year is the same.
This reflects an aversion which is attached by society to major accidents or dread consequences, e.g. cancer.
Other factors which influence the perception of risk include the degree of trust in the organisation; familiarity and understanding of the technology; the extent of involvement in the decision making process; whether it is believed that more could be done to reduce risk; comparisons with accepted risks; and — last but not least — the fairness in the distribution of the risks and benefits.
A more exhaustive list is contained in Reference 4.
Engineers need to appreciate these factors because they directly influence judgements as to the level of risk that an individual or society considers acceptable or tolerable (see Appendix 5, Glossary).
These different perceptions mean that there is scope for confusion in communicating with the public and non–specialists on risk issues, and great care needs to be taken.
III SUGGESTED IMPLEMENTATION ACTIONS
Owners, employers/managers, registered engineers, professional Institutions, providers of education and training, trade unions, government, The Engineering Council, the media and the public are all affected by risk issues.
These parties are urged to review their current practices in relation to the guidance promoted in the Code and Guidelines and take action accordingly.
Owners/Employers and Managers (see also Table 2, ‘Profile of Good Management Practice’ in Guideline 7, page 20)
Lead by commitment to creating, implementing and monitoring a risk management policy which is integral with business policy.
Create a proactive cultural awareness of risk issues at corporate and at the individual level.
Introduce a systematic approach e.g. through Total Quality Management (TQM).
Train personnel to give them appropriate skills and knowledge (includes all engineers and technicians in risk awareness training).
Adopt a confidential blame–free accident reporting system.
Engineers
Apply the Code in your professional role.
Understand risk issues associated with your work and the company's policy on risk matters.
Keep up to date with risk assessment and risk management issues through continuing professional development (CPD).
Communicate relevant information on risk issues to those who need to know (e.g. employers/managers, operators, colleagues and the public).
Professional Institutions
Promote the new Code on a local, national and international basis.
Make provision to deal with enquiries which may arise from members and where necessary refer exceptional enquiries to The Engineering Council in accordance with agreed procedures.
Encourage local society meetings to discuss ‘identification, assessment and management of risk’, lessons from good and bad practice, and how your members can implement the Code.
Encourage members to be up to date in risk assessment and management by inclusion of appropriate initial education and continuing professional development.
The Board for Engineers' Registration (which comprises nominees from engineering Institutions) and its associated committees is asked to play a leading role in the introduction of risk assessment and management in initial and continuing education and training for engineers.
Providers of Education and Training (including educational establishment, professional Institutions, employers, trade unions, and associations which provide education and training)
Encourage an awareness of risk issues in young people's education (e.g. in primary and secondary schools) with help from the Neighbourhood Engineers scheme as appropriate.
Provide a general awareness of risk issues for all engineers during their initial formation.
Identify needs and provide regular updating in risk assessment and management as part of continuing professional development (CPD) for engineers post registration.
Encourage research and development in the recognition, assessment and management of engineering risks and disseminate the findings.
Review curricula of existing courses relevant to Engineers and Risk Issues in the light of current and changing future needs.
Trade Unions
Encourage and support employers to adopt good practice in risk assessment and management.
Promote the benefits of systematic risk management and safe behaviour amongst your members.
Support and encourage your members to seek improved education and training in risk awareness, assessment, management and associated health and safety legislation.
Government
In the regulatory role (e.g. HSE, CAA) use influence and resources to support and follow best practice and explore new ways to improve awareness and practice of risk management by goal setting and other proactive approaches.
Set an example by requiring all engineers entering and already in government service to follow best practice in risk management, and in it role as a customer, to require suppliers to follow best practice.
Provide financial and other incentives to stimulate employers, individual engineers and others to gain greater knowledge and skills in risk awareness, assessment and management by improved education and training to meet present and future needs.
The Engineering Council
Continue to promote the Code and Guidelines locally, nationally and internationally through articles, talks, seminars and conferences.
Involve Engineering Council Regional Offices (ECROs), Neighbourhood Engineers and CPD advisers appropriately.
Set up a help line to deal with exceptional queries relating to the Code and other associated issues referred through Institutions or directly.
Continue to bring about a more positive attitude towards engineers and risk issues amongst employers, professional Institutions, providers, trade unions and individual engineers.
Publicise and encourage industry to adopt good practice in risk issues (e.g. through the example set by Industry Affiliate companies).
Give leadership to providers and encourage inclusion of risk awareness, assessment and management in initial and continuing education and training/professional development of all engineers.
Media
Recognise your influence and responsibility by keeping technical risk issues in perspective.
Consult with experts in the engineering profession on technical risk issue.s
Help educate the public and technical audiences on technical risk issues by stimulating debate and running informed features/programmes.
Support and help publicise initiatives by engineering bodies and other which identify good practice.
The Public (see also Guideline 10)
Seek information from local industry and from the services which you use to demonstrate that risk to the public has been assessed properly, and that an adequate risk management programme is in place.
Encourage engineers to speak at public meetings, discussions, seminars and conferences to promote public awareness of risk issues.
IV GUIDELINES ON RISK ISSUES 1.
PROFESSIONAL RESPONSIBILITY
A member of the engineering profession knowingly and voluntarily undertakes a responsibility to others within the community, and in so doing, shoulders certain personal, social and professional obligations.
This responsibility to society is widely recognised, particularly in respect of risk issues, and is reflected in the various Codes of Conduct set out by the professional engineering Institutions and The Engineering Council.
The purpose of these Guidelines is to take these general codes as a starting point and to comment on the practical implications of the responsibility owed by engineers in respect of risk issues, and to provide specific guidance to resolve risk concerns satisfactorily (see also Guideline 3, Resolving a Risk Concern, page 12)).
Because of their involvement and understanding, engineers have a central role in the control of risk.
Their professional duty rightly includes the exercise of competence and integrity.
However, individual engineers alone cannot generally be held responsible for protecting society from risk; those with managerial accountability must also bear some responsibility.
In setting out these practical implications, the Guidelines recognise and draw engineers' attention to the importance of the other influences which should govern their conduct.
Guideline 2, The Law below therefore briefly discusses the implications for conduct within the existing legal framework, and Guideline 3, Conduct (page 11) expands on the requirements of professional codes.
Mention is also made of the implications for personal or commercial insurance in Guideline 2, The Law.
Guideline 8, Evaluation (page 21) provides guidance on forming a judgement about the tolerability of risk.
2.
THE LAW
This section gives an introduction to aspects of the law which are relevant to engineers and risk issues.
It is not a formal legal treatise; it is intended to help the reader's awareness of legal issues and to stimulate further study of the subject as necessary.
The law in this area is highly complex and its application to specific situations requires careful consideration.
The following notes should not, therefore, be relied upon as a substitute for detailed legal advice.
The Bibliography contains references to a number of texts on the subject.
The following is based on English Law, that is the laws applying to England and Wales.
The law may differ in Scotland, the European Community and other countries throughout the world.
Engineers and the Law
Many engineers working in the manufacturing, process, construction service industries may well feel remote from the law in their day–to–day work.
Any matter involving legislation may be handled by the company's management.
Engineers may well ask ‘why is there a need for the Code, and how does it apply to me?’
From studies of recent accidents and incidents, as well as by making comparisons with other profession s (e.g. the medical profession), it is evident that there is a growing likelihood of ‘professional’ being made legally accountable for their actions.
Consequently, all engineers need to acquire an understanding of the law and its relevance to risk issues.
An outline guide to relevant aspects of the law is illustrated in Figure 3.
Your duty is to know the law as it applies to you.
The legal requirements are a minimum standard.
Furthermore, although the Civil Law is the judge of some aspects of professional services, there are many instances where the Criminal Law may apply.
At the extreme, accidental loss of life could result in the charge of manslaughter.
This depends on establishing, in many cases, proof of reckless disregard of accepted practices or of conscious wrong–doing.
Less serious criminal offices may involve strict or absolute liability to which there is a defence only in very limited circumstances.
Engineers should therefore seek appropriate professional advice at an early stage if they have doubts about the application of the law or regulations in a particular situation.
Example of legislation affecting the work of engineers
One example of the impact of the law affecting the work of engineers is from legislation imposed by government through the agency of the Health and Safety Executive.
For instance, The Health and Safety at Work Act (1974) and its associated regulations, impose duties on persons who design, manufacture, import or supply articles for use at work to ensure, so far as is reasonably practicable, that they are safe, and to test them, provide proper information, carry out research with a view to the elimination of risks and to carry out other duties.
This Act also imposes other duties on employers and persons at work.
An in–depth assessment from first principles and a cost/benefit analysis are not needed for every job.
The extent of consideration should match the nature of the hazard and the extend and uncertainty of the risk and the measures necessary to avert it.
In many cases it will be sufficient to identify and comply with the appropriate British or International Standard or Code of Practice.
However, actions may be challenged by others with hindsight and an engineer may have to establish the facts in the face of a hostile situation.
Ultimately, a decision may have to be defended on judgement and so, particularly where decisions or recommendations are finely balanced, the consideration should be documented and, if possible, corroborated.
There is no substitute for truly professional practice in this regard.
Latest European Directives and relevant UK Regulations
The directives are part of the European Commission's programme on action on health and safety, which is an essential ingredient in the move towards a single European market.
They have been developed under an article (Article 118A) specially added to the Treaty of Rome for this purpose.
Most of the primary duties in the new Health and Safety at Work Regulations are already addressed in general terms by existing UK legislation.
Guidance on the latest regulations is available from HMSO.
Six areas are covered in the most recent package of UK regulations:
Management of Health and Safety
Work Equipment Safety
Manual Handling of Loads
Workplace Conditions
Personal Protective Equipment
Display Screen Equipment
Others are already in place or will follow in the future.
This is in addition to regulations from Article 100A Directives which relate to manufactured products.
Commentary on Figure 3
Criminal Law
This is the Law of Offences (i.e. crimes) against the State and those under its protection, calling for prosecution usually by officials of the State.
It arises from the need to maintain law and order.
Criminal Law is actionable officially by the prosecution of offenders.
A criminal case is normally brought by the State, or rather by the Crown Prosecution Service as the agents of the State, against an individual.
However, with certain crimes, an affected member of the public may commence criminal proceedings.
Different terms are used in Criminal and Civil Law and should not be confused.
The accused may be prosecuted under Criminal Law whereas a private individual may be sued under Civil Law.
In a criminal case, if the accused person is found to be guilty, he or she may be fined or imprisoned; the successful party in a civil case may be awarded damages or granted an injunction.
Administrative Law
This is law which stems from the need for governments to appoint officials to administer various activities and is concerned with the functioning of official agencies providing various services.
Businesses operate within such a framework; they must observe planning regulations and comply with employment legislation.
IT should be noted, however, that there is sometimes an overlap between Administrative Law and Criminal Law, e.g. a failure to comply with certain provisions of the Town & Country Planning Act 1990 or the New Roads & Street Works Act 1991 may amount to a criminal offence.
Civil Law
This is so called because it is available to the general public or to civilians rather than to the authorities.
It is concerned with regulating the relationships of an individual with other individuals and comprises Contract Law, Tort (civil wrong), the Law of Property and Succession and Family Law etc.
Cases are reported as Smith v Jones, Smith being the surname of the plaintiff (plaintiff — a person who brings a case against another in court) and Jones the surname of the defendant.
The Nature of Contracts
All professional work is done under contracts containing either an express or implied term that the professional person will use reasonable skill and care in the performance of the work.
IT follows that the contract (subject to the limits imposed by the general law) which sets out the expectations of the parties can also define and/or limit the scope of that responsibility, both professional and financial.
Many of the engineering Institutions public model forms of contract in their respective fields (see Appendix 4, Bibliography).
An individual engineer is likely to perform work under contracts that fall broadly into three categories:
(a) a contract of employment, in the course of which, the individual engineer sells his or her professional skills for gain, e.g. the individual engineer works directly for an employer or partnership.
(b) a contract of engagement, in which the individual engineer, either self–employed as a consultant or as a partner in a partnership, provides specialist or general professional services to a client.
(c) a contract between an employer and the employer's client where the individual engineer supervises the client's contractor.
Those parties for whom work is to be done or who themselves are doing work for engineers must be aware of the inherent uncertainties involved in the project and negotiate a sensible and commercially prudent apportionment of liability.
Further, it is essential that engineers are in a position to demonstrate that they have carried out their professional responsibilities and have acted to remove or reduce risks to responsible and acceptable levels.
What is responsible or acceptable ultimately will depend on the material, financial and intellectual resources that are available.
If an engineer considers that the necessary resources are being withheld or are not available, then this must be addressed with the other parties involved as soon as possible.
Resolution will depend on the particular circumstances.
The outcomes may range from  complete correction to the professional satisfaction of the engineer, to an adjustment to the areas of responsibility between the parties which may result, in extreme cases, in the engineer contracting out of further responsibility or abandoning his or her engagement.
In cases where the latter course seems a possibility, the engineer should consult his or her professional organisation and seek its advice as well as the advice of an independent legal adviser in a timely manner.
A careful record, with corroboration, is always desirable in such extreme circumstances.
Tort
There are various kinds of civil wrongs, or Torts, which enable a person who has sustained an injury or loss to claim damages.
An individual or organisation may face action for a variety of Torts e.g. defamation, negligence, nuisance or trespass.
Whilst an engineer's responsibility in contract can (subject to limits imposed by the general law) be defined and regulated by the parties involved, such is not the case with liabilities in Tort (i.e. a civil wrong), which can involve the community as a whole.
As a professional, an engineer may owe a duty of care to anyone who may reasonably be expected to be affected by his or her professional conduct.
The professional codes set down benchmarks for services by engineers.
These are self–imposed standards against which, in a particular case, it can be determined whether professional responsibilities have been discharged.
To depart substantially from them invites question unless it can be demonstrated that such departure conforms to accepted practice by rational analysis.
Ultimately, the Laws of Negligence (which may vary considerably according to the jurisdiction involved) will influence the standards.
It is impossible in this publication to give a resumé of these.
They may be imposed in the form of obligations of strict liability to which defences are extremely limited or in more general and voluntary concepts of negligent omissions and commissions.
Generally speaking, so far as English Law is concerned, it will be necessary to show that there was some ‘proximity’ between the damage suffered by the claimant and the engineer's acts or omissions and that it was reasonably foreseeable that the engineer's acts or omissions would cause loss to the claimant.
3.
CONDUCT
This section discusses ‘Conduct’, the third point of the ten point Code.
It covers professional Codes of Conduct, responsibility to an employer and the resolution of risk concerns.
Professional Institution's Code of Conduct
All major Institutions publish Codes of Conduct for their members, setting out the expected standards of professional conduct.
These codes apply to conduct which may involve risk issues as well as other situations, and members may be held to account for behaviour which falls short of the required standard.
Engineers should therefore be conversant with any Codes of Conduct and Rules produced by their Institution(s), and act accordingly.
The Engineering Council's Code of Conduct
The Engineering Council similarly has a Code of conduct set out in its Bye–Laws.
In effect this is the totality of its Rules of Conduct which are issued separately.
These regulate the conduct of its registrants.
The Rules of Conduct cover the totality of a registrant's conduct, but several are directly applicable to risk issues.
These are referred to in Appendix 1.
The Council also issues Codes of Practice subordinate to its Rules of Conduct.
Codes of Practice describe the practice which The Engineering Council recommends should be followed by registrants in particular situations.
The Code of Professional Practice on Engineers and Risk Issues is one such Code of Practice.
However, this document, Guidelines on Risk Issues, does not have a formal link with the framework outlined overleaf.
The Code and Rules of Conduct of The Engineering Council and individual Institutions will normally be consistent.
The Council's Rules of Conduct and Codes of Practice are intended to embrace all engineering disciplines.
However, the professional Institutions may, from time to time, issue rules and codes for their specific disciplines which go further than these general rules.
Resolving a Risk Concern
It is in an organisation's interest to set out a formal procedure for resolving risk concerns.
Where a procedures exists, it should be used.
In the absence or inadequacy of a procedure, it is recognised that judgement is required.
In such situations the following may be helpful:
You, as an engineer, may become aware of a potentially dangerous situation.
In the majority of cases, raising the matter informally will result in resolution at local level.
Occasionally, however, you might judge that this has not happened and that an unacceptable risk is still being allowed to persist.
A true judgement as to the real level of risk involved is often difficult, as is the subsequent judgement about its acceptability or otherwise.
The potential for conflict and the difficulty of making decisions in marginal situations is obvious, especially when the possibility of sanction by your employer, client or Institution is taken into account.
You should therefore have carried out an objective, professional assessment of the level of risk making sure that:
(a)
your opinion is truly objective
(b)
you understand the wider issues of the organisation's operations
(c)
personal motivation is not clouding your judgement
(d)
your warning has been properly explained and understood.
Seeking a second opinion is strongly advised to obtain an objective assessment.
This should be done in confidence and could be from a colleague, safety representative or informal contact with your Institution or trade union/professional association.
(Although if you decide to approach anyone outside your own organisation, you should take great care to preserve confidentiality and, if you are in any doubt as to your duties of confidentiality, you should seek appropriate legal advice.)
If the matter really cannot be resolved at an informal level, then it should be formally communicated in writing to the person in charge of the activity.
The formal letter should also be copied to the person with ultimate responsibility for the activity (e.g. Director of Engineering, Director for Safety).
There may also be a safety committee set up to consider such matters.
If this does not result in the matter being resolved, then you should re–evaluate it again as above.
If you decide to go outside the organisation, firstly approach your professional engineering Institution for advice but note the earlier advice on preserving confidentiality.
If it is unable to help, where necessary, advice can be sought from The Engineering council.
It should be recognised that the professional Institution and The Engineering Council may offer advice but cannot provide a safeguard.
Additionally, you should consider contacting the appropriate regulatory body.
Raising the matter in the public domain is not advocated.
Maintain confidentiality at all times and keep to the professional route outlined above.
Guidelines have also been produced by the Royal Academy of Engineering (formerly the Fellowship of Engineering, see Appendix 4, Bibliography.
4.
APPROACH
Most engineers will have little direct influence over the form of their organisation's risk management programme.
An individual's scope for modifying it will inevitably be heavily influenced by site and corporate culture.
However, if the culture is not conducive to effective risk management, engineers should not simply accept things as they are, but seek to work actively within the organisation to improve matters.
The following principles expand on this approach:
Work Systematically
A systematic and documented approach will be more cost effective, auditable and more likely to come to the right conclusions.
IT will also help to prevent communication failures.
Individuals may have to defend their decisions in court, and if they cannot demonstrate a systematic approach, they are liable to find this difficult to do.
An appropriate level of quality assurance and audit, including proactive audit of current activities against best practice, is essential for effective risk management.
As a minimum, key risk decisions together with the reasoning should be recorded.
It should not be an unreasonable burden.
If it is unnecessarily bureaucratic the engineer should seek to have the systems modified so that they contribute more cost effectively to improved quality.
Take the Initiative
Engineers should, within the constraints of their work responsibility, seek to identify possible hazards and ways to reduce risk.
They should not take the attitude that ‘risk management is someone else's business’; rather, they should take the initiative.
For example, by trying to make sure that hazardous situations or unsafe practices do not persist.
Alternatively, taking the initiative might entail making the manager or employer aware of his or her responsibility.
Additionally, engineers should look after their own personal safety, and help others to look after theirs.
They should set an example by observing rules and regulations, using protective equipment, etc.
Comply with Regulations
Engineering standards and Codes of Practice can be thought of as the result of generic risk assessments.
They are clearly a very cost–effective form of risk assessment; the situation will have been examined at a level of detail and expertise not usually available to individual companies.
Compliance can also form a readily understood and testable basis of contractual or regulatory requirements.
However, this approach does have  limitations.
It is very hard for regulations to cover the interactions of complete systems in complex process plants, for example.
It is all too easy to lead to the conclusion that compliance with regulations is all that is required for safety, i.e. compliance ends up taking precedence over the wider considerations of risk management.
The balance of modern thinking in risk assessment and regulation is therefore moving towards a combination of codes and standards with ‘goal setting’.
This encourage systematic assessment of the whole operation/activity (see References 2 and 4).
Engineers should be aware of the need to balance reliance on codes and standards with project–specific risk assessment.
Simply complying with these does not absolve an engineer from his or her broader responsibilities.
Loopholes, omissions or ambiguities should not be exploited to gain an advantage incompatible with the effective control of risk.
Ensure Competence
Both from the professional integrity point of view and to avoid legal repercussions, specialist input should be obtained where necessary, even if it has to be ‘brought in’.
Engineers should not exceed their level of competence where the result might put people at risk, nor ask others to exceed theirs.
Similarly, it is important to validate the competence of contractors and sub–contractors.
Recognise Human Factors
Human factors are now known to have an important role in the control of risk.
Design using ergonomic principles (see Appendix 5, Glossary) involves designing the job, working environment or product to take proper account of human capabilities and fallibilities.
It should be recognised that all too often the operational design intent is not followed by those operating or using the design in practice.
Engineers should be familiar with these issues and good design practices.
Engineers should also have an appreciate of the causes of human errors so that the reasons behind safe operation and design practices can be appreciated (see Appendix 2).
Human performance is often shown as being influenced by three overlapping areas (Reference 8):
(a)
the organisation
(b)
the job
(c)
personal factors.
The Organisation
The culture of an organisation is often found to be a major influence on risk management issues.
Guideline 7, Management, discusses this in more detail and sets out examples of good practice.
The Job
Matching the job to the person will ensure that he or she is not overloaded and makes an effective contribution to the enterprise.
Physical match includes the design of the whole work place and working environment.
Mental match involves the individual's information and decision making requirements, as well as their perception of the tasks.
Mis–matches between job requirements and people's capabilities provide for human error.
The major considerations in the design of the job include:
(a)
identification and analysis of the critical tasks expected of individuals and appraisal of likely errors
(b)
evaluation of required operator decision making and the optimum balance between the human and automatic contributions to safety actions
(c)
application of ergonomic principles to the design of man–machine interfaces
(d)
design and presentation of procedures and operating instructions
(e)
organisation and control of the working environment, including the workspace, access for maintenance, lighting, noise and thermal conditions
(f)
provision of correct tools, equipment and protective clothing
(g)
scheduling of work patterns including shift organisation, control of fatigue and stress and arrangements for emergency operations.
Personal Factors
Every individual is different; individual characteristics influence behaviour in complex and significant ways.
Some characteristics such as personality are fixed and largely incapable of modification.
Others, such as skills and attitude are able to be modified or enhanced.
The key is to match the person to the job and vice versa.
References 9 and 11 provide guidance on good ergonomic design practice.
References 7, 8, 10 and 12 provide more information on human factors.
Checklists can serve as a useful indicator of the extent to which human factors and ergonomic principles have been taken into account in a particular situation.
Take Care with Computer Software
The benefits of using computers in engineering applications is very substantial indeed in terms of reliability, cost and ease of use.
However, if a system is such that an error in the software alone could cause a fault, then care must be taken to ensure that the software is to the standard required by the application.
Quality assurance of software can be achieved by following the principles of ISO 9000, as required by the TickIT scheme.
In addition an agreed development process should be used, for instance, as specified in the STARTS Guide.
The use of computers or programmable logic controllers in systems which have a direct impact on safety obviously requires special care.
General guidance on this is provided by the Health and Safety Executive.
It has been shown to be virtually impossible to give reliability figures for software when the reliability requirements are less than 1 error in 10 4 .
This implies that very demanding quality assurance procedures and methods are needed in such circumstances.
Some advocate the use of mathematical methods to gain insight into the properties of the software, as specified by the UK Ministry of Defence.
Testing is inadequate in almost all cases, since the total number of potential test cases is effectively infinite.
Specific standards for the assessment of software in safety–critical contexts are being developed.
For the nuclear industry the standards are agreed and are well advanced in  the civil avionics sector and are referenced in the Bibliography.
A generic standard is being developed by the International Electrotechnical Commission, but is not yet agreed.
It is expected that this standard will form the basis of European certification schemes within the Single Market.
Professional advice on this topic is available from the Institution of Electrical Engineers, and useful background is available from a report undertaken jointly by the Institution of Electrical Engineers and the British Computer Society.
The possibility of malicious damage should be considered, i.e. computer hacking and viruses.
Such interference could have widespread implications and plans should be made to mitigate against this possibility.
Appendix 4, Bibliography contains appropriate references.
5.
JUDGEMENT
Professional judgement is by far the most important tool in risk management.
Judgement is particularly important in the initial assessment of risks and deciding on their tolerability.
Formal risk assessment and evaluation methods should be used as aids to judgement, not as substitutes for it.
There are many limitations and uncertainties associated with even the most scientific methods.
In such situations, it may be prudent to prepare for the worst eventuality by drawing up contingency plans.
It should also be recognised that risk data will normally be only one input into business decisions, and many of the other factors will be essentially qualitative.
Where the realisation of a hazard could give rise to significant consequences to people and the environment, then specialist advice should be obtained if necessary.
6.
COMMUNICATIONS
Many accidents result from communication breakdowns.
Frequently someone knows about a hazard, but fails to communicate with those who need to know.
All too often, individuals do not recognise or understand their risk management responsibilities.
Engineers should take the initiative and look for opportunities to encourage greater awareness of risk issues within their organisation.
Where necessary, they should also seek to improve the existing communication systems.
Engineers should be aware of the potential for communication breakdowns, especially at internal or external interfaces.
Internal interfaces include those between an engineer and different levels of management, departments or functional groups within the same organisation.
An example is the interface between a design engineer and the operators (end users).
It is important that the design process does not become divorced from the end users.
They should be aware of any risks to which they may be exposed, or any relevant limitations inherent in the design or operating procedures, and of any implications for their conduct.
External interfaces include those with customers (end users), suppliers and contractors.
Adequate instructions, manuals and training should be provided for customers.
This is very important — otherwise the customer will not know the design intent nor the operational safety limits.
Similarly, engineers should seek to ensure that suppliers appreciate the quality and safety requirements of the products/processes which they are supplying.
When allocating tasks to contractors, engineers should seek to ensure that their requirements, particularly when safety–related, are communicated to those who will actually carry out the work.
Generally, safety and quality requirements should be communicated in writing and it may be appropriate to request a written acknowledgement of receipt.
Engineers should pay particular attention to effective feedback on incidents and ‘near misses’, so that lessons can be learned.
This includes feedback from end users of a product or process.
A formal company procedures is recommended which records, analyses and disseminates such information.
This is in addition to the legal requirements to report certain accidents (e.g. RIDDOR regulations — see Appendix 4, Bibliography).
Those who need to know should be provided with the lessons learned as soon as possible.
Others could be informed by the circulation of a regular newsletter.
An enlightened company culture which encourages the reporting of incidents and ‘near misses’ is recommended.
A confidential and blame–free system may be appropriate.
7.
MANAGEMENT
A major contributory cause of many recent accidents has been shown to be management failure (see Appendix 3).
Engineers should contribute effectively to risk management within their organisation by doing everything reasonably practicable to ensure that good practice is being followed.
This section provides an overview of the various activities that make up a typical risk management programme, and then presents some examples of good practice derived from Engineering Council studies and other sources.
Engineers in managerial positions should therefore recognise that they have enhanced responsibilities in three important respects: the introduction and operation of a proper risk management programme; the effective discharge of their broader duties, so that they do not themselves become a source of risk; and in the making of judgements relating tot he tolerability of risk.
Consequently, engineers have a primary role in ensuring that the risk management programme itself is managed as effectively as any other business activity.
In most ways, the corporate approach should mirror the individual approach described above, i.e. it should be systematic, planned and integrated with business decision making.
The management of change is also an important feature.
The development of a corporate culture which deals appropriately with risks is most important.
Risk management is made much easier where there is a quality–based culture which emphasises individual responsibility and ownership of problems, and where an atmosphere of ‘constructive intolerance’ of avoidable risks has been established.
Objectives of Risk Management
Risk management is defined in BS 4778 as ‘the process whereby decisions are made to accept a known or assessed risk and/or the implementation of actions to reduce the consequences or probability of occurrence’.
The three main activities in a risk management programme are therefore hazard identification, risk assessment and risk control (see Figure 7).
These are discussed in turn below, but the objective of risk management should be clarified first: it should contribute to the business objectives and not be allowed to become an end in itself.
Risk management is not simply the reduction of risk, although this is the intended result.
A more realistic objective for many organisations would be to strike an appropriate balance at the conceptual stage between the benefits from reduced risk, the expense of that reduction and the gains from the enterprise.
An objective judgement can then be made on how to operate in such a way as to optimise the level of risk on a day–to–day basis.
However, some risks may simply be unacceptable and therefore not a matter for compromise or optimisation.
As with all other aspects of management, risk management is concerned with setting and achieving goals which support overall company or societal goals.
Component Activities
Hazard identification, risk assessment and risk control are discussed below in relation to a generalized project (see Table 1).
The needs of different organisation will vary considerably, according to their complexity and the hazards associated with their operations.
The basic approach will apply in all cases, but the degree of formality and the extent of risk assessment and control programmes may fall anywhere between everyday professional judgement and a full safety case.
Hazard Identification
It is important to identify hazards systematically.
If this is not done then defence against the hazards or management of the risk arising from them can be seriously impaired.
There are a number of techniques which ask the necessary ‘what if…?’ questions systematically.
Examples include Hazard and Operability Study (HAZOP), Failure Mode & Effects Analysis (FMEA), and Operational Experience Reviews.
These terms are described in the Glossary.
References 5 and 6 provide further guidance.
Human error often proves to be a major contributor to overall levels of risk and many deserve specific consideration.
Human error identification techniques include task analysis or reference to checklists of potential human errors.
If human error is thought to be particularly important then expert advice should be sought.
The potential for common cause and common mode failures should also be considered, e.g. failure of the power supply disables all the safety systems or, as in the case of Chernobyl, they are all overridden.
Risk Assessment Risk Analysis
Having identified the hazards, risk analysis establishes the level of risk in terms of consequences and likelihood.
The level of complexity required depends on the type of study.
Useful results can often be achieved through simple analysis without resorting to the more sophisticated techniques.
The consequences of a hazard can be expressed either
(a)
quantitatively (e.g. injuries, equipment damage) or
(b)
qualitative (e.g. negligible, minor, serious)
See also Section IIm, Perception of Risk (page 4), which discusses the range of possible consequences.
Similarly, the likelihood or frequency of a hazard can be expressed either
(a)
quantitatively (e.g. per year, per operation, per journey) or
(b)
qualitatively (e.g. unlikely, occasional, likely).
Techniques include fault tree analysis and event tree analysis (see Glossary).
References to the above techniques are provided in the Bibliography.
Risk Evaluation
This is the process of determining the tolerabilty/acceptability of risk.
It is a subject in itself and is discussed in Guideline 8, Evaluation (page 21).
Risk Control
Risk control is the process of implementing the outputs of the previous stages in order to achieve the desired level of risk, initially in the decision making phase of a project, and subsequently throughout the rest of the project life cycle.
No matter how good the analysis, there will be no effect on risk until the recommendations are implemented.
The good practice presented in Table 2 and Appendix 3 addresses many of the factors important to the control of risk.
Performance monitoring is particularly important, and indicators need to be established to enable both risk and risk management system performance to be monitored, using both actual records of loss and ‘near misses’ to build up a true picture.
Figure 8 is an example of such a study which recorded and classified accidents over a period of time.
Comparisons with targets and assumptions then allow remedial measures to be identified if necessary.
Where practical, indicators of the performance of individual risk management systems also need to be established, so that the functionality and cost–effectiveness of the various components can be checked.
Finally, beyond a certain degree of complexity, a means for formally auditing the complete risk management process will be required.
Good Practice in Risk Management
The Engineering Council has conducted two studies.
The first looked at good practice in risk management through a programme of visits to industrial and commercial organisations (Appendix 6), and the second examined the lessons from major accidents.
The results of these studies have been combined with those of other work to give a table setting out good practice.
Table 2 lists managements practices which have been found to correlate with effective risk management.
It is not intended to be comprehensive, but should serve to illustrate the approach required.
8.
EVALUATION
This process requires judgements to be made based on the output of the risk analysis, i.e. it decides whether or not the level of risk is tolerable.
The discussion on the perception of risk in Section II illustrates what a difficult area this is.
References 1 to 4 provide further guidance.
In most cases, the balance is struck on the basis of judgement and experience.
All the factors involved are rarely explicit.
There are, however, methods for making the basis of decision explicit.
These range from qualitative checklists through to multi–attribute analysis (see Appendix 5, Glossary), although even the apparently purely qualitative approaches must embody some implicit cost/benefit balance.
ALARP (As Low As Reasonably Practicable)
The ALARP principle is the most commonly used although there are others.
IT states that risks to individuals and society should be As Low As Reasonably Practicable.
Reference 2 and Figure 9 explain HSE's views on how ALARP fits into an overall approach to risk control.
Risks above a certain high level are intolerable and their causes are often prohibited by legislation.
At the other end of the scale, there is a very low level of risk which is clearly negligible.
Between these two levels, risks are tolerable providing that it can be demonstrated that the cost (in time, trouble and expense) of reducing the risk further would be ‘disproportionate’ to any improvement achieved.
Individual and Societal Risk
Individual risk is defined by The Institution of Chemical Engineers as ‘the frequency at which an individual may be expected to sustain a given level of harm from the realisation of specified hazards’.
It is usually calculated for the typical average person of the group at risk.
Individual risks vary greatly from job to job and from industry to industry.
Table 3 illustrates this.
Societal risk is defined by IChemE as ‘the relationship between frequency and the number of people suffering from a specified hazards’.
In other words, it is a measure of the scale and likelihood of a large accident.
Whilst there is broad agreement on individual risk guideline figures it is difficult to do the same for societal risk.
Studies in this area to date suggest that there is no readily deducible and uniformly applicable upper level of societal risk.
Reference 4 provides further guidance.
Interpreting Risk Assessments
When making risk decisions, particularly based on quantified risk assessments, the following should be recognised:
there will be difficulty in obtaining input data and uncertainty in it; consider sensitivity analysis
pessimism/conservatism is often used in assessments
examine the assumptions, approximations and units used carefully
there may be a tendency to concentrate on the numbers; other factors also have an input into the tolerability decision process (see Section II, Perception of Risk (page 4))
care should be taken when comparing risk figures of an existing process against those of a proposed new process.
9.
PROFESSIONAL DEVELOPMENT
Training and professional development increase the awareness of risk issues.
The overall framework is illustrated below.
Schools
Children are the public and engineers of the future; risk awareness has many practical benefits for their own safety.
The objective should be an introduction to risk issues.
all engineers should therefore seek to encourage an appropriate and balanced treatment of risk issues within schools, in their role as professional, as parents, or as employers.
Risk issues should be made as relevant as possible.
They could be raised and put into perspective by talking about everyday activities: crossing the road, driving a car, smoking or drinking alcohol.
The Neighbourhood Engineers scheme, organised by The Engineering Council, links registered engineers and technicians with local secondary schools.
Working in teams with teachers, Neighbourhood Engineers provide friendly, informal, practical and committed support to schools.
The Engineering Council is currently preparing resource packs to be used by teachers.
These will provide background information and teaching aids.
The Engineering Council also operates the Technology Enhancement Programme which is for 14–19 year olds and aims to increase capability in technology, mathematics and science, developing skills that are matched to the needs of industry.
Another organisation offering teaching aids is SATIS, Science and Technology in Society.
Their address is given in the Bibliography.
Further and Higher Education
Education and training on risk issues should be an integral part of every engineer's education.
The objective is to instil an awareness of risk issues and basic methods of risk management.
The problems of over–crowded teaching programmes and the difficulties this brings for students and staff are recognised.
Nevertheless, it is believed that space must be made for the subject to be covered.
Additionally, the inclusion of a basic awareness of risk issues into other related courses is encouraged.
A possible list of topics for inclusion in a suitable course is suggested below.
Many variants will be possible and the level of detail will depend on the nature of the courses involved.
It is intended that the topics listed will be included in the syllabuses of both degree (or equivalent) and non–degree courses.
Changing perceptions of risk; human safety; environmental risks; financial risks; balancing risks and benefits.
Legal aspects and insurance: the role of The Engineering Council and of the professional Institutions; relevant Codes; legal responsibilities of employers and engineers; relevant legislation (e.g. the Health and Safety at Work Act, Employers' Liability and Consumer Protection Acts).
Basic principles of risk assessment: handling uncertainty; preparing safety cases; hazard and operability studies (HAZOPs); determining standards; allocating resources to risk assessment; employing consultants.
Professional responsibility for managing risk; examples where management has been inadequate; the need for an organised approach; responsibilities of safety officers; making and using safety audits and regular reviews; Total Quality Management.
A suggested time allocation within a degree course is 4 one–hour long lectures, supported by 2 four–hour case studies, and 1 four–hour exercise (to make a simple HAZOP or FMEA study), a total of 16 hours per student.
This teaching should be available to every engineering student, in all disciplines.
Preferably it should take place towards the end of their course.
Practising Engineers and Engineers in Management
Effective training is essential to success in almost every area of engineering, and risk management is no exception.
The key to quality and efficiency is professionalism, which is a combination of expertise and attitude.
Training and experience provide the expertise, whilst company culture and experience shape the attitudes.
Engineers should have regular opportunities for Continuing Professional Development (CPD) on the assessment and management of risk and on changes in the law.
This can be fulfilled mainly by attendance at short courses, conferences and lectures.
Responsibility for organising these falls to the higher–education sector, to the Engineering Institutions, to industry, and to specialists in the field.
The development of such further educational and training opportunities is encouraged and engineering employers should ensure that their staff have the time to keep up–to–date in this way.
Similarly, all engineers should seek to ensure that they receive the education and training they need, and that those working for them are also suitably developed.
10.
PUBLIC AWARENESS
Implications of Improved Public Awareness
The public should be protected from unacceptable risks.
They and their elected representatives also have, implicitly or explicitly, a major impact on the way companies and individual engineers make decisions on risk issues.
Public perception eventually results in regulation, in media treatment, in planning consents, and in government decisions affecting industry.
However, public perception of risk is often at odds with the objective measures used by engineers.
Thus engineers should learn about how the public perceives risk and makes risk decisions.
Conversely, engineers should, where appropriate, inform the public about how the profession perceives risk and makes risk decisions.
Public Perception of the Profession
Public perception of the engineering profession depends on an engineer's motives in safety and environmental issues being understood.
An engineer may be seen as a threat to society when designing a plant which generates toxic waste, but to be protecting society if working on a flood prevention scheme.
Reality is often more complex.
Engineers who act with professional integrity when deciding on the tolerability of risk, e.g. about the safe handling of dangerous substances, can be acting for society, not against it.
Engineers thus need to explain their role to encourage a more positive view of the profession.
Care should be taken to avoid misinterpretation and misconception.
Professional public relations advice is recommended.
Public Awareness of Risk Issues
It is usually beneficial for organisations whose activities involve some degree of risk to the public to establish two–way communication on the issues.
Early consultation and on–going dialogue help organisations to:
understand local and community concerns
take action to respond to these concerns.
This benefits all parties.
Open and honest communication and consultation with the public on risk issues builds trust.
Increased identification and understanding between an organisation, its workers, neighbours and the public or allowing them to benefit from the activity, increases the understanding and acceptance of risk.
Well planned and practised emergency procedures for major hazards require pre–arrangements with local authorities and emergency services.
They should include plans to communicate with the public and media.
Such communications should be clear and unambiguous.
The main aim of emergency planning is to reduce risk to people, equipment and the environment.
However, arrangements should also be planned to control corporate risk.
The arrangements should involve and be prepared in consultation with senior management, engineers, public relations professionals and others as appropriate.
If there is any provision contained in these Guidelines or any agreement or arrangements of which they form part which causes or would cause these Guidelines or any agreement or arrangement of which they form part to be subject to registration under the Restrictive Trade Practices Act 1976 then that provision shall not take effect until the day after particulars of these Guidelines or any agreement or arrangements (as the case may be) shall have been duly furnished to the Director General of Fair Trading pursuant to that Act.
APPENDIX 1
LIST OF RELEVANT ENGINEERING COUNCIL BYE–LAWS AND RULES OF CONDUCT
The following is an extract from The Engineering Council Bye–Laws and Rules which are relevant to the enhancement of registrants' risk awareness.
The list is comprehensive and correct at the time of publication, but additions and deletions may occur from time to time.
Registrants should maintain a current knowledge of the Council's Bye–Laws and Rules.
Bye –+Laws; Nos 68 & 69 Code of Conduct and its Enforcement
68 The Council shall provide a Code of Conduct regulating the activities and conduct of individuals on the Register through the promulgation, from time to time, of Rules of Conduct, which shall prescribe standards of conduct with which failure to comply constitutes misconduct for the purposes of the Charter.
The Council may also from time to time promulgate Codes of Practice if it is of the opinion that such codes will further the objects of the Council.
The Rules of Conduct and Codes of Practice may be amended, varied or rescinded as the Council may think fit and the Council may, in its absolute discretion, waive the provisions of any of the Rules of Conduct or Codes of Practice for a particular purpose or purposes expressed in such waiver and may revoke any waiver.
The Council may provide for the appointment of an ethics committee to administer, and give guidance on, the application of the Rules of Conduct and Codes of Practice and the provisions of Bye–Laws 26 to 28 (inclusive) shall apply to such committee.
69 All individuals on the Register shall be required to conform to the Rules of Conduct promulgated by the Council.
Failure by an individual on the Register to comply with such rules shall constitute misconduct for the purposes of the Charter rendering such individual liable to disciplinary action pursuant to Bye–Laws 70 to 73 (inclusive).
The Council may provide that the provisions of any Codes of Practice promulgated by it shall be available to and shall be taken into account by the investigating and disciplinary bodies and, if appropriate, the appeals committee in determining whether or not an individual on the Register has failed to comply with the Rules of Conduct or is otherwise liable to disciplinary action pursuant to the Charter.
The Council may further provide that compliance with the provisions of the Codes of Practice by any individual on the Register shall be a defence against any complaint in any proceedings brought against such individual pursuant to Bye–Law 70 provided that the provisions of the Code of Practice are, in the opinion of the Council, relevant to the complaint being investigated and adjudicated upon.
Complete copies of The Engineering Council's Bye–Laws are available on request.
RULES OF CONDUCT
Section 1: Rules like to be of relevance to all registrants
Rule No 1 General
Rule No 2 Professional Integrity
Rule No 3 Obtaining and Accepting Work
Rule No 4 Confidentiality
Rule No 5 Contracts with Third Parties
Rule No 6 Performance of Work
Rule No 7 Membership of Other Professional Bodies, Trade Unions and Other Organisations
Rule No 8 Technical Development & Training
Rule No 9 Practice Overseas
Rule No 10 Discipline
Rule No 11 Responsibility for Acts and Omissions of Others
Rule No 12 Engineering Titles and Descriptions 
Section 2: Rules like to be of relevance to registrants in private practice
Rule No 13 Obtaining Instructions from a Client
Rule No 14 Inducements for the Introduction of Clients
Rule No 15 Publicity & Advertising
Rule No 16 Site Boards
Rule No 17 Fees and Assignments
Rule No 18 Conflict of Interest
Rule No 19 Clients' Monies
Rule No 20 Composition of Practices
Rule No 21 Practice Names & Collective Use of Titles and Descriptions
Rule No 22 Managerial Responsibility 
Section 3: Supplementary
Rule No 23 Waivers
Rule No 24 Restrictive Trade Practices Act 1976
Copies of the above are available on request from The Engineering Council.
APPENDIX 2
SOME CAUSES OF HUMAN ERRORS
This appendix is a list of some causes of human errors.
It is not a complete list.
It should be noted that the list relates mainly to operator/worker errors as opposed to management/organisational errors.
The intention is to give an appreciation of causes of human errors so that the reasons behind safe operation and design practices can be appreciated.
Inadequate information
People do not make errors merely because they are careless or inattentive.
Often they have understandable (albeit incorrect) reasons for acting in the way they did.
One common reason is ignorance of the processes in which they are involved and of the potential consequences of their actions.
Poor communications
Lack of understanding often arises through failure to communicate accurately and fully describe the state of the process.
This is particularly liable to occur on shift handovers.
Inadequate design
Designers of plant, processes or systems of work must always take into account human fallibility and never presume that those who operate or maintain plant or systems have full and continuous appreciation of essential features.
Indeed failure to consider such matters is itself an aspect of human error.
Where it cannot be entirely eliminated, human error must be made evident or difficult.
Compliance with safety precautions must be made easy.
Adequate information as to hazards must be provided.
Systems should ‘fail safe’, i.e. refuse to work in unsafe modes of operation.
Lapses of attention
The individual's intentions and objectives are correct and the proper course of action is selected but a slip occurs in performing it.
This may be due to competing demands for (limited) attention.
Paradoxically, the highly–skilled performer, because he or she depends on finely tuned allocation of his or her attention to avoid having to think carefully about every minor detail may be likely to make a slip.
Mistaken actions
Doing the wrong thing under the impression that it is right.
For example, the individual knows what needs to be done but chooses an inappropriate method to achieve it.
Mis–perceptions
Mis–perceptions tend to occur when an individual's limited capacity to give attention to competing information under stress produces tunnel vision or when a preconceived diagnosis blocks out sources of inconsistent information.
Mistaken priorities
An organisation's objectives, particularly the relative priorities of different goals, may not be clearly conveyed to or understood by individuals.
A crucial area of potential conflict is between safety and other objectives such as output or the saving of cost and time.
Wilfulness
Wilfully disregarding safety rules is rarely a primary cause of incidents.
Sometimes, however, there is only a fine line between ‘mistaken priorities’ and ‘wilfulness’.
Managers need to be alert to the influences that in combination persuade staff to take (and condone others taking) short cuts through the safety rules and procedures because, mistakenly, the perceived benefits outweigh the risks, and they have perhaps got away with it in the past.
APPENDIX 3
LESSONS FROM PAST DISASTERS
Much can be learnt from past disasters.
As well as identifying the contributory causes of a specific disaster, it is important to look at the positive actions taken afterwards.
These positive actions can be thought of as good practice in risk management.
In each case, the examples in this Appendix have been produced with reference to the respective official accident reports from which any quotations have been taken.
Inevitably some para–phrasing has taken place; it is not practical to list every contributory cause nor every action taken afterwards.
The Bibliography references the official accident reports from which a full account of each accident can be gained.
HILLSBOROUGH FOOTBALL STADIUM DISASTER 15.4.89
Severe overcrowding at a football match.
95 died.
(a)
maximum safe capacities were not laid down
(b)
entry into individual pens was not controlled numerically
(c)
visual monitoring of crowd density was not effective
(d)
the capacity of the turnstiles was exceeded.
(a)
planned replacement of standing by all–seating accommodation
(b)
Home Office Guide to Safety at Sports Grounds (Green Guide) revised; crowd density reduced; turnstile capacity regulated
(c)
specific practical actions taken by clubs, e.g.
—
turnstiles inspected and flow rate measured
—
CCTVs installed etc.
—
stewards aged 18–55
(d)
Local Authorities to review safety certificates at least once annually
(e)
Football Association/Football League established Advisory Design Council.
Contributory Causes
Actions taken afterwards
Quote
…there is no point in holding inquiries or publishing guidance unless the recommendations are followed diligently.
KEGWORTH M1 AIR DISASTER 8.1.89
Aircraft crash.
A problem developed in the no. 1 engine.
The operating crew mistakenly shut down the no. 2 engine.
47 died.
(a)
the nature of the fault was ‘outside their training and experience’
(b)
the operating crew ‘reacted to the initial problem prematurely and in a way contrary to their training’
(c)
there was coincidental positive reinforcement that indicated shutting down the no. 2 engine was the correct course of action.
(a)
examination of the monitoring circuitry for left/right sensing
(b)
disseminate information on vibration problems, amend flight manuals
(c)
vibration indicators to have an ‘attention getting facility’, i.e. high alarm
(d)
consider inspection procedures which could lead to early detection of damage that could lead to failure of a blade
(e)
research the practicality of external closed circuit TV monitoring.
Contributory causes
Actions taken afterwards
Quote
It is much easier to advocate such a policy (i.e. to avoid making hasty decisions) on the ground than it is to execute it in the air when presented with an unusual emergency.
CLAPHAM RAIL CRASH 12.12.88
Three trains collided due to a signalling fault.
35 died.
(a)
degradation of working practices, quality of supervision, quality of testing, training, allocation of meaningful job descriptions, communication to workforce of standards for testing and installation work, supply of accurate drawings
(b)
there was no effective system for weekend working to limit excessive hours, ensure availability of appropriately qualified staff and no overall timetable
(c)
the potential for the wiring fault had not been identified (hazard identification)
(d)
lessons were not learnt from past incidents
(a)
introduction of TQM and BS 5750 systems
(b)
pay and conditions restructuring to modern salaried approach which included quality achievement payments
(c)
training and certification of competence; this includes identifying training needs, distance learning and introduction of licensing to practice and certification schemes for workforce
(d)
audit and management surveillance; line management of safety assessed under the International Safety Rating System (ISRS).
Contributory Causes
Actions taken afterwards
Quote
There was a total failure to communicate effectively both up and down the lines of management.
PIPER ALPHA 6.7.88
Fire on North Sea oil platform
167 died.
(a)
breakdown in communications and Permit to Work system at shift changeover
(b)
the initial explosion put the main power supplies and the control room out of action
(c)
regulations did not require remote but potential hazardous events to be assessed systematically
(d)
the safety policies and procedures were in place; the practice was deficient, e.g. frequency of emergency training.
(a)
regulatory authority transferred from Department of Energy to HSE
(b)
requirement within the safety case for the setting of risk reduction goals
(c)
safety case to demonstrate that the safety management system is effective, comprehensive, quality assured and auditable
(d)
many design requirements, e.g. provision of Emergency Shutdown Valves (EDSVs), Temporary Safe Refuges (TSRs).
Contributory causes
Actions taken afterwards
Quote
Senior management were too easily satisfied that the Permit to Work system was being operated correctly, relying on the absence of any feedback of problems as indicating that all was well.
KING'S CROSS UNDERGROUND FIRE 18.11.87
A fire, probably started by a discarded cigarette, rapidly engulfed an escalator on the London underground.
31 died.
(a)
the public continued to smoke despite a ban
(b)
maintenance/inspection of the escalators was not performed properly; much of the equipment in the control room was out of order
(c)
the member of staff who was first alerted to the fire did not inform his colleagues; Police radios did not work underground
(d)
there was no evacuation plan.
(a)
ISRS, International Safety Rating System adopted
(b)
formal risk assessment applied to all projects, expenditure and changes in work activities
(c)
Safety and Quality Director on Executive Committee
(d)
integration of Safety and Quality initiatives into company overall TQM programme
(e)
mission statement for customers ‘To provide a safe, quick, reliable transportation system of which all can be proud.’
Contributory Causes
Actions taken afterwards
Quote
…lulled into a false sense of security by the fact that no previous escalator fire had caused a death.
No one person was charged with the overall responsibility for safety.
(a)
reporting system to check the doors was not effective
(b)
the emergency lighting system failed
(c)
‘failure to give clear orders about the duties of officers contributed so greatly to the causes of this disaster.’
(d)
‘The voice of the Masters (ship Captains) fell on deaf ears ashore.’
(a)
door open/closed indicator lights fitted on the bridge
(b)
emergency lighting system redesigned to operate when immersed and tipped at a severe angle
(c)
company standing orders and regulations revised to promote uniformity of practice throughout ships of the fleet
(d)
regulations regarding stability calculations reviewed
(e)
counting of passengers and crew on board tightened up
(f)
research programme to enhance the stability and survivability standards of Ro–Ro passenger ferries.
HERALD OF FREE ENTERPRISE RO–RO FERRY DISASTER 6.3.87
The ship put to sea with its bow doors open.
Contributory causes
Actions taken afterwards
Quote
It is apparent that the new top management has taken to heart the gravity of this catastrophe and the company has shown a determination to put its house in order.
CHALLENGER/SPACE SHUTTLE DISASTER 28.1.86
Mission 51–L exploded soon after take off.
7 died.
(a)
faulty design of a seal unacceptably sensitive to a number of in–service factors.
(b)
the sub–contractor's management reversed its position and recommended the launch, contrary to the views of its engineers in order to accommodate a major customer
(c)
NASA management structure permitted internal flight safety problems to by–pass key Shuttle managers
(d)
the Safety, Reliability and Quality Assurance workforce was reduced partly due to budget and time pressures.
(a)
design re–evaluation included tests over the full range of in–service conditions
(b)
formal objective criteria adopted for accepting or rejecting identified risks
(c)
Safety, Reliability and Quality Assurance department strengthened and adopted a system for anomaly documentation and resolution which included trend analysis.
Contributory causes
Actions taken afterwards
Quote
…neither Thiokol or NASA responded adequately to internal warnings about the faulty seal design.
THE ABBEYSTEAD EXPLOSION 23.5.83
A methane/air explosion occurred at a water pumping station.
16 died.
(a)
an unusual design feature allowed methane to accumulate in an enclosed valve house situated underground; a flammable atmosphere had not been envisaged there
(b)
a washout valve was not used in accordance with the operating manual provided by the designers
(c)
the presence of dissolved methane in water supply systems had not achieved wide circulation amongst civil engineers in the industry.
(a)
design requirements were changed to allow for the safe venting of any methane gas
(b)
strict control of the operation of washout valves, e.g. locked closed
(c)
the hazard of dissolved methane was widely publicised and incorporated into training courses.
HSE published further advice.
Contributory causes
Actions taken afterwards
Quote
No documentation relating to the changes has been produced, and no guidance on their potential effects appears to have been sought from the designers of the system.
HYATT REGENCY WALKWAYS COLLAPSE KANSAS CITY 17.7.81
Two suspended walkways in a hotel collapsed.
114 died.
(a)
the design of the suspension connections did not comply with the relevant Building Code
(b)
the decision to change the design was made by telephone, but was not documented
(c)
the structural engineer's design drawings did not clearly assign design responsibility to the steel fabricator
(d)
the structural engineer did not review the drawings sent back by the steel fabricator carefully enough.
(a)
responsibilities between project team members regularised
(b)
structural engineers reminded that they assume overall responsibility for their designs.
Contributory causes
Actions taken afterwards
Quote
As indicated by their stamps, these shop drawings were reviewed by the contractor, structural engineer and architect.
FLIXBOROUGH 1.6.74
Vapour cloud explosion at a chemical plant, extensive damage.
28 died.
(a)
poor quality control and design of plant modification
(b)
due to staff turnover there was not appropriately qualified engineer
(c)
there was a large quantity of hot flammable material.
(a)
raised awareness amongst government, industry and the public to the hazards of large chemical plants
(b)
policy and assessment branches set up within HSE to co–ordinate and stimulate effort on major hazards
(c)
Advisory Committee on Major Hazards (ACMH) set up.
This and subsequent work contributed significantly to the current understanding of hazards from chemical plants and lead to special legislation.
Contributory causes
Actions taken afterwards
Quote
In times of crisis and extreme demand it is easy to overlook the willing horses some of whom may not know their own limitations.
(a)
the design was not strong enough to resist the forces exerted while Span 5–6 was being cantilevered out from Pier 6
(b)
the checking procedures were inadequate and failed to reveal the design deficiency.
(a)
similar bridges throughout the country in service, under design and under construction were checked; over 50% required strengthening
(b)
the inquiry revealed many failings in all aspects of the design and construction of major steel box–girder bridges, in particular the importance of independent checking and clear allocation of responsibility
(c)
a Code of Practice was written
(d)
a number of research programmes were instituted and co–ordinated by the Department of the Environment.
MILFORD HAVEN BRIDGE COLLAPSE 1970
A box–girder bridge collapsed during erection.
Contributory causes
Actions taken afterwards
Quote
…the excessively mechanical use of Codes of Practice…is unlikely to result in a satisfactory design in the hands of a designer lacking the experience to appreciate and allow for the peculiarities which each individual structure inevitably exhibits.
RONAN POINT COLLAPSE OF FLATS 16.5.68
A gas leak caused a partial collapse of a block of flats.
4 died.
(a)
failure of a substandard brass nut joining a gas cooker to the gas supply resulted in an explosion
(b)
the explosion blew out part of a load bearing wall
(c)
there was an inherent weakness in the design; the risk of a progressive collapse should have been considered
(d)
there was no specific Code of Practice.
(a)
a Code of Practice specific to the type of building was written
(b)
Building Regulations dealt with progressive collapse and effect of fire on a building as a whole
(c)
Code of Practice on wind loading updated
(d)
responsibility allocated to government minister to ensure that Standards and Codes of Practice are kept up to date and new ones issued as necessary.
Contributory causes
Actions taken afterwards
Quote
They fell victims, along with others, to the belief that if a building complied with the existing building regulations and Codes of Practice it must be deemed to be safe.
THE TITANIC 15.4.12
The ‘unsinkable’ passenger liner sank on her maiden voyage when she strick an iceberg in the Atlantic.
Over 1500 died.
(a)
the usual practice for liners in the vicinity of ice in clear waters was ‘to keep course, to maintain the speed and to trust a sharp look–out to enable them to avoid the danger’
(b)
the ship's radio officer was catching up on a backlog of communications; some outgoing messages from passengers took precedence over ice warnings
(c)
there were 2,208 people on board with lifeboat accommodation for only 1,178; additionally many lifeboats left partially filled.
(a)
lifeboat or lifeboat and pontoon raft provided for every single person
(b)
new rules for watertight bulkheads
(c)
all vessels with over 50 persons equipped with a wireless and emergency source of power
(d)
rockets to be used only as distress signals
(e)
international conference instituted,(SOLAS, Safety of Life at Sea, still in existence today).
Contributory causes
Actions taken afterwards
Quote
It is hoped that the last has been heard of the practice (see contributory cause (a)) and that for the future it will be abandoned for what we now know to be more prudent and wiser measures.
APPENDIX 5
GLOSSARY
Ergonomics
The application of scientific information concerning human beings to the problems of design (Reference 11).
Event Tree Analysis
A method for illustrating the intermediate and final outcomes which may arise after the occurrence of a selected initial event (Reference 5).
Fault Tree Analysis
A method for representing the logical combinations of various states which lead to a particular outcome (top event)(Reference 5).
FMEA
Failure Mode and Effects Analysis.
A process for hazard identification where all known failure modes of components or features of a system are considered in turn and undesired outcomes are noted.
See BS 5760.
Hazard
A situation that could occur during the lifetime of a product, system or plant that has the potential for human injury, damage to property, damage to the environment or economic loss.
HAZOP
Hazard and Operability Study A study carried out by application of guide words to identify all deviations from the design intent with undesired effects for safety or operability,(Reference 6).
Multi–Attribute Analysis
A technique designed to encompass factors, such as aversion to low probability accidents and socio–political aspects, which are difficult to quantify in monetary terms.
A scoring system for the relevant factors is used based on the judgement of a group of informed people.
Risk
A combination of the probability, or frequency, of occurrence of a defined hazard and the magnitude of the consequences of the occurrence.
Risk Analysis
Risk analysis is a structured process which identifies both the likelihood and extent of adverse consequences arising from a given activity or facility.
Risk Assessment
The integrated analysis of risks inherent to a product, system or plant and their significance in an appropriate context.
Risk Evaluation
The appraisal of the significance of a given quantitative (or, when acceptable, qualitative) measure of risk.
Risk Management
The process whereby decisions are made to accept a known or assessed risk and/or the implementation of actions to reduce the consequences or probability of occurrence.
Task Analysis
A method for identifying and assessing the tasks which humans perform when they interact with a system.
It defines the physical actions and thought processes which must be undertaken to perform a task.
Tolerability of Risk
A band between the point of maximum tolerability (above which a project must be abandoned altogether) and the point of minimum tolerability (below which a risk is so small that the project can proceed without formal assessment).
A ‘tolerable risk’ is one that society is prepared to live with in order to have certain benefits and in the confidence that the risk is being properly controlled.
An ‘acceptable risk’, which implies that the risk, although present, is generally regarded by those exposed to it as not worth worrying about.
ACRONYMS USED IN THE TEXT
ALARP As Low As is Reasonably Practicable
BSI British Standards Institution
CAA Civil Aviation Authority
CPD Continuing Professional Development
ECRO Engineering Council Regional Office
HSC Health and Safety Commission
HSE Health and Safety Executive
HSWA Health and Safety at Work Act
QA Quality Assurance
PR Public Relations
TQM Total Quality Management 
APPENDIX 6
ORGANISATIONS VISITED
Members of the Working Party have taken part in visits to organisations throughout the United Kingdom in order to study examples of good practice.
Reports on these visits have been made and from these a number of lessons have been identified which firms that are using risk management systems are likely to find of interest.
This information is also of interest to all engineers to help them encourage good practice approaches to the identification and assessment of risk issues.
In publishing this information we wish to acknowledge the help given by the following organisations which were included in the visit programme:
APPENDIX 7
MEMBERS OF WORKING PARTY ON ENGINEERS AND RISK ISSUES
CO–OPTED MEMBERS OF TASK GROUPS
THE ENGINEERING COUNCIL STAFF
APPENDIX 8.
ENGINEERS AND RISK ISSUES — CODE OF PROFESSIONAL PRACTICE
INTRODUCTION
This Code, issued under the provisions of The Engineering Council's Royal Charter, is for the benefit of 290,000 registered engineers and technicians from 44 engineering institutions and aims to encourage greater awareness, understanding and effective management of risk issues.
As the code is an umbrella document, the engineering institutions may have additional requirements to suit their particular disciplines.
The Code should also help registrants have better regard to public health and safety by taking a lead in the development and introduction of competitive designs, processes and systems that minimise risk.
1.
PROFESSIONAL RESPONSIBILITY Exercise reasonable professional skill and care
2.
LAW Know about and comply with the law
3.
CONDUCT Act in accordance with the codes of conduct
4.
APPROACH Take a systematic approach to risk issues
5.
JUDGEMENT Use professional judgement and experience
6.
COMMUNICATION Communicate within your organisation
7.
MANAGEMENT Contribute effectively to corporate risk management
8.
EVALUATION Assess the risk implications of alternatives
9.
PROFESSIONAL DEVELOPMENT Keep up to date by seeking education and training
10.
PUBLIC AWARENESS Encourage public understanding of risk issues
10 POINT CODE OF PROFESSIONAL PRACTICE ON RISK ISSUES
EXPLANATORY NOTES
These explanatory notes amplify the implications of the 10 point Code for individual registered engineers and technicians when dealing with risk issues.
1.
PROFESSIONAL RESPONSIBILITY
Exercise reasonable professional skill and care
You have a responsibility to exercise reasonable professional skill and care in the performance of your work.
You have a particular responsibility when forming a judgement about the tolerability of risk.
2.
THE LAW
Know about and comply with the law
Keep yourself up to date with the substance and intent of the legal and regulatory framework that applies to your work.
Act at all times in a manner that gives full effect to your obligations under the law and the regulatory framework.
Seek professional advice at an early stage if you have any doubts about the appropriate application of the law or regulations.
3.
CONDUCT
Act in accordance with the codes of conduct
Familiarise yourself with The Engineering Council's Code of Conduct, authorised under its Bye–Laws and with any relevant codes provided by your own Institution or professional association.
Act at all times in accordance with the requirements of the appropriate codes of conduct, and recognise that your broader responsibility to society may have to prevail over your personal interests.
Respect your duty of confidentiality to your employer or client, and follow the appropriate procedures within your organisation for raising concerns about potential hazards or risk.
4.
APPROACH
Take a systematic approach to risk issues
Risk management should be an integral part of all aspects of engineering activity.
It should be conducted systematically and be auditable.
Look for potential hazards, failures and risks associated with your field of work or work–place, and seek to ensure that they are appropriately addressed.
Balance reliance on codes of practice with project–specific risk assessment; be open–minded and do not hide behind regulations.
Do not exceed your level of competence on risk issues or ask others to do so; seek expert assistance where necessary.
5.
JUDGEMENT
Use professional judgement and experience
Judgement is required to match the approach to the nature of the hazard and the level of risk.
This might vary from a simple assessment to a formal safety case.
Uncertainty is a feature of many aspects of risk management.
Be aware of this, and use risk assessment methods as an aid to judgement, not as a substitute for it.
6.
COMMUNICATION
Communicate within your organisation
Communicate effectively with colleagues, both up and down the chain of responsibility, to help ensure that risk management activities are sufficiently comprehensive and understood.
Endeavour to raise awareness of potential hazards and risk issues among your colleagues.
Seek to ensure that all those involved with a project are aware of any risks to which they may be exposed, of any relevant limitations inherent in the design or operating procedures, and of any implications for their conduct.
Discuss the reasons for incidents and near misses with your colleagues, so that the lessons can be learned.
7.
MANAGEMENT
Contribute effectively to corporate risk management
Help to promote a culture within your organisation which strives for continuous improvement, securing involvement and participation in risk management at all levels.
Give due attention to risk analysis, evaluation, decision making, implementation and monitoring during all phases of an engineering project to ensure effective management of risk.
Seek to ensure that management systems do not allow risk issues to be ignored, subverted or delegated to levels which have no control.
Consider the cost implications of all aspects of risk management.
8.
EVALUATION
Assess the risk implication of alternatives
Always consider the possibility of reducing or avoiding a source of risk completely.
The tolerability of risk will vary with context, and the basis for establishing it needs to be understood.
In determining the tolerability or otherwise of a given risk, promote effective consultation with those who may be exposed, where this is practical.
Some risks are so great that they cannot be tolerated under any circumstances, while others are so low that they can be tolerated without further justification; between these extremes, assessment is needed.
9.
PROFESSIONAL DEVELOPMENT
Keep up to date by seeking education and training
Risk issues and approaches to risk management should be integrated into every engineer's initial education and training.
As part of your continuing professional development, seek education and training in risk management techniques.
Increase your awareness of the range of potential hazards and learn from past events.
10.
PUBLIC AWARENESS
Encourage public understanding of risk issues
Contribute to the education of the public where you have the opportunity, so that they can be aware of and form an objective and informed view on major risk issues.
Seek to encourage a positive public perception of the engineer's role in the management of risk.
Contribute to improved communication on risk issues between your organisation and the community.
PEOPLE AND ORGANISATIONS INTERESTED IN THE CODE
The Engineering Council expects registrants to adhere to good engineering practice wherever and whenever possible and considers that this Code of Professional Practice will assist registrants in achieving this standard.
Registrants should be aware that non–compliance with the provisions of this Code may be relevant when considering professional disciplinary matters although adherence to the Code will be regarded as demonstrating good practice which could constitute the best protection against such action.
While a failure to adhere to the provisions of this Code by an individual registrant may not necessarily amount to negligence or a breach of an implied contractual term by that registrant, such a failure may evidence an infringement of the Council's Rules of Conduct which could lead to disciplinary proceedings.
This code will come into effect on 1st March 1993.
The provisions of this Code are not intended to form part of any contract entered into between registrants and third parties unless expressly incorporated into such contract and should not be regarded as creating a collateral contract between registrants and third parties.