

The world of plants
1.
Two very different types of plant are the giant redwood trees which can be up to or exceeding 100 metres in height and one celled  algae in water.
Beside the difference in size the algae has a much less complex system to transport food with and lacks the bark evident in redwoods.
2.
The fact that no one plant can supply a balanced diet is not a problem because there are many different plants which supply different quantities of different necessary constituents of a diet so it is simple enough to get the right foods for a balanced diet.
3.
Man benefits through the wide variety of plants in the world through different plant many and varied medicinal properties.
4.
When plants are cleared from an ecosystem effects animals as it reduces their food resources and thereby creating competition and by sometimes cutting down their shelter and natural habitat forcing them to move to areas where they can't survive.
5.
It is important that the  world's under exploited plants are saved from extinction as if the plants were utilised properly they could help reduce occurrences of famine as the varieties of plants are suitable to many different climates.
6.
Mankind will lose out in the long run if wild varieties of crop plant species are allowed to die out as it will mean that
a)
all the crop plants will have almost exactly the same genetic pattern and therefore be susceptible to the same diseases so one virus could wipe out vast crops of plants and
b)
they will have less opportunity to breed its new traits or useful mutations available from wild species.
Futility
In my view ‘futility’ deals with nature and nature's attitude to war.
The sun represents nature in general and nature as a source in particular.
At the beginning it also represents the sun itself.
The poem describes how ‘even when he was in  France ’— in the context of the poem it is reasonable to presume the front line trenches —‘the sun still woke him as it had at home’.
The sun also carried a message of hope ‘whispering of fields unsown’ this could be seen as analogous to the light from the candle in ‘The sentry’which represented a symbol of hope to the blind soldier.
However as in the sentry the message of hope is a false one and the soldiers died anyway, while the snow in the phrase ‘until this morning and this snow’ is assuredly a description of the same it would also appear to be in contrast to the warm sun as death is the contrast to life and the day the soldier is brought out the sun fails to wake him and there is snow.
While it says ‘if anything might wake him now, the kind old sun will know’.
It is not as it may be  interpreted a message of hope that the sun might still wake him but rather one of despair that even the sun is at a loss and does not know how to wake him.
This could be one manifestation of the futility of the title.
To my mind this poem deals more sentimentally than some of Owen's others.
For instance in ‘The Sentry’ the blinded man is quickly forgotten in the confusion of the dugout.
The second half of the poem is a lot less straightforward and more difficult to understand.
The couplet ‘Think how it wakes the seeds,— woke, once, the clays of cold star.’
The ‘cold star’ in question is probably meant to be the Earth as opposed to an actual star and the waking of its days to the beginnings of life.
The waking and stirring of life is a recurrent theme in this poem.
Some might argue that the references to awakening and creation could suggest the sun represents God.
However I do not favour this view as to my mind the force in this poem which awakens is one indifferent to the survival of the life it awoke.
This is not the attitude of any god recognised by popular religion.
‘Think how it wakes the seeds’, this itself  suggests that the force in question is not God and is indifferent to whether the man lives or dies as although it takes the effort to wake the seeds and the earth it cannot wake ‘sides full-nerved — still warm’.
The body of one so recently dead.
To me the last part of the poem is the one that really contains the message of futility suggested by the title:
‘Was it for this the clay grew tall,
— O what made fatuous sunbeams toil
to break earth's sleep at all?’
The cly growing tall is an obvious biblical reference to Adam and therefore man being made from the clay and the question Owen is asking is really simply if man is merely born to die why was he ever born at all.
The last two really best describe the futility from the title.
It asks why the sun bothered to start the cycle of life at all if life was just going to end at the middle like the soldiers life.
‘— O what made fatuous sunbeams toil’.
The fatuous sunbeams once more shows the sun can not represent any recognised god as the very expression describe the entity as mindless or imbecile in its creation of life only to watch helpless as that life is destroyed.
The ‘sunbeams’ endless struggle to create life is the futility of the title and its helplessness when it comes to protecting that life.
Unit 1: Context B
1 Up until 1914 women were thought of as second-class citizens in all roles of life.
They had no real control over their own lives, and were forced around by men.
As source A describes, married women were only allowed to own property after 1882, and even this land would mainly be kept under their husbands power.
Unmarried women had even less control, and could not own land at all.
Their only chance of such would be to marry a wealthy man, because as source A also describes, before 1919 no woman was allowed a complete education, and therefore they never  achieved positions in highly paid jobs, such as lawyers.
If a woman married a poorer husband, however, she was left to struggle in what source B calls ‘the white slave traffic’.
This meant having to work in hard labour, alongside her husband and possibly children, in order to support her family.
Women were thought of as stupid and  incapable of doing anything worthwhile.
2 Source B is a  propaganda poster produced by the suffragettes and is therefore likely to be heavily  biased and also exaggerated.
The pictures show women from various classes all suffering in one way or another, which is clearly shown  by their pained expressions.
However, they show little evidence of what their problems actually are, and the phrase at the top does little to help ideas, describing only the slavery in sweated labour.
Because of the lack of factual detail, and the likely bias and exaggeration, the source cannot provide reliable information.
3 The First World War allowed women to prove just how skilled and work-hard they could be.
Source C describes how they bravely took over the dangerous jobs in munitions factories, and how they joined or worked alongside the armed services, either joining women's armed services, or working as nurses out on the battlefront.
But these were not the only jobs they performed.
Since most men joined the army, there were large gaps in the workforces of industries at home.
Filling in perfectly for the missing men, women filled in the gaps in such important industries as agriculture, to provide food, weapons and munitions manufacturing, and railways and transport.
This meant that country could keep on running during the war, and, proving that they could do the same jobs as men, women gave themselves an  enormous boost in the push for votes.
4  There were still differences between the voting rights of men and women.
Men only had to be 21, and have 6 months' residence/occupation of business premises.
‘Security is Mortals' Chiefest Enemy’
About the middle of the play, Hecate speaks this line having told the witches not to interfere with Macbeth's destiny.
She is inferring that when mortals feel secure, and sound in their knowledge of others, then that is the time for them to be unsure of most, because if anything is going to happen, it will happen then.
When people are confident in themselves, and trusting of others, then they should be worried.
There are various examples of it in the play.
Back at the very beginning, we are told the events leading up to the Highland Rebellion, and the battle with the Norwegians.
King Duncan has obviously thought that his country men were happy with his rule, and had become lax in his supervision of the outerlying parts of the country.
Two Noblemen of Scotland, Macdonald of the Isles, and the Thane of Cawdor, conspired to set up a rebellion in the Highlands to draw the King's army to quell it, whilst Sweno, the Norwegian King, appeared with his own army, and started to march across Scotland.
Thanks to the brilliance of Macbeth, the throne was upheld, and the invaders banished.
The Captain warns the Kind that he was too trusting and confident:
‘So from that spring whence comfort seems to come
Discomfort swells.
Mark, King of Scotland, mark:
No sooner justice had…
But the Norweyan Lord, surveying vantage…
Began a fresh assault.’
The Captain tries to put his message more clearly, but is in great pain, and the King orders him out with attendants and fails to understand his message.
Following the exit of the Captain, Ross and Angus enter, and bring news of the Norwegians, and the wicked Thane of Cawdor.
They came from Fife, ‘Where the Norweyan banners flout the sky’, and explain to the King the evils of Cawdor: He reacts by denouncing him:
‘No more that Thane of Cawdor shall deceive
Our bosom interest.’
and giving his title to Macbeth.
Later on, he says how much he trusted him:
‘He was a  gentleman on whom I built
An absolute trust.’
which shows how trusting and foolhardy he was.
Then he gives a traitor's title to another man whom he foolishly trusts, which we as the audience realise to be some extreme form of Irony.
Duncan does not realise this, and travels to Inverness, unaware of his fate.
Macbeth, although shown to be very brave and soldier-like, is also very foolish.
He manages to believe the witches and their  prophecies , leading him to commit acts of treason and murder, although he should have known better.
The witches tell him that he is to be the next king, and instead of leaving the matter to take its natural course, he murders the King, and claims the throne.
Later, the  witches' messages imply that he will probably never be ousted from his throne:
‘until
Great Birnam Wood to high Dunsinane Hill
Shall come against him’
and that:
‘none of woman born
Shall harm Macbeth’
He is content to believe this, the implication being that he is invulnerable except to anyone who is alive, who has been born.
And when he is inside his castle as the English forces surround him outside, he is happy to sit inside, unafraid of  their threat:
‘Our castle's strength
Will laugh a siege to scorn.’
But when Lady Macbeth is found dead, he loses confidence, and decides to fight for everything, and meets his end with Macduff.
A lot of the characters in the play have very trusting natures, and this invariably leads to their downfall.
Shakespeare has a message in it somewhere.
Recycling Waste Materials
It has been known for many years that recycling used materials helps make great savings, but it was not until recently that it was realised how much good that it could do for the environment.
For instance, how long have people made compost in the garden, to put on Roses, and the like, using mown grass, and vegetable peelings?
But how long after did they realise that they were saving the environment by not having to dump the waste, and by using Organic Matter to help plant-life grow, rather than synthetic chemicals?
Now, I'm no ‘Greenie’ but Recycling is something I feel quite strongly about, and here I hope to give some pros and cons about Recycling, and also give some information about the actual processes.
For centuries, the World's rubbish has been quietly dumped on open, uninhabited ground.
These sites have now become, in a modern day, highly decayed masses of rotten chemicals, seeping into the Earth; the sites have become highly dangerous, highly toxic, and in some cases, because of methanes produced by decaying masses, explosive.
Recycling can make a considerable difference to the rubbish dumping problem.
And there is a problem; in New York, one of the world's dirtiest cities, the authorities are having to ship rubbish to any available sites on the coast, because there is no room left in the city; and the cost is tremendous.
The Methane produced on landfill sites is very explosive and can lead to severe illness if inhaled to a great extent.
People living in houses near landfill sites often feel unwell, and in some unfortunate cases, can be killed by explosions caused by accidentally ignited gas seeping into houses.
as if this isn't enough, the Methane, and other gases released can have a serious effect on the ozone layer.
Britain, though we may not think it, has one of the smallest rubbish-per-head rates for industrialized countries in the world.
In Britain, on average, a person disposes of about 1.75lbs of rubbish every day; whereas in Japan, the rate is 1.9lbs, and 3.5lbs in America!
Despite the fact that about 95% of that can be recycled, very little actually is, but this is not because of people's ignorance, but more because the majority of district councils in Britain provide insufficient Recycling services.
Another way of disposing of rubbish is to burn it in large incinerators.
Tons and tons of waste are piled on to giant furnaces every day, burning away all the waste.
Well, not quite all.
The problem with furnaces is that they let a lot of gas products from the waste escape, causing havoc in the ozone layer, and polluting the air.
Also, the furnace leaves behind large amounts of Ash, which although more compact than the original rubbish, still has to be dumped somewhere, causing similar problems to landfill sites.
But the Recycling Rose does not always smell sweet, because recycling waste can often cost a lot of money; and buying recycled products can often cost more than ‘raw’ products.
I don't often buy paper from the School Lodge, but as far as I can remember Recycled paper costs more than Ordinary Paper.
The actual recycling processes, although similar to the normal manufacturing process, often takes more time, and costs a lot more, with only the same end result.
And also, in some countries, when less and less is being recycled, less and less provision for recycling is made, making it more difficult for people to recycle waste, causing fewer people to try it, and so on, ad infinitum .
To summarise, then; On one hand we have the  environmental savings, the fewer natural resources used up, less land wasted on rubbish, and people feeling a lot better with themselves; and on the other, the high costs of recycling, and the cost of the end product.
BOMBING RAID OVER GERMANY
12 June, 1993
The bombers took off.
The pilot turned the handle which would switch the blades to fine pitch.
He felt the runway slip away from under the wheels.
He watched as the lights of the aerodrome folded away into the distance.
As the undercarriage was retracted, the plane picked up speed.
This was his twenty first mission on his second tour with bomber command.
He and his co-pilot settled down in the darkness for the long flight in the cramped cockpit.
The men at the guns stayed alert.
There were three gunners, both front and rear of the plane and one in a bubble canopy halfway down the fuselage.
The front gunner was also the bomb aimer.
He would leave his position once they were over the target and would ‘talk’ the pilot over the target before releasing the bombs.
Captain Biggins had had this crew for fourteen missions now, few things had gone seriously wrong, and his skill and judgement were fully trusted.
The crew were in high spirits as they passed over the channel as this was to be their last mission before leave, away from the stress of bombing well protected targets over Germany.
Once they were over the channel, Biggins spoke into the intercom,
‘Look out chaps! we're over the channel and into France.
Keep your eyes peeled for bandits, there might be a few up tonight.’
The formation was now well into France.
Suddenly tracer fire streaked past the plexiglass dome of the cockpit.
He saw the tail of an Me 109 fighter shooting into the distance.
The atmosphere inside the plane immediately became tense, five pairs of eyes scanned the starry sky, they could see nothing.
Biggins broke the tension,
‘I think that it was just a solitary fighter boys,’ said Biggins to the crew, ‘but stay well alert, just in case.’
As the planes flew on they neared their target of the German city of  Nuremberg .
As they neared their target, Biggins instructed the front gunner to take up his station as the bomb aimer.
‘We'll stooge around the outside of the target to find the best way in,’ Biggins told his crew.
This was his usual technique on major, well protected targets.
He liked to find a safe way to get an accurate hit thus sustaining as little damage to the plane as possible.
‘The flak seems to be less intense on this side of the target’ said the bomb aimer in to the little microphone hovering a few inches in front of his mouth.
‘O.K., she's all yours’, came the reply.
The gunners gripped their triggers tightly, Biggins could feel the joystick, slippery with the sweat from his hand.
They were now at the most vulnerable stage of the mission.
They would have to fly a straight unwavering course in order to  hit their target, leaving themselves to the mercy of the gunners on the ground and the fighters in the air.
From his cramped position under Biggins' feet, the bomb aimer instructed him over the target.
‘Port, starboard, port, port’ said Charlie, his eyes glued to the sight.
A Messerschmit, seemingly from nowhere, appeared behind them.
The rear gunner loosed off a round of deadliness in the general direction of the fighter, but, it seemed, he was not the target and Biggins could only watch in morbid fascination as his wing man went down in flames.
He saw the crew bail out and he also felt a sickening feeling as he watched the rear gunner, petrified, trying to escape from his rapidly descending prison, plummeting towards a certain death.
‘No  wonder they call that position the arse end Charlie’, he thought grimly.
The Messerschmit came round again and this time the rear gunner was more accurate and the  Messerschmitt began to roll helplessly out of control in the direction of the ground, belching smoke and flames.
‘Port, port…starboard…bombs away!’,
Charlie's thumb pressed the little red button which dropped the bombs onto the unseen enemy below.
‘Well done Charlie,’ said Biggins ‘Back to turret.
Bomb doors closed.
 Let's get the hell outa here.’
As the bomb doors closed, the plane shot forward, the speed increased by the quick reduction of drag.
They headed for home.
Biggins wondered what it felt like to be living in  Nuremberg ; to have heavy bombardment every night.
Every night people got killed.
Who had he just bombed?
The commanders would only give the pilots a grid reference of the target and instructions to drop the bombs on the flares dropped by advance fighters.
What if his bombs had fallen on a hospital?
The patients could have been bed ridden.
Luftwaffe pilots.
They might not have been able to shelter from the bombs.
They would have been murdered in cold blood.
He shuddered at the thought.
Tonight, and indeed on all the missions he had flown, the destruction and death was partly his fault.
Somehow it didn't seem quite right.
He felt that his bombing of Germany would hang on his  conscience for the rest of his life.
How did the people in  Nuremberg feel towards the British for bombing them?
Probably the same as the British felt towards the Germans.
But did they?
He didn't know.
He was just doing his duty.
But the Germans were all Nazis!
All of them?
They couldn't all be bad and evil.
They probably thought that it was unfair.
His war was against the Nazis, Biggins decided.
The ordinary German people could only sit and watch while he reduced their homes, possessions and friends to rubble and a tangled, indistinguishable mess.
They…
Biggins was rudely interrupted from his thoughts by the jarring of the front middle and rear turrets firing in unison.
Suddenly the plane pitched forwards into a steep dive.
‘Damn,’ he thought, ‘they must have taken off my elevators, bastards!’.
He yanked the joystick backwards.
No response, he was hugging it to his chest, something should have happened.
He slowly came to realise that there was no longer any firing from the rear turret.
He looked backwards expecting to see the rear gunner running up the fuselage to report that his gun had jammed.
As he turned his head he saw blackness and stars.
And stars?
Sickeningly he realised that the end of the ‘Lanc’ had been severed off.
By what he  wondered ?
He presumed that a plane, out of control had crashed through the fragile  frame of wood and canvas.
He hoped that the rear gunner had been able to parachute to safety.
As he looked backwards into the stars, he saw a Messerschmit flash past the gaping hole.
It was in flames.
He  wondered how those pilots prepared for the prospect of a painful, dizzy death in the cockpit of a burning plane.
Did they actually care?
Were they so committed to their cause that the thought didn't bother them, like the Japanese.
It was he thought, another life wasted to a seemingly futile cause.
Although he had managed to get the Lancaster onto a fairly level plane, it was still pitching forwards and was uncontrollable.
His co-pilot radioed the command centre, requesting a fix in order to enable him to plot the best route back to Britain, or  at least to the channel where he could be picked up by the  coastguard or a spotter plane.
Back at bomber command, the radio operator received the distress call.
She calculated the fix.
‘Your relative position is 917–604’, she said, ‘the coast  guard are standing by.
Affirmative?
Affirmative?
Captain Biggins?
There was no reply.
The radio was dead.
‘ASSISI’ by Norman Mac Caig
12 June, 1993
I feel that in this poem, the poet is expressing an anxiety.
It is really an anxiety about the modern day church.
He does it in many different ways.
First, in the opening of the poem, we have the tramp.
He is first described as ‘The dwarf with hands on backwards’.
This description introduces us to the tramp and gives us a rough picture of him.
The next three lines of,
‘sat, slumped life a half filled sack
on tiny legs from which
sawdust might run’
paints a very pitiful picture of the tramp.
It arouses sympathy for him from us.
We get the impression that he is badly deformed.
Almost that he is twisted, leant over to one side, he perhaps has a severe spinal problem.
We are then told that he is sitting outside the church built to the dedication of Saint Francis ‘Brother of the poor’.
The church is described as being built on ‘three tiers’.
This gives the impression that it is very grand.
Perhaps it has steps leading up to it.
Then the actual church which is iced by the third tier, the spires and decoration around the top of the building.
This creates a very magnificent picture of the church.
The tramp is then described as having the advantage over Saint Francis of ‘Not being dead, yet’.
When reading this section, we cannot help putting in a pause after ‘dead’ to emphasise the ‘yet’making it a cynical remark with the implication that he soon will be dead.
It makes us feel that Saint Francis had every other possible advantage over the tramp despite that lifestyle that he led.
This  emphasises the tramp's plight.
It is not until the third verse, that the tramp is mentioned again.
He is described as a ‘ruined temple’.
We are told that his eyes ‘wept pus’, that he had a lopsided mouth and a hunched back.
We are also told that the lopsided mouth
‘said Grazie in a voice as sweet as a child's
when she speaks to her mother
or a bird's when it spoke
to Saint Francis’
I personally feel that this ties in with the ruined temple comment.
It shows, I think, that although the tramp is physically grotesque, he is actually pure at heart, like a ‘ruined temple’ which, although a wreck and a complete mess, is still arguably sacred and a place of purity.
The church as I have already mentioned, is built ‘on three tiers’ and appears to be very grand, even although Saint Francis was a person who lived simply with few superfluous belongings, for the reasons that I mentioned earlier.
This shows an irony that although Saint Francis gave all he had to the needy, the church is spending its money on building magnificent and expensive structures instead of giving it to the poor.
Inside the church is a priest showing tourists Giotto's frescos, explaining to them that they were supposed to,
‘reveal to the illiterate the goodness
of God and the suffering
of his son…’
The writer then goes on to say
‘…
I understood
the explanation and
the cleverness.’
This last quote is a hint to the fact of the irony of the poem and that the author realises the irony.
The irony is that outside the church is a tramp.
He is very poor, badly deformed and desperately in need of help.
He is sitting outside a church that is dedicated to Saint Francis who is described as ‘brother of the poor’, ‘talker with birds’.
A church that is dedicated to a gentle, caring man who cared about the poor, instead of helping the man who needs help and who is literally sitting on the doorstep, is showing tourists paintings, especially commissioned to educate the illiterate about God, is not even showing them to the illiterate.
The priest who is thought of as a man who goes into poor areas and preaches and helps the needy and the poor as Saint Francis did, is showing rich tourists paintings.
The writer is trying to ridicule the man.
The fact that the priest is showing tourists rather than the illiterate the paintings is only half the point that Mac Caig is trying to put across.
What good will just the teachings of Jesus and the church do the poor tramp sitting outside the church?
What he needs is practical help, not spiritual help.
This is where the author's comment about understanding the cleverness  comes in.
I feel that he is really saying not that he sees the cleverness and the artistic quality of the painting or the message in the paintings as might first be assumed, but that he understands what the church is doing, instead of helping the poor, it was showing the pictures to educate them about God.
The writer is saying that he understood that the church was not really interested in helping the poor, just in attracting new members to the church for its own glory and ultimate gain.
Throughout the poem there are several references to birds.
This is used because Saint Francis was supposed to be so gentle that he could actually speak to the birds.
This is also a recurring metaphor.
They, the birds, are  mentioned first in the first verse when Mac Caig is talking about Saint Francis as a ‘talker with birds’.
It then lies dormant until the third verse when, once returns.
It first comes back in the first line of verse three when the tourists are being described as ‘clucking contentedly’.
This metaphor is developed in the second last line to describe the voice of the tramp as ‘as sweet as a bird's…’.
The repeat of this metaphor emphasises the fact that the priest is leading people to believe that the church's only duty is to get people to ‘join its ranks’.
The poet mocks the people for being taken in by the priest but lays the blame on the shoulders of the priest and ultimately on the church for failing to do its duty.
He also criticizes the people for not helping the tramp.
 They had to walk right past the tramp to enter the church and they made  absolutely no attempt to help him in any way.
In this poem the poet is expressing an anxiety about the modern day church.
He feels that in trying to get more people to believe with the increasing trend towards atheism, has neglected its traditional duties of helping the poor etcetera.
He uses this church as an example because it is very easy to see the faults of the church through the irony of the poem.
He feels that the church should be helping people overcome problems rather than making money through showing the church to tourists or buying paintings.
He is telling the church to stick to its principles and not get side tracked or become hypocritical.
Although the main theme of the poem is an anxiety about the church, it is also a comment about the caringlessness about modern  society .
This is illustrated by the people walking past the tramp, showing him no humanity  at all even though he was obviously in dire need of help.
THE MAIN THEME OF THE NOVEL
12 June, 1993
In my view, the main theme in To Kill A Mockingbird is not  entireley racial  prejudice .
I feel more that  Harper Lee is expressing concern about the inhumanity that man does to man.
Racial  prejudice is however included in this.
This view is supported by many examples spread throughout the text.
The most obvious forms of inhumanity are shown through racial  prejudice and the example that illustrates racial  prejudice best is the trial of Tom Robinson.
Events that happen previously show us that Atticus is a person that we can put our trust in.
When he believes that Tom is not guilty of the rape of which he has been accused, we know that Tom is innocent so when he is found guilty of raping Mayella Ewell, it is quite clear that the decision had been heavily  prejudiced .
Both Atticus and Judge Taylor realise that the case is lost before that trial even begins because they realise that because the jury is all white, they cannot convict a black man against a white man's word.
This shows inhumanity because it is  despicable to convict a man of a crime of which you know he is innocent.
The fact that the punishment is death means that the injustice is worsened.
Bob Ewell who is the father of the so called victim, Mayella, is prepared to use his influence as a white to get Tom convicted even though we know that it is Bob Ewell who should be taking the punishment as it is made clear in the trial that he is the person who abuses Mayella not Tom.
This shows more inhumanity because he is willing to send another man to his death for no other reason that he is black and that he does not like him.
The terminology used to address Tom when he is on the witness stand is not very  complimentary , phrases such as‘boy’ or ‘nigger’are the norm.
These terms are obviously meant to degrade Tom and this also shows racial  prejudice although not to such a great extent.
Other instances of racial  prejudice can be found in the fact that the church used by the black community is used by the white men as a gambling den in the week although using a white church for such purposes would not be allowed, if even thought of.
This makes the blacks seem inferior and that their religion, although they worship the same god, is unworthy of respect.
In the church, the blacks have no hymnbooks, and we are told that even if they had them they probably could not read them, showing that the blacks are  oppressed and have no  opportunity of an education.
Two more forms of racial  prejudice are shown here.
One is illustrated by the fact that the blacks call their church first purchase, this is because it was the first thing that their community bought when  they were all released from slavery, another form of racial  prejudice on behalf of the whites.
The missionary ladies state that they are Christian, but do not appear very Christian in their attitude to blacks, for instance Mrs Merriwether only pays her maid a pittance and Zeebo, Calphurnia's son is dustman.
This is regarded as a really good job showing that there are no real job  opportunities for blacks as jobs are really only given to whites because of the racial  prejudice in Maycomb.
Although racial  prejudice is a part of the theme of man's inhumanity to man, there are also other points to support my view, the most significant being the plight of Boo Radley.
Boo Radley got himself into trouble and although the punishment inflicted on him was in no way severe or a major disgrace, his father decided that it would embarrass the family to have his son be sent away to the school that the punishment intended.
Instead he told the judge that if he let his son go free, he would see to it that his got into no more trouble.
Knowing that Mr Radley's word was his bond, that judge gladly accepted the offer.
Mr Radley, Boo's father, then prevented Boo ever leaving the house.
This punishment deprived Boo of all of his youth and destroyed his character as well as making him very lonely.
Boo was only a rather slow boy who got into mischief and had a punishment inflicted on him that was greater than the crime by his narrowminded father.
Because Boo had not been seen for so long by Maycomb, he was turned into a scapegoat by the adults who blamed him for any thing and every thing that went wrong, and the children thought of him as  a terrible monster with blood dripping from his mouth who ate  squirrels .
Both these examples are unfair to Boo and show the willingness of man to manifest ideas into his mind about  certain subjects and  then to act according to these ideas, ie. the monster and scapegoat.
This is clearly inhumane and really cannot be suitably  justified .
Obviously neglects them and does not care about them  at all .
He does not spend his welfare money on his family as he should do, instead he spends it on drink for himself.
It could be said that his attitude is as a result of his poverty but in chapter three we meet a young boy called Chuck Little who ‘didn't know where his next meal was coming from’ but who was also ‘a perfect gentleman’and when he is contrasted to Bob Ewell's son Burris we see that they are both in similar circumstances.
Chuck's parents have some pride and care about the upbringing that they give their child(ren) showing that it is Bob's character that it as fault and that his attitude cannot be blamed on his economical situation.
Although I feel that one theme in To Kill A Mocking Bird is racial  prejudice , I feel that this idea broadens out to the main theme for the whole novel of man's inhumanity to man.
Examples which justify my view can be found in the section in which Tom Robinson is being tried, showing racial  prejudice , Bob Ewell's treatment of his children and Mr Radley's treatment of Boo portraying other instances of man's inhumanity to man.
The Purges
Although there are many different historical interpretations as to why the purges happened most are agreed that the main purpose was to secure Stalin's power against all possible enemies.
This, however, does not explain why the purges were so extensive.
Once they began, they acquired momentum of their own, and the size of the purge made it credible.
The spark to start  off the purges was the assassination of Sergei Kirov, head of the Leningrad organisation.
It is widely conjectured that Stalin himself planned the murder of Kirov.
The first stage of the purge was to seek out and kill those who had assassinated Kirov.
The purge soon spread to an onslaught against oppositionists within the party itself.
Zinoviev and Kamenev were again arrested and charged with ‘ideological complicity’ in Kirov's murder — whatever that means.
Thousands of their supporters were charged with the same offence.
Due to the cleaning out of a lot of prominent party figures the ‘second rank’ party members were the ones who benefitted from the purges.
More than half a million party officials were promoted during the period of 1934–39.
The purges changed the character of the party and the well-educated were especially hard hit.
In 1936 and 1937 there were a series of ‘show trials’ in which old friends and comrades of Lenin were forced into making the most extraordinary confessions.
They confessed to such things as being in league with foreign powers, sabotaging economic projects, poisoning the workers food, causing railways accidents and plotting to assassinate Stalin.
75% of the Central Committee of the party were found guilty of such crimes and executed or deported to Siberia.
By killing all these party officials he brought men into the party who owed everything to Stalin and so loyally supported him.
in 1937, with threat of war with Germany moving ever closer, Stalin came up with inspired notion of purging the armed forces.
He decided to rid the army, as he had done with the party of any possible opposition.
Marshal Tukhachevsky, the Civil-War hero and commander-in-chief was executed, as were all 8 admirals, tens of thousands of officers, 80 members of the Supreme Military Council, ½ of the officer corps in total were executed or imprisoned.
The secret police was finally purged, with its chief, Yagoda, perishing along with other senior personnel.
The consequences of these purges was that the government was now more harsh than ever.
Party censors stamped out any arts they did not like.
The Party was now completely subordinate to Stalin.
As much as 50% of Russians with higher education were arrested and the proportion of well educated party members was greater than that.
The purges have proved to be one of the most hotly debated topics for historians because, due to the harsh censorship and killing of many opponents of Stalin, there is a lack of opinion and primary sources which show how they  affected the whole country, and nobody could read Stalin's obviously warped mind to find out his reasons for this  holocaust .
Kirov's Murder
There are four possibilities as to who was responsible for Kirov's death: Nikolaev alone planned and executed the murder; Nikolaev executed it but it was encouraged by the local NKVD; Stalin planned the murder or a ‘near miss’ which would be followed by a purge; a foreign government planned it.
The possibility that Nikolaev shot Kirov on his  own thinking is the first possibility to be discussed.
Nikolaev had been expelled from the Communist party in Leningrad.
On the nights previous to the murder he had been seen lurking outside party headquarters.
Only on the second occasion was he searched  and found with a gun.
He was released.
 A friend of Stalin was in charge of security.
He was later executed.
Kirov's bodyguard, not present when Kirov was murdered, was killed in a car crash the day after Kirov's murder.
The second possibility that Nikolaev  committed the murder under the guidance of the NKVD seems to be more likely that the first possibility because so many people seem to have conveniently neglected their duties but I still think that it is not the most likely.
The idea that it was a foreign plot seems to be the least likely of the possibilities, because although Stalin believed that they wanted to crush Russia I don't see how killing Kirov this would help a foreign power in any way to crush Stalin's Russia.
I don't think a foreign power would have all those  Russians (the bodyguard, head of security) on  its side.
I think that the most likely of the four possibilities was that Stalin planned the murder with Nikolaev to commit it for him.
I believe that Stalin was paranoid about other people in the Soviet Union rising up and overthrowing him, so by bumping off Kirov and blaming on them, he effectively gave himself a licence to go out and kill all other  them as revenge.
He wanted to eliminate people within and without the party and by killing Kirov, another major figure in the party he could eliminate those in the party whom he disliked, legitimately enough, so that they did not appear to be murdered but  victims of the purges.
I would not hand this in to my superior lest I would become a victim of the purges myself.
Civil War
Why were the reds victorious?
The Reds were victorious over the Whites because they had a well organized, well co-ordinated, strictly disciplined army who were aware of their situation and knew exactly how to handle it.
 Their victory can also be put down to the lack of a co-ordinated attack by the Whites.
The White forces consisted of four major forces: The British and Americans in the North; Kolchak in the east, commanding a Czech legion; Yudenich in the west and Deniken in the south.
They were four different groups with different aims, but one common aim — to defeat the Reds.
The Whites  had vast total forces but the separate forces did not attack at the same time.
This was due to the severe lack of communication between the Groups.
Consequently each attacked separately and so the Reds had less rouble defeating four small groups, one after the other, than one large group, attacking in one move.
The Reds, only having a small area to defend could communicate with each other and knew how to defeat the Whites.
The fact that the White groups were spread out over such a  vast area caused the lack of communications.
The Reds won the war because they had a good, disciplined army and also because the Whites could not co-ordinate their attacks, due to poor communications and were consequently defeated by the Reds without half the trouble they should have caused the Reds.
Credit Question
1 In your opinion was the March Revolution a spontaneous uprising?
The March Revolution of 1917 in Russia was, in my opinion, a spontaneous uprising.
The Revolution began on Wednesday 7th March with the closure of the Putilov engineering works which thus threw 40,000 workers out on the street.
By Saturday 10th 240,000 workers were on strike.
The uprising continued along the same lines as the bread riots which had been rife in Russia at that time and so the Tsarina was worried but thinks everything will be alright and informed the Tsar, who was away inspecting troops, to this effect.
The Tsar received a telegram the leader of the Duma, Radzianko, telling the true story of the situation and how if measures, such as the distribution of emergency food were not taken, the whole situation could worsen.
On March 12th the Volynsky Regiment mutinied and added more weight to the revolutionary machine and they broke into the arsenal in Petrograd and handed out weapons.
 Prisons were opened and crowds fired on the Law Courts and by nightfall the mob controlled Petrograd.
The Duma defied the Tsar, who suspended them, and formed a government, which they declared to have taken over all power in Russia.
A Soviet was elected by the workers and soldiers, and they met in the Tauride Palace.
The March Revolution was a spontaneous uprising because no-one had planned it; it merely escalated from a seemingly harmless bread riot into a complete constitutional over-throw.
 The uprising had no leader at  its helm with a master plan for how life was going to be after the revolution was over.
The people were not campaigning to overthrow the Tsar in order to install Communism, they just wanted to get rid of the Tsar.
The revolution was so anarchical and disorganized that the Duma had to think long and hard before agreeing to support it.
The revolution was  definitely , in my opinion, spontaneous.
Log Book
When recording notes, head up paper with each sub-heading and  take notes on that subject on that piece of paper.
Don't just write a continuous stream of unorganised information.
How successful was the 1905 Revolution?
The Revolution of 1905 made Tsar Nicholas II  reluctantly agree to a series of sweeping changes.
This Imperial Manifesto stated that the people of Russia were now allowed freedoms of speech, conscience and assembly; trade unions were to be legalized; individuals could not go to jail without having a trial; the people were now allowed to elect a new parliament called the Duma, which would advise the Tsar and approve new laws.
A Prime Minister was to be elected, the first of these being Witte.
He pressed the Tsar to grant the constitution.
The St Petersburg soviet, whose leading figure was Trotsky now had a great conflict with Witte.
After calling for a return to work they organised a series of  campaigns , about censorship, the campaign for the eight hour working day.
This latter campaign was a failure had now finally split the liberals and working men.
Another strike was called.
Clerks, public service workers and government officials relented from this strike and caused its downfall.
270 members of the soviet were arrested, thus signalling the end of the 1905 revolution.
Spring 1906 saw the election of the first Dumas.
However, the Tsar broke his promise to share power and stated that he still had overall power.
He still believed it was his God given right to govern.
The election was without socialist candidates but still consisted of the Tsar enemies, mainly liberals and social revolutionaries.
The Tsar refused many motions and the Duma pressed him, but they arrived for work one morning to find the Duma had been closed.
The second Duma consisted of the same as before plus a few Social Democrats.
This Duma was also dismissed after agents who had spied on the organisation reported back to the Tsar.
The third Duma consisted of people that had been arranged by the Tsar.
Although the 1905 revolution promised much, the Tsar went back on his words, stated in the October Manifesto and so this meant that the Dumas, the major reform in the manifesto, was totally powerless and therefore other points stated in the manifesto were ineffectual.
Personal Experience
Choose one day which really stands out in your mind, and recall the events of that day.
Record the experience in a diary entry.
You might describe:
weather
atmosphere
people
places
feelings
Mention colours, smells, sounds and conversations if you like.
I awoke on the day.
It was much the same as the previous one, except it was referred to by a different name.
School came and went in the way that a school day usually lasts.
But today there was a different feeling when I got home.
Maybe it was because it was the last school day of the week; maybe it was because the house was especially tidy that day; maybe it was because I was in the wrong house, at the wrong time, in the wrong Galaxy.
This last statement, however, I discovered was not true.
The evening generally floated past, the way some evenings do, when you are sitting in an especially tidy house.
The clock reached 10.30pm.
I looked at the paper, and realised that a new comedy show was about to start on Channel 4.
This show was to change my life…forever.
It had a title which was not the most inspiring one I had heard in what I presumed to be my life, but told of the one man who had a great impression on me.
His name was Vic Reeves; the show was Vic Reeves Big Night Out.
Sublimity was not involved.
It was from ridiculous to totally certifiable madness.
The humour was  devastatingly fresh and Vic and his sidekick Bob saw life from a sort of vaguely diagonal point of view.
I sat in the armchair and was entertained by the funniest and most unorthodox brand of humour I had experienced in the short time in which I had graced the Earth with my presence.
I think I will look back on this day and think, I really had quite a distressing haircut didn't I, but also that  this was the first day I was introduced to the humour of Vic and Bob.
A Critical Analysis of the Availability of Sources
Sources for use in our investigations vary a great deal.
Due to the fact that we are obliged to do our investigations on a local topic there is a great amount of visual evidence.
If you are doing, as I am, an investigation concerning housing most of the houses from the period I intend to study, are still standing today.
Also, the libraries and record offices contain plans of these houses along with a vast amount of pictures of Edinburgh.
Also, if you are studying a period in history before the invention of the camera, there are many paintings that depict Edinburgh that are to be found in various galleries in Edinburgh.
If the time of period that you choose to study allows, you may be able to use oral evidence.
This however has the drawback that you are likely to be interviewing an old person, who could have a failing mind or may exaggerate experiences greatly.
If opinions are what you seek, you are probably better looking a source written at the time of the issue you have chosen by a person of sound mind.
A good place to find primary evidence of this nature is in the Edinburgh Room at the Central Library.
It, as  its name suggests, is full of information about Edinburgh.
These books also give secondary sources, and historians views on the subject.
The Central Library holds copies of the Evening News and Scotsman dating from the 19th Century.
These are good for seeing peoples views.
The Scottish Record Office has a wide variety of sources including plans of the city, valuation rolls and photographs.
I anticipate this being very useful in the production of my investigation.
Museums in Edinburgh often have exhibitions on showing what life used to be like in Edinburgh.
There are usually a good blend of visual and written material.
Finally the C.U.S.C. is a place which is solely for the benefit of people putting together investigations.
It contains a great amount of statistical evidence and pictures and models.
It should prove useful, as will all the places I have talked about above, in that they will provide me with the amount of information to produce an investigation that has all the qualities necessary to gain a good grade.
English Essay
Peace proliferates.
Equilibrium is ubiquitous.
I sit, still and alone in my own little part of the Galaxy.
The life I lead although contented, easy, worryless and relaxing is lacking something; world peace is not all they said it would be; the politicians that is.
‘Vote for World Peace.
No more trouble and strife, unnecessary arguments about electricity bills, or fights with your wife, or murder, or war, or mass destruction, or anything.’
or words to that effect.
Everybody had thought that this would be the best idea since bringing back the death penalty.
So they had all foolishly put the ‘X’ on the ballot paper and thought to themselves, ‘Just think, I'll be able to tell the grandchildren that I was partly responsible for world peace.’
My claim to fame nowadays is that I am one of the seven people who did not vote for world peace.
I was washing my hair that day, or that's what I decided was the best excuse to tell the voting commission.
After the vote there was no punishment they could give me anyway, because punishment involved breaking regulations of World Peace.
The other six people all used this same excuse, but at least they had some hair to wash.
Everyone but us seven voted for world peace.
That was six months ago.
After three weeks most peace went mad, but very quietly, and without an argument, but the strong minded continued to stand fast and weather the quiet and unargumentative storm.
After one hundred days of world peace, all surviving were to put it mildly, a little bothered and regretful.
There was simply nothing to do.
Arguments or wars had, some group of statisticians had calculated, taken up to 89.7% of our lives.
The other 10.3% of our time accounted for sleeping and eating, and was working under the assumption that no argument took place whilst sleeping, which was not true.
If you weren't actually having a ‘sleep-argument’ you were probably dreaming about having one.
All sports, or rather ‘sweating-arguments’ had been consequently abolished.
Music or ‘tuned-arguments’, had followed a similar course.
Even after hard consideration colour or ‘rainbow-arguments’ had been abolished everything around now was black or white, just like the world had been before colour televisions.
So from the black and white picture I have painted you can see that life in a state of world peace is just no fun.
However, things did not stop at that.
On the hundredth day of world peace all the ‘a little bothered and regretful’, people all gathered to hear the oration by the pioneer of world peace, commemorating this historic day.
It was not quite an oration because two days earlier speech had been phased out because it was discovered to be the ‘root of all evil’, by somebody who never talked and was consequently the most unevil person in the world.
Whistling had been adopted as the language of the world.
The ‘whistlation’ lasted four days, as the pioneer had to repeat himself 808 million times, until someone realised he was whistling the words, ‘this is just going to be a short whistle because I have very sore throat.’
As you can view, world peace is not all it promised to be, so if your planet ever has the choice of voting for world peace, do not follow the example of the planet Earth.
If there is a vote, stay in that day and if anyone asks say you were washing your hair!
The Russian Economy
The Russian Economy in 1914 severely lagged behind other principle nations in Europe and the world.
Russia at this time had potential labour force over double that which it had in the mid 19th Century.
85% of the population worked on the land.
Russia produced vast amounts of grain; 80 million tons in 1913, but although this  is an impressively large amount, considering the potential labour force, the productivity levels were sadly lacking behind other world nations.
A great deal of  subsistence farming went on among the peasants.
However, technology was poor.
Tractors were  non-existent , wooden ploughs pulled by horses still proliferated.
In 1860 the agricultural production per worker in Russia was 7.5, compared to 20.0 in the UK and 22.5 in the USA.
By 1910 it increased to 11.0, but the UK figure was now 23.0 and the USA figure 42.0.
Russia was being left behind when it came to efficiency of production.
Russia has a great deal of natural resources.
At this time, however, due to the unequal distribution of wealth these resources could not be tapped.
Money was needed to build the factories and provide the machinery to exploit these resources to the fullest extent.
There was  definitely the potential for Russia to become an industrialised country.
However, in 1913 foreign investment still made up 25% of the money invested in Russian industry.
The Russian railway lines expanded greatly from 660 miles in 1850 to 40,194, principally because of the construction of the Trans-Siberian Railway.
However, railways only made up 3 metres of every kilometre squared of territory as opposed to 200m/1km 2 in Britain.
Although the Russian industry was expanding it was still very backwards compared with other nations.
In conclusion, the Russian industry was full of potential, but yet, due to the distribution of wealth, there was not the vital spark to set it off.
Russia was full of resources just waiting to be exploited, and yet if the system did not change, it would be foreign  investors that would profit from them.
ENGLISH: MACBETH ESSAY
Lady Macbeth's character undergoes a radical change within a short section of Shakespeare's play ‘Macbeth’.
At the opening of the text Lady Macbeth is conveyed as a single minded and ambitious individual, unlike her husband who lacks the drive and motivation for success.
Lady Macbeth provides Macbeth with the determination he requires when she hears of the witches prophesy and her husband's title of ‘Thane of Cawdor’, she immediately begins planning Duncan's murder.
In Act I Scene V she calls to evil spirits, showing that she realises human feelings must be obliterated in the fight for power.
She cries: ‘…fill me from the crown to the toe, top-full Of direst cruelty!
Make thick my blood.’
Alternatively, the reader can interpret this as a sign of her weakness, that she requires this support to justify her actions.
However, when Duncan arrives at Macbeth's castle, she remarkably employs the nature of the perfect hostess.
She reveals her strategy to Macbeth,
‘Look like the innocent flower But be the serpent under't’
The reader can already recognize the cunning nature this complex woman possesses.
In relation to his indecisive character, Macbeth decides that he cannot commit the murder of Duncan, stating firmly, ‘We will proceed no further in this business.’
Lady Macbeth tries sweetly to persuade him, but her husband seems to have made up his mind.
Following this she then insults his manliness, and delicately manipulates Macbeth to her view of the situation.
Showing her ruthlessness, she melodramatically claims: ‘I would, while it was smiling in my face, Have plucked my nipple from his boneless gums, And dashed the brains out.’
Surprisingly, this reference to child-killing is later turned into a reality by the Thane of Cawdor himself.
Continuing this outburst she devises the plan for Duncan's murder.
She lays the daggers ready, but she then shows her first sign of compassion, revealing:
‘Had he not resembled My father as he slept, I had done't.’
When Macbeth returns in a trance, still grasping the bloody daggers, Lady Macbeth illustrates her strength by returning them to Duncan's chamber.
Conversely, Macbeth cowardly refuses to return them, knowing he could not cope with seeing what he had done.
Throughout the first two acts Lady Macbeth is generally in control of her emotions.
Before the murder of Banquo, however, she contemplates,
‘Where our desire is got without content;
‘Tis safer to be that which we destroy,
Than by destruction dwell in doubtful joy.’
The juxtaposition of her actions compared to Macbeth's both before and after Duncan's murder reveals a great uneasiness which has developed within her character.
She demonstrates her first admission of remorse and indicates she feels too guilty to enjoy her new position as queen.
The reader may be able to even feel concerned for her as she does seem to have a conscience.
This is enhanced when after all she has done to help her husband become king, she has to ask to see him.
He no longer confides in he, as he did in the letter at the beginning, but distances himself from her.
Once again, she grasps control of the situation, when Macbeth sees Banquo's ghost.
She bravely attempts to recover the occasion, but this time has to admit defeat and dismiss the guests.
The reader can appreciate her desperation as her love for Macbeth becomes hopeless.
He communicates less and less with his wife, who now deeply regrets the entire affair.
Shortly afterwards Lady Macbeth suffers a complete emotional breakdown.
No doctor is able to remove ‘the memory of a rooted sorrow.’
Unlike her husband who has gained in strength because of his evil deeds, she is destroyed by them.
The darkness which grows inside her eventually becomes uncontrollable.
She constantly requires a candle, symbolising light and truth, beside her.
She cannot live with the knowledge and guilt of several murders, and her eventual death is a blessed release from her suffering.
At the beginning of Shakespeare's play Lady Macbeth is a strong-willed and seemingly unscrupulous character.
However, she needs to ask evil spirits for strength, but this power cannot be maintained and when her true emotions permeate her denial of her own conscience they completely overwhelm her and she is punished with madness.
Macbeth's mind is also poisoned.
Before Banquo and Fleance are murdered, he proclaims: ‘O! full of scorpions is my mind.’
By the end of the text the reader feels sympathetic towards Lady Macbeth because she realises that no good will emerge where ambition had not been achieved by good fortune and ‘borrowed robes’ all too often don't fit.
English: Julius Caesar Essay
‘Things are not always as they appear…’
How true do you consider this statement to be of Mark Antony?
In Shakespeare's play ‘Julius Caesar’, I find the above statement to be very appropriate in accordance with Mark Antony.
His character appears to be very unimportant and innocent, but during the remainder of the book his true identity is gradually unfolded.
Throughout the first few scenes of the play Antony is portrayed as being very subservient and devoted to Caesar.
The reader can easily recognise this due to such quotes as, ‘Caesar, my lord?’, and ‘When Caesar says ‘Do this,’ it is performed.’
Antony seems to be an athletic young man, who loves his master, and will go out of his way to keep him happy.
A little further into the play however, Antony reveals a segment of his true-self.
This occurs when he discovers that his beloved Caesar has been murdered.
He lies beside the collapsed body, crying, ‘Who else must be let blood, who else is rank.’
Following this he states, ‘Live a thousand years, I shall not find myself so apt to die; no place will please me so…’.
But then, in his very next speech he insists on shaking the hands of all of the conspirators.
He says, ‘Though at last, not least in love, yours, good Trebonius.’
Then, ‘Friends, I am with you all, and love you all.’
Antony's only request is that he may speak at his funeral.
Nevertheless, during Antony's soliloquy at the end of the scene he refers to the murderers as ‘butchers’, and ‘bloody men.’
At the beginning of the second scene of the third act Antony once again shows us that things are not always as they appear.
At the start of his speech he announces, ‘I come to bury Caesar, not to praise him.’
In the course of the following pages, this is evidently not true.
He becomes extremely sarcastic, referring several times to Brutus' honour.
Presently he soon takes advantage of the simplicity of the plebeians.
He has to stop speaking as he is overcome with grief.
Perhaps this was another part of his very cunning, and well performed oration.
Next, he mentions Caesar's will, which he says he shall not read.
However, Antony knows full well that this will be of great interest to the common people.
Slowly we are noting that Mark Antony is not as shallow as he first appeared.
He descends down to the people, and they form a ring around him.
He flatters them by calling them, ‘Good friends, sweet friends,’ and, ‘Romans and countrymen.’
In this way, he creates a feeling of intimacy, and a bond between himself and the people.
As Antony's speech continues, the reader can easily recognise how gifted he is at speaking in public.
So, when he declares: ‘I am no orator, as Brutus is,’ it is possible to notice how shrewd Mark Antony really is.
He goes on to describe very vividly how Caesar was stabbed to death, and as he fell, so did the whole of Rome and all her contents.
At the very beginning of the play Shakespeare demonstrated how easily the people changed their personal opinions.
This was when the cobbler praised, ‘…
We make holiday to see Caesar, and to rejoice in his triumph.’
Antony cleverly exploited this principle when he told them of Caesar's will.
As soon as the people heard that he had left them money,(especially as it was quite a worthless sum) they sympathized with Antony.
The talented speaker even managed to make the crowd appreciate all the recreational areas within the city.
The workers must have felt important when they were described several times as being, ‘Caesar's heirs forever.’
He moves onwards to tell of how Brutus was always Caesar's favourite, and of how the dictator had always loved him.
After all these statements he announces, ‘If I were disposed to stir your hearts and minds to mutiny and rage, I should do Brutus and Cassius wrong for they are  honourable men.’
Although the commoners do not realise it, he is very subtly installing his own aspirations inside their heads.
Once they have all departed, the single figure says to himself, ‘Now let it work: Mischief, thou art afoot, take what course thou wilt.’
This line proves that Mark Antony meant to set the people off, to kill the members of the conspiracy.
Nearing the concluding few scenes, Mark Antony provides a remarkably relevant passage showing just how things are not as they first seem to be.
He says, ‘Fetch the will hither, and we shall determine how to cut off some charge in legacies.’
This means that the money that the multitude were so eager to learn of will not be as much as was first spoken.
Antony also has the major say in deciding who should die in the battle.
He provokes Brutus with phrases such as: ‘In your bad strokes, Brutus, you give good words.’
Even though he said all these things, he is not to be heard of during the final battle.
He does say that he will be Octavius' tent, and shall be waiting to hear how everything has turned out.
Antony pretends throughout the play to be very courageous, but was probably in reality much better using words, than his fists.
At the end of Shakespeare's creation, Antony admits to thinking of Brutus as very noble, and that he was the only person who genuinely killed Caesar for the good of Rome.
He even confesses to finding Brutus a true man, of excellent qualities.
None of this was mentioned to the crowd when he spoke.
Therefore, for all my reasons I have chosen to display, I conclude that Mark Antony is a first class example of ‘Things are not always being as they seem.’
Life in The Gulags
I awoke at the sounding of five o'clock reveille, shivering in the bitter cold.
As always I got up at once so that I might cherish the ninety minutes until we assembled for work — minutes that were mine — not the authorities.
I washed quickly in freezing cold, icy water, Breakfast was skilly as usually, and I was still starving as I began my three mile trek to the work site.
The ground was frozen, and digging foundations was practically impossible in such drastic weather conditions.
Half way through the day we were given a bowl of watery porridge each, I was so hungry I ate mine, and then rejoined the long queue for a second helping.
The second half of the day was building a wall.
The cement was freezing before we were able to apply it to the bricks.
We all raced back to the camp, another three miles over tough terrain.
One man collapsed, and before his body was cold his clothes had been removed by the others.
In this barbaric world, there were no polite procedures, just basic survival techniques.
It was every worker for themselves.
Parcels were supposed to be give out, but the guards stole any items of slight value.
I was given soup from the middle pot, meaning I had just managed to achieve my work quota.
Others were given warm water for soup, and on complaining were harshly told to work harder.
During the remainder of the evening I did small jobs to earn money for tobacco.
I retired late to bed, for as always the morning would arrive too soon.
Starving and tired I prepared for the next day.
UNIT 22: THE GREAT TERROR
DECEMBER 1934
Kirov, the Communist chief in Leningrad, was shot dead by a young student.
We know this individual pulled the trigger, but there are several possibilities as to who was actually responsible.
Nikolaev, the young murderer, may have killed Kirov due to personal reasons, without the intervention of any others.
However, it is equally possible he was encouraged to kill Kirov by the local NKVD, or secret police.
It is possible they were acting on their own initiative, in the belief that Stalin would have been pleased to have Kirov removed.
Alternatively, Stalin organised Kirov's murder as an excuse for the widespread purges.
Stalin would not have been suspected, or connected with his murder, and it would have provided an excellent reason for the purges, which Stalin began due to his paranoia of being replaced.
The next possibility is that Stalin had planned a ‘near miss’ followed by a purge.
However, I have excluded this idea as I believe it to be too far fetched.
Once such motives as this are considered, many hundreds of other possibilities become active.
The final suggestion is that Kirov's murder was a ploy by a foreign government.
Many western governments are highly fearful of Communism, and Russia's growing power as an industrialising nation.
These were Stalin's policies, and the leaders of many nations would have been happy to have seen him removed.
Overall, I believe Stalin planned Kirov's murder so that he could continue the purges, with a justifiable excuse to back him up.
He was a dangerous individual, capable of anything if it seriously threatened his position as the leader of Russia.
Although foreign  governments feared Stalin, I don't think they would have murdered Kirov, as it was a drastic action and strengthened Stalin's role.
My Sin
Being the sinless character that I am, my quest for a sin has been a long  and arduous task (which started five minutes ago).
And then it dawned on me; I woke up, smelt the coffee, was disenchanted.
I realized that I might actually have a sin.
It was actually within the realms of possibility.
I might just be that eency, weency bit lazy.
I know it's hard to believe but I think it is actually possible.
After all, I put of starting this essay until five minutes ago.
My main problem has been dragging myself away from my favourite armchair, prising my eyes from the television and relinquishing my white-knuckle grip around the remote control.
And now that I'm up here the problem is keeping my eyes on this page and stopping my mind from wandering and my pen from straying to the edge of the paper and doodling, something I am sure to give  in to before long.
Already, my fingers are picking at the edge of the pad and I have only written,(dragged out) 178 words, but who's counting?
And after working for seven minutes I am already feeling the need for the ingestion of sugar.
Mmmmm!
That succulent clementine tasted divine.
I'm back.
I am now going through my ‘it doesn't matter’ stage.
One which is likely to rear its ugly head continually during this piece.
It doesn't matter if I don't hand this in tomorrow even though I am already a day late.
My English teacher is too soft to do anything anyway.
It doesn't matter if this essay does only end up one side long, my standard grade folio is almost complete anyway.
At the moment the only thing making me write this essay is the  thought of me being able to vegetate in front of the box tomorrow night and also, if I push my self and write three lines a minute I will be able to go to bed early and ease the strain and trauma of getting up in the morning and trudging off to another dreary day in school.
(Except for English of course, which is the highlight of my day) I thought I should put that in to please my English teacher and even up my grade.
I'm off again, be back in a minute.
I feel the need for another fattening snack.
Those two mini babybels sunk down nicely.
In case you think I eat a lot I'll reel you my standard excuse, which is that I'm trying to put on weight for rugby.
This is partly true, as in collisions with thirteen stones on the hoof (as rugby commentators frequently put it; though they're usually dealing with some what ‘healthier’ weights) I usually end up bouncing off.
Anyway, back to laziness.
I came across an example of my laziness on the way to the kitchen.
I had to consciously tell myself what I was going in for and not to use the trip downstairs as an excuse to have a ‘little’ rest on the sofa after my thirty-four minutes of hard work.
Even now I'm struggling to stop myself going for a jaunt around the room though I know this will inevitably lead to me lying on my bed or sitting on the floor in a mesmerised, trancelike way and  staring into nothingness as if stoned.
As superb example of my laziness occurs every morning even though I am highly regular.
Here is my daily pre-school routine.
I set my alarm for 7.00 am.
When the alarm goes off I frantically fumble in the dark  for the tiny rubber switch that deactivates the alarm and having found it I switch it off.
Here is the lazy part.
As soon as the alarm is off I immediately close my eyes again.
There is now a horrific and bloody war being waged within me.
One half is telling me to get out of bed whilst the stronger half is telling me to go back to sleep as it doesn't matter if I'm late for school.
What are they going to do?
Shoot me?
Eventually I reach the same old compromise.
In the words of Alfieri: ‘Most of the time now we settle for half and I like it better.’
In my case it's every morning, though I do in a sense like it as it heralds the beginning of another crap day at school.
My compromise is this.
I tell myself that I will let myself lie in bed for another five minutes though I stipulate that I am not allowed to go back to sleep and that I have to count out the five-minutes in my head.
There are three possible results of this.
(a)
I fall asleep counting and I am late for school; this is the desired effect.
(b)
I realize I am too awake to fall back asleep but I manage to make the fourth minute take longer than the previous three to count out, or finally
(c)
I am wide awake and soon get fed up counting and get out of bed.
This, I am sorry to say, is what has been happening recently.
And now that it is 8.58 pm and I have done fifty-eight minutes of work, which I deem to be more than enough for one night I am signing off, because, I'm lazy.
Short Story — The Watergaw
The frosty ground crunched under his boots.
His legs were numb and heavy from fatigue and worry.
He had been walking for almost four hours.
He wasn't used to this sort of thing.
His fleshy paunch was hanging over his sweaty jeans  with the legs of his trousers clinging to him with the viscosity of four week old socks sticking to the bedroom wall.
His pants were halfway up his bum and he could feel the sweat dripping from his armpits and trickling down his arm to emerge in the crisp, fresh air.
His life was a mess and he knew it.
He was disorganized and slobby.
He had been so throughout his school life and through college, managing to only just scrape through by handing in work started the night before it was due in.
This was the story of his life so far and here he had the chance to change it and he knew he should and he wanted to, but there was a part of him that grew stronger everyday and which told him not to bother.
It was the part of him that told him he was managing fine and not to change as it would just lead to hassles and worries.
It was the part of him that switched off the alarm in the morning and made him sleep in.
It was the part of him that found it too much of a strain to even think about organizing his work.
He knew he was lazy and he wanted to do something about it.
The problem was, he was too lazy to try and stop being lazy,
The one good thing that had happened too him in his life had come in the form of Jane.
‘Plain Jane’ they called her.
But it was true, nevertheless he felt such great feelings for this gift from God.
He loved her.
In a way she was nothing special.
She had faults in her personality, her  hair wasn't  blonde , she was a copper top, her figure wasn't amazing either.
But it was something about her, something that made it work between them.
He had been seeing her for over a year now and yesterday she popped the big question.
But he was scared.
In a way he liked his safe, comfortable lifestyle.
He was frightened of change.
He had told her he needed to think about it and now here he was out in the hills.
Thinking.
He hadn't come prepared, he was cold, wet and hungry and he just wanted to go home, go to sleep and forget about everything, hoping it will all have disappeared in the morning.
But this was the one time in his life he wasn't going to curl up and ignore things.
He knew he had to come to a decision before he went back down, he wanted to come to a decision before he went back down.
If he agreed to marriage it would mean a whole new lifestyle.
He would have to work hard, clean himself up; change his whole image.
He wasn't sure whether he wanted to.
He was comfortable where he was.
‘There is a tide in the affairs of men which, taken at the flood, leads on to fortune.’
He remembered these words from some time in his past.
This was his chance but he still wasn't sure.
This could be the turning point in his miserable, despicable life.
Then it started to rain.
The rain fell in tiny, miserable droplets that were blown about by the wind.
These icy cold droplets seemed to cut through to the bone as if to punish him for the way he was.
He  sought shelter.
But the best he could do was it down behind a large rock and escape from the grasp of the wind, though the rain still got to him and he started to shiver violently.
The rain was pelting him  relentlessly and he may have been as well to have had no clothes at all for all the protection his gave him.
But when he thought he had reached the peak of his misery and was regretting ever coming to this place the rain started to slow and ease off.
His wet, cold body was aching and calling out for a hot meal and warm bed.
Then, as he was getting ready to haul himself back down the hill and into his bed where he could forget his troubles and try in vain to sleep them away, he saw it.
He wasn't sure what it was.
It was like a rainbow in a way but it was far softer and more frail, hanging there in the mist like some ray of home.
Like the good side of humanity, without lies and hate.
Without pain and poverty.
It was completely innocent.
Its fresh, new, pure, clean, almost sacred beauty clinging to the air and its hilly hiding place entirely unaware of the crazy world around it.
It seemed to be calling out to him, calling out to his feeling, his very being.
It was the most beautiful thing he had ever seen.
Its beauty came from its delicate simplicity.
Not like the man-made beauty of a sports car, its sleek lines and purring engine.
It wasn't that sort of beauty, it was Nature's beauty, too complex to copy.
And yet, simple.
It called out to him, to the fibres of his soul.
He felt fresh, happy to be alive, his strength renewed and his belief in himself restored.
He knew what he had to do now.
He watched until it disappeared and then he skipped happily back down the hill.
He would go and give her his answer right away.
Yes, as soon as he got off this hill.
He wasn't cold anymore, there seemed to be a fire burning within him.
He couldn't wait to see the look on her face, he couldn't wait to start his new life.
Then he remembered, he had to go out of his way to go to her flat.
It couldn't do any harm to put it off until tomorrow.
Yep he would get up early tomorrow and go and see her.
Well not too early because he'd had a hard day.
Yes, tomorrow, he couldn't be bothered going right now.
He deserved a rest.
A View From The Bridge — Critical Essay
Character Analysis of Alfieri
It was very clever of Miller to have a character like Alfieri in the play.
Unlike the other characters his thoughts are revealed to the reader.
These insights to his mind serve two purposes.
Firstly, and what I see as being most important his thoughts are used as an introduction to both acts.
In Act One he first of all introduces himself and his job and what this entails and then he goes on to set the scene by describing the general vicinity and its history.
As shown where he thinks ‘In those days, Al Capone, the greatest Carthaginian of all, was learning his trade on these pavements,…’
Then he brushes over some of the issues which run through the play which are especially noticeable at the end.
Though at this point I paid little notice to them as he did not emphasise them.
He mentions the issue of justice, ‘Oh, there were many here who were justly shot by unjust men.
Justice is very important here.’
As well as this he mentions the issue of settling for half, ‘Now we settle for half, and I like it better.’
Finally he goes on to introduce Eddie Carbone, this play's main character.
Though he does not actually  tell us much about Eddie he tells us that Eddie could be involved in something bloody.
This is done by, when he thinks, ‘…heard the same complaint and sat there powerless as I, and watched it run its bloody course.’
Secondly, he acts as a commentator at a football match in a way.
He gives a running commentary on what is happening at the moment in the game but also gives a players history where he thinks it will help the reader to understand to a fuller extent what is happening in the play.
This idea of a running commentary is shown on pg 59 where he tells the reader what various characters of the play have been doing that day.
An example of the latter point I made is shown on pg 45 where he tells of how he came to know Eddie.
As a character, I am not so sure about the importance of his role.
His main use I think is to bolster the reader's view of Eddie and is used by Miller to drive home Eddie's feelings in case you do not know them already.
He is a way of Eddie explaining clearly to the reader what his views are on Rodolpho's sexuality for instance without the subtleness of when he is conversing with another character.
And because of this ‘safety net’ there is no chance of the reader getting lost and not understanding the play.
The idea of Alfieri being used as a ‘bolster’ and medium by which Eddie can clearly explain his views and feelings are shown on pg 45 where he clearly tells the reader his feelings and views on Rodolpho being bent.
He says to Alfieri, ‘the guy ain't right, Mr Alfieri.’…‘but sometimes he hits a note, see.
I turn around.
I mean — high,…if…you didn't know who was singin', you wouldn't be lookin' for him you would be lookin' for her.’
This is the closest Eddie comes to outrightly calling Rodolpho bent.
This backs up my point of Eddie clearly explaining his views without the subtleness of speech to an ‘involved’ member of the play.
Such as on pgs 37–38 where he is talking to Louis and Mike.
Here Mike says, ‘Well he ain't exactly funny, but he's always like makin' remarks like, y'know?
He comes around, everybody's laughin'.’
‘I mean he gives you a look sometimes and you start laughin'!’
I think this is clearly Miller's main use for the character of Alfieri and he tries to make this more realistic by making Alfieri a lawyer though I do not think that this is done very well as Alfieri does not say anything which would justify him being a lawyer as all Eddie asks him are things he would have asked anyone though perhaps he asked him because he was a ‘lawyer’ and he respected this and knew he would get confidentiality.
For example, on pg 45 Alfieri says, ‘Because there's nothing illegal about a girl falling in love with an immigrant.’
Obviously.
And again on pg 47 Alfieri says, ‘You have no recourse in the law, Eddie.’
Obviously again.
Because of this view I have, I believe Alfieri need not necessarily have been a lawyer as almost any other outsider would have done the job just as well.
Except for obvious examples such as the local gossip.
All Eddie really needs is a confidant.
Though I do believe Alfieri is still important for the role he plays which I mentioned at the beginning as it is clever of Miller to incorporate the ‘narrator’ into the play in this way although it is not an original idea as Shakespeare used it with his characters'  soliloquies .
If my list of cons against Alfieri seems great, it does not mean I dislike everything he does for as I've said he plays the important role of introduction and conclusion which I like especially and count as a clever idea on the part of Miller.
Here Alfieri repeats one of the main issues raised in his introduction, ‘Most of the time now we settle for half and I like it better.’
And I agree.
It's safer.
Abortion Should Be A Woman's Right To Choose
Well, who really has the right to say Abortion should not be the woman's right to choose as what it comes down to, no matter how sensible, well-based or factual your argument is, She is the one having the baby.
There may be some of you out there saying ‘What does this boy know?’
He has never gone through the pain and never will, nor will he ever suffer from post-natal depression, morning sickness and the list goes on.
Maybe not, but in a world of feminists demanding freedom of speech and equality everywhere possible, Why should I not be allowed to present my view?
After all everyone is entitled to their own opinion are they not?
And my humble opinion is this.
Once upon a time, God created man.
Man lived on the earth content for a while within the garden of Eden with all the animals and plants God had created.
But man had this animal desire within him to do what Mr Lion did to Mrs. Lion but he had no mate to  fulfil his desire.
God, knowing man's thoughts created a mate for man called wo-man.
And after a bit of exploring and prodding man and wo-man got it right.
By this time they had been chucked out of the garden of course.
Anyway after a lot of ‘getting it right’ man and wo-man had a child.
But this is where their lives change.
Wo-man had a child not ‘man and wo-man had a child’.
Woman was able to do less and less work, suffered from morning sickness and gradually her lifestyle changed from eating, sleeping, working and ‘getting it right’ to bingeing frequently and sleeping.
Meanwhile man carried on eating, sleeping and working but with the noticeable exception of ‘getting it right’(sex — just in case you haven't got it by now).
In other words man's life was not really affected except for the possible lack of sex which I have mentioned whereas woman was reduced to eating and sleeping and also  probably knitting little woolly jumpers and hats and gloves and scarfs and trousers.
Though most women take some sort of weird maternal joy in this, being a single parent or the main money-earner in the family can lead to financial problems when she has to stop work.
Meanwhile the man of course, is leading his married life and is hardly affected at all .
Not only that but her social life is ruined.
She will be reduced to wearing baggy jumpers and those shapeless monsters, maternity dresses, for the next nine months.
Her chat up line will be (if she's single.)
‘Hi, I'm pregnant, what's your name?’
A sure winner with the men.
Meanwhile the man is still free to do what he wants socially.
Then will come the time when she has the baby.
She will go to hospital and go into labour.
This could be a long drawn out affair of up to eight hours or more.
⅓ of a day.
This will be a normal working day for the man and after work he might go off to the pub for a drink with his mates.
By this time the woman will be into the second stage of labour.
This is the actual pushing stage.
By now the man may be home enjoying an evening meal.
At last the baby is born but you may still have to stay in hospital overnight.
There are also a lot of things that could go wrong which could prolong your stay.
For example the baby being born prematurely or perhaps more drastically the need for a Caesarian to be carried out.
While the woman could be suffering from any number of complications, the man will be leading his normal life.
Even if he's your husband he cannot go through the pain you went through and so cannot know what it is like.
This is my point of view.
Because I believe that it is the women that goes through all the pain, suffering and has to carry the burden of the chance of getting pregnant which a man does not have for obvious reasons.
I believe it is entirely a woman's right to choose whether or not she has an abortion.
Though this is not to say that abortion is a topic to be taken lightly as it is a human life a woman is dealing with and I think she should think carefully about all her options before she makes a decision but in the end it is her baby and up to her what happens.
People might say that a woman is depriving a baby of the chance of life which leads on to the argument of ‘when is a foetus human?’ etc…
They could say it is human as soon as the egg is fertilised.
That's fine as you can have whatever opinion you want but it is still not your baby and therefore you cannot decide what should be done.
I'm sure it's a hard decision to make and I'm happy in the knowledge that I will never have to carry the responsibility of deciding whether or not to deprive the chance of life.
An Episode In The Life Of Ralph
‘Go, go, go,…come on move yourselves.’
‘Get down.’
‘Come on, get going.
Who's got the anti-tank missiles?
Tubby, Tubby where are you?
Come on.’
‘Careful now, we're in a minefield.’
Ralph had been drafted for the army to fight against Scotland in a bloody civil war that had torn the country apart.
He was now 25 years old and the episode on the island still haunted him at nights.
Especially now that he was watching men die around him.
But he was determined to learn from what happened there and put it behind him.
His best friend in the army was Tubby, a boring, plump, practical character who from his previous experience knew he could trust.
‘Arghhh, my leg, my leg, I've been hit.
Ralph, Ralph, my leg, arghhh.’
‘Oh no,’ said Ralph as he saw Tubby clutching in one hand his knee and the other a bloody stump.
‘Hold, on Tubby I'm coming to get you.’
Running towards him, he saw Tubby shift over to make himself more comfortable.
He sat on a land mine.
‘Poor sod,’ he said to himself as he turned and headed for the others.
‘Sam and Joe, come with me.’
‘— Yes —’
‘Sarge —’
Sam and Joe were identical twins and did everything together.
Rumour had it that they even still shared a bedroom.
‘Can't let my mind stray.
I've got to keep concentrating.
Where are we heading for?
Oh yes I remember now.
‘Come on.
Move yourselves.
Let's go.
Okay single file, we're coming to a wood.
Sam and Joe, come on.
Quiet now.
Not a sound.’
Slowly they worked their way deeper in to the forest.
‘Okay Sam ‘n’ Joe.
See that tree there?
Run to it.
I'll watch your backs.’
But before they could go shots rang out.
They grouped together on the ground.
‘Right.
Go for that tree.
This time I'll give you covering fire.
 Got that?
Go.’
He fired over their heads in vain.
After they had gone no  more than ten metres they were shot dead.
‘Where's the git hiding.’
Then a terrible feeling came over him.
He was paralysed with fear.
If he couldn't see the guy shooting at him, he didn't have a chance.
What could he do?
Come on, think.
But he couldn't.
A curtain was drawn across his thoughts.
He couldn't think.
No, not like Piggy.
I helped kill Simon.
I murdered someone.
Where's that little boy, the one who disappeared.
Sam'n'Eric, Roger, Jack, Maurice, Bill and Percival Weyms Madison, The Vicarage…what was it again?
 What was that in the clearing.
His eyes had passed over it, he brought them back.
It was, it was too dark.
It was…what looked like a pig's head on a stick.
Punctuation Revision
‘You deny that you were anywhere near the scene of the crime?’
‘I do.’
‘Where were you then?’ asked the sergeant, his voice getting harder, ‘At home, I suppose?’
‘That's right,’ replied Brown, ‘I was at home all evening.’
‘Doing what?’
‘I watched the television for a bit,’ said Brown shuffling uneasily in his chair, ‘and then I went to bed.’
‘What did you watch?’
‘I beg your pardon?’
‘I said,’ replied the sergeant, growing angry, ‘what did you watch on television?’
‘I can't remember.’
‘Do you expect me to believe that?’
‘Believe what you like,’ Brown grunted.
‘Oh I do,’ said the sergeant, ‘and I believe you are guilty.’
English Credit Interpretation
1a)
He had to have directions given to him which shows he did not know those parts.
b
He had been given curious looks by the person who gave him the directions which show that he was a stranger as he was not recognised.
2a)
The phrases ‘deluge trickled down his neck,’ and ‘met by such a blast of wind and water that he could scarcely see the track’make Turnours' journey  seem physically unpleasant.
b)
He was conscious of being watched by unfriendly eyes which show he felt he was a stranger intruding.
c)
Words such as‘unfriendly, watched, gibbets, sour’ help to create a sinister atmosphere as they are all oppressive words dealing with being shut out, death, and distaste.
3
Turnour has changed from being relaxed and comfortable with what he was about to do to feeling uneasy in a strange environment which has now put him in a bad mood.
4)
He felt it a boring thing he had to do as he would probably rather do something else but nevertheless it had to be done, not to save his reputation but restore his self-respect which he felt he did not have fully if someone was allowed to insult him and get away with it.
5
His reason is that he cannot be sure of what code of manners were followed there and if they were not the same as his it would seem as if he were almost a bully in chasing down someone below his class.
6)
His attitude has changed from being one of someone superior punishing someone who had insulted him to that of him being a bully and chasing down a poor wretch.
7a)
Wholly abominable
b)
reputation
8a)
It had no curtains, no sign above the door, the door was not wide and welcoming, the forecourt was dirty, and there was at least one broken pane in each window.
 These add to his feelings by causing him to feel unwelcome and unsafe in such a dirty, disused place.
b)
The stables were satisfactory.
He believed that a place which respected horseflesh would not be wholly comfortless and as he had horses this applied to him.
9a)
He gives the impression of being used to work, strong and rough.
b)
He is astute by realising the question was not friendly, abusive, a snob used to ordering others about.
10a)
Turnour seems to be happy to be insulted as he enjoys putting people in their places and he was used to it and relished it.
b)
Because he is used to having to do this and this familiar act probably made him feel secure as it was something he did back home.
11)
This he expected from Turnour's voice, manner and the way he looked as he was sitting.
12 a i)
The way Turnour was on his toes as if he was a runner.
ii)
His relaxed but charged and ready poise.
iii)
His vigilant and scornful eye.
b)
That Turnour was a hard, tough, trained fighter.
13a)
He apologises by saying ‘No offence’.
b)
He requests that Turnour waits and calls him ‘honour’.
14)
It is effective because these three words show that Turnour realises his opponent has submitted and he himself is not willing to take the matter further.
15)
He means by ‘civility’ that the inn keeper does whatever he wishes done and obeys all of his other commands.
Acts like his servant.
16)
It is one of civil politeness with the inn keeper realising that he could not beat Turnour in a fight and so he is prepared to bend under Turnour's will as shown by his ‘almost’ friendliness when telling Turnour about his house and his asking of when Turnour would like to eat.
17)
Yes, I do as we were told in paragraph that ‘he could not be comfortable in his mind while one walked unpunished who had questioned his breeding or his courage.’
Also, he does not turn back after facing such difficulties as the weather and the people's hostility towards him.
Essay On Wilfred Owen's Futility
‘Futility’ is another of the poems which Wilfred Owen wrote on battle and like ‘Anthem for Doomed Youth’it is an anti-war poem.
But, unlike ‘Futility’, ‘Anthem for Doomed Youth’, is a poem of comparison.
In ‘Anthem for Doomed Youth’ the  comparison is between death on a battlefield and a ‘normal’death at home.
‘Futility’ is a more subtle poem which is about nature's useless battle against man's foolishness.
The foolishness in ‘Futility’ being the foolishness of men going out killing each other and then coming back to nature and hoping that nature can sort out the mess they have made.
The first stanza of the poem concentrates on a small incident and is specific about the power of the sun to wake up the dead soldier as it used to when he slept in a field.
But now the sun cannot do this because the man is dead but his comrades are hoping that by moving his body out into the sun it can use its power to wake him as it used to do.
But this is futile.
From the second line onwards until the end of this stanza the poem has a nostalgic tone.
It tells us that the soldiers are thinking back to before the war, to the sun as if it were something in the distant past which they took for granted but has now become their last hope and so they are turning back to nature to put right a problem they caused.
Overall, the first stanza has been written in a depressing way.
The word ‘sun’ being a word of home and a word associated with new life.
This hope is destroyed when the word ‘snow’ is introduced into the stanza.
This word bringing a feeling of coldness; the opposite of the warmth of the sun, and depression.
The second stanza is a global view of the sun's power and refers to the sun's life giving properties in general.
The first two lines of the first stanza are symbolic of the suns ability to give life as they refer to a man's physical awakening, but here the tone changes.
It is as if Owen is angry with the sun for its inability to raise the dead.
He is annoyed that the sun can't do the simple task of reviving this man who has already got his limbs, is fully nerved and is even still warm.
This tone continues to the end of the stanza.
In line 5 the word ‘clay’ appears for the second time.
It first appeared three lines ago where it referred to the suns ability to give life to the earth of a cold star.
But now I think it has a different meaning.
That being of a man.
referring to the bible where men were made out of clay.
And so the line could read, ‘Was it for this the bodies of men grew tall?’
Here Owen is clearly asking whether men were made to just destroy themselves and nature.
The last two lines I think can be read in more than one way.
This ambiguity  hinging on the word ‘earth's’ in line 7 of the second stanza.
It could mean ‘earth’ as a planet, which would agree with the usage of the word ‘clays’in line 2 of this stanza.
Or, it could mean ‘earth’ as in man, which would agree with the word ‘clay’in line 5, if ‘clay’is taken as a description of biblical man.
This ambiguity increases the subtleness of the poem.
In this second stanza the words ‘fatuous’ and ‘toil’are used to describe the futility of the sun giving life to planet earth/mankind.
These words are of significance as they tie in with the title ‘Futility’ because all three words have basically the same meaning and their use enhances this feeling of futility throughout the poem for the reader.
‘Futility’, unlike Owen's other poems is made up of two regular stanzas of 7 lines each.
The rhyme scheme of both stanzas are the same, these being, a b a b c d c and e f e f g h g.
But, in both stanzas there is not the sharp, clear rhyming which is to be found in other examples of Owen's poetry.
There is however an exception to this in both stanzas.
The third last and last lines of each stanza rhyme perfectly.
This contrast in rhyming helps to emphasise important points in each stanza as this difference makes these lines stand out.
In the first stanza, these two lines are emphasising the feeling of depression with the word ‘snow’ and the nostalgic tone with the use of the phrase ‘The kind old sun will know.’
This sharpness of rhyming is used at the end of the 2nd stanza to emphasise the fact that the sun toiled in vain as men just destroyed each other.
This poem, though in appearance and make-up is different from other Owen work it still carries the same anti-war message, but for me this poem is the best of his poems because of its subtly hidden anti-war message and meaningful ambiguity.
The Witches:
From a  Shakespearean play you have read, choose a character whose relationship with the main character reveals important aspects of the play's theme(s).
Discuss the dramatic role of the character you have chosen and explain how her/his relationship with the main character gives us an insight into the theme(s) of the play.
Theme(s): darkness and light; evil  occurring in darkness.
Pathetic fallacy.
Appearance and reality.
Briefly outline what witches do, when they appear and what part they play in  Macbeth ‘s decisions etc…power of evil.
My chosen character is that of the three witches from Macbeth, a tragedy by Shakespeare.
In my view the role of the three witches in this play, were to bring to the surface of Macbeth's character his ambition, and so eventually cause his downfall.
Yet though the witches bring his already existing ambition out they cannot be completely blamed for his downfall and degeneration as it this, his own ambition which eventually takes him over and turns him into a psychopath, killing merely out of feeling and without reason.
It is the witches prophecy to Macbeth that he will be Thane of Cawdor and then king (Act 1 Scene 3) that show to the reader that Macbeth has got ambition in him, as shown by his demand of them to speak more before they vanish.
This, showing that he is interested in what they have said unlike Banquo who treats it as a joke.
This ambition becomes more predominant in his character not long after his encounter with the witches.
This is shown by the line
‘Glamis, and Thane of Cawdor: The greatest is behind.’
(Act 1 scene 3) And, only three lines after this, the theme of belief in the power of evil is shown by Macbeth when he says that the witches gave him the Thanehood when it was actually the king.
This belief in the witches power becomes more evident as the play goes on and he comes to rely on them for more.
Then Macbeth seems to have a change of heart and says he is leaving whether he becomes king or not to chance.
He is hoping that if chance does then make him king he will not have to murder Duncan.
Yet  his ambition gets the better of him in Act 1 Scene 5 where Malcolm is named Prince of Cumberland and he realises he has to stop Malcolm and also decides to kill the king and not leave the kingship to fate.
‘That is a step On which I must fall down, or else overleap.’
And, at the end of this act we are shown how his ambition has led to another theme, that of appearance and reality, where Macbeth is told by his wife to conceal his thoughts and appear to his guests to be the perfect host whereas he is really supposed to wait for the time to kill the king.
In MB's soliloquy.
Act 1 scene 7. in which he is laying down the reasons to himself for not killing the king he even admits to himself that his ambition is very powerful ‘vaulting ambition’.
Second time line 34 recurring theme of clothes.
MB's is wearing clothes that do not fit in the first example eg. This time he refers to the  good opinions that people have of him as new clothes and killing the king would be like throwing away hardly worn clothes.
Even after the king is killed and Macbeth is named king his ambition will not let him leave it at that.
He now wants his heirs to be kings as well which goes against the witches prophecy of Banquo's heirs being kings and not Macbeth's.
The next meeting between Macbeth and the witches takes place in Act 4 Scene 1.
 This scene reveals that Macbeth is now feeling insecure and paranoid about losing the kingship and so he consults the witches as to what will happen to him.
The three answering apparitions make him feel safer with their answers of…and yet he decides to kill Macduff for safe measure but as Macduff has fled he decides to kill everyone linked with Macduff though they pose him no threat.
Also the way in which he decides whether MD should die is very flippant.
Like tossing a coin to decide on a man's life.
This action shows his psychopathic nature of killing out of a mere whim without reason.
Act 4 Scene 1 Line 139 he also says, ‘Damned those that trust them’ which perhaps shows the decline that his mental state is in as he himself trusts them.
English Report
During the past two years, there has been a settlement of travellers' caravans in a parking area at the centre of Robton in Central Scotland.
At least three caravans and sometimes as many as twelve have been there.
Feelings among the community are varied.
Many of the local people describe them as being an eyesore, who leave piles of scrap metal and rubbish which cause a smell.
These factors are believed to reduce property values.
Also they do not pay rates and so do not contribute to the upkeep of the area in which they live.
But, as the local police superintendent has pointed out, all complaints against the travellers have been investigated and all but one have been unfounded.
Though this one case which involved a certain family among the travellers stopped as soon as this particular family left.
A statement made by Daniel McPhee, the travellers' spokesman and himself a former traveller agrees with what the police super.
has said about most cases being unfounded though Mr McPhee does say that they (the travellers) do not stay on permanent sites whereas there has been a constant settlement of varying numbers of caravans over the past two years.
The prospects for an acceptable permanent solution were discussed at a District Council meeting recently and it seemed agreed that the travellers should have a permanent site and that the situation is urgent as tension is growing.
The question is where would this be located?
And, who would fund such a project?
The S.D.D. (Scottish Development department) had been approached about funding such a project but they had replied saying that the projected cost of such a project would be too high for them to offer financial aid.
Without the help of the S.D.S. the project seems doomed as the Region are unwilling to help and few of the local people would consent to council funds being used for the setting up of a permanent site or the renting of a plot of land as a short-term site until a permanent site can be found away from the town.
It was eventually decided at the Council meeting that farmers should be approached about renting out a plot of land for a short time for the travellers whilst the search for a permanent site continued.
I think that in the short term something needs to be done as the travellers are starting to be harassed and recently one of their caravans was set on fire though the culprits are yet, unknown.
The situation could easily get worse if something is not done immediately and I suggest moving the travellers away from the centre of town to the outskirts onto a piece of disused land for example until a short-term site has been rented or a permanent site set-up.
For, it is obvious from the arson attack that there will be trouble is the travellers are not moved immediately to reduce the tension.
Great Expectations Is Thought Of By some Critics As The Greatest Novel Written In English
Having read this novel, each page crammed full of description, mystery more than enough content to keep you reading, I agree that Great Expectations is the Greatest novel written in English.
Though the number of books I have read is pitiful I doubt whether I will find another book as good as this.
I think that part of the reason it is so intense in the sense that every chapter practically is full of mysteries, revelations, amazing characters, love, humour and even violence.
Thus covering a hugely vast range of themes from class divide to love, deceiving appearances to justice and punishment.
This is because as  Dickens wrote his novels as weekly instalments he had to put enough into each instalment whether it be a couple of chapters or many, enough to captivate his readers and cause them to wait with eagerness for the next instalment.
 Dickens does this and more.
 Dickens does this all with the first person narrative in the form of Pip, the narrator and main character of the story.
It is written as if written by Pip himself reliving the majority of his life.
And so you get an  insight into his character, the way he thinks, what he feels now looking back in retrospect and just as important what he felt then.
 There are several predominant themes running throughout the book as well as some repeating features.
There are three themes which stand out to me that run throughout the book that are all in some way or other interlinked.
The first one I'd like to deal with is love.
The first example of this which probably springs to mind is that of the love/hate relationship between Pip and Estella which develops throughout the book as they grow older and their characters change and develop.
From Pip being infatuated with Estella and this causing him to turn against his upbringing and background though she harbours no feelings of this sort for him due to her upbringing by Miss Havisham solely as a means to break the heart of men as Compeyson once did to her.
Though by chap.
49 Miss Havisham regrets her ‘training’ of Estella and when Pip returns from abroad where he was working for 11 years he finds Estella much changed from her unhappy marriage to the spider.
Quite how their relationship will continue after the book ends is hard to tell but I think they will both just remain good friends.
Of course though this is the main relationship in the book there are others.
For example that of Joe and Biddy which turns out to be a very happy, contented marriage reflecting around home life and this marriage depriving Pip of the chance to propose to Biddy though I think that she would have refused on the grounds that he was still in love with Estella.
The other importance of this marriage is their offspring, the mirror image of Pip and someone that Pip is determined to bring up with his hard earned wisdom and experience in order to stop Pip II from making the same mistakes.
Another example of the love theme is the  humorous courting by Wemmick directed towards Miss Shiffins and the funny way in which they (Pip and Wemmick) arrive for his marriage with Wemmick ‘accidentally’ discovering a church and then a pair of gloves, followed by Miss Shiffins and finally a wedding ring.
This turns out to be in my opinion one of the funniest episodes in the novel.
But even this, Wemmick decides to keep to his life at Walworth and not let it be mentioned in Little Britain which even though it seems odd, stays within the boundaries of his character which  Dickens has been building on.
Yet another example is the marriage between Joe and Mrs Gargery before her accident and death.
In that marriage she was easily the dominant partner and Joe let her be partly because it isn't in his nature to be pushy or dominant but mainly due to the fact his father bullied his mother, as we are told and he is afraid of him doing this as well and so fails to protect Pip and tolerates Mrs Joe's dominant character.
This is the only fault which I can find in his character though it bears little importance as it takes nothing away from the readers' love of him and may even increase it due to his helplessness.
In fact towards the end of the book looking at the overall picture it seems that everyone else's life ends happily in marriage apart from Pip's, and him meeting Estella in the end completes this sort of feeling of his life not being complete.fulfilled.
The second theme that I'd like to deal with which more or less incorporates the third is the theme of people changing as well as how appearances can be deceiving.
Of course the main example of both these themes as you'd expect is Pip.
Pip changes from being content with his life at the beginning and not expecting much out of life until he goes to Miss Havisham's and meets and falls in love with Estella.
This causes him to doubt himself, that is his worthiness in loving Estella as he now thinks because he has been called common and coarse.
He is now  too afraid to even feel secure in the forge in case she sees him there.
And so the arrival of Jaggers, bearing the news of his great expectations is to him, a way of raising his social standard to that of Estella's and thereby improving his chances with her.
But as Mr Pocket says, ‘No man who was not a true gentleman at heart, ever was since the world began, a true gentleman in manner.’
Pip may have the wealth and social standing of a gentleman though he is a false one whereas Joe lacks both of these though it is he, along with Herbert that I would call the true gentleman of this book.
This can also be seen in Bentley Drummle who has the upbringing and background of a gentleman but is far from one.
Pip struggling to become a gentleman and find mutual love with Estella  takes him through his early teens when he left his apprenticeship right through to his middle-age where the next major change takes place.
Here the reader has once again been won back onto Pip's side after his care of Magwitch which seems especially significant as upon hearing that he was his true benefactor he loathes the man and tried to distance him from him, physically and socially.
And also after his reconciliation with Miss Havisham, for whom he gets hurt in the process of trying to save her from the fire and also because of how he wants so much to help Herbert.
This  change in Pip's attitude and behaviour and perhaps his realisation that he is not a true gentleman is his final change from contentment, to discontentment and snobbery to finally semi-contentment though I think he knows he cannot be fully content with reaching some sort of conclusion with Estella as she still has his heart.
As I said, people changing and deceiving appearances are linked.
In many cases deceiving appearances contrast with and help to define the change more as in the case of the loathsome, lonely, hardened criminal Magwitch.
Though at first, Pip could not bear to touch him, later on he takes great care of him and grows to love him which is shown by their holding hands at the trial of Magwitch and his visits to him as he is awaiting execution.
One of the best examples of this kind is the sharp contrast between Wemmick's home and work life which he insists on keeping secret and apart.
Where at work he is harsh and business like, at home he is a gentleman.
Another example is of course Jaggers who in chap.
51 is discovered to have kind feelings which like Wemmick he conceals from his office life.
In the case of Estella however her appearances aren't really deceiving as she looks arrogant and proud and has proud eyes though she really changes for the better even though it  occurred because of her treatment by Bentley Drummle and in the end like Pip, she is wiser and has been softened by her experiences and lost her proud eyes and air.
There are many repeating features in this book, and one such is Dickens' amazing ability to conjure up the most absurd but believable characters.
Dickens does this by his attention to even the smallest detail of the  characters' appearance, which includes their faces, clothes and especially any odd phrases or physical blemishes they have as in the case of Pumblechook and his, ‘I have brought you, Mum,’ and in Melly's and Herbert's cases, that of her strong wrists and his pale young complexion.
And also Jagger's compulsive washing of hands.
This detailed description lets the reader have an intimate knowledge of each character, almost to the point of being able to anticipate what they are going to do and say next.
When has or will a person such a person as Miss Havisham exist?
Although within the boundaries of the novel, this idea is entirely  feasible .
The same goes for Pumblechook, especially his name and also to a certain extent Wemmick.
Reader manipulation is another  recurring feature that in some ways is obvious looking at how the book is written but as you're reading the book you're practically living in it and when you finish  it's almost as if a piece of your daily routine is missing and because it is an integral part of your life it is hard to distance yourself from it and analyse it.
You are made to feel sympathy at certain points of the book and hatred at others.
How you start your day could even depend on how  Dickens causes you to feel that morning in that particular part of the book.
Another recurring feature is that of symbolism.
I don't think there is an overall meaning to be got by the symbolism of hands, though they are used many times to mean different things with many characters though in some cases what makes them symbolic is because it is hands that are being referred to and not another part of the anatomy.
Perhaps the most obvious example is Jaggers almost compulsive washing of hands which hints towards him feeling guilty perhaps about the way he runs his business and treats his clients.
It is by the appearance of hands by which Pip recognises Molly as being Estella's mother and Molly's strong deeply scarred hands, the result of a life of hardship and toil.
Pip himself takes part in this symbolism.
In the way by which he was brought up by hand and also how his hands are burnt and so scarred by the fire in which he tries to save Miss Havisham, perhaps showing physically the mental scars he has taken on through his treatment of others, especially Joe.
There is also the recurring feature of irony.
Irony in the name Satis House in which no one is really satisfied, especially Miss Havisham with all her wealth.
Irony in Estella's true background after Pip has tried so hard to distance himself from the lower classes and she turns out to have come from them.
And so he is no longer too common for her as she is really as common as he was.
And there is also irony in the way Pip treated Magwitch; loathing him and not  bearing to touch him and ending up loving him and holding his hand in court.
These themes and features, so well  sewn together are what make Great Expectations a truly great book.
Though other books may be just as good or even better on one particular feature.
For example‘Lord Of The Flies’ on symbolism, no other book I have read is so well and so believably put together with everything fitting together perfectly.
It even has a happy ending.
Jocelyn Strot lives in Birmingham a fact which does little to cheer her.
Her life is in tatters.
‘Her own fault’ scream the voices of her parents and teachers and those who know better.
Partially true of course.
Those who fall for drunkards and drug addicts have only themselves to blame if it goes wrong which it nearly always does.
Pain like many things is mostly self inflicted.
Jocelyn's pain woke up after a night of drunken revelling feeling remarkably well.
He still however was in a sufficient bad temper to punch Jocelyn in the mouth as she brought him tea.
This he did fairly regularly.
Tom Strot was  definitely a man for keeping things routine.
He had certainly managed so far.
Last night as always he had lost most of his  week's earnings in the organised card game down at his bar.
He had used the rest buying drinks to console himself and had then staggered back to the flat for the night.
Jocelyn on the other hand would have  preferred a few irregularities in life and so was leaving to live in a battered wives hostel.
She hadn't told Tom this and so he was surprised to see her packing a suitcase full of clothes.
‘What do you think  you're doing?’ he barked at her striking her across the face.
‘I'm leaving you Tom’ she said quite calmly.
‘Shut up.’
Tom yelled.
‘ You're my wife.
You stay here.
 You're not going anywhere!’
To emphasise his point he fetched a kitchen knife from the cabinet.
 Jocelyn being  conscientious  sharpened them regularly the edge glittered.
Jocelyn ignored him and carried on packing.
He lunged at her slashing out and a long slash appeared on her leg.
She screamed and shook him off.
He tried to crawl up her and she screamed and fell over.
He raised the knife to stab and she  succeeded in knocking it away.
It flew in a shimmering curve and sliced Tom's throat open.
Scarlet blood spluttered the bare boards of the flat.
Tom stood up and clutched at his throat.
His eyes moved wildly in his head.
He made a coughing gurgling sound.
His mouth remained closed in favour of the second mouth conveniently nearer the lungs.
He fell into a pool of blood and blackness.
Jocelyn was stunned.
She had been partially knocked out during the fight and was lying on the ground.
She was painted from head to foot in red.
She returned to  consciousness of a sort and  succeeded in getting up.
Her mind ranged over wide vistas of blood but her body took a shower and changed its clothes.
She put Tom's body in the bath and cleaned the floor.
She then finished packing and left.
Life like death goes on.
In the  wives' hostel Jocelyn finished unpacking and turned to look at the other occupant of the room a pleasant woman of thirty five who had introduced herself as Jane Smith.
‘What a pretty locket’ remarked Jane meaning Jocelyn's  extravagantly decorated locket.
‘My parents gave me it on my twenty first.’
said Jocelyn and thought about her twenty second when they disowned her.
It had really wrecked the day.
Jane enquired about what was in it and Jocelyn obligingly opened the locket that contained a picture of her with her parents.
A huge torrent of blood streamed from the locket.
Horrible and impossible it enfolded the two women in its slimy obsceneness.
When it passed there remained in the locket a face which they both looked at speechless.
It was Tom.
He spoke.
‘2 of Diamonds, 3 of clubs, 10 of clubs, Ace of spades, Jack of diamonds, Jack of clubs…’
Jocelyn appalled shut the locket.
The room seemed to shift slightly and she looked round.
Although she and Jane searched the room for an hour there was not a trace of blood.
Jocelyn and Jane then went to Tom's bar.
The card game was on.
Its rules were quite simple.
You placed bets on what card was going to be drawn and you had to guess correctly to get your money back.
Each round was a point and at the end you were given a tenner for each round.
A View from the Bridge: Character Study of Alfieri
In ‘A View from the Bridge’, it was Alfieri's job to provide the ‘chorus’; he explained and commented on developments in the play for the benefit of the audience.
He began the play by speech, and he ended it with a speech.
He was the only constant; the only person unchanged by events.
The only objective onlooker.
He was the alpha and the omega.
While Alfieri's main purpose was to inform the audience, he also had a part in the action of the play, and was therefore a factor, however minor, in how the drama unfolded.
He was not an especially major character in the play, but was nevertheless allowed enough of a share of speech to make a character study feasible.
It is Alfieri's character that I want to examine, and I shall attempt to do so by presenting the individual trails that made the character.
The first things that strike the reader, when encountering Alfieri's first speech, are the quality of grammar and fluency of speech, and then when compared to those of other characters, Alfieri seems a comparative genius.
From the outset it is clear that Alfieri is a highly intelligent man, and one who has been well educated.
He had had dealings with Eddie's family, and as Eddie says: ‘My father always said you was a smart man.’
Alfieri has a good job; he is a lawyer.
He respects his profession and treats it very seriously, and always quotes the textbook answer to his client, whether it is Eddie or Marco, or Catherine.
He is very careful about what he says to people, and makes sure they know exactly what their situation is by the law.
As he says to Eddie: ‘Eddie, I'm a lawyer.
I can only deal in what's provable.
You understand that, don't you?’, and also to Marco: ‘In a book.
There is no other law.’
These demonstrate Alfieri's commitment to the law, and his unwavering professionalism.
Perhaps Alfieri's major ability is his uncanny sense of perception.
He seems to be able to predict people's feelings, and how they will react to something.
From his conversation with Eddie, he works out that something about his relationship with Catherine is not quite as purely ‘parental’ as it might be.
Alfieri senses that he might be becoming attracted to her, and that this is the root of the problem.
He says this to Eddie, who doesn't exactly deny the lawyer's gut feeling.
When talking to Marco, Alfieri knows how he feels towards Eddie, and so makes him (Marco) promise not to harm him.
This showed a lot of foresight, but unfortunately for Eddie Carbone, Marco did exact revenge on him — arguably in self defence however.
Perhaps the best example of Alfieri's perception came when Eddie, trying to get rid of Rodolpho, decided to phone the immigration office, to report the two ‘submarines’.
Alfieri realised this,(without Eddie having said a word), and tries to stop him.
Another side of Alfieri's very accurate sense of perception, is his fatalism.
It seems that he believes in destiny, is loath to prevent fate from running its inevitable course, in the last few pages of the play.
His profound sense of fatalism becomes apparent as early as the last paragraph of his very first speech: ‘…every few years there is still a case, and as the parties tell me what the trouble is,…the thought comes in that…another lawyer, quite differently dressed, heard the same complaint and sat there as powerless as I, and watched it run its bloody course.’
This is a reference to the case concerning Eddie and the two submarines.
It is the ‘one every few years’, and Alfieri knows, or can predict what the outcome will be.
Because of Alfieri's sense of fatalism, he is intrigued by the case, and it interests him greatly.
He can see what the bitter outcome can be, but instead of washing his hands of the affair, he doggedly and morbidly follows the Carbone's situation to its tragic resolution.
He is not in the least surprised when Marco kills Eddie.
He knew that Eddie's love for Catherine was immense, and that trouble was in store for whoever upset that relationship.
He had studied and pondered the case, and was immersed in it; he tried talking to both Marco and Eddie, and pursues Marco for the promise that could save Eddie's life.
Alfieri's obsession with this case and his genuine concern towards what the outcome might be show a compassionate, and perhaps emotional, streak in the man.
Alfieri's care and compassion are not very obvious to the reader from what he says, barring his final speech, but there is a very tangible kindness in his behaviour.
A very good example of this is the scene where he confronts Marco, asking for his word not to kill Eddie.
Alfieri takes Marco's hand, and speaks to him like a wise older brother, giving him advice and trying hard to help him.
This sort of fraternal instinct is further demonstrated when he delivers Eddie's epitaph in the closing lines of the play; he identifies with the dead man and feels an irrational love for him, despite his destructive actions, and shows a very brotherly kind of sorrow.
While his genuine care for the parties in the case may have won him their respect, another contributor to this was his respect for them which is demonstrated through his sense of perception and realism.
Alfieri was frank and professional with his clients and had them under no illusions.
When speaking to Marco in the prison for instance, he tells him he is bound to be deported, and that there is no hope for him; Alfieri would realise it was hard for Marco to take, but respected him enough to tell him the absolute truth.
He also always managed to see the good side of a person, and would defend them as he saw fit (ie Rodolpho) which shows a very christian type of behaviour.
Alfieri was a good, honest, and intelligent man who loved his job.
He respected the law, and everything he said was qualified by it.
His clients were treated well, and were respected and pondered over by him.
Alfieri watched out for his clients and tried to help them as far as his job would allow.
He knew what they were thinking, and he sized them up in his very concise and perceptive manner.
He was on the whole, a very decent and caring man who did his job well tried to help those around him.
Critical Essay: George (Of Mice and Men)
George was a friend of Lennie Small.
Lennie was a giant child.
George protected Lennie and helped him because he was mentally retarded.
Lennie was entrusted to George by Lennie's Aunt Clara, his guardian.
Not only did George have to fend for himself but he had to protect and feed Lennie so there was a very large responsibility on him.
Under the strain, George copied remarkably well.
George has a very complex character.
He has a large number of good qualities and very few bad ones; George is very kind and caring and took great care over Lennie.
He appreciates Lennie's circumstances and makes allowances for him.
He allows Lennie to pet mice and was going to let him keep one of Slim's new pups.
George cares what Lennie thinks because he is frightened easily and so always puts things straight and simple for Lennie.
George is very unselfish to Lennie both with his time and his  possessions .
He will always talk or listen to Lennie and keeps the dream of the land and the farm fresh in Lennie's head.
He always has enough time for Lennie and when Lennie speaks George always listens, no matter when.
George is also quite generous with his  possessions , giving Lennie a larger portion of their food, or giving him all of his ketchup to keep him happy.
George did a lot of things to keep Lennie well fed and in a happy mood.
George is extremely patient with Lennie, and is there whenever Lennie needs him.
He always puts up with Lennie, and is there whenever Lennie is feeling ashamed or unwanted and produces his ‘I could just go to the hills and’ I could find a cave, and pet mice’speech.
George knows Lennie can't and won't remember things so he is patient enough to repeat things for Lennie; time and time again, day after day.
George's patience is probably what keeps Lennie from really getting himself into trouble, all the time and it is patience that has kept Lennie alive so long.
For all George may not be particularly clever,(though certainly not stupid), he is quite wise.
He knows how to handle situations and can plan ahead for things.
He copes well in situations involving Lennie and invariably seems to pick the best of a bad lot of consequences.
(With Lennie, talking to the owner of the ranch, George got out of a tight spot concerning his relationship to Lennie and why Lennie was so silent, this characteristic was evident).
George was probably wise to kill Lennie the way he did, preserving Lennie's dignity.
George is quite realistic throughout the book and is in some cases, justifiably pessimistic.
He does not expect miracles from Lennie and is not at all surprised when Lennie forgets things, even though he gets angry at him.
George knows that sooner or later Lennie will do another ‘bad thing’ and so when Lennie accidentally kills Curley's wife, George is very upset and disappointed, but not shocked.
George probably suspected that something would come along which would end the dream.
George is fairly charismatic and people seem to want to talk to him.
He is small and not particularly bright, but yet is not patronized by people, and is taken seriously and listened to, unlike Lennie.
George is a quiet, internal person, but is ready to talk to almost anyone who will listen.
George Milton has very few weak points, but one of them is his hastiness and lack of forethought.
He is often very callous to Lennie and is constantly reminding him what his life could be like without Lennie.
Sometimes, when Lennie says something or does something wrong, George gets very annoyed and lets something slip without thinking.
 Although what George says is easy to rectify with Lennie, it might not be the case with other people, and if so, George could find himself in a lot of trouble.
Probably the most important thing about George is why he continued to travel with Lennie for so long and why he needed him.
George is a quiet, fairly shy person, who is not very imaginative and needs someone to share a life with.
He needs to feel worth something to other people and perhaps even feel dominant,(though protecting Lennie is not just an ego trip).
George would probably be extremely lonely on his own, and that is probably why he conceived the idea of the dream; the cottage, the pigs, the rabbits etc.
George could not face a life on his own, though I don't think he would consider marrying because he is not a ladies' man.
He is rough and very unromantic and would prefer male company.
George takes time to learn to cope with Lennie and matures a lot through the experience.
At first he treated Lennie as a joke, ordering him around; as he says, ‘…a bunch of guys was standing around on the Sacramento River.
I was feelin' pretty smart.
I turns to Lennie and says: ‘Jump in.’
An' he jumps.
Couldn't swim a stroke.
He damn near drowned.’
George takes the responsibility for Lennie and accepts him gradually.
He changes slowly from messing Lennie around and playing stupid jokes on him, to treating Lennie as a friend, a companion, but someone he must protect from his own strength and stupidity.
Even during the short period at Curley's father's ranch, George's attitude towards Lennie changes.
Slim may be a factor for this, but the main reason is that George senses danger in Lennie's attraction to Curley's wife.
On the whole, George Milton is a good, honest man who has a difficult life to lead, looking after Lennie the simple giant.
George coped very well with Lennie and always kept him happy, but in the end, Lennie's strength cut off all options and George had to kill a best friend.
George had very few faults and was on the surface, a simple, good man.
Why do so many governments, rich and poor, spend so much on weapons and military equipment which rapidly become obsolete, and which ordinary people throughout the world hope will never be used?
During this essay I shall try to reach a balanced judgement on the subject of military spending by showing the arguments for and against it.
I feel I should start by defining the question and making it more precise.
I see it as asking: ‘What reasons do governments feel justify their vast spending on weapons and equipment, which are more important than: a) public opinion, and b) the knowledge that such armaments are bound to become obsolete in just a few years’ time?’
There are two types of clearly defined weapons or armaments.
They are: ‘conventional’ and ‘unconventional’.
Conventional armaments contain such types as: land based military forces (ie soldiers and tanks); sea forces (destroyers, frigates etc. all fall under this category); and finally air forces.
Aeroplanes such as‘jets’ and ‘bombers’are classed as air forces.
‘Unconventional’ forces contain such elements as nuclear weapons (probably the greatest source of military controversy); guerilla forces and mercenaries, and a different kind of land based force; a territorial army containing ordinary people, citizens enlisting in their own force, and of their own free will.
Nuclear submarines also come under the heading of ‘Unconventional’.
The weapons listed above all have very different purposes and very different costs per unit.
Conventional armaments are used for the defence of a country, or small, supported offences on countries.
(Evidence of the effectiveness of small strikes was seen in the Gulf War where the careful and strategic destruction of the enemies' forces came into its own.)
Unconventional armaments have many different purposes.
The major ones are: defence,(the territorial army mentioned above); terrorist capabilities; complete destruction (or Armageddon weapons) such as nuclear weapons; or ‘First Strike’ purposes,(this is the school of thought which says a good strategic hit while the enemy is unaware, is the best way to start a war.)
Because the weapons listed previously have different purposes, there will also be a great variation in the end result.
Conventional weapons have accurate, small strikes, causing minor, but nevertheless, important damage to the target.
Conventional wars have traditionally been very lengthy affairs: the American Civil War and both World Wars were all far longer than expected; all going on for at least a year.
In fact, while on the subject of World Wars, WW2 was probably brought to an abrupt end by Hiroshima.
It was the greatest nuclear bomb ever launched, weighing in at 20 kilotons, and its destruction was infamous, never to be forgotten.
Conventional weapons would not have much of an offensive application in a world war in this era.
The greatest, and definitely the most telling damage would be done by nuclear armaments.
This is one of the reasons why governments feel the need for nuclear weapons.
UnConventional weapons, concentrating on the nuclear aspect, would not be as accurate as conventional weapons, and accuracy is important.
(Prof. Michael Pentz calculated that while a tenfold increase in power would only increase effectiveness by 4½ times, a tenfold increase in accuracy would give a hundredfold increase in effectiveness.)
This surely gives grounds for greater weapons development and investment; if a more accurate weapon could take the place of one hundred others.
The argument about increased accuracy and destruction leads onto two which oppose such weapons.
The first is the cost in human lives.
That is to say the fear that people feel.
If weapons could be made so much more destructive, if used, the results would be cataclysmal, and could endanger the existence of the planet and all life on it.
The results of Hiroshima were horrific.
A 20 kiloton bomb killed 1 million people and many thousands would have been blinded while more would suffer cancer, leukaemia and various other diseases caused by this gross destruction.
The land all over Japan would have been devastated and the cities of Nagasaki and Hiroshima were virtually obliterated.
Perhaps as one remembers this, one could pause to think that we have weapons 1000 times more powerful than the ones which caused this destruction.
If a 20 Megaton bomb were used today the damage would be incalculable.
This statement in turn leads onto the second question: Why?
What is the point of having a bomb that could instantly destroy the city of Glasgow?
This immense destruction, not to mention the long term damage caused by nuclear fallout, would linger for years.
(Chernobyl, the Soviet nuclear reactor which blew up in January 1987 caused nuclear traces to be recorded over 2000 miles away in the sheep of Scotland.)
The basic fact is that there is no point in having such a terribly destructive nuclear ‘deterrent’ anywhere.
If used, it will almost definitely start a nuclear world war, and if not, it is just a waste of resources and a treacherous device to disarm.
With conventional weapons, the destruction is not so drastic, far more controlled, and more accurate and economical.
Armies are the main conventional weapon and have been around for over five millennia in various forms.
Even Switzerland has an army,(albeit more pageantry than practicality), in the Swiss Guard.
Armies are not as feared by Western nations as they are by countries in Latin or South American countries (to which I will refer later), in fact in the UK, by an attempt to cut government spending, it was revealed that there is great support for the army.
The incident I am referring to is the government's plan to shrink and disband many major regiments throughout Britain.
This was met with such ferocious opposition by politicians, high ranking officers and public alike, that the government for the most part stepped down.
It seems, though people would rather not see it put into combat, the army has a definite role in the modern civilisation.
The British Royal Navy also is a source of national pride, and though it may not be as true today, ‘Britain rules the waves’ is a claim people would like to be able to make.
Navies all over the world do more than just try and blow each other out of the water, or go on  desperate  reconnaissance missions as seen on TV.
They police waterways, clean coastlines, help ships in trouble, and are basically an integral part of international co-operation and patrol.
Another justified project for investment is ‘anti-missile missiles’.
These include such types as the $4 million a throw ‘Patriot’ missile which were utilised during the Gulf War.
These were highly effective and accurate, and certainly saved a vast amount of lives.
I say that this type of equipment is necessary because until we can be sure all major rockets and missiles have gone, there will always be a chance of such offensive capabilities ‘falling into the wrong hands’ and that may result in terrible consequences.
There are many reasons why governments feel the need to spend so much on weapons and military equipment.
Different governments have different motives, depending on how radical and also how democratic they actually are.
For some governments (particularly Latin and South American) the vast military spending is so they can enforce their regimes and keep protests and activists well at bay.
Some have armies and weapons because they fear that, come a war, they would need protection and defences.
Linked to this is the upkeep of military forces and armaments for domestic reasons.
This was especially true in Ethiopia and around the Persian Gulf where there were wars fought within countries.
That is one of the reasons that many of the developing nations are so poor; money is ploughed into supporting armies and wars with little thought or notice taken of the underlying causes of these situations, such as famine and dissatisfaction.
Some countries (increasingly more Western countries, and especially the CIS) cannot afford to lay off army and other forces because of the mass unemployment and possible poverty that people might face.
A few other countries, especially America, feel the urge to strive towards perfection ploughing literally trillions of dollars into defence programmes such as‘Star Wars’, ‘Stealth’, ‘Patriot’ and many, many, others.
This is really unnecessary spending.
To be so far ahead of other worldwide countries is really just a gratuitous deterrent.
In summary, governments have many reasons for spending so much on defence.
Whatever the reason may be: investment programmes, wars, fears of conflict, or the enforcement of a regime, they all stem from global mistrust and deception, and such great amounts of money could be directed in other ways if people all trusted each other and armament production was open.
Until this happens people will always feel the threat of a ‘10/6’ dictator popping up somewhere and causing great global conflict damaging the fragile, but nevertheless improving balance of world power.
War Poem
The Great War was too great;
too great for me to contemplate.
While they went off to save our lands
I knelt down and joined my hands.
In my mind I'm racked with pain;
that little white feather nags at my brain.
It begs the question: ‘Why should I be
the one who prays on bended knee?’
While brave men fight to defend a line.
I dig myself into my sacrosanct shrine.
A victim of my pious breeding;
not rugby and games but church and reading.
Why can't I be but one more sheep —
shepherded bleating to trenches deep,
To fight the good fight as everyone should,
and foil the Huns as a real man would.
But such is my lot; without a spine
I can but pray it will all be fine.
ROMAN POLANSKI
Witches on beach instead of in forest (at start)
Decent sets/Decent clothing/Decent actors
Duncan is a lot younger and stronger
Text is very heavily edited → large chunks missed out
 Macbeth finds witches, instead of witches appearing around  Macbeth 
Banquo is a lot younger than in other play
Much more atmosphere and reality than in play
 Macbeth is not happy to see Ross etc, as in play
Different speeches mixed around
Very different interpretations of the text
Lady  Macbeth is more glamorous and styled than in play.
Parts of speaking just used as person's thoughts.
 Macbeth obviously is unpleased at crowning of Prince of Cumberland.
 Macbeth and Lady  Macbeth act much more happily together than in play
Lady  Macbeth acts much harder during ‘direst cruelty’ bit.
Actual murder scene shown.
 Macbeth seems indecisive, but kills Duncan because Duncan wakes, and cries out.
Takes out the whole aim of the play.
 Macbeth shouldn't have been indecisive about the murder.
Says ‘Wake Duncan with thy knocking, I would thou could'st’ in an angry way, instead of sorrowfully.
Bit of a funny dream sequence in the middle.
Ross is made to be third murderer.
Banquo sacrifices his own life to save his sons.
Il y a beaucoup des witches dans la video.
The apparitions (especially the third one) are very different.
There's a bit of a lack of a second messenger to warn Lady Macduff.
The bit with Seyton (after the sleep walking) is changed
Ross's telling of the Macduff family slaughter is in the wrong place (later)
Ross changes sides because  Macbeth doesn't reward him well enough.
Donalbain appears at the end to visit the witches.
MACBETH
Malcolm's reaction to  Macbeth becoming Thane of Cawdor → doesn't like him.
The costumes are crap, out of character, and more Victorian than medieval.
Makes the play seem crap → cannot fully imagine the scenes.
Duncan is very old.
Banquo is quite old.
Malcolm, meant to be a teenager, is in his 20's
They have no sets at all, just plain coloured backgrounds.
Makes the film lose a sense of atmosphere.
Duncan's religiousness is being very heavily emphasized
He is meant to have been a brave warrior, but now looks very old and weak.
Lady  Macbeth is meant to be glamorous and powerful.
In the video she is dressed in plain black robes and a head cloth.
Makes her seem less important/powerful
Lady  Macbeth acts frightened when she does her ‘direst cruelty’ bit
 Macbeth and Lady  Macbeth appear to have a very intense relationship