

Extra Travel Insurance…
For those who would rather stay at home
Travelling this year?
You're not alone.
Millions are on the move worldwide.
But not everyone is travelling for business or pleasure.
Many of the world's travellers would rather stay at home.
Right now in Ethiopia and Eritrea, hundreds of thousands of families are hoping that they won't have to go away this year.
But unless food reaches drought-stricken areas they will have no choice.
Relief camps will be their destination.
Despite the war Christian Aid is managing to bring food across the border to people in their villages.
In this way fewer people will have to travel in search of food this summer.
Food is not the only problem.
In this time of drought, many have sold their possessions to feed their families.
Practical help is also needed if they are to start again.
Seeds for planting, tools for cultivation and oxen for ploughing are just some examples of the long-term help being given.
In this way famine can be prevented now and in the future.
Help such as this is a form of ‘travel insurance’— it insures families against the need to travel for food.
But it is costly.
Grain to feed a family of four for a month costs about £14.40, seeds and tools to equip a farmer about £5 and an ox which a community can share about £200.
Your help is needed in taking out extra ‘travel insurance’ this summer so that fewer people in Ethiopia and Eritrea are forced to travel in search of food.
Please consider giving a penny to Christian Aid for every mile you travel.
A round trip to London would provide a hoe for a farmer, while a trip to Sydney would provide an ox a community can share.
‘HOME & AWAY’
‘I want to give to charity, but I'm torn between helping someone ‘on my own doorstep’ or in the Third World’.
You're not alone…and with Home & Away you can do both.
Three major charities, Christian Aid, SCIAF and Shelter Scottish Campaign for the Homeless, have joined together for form Home & Away.
Together we will enable your donation to help Scotland's homeless and poorly housed people and at the same time answer emergency appeals — like the Ethiopian famine — build fresh water wells, and hospitals in developing nations.
— For the price of a newspaper or a bar of chocolate you can help someone at home and away —
Home-Help and Foreign Aid
PAYROLL CONSORTIUM
NAME: COMMON CONCERNS
What do Christian Aid, SCIAF and Shelter have in common?
Working together with the poor at home and abroad, Christian Aid, SCIAF and Shelter share the same concerns, this: to bring about lasting change in communities and to give people renewed dignity and hope.
Christian Aid and SCIAF act for the Scottish Churches in working together with local people overseas for a more just world, promoting relief and development programmes in Asia, Africa and Latin America.
Shelter in Scotland has a network of housing aid centres which give advice and practical help to homeless people.
It also funds innovative schemes to provide secure homes for young and old.
CHRISTIAN AID
Review 1990
From the above we see that LAC arranged for 4 visitors, were in contact with 14 area secretaries and 19 visits in all were made.
AME brought 5 visitors, contacted 15 area secretaries and again, 19 visits were made.
AP brought 2 visitors and contacted (to our knowledge) 5 area secretaries, making 5 visits.
The information is based on what was sent to the Area Staff Office in 1990.
The number of area secretaries participating in visits once or more were as follows:.
However, Ireland makes some separate arrangements eg. the R of I relationship with Middle East visitors.
OVERSEAS VISITORS PROGRAMME
Draft Procedure
It is clear that despite the continuing success and positive feedback from the Programme the difficulties of organisation hinder a much better sharing between the Regions.
The objective should be to get at least one overseas visitor from each Overseas Group into each of the eight Regions within any two year period.
Evidence suggests that Regions find it difficult to do business on the rather competitive ‘put in your bids’ basis.
It must be a bit of a nightmare for the person trying to organise the itinerary at Waterloo.
It is also unfortunately still true that the Area Staff Office receives very partial information from the Groups and therefore finds it difficult to play much of a coordinating role in the process.
And despite repeated requests, there are occasions when Groups relate directly to Area Secretaries instead of Coordinators, as previously agreed.
Within the proviso therefore, that short-term visitors only may be offered to individual area secretaries, I would like to make the following proposals for which I am indebted to area staff colleagues for their help:
1.
That we adopt a system of Primary and Secondary Visits which would operate over a two year period.
We can assume that each Overseas Group has about four visitors per year.
There are eight Regions.
The Regions would take turns in being Primary and Secondary hosts — the primary visit would be for about two weeks and the secondary for about one week.
The plan, outlined in the table below would result in each Region hosting one visitor from each of the Overseas Groups as a Primary host and one visitor from each Overseas Group as a secondary host within two years.
Looked at from the Overseas Groups point of view, the pattern would look something like this:
2.
That Education Advisers (and other colleagues) meet face to face with Coordinators to discuss their proposed programme of overseas visitors for the coming year.
This meeting would transact primary and secondary visits as described.
I would be happy to convene such a meeting with such other colleagues present who expressed the need (eg. Education, Communications, etc).
3.
All subsequent communications about overseas visitors itineraries to be conducted with Coordinators only.
Making arrangements with individual area secretaries works against the objective of achieving any kind of balance within or between Regions.
Coordinators would be responsible for arranging the itineraries within their Region with their area secretaries.
4.
In addition to the two blocks of time suggested (Primary and Secondary) there would be time for briefing, rest and relaxation and de-briefing.
A day or two at the beginning, a day or two between Regions and again a day or two at the end of the visit should cover these needs.
Not all visits would be for four weeks and not every Group would have exactly four visitors each year.
But with reasonable adjustments of time and numbers, I propose that this arrangement could be considered.
It seeks to reduce the numbers of people to whom Education Advisers relate in the area staff, gives Coordinators and their area secretaries the responsibility of organising programmes within their own Regions and finally, achieves the sort of balance between Regions and Overseas Groups we have sought and so far failed to achieve.
Staff Council — SMT Papers — Comments
CONSULTATION
A more relevant question perhaps is not HOW the consultative process works but whether any notice is taken!
On balance I feel that we have far too many consultative papers and an awful lot of stages of process on many things that are not central.
However when we had a crucial area such as the future of Church Relations, decisions seem to have been taken.
And I am not entirely persuaded that the views of colleagues in this matter were given adequate weight when the final decision was taken.
COMMUNICATION
I welcome a more  requent update on Matrix Staff list to keep abreast of all the changes.
Also summaries of minutes/decisions would be helpful.
SABBATICALS
I  don't think really that we can argue for these in view of the other agencies' policies.
TOPR is fine but only for those who can afford to be effectively unemployed for several months.
I think that they might seem to be an indulgence to supporters more than partners, even if they offered training/education.
Clearly there is a difference in CA providing me with a sabbatical to study drought in Africa and one to work on Scottish Coins or Candles (!)
But it may be that the way forward is to look at secondment (from the Dublin office has been seconded to  Sri Lanka for several months.
WORKLOAD
I find this a very hard nut to crack.
As a Manager I try to keep an eye on staff working too long (allowing for some ‘gift time’ to CA which we all give!)
Certainly we are trying in ASMT to get the ‘core Tasks’ reduced but will this help?
All that we do is varied, much is reactive, a good deal is hard to plan with any real consistency.
Waterloo folk rarely have callers off the street.
No great wisdom here I'm afraid.
Christian Aid
Schedule for Campaigns for 1991–96
In the two papers ‘Procedures for Campaigning’ and ‘Campaigns and the Overseas Group’, the procedures to be followed in agreeing, resourcing and conducting Christian Aid campaigns are set out.
This paper sets out the overall timetable for the information of all staff.
Main Campaigns
The major campaign for Christian Aid each year is Christian Aid Week and the build up to it.
The other main campaigns, which all parts of the organisation will support, are as follows:
April 1991 to March 1992 — Debt
September 1992 to August 1993 — 1992, Europe and Trade.
During the calendar year 1992 there will be an educational emphasis on Latin America.
Latin America will feature in the Lent materials, probably Christian Aid Week, and will be highlighted in the Festival.
The 1992, Europe and Trade campaign, beginning in September 1992, will have an emphasis on Latin America for the first four months and then for the remainder of the year will focus on Europe and Trade in the global context.
September 1993 to August 1994 — People and Trees.
In 1991/92 the process of agreeing the campaign for 1994/95 will be initiated, and in 1992/93 for 1995/96.
From January until July 1992, whilst the debt campaign is running down and before the 1992 and Trade campaign is under way, there will be some emphasis on the environment.
This will take account of the external realities of the major UN Environment Conference in Brazil in June and the One World TV broadcasts in May.
Christian Aid will centrally lobby and support both events.
We will produce limited resources: a major popular book, a short report and some support material.
The 1992 Christian Aid Week theme would take this emphasis and Latin America into account.
Group Campaigns
The three overseas groups have each identified as part of their five year plan the major campaigning issue from their regions, and will be preparing limited materials and campaign plans to support work on these issues.
The campaigns will be managed, supported and promoted primarily by the staff of the relevant Group.
The materials will be promoted centrally and will be available through the Area Secretaries.
The degree of promotion and support provided by Area Secretaries to these campaigns will depend upon agreements within their Region and Nation, their own work plans, and agreements made with the relevant overseas Group.
The Latin America and Caribbean Group will major on 1992 and a celebration of Latin America.
1992 marks the 500th anniversary of the arrival of Columbus.
The Latin America Group will focus on providing an alternative celebration looking at what Latin America has provided for Europe and sharing the inspiration, courage and culture of the people of the region.
This educational campaign will run for the whole of 1992.
The Group will continue to provide support for Central America Week in March, and will be investigating in the first few years of the five year period the possibility of raising the profile of the Andean countries.
The Africa and Middle East Group has prioritised the Palestinians for its major campaigning work.
The intention is that it should be the major Group priority for two years from September 1991.
A package of materials (written, visual, marketing) will be provided, as well as the possibility of visits, visitors, conferences, and an urgent action mailing.
The Southern Africa mailing list will continue to be serviced and new names can be added to it, but there will be no active promotion of it.
The Horn of Africa is likely to remain a high profile emergency area and highly focused sporadic and urgent campaigning work may be required from time to time.
The Asia and Pacific Group has prioritised Cambodia for their major campaigning work, and expect this to continue throughout at least 1991 and 1992.
The Cambodia work  is an ongoing campaign with a mailing list providing three mailings per year.
It involves being alert to particular developments in the situation for which campaigning action is required.
The Group intends to continue some focused work on the Philippines but this will be carried out primarily through the Philippines Ecumenical Network, and through the autumn 1991 IBT programmes.
The production of materials has to be timetabled with care both because of the work load of the print and design team and also for the promotion and marketing of them.
There are only a limited number of possibilities for public launches of campaigns and campaign materials, and only a limited number of points in the year at which materials can be promoted centrally.
The latter relate to the mailings for Christian Aid News.
The proposed schedule for the next two years in relation to promotion of materials through the Christian Aid mailing is as follows:
April to June 1991 — Debt materials
July to September 1991 — Cambodia focus.
October to December 1991 — Palestinian materials.
January to March 1992 — 1992 and Latin America materials.
April to June 1992 — the major Christian Aid book and other environment related materials.
July to September 1992 — currently open, probably a further promotion of the book and environment.
October to December 1992 — 1992 and Trade materials focusing on Latin America.
January to March 1992 — a further promotion of 1992 and Trade materials, possibly with a more Global and Europe focus.
The proposed timetable for public platforms/launches as far as these can be scheduled is as follows:
April 17th 1991 — Joint agency Cambodia day with photo call, parliamentary lobby and public meeting.
July 1991 — Debt platform around the G7 London meeting.
Autumn 1991 — Palestinian materials.
Early 1992 — 1992 and Latin America.
April 1992 — the Christian Aid book and the environment.
August or September 1992 — 1992 and Trade.
First quarter of 1993 — further launch of Trade and Europe matters.
External factors must affect the timing of particular events and the points at which we highlight and are particularly proactive about specific issues.
The above is not therefore intended to be totally inflexible even when agreed.
But it does provide a framework to which we are all working, spreads out the major publications and pieces of campaigning work, and allows all those in the organisation to know the overall timetable being pursued.
It is intended that such a timetable should be updated and agreed for circulation to staff each April.
ACTIF Development Education Worker Project
Members of the funding agencies, the Area Secretary and the ACTIF Chair met with  to discuss the way forward for Falkirk Development Education.
We were all happy with the work of  in becoming a facilitator in the region but felt that she needed to have an outlet for displaying materials and that we needed to ensure a fair wage for the development education worker.
I recommend that we increase the grant recommended to £1,500 (At the November meeting of SCAC, £1,050 was agreed.) and give a one-off grant of £250 to buy display stands.
You are invited to meet  Christian Aid Partner from Uganda at   on Friday, 28th May at 8.00 p.m. for a Buffet Supper
It would be helpful if you could let us know whether or not you can come.
Also, if you need directions, please be in touch.
Re: Pay Negotiations
At the meeting of the Staff Salaries Committee (SSC) on 14th February, no agreement could be reached on the recommendation to go forward to the Finance and Staffing Committee (F&S) on 5th March on the pay award for 1991/2.
This is mainly because of the continuing difference in opinion between the staff-side reps (ACTS, NUJ and Staff Council) and the other members of SSC (SMT and Board/F&S members) on the question of a reduction in pay differentials.
As SSC has only consultative, not decision-making status, this means that a recommendation will go to F&S not from SSC as a whole but from the Board members who sit on both SSC and F&S, and .
Their proposal will not be finalised until a few days before the F&S meeting on 5th March, but seems likely to be for a 9% pay increase (the lower figure of price inflation and the average national wage increase), with no reduction in differentials.
It is unclear at present what the proposal will say about London Weighting (LW).
At SSC on 14th Feb, a proposal devised by SMT was tabled whereby LW would increase to £1,780 for Grade 3 and 4 staff, but only to £1,571 for all other staff.
This was firmly rejected by the staff-side reps, who have maintained throughout the negotiations that the original agreement on LW should be adhered to, that it should be considered separately from the rest of the negotiations, and that LW needs to be a flat-rate, across-the-board payment to compensate for the costs incurred by working in London.
It remains to be seen to what extent these concerns will be taken into account in the final proposal.
You were asked recently to vote on the forms of action you would prefer to take in support of the shop's position on the reduction of pay differentials.
As there has been no movement on this issue, this action now needs to begin.
Writing to members of F&S and direct contact by shop officers with members of F&S got the most votes, so you are now asked to sign, date and send the attached ‘model’ letter to  (who is Chair of both F&S and SSC), or better still write your own version of the letter, to make your feelings clear.
Please use a stamp rather than the Christian Aid mail!— the cost of your stamp can be refunded by the shop.
If you feel moved to write to other Board members of F&S as well, please ask  for a list of names and addresses.
Please send your letter(s) as soon as possible, to arrive by Monday 4th March — the day before F&S — at the latest.
The more letters are received, the more attention is likely to be paid to the strength of staff feeling, so pleas join in the action.
We will keep you posted with the results of this letter-writing campaign.
If it has no effect, members will be consulted again on ways of stepping up the action.
Amendment for the ACTS extraordinary meeting 13 March 1991
The Union — regrets the Decision of the F&S Committee to reject the Unions and Staff Council's common proposal on the reduction of Grade 1 to 4 differentials.
The Union regrets also that the Director is unable to see that there is a genuine issue of justice involved.
However, in view of our common and primary commitment to serving our partners:
The Union — resolves to set up a working group to consider which are the most important and most  achievable pay issues to campaign on next year.
Issues to consider should include:
Proposed amendments to the draft job description for Coordinators
Section 2 to read: The Coordinator as part of his/her responsibility is part Area Secretary for a geographical area with no more than approximately a quarter of a million population.
The UK/I group has a Head of Group and Head of Area Staff.
Policies and priorities are the final responsibility of the Head of UK/I.
However, seeing these are carried out satisfactorily and that adequate resources are made available for doing so, is the responsibility of the Head Area Staff.
The Coordinator is finally responsible to the Head of Area Staff who is himself/herself responsible to the Head of UK/I for ensuring that UK/I priorities for work are pursued in Regions and Nations.
The Coordinator is responsible to the Head of Area Staff for the work patterns of Area Secs and Admin Assistants in their individual regions for matters dealing with resources.
Add 2 further items
k)
Ensuring that his/her colleagues work to implement UK/I policies, both individually and as a team.
l)
Encouraging regional initiatives which fall within UK/I policies.
CONFIDENTIAL to 
I have drafted this as an aid to our discussion on 26th Nov on the role of National Secretaries.
I ask that at this stage at least it be kept confidential among us, as it could be understood in the wrong way.
It reflects some current concerns, and also questions which do not arise  specifically at the moment, but which we ought to realise may arise in the future.
It is not an attempt to put my own view, but to set the parameters for a useful discussion.
I have framed it largely in the form of questions.
In some cases, I do not even know what my own opinion is.
Obviously any of the rest of you may feel some of these are irrelevant, or that other important ones should be added.
This is not intended as an exhaustive list.
I have always had the understanding that the National Secretary had a general responsibility for all CA activity in his/her country.
Is this true or not?
Certainly it was the view adopted, for example, when we had a 6 month interregnum in Dublin, and it was assumed it was my responsibility to hold the fort.
However, recently I have had the impression that this attitude no longer prevails in CA.
If this general statement is not correct, I then need to have a complete new understanding of what my job is, and the rest of this paper is irrelevant.
If the statement is acceptable, then we need clarification about what it means in practice.
I list a series of questions which need answers:
1.
Is National secretary to be involved in decisions on staffing, and in decision making about staffing, whether Admin staff or Area Secretaries?
2.
Is National secretary to be involved in decisions involving budgets for which his region is responsible?(not just informed, involved)
3.
Is the Nat Sec the person through whom all dealings with the nation's Churches at central level are to be conducted (eg Synods, Assemblies, central  women's organisations, youth offices etc)?
4.
Is Nat Sec the person through whom all dealings with government departments are to be channelled (eg Dept of Education, Dept of Environment who are responsible for house to house collections in N.I)?
5.
Is Nat Sec responsible for the running of the National Office?
Is he also a key person in any decisions made about the other offices which may exist or be proposed in his nation?
6.
What is the role of the Nat Sec in relation to Area Secs and vice versa.
Does Nat Sec have any responsibility at all to ensure that the work is being done, and if so what is Nat Sec expected to do if an Area Sec does not appear to be doing his/her job effectively?
Conversely, is the Area Sec under obligation to keep the Nat Sec in touch with his/her work, or is he/she answerable only to Ken?
The Area Sec has the right to relate directly to Waterloo, but how does this relate to the role of Nat Sec who needs to be informed?
Another practical question arises here.
Given that the role of Nat Sec is different in part from that of Coordinator in England, how does the job description of a Scots, Welsh or Irish Area Sec need to differ from that of an English Area Sec?
7.
What is the role of Nat Sec when HQ writes to Churches in our nations or to supporters?
Are we right to fight for responses to be channelled through National offices, rather than directly to Waterloo.
This arises in connection with appeals (Bangladesh, Christmas, which had reply paid envelopes to London), with the link in every congregation etc.
Is national Sec right to expect that the national office will be seen as the normal point of contact with people in his nation?
8.
What is the role of the National Secretary when a colleague is off ill, on an overseas trip, a holiday or when there is a vacancy?
I am sure you will wish to add to this list of questions.
Ken has  encouraged me to circulate this, although he has not seen it in detail.
Perhaps if you wish to add questions, it might be helpful if you could circulate them amongst the 4 of us before the 26th.
Best wishes to you all.
TEN STATEMENTS ON CHRISTIAN AID
1.
Christian Aid spends every penny of its money overseas.
2.
Christian Aid spends its money mostly on Christians.
3.
Christian Aid has projects in every country in the world.
4.
Christian Aid is mainly involved in responding to disasters.
5.
Christian Aid is very careful never to make any political statements.
6.
Christian Aid has lots of Government money.
7.
Christian Aid does not encourage child sponsorship.
8.
Christian Aid works ecumenically.
9.
Christian Aid does not have any staff overseas.
10.
Christian Aid is owned by you.
Thank you for your interest in learning about those you have helped this Christian Aid Week.
Let me tell you a little more about a couple of them.
Meet …
lives in southern Ethiopia.
Her health began to fail during the recent drought and as a result she had to give up her job.
Without money for food and medicine her condition became worse.
She had previously benefitted from a credit and loan scheme, but had been unable to continue due to lack of funds.
However a project worker saw her condition and paid the amount needed to renew her subscription.
This provided her with some seeds and a loan to buy a goat.
The seed has now grown to produce a healthy harvest and the goat has had four kids.
has sold one of them to repay the loan and is keeping the others for when times get harsh.
And …
is a 20-year-old nursery school teacher in the village of Goorookelle in Sri Lanka.
Even though most of the 40 or so mothers cannot afford the 35 pence-a-month school fees, will not turn the children away.
The children's mothers are tea pluckers and earn as little as £1 for a full day's work.
For many of the families, home is a single room with no clean water supply and no toilet.
Skin sores and diarrhoea, caused by poor diet and dirty water are a familiar problem for adults and children alike.
's classroom is the village community centre, which is also used to provide literacy and health care classes for the children's mothers.
Christian Aid supports many people like  and  in their efforts to overcome the effects of poverty in their everyday lives.
The enclosed copy of our annual report gives you some idea of the full scope of our work.
While the ‘Welcome to Christian Aid’ leaflet summarises what we do, what we can offer and how you can get involved.
Finally, we would like to keep you informed about our work by sending you our latest news every quarter.
Do let us know if you would rather not receive this information.
Thank you once again for your interest.
MONTHLY REPORTS FOR AREA SECRETARIES
I enclose the revised monthly report (no longer a questionnaire as such) which takes account of the comments of people who replied.
It aims to relate to the main area of the job description, but also leaves space for people to say what seems to them significant with more freedom.
The only ‘box’ which survives from the old system relates to contact with key people in the constituency.
‘Committees’ means both actual committees but also individuals or organisers listed as committees.
The box should give an indication of the number of times you have been in touch personally while nature and content can be filled in through what you enter in the rest of the sections space.
I hope regions/countries will continue to share these reports, as those who hitherto have done so have found the practice useful.
The concern that colleagues find a fulfilling balance between work and the rest of their lives is dealt with in the TOIL/Flexitime Section attached.
Messages should be sent separately, direct to the central office group/sector/person addressed with a copy to Head of Area Staff.
Having tried several adjustments to the system over the past 6 years, I hope this provides a format which will serve us for a good while into the future.
It won't suit everyone entirely — how could it if people's (varying) comments and suggestions are taken into account — but one general desire is for a more open approach.
While some appreciated the more structured approach of the questionnaire, most wanted more space and less detail.
I do want to record that during the past colleagues have, almost without exception, done their best to work the system and I have greatly appreciated that.
There remains a couple of concerns even though I think this pattern will serve.
In the delicate balance between trust and accountability, an Area Secretary should be confident that her/his report will always be acknowledged on the basis of its having been given serious attention.
Equally, the principle of ‘direct access’ to Head of Area Staff should be preserved.
I think both principles remain given this system.
It is not possible to personally do this for 45 Area Secretaries monthly, so the new Monthly Report is dealt with as follows:
1.
It is filled in each month and sent (no later than the 15th of the following month) to the Co-ordinator/National Secretary.
2.
The Co-ordinator will acknowledge and comment if necessary.
3.
The Co-ordinator will include significant items in her/his own Regional Report, sent to Head of Area Staff monthly (by the end of the following month).
I attach a document which describes the network of the Report.TOIL/Flexitime procedures.
One report will suffice for July and August making for 11 Reports per year.
If there are any problems with these procedures, please try to resolve them in the Region/Country, otherwise, contact me and we will try to reach a solution.
Thank you for your time and patience.
TEN STATEMENTS
CHRISTIAN AID
1.
Is an official agency of the British and Irish Churches
2.
Is responsible to a Board of trustees drawn mainly from the churches.
3.
Does not have overseas based staff but works mainly through partner Churches and Councils of Churches.
4.
Seeks to ‘Strengthen the Poor’ in their struggle for dignity and  fullness of life.
5.
Seeks to  serve all, regardless of their creed, though not unrespectful of their beliefs.
6.
Is concerned more about justice than charity.
7.
Currently campaigns on International Debt.
8.
Co-funds many projects with government or EEC money.
9.
Spends 4% of its funds on Development Education here.
10.
Is committed to work ecumenically at home and overseas.
TRAVEL INFORMATION UPDATE
We feel that the experiences of some staff over the last few months would be beneficial to all people who travel overseas, and so we have collated various pieces of information which we hope will be useful to you.
1.
Insurance.
Everyone who travels abroad should have a copy of the attached insurance sheet which gives the emergency number to contact should the need arise.
This sheet should be readily available in each Group and need not be obtained from Finance.
On a minor point about insurance, if you should be unfortunate in having money stolen from you, this will not be paid back by insurers unless the theft has been reported to the police in the particular country.
We have had a couple of occasions where the money cannot be claimed back recently, so this is just to inform you of the position that the insurers are taking.
2.
Travel Agents
We have noticed over the last few months at Cadogan Travel seem to be noticeably more expensive than the other travel agents used by Christian Aid.
It would seem sensible, therefore, to try and avoid using them as far as possible.
We have arranged credit facilities with another travel agent Gray Dawes, as well as Key Travel, which enables Christian Aid to book tickets without having to pay in advance.
The address and telephone number of Gray Dawes is:.
3.
Money
When ordering money or travellers cheques, please inform  at least 6 working days before you need to collect them to allow time for them to be ordered by the bank.
To avoid mistakes, please would you use the new form attached to make your order, signed by your Head of Group/Sector  rather than using a memo as was the case before.
When you come to write up your expenses from overseas trips, please make it very clear if Christian Aid owes you money, preferably by attaching a yellow to the account.
This will avoid any delay in making payment to you, otherwise this might be missed until the next reconciliation of the travel accounts.
4.
Who's Who in Finance
Finally, it might be useful to have a list of who does what in Finance when it comes to overseas travel.
Here it is:
We hope all this makes sense and is useful.
Please don't worry about asking anyone in Finance if at all unclear.
QUESTIONS ABOUT CV PROCEDURES
Who makes sure the CV is invited to induction/other training courses?
mention the NS — national secretary — as well as RC
make it clear that the contract letter is sent by the VC
clarify procedure for ending a contract is CV unsuitable
Who sends the CV mailings? both London and area? who decides what to send?
Clarify role of RC/NS at appointment stage and then regarding review of CV work
AREA SECRETARIES' PRIORITIES IF RESOURCES WERE INFINITE
schools and youth work 10
systematic visits to clergy 8
more time to work with links, groups and train organisers 8
exhibitions and bookstalls 5
GAYE, RSI, work with companies 4
smaller areas/more area secs. 4
newsletters 2
South Africa networks 3
work on government policy/MPs 2
WHAT CVs ARE DOING ALREADY (33)
taking materials into schools
speaking/preaching
exhibitions
S Africa detainees networking
Traidcraft
development ed. with adult groups
media promotion
Changemakers
RSI and GAYE
contacts with clergy
encouraging CAW support
congregational links
Dev. ed. resource centres
survey/research on CAW
area newsletters
New ideas for tasks for CVs
CV to co-ordinate volunteers in area
CV shared between CA and Cafod to build prayer, study, action groups
‘NON-CONTRACT’ VOLUNTEERS
number of A/S using volunteers for speaking/preaching 14
mailings 13
looking after office 9
exhibitions/graphics 7
other tasks mentioned:
sources for volunteers included: members of CA board for Ireland and for Wales, and scholarship students as speakers using members of the family to ‘office sit’ and to do the graphics
LOOKING AFTER VOLUNTEERS
tea/coffee 11 offer 4 don't
lunch money 2 sometimes offer 12 don't
fares 6 offer 4 don't some just offer fares to speakers
London team gives an honorarium to office sitters of £5–£10 for a day
who looks after vols?
training? only to explain job or office routine; selected material given to speakers; occasional regional or area conference
GUIDANCE FOR HOLDING SPONSORED EVENTS ON PUBLIC HIGHWAYS
Concern has been expressed in many quarters about recent apparent changes in the attitude of the police to Charity Sponsored Walks, etc. on public highways.
One or two local CA committees with long established events have experienced a sudden complete lack of support and co-operation from the police.
The Scottish Churches Christian Aid Committee has been investigating and has had a helpful meeting with a senior representative of the Association of Chief Police Offices (Scotland)(ACPO).
The ACPO in Scotland, as also in England and Wales, has made a policy decision about sponsored events which has brought about the above situation.
The ACPO feels that they are in a cleft stick.
If they do not support public charity events their relationship with the public can suffer; but if some major accident occurs on one such event, they will be open to criticism.
Their opinion is that sponsored events on public highways are dangerous and place participants at unnecessary risk, and they have decided they will no longer support them.
An application by any local charity to hold such an event will almost certainly be given a standard reply on these lines:
a)
On road safety grounds the police do not support the event.
b)
The potential dangers of the event are stressed.
c)
The possibility of a damage claim, should an accident occur due to the event being held on the highway, is highlighted.
d)
Safer alternatives off the public road are recommended.
Our meeting with the ACPO representative did not bring about any change in this position, and we had to admit that we shared their concern for road safety.
What was clearly stated was that the police have now powers as such to ban an event, unless it can be shown to be a public nuisance, and that they have no desire to fall out with all the local charities.
Convenors of local committees are still encouraged to go along to the police and to discuss their plans for an event with them.
While their position is that they will not approve sponsored events on public highways, we have been assured that they will not be unnecessarily unco-operative or unhelpful.
Our advice to local organisers is therefore first of all to hold your event in a public park or along country walks if at all possible.
If you cannot avoid public roads, you should first of all discuss your plans with the police and then inform them of what you are doing.
They have no right to stop you and are likely to co-operate the more you consult with them and keep them informed.
We would however emphasise the importance of good stewarding, with or without the police.
To fail to have adequate stewarding would be to put participants at risk and to damage the good name of Christian Aid.
We have also checked with Christian Aid in London about insurance cover.
This is not affected by the withdrawal of police support but would be badly compromised by weak or inadequate stewarding of a sponsored event.
TRAINING PLAN JUSTIFICATION DEVELOPMENT SUMMARY
Topic
Target Group
Justification
Frequency/duration
To be delivered by
Word processing
Inter-church House staff
To support the investment in IT
2 basic and 2 advanced in-house courses of one day each
External trainer
Word processing
Area Staff
To support the investment in IT
15–20 one day internal courses in a tailored programme delivered regionally and also covering databases
Computer Unit and TO
Area Staff database
Area Staff
To support the investment in the development of this database
15–20 one day internal courses in a tailored programme delivered regionally and also covering WP
Computer Unit and TO
Aid Sector database
Aid Sector staff
To support the investment in the development of this database
3 one day internal courses
Computer Unit and TO
Computer training in specialist packages
as identified when packages are bought
To support investment in specialist packages (eg DTP and library systems
ad hoc External Trainers
Induction
All staff and CVs
To improve the assimilation of new staff into CA and reduce the time it takes for them to be working to full potential
2 internal courses of 1.5 days each, plus development of induction materials and of the induction process as a whole
TO
Induction
Newly recruited overseas staff
To improve the assimilation of new overseas staff into CA and Britain, and reduce the time it takes for them to be working to full potential
investigation of induction possibilities, included language training for staff member and/or family, briefings and possibly more formal external briefing programmes
TO and external providers
volunteers
Education Sector
Interviewing and equal opportunities
All staff who take part in selection interviewing
To support the equal opportunities policy and to ensure panel members are equipped to select the best candidates for CA posts
2 in-house courses of 1 or 1.5 days each
External trainer
Anti-racism
All staff
To support the equal opportunities policy and ensure that staff are equipped to develop anti-racist practices in their work
1 in-house course of 1–1.5 days per month
External trainer
Appraisal
All staff who appraise
To support the investment in the appraisal system and to improve working practices
4 internal courses of 1.5 days each
Appraisal Training Team
Recruiting volunteers
Area Secretaries
In support of the Area Staff Commission recommendation to change working practices
1 seminar of half a day or 1 day
TO and Volunteers Co-ordinator
Campaigning
To be identified by H of G and S and by campaign working groups
To support Group, Sector and working group campaigns
1 in-house course of one day
External trainer
Lobbying
To be identified by H of G and S and by campaign working groups
To support Group, Sector and working group campaigns
1 in-house course of one day
External trainer
Using AV materials and equipment
Area Secretaries
To support the investment in the production of AV materials, and to further corporate campaigns
2 internal courses of one day each, probably run in the regions
AV Unit
Specialist fundraising skills (eg payroll giving and corporate sponsorship
Fundraising Sector staff
To support the Sector's target of doubling income over five years and to develop Fundraising staff
ad hoc as external courses in specific subjects present themselves.
A tailor made programme of training to be run in-house is also under investigation
External training providers
Management
Grade 1 and 2 staff
To improve working practices, to develop staff and to improve staff support
2 in-house courses (duration to be determined)
TO and external trainer
Management
SMT
To improve working practices and staff support
1 in-house course (duration to be determined)
External trainer
Accessing the media
Area Secretaries
To support campaigning and promotional initiatives
2 internal courses of one day each
CPO and TO
Appearing in the media
Largely Area Secretaries, SMT, project staff and Group Journalists
To support campaigning, promotional and public policy initiatives
3 in-house courses of one day each
External training provider
Economics
SMT
To improve understanding of economics issues and therefore to support campaigning initiatives and professional aid practice
To be arranged by Head of Aid and SMT
Head of Aid
Development economics
Aid Sector staff
To improve understanding in this area and therefore to improve professional aid practice and partner support
4 short (1–2 hour) internal sessions
Head of Aid
Gender planning
Aid Sector staff
To support the equal opportunities policy and to encourage good practice in aid work
2 internal courses of 1 day each
Gender Planning Training Team
Group priority countries
All staff
To further Group campaigning initiatives
STC workshops
Group staff
Using CAW materials
To be determined by Education and Fundraising
To support the investment in materials production to further Fundraising's target of doubling income and to further Education Sector's development education priorities
1 in-house course (duration to be determined by Education Sector and Fundraising) Education Sector and Fundraising
Education Sector and Fundraising Sectors
TRAINING
[Story of the rich young man]
Good news for the poor is not immediately apparent as good news to the rich, who are asked to give up comforts.
Thus it is not an easy task facing those working in the UK to raise awareness about the causes of world poverty, and the dangers to the planet of Western hegemonic over-development, and the present economic order.
In the Philippines or in Latin America those working in the field of conscientization or community empowerment are confronted with deprivation and misery.
If they succeed in winning the confidence of their community that things can be changed, it is clearly in the immediately perceived interests of the people that they be changed.
Literacy, health care, community organization, improved agriculture, etc, are what people usually want.
Activists, educators, campaigners, call them what you will, have a tough task in this country, with an individualized, nuclear-family society reluctant to come to meetings of any sort, and a  resistance to being engaged by a message that in the short and medium term questions their lifestyle, material aspirations, and culturally-engrained assumptions that Our Way of Life is best.
Christian activists however have an advantage over their secular allies.
Only 10% go to Church in England, but that 10%, many of whom attend meetings during the week as well as Sunday service, represent the biggest single sector in British society that come together voluntarily and regularly in an intentional way that is focused on something to do with how human beings live their lives (i.e. not sport).
The decline in trade unionism is particularly significant here.
In other words, though the UK may be a hard nut to crack, Christians are better-positioned than any grouping other than Muslims to effect change here in an understanding of and commitment to strengthening the poor.
Unlike our sisters and brothers overseas, who are committed to programmes of human resource development, leadership programmes, our work in this field has gone largely unsupported by training in the skills needed to motivate and conscientize others.
It is assumed that anyone knows how to run a workshop, publicize a meeting, organize a local campaign, set up a committee — or whatever.
The list of appropriate and relevant, even necessary skills for being an effective organizer/activist/motivator is a long one.
Meanwhile in other areas of life, even church life, professionalization and training has been given an increasingly high profile.
Ministers are sent on courses to learn counselling skills and how to manage parish accounts.
Where do activists go to learn the skills necessary to their work?
Where is our Training for Transformation Centre?
We have so much to learn from youth and community training, as well as our partners overseas.
We need to learn fast.
TRAINING FOR CHRISTIAN SOCIAL ACTIVISTS: REQUEST FOR ADVICE
SPECIFIC PROPOSAL
I hope to visit relevant training programmes in the Philippines and Southern Africa, where possible participating as a trainee, in order to learn from the experience of those who have been undertaking this work for some years; and to identify elements in the training processes which may be transferrable or adaptable to a UK situation.
The purpose is to feed such methods into a future programme for training Christian Social Activists.
Should partners in the Philippines or South Africa wish to hear something of current British practice I would be delighted to offer a presentation.
I hope to visit the Philippines from September 1992 for four to five weeks, and Southern Africa in November 1992 for three to four weeks.
Christian Aid has agreed to my taking three months' unpaid leave, and the English-Speaking Union of the Commonwealth has kindly awarded me a bursary to cover costs of travel.
SPECIFIC REQUEST
I would be very grateful for a response, as soon as is convenient, covering if possible the following points:
1.
Does your organization have any programme of training you think would be relevant to human resource development; communication/presentation skills?
If so, could you send any information on the specific courses/training programme?
2.
Would the language medium include English?
3.
Would the training programme allow my participation as a trainee?
4.
Would it be possible to arrange accommodation?
5.
What are the costs?
6.
Can you recommend any other programmes of training which may be relevant?
BACKGROUND TO THE PROJECT
The more we discover about the interactions of world poverty, ecoclimate, world trade arrangements, debt, etc., the more important it becomes to raise awareness and change attitudes, campaign and lobby, in the rich countries of the North.
In the UK many organizations, including CIIR, Christian Aid, etc., are aware of this, and geared at getting supporters on board.
There is, however, no systematic training for volunteers who become concerned over issues like the rainforest, the debt problem.
We seem to assume, with rather typical British arrogance, that if, as volunteers, we become committed, we innately possess the knowledge and skills to recruit supporters; organize and publicize meetings, start and run effective committees; run workshops, organize campaigns; interact with the media.
My experience tells me that we do not all have all the necessary skills to do all these jobs well — it is often a hit and miss affair, with much poor practice.
There is training, though not enough, available at considerable expense to staff working for NGOs, but training for volunteers is patchy and unsystematic, where it exists at all.
To become more effective, we in the UK need more training for those who become involved.
Christian Aid has encouraged me to see whether it is feasible to work towards a nationally-recognized, cross-agency, accredited system of training in human resource development, concentrating on communication and campaigning skills, which would probably be organized in a modular/portfolio style.
ABOUT MYSELF
I have worked for Christian Aid, the ecumenical aid and development agency of the Protestant churches in the UK and Ireland, for seven years as Co-ordinator in the North West of England.
I lead a team of ten, dispersed around the region.
Our work is awareness raising on issues of international justice and development, primarily with different sections of the church constituency.
Included in our work is an element of training of volunteers, to multiply the work, and to increase the number of those committed to change in all the churches.
We are also involved in some training of professionals, e.g. church youth workers; clergy; Religious Education teachers.
My own background before joining Christian Aid was in adult education, in both the tertiary education sector, and in the nonformal sector.
I was also much involved, as a volunteer, in campaigning on a variety of issues concerned with peace and justice.
As I hope to leave Britain within four weeks I would be immensely grateful if you could Fax me back with a reply as soon as is convenient, as I need the information to determine when I should book an air ticket.
With very many thanks for your help,
BACKGROUND
Christian Aid in the North West is considering the feasibility of offering a systematic modular training for volunteer supporters.
This training will fall into three categories:
1.
Spiritual development — the ‘why’
Some examples: the bible and justice; integrating prayer and action; dealing with the pain of commitment; praying with the poor; images and meditation.
2.
Content — the ‘what’
Some examples: third-world debt; good and bad official aid; the effects of present trade structures on the countries of the South; theories of development; the arms trade and development; women and development; input on particular countries and regions.
1.
Skills — the ‘how’
Some examples: publicizing an event; public speaking; preaching; leading worship; small group techniques; running a workshop; planning a day conference; how to service and chair committees; using graphic images as a conscientization methodology; running simulation games and role plays; listening; using, setting up and supporting local networks.
AIM
To run a pilot training project in the North West.
Christian Aid is not in a position itself to set up and service all the training which it is envisaged might be useful to supporters.
There is no reason anyway to reinvent the wheel, and we need to know initially what is already going on at different levels, in different forums, in different geographical areas, before engaging in a pilot project to network available training and encourage initiatives where there are gaps.
FIRST OBJECTIVE
To have a register and fully annotated report of all the training currently offered by all denominations, and other relevant organizations.
It is envisaged that Stage 1 would need to be completed by 15 December 1991.
To facilitate this Christian Aid could offer an honorarium of £100 plus postage and telephone expenses, in return for a fully detailed and annotated report.
STAFF MEETING — 30th November 1987
1.
Area Staff Conference
Ella and Ernest going.
Karen and Jenny staying to keep office open, etc!
2.
Christian Concern for S. Africa
Meeting at Chaplaincy Centre on 2nd December at 2.30 p.m. concerning a conference to be held in the Spring 88.
Karen to attend.
3.
Computer
Jenny to give Ernest list of queries, etc., concerning the computer for the session at the Area Conference on the computer up-date.
STAFF MEETING — 25.1.88
1.
Garden Glasgow Festival — meeting today in Glasgow at 2 p.m. with SCIAF.
arranging fashion show here in Edinburgh as pre-run for May.
,
and  to  liaise .
2.
Jean Harrison — Mid-term school break follows directly after arranged dates, so no chance of getting teachers.
3.
Edinburgh Peace Festival — 19th to 28th February.
Karen to find out more about this — we thought we had booked stall.
4.
Labels — either London print these or they send us blank labels for CAW organisers and church leaders print-out.
Jenny to pursue.
Labels needed for ministers about Garden Festival and also CAW organisers for this and for Newsletter.
5.
Monday 15th February — Karen off.
Christian Aid Conference, Scottish Churches' House, Dunblane.
29th February–2nd March, 1980
Programme Notes:
Friday
Welcome and Introduction.
will take care of this.
First Session:
Christian Aid in a Changing World and how it has been shaped by World Wants and Developing Relationships.
To be introduced by  and .
Film: ‘To Serve the Present Age’ to be included as part of the presentation.
The film, projection equipment and projectionist provided by .
Saturday
First Session:
Learning from Overseas Partners:
South East Asia & the Boat People
Introduced by .
to speak fully about this but to leave time for questions.
I assume that  will provide him with a suitable brief.
Session Two:
How Christian Aid Supports Projects (a)
There will be six groups of nine persons.
Case studies have been updated and will be sent to participants within the next week or so with other Conference papers.
Who will be the guiding influence in this session??
Market Place:
Scottish Staff is taking care of this.
Team members to be present for conversation and questions.
Display to be set up late on Friday evening and removed after dinner on the Saturday.
How Christian Aid Supports Projects (b)
Presumably directed by the same guiding influence as in (a)
Sharing Experiences
This should be a general sharing of Christian Aid experiences in Scotland introduced by say, four persons, from Scotland each speaking for about ten minutes on a particular aspect of their experience.
For example fund raising/fund raising and eduction in Primary/Secondary Schools/Churches.
Thereafter it should be opened up for general discussion.
Optional Late Night Films
Suggestions! has some ideas I believe.
We shouldn't go for anything too serious.
I have a couple in mind which can be had from the Scottish Film Library.
Sunday
Overseas Reports
This is a session of 45 minutes which means reports will require to be fairly concise.
Service of Worship in Dunblane Cathedral
Arrangements have been completed for this.
Dr. Gray is most co-operative.
Dame Diana has already had a letter from him, welcoming her to his church and pulpit.
It will be very good to have Dame Diana preach.
I hope will be happy to read the first lesson.
Perhaps I should add that Dr. Gray on occasions has not been too impressed with the WCC! informs me that he was strong in his support of view at last year's General Assembly that the Church of Scotland should withdraw from the WCC.
Dismissal at Scottish Churches' House
A short act of dismissal by the Chaplain is all that is needed here, preceded by the customary brief word of appreciation.
Team expected
NOTES ON CASE STUDIES
These Case Studies comprise of six reports for funds.
These requests illustrate how Christian Aid spends its income.
We shall deal with these requests in the Session on Saturday morning entitled ‘How Christian Aid Supports Projects’.
We felt that it would be more interesting if the Conference participants experienced to some degree the complexity of weighing requests, one against the other, for what are always limited funds.
We propose therefore that in groups of 6 the participants will discuss these requests and allocate funds to them.
The group can expend not more than £100,000.
We would therefore ask you to familiarise yourself with these requests so that you can take part fully in the discussion in your group.
You will notice that these requests differ in style and amount of detail.
This in fact is how requests are received by Christian Aid.
In actual fact requests from overseas are dealt with in one of four regional committees and those from with Christian Aid are dealt with in the Budget Committee.
The results of the group discussions will be dealt with at the Session at 5.00p.m.
‘How Christian Aid Supports Projects’: A Panel to Discuss.
We hope that you will find the discussion of the requests a useful and informative session giving insight into the working of Christian Aid.
Notes for John Harris
1) General welcome…to the third National Christian Aid Conference in Scotland.
2) Welcome and introduction:
CHAIRPERSON:, Convenor of S.C.C.A.C. and minister of Bearsden South Church of Scotland.
CHAPLAIN:, Kenya, doing post-graduate research at Glasgow University leading to a Ph.D.
degree.
OVERSEAS PARTNERS
— Mauricio works for a Christian Aid partner organisation in Chile.
Has lived for 15 years in slum areas of Chile, and when in exile, in Peru.
During his exile he has also lived in the US and worked with migrant Mexican workers.
His work is in the field of popular education and radio communications.
He helps to equip trade unions to do their own educational work.
He's been involved with all sorts of activities with neighbourhood associations, youth groups, Christian groups, alcoholics, prisoners and prostitutes.
He studied theology, philosophy and sociology.
— Works for a Christian Aid partner organisation in Bangladesh —.
WORKSHEET 1
2.
‘I don't think we Christians have understood what carrying the cross means.
We are not carrying the cross when we are poor or suffering small everyday things — these are all part of life.
The cross comes when we try to change things.
That is how it came for Jesus’.
3.
Questions:(Suggestion:— first share the questions in twos — then as a group).
(1)
Consider the cartoons at the top of the page — what should the fisherman do?
)(What would you do?)
(2)
‘Christian Aid is a campaign’.
True or false?
(3)
‘While advertising the causes of people's poverty, Christian Aid's task is to fight the effects of poverty’.
Is this how you see Christian Aid?
(4)
‘strength…balanced by strength’(Statement of Commitment)— is this a reasonable goal — can it be justified in any Christian sense?
(5)
Does experience of life lead you to agree or disagree with what  says?
WORKSHEET 2
1.
Read through the role-play about Nicaragua.
2.
Try to ensure that there are supporters for each of the choices — then let play commence.
3.
Here are some further questions for discussion.
(Suggestion — first share the question in 2-s — then as a group.
(1)
‘Community of Disagreement’.
How true of this of the Church?
(2)
Is ‘disagreement’ a source or sign of weakness and what is necessary to make it a strength?
(3)
‘Campaigning’ is the only effective way to make change possible.
(4)
Aid is an outmoded concept — how do you arrive at priorities?
(5)
‘Our money distorts our lives’.
How can this be true of Christian Aid?
(6)
How do you resolve differences without surrendering principles?
TRADE FOR CHANGE
Christian Aid Scotland National Conference
12th–13th March, 1993 at St Vincent's Centre, Langbank.
The conference is intended for Organisers, Supporters and all interested in Christian Aid's work.
Participants include .
‘Trade for Change’ is Christian Aid's current campaign in response to requests from our Partners overseas.
The conference will look at different aspects of this — how it affects the world's poor, how a fair deal can be given to those who produce the goods, and how we can help by what we buy.
We will start on Friday evening and finish by late Saturday afternoon.
Further details are on the back of this leaflet.
The weekend will have workshops on Trade and the Bible, Trade and the Individual, Trade and the Media, Worship, the video, ‘Bitter Sweet’, Christian Aid staff in practical sketches and ‘Climbing the Wall’— ideas for fundraising and local activity as well as Traidcraft and exhibitions.
If you could like to register or receive a programme after the New Year please fill in the form below.
The venue has been changed from Scottish Churches House because of pressure on places at the last conference.
You are advised to book as soon as possible!
Cost: £25 (including all means and accommodation) Unwaged, £15.
Jabbok Theatre Group come from Leeds.
They take their name from the place where in Genesis ‘Jacob wrestled with the Lord’ and are a group deeply concerned about ethical, social, and international issues.
Their play, ‘Columbus, the Fish, and the Tree’, was commissioned by Christian Aid as was the current one on Trade.
has worked for the Latin American Council of Churches in Brazil.
She is an educationalist working with local groups and is in Britain as a Partner shared between Christian Aid and the Methodist Church.
is now known to so many in Scotland.
A Partner-in-Residence shared between Christian Aid Scotland and the Church of Scotland, he is on secondment from the Zimbabwe Council of Churches which he serves as Senior Development Officer.
has been Head of Christian Aid's Latin America/Caribbean Group for the last seven years.
She has worked in several countries in Latin America and was formerly Secretary of the Chile Committee for Human Rights.
Wendy has special responsibility for the Trade Campaign.
is Campaigns Officer at Christian Aid.
He will give pointers to advancing the Trade Campaign in our areas.
‘Bitter Sweet’ is Christian Aid's new video on Trade, focussing on the situation of sugar cane workers in the Caribbean.
‘Whosoever commands the trade of the world commands the riches of the world and hence the world itself.’
Evaluation of Scottish National Conference 8/9 March 1991
36 attended, 20 forms returned.
1.
Did the conference meet your expectations?
18 yes and 3 no to fulfilling expectations.
(Some answered both) Good to learn about debt but disappointed about lack of suggestions for action (× 2)
Too crowded — not enough in depth on debt
Not sure what to expect but suffice it to say I found it worthwhile and stimulating
(We only asked them to comment here if it did not meet expectations — either they all had low expectations or the conference was a high standard.)
2.
What was most useful about the conference?
The following are grouped in rank order (a) to (d) according to the number of times they were mentioned
(a)
Eloquent, passionate and constructive input by Overseas Students (× 7)
(b)
Overseas issues, learning from people who are involved (× 4).
Meeting staff and others (× 4).
Able to focus on debt issue, education about debt, eye opener about debt, greater understanding of problems faced by debtor countries
(c)
Wider perspective, sharing — ideas joys and problems (× 2).
Group participation.
Leith Dunn (× 2), her first talk.
Exchange of fundraising ideas (× 2).
(d)
Info about C.Aid in general.
Problems on Africa
Advice on media contact
3.
What was least useful about the conference?
11 out of the 20 forms returned left blanks here and two said they couldn't think of anything to say.
The following points were all made individually — of the seven who responded to this section, no two people had the same view on what was least useful.
Local success/failure workshop — needed to be more structured
Session on media
Panel session — too tired by then — better to have had brief preparation session in groups
95% Political — perhaps necessary for subject, but tend to lose vision of whom we serve
Friday night worship — too long, Saturday worship too complicated
Africa Workshop in debt
First game not necessary — mixing could have been achieved better at mealtimes
4.
Looking at the Conference as a whole was the content:
Organisation:
Mainly positive comments, although a number of blanks.
It would seem many misunderstood the form and responded to the following points as if they were under the heading of organisation.
Comments were in the range: Good, excellent, not too rigid, ran very smoothly, very good, etc. etc.
Excellent facilities — would have appreciated warning about sharing rooms, though no objection in principle.
One negative comment: No-one greeting people at door, no explanation of layout of house, better to have meal at end than beginning, start too early.
Timing:
This had been reduced to 24 hours from 48 based on the 1989 evaluations and seemed to be just about right.
Comments were generally good, with the following exceptions: longer lunch better, later start on Friday (× 2), could be longer, less intensive, less rushed.
Worship:
Comments ranged all the way from excellent to poor with the majority being in the good to very good range.
It was thought to be good to have this led by an overseas person.
Negative comments: Friday night was found too long and heavy by several.
Some preferred more silent meditation, some preferred more structure and were uneasy about spontaneous prayer.
(I guess in  an ecumenical setting it depends where you are coming from!)
Subject:
Ten forms simply listed good, very good, interesting, pertinent or excellent.
Other comments included: expertly dealt with, learned a lot (× 3, including one who could not wait to get back and teach committee), more interesting than expected, challenging, covered most  layman's (sic)queries.
Negative comments: inevitably depressing but informative, a trifle repetitive, not enough depth.
Workshops:
Evaluation form did not specify which one they had attended.
15 had comments in the positive range from helpful to excellent, informative, well structured/
Negative comments were individual ones about lack of opportunity for participation (on Africa), lack of opportunity to share fundraising ideas, lack of conclusions on Brazil workshop (on environment and debt), leaders' lack of familiarity with game (and  on SEAD debt game) and lack of energy to cope with two workshops.
5.
Did the style of the conference suit you
Yes:
100% responded thus.
Comments: good mix/balance of participation and listening.
Small groups helpful.
Teaching excellent, but too much aid and not enough Christ.
Leith's human sculpture exercise good.
6.
How will you apply your learning
The majority felt that they would be able to inform and motivate their local committee towards a greater emphasis on education.
Two said that the benefit would be greater personal motivation and one hoped to inform and involve their Kirk Session.
One said that they would be a better fundraiser and one felt a little overwhelmed by the issues.
7.
Would you recommend to others if so whom?
One reply said it would be better to separate fundraising and education.
All the others said they would definitely recommend it to: committee, collectors, volunteers, interested people, demotivated people etc., etc.
8.
Other comments
Several commented on the lack of free time, especially at lunchtime, causing energy to flag.
Too much packed in to a short time.
Meal before leaving would have been preferred.
One said that devotions helped to keep things in perspective and one asked whether Christ and his commission came first?!
Many people did not fill in this section and others made positive comments which are duplicated elsewhere
OVERALL EVALUATION WAS VERY POSITIVE ON STYLE, LENGTH AND CONTENT, WITH PARTICULAR APPRECIATE OF PRESENCE AND INPUT OF OVERSEAS PARTNERS /VISITORS /CHAPLAIN.
FUTURE RECOMMENDATIONS DRAWN FROM REMARKS MADE IN EVALUATION
1.
Keep same style of conference with blend of input and participation, but keep Friday night light and short.
2.
Keep same length of conference (24hrs Fri eve/Sat all day), but consider longer lunch break, later start (optional meal?) and meal before departure (again optional?)
3.
A larger, more flexible centre would be better — and perhaps an info pack about the centre with registration papers.
4.
Give more place to local issues and fundraising.
5.
Give more practical ideas for action on issue.
6.
Better briefing of outside worship and workshop leaders.
7.
Overseas guests, speakers and chaplain are an absolute must, as they were by far the most successful part of the conference.
8.
Please remember to do evaluation!
It might also help to look more closely at our objectives before planning begins.
EDUCATION SECRETARY
Year Plan 1993–1994
The plan for 1993–1994 seeks, basically, to utilise opportunities given to make development education mainstream, bearing in mind the limited resources and staff time.
1.
Development Education Sub-Committee
To continue discussions/refine strategy for Scotland so that a clear picture of priorities emerges.
To continue to develop the relationship between the Sub-Committee and Scottish Partners by visits/time on the Sub-Committee for Partners etc.
To offer one training day, for development education centre (DEC) staff in particular, to promote C.Aid materials/our expectations.
2.
Networking
To continue work begun with sister agencies under the umbrella of SFDES and IDEAS.
SFDES combined approach to schools with SCIAF/Oxfam (see below).
The Scottish Consultative Council on the Curriculum (SCCC) has agreed to development education materials being included for the 5–14 year old curriculum — the plan is to match C.Aid materials for that contribution.
IDEAS continued discussion on:
a)
corporate funding of DECs
b)
the relationship with DECs and the corporate campaigning thrust.
SDEC I will be the C.Aid representative on the Management Committee.
3.
Churches
To make initial contact with the education sectors of the main churches.
To investigate with them ways of development education being increasingly central to their agenda, for example with bible colleges, presbyterian links and with main centres.
4.
Schools
To continue to reply to the increasing number of requests for material for Standard Grade and Higher prospects and to this end to develop a limited resource base in the Education Secretary's office (beyond our own material).
To acquire a Contract Volunteer (C.V.) to  identify gaps (by studying London and Scottish mailing lists).
5.
Personal Training
I plan to undertake some kind of training in media presentation, if possible, and to continue with w.p. training.
I also plan to schedule time for a retreat, both to take stock and be more objective/clear about the task and for personal development.
6.
Resources
Possibility of shelving, box files and flip chart.
Review 1992–1993
With the establishment of the development education post in this year, work has focussed more on laying foundations than on expanding.
To this end, much work has been done in the Sub-Committee in considering our relationship with other parties (responsibility/claims/co-ordinated approach), the funding criteria and their application in Scotland and, finally, formulating a Draft Strategy for Development Education in Scotland.
Because of limited resources/time, this is all key to future decisions on our priorities and stewardship.
Initial contacts have been made within the formal sector and the matching of resources has begun, taken up recently by a C.V..
The implications for administration have been noted if effective contacts are to be made throughout Scotland.
The most important work in the formal sector this year has been done under the auspices of SFDES.
Regional authorities are much happier with a combined approach and it seems possible to retain our individual identity within this framework, while promoting development education (and allaying the fear of a hidden agenda for fundraising).
IDEAS, which was promoted as a campaigning/training resource, foundered on the development of a constitution acceptable to the Inland Revenue (confirming my suspicions that this was impossible).
It has reconstituted for six months to come up with specific proposals and a plan.
Due to lack of time, contact with Churches has only been on an informal basis.
To all members of staff and Board Members
The British Council of Churches
CHRISTIAN AID
Christian Aid Week 1988 — Shares for the Poor?
I have been thinking a good deal, as I'm sure you have, about the decline in income and the urgent need to improve matters.
We have set up a Review Group but I do not think all action can wait on its recommendations.
The plan I am proposing will however provide an excellent piece of action-research for the Review Group to reflect on and take into consideration.
My proposal asks a great deal of many of you: time, energy, commitment, a willingness to go along with a plan which there is not time to discuss at length, and with ideas which I don't imagine will win universal approval.
I am asking everyone to contribute where they can, ‘have a go’ and leave the debate until the post-mortem (or post-resurrection) when we decide whether to do any such thing again.
I am setting a target of £9M for CAW 1988.
I am assuming the £6M will be raised if we carry on in 1988 as we did in 1987, improving distribution of course and encouraging people but doing nothing to undermine what individuals, churches and committees do already.
That leaves an addition £3M.
It is always dangerous to break things down because people will rightly object: ‘you can't do it like that, it wouldn't be fair’.
But break things down we must so that we get a sense of scale.
I am told there are 3,000 Committees.
An additional £3M breaks down into £1,000 for every committee.
We shall not ask the committee to raise it, but with or without its help, and its help of course will be welcome, we shall find roughly in its neighbourhood either one new group to commit itself to raise £1,000 (or two new groups to raise £500 each).
In some cases we may have no difficulty in finding several groups, but in every case we shall find one (or two).
The most obvious sort of ‘group’ will be a local congregation (remember the urgent need to move back into the churches and be owned by them where we are not) but it could be a Youth Group, a VIth form, a sports team, a WDM Group, an organisation or club — all manner of groups come to mind.
Each group will be given:
1.
A geographical area to work in if that is appropriate and it does not interfere with existing house-to-house and street collections.
2.
A short ‘idiot's guide’ to fundraising (of the sort this idiot would need) with suggestions about events and methods of fundraising (including how much they can expect from house-to-house collecting), any rules they need to know, how to link with CA, how to do a bit of educating through a display or briefing meeting or a good enjoyable social occasion to launch the effort and raise the level of interest and understanding.
Recruitment should be helped by the fact that it is an existing group.
3.
A specially prepared Project Focus type folder telling the story of a project or organisation we are committed to funding and stating what £1,000 will pay for.
There will obviously be different folders, maybe focussing on areas of topical interest, but the numbers and types will be made up to coincide with existing funding intentions and policies up to £3M.
This material will be attractive, serious but with an air of fun and festivity as well.
Picking up on ‘The Real Share Issue’ and ‘The Poor haven't a Share in the World’we may be able to give the whole campaign a title and see each unit as ‘A Share for the Poor’.
That is the plan in outline.
Clearly there are many many details to be worked out, and soon.
Materials have to be prepared.
Projects for funding selected.
Money and staff resources set aside.
Those most immediately affected given support.
Procedures and timetable clarified.
And many of us, Area Staff above all, will have to be involved to put the plan into effect.
I have asked , and  to take the major responsibility for seeing it through, and you will hear more from them soon!
This introductory note is to ask everyone to accept the plan and the challenge which it represents.
It is asking a lot, I know, but I think I should ask, and knowing you I believe it can be done.
COMMITTED GIVING
1.
INTRO AND BACKGROUND
2.
AIMS
to increase long term, regular giving
to encourage supporters to feel closer to partners and encourage understanding of the work of Christian Aid
to have a strong Christian emphasis
3.
THE TONE
— neighbourly, approachable, Christian, encouraging interest
4.
THE MECHANICS
4-year commitment by BO/Covenant, at a set price of £12/month or £144/year
Focus on one Partner
Earmarking, through reimbursement for the first year; remaining 3 years to go where the need is greatest
the name
5.
WHAT THE SUPPORTER RECEIVES
The ‘Welcome’, including audio cassette
‘News from the Partner’
6.
WAYS OF PROMOTION
Church Press
Adverts and inserts
CANews
Direct Mail
Area Secretaries
Video
Committee
Fundraising by telephone
GIVE AS YOU EARN CONSORTIUM — 13.12.88
Points raised during discussion
1.
Maitland to be asked to circulate a copy of the draft Minute of Agreement to Christian Aid and SCIAF before the next meeting so that this can be looked at.
2.
Would we envisage ending our own individual involvement in GAYE after Consortium is up and running?
3.
Christian Aid was involved in a Third World Consortium which has now ceased to exist — why?
We should look into this and learn from successes/mistakes, etc.
4.
How much staff time would be involved?
5.
Need to be careful when printing material as the amounts will change each budget.
Costing of material — could be comparable to that produced for Will Aid?
6.
Personal contact important in producing GAYE givers, so need to have a  canvasser on the shop floor.
STUC hopefully will take this up.
What about training of people to canvas?
What about non-union people?
7.
Name of Consortium — should we try to get professional help with this?
8.
For next meeting, each agency should come up with:
a)
3 pictures (black & white?) for a leaflet
b)
3 pictures (black & white?) for a poster
c)
6 slides
And have written 50 words describing the whole Consortium.
9.
Next Meeting:
DRAFT
Christian Aid
Guidelines for Community Linking
What is Community Linking?
Community Linking is direct people to people contact which leads to equal, mutually beneficial relationships across cultures.
It has the aim of enabling participants to understand the reality of each others' lives, and thereby contribute to changes in both societies.
Why is Christian Aid willing to help facilitate linking?
In much of the world not just the poor but whole countries are getting poorer.
In the UK and Ireland, whilst a few people are getting poorer, the majority of people are increasing their standard of living and most expect to get better off year after year.
Our education programme changes attitudes slowly in an environment where selfish values grow even faster.
Our fundraising work assists people in small yet significant ways but does not change the vast inequalities in our interdependent world.
Linking is a way in which that interdependent relationship can be experienced in practical ways so motivating people to want to do something to change the enormous inequalities which exist.
Each link is unique.
Those that Christian Aid is willing to help facilitate would involve at least some of the following:
A named community, village, town, church or school in the UK or Ireland linking with a named community, village, town, project area or institution in the Third World, both in partnership with Christian Aid, having a link with the purpose of learning more about each other.
Direct correspondence — perhaps between linking committees, and between churches and churches; schools and schools, etc.
An exchange of visitors in both directions or an overseas visitor to the UK/Ireland and an overseas exposure tour to include the linking community.
A work exchange programme in both directions.
A link involves fundraising both to meet the costs of sustaining a long distance friendship and to provide funds to help to support Christian Aid's existing partnership with the Third World community with which there is a link.
There should be celebration and publicity, prayer and worship, the sharing of achievements, newsletters, photos and events.
Linking involves:
BEING INTERESTED — GETTING INVOLVED — TAKING ACTION — DEVELOPING AWARENESS — REFLECTING ON LIFESTYLE — APPRECIATING OTHER CULTURES — EDUCATION 
Are the groups at both ends sufficiently motivated and organised?
Will they both benefit?
Is the timescale long enough?
Are the expectations realistic?
Is the link sustainable?
Questions to ask before facilitating linking?
For Christian Aid to be involved some elements of Christian Aid's normal programme of work would need to be included:
Education; fundraising; prayer and worship; advocacy; visitors…
How to start:
Meet to decide what you would like to do; why you would like to do it; whether you have the resources of information, time and money, enthusiasm and motivation, to undertake it.
Discuss your plans further with your Christian Aid Area Secretary and take it from there…
PARTNERSHIP COMMITTEE
Overseas Visitors — May 1991–May 1992
Brief Report
May 1991
(India).
Four days in Edinburgh and Aberdeenshire.
Met with SEAD and interviewed for SEAD Newsletter and Radio Scotland.
Spent some time with supporters at beginning of Christian Aid Week in Edinburgh.
Spoke at Coffee Morning and at St. Andrew's & St. George's Book Sale.
Addressed the Friends of St. Thomas (Indian support group).
Met with Theology & Development students and church representatives.
Highly successful in commending himself to a variety of audiences and communicating his project with the Dhalit people.
October 1991
(India) Five days in north of Scotland/Glasgow area.
Met with a variety of church groups and was judged by colleagues to be very good value.
Glasgow Justice & Peace group transformed by his coming to talk.
November 1991
(Philippines).
Four days in Glasgow and Edinburgh.
A fairly rushed programme but involved in going to Stranraer  Women's Guild where she communicated extremely well and was delighted to see Christian Aid work at local level.
In Edinburgh, she met with representatives of SEAD and was interviewed for a media article.
February 1992
(Bongi)—(Zimbabwe).
Seven days in south Scotland, Glasgow, Edinburgh.
A very successful visit with perhaps the exception of attending the SEAD conference where good personal contacts were made but the material was felt to be inappropriate for her purpose.
Spoke at a number of events and was enabled to see a good many different sides of the west of Scotland making a strong link with a group in Garthamlock (Rev. )
March 1992
(Costa Rica).
Seven days in Aberdeen, Perth and Dundee, and Edinburgh.
The week gave the opportunity for a quite extensive programme.
According to reports from the north, he communicated well.
We had more problems in Edinburgh and his  colleague from Costa Rica often hard to interpret.
But even within those limitations, a great many people were moved and excited by what he had to say.
Media coverage was mixed.
An article for the Baptist church magazine was successful but less so, an interview for Radio Forth.
It simply highlights the problem of language with some visitors.
Plans for two visitors this May: from India and  from The Philippines.
will  be the longest-staying visitor that we have had spending nine days in south Scotland, Glasgow and Edinburgh.
Varied programme is envisaged included participation in the Bridge Crosses, a number of services on 3rd & 10th May, schools, Presbytery, church representatives, and Theology & Development students.
will be with  and following up the interest shown in The Philippines by groups in the west.
SCOTTISH CHURCHES ACTION FOR WORLD DEVELOPMENT (SCAWD)
Request to Christian Aid for a Grant for 1991–92
Background
SCAWD is an ecumenical agency of the churches in Scotland, working in the field of development education and international solidarity.
Founded in 1972 as an expression of the enthusiasm of Christians in the '60s for ‘world poverty action’ and ‘action for world development’, SCAWD has focussed over the years on such concerns as development and disarmament, the debt crisis, the Brandt and Brundtland Commissions' reports, and South-North: Cultures and ‘Development’.
Particular regions of the world have been chosen for special attention and solidarity work, e.g. the Pacific (SCAWD had a Frontier Intern from PNG on its staff for eighteen months), Latin America and the Middle East.
SCAWD is the Scottish staging post of One World Week, organising planners' conferences and other meetings each year.
From 1982–90 SCAWD ran a small investment company, one of the fifteen or so international support associations of EDCS, raising in that time some £250,000 in investment capital for the WCC development bank.
One of the main tasks of the SCAWD and its Secretary has been as an educational resource for conferences, congregations and local church groups, working mainly on international justice and peace issues and solidarity concerns.
Central America and Israel/Palestine have recently been prominent in this work.
Structure
The partnership network of SCAWD includes all the main Scottish churches, Scottish Churches Council and now ACTS, Scottish Churches House, the Iona Community, Christian Aid and SCIAF, the WCC and WSCF, the European Ecumenical Commission for Church and Society, the South-North Network: Cultures and ‘Development’ and various solidarity and aid organisations at home and abroad.
The SCAWD Committee, a board-like structure composed of representatives of all SCAWD's supporting bodies, decides on its policy and orientation.
During the 1980s a strong Steering Committee has developed, which reflects on and plans the programme.
Ad hoc groups like the North-South and Israel/Palestine Working Groups head up different projects with a style that makes for continuity.
The office is based in the Augustine Church Centre in Edinburgh along with its CUS congregation, Christian Aid and Feed the Minds.
Since 1978 there has been a full-time secretary (previously half-time), with part-time assistance.
Volunteers have helped greatly e.g. with ‘GulfWatch’.
Funding
SCAWD is dependent for funding on the Scottish churches and agencies, such as Christian Aid, SCIAF and the Iona Community.
SCAWD's regular funding is threatened by the fact that some of our main donors, including the Church of Scotland, SCIAF and the URC, as well as Christian Aid, have all said they cannot increase their grants annually to cover inflation.
A similar situation exists for SCAWD as with the budget of One World Week.
The Financial Statement for the year ending 31st July 1990 is to be found in the Annual Report 1989–90.
Please note that the Christian Aid grant of £8,335 for 1990–91, paid in June 1990, will figure in the annual report for the current year.
Two years ago Christian Aid and SCAWD arranged earlier payment of the annual grant to help with cash flow problems at the start of our financial year.
(For an explanation of the large balance at year end, please see the Treasurer's Report.)
For further information, including detailed accounts, see the attached leaflet and Annual Reports.
The request to Christian Aid for core funding for SCAWD for 1991–92 is for £8,335.00 (the same sum as last year).
FALKIRK COUNCIL OF CHURCHES DEVELOPMENT EDUCATION WORKER PROJECT
1) BACKGROUND AND UP TO DATE REPORT ON THE PROJECT
The Falkirk Council of Churches established the post of Development Education worker in Falkirk in March, 1989 and Mrs.  held the post up to the end of October this year.
She was very much involved in local secondary and primary schools, as well as local church groups, and youth groups.
She worked with the regional adviser in religious and moral education and became involved in teacher' in-service training particularly concerning multicultural education.
She has successfully set up a resource centre for materials from Christian Aid and the Scottish Catholic International Aid Fund.
She has been involved with assisting at church services which were relevant to issues of world poverty.
During ‘One World Week’ in October this year, she has initiated a project in Falkirk to support ‘Tools for Self Reliance’.
This project has received much local support and she has set up a group of people who will organise it long term.
As she is now studying fell-time for the Ministry, she resigned from the post at the end of October, 1991, and we have appointed another worker, Mrs .
The worker has been financed by Christian Aid, SCIAF and local churches.
2) THE AIM OF THE PROJECT
The aim of the project is to spread information on issues concerning the less well-developed countries, to make educational resources easily available and to bring development education into the local schools.
The worker deals with schools, churches, local organisations and community groups.
3) CONSTITUTION OF THE PROJECT
Members of the management committee, which consists of members of the executive committee of the Falkirk Council of Churches and of the Forth Peace Group, meet the worker regularly and are closely involved with her projects.
4) SPECIFIC PROPOSALS FOR WHICH FUNDING IS SOUGHT
Funding is sought so that we can continue to pay the Development Education worker an honorarium of 200 per month including expenses, and also to purchase resources when  necessary .
5) FINANCIAL DETAILS:
see enclosed accounts.
DUNDEE ONE WORLD CENTRE
I visited the Centre in the last month and was impressed by the systematic approach of the Centre.
has worked hard to provide up-to-date materials, covering a wide range of topics and countries; the Centre is well organised and ‘accessible’.
His outreach work is also to be commended, with appropriate leaflets/catalogues being sent to the various sectors.
He is also concerned with evaluating the seminars he runs — both the ‘staff lunches’ and afternoon seminars — so that there is an on-going assessment which contributes to an overall sense of commitment to the task.
I recommend that the funding continue at the present level, with an inflationary consideration — £5,954.
November Meeting — Agenda Notes /Draft Plan for discussion
At our last meeting it was decided to make the meeting on November 10th, an extended on in which we would consider the distinctive role of Christian Aid Scotland within the national structures.
This was of course prior to the General Election.
Perhaps in the post-election ferment of thinking about where Scotland goes now it is even more important that we seek to discover the appropriate role for Christian Aid in that.
I propose the following structure for our meeting.
The morning would follow the same basic pattern of reports and any necessary decisions being taken from the deliberations of our sub committees.
In the meantime we will have had two overseas visits undertaken for Christian Aid.
will have been to Colombia as part of the Church leaders delegation in July organised by CA/CIIR and  will go in September to Bangla Desh and India.
We will want to give adequate time to them to share their experiences and insights.
In addition we will have with us  and I am sure that the opportunity should be given to him to share news on Zimbabwe and the drought situation.
We shall therefore have a focus on three continents — Latin America, Asia, and Africa.
In the afternoon I would propose that we meet briefly after lunch and receive any comments additional to papers that might go out beforehand.
The major part of the time would be spent in at least two and no more than four groups meeting around the building.
An hour should be allowed for this and the fullest opportunity to explore appropriate devolution, questions of identity, and resources and relationship both to other agencies and to the corporate body.
We would then have a report back in plenary and a time for additional comments.
I would hope that we would be able to complete this as near to 3.30. as possible, certainly no later than 4.9. pm.
Suggested documents would be:
Constitution of Christian Aid and of the Scottish Committee (where certain relevant aspects are spelt out)
A paper containing comments from Scottish Staff and Committee members (I would compile this)
A paper from a member of SCAC with experience both of the Scottish and UK/Ireland work.
's paper (or a summary!) on Scotland and Overseas Aid.
YOUR WITNESS
PP: Ladies and gentlemen of the jury, welcome to another live edition of ‘Your Witness’ where I, Perry Perseverance, the well-known television lawyer, seek to hear the people's evidence and point the finger of guilt in the most unlikely of directions.
You are here today to consider evidence about the death of Inday Rodriguez from the San Fernando barrio in Bukidnon in the Philippines.
Your task is to determine the cause of her death.
I call the first witness, Dr Ernie/Ernette Wise.
Dr Wise, you were called to the home of Mrs Rodriguez on the day of her death.
What, in your opinion, was the cause of her death.
DrW: Mrs Rodriguez died of pneumonia
PP: As far as you could tell, were there any other factors which contributed to her death?
DrW: Yes, she was severely undernourished.
PP: In your expert medical opinion, what led to this state of malnutrition?
DrW: In this case, I am prepared to state categorically that her condition was caused by lack of food.
PP: Would you say, therefore, that Mrs Rodriguez had died from ‘natural causes’?
DrW: Yes, I would.
PP: A final question, Dr Wise.
Did you notice any foodstuffs in the home of Mrs Rodriguez?
DrW: Now that you come to mention it, as a matter of fact I did.
I observed that there was a pineapple lying by Mrs Rodriguez.
PP: Dr Wise, would you be good enough to examine Exhibit A?
Do you recognise it?
DrW: Yes.
It is the pineapple I noticed in Mrs Rodriguez's home.
PP: Are you sure?
DrW: Yes.
(examining pineapple) I recognise this distinctive blotch.
PP: Dr Wise, thank you.
I now call Mr Alvaro Rodriguez to the stand.
Mr Rodriguez, are you the husband of the late Inday Rodriguez?
AR: Yes, I am.
PP: Could you describe the circumstances leading to your wife's death?
AR: After Inday and I were forced from our land by the Del Monte Corporation, it became impossible for us to make ends meet.
We had to take jobs with Del Monte, but they didn't pay us enough money to buy medicines as well as food.
Inday became ill and there was nothing we could do.
The final straw was when the government put up the price of rice yet again.
PP: Thank you.
Mr Rodriguez, I would like you to examine Exhibit A. Do you recognise it?
AR: Yes, it is the pineapple that Mr Monte, the plantation owner, brought as a gift for Inday the day that she died.
PP: Mr Rodriguez, was your wife fond of pineapples?
AR:(said with feeling) No, like me, she loathed them!
PP: Thank you.
You may leave the stand.
I now call Mr Derek Monte.
Mr Monte, or can I call you Del, why do you grow pineapples in the Philippines?
Is it just to make large profits?
DM: No, and I resent the suggestion.
We grow them to provide jobs for poor Filipinos and to enable the Philippines government to export.
From its exports it can earn foreign currency, and begin to pay off its huge debts.
The more pineapples we grow, the more dollars the government has to pay its bills.
PP: Del, thank you for that incisive economic analysis, but now would you be good enough to examine Exhibit A?
Do you recognise it?
DM: Yes, I do.
This is the precise pineapple I gave to Mrs Rodriguez as a ‘Get Well Soon’ present.
I thought it might cheer her up.
PP: Thank you Mr Monte.
I now call Mrs Corazon Aquino, until recently President of the Philippines, to the stand.
Mrs Aquino, we are investigating the cause of death of Inday Rodriguez.
We have heard evidence that it was the rise in the price of rice, that you approved, which was the final straw.
She no longer had the money to make ends meet.
Why did you approve this action?
CA: Unfortunately my government had no choice.
We had to assume many of the debts of Ferdinand Marcos and his associates and this has increased the repayments to banks like Barclays to such an extent that we have had to agree to the conditions of the IMF to get new money.
Not only has food gone up.
We have also had to raise the price of water, electricity and fuel oil.
We are now considering new taxes to balance the books.
PP: Mrs Aquino, do you accept that your policies may have contributed to Mrs Rodriguez's death?
CA: I resent the inference of your question.
Have you forgotten that I became President through People Power?
No, if government is to blame, then you should blame Ferdinand Marcos, the banks and the IMF.
PP: Thank you, Mrs Aquino and, by the way, would you be good enough to examine Exhibit A?
Do you recognise it?
CA: Yes, it is a pineapple.
We grow them in the Philippines.
PP: Mrs Aquino, you may stand down.
I now call Prudence Lending to the stand.
Miss Lending, I understand you are employed by Barclays Bank on the Philippines account.
Is this correct?
PL: Yes, it is.
PP: I understand that Barclays is the largest European lender to the Philippines with loans totalling over $384 million and that in 1987 you refused to sign a loan extension agreement between the Philippine government and 500 commercial creditors unless the $57 million debts of a private company, Planters Products PLC, were assumed by the government.
Is this correct?
PL: Yes.
PP: Am I right in thinking that Planter Products produces fertilisers and pesticides used in plantation agriculture?
PL: Yes.
PP: Am I right in thinking that you recognise Exhibit A?
PL: Yes, it is a pineapple.
PP: Prudence Lending, I have no further questions.
You may stand down.
I now call Bernard Blunt to the stand.
Mr Blunt, am I right in thinking that you deal with Philippine affairs for the International Monetary Fund?
BB: That is correct.
PP: We have heard evidence suggesting that the conditions imposed by the banks and the IMF led to rises in the price of food which may have contributed to the death of Inday Rodriguez.
Would you agree?
And why do you impose these conditions?
BB: I would not agree and deny that the IMF imposes conditions.
Our task is to provide helpful guidelines for better economic planning.
We seek to enable the Philippines to spend less and earn rather more.
If that helps the government keep up with their debt repayments, that's all well and good.
As for victims, you can't make an omelette without cracking eggs.
PP: Thank you Mr/Ms Blunt for your disarming honesty.
I would be grateful if you would examine Exhibit A. Do you recognise it?
BB: Yes, it's an omelette.
PP: Thank you.
You may stand down.
Ladies and gentlemen of the jury, you have heard all of the evidence.
Dr Wise suggests that Inday's death was from ‘natural causes’.
But this, I feel, cannot be correct.
The most obvious cause of death is the National Debt of the Philippines.
It would seem obvious that Inday was killed by the intransigence of Western banks, like Barclays; by the harsh conditions imposed by the IMF; by the malevolent impact of Del Monte; and by the economic policies of successive Philippine governments.
But I didn't get where I am today by being drawn to the obvious.
No, there is another, and far more compelling, explanation.
You will notice that each witness has chosen to discuss foodstuffs, especially pineapples, at the first opportunity.
Members of the jury, it is clear that there is more here than meets the eye and I call on you to reach the only verdict that matches the evidence;
unlawful killing by pineapple or pineapples unknown.
Master's Diploma in Theology and Development
I am pleased to confirm in writing that Christian Aid's Executive Committee have agreed to Christian Aid supporting the proposed course, and that it should be at the University of Edinburgh.
We are particularly happy that you yourself will be so closely involved.
I enclose the final version of the papers put before the Committee — which were slightly amended from the versions you say.
They can serve as a guide to what was agreed, and we now need to work on the detail.
The financial commitment of Christian Aid is for up to ten scholarships for a period of three years.
As you know, this would be through the WCC Scholarship system.
I enclose the standard leaflet for that programme, and please do look it over carefully.
If fewer than ten suitable students are identified, there is a provision for substitute funding; I think you suggested half the fees for places that are taken up, and that would certainly fit within the limits set by the Executive.
Obviously Christian Aid's commitment to the course is more than financial; we hope it can be a major contribution to thinking about development within the churches.
We see ourselves putting a continuing input into the shaping of the course, and helping to recruit suitable students.
On the other hand, we don't want to get in your way, and we should clarify at the start our respective roles.
How about a steering committee meeting every three months or so?
Can we now produce a timetable up to the start of the course?
We should finalise the start date straight away.
We are assuming a start in autumn 1990, especially with student recruitment in mind, though obviously 1989 would be better if everything could be ready.
I think there are four interlocking processes:
(1)
The approval of the university authorities.
I assume this can go ahead immediately, without tying us to a detailed course outline.
(2)
Consultation with partners in the Third World, in developing course content and structure.
Both by letter and face to face.
Perhaps an informal seminar early in 1989?
Particularly important to discuss with Dr  of PTE, who would be prepared to help the consultation process.
We need to follow up the contacts already made when we invited comment on the idea of a course (in any case, I promised to let them know what happened).
I will send copies of the correspondence, and we should draft follow up letters.
I think it would be well worth involving , who has just started a year at Selly Oak — his letter attached.
At the Christian Aid Executive meeting, was very willing to be involved, and no doubt there are others within Britain that could be drawn on.
(3)
Recruitment of an overseas lecturer (and visitors if funds will stretch).
(4)
Recruitment of students.
To some extent, this can be linked to the consultation of process (2 above ).
The priority, I think, is a good leaflet which can be used as the basis for a mailing and for sharing with Christian Aid's partners and your contacts.
We should discuss timing the leaflet: on the one hand, it would be good to wait for consultation on course content, but there is also some urgency.
The standard WCC process is long: applications to start in Oct 1990 should theoretically be with Geneva by Oct 1989, and before that they have to be approved by the  relevant screening body within the student's country (usually the Council of churches) and by the sending institution (eg a church).
These hoops can be jumped through quickly if all parties cooperate, but the point is that some potential candidates for the 1990 Edinburgh course will already be looking for possible courses early in 1989.
Perhaps an early version of the leaflet, with a revision later?
One point made by the Executive was that it would be good to evaluate the course before the three years is up.
I had discussed that with Dr , and he indicated PTE would be happy to help, eg by suggesting names.
I am very pleased this is now underway, and look forward to working with you on it.
See you on Monday 10th Oct, at four o'clock.
With best wishes,
FOR THE CHRISTIAN AID EXECUTIVE COMMITTEE, 20 SEPTEMBER 1988.
THE BRITISH COUNCIL OF CHURCHES
CHRISTIAN AID
MASTERS/DIPLOMA COURSE IN THEOLOGY AND DEVELOPMENT
1.
SUMMARY
This paper proposes that Christian Aid support a new one year course in Theology and Development for students from the Third World, to be run by either the University of Leeds or the University of Edinburgh.
It would be an opportunity for reflection specifically for people coming with a background of development experience and practice.
It would be funded by tying to this course 8–10 of the 23 WCC scholarships that Christian Aid already finances.
This would provide for the university to appoint a new lecturer to direct the course.
Initial consultations with Third World partners have been generally positive, with partners wishing to be involved in the design of the course.
Christian Aid staff have been sceptical whether this is appropriate for Christian Aid, with some (including the LA/C Group) strongly opposed.
2.
HISTORY OF THE PROPOSAL
The idea for such a course came from Prof , member of the Christian Aid Board and Professor of Religious Studies at Leeds at a Board meeting on 2 Nov 1987.
He elaborated it in a memorandum of 17 Nov 1987, which was discussed at the Africa/Middle East Committee on 8 Dec 1987, and at SMT on 4 Dec 1987, both of whom recommended that it be explored.
Since then, the proposal has been developed by theology and development studies staff both at Leeds and at Edinburgh universities.
In discussion with Christian Aid's Director and Head of Aid.
These two universities have been involved as two of the few in Britain with expertise in both theology and development.
3.
VIEWS OF PARTNERS
A letter outlining the proposal was sent to some 35 Christian Aid partners and theologians, mostly in the Third World, to establish whether there was a felt need for such a course.
Thirteen replies were received (6 from Latin America, 4 from Asia, 2 from Africa, one from WCC).
The limited response, especially from Africa, must give cause for concern.
In general, ten welcomed the proposal, including  from Argentina (‘I think this type of study is necessary’), of the Christian Conference of Asia (‘I join others who have welcomed the idea of linking up theological thinking to development issues.’)
and  from the Sierra Leone Council of Churches.
Only two were against: the Ecumenical Center for Development in the Philippines (‘such learning process becomes more profound and meaningful within the locus of people's struggle or action’) and the WCC (‘from a Third World perspective we are not at all sure that your proposal in its present form meets the need’).
A common theme, especially from those enthusiastic about the proposal, was the need for commitment: ‘the struggle for justice is the only hope for the movement of society towards the kingdom of God…
The critical principle to develop a relevant theology is the struggle of the people.’
Secondly, there was consensus on the need for a substantial input from Third World staff, both in the design and teaching of the course.
More detailed points from their letters are included in the discussion below.
4.
THE OUTLINE OF THE COURSE
The course content would be worked out in further consultation with Third World partners.
However, the two proposals as they stand are:
4.1 Leeds
The course would be very flexible, responsive to the needs both of partners and students.
The initial proposal includes a compulsory course on Theological issues in Development such as Humanity and the World (eg theology and hope; theology and justice; theology and communities); the Church (eg theology as reflecting on practice; as witness to the kingdom of God); and Methodology (eg theology and secular science).
A second compulsory course (taught by development studies specialists) would be on the Principles and practice of development both at the macro level (eg the place of the Third World countries in the world economy) and the micro level (eg community organisation; role of church-related NGOs).
A seminar series would allow students to present reflections on their own experience, and provide an opportunity for integrating the theological and development issues.
In addition, students would take one option from the range of theology or development courses at the university, and write a dissertation which might be linked to the seminar series.
4.2 Edinburgh
There would be one thematic core course in which two tutors, from Social Science and Theology respectively, would introduce discussion around key concepts.
Concepts suggested include: power, justice, liberation, culture, community, stewardship, need, debt.
As at Leeds, there would be a seminar series based on students' experience, and three options.
Students would write a dissertation.
5.
JUSTIFICATION
The primary justification is its value to churches in the Third World.
First, intellectually: there is widespread agreement in the replies from partners that ‘up to now theology and development have been very separate; both disciplines looked at together will be very beneficial to people who are involved in social issues and who are looking for ways in which development can be integral to God's plan.’
The 1987 Assembly of the All Africa Conference of Churches asked for opportunities for Church leaders to study so that they can cope with problems cropping up everywhere.
Much of Christian Aid's funding is in support of Third World church groups' practice of development.
But Christian Aid has also recognised — for example in grants to the Institute of Contextual Theology in South Africa — the value of church groups' reflection about development in support of its practice.
This course would be an additional support to that process.
Reflection and action need to be combined; the course would depend on students bringing an experience of development.
Secondly, it would be justified if there is a demand for such training — from Christians engaged in development work, and from future church leaders who want both to understand ‘the problems cropping up everywhere’ and to support development initiatives with a chance of success.
The WCC Scholarships Unit expressed doubts that enough suitable students would apply.
Is the course a paternalistic idea which Christian Aid is pushing, rather than a proposal that arises from the needs of partners?
These are obviously major concerns.
The responses from other partners including the WCC Programme on Theological Education suggest however that there is a pool of potential students.
We see this as sufficient justification to go ahead at a pilot level of say eight student places (rather than 15 for a later course with two lecturers), but also a warning that considerable effort will have to be put into consulting with partners both to incorporate their main concerns, and to advertise the course.
6.
ISSUES
6.1 Benefit to Britain
If the course can be justified, then an additional benefit is the potential resource that such a course would offer in Britain.
Christian Aid, as part of the British churches, seeks to share in the process of theological reflection worldwide on development and social justice — both to renew our own understanding and commitment, and to feed into development education.
The teaching and research staff, and the academic centre the course would make possible, would greatly enrich this process within Britain; it could indeed be seen as an important example of resource-sharing from south to north.
The establishment of a course should permit a flow of publications from staff and research students, and possibly short summer courses and other networking.
Some British students might actually do the course, though they would be kept to a small minority.
Christian Aid itself would hope to be able to draw on the resources of such a centre, both indirectly through contact with the course, and directly by requesting the centre to undertake specific pieces of work on our behalf.
6.2 Why in Britain, not in the Third World?
‘The ideal milieu,’ says the reply from the WCC, ‘would be in a Third World country (where) the ‘laboratory’for research lies at the very door-step of the academic institution.
We feel so strongly about this that we would say even in a course offered by a University in Britain it would be most desirable for students to ground their work in some hands-on experience in a Third World setting.’
This is a strong reservation amongst Christian Aid staff also, who point to institutes and universities in the South which are already trying similar approaches (for example theological training in India) or who are staffed to do so if funds could be provided.
Furthermore, a course in Britain may be regarded by some as a reward for senior staff, whilst a course in the south would attract only those appropriate for it.
There is no doubt that the heart of this process of reflection is, and has to be, in the Third World.
Christian Aid does support it in some places, and perhaps should look harder for others.
However, this small British course would be one extra node in the network.
of CCA comments, ‘I do not think that this experiment is going to substitute and take the place of several experiments going on in the Third World.
This being one of several experiments, involving a limited number of people, its location can be Britain provided the total duration of the course is less than one year and that participants are those who are rooted in action in their own countries.’
This course would be a period of reflection for people involved in action at home: they would bring experiences to reflect upon.
Indeed it might be unnecessarily time-consuming for students also to learn about the particular issues of the country where the course takes place.
There are also practical considerations: central location, easy travel and visas, good libraries, accommodation for students, and so forth.
This was the general reply from partners, who were specifically asked not only whether the course would not be more appropriately located in a Third World country but also for the experience of institutions that already have similar courses or related aims.
The essential elements to counterbalance location in Britain are
(i)
the involvement of Third World faculty, especially theologians, in the design of the course and in the teaching; and
(ii)
the recruitment of students with field experience; and
(iii)
Christian Aid support for parallel initiatives in the South, to which this British course could relate.
6.3 Is this kind of academic programme desirable?
The Ecumenical Center for Development argues that short term seminars or consultation in academic centres would be much more fruitful for people with a deep commitment to development who could and should not spend a year away.
Christian Aid's emphasis on strengthening the poor might direct us to look first at supporting people at the base ‘doing theology’, rather than year-long academic retreats.
Yet, the one does not preclude the other: this course would be only one extra input into Christian Aid's existing funding of action/reflection in the Third World.
Crucially, the one may support the other:, a prominent Jesuit in Nicaragua, comments ‘I think the lack of a good academic training is at the roots of too many simplifications in the pastoral work of people using the framework of liberation theology.’
In part, this is an argument about scholarships more broadly.
Christian Aid's present funding of some 40 scholarship students a year indicates a belief in the value of academic study.
Many in the Latin American/Caribbean Group of staff, in discussing this paper, disagreed strongly that scholarships usually efficiently strengthen the poor.
I would argue at least that concentrating a group of students on one course should enable our scholarships staff both to tailor a more relevant course and to provide a better service to students.
6.4 Is further consultation necessary before a decision is made?
Several correspondents called for a brainstorming session, largely of Third World scholars, to discuss how best to proceed.
Clearly, consultation is essential, with a wider group than yet involved (including for example EATWOT, the association of Third World theologians).
The question is how given Christian Aid's limited staff resources, we propose to identify the university first, as a base from which consultation can take place on course content and methodology.
It would be possible to include an exploratory phase, before the first students arrive.
A special grant might be made (? £15,000) to permit the appointment of a lecturer for 6–12 months beforehand, with time to visit Third World partners, convene seminars, plan the course to meet the needs that emerge, recruit appropriate students, and indeed have time to begin writing.
The problem is that it would be very hard to justify the cost: much of this could go on after students arrived, and the course modified as it went along.
If an exemplary phase is not included, then greater responsibility falls on existing university staff, and on Christian Aid staff, to inform, consult and recruit — both in writing and when visiting.
We need to consider carefully what we could do.
In particular, it might be appropriate to delay the start of the course to September 1990, rather than 1989.
7.
FINANCIAL IMPLICATIONS
To fulfil the objective of setting up a serious centre, the new course needs to be supported by at least one new lecturer, and ideally two — a theologian and a development specialist with experience in small-scale community participation projects of the type churches are often involved with.
University funding arrangements mean that one lecturer can be financed by the fees of between eight (Leeds) and ten (Edinburgh) students.
These would have to be guaranteed for three years, in order to make a substantive appointment.
The cost per student would be £8300, made up of fees (£3950) and maintenance (£4300).
If the WCC were not to be involved, then we would also have to fund air fares (say £1000).
So the total cost would be between £66,000 and £93,000 per year (for eight and ten students respectively).
It is proposed to finance these, however, by earmarking existing Christian Aid WCC Scholarship grants.
At present about 100 students come to Britain on WCC scholarships in a wide variety of fields.
23 of these students are funded by Christian Aid, and the selection of which students to fund is made by a small Christian Aid Sub-committee.
The sub-committee can simply decide to allocate eight of these to applicants for Theology and Development (so long as the WCC Scholarship Unit in Geneva passes on sufficient applications).
This is obviously restricting the options available to WCC applicants, but not seriously (i) if there really is a demand for a Theology and Development course, and (ii) in view of the 92 other WCC scholarships in Britain.
It may well be that other scholarships could be found, which would mean not all 8 places need be Christian Aid funded.
If insufficient students applied, we would face a difficulty in meeting a guarantee to the universities to fund a lecturer for three years.
This needs further negotiating; at the extreme, that might cost £20,000 in a year.
8.
CONCLUSION
We recommend to the Executive Committee that they approve Christian Aid supporting such a course in the way outlined.
NOTES ON PLANNING MEETING (Monday 12th October
NATIONAL CONFERENCE, MARCH 12/13th 1993
VENUE & RESOURCES
to check arrangements made with St. Vincent's Centre, Langbank for times and numbers.
had already secured Jabbok and there was a previous  suggestion that  and  from Brazil with MCOD should be invited.
Other suggestions were  for campaigning and .
Also  or  from the Directorate.
Resources would include the video ‘Bitter Sweet’, slides on Trade, Trade Pack, and other books with the ‘Hallowed Be Thy Name’ slide set for worship.
PROVISIONAL PROGRAMME AS FOLLOWS:
FRIDAY, 12th March
After the evening meal, introductions but no ‘warm up’ game this year.
Jabbok with their Trade performance followed by possible Biblical reflection from material by Jabbok.
Worship — to be asked to lead this.
SATURDAY, 13th March
Worship — based on ‘Hallowed Be Thy Name’ slides and taken by one member of staff.
Breakfast.
Major input on trade with slides and introduced by .
If Brazilian partner is there to accompany  on the impact of trade on Brazil.
Coffee.
Video: ‘Bitter Sweet’
Workshops:
or 
Lunch
CONTRACT VOLUNTEER NEWSLETTER
Winter 1990
This  year's staff conference was on the theme of the debt crisis.
The Banking on the Poor campaign had been launched a week before and the main speakers there, Bishop Mauro Morelli from Rio de Janeiro and Susan George the author of ‘A Fate Worse Then Debt’, also spoke at the conference.
David Thatcher who minutes the CA debt working group came to the conference and his account of it is the main article in this newsletter.
Those of you who do not see your area secretary very often may not have seen the ‘Banking on the Poor’ pack.
These can be obtained free from Marketing and Resources and are well worth it for the ideas and information contained in it.
STAFF TRAINING CONFERENCE
Asking what one remembers a couple of months after a conference is perhaps a good way of judging the event.
So what do I remember of those three days in mid-September when I joined around 200 CA staff for the annual training conference at Swanwick in Derbyshire?
This year's conference was focused on the far reaching issue of international debt, and thus was directly relevant for my involvement in CA's Debt Working Group and the wider Debt Crisis Network that links interested UK NGOs.
I provide secretarial support for these two bodies as a CA volunteer, much of my job being committee work.
It is a learning experience for me because I have only a general knowledge of the economic and financial world.
The conference was helpful in aiding my understanding of the great mass of information that I am faced with in my volunteer role.
But much more important for me was to be exposed to the experience of people working with the poor in the Third World whose suffering results from debt.
Thus the major impact of the conference on me was to feel some of the actual consequences of debt for the poor in countries such as Brazil, Kenya, Jamaica and the Philippines.
The portrayal was of enslaved society, of people's life reduced to stretched death, and of nations suffering warfare in which foreign armies are replaced by their own national security forces.
During the past decade the poverty stricken countries of the South have been paying far more money to the rich North than they have been receiving in new money.
Realisation that our affluence in Britain, including mine, is at the expense of the poor in the Third World is a troubling conclusion that demands personal action.
The conference was helpful in suggesting ways to act and by providing solidarity so that I do not feel alone.
Indeed for me the conference was a great opportunity to meet so many CA staff, whose vitality and unity, in a common cause impressed me.
I enjoyed their friendliness.
The evening of talented entertainment was hilarious and also included shafts of criticism expressed in humour that struck me as evidence of CA's basic good health.
I am certainly grateful for the three days, which gave me much that I will certainly remember beyond two months!
Good for the Poor
by Michael Taylor, £6.95 in bookshops, but available direct from Christian Aid at a special price of £4.95
Michael Taylor, the Director of Christian Aid, examines the nature of Christian morality, and its relationship with faith and hope.
From that standpoint he looks at world development, taking into account the technical problems but concentrating mainly on the moral issues involved.
He asks what God requires of us in relation to the world's poor, and he outlines and evaluates possible courses of action.
Don't buy my harvest cheap and then give me charity
Unless you have recently became a Contract Volunteer you will find with this  newsletter a Mailings and Materials sheet which I would like you to fill in.
Word filters through some of you are not receiving all the material that you would like and I am hoping to rectify this by having an up to date record of what is needed.
May I wish all of you a very Happy Christmas and peaceful New Year