

Dear Ms. ,
ALMOND BANK PATH
Volunteers from ‘Spokes’, the Lothians cycle campaign, with the help of the national path-building charity Sustrans, would like to build an all-weather path for cyclists and pedestrians along the south bank of the River Almond, from Boathouse Bridge to the point near Turnhouse village where the East Coast Main Line crosses the river (point A on map, enclosed).
The distance is about one mile.
We understand that Edinburgh Airport Ltd. owns the land, which runs parallel with the airport perimeter fence.
There is already an unofficial path along this route, used mainly by fishermen and for river access, but otherwise the land is at present unused.
The path would be built to a width of 2 metres, with a foundation of aggregate and a whindust surface.
A footbridge would be erected to cross the Gogar Burn.
Barriers at each end would keep out any traffic other than cycles and pedestrians.
The path would form an extremely useful link in a ‘quiet’ route from Edinburgh to the countryside to the west, basically following the route of the old A9 from Maybury, via Turnhouse and continuing to Kirkliston and Winchburgh.
At Kirkliston there is a connection to the Newbridge to South Queensferry Path.
An Almond Bank link would thus enable cyclists to get from Edinburgh to the Forth Road Bridge on quiet roads or paths.
We envisage that the path would be mainly used for recreational cycling at weekends and by touring cyclists during the season, but it is also possible that a few commuters from Kirkliston would use it during the week.
I suspect the path would also be popular with walkers.
Sustrans has constructed a number of such cycle/pedestrian paths throughout Britain.
Volunteers from ‘Spokes’ also have path building experience in Edinburgh, for example the Pilton Path from Crewe Toll to the shore road, and ‘Donkey Lane’in Currie.
Edinburgh District Council have been consulted and officials from their Planning Department have looked at the route and agreed that it has good potential.
We would therefore be very grateful if Edinburgh Airport Ltd., as the land owner, would give us permission to go ahead.
We would hope to do the construction during the spring or early summer this year.
If you require any further information, please let me know.
We look forward to hearing from you.
Yours sincerely,
(Dr)
Dear Mr. ,
ALMOND BANK PATH
Volunteers from ‘Spokes’, the Lothians cycle campaign, with the help of the national path-building charity Sustrans, would like to build an all-weather path for cyclists and pedestrians along the south bank of the River Almond, from Boathouse Bridge to the point near Turnhouse village where the East Coast Main Line crosses the river (point A on map, enclosed).
The distance is about one mile.
Edinburgh Airport Ltd. own the land, which runs parallel with the airport perimeter fence, and have given permission for the path to be constructed.
There is already an unofficial path along this route, used mainly by fishermen and for river access, but otherwise the land is at present unused.
The path would be built to a width of 2 metres, with a foundation of aggregate and a whindust surface.
A footbridge would be erected to cross the Gogar Burn.
Barriers at each end would keep out any traffic other than cycles and pedestrians.
The path would form an extremely useful link in a ‘quiet’ route from Edinburgh to the countryside to the west, basically following the route of the old A9 from Maybury, via Turnhouse and continuing to Kirkliston and Winchburgh.
At Kirkliston there is a connection to the Newbridge to South Queensferry Path.
An Almond Bank link would thus enable cyclists to get from Edinburgh to the Forth Road Bridge on quiet roads or paths.
We envisage that the path would be mainly used for recreational cycling at weekends and by touring cyclists during the season, but it is also possible that a few commuters from Kirkliston would use it during the week.
I suspect the path would also be popular with walkers.
There is an unofficial parking and turning area at the Boathouse Bridge end.
Sustrans has constructed a number of such cycle/pedestrian paths throughout Britain.
Volunteers from ‘Spokes’ also have path building experience in Edinburgh, for example the Pilton Path from Crewe Toll to the shore road, and ‘Donkey Lane’in Currie.
Edinburgh District Council have been consulted and officials from their Planning Department have looked at the route and agreed that it has good potential.
We would hope to do the construction during the summer this year, possibly using volunteers from an international work-camp as well as Spokes members.
One very interesting feature of the project is that we hope to use the old bridge which used to span the railway in Princes St. Gardens.
The bridge will serve to take the path over the Gogar Burn.
The estimated cost of the project, including installation of the bridge, is £15,000.
This is an estimate based on the costs of building similar paths elsewhere, and assumes that volunteer labour will be used.
We are therefore asking Lothian Region to make a contribution towards these costs.
We think the project is very practicable and potentially of great benefit to the community; the re-cycling of the bridge adds a feature of significant historical interest.
If you require any further information, please let me know.
We look forward to hearing from you.
Yours sincerely,
(Dr)
Dear Ms. ,
ALMOND BANK PATH
Following the site meeting with yourself and the representative from your Clerk of Works Dept. on 27 April, this letter is to confirm that Edinburgh Airport Ltd has no objection to the proposal by ‘Spokes’ to construct a path along the bank of the River Almond from Boathouse Bridge to the railway bridge of the East Coast Main Line, on land owned by Edinburgh Airport Ltd.
The path would be built between the airport perimeter fence and the river, to a width of 2 metres maximum, with a whindust surface or similar.
We understand that planning permission from Edinburgh District Council will need to be granted, and that we shall consult with yourselves over some of the details, such as the design of the area adjacent to Boathouse Bridge.
I have put the plan to Lothian Regional Council, and their Transportation Committee have promised a contribution towards the costs of construction.
I also hope to get contributions from the District Council and possibly other organisations.
I would like to have further discussions with your Clerk of Works, particularly over the construction of a bridge to cross the Gogar Burn, and I will contact him shortly.
Yours sincerely,
(Dr.)
Dear Sir,
Tutorial Programs in Phonetics & Linguistics
I was formerly a Lecturer in Phonetics and Linguistics at Queen Margaret College, Edinburgh and while there, I developed a number of computer programs to assist with my teaching.
The programs are designed to enable students to work in their own time and at their own pace.
They are given appropriate feedback, and they can make mistakes (and recognise and correct them) without anyone else knowing.
Each program is designed so that most students complete it in 45 to 50 mins, ie. the average tutorial hour.
The programs were originally written for BBC machines because their ‘user-defined graphics’ facility enabled me to bring up the special phonetic symbols on screen.
It was also possible for the user to input these characters, by re-programming the keyboard.
Later, a PC version was made available by using a conversion program, which in effect enables the PC to be run in BBC Basic.
The programs were tried out extensively with my own students, and from their feedback I made several modifications.
As a result the programs have been very successful and I have sold copies to many colleges and universities, mainly in Britain but some overseas.
Details of the programs are enclosed.
I think it would be good if these programs could be adapted to run on AppleMacs, and I am sure this would enlarge the market for them.
In addition, the AppleMac's facility for incorporating sound within a program means that this further dimension can be added to the programs; the user could then learn to associate the sound with the symbol, or with its description.
I am therefore writing to ask if you would be interested in our working together to produce AppleMac versions of the programs.
I took early retirement from the College last year, so I have time available for this.
My knowledge of programming is limited to BBC Basic — I am a phonetician by training, but I learnt the basics of programming on a staff development course and then taught myself, using the Manual and advice from staff in the IT centre.
Yours faithfully,
(Dr.)
Dear Richard,
BAIRD ROAD CYCLE PATH, RATHO STATION
Official signs for a cycle path connecting Baird Road, Ratho Station, to the minor road from Ratho to Newbridge have been up for some time.
The path follows the route of part of the old road and crosses the Edinburgh-Glasgow railway by a bridge used only by cyclists and pedestrians.
Unfortunately, at the top (southern) end of the route, where the path emerges onto the minor road, there is no dropped kerb for cyclists, and there is another kerb further down, towards the primary school, which also needs to be dropped.
On behalf of‘Spokes’ therefore, I would like to ask the Highways Department if they could attend to this as soon as possible.
Yours sincerely,
Dear Sir,
PENTLAND ART CLUB A/C 
When I opened a High Interest Business Account (in addition to the Club's Current Account) in September 1990 I was assured that funds to top up the current account would be transferred automatically from the business account whenever the former's balance fell below £50.
Since opening the new account I have had to make at least six unnecessary visits to the bank because the system was not working properly, thus wasting your time and mine.
Your letter of 27 Feb., informing me that the current account was overdrawn and charging the Club to rectify this, was the last straw.
Please close the High Interest Business Account and transfer the funds to the current account.
I realise that the Club will lose interest from this, but it's obviously a case of the bank profiting from its own mistakes, like British Telecom.
Lucky for you that you are the only bank in Juniper Green, otherwise I would have transferred all the Club's funds long ago.
Yours, fed up,
(Treasurer)
BARNTON GOLF COURSE PATH
Barnton Golf Course path is 420m. long (about quarter of a mile) and runs from Barnton Avenue to Barnton Avenue West.
It forms an important link in a cycle route from the centre of Edinburgh to Cramond Brig and the Forth Road Bridge.
This route starts at Roseburn, proceeds via the railway path to Davidson's Mains, thence on quiet roads to Barnton Avenue, and quiet roads again from Barnton Avenue West to Cramond Brig.
A dedicated path will eventually take cyclists on from there to the Forth crossing.
The existing path through the golf course is unformed, and gets very muddy in wet conditions.
Sustrans, in co-operation with Edinburgh District Council, now have the permission of the landowners to upgrade the path to the standard 2-metre width.
The surface initially will be whindust but eventually there is the possibility of asphalt.
The work will be carried out by volunteers from ‘Spokes’ and the local branch of Scottish Conservation Projects under the supervision of Sustrans engineers, and will take place between 8th Oct. and 17th Oct. 1993, including two weekends.
The surface will initially be scraped by a small bulldozer, and the volunteers will then bring in the foundations, consisting of highway planings, on dumpers, and lay this to a depth of about 8 inches.
After rolling, a finish of whindust will be laid and rolled, again by the volunteers.
Associated tasks are as follows:
1.
to investigate and improve the drainage at the east (Barnton Ave.) end;
2.
to remove existing 80-metre fence at west end and replace with new fence to allow full 2-metre width (old fence to be removed at start of works; new fence to go in on completion, to allow dumpers to manoevre while work is in progress.
It is possible that concrete foundations for a boundary wall will be laid at the same time by the adjacent landowner);
3.
to clear overhead vegetation, including tree branches.
The path actually passes between two golf courses, neither of which is called ‘Barnton’, though both are situated there.
The course to the north is called ‘Bruntsfield’ and they are the owners of the land over which the path runs.
The course to the south is called ‘Royal Burgess’.
The final 80 metres at the west end, however, passes between the fence of a private house and the fence of a proposed small housing development.
The entrances to the path will be protected by bollards and a chicane, to stop any unauthorised traffic.
These will be installed after work on the path surface is complete.
Every effort will be made to minimse inconvenience to present users of the path and local residents while work is in progress.
Local residents will, it is hoped, benefit from an upgraded path, and it will be of particular benefit also to pupils of the Royal High School, which is located nearby.
If there are any queries,, the co-ordinator of the volunteers, can be contacted on (031) 453-3366.
Dear Mr. ,
CYCLE PEDESTRIAN BARRIERS
I am afraid I am not satisfied with your reply of 6 August to my letter of 14 April.
The point of my earlier letter was that the existing standards of barrier widths are not adequate.
We are not asking that all existing barriers be changed, only that when new barriers are put in, that they conform to a standard which allows cyclists to pass without having to dismount or, if carrying panniers, to lift the cycle over the obstruction.
What is the point of having cycle facilities which cyclists will not bother to use because of the inconvenience?
It is difficult to find an exact parallel with motor traffic, but would motorists for example put up with having to drive over 200m. of rough stuff in order to get onto a motorway?
For the sake of a tiny minority of possible abusers, the cyclist is being unreasonably inconvenienced.
This is never done to motorists, where a very substantial minority of abusers literally get away with murder, despite the existence of technology which could reduce speeds substantially.
So why must cyclists put up with second-rate facilities?
With particular regard to the barriers at Baberton Crescent, I feel especially aggrieved because I withdrew my objection to the Muirend Ave.
one-way system on the promise of an adequate cycle path alternative, and we still have a barrier which is not negotiable.
These barriers do not even conform to the existing standard, since the gap at pedal height on the upper barrier is only 392mm., while the gap at the bottom of the lower barrier is only 395mm.
I have not measured the gap of the barrier at the north end of the Pilton path, but I am quite certain it does not meet the 400mm. minimum.
Yours sincerely,
Dear Richard,
Further to our recent phone conversations on the topic of barriers, I enclose a copy of a design used elsewhere.
The problematic barriers I have encountered are:—
1.
Baberton Cres. to Baberton Mains path — top and bottom
2.
Lower Granton Road — new path; contact David Sillence
3.
Pilton Path — north end, where path emerges onto Caroline Ave.
There may well be other barriers causing problems — I'll ask ‘Spokes’ to get cyclists to report in.
In the meantime, if the four barriers mentioned could be attended to I would be very grateful.
Yours sincerely,
Dear Headteacher,
BIKE to WORK (SCHOOL) DAY
As a contribution to Edinburgh's Festival of the Environment, ‘Spokes’ are organising a Bike to Work Day on Tuesday May 18th.
There will be a cyclists’ reception and breakfast at the City Chambers, an evening ride to Cramond, and a Commuter Challenge in which people travelling by different modes of transport will set off from Currie Post Office at 8 a.m. to reach the City Chambers.
We would like to ask everyone in the Secondary Schools of Edinburgh to join in by encouraging as many students and teachers as possible to travel to school by bicycle that day.
Participation could perhaps be increased if the event is planned beforehand; for example, it might be an advantage if groups of children who all live in the same area arranged to meet and cycle to school together.
This would provide ‘safety in numbers’, and might overcome the fears of some parents who would otherwise be reluctant to allow their children to cycle.
Another possibility is to get older pupils to run a ‘Doctor Bike’ clinic at the school, ie. checks to see that bikes are working properly and suggestions on how to rectify faults.
‘Spokes’ has information on how to run a Doctor Bike clinic, which we can send to you if you contact  (phone no. below).
Here are some observations and facts which you may find useful:—
1.
‘A vicious circle is being created where parents perceive that the roads are becoming more dangerous, so they forbid their children to cycle, and take them to school by car.
This in turn makes road conditions even worse for the remaining cyclists’.
2.
‘The bicycle is a child's only independent means of transport, yet that mobility is under threat.
Child health is also affected, as the decline in child cycling has been accompanied by a rise in the popularity of computer and video games, making children less active’.
Some facts:—
1.
90% of junior schoolchildren, and 79% of seniors, own bicycles;
2.
Yet only 1% of schoolchildren cycle to school;
3.
75% of juniors and 25% of senior schoolchildren are forbidden by their parents to ride their bikes on the road;
4.
Taking children to school by car accounts for 10% of rush-hour traffic;
5.
60% of child cycle owners have less than a two kilometre journey to school;
6.
In the Netherlands, by contrast, over half of all journeys by senior schoolchildren are made by cycle.
These observations and facts come from an information pack about National Bike Week, recently published.
For more information locally, please contact  on 031-453-3366.
Dear Bike Express,
As one of the cyclists on the Spanish run in late August, I would like to say a heartfelt ‘thank you’ to you and your organisation for the kind and efficient way in which the operation was handled.
In particular, to the hosts Gail and Paul, who coped magnificently with our needs and requirements, and managed to produce food and drinks for us with very limited facilities.Also to the drivers, who not only drove with such care that the passengers weren't inconvenienced in any way, but also doubled as bike handlers to get the bikes on and off the trailer, inevitably a dirty job.
The food and drinks offered by the hosts were, I thought, just about right, and very reasonable in price, which encouraged us to use this service, despite the service station stops.
To be able to produce such a variety, with only a microwave and a supply of hot water, was little short of miraculous.
The bike trailer with its brightly coloured tarpaulin was a very good mobile advert for the CTC.
Although it seemed very efficient, one improvement I might suggest would be to mount the covers on spring rollers, because the drivers found it difficult to get to the bikes with the covers pressing on them while they worked.
I appreciate that we cyclists must have caused the operation quite a bit of inconvenience, particularly the stops to get us on and off; the problems of finding suitable lay-bys etc; the time taken; and the dirty work for the drivers.
Perhaps cyclists using the service could be asked to clean their bikes as much as possible so as to minimise the risk of oil stains etc.
I hope these problems won't discourage your company from continuing to run the service, which I hope has been a success this year.
It certainly was as far as I was concerned, and I am looking forward to making a booking for next year.
Once again, many thanks for your contribution to one of the best and most memorable holidays.
Yours sincerely,
Dear Derek,
COMMUTER CHALLENGE
On behalf of‘Spokes’ I am organising a ‘Commuter Challenge’for the morning of May 18th, which has been designated ‘Bike to Work Day’as part of the Festival of the Environment.
The Challenge starts from Currie Post Office at 8 a.m. and finishes at the City Chambers, where a cyclists’ breakfast is being laid on.
The idea is to show that environment-friendly modes of transport can be just as quick, if not quicker, than the private motor car.
Radio Forth are interested and are hoping to record my progress on the cycle, and to interview all the competitors as they arrive.
So far, I have a car driver and a motor cyclist and I'm looking for someone for the bus and train, and possibly taxi.
I would like to ask if you could officiate at the start, and set us all off.
There will, hopefully be a ‘Commuter Challenge’ banner, and the link to Radio Forth.
Perhaps after setting us off, you could be the bus, train or taxi competitor too!
I do realise however that you don't live in Currie, and that it is rather an early start.
But if you could help us out we would be very grateful, and as the District Council is organising the events at the City Chambers, it seems appropriate to have our District Councillor to set things rolling.
My phone no. is 453-3366, and I look forward to hearing from you.
Yours sincerely,
Dear Mr. ,
UNION CANAL TOWPATH REPAIRS
In a telephone conversation yesterday with Linton  of the Broxburn office I was told that the work being carried out by volunteers from ‘Spokes’ was to cease forthwith.
The reason given was that approval had not been granted by the Engineering department.
There appears to be some misunderstanding here.
On 10 June I received a letter from Mr. , which made reference to the site meeting I held with you on 4 June, and then said, and I quote, ‘the volunteers will carry out the resurfacing works on the Canal towing path…’; ‘after the works are completed…’; ‘the upgrading works carried out by your organisation will be to the benefit of all canal users’.
I took this to be written approval for the project to go ahead and I believe, in view of the wording, that I was quite justified in doing so.
I assumed that Engineering department's approval had been conveyed internally to Mr. , particularly since the letter makes specific reference to our site meeting (why else would he mention it?).
When I asked Mr.  if engineering approval was likely to be given, he said it was not, the reason being that BWB themselves are proposing to upgrade the whole length of the Union Canal towpath.
If this is correct, why was I not given any indication that this was a possibility?
If it isn't correct, I would like to know why Engineering's approval has been withheld, because I have never been given any indication, at any stage, that there were any major problems regarding the project.
Following our site meeting, I took on board all the points you made.
For example, you mentioned the need for public liability insurance, so I went ahead and arranged that; I also had signs made saying ‘Caution: Work in Progress’, as you recommended; I took care to explain to the volunteers to avoid disturbing the kicking stones, and to avoid making heaps of spoil so as not to impede the grass cutter.
I was also careful to explain BW's policy as regards cycling on the towpath, and I emphasised that the work was for the benefit of all users and gave Spokes members no rights whatsoever.
I can only conclude by saying that I am sorry the situation has developed the way it has.
In the past I have co-ordinated some very successful projects with various authorities and funding bodies, and I have not had any trouble.
In this project I have invested considerable time and not a little of my own money.
Had we been allowed to continue I believe we would have made a significant improvement to the path.
Certainly the comments of passers-by were very favourable, most saying it was high time something was done, that the path had been in a shocking state, etc.
Yours sincerely,
(Dr.)
Dear Mr. ,
UNION CANAL TOWPATH
Thank you for your letter of 30 June.
I appreciate the points you make, and I am pleased that you think the project may be able to go on.
To take up some points from your letter; first, Historic Scotland.
Realising that the canal is scheduled as an Ancient Monument, I contacted them well before the event and received an application form for consent.
However, clause III (a) grants an exception in cases where no material alteration is involved.
Thinking this exception might apply, I checked with your colleague Ian Law, who was of the same opinion.
Accordingly I wrote to Historic Scotland, giving details of what was proposed, and asking if the application was perhaps not needed.
They replied (10 June, ie BEFORE we started work) that this was in fact correct, since the work would be covered under Class III a of the Class Consent Order 1981.
The letter was signed by a Mrs D .
Second, as regards funding, a letter of 8 June from Christopher Badenoch, Area Manager of SNH, confirms that they’ are minded to approve the project, subject to…the written approval and consent of British Waterways’, and operating through the Edinburgh Green Belt Trust (who had, as I think I mentioned, promised us £3,000 subject to SNH approval).
If British Waterways are agreeable then, and confirmation of funding is received, there would appear to be no obstacles to the project going ahead.
It may take some time to get the team of volunteers together again.
I myself will be away from 7 July until 8 August, and then again from 28 August until 12 September.
The earliest we could start work would be the 19th September, for which I would need to put out a call during August.
Does this sound a reasonable time scale?
If BW approval can be arranged, I would be grateful if this could be communicated to David Oldham of the Green Belt Trust, so that he can arrange the funding.
The address of the EGBT is Castlebrae Business Centre, Peffer Place, EH16 4BB, tel. 031.652.1114.
I will let David Oldham know how the situation stands at present, and ask him to liaise directly with yourselves if this is appropriate.
Yours sincerely,
Dear Mr. ,
UNION CANAL TOWPATH REPAIRS
In a telephone conversation today (14 June) I was informed by Linton  of your Broxburn office that the proposed repairs to the Union Canal towpath should cease forthwith.
I would like to put on record a summary of the meetings and correspondence between myself (on behalf of‘Spokes’) and officers of British Waterways.
Following a telephone conversation in late February in which Mr.  expressed possible BWB interest in collaborating on a project to repair certain sections of the towpath, I had a first site meeting with him on 5th March.
At this meeting I was given very positive signals about the project and after discussing the outlines, Mr.  said he would consult his boss (yourself) for confirmation.
In a subsequent phone conversation I was told that your response had been favourable, provided BWB were not involved in any expenses being incurred.
I assured Mr.  that we in Spokes would find the funding for the project, and that indeed the Edinburgh Green Belt Trust had been approached, and that they felt the project was one they would be willing to support.
(I subsequently had (27 April) a site meeting with an EGBT official, who completed a proposal form on the spot — however, the funding aspects are not my main concern here; suffice it to say, 1) that I have always been confident that funding would be secured from one source or another, and 2) that my direct approach to SNH was done only because I had indications that their project approvals took months rather than weeks — something I have subsequently been assured is not true).
Assuming that I now had BWB approval in principle and a promise of funding, I went ahead and on 12 May called on our members for volunteers.
Obviously these events have to be organised well in advance, and one has to assume that if approval from funding bodies and the landowner has been given in principle, then there are no major obstacles.
It also seemed a reasonable timescale, given the first site meeting on 5th March, for the work to take place in June, more than 3 months away.
In any case, volunteers are not available in July/August (holidays), and by September the weather is unreliable; May and June are, realistically, the most opportune time for such projects.
I continued to assume that BW were happy about the proposal, and indeed had a second site meeting with Mr. , at which details of the sections of towpath, methods of work, and types of materials to be used were discussed — surely an indication that there were no significant problems.
Furhtermore, Mr.  gave me a drawing to show the kind of working drawing BW engineers expected.
I was also given an indemnity form, which I duly completed and returned.
All this led me to believe that written approval was just a matter of time.
After receiving my version of the working drawing, Mr.  phoned to say that the drawing did not have sufficient detail, and that another Mr.  from the Glasgow office would be in touch to ask for a clarified drawing.
On 28 May I received a letter from this other Mr. , which did NOT, however, ask for greater detail, as expected.
The letter started by saying that ‘permission cannot be given’ but finished by calling for a site meeting (a most peculiar letter really).
Accordingly, I duly had a site meeting with Mr. George  on 4th June.
He said the proposals would have to be approved by the engineering department.
When I suggested, in view of time pressure, that it might help if I completed the paperwork there and then, he agreed.
I therefore completed to his satisfaction all the forms he gave me, and I gave him a detailed written description of our proposal, and a revised working drawing showing greater detail, with both of which he seemed satisfied.
Further points were discussed, for example the need for public liability insurance, which I duly went and arranged; the need for ‘Caution: Work in Progress’ signs at each end, which I duly had made; the need to take care, when working, not to disturb the kicking stones; and the need to avoid making heaps when distributing the spoil, so as not to impede the grass cutter.
I took all these points on board, and indeed took care to explain them to the volunteers before we began work.
I was also careful to explain BW's policy as regards cycling on the towpath, and emphasised that the work was for the benefit of all users and gave Spokes members no rights whatsoever.
At no time was I given any indication, by any BW personnel, that there were any reservations about the project.
Indeed it was my impression that BW were pleased that an outside body was showing sufficient interest in the canal to secure funding to undertake works which BW itself could not afford.
On 10th June I received a letter from Mr. L. , referring to the site meeting with G.  and stating, I quote, ‘although the volunteers will carry out the resurfacing works on the Canal towing path…’; ‘after the works are completed…’; ‘the upgrading works carried out by your organisation will be to the benefit of all canal users’.
I took this to be written approval for the project to go ahead and I believe, in view of the wording, that I was perfectly justified in doing so.
Subsequent to the receipt of this letter I received no further communication.
If any BW officer had reservations about the project they could have phoned me on 10th or 11th June, particularly as everyone knew the work was scheduled to start on the 12th.
I feel I have done my best to communicate at every stage.
I can only conclude by saying that I am very sorry the situation has developed as it has.
In the past I have co-ordinated some very successful projects with various authorities and funding bodies, and I have not had any trouble.
In this project I have invested considerable time and not a little of my own money.
Had we been allowed to continue I believe we would have made a significant improvement to the path; certainly the comments of passers-by were very favourable, most saying it was high time something was done, that the path was in a shocking state, etc.
Even now, the only substantial reason I have been given for stopping the work, is that BW themselves propose to upgrade the towpath along the whole length.
Mr.  said he knew of this two days ago (presumably Friday).
If he, or anyone else, had had the courtesy to inform me, he could have saved our members a lot of hard work.
And I can only wonder why none of the BW personnel who knew of our project ever gave any intimation that this wholesale upgrading was being considered.
Yours sincerely,
(Dr.)
Dear Sir,
CYCLING ON TOWPATHS: a respose to the Consultation Document
As a cyclist, and campaigner on behalf of cycling, I warmly welcome this consultation document, which sets out the issues very clearly and comprehensively.
I live close to the Union Canal and use its towpath for cycling, so my comments will relate to this and to the neighbouring Forth-Clyde Canal.
However, both are in some ways representative of towpaths generally in that (a) these canals pass through some areas of concentrated population — Scotland's Central Belt having a total of over two million, and these canals pass right through it — and (b) parts of the towpaths are urban and others completely rural.
In urban areas eg Wester Hailes to Central Edinburgh, 4 miles, the path is heavily used by commuters (despite its current deplorable condition) and forms a significant ‘safer alternative’ for cyclists esp.
those from the western suburbs.
West of Wester Hailes (ie away from the city) the towpath is rural and in poor condition but could form a valuable corridor for leisure/recreational access to the countryside.
One section, eastwards from Ratho for about a mile, has been improved and is well-used by walkers and cyclists — it shows the potential the whole route could have if upgraded.
Similarly, west from Falkirk, large sections have been upgraded and offer an excellent recreational facility.
(paras.2.6, 4.2) I belong to the 40% who would be willing to pay £10 for a national permit, but I appreciate the problems of administration and enforcement, which probably means that Option A is the more practical alternative.
My main concern is how much of the network would become ‘prohibited’; if it's more than a fraction, I would prefer the present undefined arrangements.
For example, if all Class C paths became prohibited, this would amount to a substantial proportion, certainly on the Union Canal.
But I have a suggestion to make on this point (see below).
I see the way forward as co-operation with local authorities, who would finance the upgrading and maintenance of the paths (as they have for example on the Forth-Clyde at Falkirk and Clydebank).
The costs form a very small proportion of local councils’ overall transport budget, and the councils are now taking greater notice of environment pressure groups and are willing to promote cycling.
There may also be scope for working with voluntary organisations.
In Scotland we have Scottish Conservation Projects, and locally Lothian Conservation Volunteers, both of whom have experience in, and enthusuasm for, path building.
I belong to the local cyclists’ campaign group, ‘Spokes’, and we have a core of volunteer path builders who have already upgraded paths in this area, to a very high standard.
Since labour is the most expensive item, costs can be kept to a minimum.
It seems reasonable that BW should look to outside bodies for funding, because of the problems of collecting revenue from users.
Concerning prohibited sections, then, my suggestion is that, as a policy, wherever a no-cycling sign goes up, there should be immediate consultation with local authorities and voluntary groups to arrange upgrading so that cycling IS permitted.
I feel sure this would stimulate local forces into action, to the benefit of everyone.
In the Edinburgh area at the moment there are several organisations very willing and enthusiastic to pay for and carry out much-needed upgrading of the Union Canal towpath, but it appears that different departments of BW are giving different reactions.
I hope the policy document will sort this out because many of us are keen to see improvements; any help you could give us here would be appreciated!
(Appendix 1 — the Code): the Code as presented is very clear and straightforward, with a suitably informal style.
Scotland has recently produced a code of conduct for mountain bikers and there are one or two phrases in it which might be useful for your Code:
Think about others;
Cycle with consideration for others, giving way where necessary;
Do not alarm walkers by coming up silently behind them.
(Section 6): I would change ‘dismount’ to ‘get off’in keeping with the informal style.
(Sections 7,8): I would replace with a single section:
Cycle with consideration for others.
Do not alarm walkers by coming up silently behind them — always use a bell or a hooter.
Anglers may prefer you to pass quietly.
If they're deep in concentration etc.
Then maybe add a new para.:
Cycling is permitted through the courtesy of BW.
Do not do anything which risks this privilege being withdrawn.
I hope these comments are helpful.
Yours faithfully,
(Dr.)
Dear Editor,
Christine McColl's letter (C & B News, February) amazes me.
I think she's very optimistic if she expects others to go by bus so that she can get her car out of Muirwood Road, to get to work in Wester Hailes.
I wonder if she has thought of alternative means of transport?
At a very gentle pace, it took me less than 7 minutes to cycle the 1.5 miles from Muirwood Rd. to Wester Hailes Shopping Centre — and 10 mins. to get back (it's uphill).
I doubt if she could drive it in that time.
Even walking should take no more than 25 mins.
That amount of daily fresh air and exercise does wonders for health and fitness, so the time taken in travelling to work is actually being put to good use.
The route, via Donkey Lane, is lovely countryside and the experience should become the exact opposite of the stress and distress she obviously gets from driving.
Furthermore, the worst air pollution is caused by cold engines in congested conditions — and motorists, in their confined space, breathe the worst of that.
So she would be doing everyone a favour, including herself!
Yours sincerely,
IMPRESSIONS OF CANADA
The Hawkins family this summer spent four weeks on Vancouver Island, on the west coast of Canada.
The excuse for this trip was to visit Val's brother and his family, who have recently moved from Regina in the middle of the prairies, to these more temperate and scenically more exciting shores.
The dates (July and the first week of August) were dictated by Val's holiday times and Ed's graduation from Lancaster University, which took place on July 7th.
It was quite difficult to get flights at this time of year; when we first applied they said, come back when we know our schedules, and when we went back, they said sorry, nearly everything is booked up.
But we got flights from Gatwick to Vancouver, leaving on the 10th.
It wasn't worth going back to Edinburgh (after the graduation ceremony) so we took the opportunity to visit our old friends the Kembles, who live in South Croydon, which is only a mega traffic jam's throw from Gatwick.
We left the car in their garage while we were away.
Vancouver Island is big — about 300 miles long — and is separated from the mainland by a strait about 25 miles wide, which contains lots of small islands known as the Gulf Islands, of which more anon.
Peter (Val's brother) lives in a town on the east coast of the island called Nanaimo, which has a population of about 50,000 and is connected to Vancouver (which lies almost opposite) by a regular ferry service.
The crossing takes about an hour and a half.
The summer in these parts is normally quite dry and sunny without getting too hot.
This year was unusual in having quite a few cool, cloudy days and some rain, though the final week was sunny and quite hot.
The cooler weather was good for cycling.
Ed and Matthew stayed at Peter's for only a week and then they were off on their own.
They had a Canada rail pass and took the train from Vancouver through to Jasper National Park and then on right across to Toronto, where they were met by Ed's girl-friend Kelly, who comes from Ohio.
Together the three of them went via Niagara to New York.
Matthew eventually returned to Nanaimo and came home with us, but Ed continued on to Ohio for a longer stay.
It wasn't meant to be a cycling holiday and we didn't take any bikes with us, but Peter and Judy had a bike apiece for us to borrow.
Pete's bike was a ten-speed Peugeot with a narrow range of gears.
It might have been OK for the prairies, but bottom wasn't low enough to cope with the hills of Nanaimo.
The land rises quite steeply from the sea, and the roads, with the exception of the Island Highway, do not follow the contours, so there is very little flat ground.
There were plenty of bike shops (I visited no fewer than six), but not many cyclists around.
I enquired about local clubs at the first bike shop I went to, with the idea of doing some weekend riding with them, perhaps.
I was received very cordially and given some names and phone numbers.
It turned there was a group which meets at weekends, and the assembly point was very near Peter's place (that was quite important, because Nanaimo for all its small population is very strung out — it was 13km., for example, from Peter's place to the centre (’ downtown’)).
This group meets at six in the morning.
They do a run of one and a half to two hours, then return for breakfast.
The idea is to be riding in the cool of the day, and when there is much less traffic — and they can then spend the rest of the day with their families.
I said I would be delighted to join them if I could wake up in time (which I doubted), I said not to wait for me, and they promised they wouldn't.
As it happened I was the first to reach the meeting place, and soon, four others turned up.
We had a good ride — quite a hard one, I had difficulty keeping up, though towards the end they were getting noticably slower!— and we were then invited to one of them's house for breakfast.
A real Canadian breakfast, pancakes and honey, with eggs and ham and coffee, just what we needed after a good workout.
I went out with this group several times on Saturday and Sunday mornings.
One occasion was quite spectacular.
They were in the habit of calling first at a petrol station, and using the air line to blow their tyres up really hard.
One guy put in a pressure of 120 psi, which raised my eyebrows not a little.
About 20 miles out, on a deserted and very quiet country road, there was this mighty explosion and we all dived for cover.
But it wasn't the IRA, just a sudden release of the 120 psi, leaving a few shreds of inner tube!
CANAL TOWPATH, HERMISTON
A group of about 30 Spokes volunteers (15 each day) worked really hard over the weekend of 12-13 June to transform a section of the Union Canal towpath at Hermiston, on the western outskirts of the city.
The towpath, covered with a build-up of earth and grass which had been accumulating since commercial traffic on the canal ceased in the 1930's, was cleared to a width of one metre for a distance of about half a mile.
In some parts, the setts of the original path, laid when the canal was built in 1810, were uncovered (though we didn't discover any valuable Victorian artefacts!).
The intention was to complete the work the following weekend by laying a stone and whindust surface, thus improving the path for the benefit of all users, who include walkers, joggers and anglers as well as the occasional cyclist.
Unfortunately, the British Waterways Board called a halt to the work, claiming that the paperwork was not in order.
As a result, the path has been left in a half-finished state.
Negotiations with BWB are, however, continuing, and it is hoped that, with their consent, volunteers may be able to complete the work at some future date.
The Green Belt Trust have offered a grant to support the project, conditional on BWB consent.
The situation is complicated by BWB's official policy of not approving the use of towpaths for cycling, though a number of particular schemes, such as part of the Forth-Clyde path, have received official approval.
Dear Sir,
ALL CHANGE!
I am writing to support the proposals, by Central Regional Council, for a shift in transport policy towards public transport, traffic calming, and better facilities for cyclists and pedestrians.
Such a shift will, we hope, make our towns and cities safer and healthier, nicer places to live in.
I hope too that other regions will follow your example.
I come to Central Region quite regularly as a cycling tourist, and the train service from Edinburgh to Stirling and Dunblane is very useful because cycles can be carried on it, free of charge.
Long may this continue!
I hope your new proposals will work towards better rail-cycle facilities, as we have been having a lot of problems with Scotrail about the carriage of bikes.
I wish you all success with the new policies, and if I can help on any issues specific to cycle tourism, please let me know.
I am familiar with many routes on minor roads in the region, as well as the cycle paths built by organisations like Sustrans.
Yours faithfully,
(Dr.)
Dear Sir/Madam,
OUTDOOR CLOTHING FOR CYCLISTS
Thank you for your catalogue of outdoor clothing, which I received recently.
I would like to make a few comments, as a mainly urban cyclist who also rides for recreation and covers about 9,000 miles a year.
First, the materials look really excellent.
They appear to offer the right combination of warmth, windproofing and breathability.
The designs also look both elegant and sensible, and the concept of the reversible garment is very practical.
However, none of the garments advertised quite fulfils what I feel is needed.
For the cyclist, conspicuousness is of paramount importance.
The problem is that light-coloured garments tend to show the dirt rather quickly, and lose their lustre.
From that point of view, the colours you offer are sensible.
But it is possible to get the best of both worlds with a garment which is mostly dark, but has bright patches incorporated at strategic points.
Some manufacturers put reflexive strips at front and back, but even more important are the sides, because cyclists are very vulnerable to vehicles emerging from side turnings or entering roundabouts.
Additional patches are therefore needed on the shoulders or at the top of the arms.
The American firm Cannondale produces a jacket like this (though I didn't buy it, as it seemed designed for an American winter!)
In summary, I am looking for a jacket which is wind and water proof, breathable, looks respectable enough to turn up at the office in, and offers conspicuity.
Am I asking too much?!
I hope you find these comments helpful, and if you do at some stage produce such a jacket, please let me know.
Yours sincerely,
COMMUTER CHALLENGE
Motorcycle and bicycle proved the fastest modes of transport in the Commuter Challenge, organised on May 18th in Edinburgh by ‘Spokes’ for Bike to Work Day, as part of the city's Festival of the Environment.
The time taken by the cyclist for the six and a half mile journey from Currie to the City Chambers was thirty minutes, making an average speed of 13 mph.
The route, it must be admitted, is mostly downhill, and the wind that day was a favourable one.
The motorcyclist beat this time by five minutes, but conditions were unusual; many institutions such as the University and the Art College remained closed for a second day of holiday, which meant traffic was unusually light.
The motorcyclist also used the West Approach Road, a stretch of urban semi-motorway on which bikes are banned (next time, we'll make sure all contestants use the same route!).
Third home in the race was the bus passenger (35 mins; average speed 11.2 mph) and fourth was the car in 36 mins (average, 10.8 mph; and time to find a parking place and then walk to one's destination would normally have to be added to this).
Both contestants thought these times were unusually fast, thanks to the traffic conditions.
Last in was the train passenger, who took 52 mins (average speed, 7.5 mph); this, despite the fact that a train was scheduled at exactly the right time for the contestant to catch by cycling the 0.7 miles from the start to the station.
Had the train been on time, this contestant stood a good chance of winning.
As it was, the train was 18 mins. late due to a points failure at Mid Calder.
This was also the most expensive mode of travel; the fare of £1.90 not only compares badly with the 90p bus fare, but was augmented by the £3 cycle carriage charge, the total coming to about the cost of travelling in by taxi!
The race was designed to show that a bicycle is not only cheap, healthy and friendly on the environment, but also quick.
For the cyclist however it was a ‘challenge’ in more ways than one, partly because the distance was much greater than is usual in such events, thus giving the motorised modes a head start on the outer-suburb uncongested sections, and partly because traffic was lighter than usual on that particular day.
This highlights yet another advantage of the bicycle — the consistency of the time taken for any particular journey.
Car, bus and train passengers have to make generous allowances for traffic being heavy or bus/train being late or cancelled.
The cyclist knows, give or take the wind speed and direction, almost to the minute how long the journey will take.
The contestants were asked to note where they were at ten minute intervals.
The race was started (by Derek Burns, the District Councillor for Currie) at 8 am.
At 8.10, cycle and motorcycle were ‘neck-and-neck’(I use the inverted commas advisedly!) at the Slateford aqueduct, while the car was 2 miles back, in Juniper Green; the bus (travelling by a different route) had reached Craiglockhart; and the train contestant was still waiting at Curriehill station.
At 8.20, the cyclist was at Haymarket, the motorbike was bowling along the West Approach Road, and the car was still 1.5 miles behind, at Hutchison Crossway.
The bus was at the King's Theatre approaching Tollcross — and the unhappy rail man was still at Curriehill!
At 8.30, the cyclist was arriving at the finish, the motorbike had arrived 5 mins before (but note, no time had been taken in finding a parking place, which would normally be the case); the car was at the Morrison St — Lothian Road junction, and the bus had taken ten minutes to reach George IV Bridge, less than a mile.
The train had reached Kingsknowe, two stops down the line, and still ‘mins from the destination.
These intermediate times show very clearly that all modes apart from the cycle had periods of fast or slow movement, whereas the bike continued at a consistent pace.
The main delaying factor in the inner city, for the cyclist, is in fact the traffic lights.
It is interesting to wonder whether, if everyone cycled, even these would be necessary!
Dear Editor,
COMMUTER CHALLENGE
‘Spokes’, the Lothians Cycle Campaign, are organising a ‘Commuter Challenge’ on the morning of May 18, as a contribution to Environment Week.
The City Chambers have been booked for a cyclists’ breakfast and we hope to encourage as many people as possible to bike to work that day.
We would like the Herald & Post to give coverage to the Commuter Challenge, and to invite one of your staff to participate if they so wish.
The challenge involves a variety of modes of transport and the time taken for a particular journey, typically a journey to work during the rush hour.
The aim is to demonstrate that environment-friendly modes can be just as quick and efficient, if not more so, than the private motor car.
Similar challenges have been organised previously in London, Canterbury etc but as far as I know this one is a ‘first’ for Edinburgh.
We propose to start from Currie Post Office at 8 am.
The destination is the City Chambers, High St. Modes of travel will be bicycle, car, bus, train, motor cycle and possibly taxi.
We already have a car, motor cycle and bicycle lined up, but we need someone for the bus and train.
On the bicycle, I am hoping to carry a microphone and tape-recorder, to make a commentary as I progress.
The commentary could include traffic conditions, weather conditions, positions of the other competitors, road surface problems and any on-going events; if I can borrow equipment for monitoring heart-rate etc, this could emphasise the health side of cycling.
I look forward to hearing from you.
My phone no. is .
Yours sincerely,
(Dr)
NEW PROGRAMS IN PHONETICS & LINGUISTICS
CATEGORIES of the ENGLISH VERB
This program practises verbal categories in greater detail.
A Verb Phrase (eg. might be looking) is put on screen and the user is asked to choose, from a menu, the category of each verb in the phrase — categories such as Primary Aux, Modal Aux, Copula etc.
Immediate feedback is given and a ‘help’ section with examples is always available.
There are 70 items, grouped into 7 blocks of 10 and loosely graded for difficulty.
The program is similar in aims to ‘Parts of Speech’.
See also ‘Tense and Aspect’.
TENSE/ASPECT in the ENGLISH VERB
Practises the tense/aspect categories of the verb, namely PRESENT, PAST, SIMPLE, PROGRESSIVE, PERFECT, and combinations of these.
A Verb Phrase (eg. was waiting) is put on screen and the user chooses, from a menu, the tense/aspect of the phrase.
Feedback is given, and a ‘help’ section with examples of the categories and their combinations is always available.
There are 50 items, grouped into 5 blocks of 10 and graded for difficulty.
Complements ‘Categories of the English Verb’.
In Preparation:
English Pronouns: a program to practise specific categories of Pronoun, including Personal, Demonstrative, Indefinite, and, for Personal Pronouns, Person, Number, Subjective, Objective, Possessive, Modifier and Head.
Dear Alan,
Thank you for your letter of 4 June, and the cheque.
I have sent the fee to the Society of Friends.
The costings for our external affiliations are as follows:
These subscriptions have been paid for 1993.
We anticipate similar expenditure for 1994.
Yours sincerely,
(Treasurer)
NEWS FROM SCOTLAND
Two Sustrans sculptures on the Edinburgh — Glasgow cycle route were ceremoniously ‘unveiled’ during the summer by veteran CTC members Ted Zoller and Walter Browne, who have between them clocked up 150 years of membership of the club.
The sculptures, ‘Bedrock Bike’ and ‘The Calor Men’, were designed by Dave Holladay, using re-cycled materials such as mill wheels and gas bottles (see photos).
‘Calor Men’ are a pair of anglers, the smaller bottles on top suggesting in one case, waiting for a bite, and in the other, a catch on the line.
This sculpture is beautifully situated beside a reservoir noted for its fishing, on the converted railway path between Caldercruix and Blackridge in West Lothian — an area socially devastated by the closure of its pits.
Children from the local primary school cycled the path to attend the ceremony, but when Walter and Ted started reminiscing about bike rides to Newcastle in the 1920's, their patience ran out and they scampered off to the village hall for their free tea!
Walter has since celebrated his 100th birthday, but sadly, Ted died recently, at the ripe old age of 91 and still cycling.
Another bit of cycle path has just been constructed at Barnton on the outskirts of Edinburgh.
CTC member  co-ordinated volunteers from ‘Spokes’(the Lothian cycle campaign) and other organisations.
The path, quarter of a mile in length, forms an important link in a cycle route from the city centre to Cramond Brig and, eventually, to the Forth Road Bridge.
Directed by Sustrans, the project was supposed to take six weeks, but was completed in 15 days, such was the enthusiasm and hard work of the volunteers.
Although close to the city, the path runs between two golf courses — a delightful rural setting for work, in dappled autumn sunshine.
The Scottish Cycling Council, which is made up of rep's from all the DA's (and others), is quite deeply involved in the debate on access to the countryside.
Several members have sent submissions to a national review called ‘Enjoying the Outdoors’, and John Taylor, the secretary, has been monitoring developments in forestry.
Too many Scottish forests are being sold off, in a programme of ‘creeping privatisation’, without any guarantees of continued public access.
Paradoxically, the Forestry Commission itself has an enlightened approach to access; cycling is being encouraged, with local trails, backed up by leaflets and maps, and even longer distance routes, for example in the Great Glen.
Dear Mr. ,
CYCLE PATH BARRIERS
Your letter to Mrs. Evans of ‘March was sent on to me because I recently wrote about cycle barriers in the ‘Spokes’ magazine, which she saw.
We in Lothian have had problems with barrier design, and the best solution I know of is the design enclosed.
The two critical dimensions are the height of the hoop, which must be no more than 30 cm. to allow pedals, and possibly panniers, to clear it; and the distance between hoop and upright, which must be a minimum of 38 cm.
I cannot over-emphasise how important it is for cyclists, that any barrier should allow enough room to pass through without dismounting.
If cyclists have to dismount, or even worse, lift their bikes through, the facility (path etc) will be much less used; cyclists will even choose a busy main road for preference.
This is bad for everyone; the local authority complains that their money spent on the facility has been wasted, and motorists complain because they still have to get round the cyclists.
One has to accept the fact that any barrier wide enough to pass a cycle with panniers will also enable the odd moped to get through.
The point is, a) that a really determined motorcyclist or moped rider will find a way onto a path no matter what barriers are put up, and b) that it is not right that the cyclists, disabled walkers etc at whom the facility is aimed, should be disadvantaged for the sake of the minority of potential abusers.
To take a case from the motoring sphere, supposing one wished to exclude vehicles above a certain length from a residential street; would the ordinary motorist tolerate a barrier which required a complex reversing manoevre?
There seem to be quite a few local authorities with difficulties over barrier designs, and certainly we, as cyclists, come across more ‘bad’ barriers (require dismounting) than good.
I hope therefore that the enclosed design will be adopted more widely, and I am writing to ‘Cycle Digest’(the magazine sent to all local authorities) to suggest an article on the subject.
The ultimate test for a barrier, of course, is to get a local cyclist to try it out.
One has to remember also, that a path may be used by tandems and other types of specialised bicycles, like the duette which carries a disabled person in front.
If I can be of any further assistance, please let me know.
Yours sincerely,
(Dr.)
PRESS RELEASE
UPGRADING of ‘DONKEY LANE’, CURRIE
‘Spokes’, the Lothians cycle campaign, are organising two working weekends to upgrade the footpath known as Donkey Lane, Currie.
Donkey Lane is an ancient droving road which runs north from Muirwood Road, Currie, to Whitelaw Farm.
Its importance is that it provides a potential link from Heriot-Watt University campus to the residential areas of Currie and Juniper Green.
At present the path is impassable in wet conditions.
The aim of the work is to make an all-weather path which can be used by walkers, joggers, cyclists and horse-riders, while preserving the rural character of the route.
The path is 600 yards long and connects to a tar-surfaced lane at the north end.
The upgrading is a collaboration of several organisations.
Edinburgh District Council and the Green Belt Initiative are paying for materials and equipment; Spokes are providing the labour; Lothian Regional Council and Sustrans,(the enterprising national path-building charity) supply the expertise.
Work will take place over the first two weekends in June (1st-2nd, 8th-9th), starting 9.30 am on site.
Extra volunteers are welcome.
We would be grateful for any publicity you can give to this event, including photographs.
THE UPGRADING OF ‘DONKEY LANE’
Donkey Lane is a 600-yard footpath linking Currie (a suburb of south-west Edinburgh) with the campus of Heriot-Watt university at Riccarton.
In June 1991 a determined group of cyclists converted a muddy quagmire into an all-weather cycle/pedestrian path.
Donkey Lane runs north-south from a residential road in Currie (points A to B on enclosed map).
At the bottom (north) end it connects with a tarmac farm road which continues through a level crossing (point C on map) which is now open to pedestrian traffic only (so it's a very quiet lane), and thence to the entrance to Riccarton campus (point D).
At the top (south) end cyclists can connect, via a residential road, with the Slateford-Balerno pathway (point E), which provides an off-road route right to the centre of the city.
Donkey Lane is thus a potentially very useful link.
Despite the proximity to the suburbs it is completely rural in character, with a golf course to one side, open fields on the other, and extensive views north across the Forth valley.
It is bordered by native hedges and woodland.
Older residents recall the days when a car could be driven down this lane, but years of neglect had reduced it to a narrow path.
It could be cycled in a prolonged dry spell but most of the year it was waterlogged, its condition made worse by the horses from the riding school attached to the farm at the bottom end.
Even they were finding the going hard; other users had given up, and formed temporary alternative paths in the adjacent fields.
From heavy use in earlier years (it is said to be an old droving road), the path's formation had sunk, so that in places there are banks on both sides, a perfect place for water to collect.
This meant that substantial building-up would be needed, to allow the water to escape.
The ‘before’ photographs show the typical muddy, waterlogged condition of the path at this stage.
Inquiries revealed three potential groups of users: 1) walkers, including locals with or without dogs; students; and others; 2) cyclists, again including locals, students, and others from further afield; and 3) horse-riders, particularly from the riding school at Whitelaw Farm beside the north end of the path, and others from further away.
In 1988 the District Council, responsible for maintainance of pathways, had said that improvements could be made if ‘Spokes’, the Lothians cycle campaign, would supply voluntary labour.
But first they wanted to see to the drainage at one particularly bad spot, where a stream was running down the path.
This was eventually done, and in April 1991 I contacted them again and  they agreed that if I, through Spokes, could organise the workforce, they would pay for materials and the hire of equipment.
I began with the horse-riders and their representatives.
I needed their co-operation, because they have a vested interest in the path and could, if antagonised, form a powerful opposition.
Luckily I already knew Elaine Stewart, one of the horse owners and an influential member of the Horse Society.
At first reluctant to agree to any changes, she was eventually persuaded that the riders would benefit.
After long discussions in which cyclists’ opinions of horses were also aired, we agreed that in fact, riders and cyclists have many aims in common: both want traffic-free, cross-country routes.
Elaine claimed that horses do not damage paths which are properly maintained (ie well drained), but horses do not like tarmac.
Since I already knew that the local residents wouldn't favour tarmac either, I decided from the outset to go for a whindust (fine gravel) surface.
The volunteers were found through Spokes’ own publicity.
A quarterly newsletter is distributed to several hundred members, and a monthly ‘Spokesworker’ goes out to a smaller group of committed activists.
The project, now scheduled for the first two weekends of June, went into the May issue of Spokesworker and was given front page treatment in the main newsletter, which also came out in May.
I was optimistic, because I'd had a good turnout two years earlier for a smaller project, the clean-up of an old railway path.
I phoned some of these former volunteers, and once I had ten committed names, I knew the project was ‘on’.
The next job was to prepare an estimate.
With the best will in the world, an amateur path builder has to get professional help.
Dave Holladay, path engineer for Sustrans in Scotland, immediately offered his expertise.
We had a meeting on site, and Dave thought the best idea was to clear the overhead vegetation first (volunteers), then cut the path with a bulldozer and let the lorries drive right through, dropping their loads of chippings as they went.
Volunteers could then form the path into shape and make side ditches, spread the whindust, and do the rolling.
I had some misgivings at the prospect of 16-ton lorries on a country path, but the sheer volume of material needed (to get sufficient build-up), ruled out the possibility of doing the job manually, with wheelbarrows.
The core material would be highway ‘planings’, which are basically what is scraped off a road before it is re-surfaced.
The idea of using recycled asphalt appealed to me, and it is available cheaply, because often it can be brought to the site directly from the roadworks.
Dave calculated we would need 500 tons, at £2 per ton.
On top of this would go 60 tons of whindust, at about £6 a ton.
The other main expense was the hire of the bulldozer, plus driver, at about £1,000.
In all, including hire costs for barrows, spades, shovels etc, the estimate came to about £3,500 — compare this with the cost of building a mile of motorway!
Further expertise was on hand from a member of the Regional Council's cycle team, Rory Sumerling.
He agreed to be on site for the first weekend, while Dave would be present during the week and for the second weekend.
It was Dave who organised the hiring of the heavy machinery; Rory liaised with the contractors who would deliver the planings.
We were all set to go, but at this point the District Council dropped a bombshell.
They couldn't possibly meet our estimate, they said, since their ENTIRE annual budget for path maintainance in Edinburgh was only £5,000.
With only ten days to go, this was a disaster (not that I'm blaming the Council — there was probably misunderstanding on both sides; I had no idea they worked on such a miniscule budget, and they for their part probably expected expenditure in the hundreds, rather than the thousands.
With a budget like that, it's not surprising that so little ever gets done ‘on the ground’).
After a further series of internal meetings taking several days, they eventually agreed to pay half the sum, provided another organisation would put up the other half.
Fortunately I had already been in touch with the Edinburgh Green Belt Trust, whose representative I met by chance on their stand in an exhibition marquee during Environment Week.
They were interested in my project because it fitted in with their general aims; it was in the Green Belt; and they were short of summer projects.
When the Council gave their ‘ultimatum’, the EGBT stepped in and saved the day.
A meeting of the interested parties (Dave, Rory, Elspeth Coutts from EGBT, and myself) was then held to arrange details.
(The meeting started in a vegetarian restaurant but when it turned out that the table was already booked, we carried on outside, in a freezing wind.
I've read since that all the best meetings take place in unusual circumstances!).
Later, however, Elspeth and her colleagues were upset at the prospect of 16-ton lorries, with a height of 20 feet when fully raised for tipping, descending on a country lane teeming, at that time of year, with bird and insect life.
We held an eleventh-hour site meeting to try to find a solution.
In the end, EGBT were willing to put in more money for a more environmentally-friendly mode of working, and we agreed that the planings would be off-loaded at the end of the path, and then  ferried in on dumper trucks.
The bulldozer would be used to load them.
It was now Friday, and the first volunteers were expected the following day!
Meanwhile I had found out that tools could be borrowed (instead of hired), from two local organisations already involved in similar work: Scottish Conservation Projects, and Lothian Conservation Volunteers.
Both had a comprehensive collection of tools, and luckily what we needed would be available at the right time.
In the week before work began I prepared three documents.
The first was a press release saying what we were doing, where, and when, and inviting additional volunteers.
This went off to the Edinburgh dailies and weeklies, and the local (suburban) monthly News.
The second was a letter to everyone who had volunteered, thanking them for offering to come, and saying when to turn up and what to bring.
This needs to be done on such occasions, to make people feel involved and committed — they are then more likely to turn up, even on a bad day!
(In my enthusiasm, I sent this letter to everyone whose name and number were on my telephone pad (I’ d been out rather a lot, and other members of the family took the calls); this included someone who'd phoned for a different reason, and next day I got a somewhat bemused call from an elderly gentleman who had never heard of Donkey Lane, but thought it sounded a splendid project and wanted to know all about it.
I nearly ended up persuading him to come along!).
The third document was another letter, which I got laser printed and 100 copies made, to all the residents within a quarter mile of Donkey Lane, telling them who we were and what was going to happen, and apologising in advance for any inconvenience (including the lorries).
This letter produced one extra volunteer, and several phone calls to me, all of which were in favour of the project, and several from older people who recalled Donkey Lane as it used to be.
On the first day of work, sixteen volunteers turned up.
The job: to cover up two British Telecom manholes for protection, and to clear overhead vegetation to make a ‘box’ 2 metres wide and high, and a centre clearance for horses.
As we were debating the height of a horse and rider, Elaine Stewart turned up — on horseback!
The answer was 3 metres.
She and her riding friends provided refreshments and we all got to work.
With so many hands we had achieved our objectives by midday.
There was nothing more we could do at this stage, so we enjoyed a leisurely lunch, and Sunday was cancelled (which was fortunate, as it rained).
On the Monday, the bulldozer moved in and turned what had been a rough path into a track about 8 feet wide.
On Tuesday deliveries of the planings began, and for the rest of the week two of us, both volunteers, drove dumper trucks to deposit the material in small piles, which the bulldozer later smoothed out (driving dumper trucks proved a popular occupation — there was no shortage of helpers to relieve us for breaks.
I actually think people would pay to do this job!).
By Friday the planings had been completely spread.
The path was in fact too wide, the width having been determined by the machinery.
The work for the weekend was to bring in the edges and build up the centre, thus making side ditches and a reasonable camber.
A diesel roller, operated by hand, was hired to roll the surface as it was formed, and then roll it again when the whindust was laid on top.
The whindust was brought in by the dumpers.
The ‘in progress’ photographs show various aspects of this work.
Good progress was made on the Saturday but when I looked at what still remained for Sunday, I thought we'd do well to finish half the distance.
However, fifteen people turned up (the same number as the previous day), and the goal of completion spurred us on.
By 5.30 pm the last barrowloads of whindust were laid and rolled and the job was done, apart from one set of bollards (to stop vehicles) which had still to be erected, and some tidying up of site.
In addition, the Council agreed to put up cycle/ pedestrian direction signs at suitable locations nearby, so that people, local or not, are aware of the path's existence.
The damaged vegetation grew back very quickly in the following months, and by the end of 1992 it was difficult to believe that such a wide swathe had originally been bulldozed.
The bollards at each end have been successful in keeping out vehicles, without impeding the passage of bicycles, prams etc.
The path is obviously very well used by all three of the ‘target’ groups mentioned earlier — walkers, cyclists and riders.
Letters of appreciation appeared in the local News.
So far the path has stayed dry, despite some heavy rainfall, though one or two spots are beginning to show signs of wear.
The ‘after’ photographs show the path in its present state (Feb.1993), along with some of the users.
And finally — I took it as a compliment when the local Councillor took credit for the upgrading, prior to the local elections!
(Project Co-ordinator) 14 Feb.1993
Dear Sir,
DONKEY LANE, CURRIE
Sometime during the last fortnight, two of the three bollards which protect Donkey Lane at the northern (Whitelaw Farm) end have been uprooted and cast to one side, thereby leaving the way clear for motors.
I fear that unless something is done to replace them pretty quickly, people will drive up there and dump all manner of rubbish.
The bollards consist of old gas bottles, and were put in place in June 1991 when Donkey Lane was upgraded.
The bottles are still at the site.
The Whitelaw farmer, Mr Catto, claims he needs access for a tractor.
The best solution might thus be for the centre bollard to be held in place with a padlock, for which he will have a key.
I understand that Council staff may also require access for grass cutting and trimming.
If I can be of any further assistance, please let me know.
I would be grateful if you could take action on this as soon as possible.
Yours faithfully,
Dear Drew,
A few things that have come up from our sub-committee meeting on Monday evening; first, thanks for your quote for computers, and I've got the application form from SNH to apply for a grant to buy it.
However, the maximum we can get is 60%, and assuming we go for the 386, which seems sensible, the cost is about £800 plus VAT, ie about £940, and 60% of that is £564, leaving a shortfall of about £400 which would have to come from the Birthday Rides grant.
We all agreed that the B/R grant shouldn't go on SCC running costs, but the question is, what might be an appropriate way of spending the remaining £600?
I suggested we might use it for publicity, ie the costs of producing and printing a leaflet explaining what the SCC is and its aims, for a general audience, especially the participants of mass bike events such as St Andrews ride, Tour de Forth etc.
John Mackay said he'd draft a leaflet, and I've just done one myself, knowing how busy John is, and feeling also a sense of urgency about this, that we need to get ourselves better known.
I've got to add some graphics to the draft of my leaflet, but could I send you the draft when it's ready, and you could improve it perhaps, and then get it printed?
In the meanwhile, if we're going to use the B/R grant pretty soon, can I just leave it in the current account?
We felt it was not appropriate to return the miserly £300 grant from HQ to them.
However, I am writing to Alan Harlow to state our disappointment; to point out that we cannot continue to pay subscriptions if the grant is not increased; that we are doing our best to find sponsorship (I've written, on my own initiative, to 3 companies who might be willing to help, on environmental grounds); that sponsorship from SNH is pretty unlikely, a) because they don't do any core funding, and b) because the NCC element appears to be dominant there anyway; that sponsorship from the Sports Council is also unlikely, though we are seeking a meeting with Terry Dowey of SSA as soon as possible.
(Alan said, in his letter, that we should be getting sponsored by SNH or SCC).
We also feel that the number of Scottish members of CTC warrants a grant of at least the £600 we got before.
The leaflet I have in mind is an A4 folded in three.
It seems a bit odd to be asking people to join the CTC in order to further the interests of cycling in Scotland; but if we get this leaflet off the ground we can then tell HQ what we are doing for them.
The glossy 4-page job, with inserts, which THEY have produced is quite inappropriate for us,(and in my opinion isn't very suitable at all; it doesn't exactly ‘grab’ one!)
All the best,
Peter
Dear Mr. ,
SPONSORSHIP APPEAL: SCOTTISH CYCLING COUNCIL
Following on from my recent committment to investment, I would like to nominate the Scottish Cycling Council, of which I am the Treasurer, for a donation from Ethical Investors Group, or, better still, sponsorship on a regular basis in return for carefully targeted publicity for EIG.
The Scottish Cycling Council is the Scottish ‘arm’ of the Cyclists Touring Club, the national organisation which promotes touring and campaigning.
The SCC is particularly concerned with campaigning: we aim to promote cycling as a partial but significant solution to the problems of urban congestion and pollution, because cycling is not only pollution-free but also flexible, cheap and above all, healthy.
We also promote recreational cycling in the countryside.
Our campaigns are for better cycling facilities, especially in urban areas, by encouraging local authorities to provide cycle lanes, segregated paths, joint pedestrian-cycle zones and crossings, parking racks etc.
What we can offer:
First, we are an environmentally friendly organisation, working towards goals similar to those of EIG.
Our members, of whom we have about 2,000 across the whole of Scotland, are almost all committed to environmental issues and therefore form a logical target population for membership of EIG.
Second, we also promote good health: in 1992 the BMA published ‘Cycling: Towards Health and Safety’(OUP), which points out the health benefits of cycling, and they have since issued the leaflet ‘Bike for your Life’, which has been distributed to all GP's.
Cycling to work is particularly beneficial because it combines physical exercise with an essential daily task.
Cycling is also a very ‘democratic’ activity which can be (and is) enjoyed by anyone and everyone, including the young.
Third, we organise publicity which could bring information about EIG to a well targeted readership.
Our publicity is distributed to participants of mass bike events such as the annual Edinburgh — St. Andrews ride which attracts over 600 entrants.
In addition, T-shirts and sweat shirts worn by commuting and recreational cyclists could include an EIG logo and would be particularly effective because they are designed in bright colours for conspicuity and would be highly visible to the travelling public.
News of your sponsorship would of course be published in the CTC's national bi-monthly magazine Cycletouring, which has a readership of over 40,000.
Unlike many organisations with sporting connections we are not oriented to competition but to participation.
We are committed to a saner transport policy including better public transport.
Our requirements are fairly modest; we are looking for about £700 per annum.
Our costs are: 1) secretarial and postage — the distribution of information to members; 2) production and distribution of publicity material, eg at bike events; 3) subscriptions to organisations working in Scotland for the interests of cycling; 4) travel expenses to our Council meetings, which are held four times a year.
Our total annual budget is about £1,000.
Most of this has until recently come from a grant from the CTC, but that has now been reduced to £300.
Obviously it would be better for both parties if all the sponsorship we need comes from a single organisation.
We could then concentrate on mentioning EIG in our publicity.
Yours faithfully,
Dear Sir,
EAST LOTHIAN LOCAL PLAN
I would like to make some initial comments about the above plan, in response to the introductory leaflet: in particular the section under economy, ‘to improve access into the countryside’.
The Council have done a wonderful job in constructing existing pedestrian/cycle paths such as the Longniddry — Haddington path, which seem to be very successful in terms of use.
I would like to see existing provision improved by upgrading the Pencaitland railway path so that it can be cycled and walked in all weathers.
The western section is already at an acceptable standard but the east section is in poor condition, virtually unusable when wet.
In addition there is one important new route I would like to be considered: an east-west route running from Macmerry via New Winton to the B6371 at Buxley, and continuing via North Elphinstone, West Mains and Crookston to Whitecraig.
Parts of this route are already minor road, and there are only two short sections which need upgrading to make this route complete, one near West Mains, and the other between Macmerry and New Winton.
The route would form a significant alternative to the A1 (and if linked with the A1 upgrading, perhaps Scottish Office money might be available?).
If money is a problem, we in ‘Spokes’ have a group of experienced path-building volunteers, who could organise and carry out the work.
Indeed, if the Council have any other similar projects in which we could be involved, we would be happy to help.
I would be interested to hear your views on the Macmerry — Whitecraig route, and look forward to hearing from you.
Yours faithfully,
Dear Sir or Madam,
SPONSORSHIP APPEAL: SCOTTISH CYCLING COUNCIL
I would like to ask ETA to support the running of the Scottish Cycling Council, of which I am the Treasurer.
The Scottish Cycling Council is the Scottish ‘arm’ of the Cyclists Touring Club, the national organisation which promotes touring and campaigning.
The SCC is particularly concerned with campaigning: we aim to promote cycling as a partial but significant solution to the problems of urban congestion and pollution, because cycling is not only pollution-free but also flexible, cheap and above all, healthy.
We also promote recreational cycling in the countryside.
Our campaigns are for better cycling facilities, especially in urban areas, by encouraging local authorities to provide cycle lanes, segregated paths, joint pedestrian-cycle zones and crossings, parking racks etc.
What we can offer:
First, we are an environmentally friendly organisation, working towards goals similar to those of ETA.
Our members, of whom we have about 2,000 across the whole of Scotland, are almost all committed to environmental issues and therefore form a logical target population for membership of ETA.
Second, we also promote good health: in 1992 the BMA published ‘Cycling: Towards Health and Safety’(OUP), which points out the health benefits of cycling, and they have since issued the leaflet ‘Bike for your Life’, which has been distributed to all GP's.
Cycling to work is particularly beneficial because it combines physical exercise with an essential daily task.
Cycling is also a very ‘democratic’ activity which can be (and is) enjoyed by anyone and everyone, including the young.
Third, we organise publicity which could bring information about ETA to a well targeted readership.
Our publicity is distributed to participants of mass bike events such as the annual Edinburgh — St. Andrews ride which attracts over 600 entrants.
In addition, T-shirts and sweat shirts worn by commuting and recreational cyclists could include an ETA logo and would be particularly effective because they are designed in bright colours for conspicuity and would be highly visible to the travelling public.
News of your sponsorship would of course be published in the CTC's national bi-monthly magazine Cycletouring, which has a readership of over 40,000.
Unlike many organisations with sporting connections we are not oriented to competition but to participation.
We are committed to a saner transport policy including better public transport.
P.T.O
Our requirements are fairly modest; we are looking for about £700 per annum.
Our costs are: 1) secretarial and postage — the distribution of information to members; 2) production and distribution of publicity material, eg at bike events; 3) subscriptions to organisations working in Scotland for the interests of cycling; 4) travel expenses to our Council meetings, which are held four times a year.
Our total annual budget is about £1,000.
Most of this has until recently come from a grant from the CTC, but that has now been reduced to £300.
Obviously it would be better for both parties if all the sponsorship we need comes from a single organisation.
We could then concentrate on mentioning ETA in our publicity.
Yours faithfully,
Dear Mr. Major,
FOREST ACCESS
It appears that, despite assurances before the election that Forestry Commission land would not be sold off, parts of the holdings are in fact being sold to private developers.
My concern in this case is the public's access to forestry tracks for walking, cycling and recreation.
The FC at present have a very good policy of allowing access and, indeed, encouraging the use of the forests for recreational purposes.
This is really important for ‘outdoor’ people like my family, who keep fit and healthy by walking or cycling.
The forest routes are in many ways ideal for these activities because (a) there is little or no motor traffic,(b) the tracks are well maintained, and (c) the trees provide shelter.
At present it appears that local authorities can draw up individual access arrangements with the new owners, but this is not a satisfactory solution, partly because some authorities may not have the motivation to do so, and partly because they are all very short of money and could not back up the agreements financially.
What is needed therefore is central government legislation requiring new owners to preserve existing access rights — and encouraging them to provide more.
That seems to be the only way to prevent the piecemeal fragmentation of present facilities, and I would be grateful if you could ensure that steps will be taken to implement these measures.
Yours sincerely,
Dear Mr Forsyth,
PRIMARY TESTING
Despite the slick advertising on television I remain totally unconvinced of the case for primary tests.
It is not clear to me precisely what purpose these tests are meant to serve (there must be a ‘hidden agenda’, as the overt reasons given do not make sense), but I can see several disadvantages:
First, they will distort the curriculum because teachers will feel pressured to teach to the tests;
Second, they risk being used (misused) to judge the performance of schools and of teachers in ways which are not in our best interests (HM Inspectorate presently exists to oversee standards of teachers and schools, and can offer constructive criticism where necessary; what is wrong with this system?);
Third, the time and resources taken to prepare, administer and mark the tests are better devoted to real education;
Fourth, if some children are labelled low performers or failures at this early age, this puts their future at risk, because of the danger of self-fulfilling prophecies.
This can hardly be compatible with the Prime Minister's stated aim of a classless society — quite the opposite in fact.
Finally, I think the tests will simply overburden an already hard-pressed system, and prove unworkable.
I am glad that my own children are beyond primary age and will not have to suffer from the effects of this campaign, which looks increasingly like political dogma forced into the classroom.
In general I am angry about the waste of public money on the television advertisements, which really shows that the public remain unconvinced.
I also think it is time politicians stopped trying to interfere in the everyday affairs of education, and left the professionals to get on with it.
The government would not venture to interfere with the internal details of other professions such as those of law and medicine, and if teachers are not allowed to run their own show, education will suffer.
In this, as in other educational issues, the government has acted too hastily and with too little consideration for those involved.
There is already a desperate shortage of teachers in some regions, administrative chaos in others, and a demoralised and underpaid profession.
Is this serving our best interests?
Yours sincerely,
(Dr.)
Dear Mr ,
PRIMARY SCHOOL TESTING
Thank you for your letter of 9 May, and the enclosures.
I have carefully read the ‘20 Questions’ leaflet and the letter from Michael Forsyth to Sir Hector Munro.
However I still have difficulty in identifying a substantial reason (or reasons) for the introduction of testing in the Primary schools.
Take the leaflet first.
We are given 4 reasons for the changes:
1 for jobs and prosperity, children need the best education possible.
No quarrel with that one — but it's difficult to see how testing, per se, is going to achieve it.
2 Reports by school inspectors showing inconsistency of standards across schools.
In default of a totally homogenised society, it is impossible to imagine a situation where there will not be variation from school to school, from teacher to teacher and from children to children.
The Inspectorate's observation is therefore little more than a truism, and is merely typical of the kind of thing inspectors have to say, and always have said, in their reports.
3 Identify best practice and apply it everywhere.
This is a naive notion which could never be realised, because of inherent variation as in (2).
Many years ago I worked as a Time and Motion Study (Work Study) officer in industry, where the question was always: why can't all workers produce the output achieved by the best workers?
The answer is that they can't, for a whole variety of reasons.
Telling the poorer workers that others were producing more, simply led to demoralisation; they already knew that, and telling them so only made them feel worse.
The same will happen with teachers — what would it feel like if YOUR children perform worse on the tests than the children of other teachers?
Will it change your behaviour?
Of course not!
You will find a variety of reasons for the differences, none of them anything to do with yourself (and of course you may be right!).
People's behaviour can't be changed by telling them they are doing badly.
4 Parents need more and better information about schooling.
Since a very large number of PARENTS have objected to the tests, it seems the tests are not going to achieve that aim.
A less charitable view of their purpose is to give politicians yet another stick to beat the teachers with.
In my experience as a parent with three children, parents are already very well  informed, through parent visits, information, and report cards, the latter detailing each subject and giving grades for effort as well as achievement, which I approve of.
The Sir Hector Munro letter re-iterates most of these points but raises others.
Perhaps if there really was (and is)‘widespread discontent…about the quality of education’, the best remedy would be to enhance teaching as a profession so as to attract and retain the best recruits, by paying them proper salaries and by promoting those who teach well, in such a way that they stay in the classroom instead of becoming administrators.
Government policy has signally failed to do this and the result is a profession which is demoralised by its responibility to the children, to parents, and to a host of bodies and organisations, all of whom want their ‘say’.
Teachers have massive responsibility but almost no power.
In the circumstances we are lucky that our education system is as good as it is.
One final point: ‘the spectre of the 11+…dies hard’, says Mr Forsyth.
On the very day I received that letter, it was announced that opting out schools can apply for grammar school status without waiting for 5 years.
And how will children be selected for those schools?
It couldn't be from the results of the Primary 7 tests — could it?
Yours sincerely,
cc M Forsyth, MP
FRENCH PHONETIC TRANSCRIPTION
This program on the phonetic representation of French words is designed for the BBC B and upward versions of it.
There is also a PC version.
To load the BBC program, press BREAK while holding down SHIFT.
To load the PC version, see operating instructions; choose program from menu.
The aim of the program is to increase students’ awareness of the sounds of French, and hence indirectly to help improve pronunciation.
The program puts up words one at a time, in transcription, and the user's task is to read the word and then input it in normal spelling.
A list of phonetic symbols for vowels and consonants is given in the Introduction and can be called up whenever the user needs to refer to it.
The Introduction also offers some examples.
The words are grouped into sets, with ten words per set and twelve sets in all.
A score out of 10 is given for each set, the score being tallied as user progresses.
To proceed to next set, user must score at least 8 out of 10.
The sets are arranged in order of difficulty (roughly).
All items are common words or names.
In the transcriptions, no distinction is made between varieties of /a/, except after /w/, where //is used (eg choix).
The symbols chosen are those commonly used by linguists, eg. /u, o/ rather than the /y, o/ often found in dictionaries.
For typographic reasons, however, we have used /o /for the vowel of brun, rather than /o /(because of the double superscript).
For similar reasons the more traditional //is used instead of //for the vowel of fin.
When inputting answers, lower case (‘small letters’) must be used — turn CAPS LOCK light off by pressing CAPS LOCK key once, and leave it off.
Use lower case even for proper names, eg peugeot.
Type as ‘oe’(eg. oeuf).
Type E for e, \ for e, and C for c (use SHIFT key to get capital E and C when needed).
When there are homophones (two words or forms with identical pronunciation), always use the infinitive, eg. sauter, not sautez, saute, sautee, etc even though pronounced the same.
If you have any problems, or suggestions for improvement, please let me know.
Dear Mr. ,
GREENWAYS
I was present at the public meeting at Hutchison Crossway on 26 Nov. and I made some comments, warmly welcoming the proposals and asking about the upgrading of a parallel cycle route.
There are a couple of points which have occured to me since the meeting:
1.
In reply to Lanark Road residents’ objections, perhaps a good example of how carriageway reduction can simultaneously reduce traffic speed and volume is Niddrie Mains Road, where 4 lanes were reduced to 2 a couple of years ago.
I would be interested to know whether this has been successful in reducing speed and accidents, but my impression is that it has worked very well.
We already know that the building of new roads only generates more traffic, and that congestion rapidly returns to its former levels.
What is not so obvious is the converse of this, ie a reduction in road space can be used to reduce traffic speed and volume.
I hope this works in the case of the Lanark Road.
In any case it is a good argument to put to objecting residents.
Could I suggest that cycle lanes be incorporated into the wide stretch of the Lanark Road between Gillespie and Inglis Green?
2.
On the question of enforcement; if a bus lane is infringed by a parked vehicle, the value of the lane is severely curtailed and a lot of people (the passengers; and subsequent passengers, if the bus is made late) are inconvenienced.
I believe bus drivers already have radio communication; could they perhaps use it to report the illegally parked vehicle and summon a towaway unit?
If the public knew they could be ‘caught’ by any passing bus driver, this would act as a good deterrent against infringement.
Yours sincerely,
Dear Alan,
S.C.C. GRANT
Thank you for the cheque for £300, a receipt for which is enclosed.
To say we are disappointed with the grant would be the understatement of the year.
Are the Committee aware, I wonder, that we are supposed to pay subscriptions to various Scottish organisations which promote cycling, subscriptions which were formerly paid by HQ?
These at present amount to about £200.
Obviously we shall have to cancel these subscriptions unless our grant is restored to the previous year's level.
In reply to your points in the letter to Graham Dann (12 March), we are certainly doing our best to find sponsorship, and I enclose copies of letters recently sent to public companies in search of support.
You mention SNH; you will be aware that they are a new body resulting from the merging of Countryside Commission and Nature Conservancy.
This has created a long period of uncertainty, but in fact it now appears that they do not grant core funding (and inside information indicates that the NCC element is the dominant one).
We have nonetheless put in an application to them for word-processing equipment, but this is obviously a one-off capital item.
We are also arranging a meeting with the Secretary of the Scottish Sports Association, though again, having seen their information on grant application, it seems unlikely that we will qualify for it.
We feel that we have kept our own expenditure within very tight constraints and we have always been careful to stay within the limits of our modest budget.
We appreciate, too, that the Club has its own financial problems.
Nevertheless, we have nearly 2,000 CTC members in Scotland and assuming an average of around £20 per member, this amounts to almost £40,000 of income, of which our request for £750 seems modest in the extreme, particularly since we now pay the subscriptions I mentioned.
It is our opinion that if the Club has to cut its expenses, there are plenty of other ways this could be done.
It may be that the Committee is unaware of the amount of work we do on behalf of cycling in Scotland.
We do not send you copies of every letter we write, minutes of every meeting we attend, etc because we assumed you would realise we were getting on with the job.
Graham, John Taylor and I spend at least the equivalent of a day a week on cycling matters.
John Mackay and the other members of Council are also very active, and Jim Brown has worked far beyond the call of duty on our behalf.
We understand that Jim was not present at the meeting at which our grant was determined.
If he had been invited, he could at least have put our case and, in return, received and discussed any misapprehensions the Committee may have about us.
Yours sincerely,(Peter)
Dear Ms. ,
UNION CANAL TOWPATH REPAIRS
I asked for an application form for Scheduled Monument Consent because British Waterways have agreed that ‘Spokes’ can undertake repairs to the towpath of the Union Canal, in the Hermiston area.
I realise that the canal is scheduled as an Ancient Monument.
However, having read the notes accompanying the application form, it seemed that the work we wish to carry out does not require the formal Consent, since the work falls under Section (a) of Class III of the exceptions listed in paragraph 2, ie. works of repair or maintainance not involving a material alteration to a monument, and this opinion has been confirmed verbally by British Waterways themselves.
However, I would like to keep you fully informed of our intentions, and for this purpose I enclose a copy of my letter to the BWB engineer, G. , together with a copy of the working drawing.
The letter makes clear the nature of the operations, and I would like to emphasise that the work involves the use of hand tools only (apart from the roller), and that repairs will not encroach on the edge adjacent to the water, to ensure that no damage is caused to the banks.
I will assume that this information satisfies your requirements, unless I hear to the contrary.
If you require further information, please contact me (tel. 031.453.3366 anytime).
Yours sincerely,
(Dr.)
Dear Miss ,
HOLYROOD PARK DRAFT PLAN
I have enjoyed reading the Draft Plan, which is very clear, and sets out the issues in an informed and concise manner.
I use the Park both for walking and as a motorist, but more frequently for cycling, and I write on behalf of‘Spokes’ and Edinburgh cyclists in general .
It is obvious that large volumes of private cars use the Park roads but I was surprised at the extent of this, as revealed by the Traffic Survey — nearly 20,000 vehicles a day.
What concerns me is that the vast majority are not coming to enjoy the Park but are using the roads as convenient thoroughfares.
In effect the Park has become part of the city's road network.
This is a bad situation for several reasons.
First, those who come to the Park to enjoy it cannot do so, because of all the traffic.
I note that 43%, ie nearly half, of the respondents in the Visitor Survey found their enjoyment reduced by the traffic.
Second, it is clear from the Report that motorists are not keeping to the Park's speed limits and are thereby abusing the privilege of vehicle access.
Surely this alone would be sufficient justification for the privilege to be withdrawn.
The volume and speed of traffic not only creates a sense of danger but makes a significant contribution to noise and air pollution.
The arguments for continuing to allow through traffic appear to be as follows:
1) if the roads were closed, pressures would be felt in surrounding suburban areas (and presumably the residents would protest);
2) if the roads were closed, motorists affected would protest.
These arguments have obviously won the day so far, but the climate of opinion is changing.
Both the Regional and the District Councils are taking steps to discourage people from bringing their cars into the city.
Pollution levels in the city centre have been shown to be dangerously high, and these can only be reduced by encouraging a switch to more environment-friendly modes of transport.
Closing the Park to through traffic could make a significant contribution in this direction.
The traffic-calming measures proposed in the Report may have some effect, and are therefore to be welcomed; but the eventual aim should be closure.
The Park might then have a chance to return to the ‘wild character’ which is its chief delight.
The closure would probably have to be done in stages, eg one weekday a week to start with, though that could be worse than total closure because motorists would switch to local roads for one day, but total closure might force them to switch modes altogether.
Inevitably there would be howls of protest but there are several valid responses to these.
Local residents, for example, who fear increased traffic can apply for their own traffic calming, since the authorities are now able to introduce it.
To the motorists themselves, first they have abused the privilege by excessive speeds; second, nearly half the true visitors find the traffic objectionable; and third, Holyrood is, as the Report acknowledges, a unique Park, the very wildness being the essence of its appeal in the middle of the city.
Does the Park actually gain anything from being part of the city's road network, one wonders?
The Report does not mention any ‘quid pro quo’, so what has the Park to lose by excluding the traffic?
It is proposed to close the Park to traffic on Sundays.
Paradoxically, this is the one day of the week when there IS some justification for allowing traffic into the Park — so that it can be enjoyed by the aged and infirm whose only means of access is by car.
In summary, the exclusion of through traffic would serve the city well and can now be justified by several arguments.
It would also return the Park to its proper function.
Why should those who come to the Park for enjoyment and healthy exercise — walking, cycling, jogging etc — have to put up with the danger, the noise, and the pollution created by those who are looking only to their own convenience?
It is time for the Park management to approach the Councils and the local residents to agree a scheme to stop the Park being used as a thoroughfare.
Yours sincerely,
Dear Mr. Howard,
PETROL TAX
I read recently that your Department is considering increases in the tax on petrol (and tobacco) as a means of increasing revenue.
May I say that I wholeheartedly support a big increase in the tax on petrol (even though I'm a motorist myself).
The increase might do something to encourage motorists to switch to public transport or other environment-friendly modes of transport, and I cannot see this switch being achieved without financial incentives.
Is it not a ridiculous situation when the motoring correspondent of The Times (30 Jan.) describes how he intended travelling from Brighton to Birmingham by rail, but found that he could drive for one quarter of the price, despite sole occupancy of a largish estate car?
Obviously he was calculating on the basis of marginal costs of running the car, but this is what all motorists do.
The price of petrol thus has to reflect the cost of a single-occupant trip by bus or rail, so that private motoring only becomes cheaper if the car has more than one occupant.
Cheap petrol at present does not reflect the true environmental costs of global warming and the effects on the health of everyone from the atmospheric pollutants discharged by road vehicles.
If people could see that the extra tax was going to a fund to improve public transport, they would be happier to pay it.
Yours sincerely,
(Dr)
Dear Mr. ,
HIGHWAY PLANINGS
As per telephone conversation with David Henderson, please supply 200 tons of highway planings, of which 100 tons to canalside at Gogar Station Road, and 100 tons to canalside at Hermiston House Road (see map below).
Invoice to be sent F.A.O.
Rosemary Lyons, Treasurer, ‘Spokes’, St Martin's Church, 232 Dalry Rd., Edinburgh EH11 2JG, marked ‘Union Canal Towpath Repairs’.
It would be appreciated if the planings can be delivered as soon as possible.
Yours sincerely,
(Dr.)(Project Co-ordinator)
Dear 
I am the ‘concerned parent’ who initiated the survey of modes of travel to Currie High School which you filled in last year.
In it, you mentioned that you would be willing to write to an official in support of the building of a proper path between Bloomiehall Park and Muirwood Road, to give children a shorter and potentially safer route to school avoiding the Lanark Road.
The field which the path has to cross is owned by Wimpey and let out to a tenant farmer.
Wimpey have made it quite clear that they will not release a strip of that land unless they get planning permission to build some houses.
The Council are equally adamant that the land is zoned for recreational use and part of the Green Belt; and a majority of local residents would probably agree that housing development on the field is undesirable.
The results of the travel survey have been published in the June issue of C and B News, and copies were sent to the local councillors, Hugh Fraser (Region) and Beth Brereton (District).
The report has also been discussed by the School Board.
In a reply to this report Cllr.
Brereton mentions several problems involved in creating a path, but she is ‘currently exploring with the appropriate officials the possibility of the promotion of a Compulsory Purchase Order on the site’.
This is good news, and obviously the more support she can get from the community, the better.
The School Board is writing to support this initiative, and it would be most helpful if you could do likewise.
You could say, in a letter, that you strongly support the creation of a route for walkers and cyclists from Bloomiehall Park to Muirwood Road, especially for use by children to get to school, and that to overcome the present impasse, it might be a good idea to use a Compulsory Purchase Order to acquire the land needed.
In her letter, Cllr.
Brereton says the farmer is disheartened by the damage to his crops.
A proper footpath could remedy this because users would be more likely to keep to it.
This might be a further point to mention in your letter (you might also say what you think of Wimpey, playing politics with the safety of local children!).
Your letter can be quite short.
Please make every effort to write, because councillors can only take action if they have the community behind them.
Cllr.
Brereton's address is: City of Edinburgh District Council, City Chambers, High St., Edinburgh EH1 1YJ.
If you have any queries, you can ring me on 453-3366.
Yours sincerely,
SPORTS DEVELOPMENT GRANT APPLICATION
JUNIPER GREEN TENNIS CLUB
The following is the background information in support of our application for assistance from the Scottish Sports Council.
Juniper Green Tennis Club was formed in 1979 and for 11 years it has provided a valuable service to the local community in Juniper Green and Baberton Mains.
There are two courts, with blaize surfaces.
The courts, together with a wooden pavilion of historic interest, were built around 1910 but lay derelict for many years until the Club revived them with a grant from the Village Association.
The land was leased by Edinburgh District Council from the Foulis Trust, but the 99-year lease expired in 1990.
The courts were only retained for recreation by a concerted public campaign, which resulted in the District Council acquiring the land through a Compulsory Purchase Order.
Although the Club is a private one, we have always seen it as a service to the local community, particularly the younger members.
This is reflected in the annual subscriptions, which have been only £10 for family membership, and £2 for a junior membership.
On average we have had 35 family members and 30 juniors, but because of the difficulty of ‘policing’ the courts we believe that at least twice that number of juniors actually play on the courts without paying a subscription (members get a key, but juniors let their friends in).
In addition, coaching sessions are arranged: there is a scheme organised by Prudential Insurance which runs weekly sessions for six weeks after Easter, and in the summer holidays further coaching has been arranged on a regular basis.
Competitive events are organised, sometimes by the juniors themselves.
The courts have been maintained by the Club with the application of blaize to the surfaces at the beginning of each season.
However, because of the high levels of use, particularly during the dry periods of spring and early summer, and also because the courts have lain idle while the issue of land ownership was resolved, the surfaces have deteriorated to the point where complete refurbishment is necessary.
The estimated cost for this is at least £3,000.
Edinburgh District Council have agreed to carry out essential repairs to the fencing and to the pavilion, on condition that the Club arranges for the re-surfacing of the courts.
We have been promised a grant of £1,000 from the Village Association, and a further long-term loan from them of £1,000.
We are therefore asking the Sports Council for a grant of £1,000 to enable the work to go ahead.
We are particularly anxious to bring the courts back into use for the 1993 season, so we would be most grateful if the application could be dealt with as soon as possible.
KM 152, May 1992
A Report, written by 
Over 170 cyclists gathered in the grounds of Drumlanrig Castle, near Thornhill in Dumfriesshire, over the long weekend of May ‘-25 to celebrate 152 years of the invention, by Kirkpatrick Macmillan, of our favourite form of transport and recreation.
A few took local accommodation but most of us camped in the castle's magnificent park.
The weather did its best for us, not a drop of rain and four days of glorious cycling in unspoiled countryside, small villages and quiet roads.
For evening entertainment we had two slide shows and a ceilidh.
Julie Rattray from Glasgow showed slides of an Alpine tour, jumping, as it were, from col to col and back again; over 50,000m. of climbing in 28 days, a remarkable feat.
And Stan Bray rambled the local countryside with reminiscences of KM 150.
The ceilidh was held in the stable yard of the castle but as there was no lighting, festivities had to cease when it got dark; great to live by nature's principles like this, but a shame to stop when it was going so well!
It's always the little amusing incidents which remain in the memory.
Like the couple who left one of the rides early to get back in time to prepare the evening event; and two hours later we met them — riding in the opposite direction!
Moral: minor roads are only a short cut if you know where you are!
The KM rides have been attracting more participants every year — and the strain on the facilities is beginning to tell.
One cold water portacabin, only tepid water in the castle quarter of a mile away, and no showers shared by 170 folk is a little on the primitive side!
(I hasten to add this was not the organisers’ fault — rather, an inadequate infrastructure as they say).
But facilites apart, we all enjoyed ourselves, and John Taylor and the organising committee are to be congratulated on running the rally so efficiently.
Dear Mr. Leigh,
I read in the newspaper of your trip by bicycle from London to Lincoln to promote cycle helmets.
While wishing you well on the trip, I can't help feeling that you'd be doing more good by campaigning for better facilities for cyclists, in particular for routes and paths which segregate cycles from motor vehicles.
Your ride to Lincoln will probably illustrate how awful long-distance cycling in Britain can be, and how few facilities are provided.
In this respect we compare very unfavourably with our continental neighbours.
Germany, Holland and Denmark have extensive networks of cycle paths, well signed, and with maps etc to encourage their use.
France has a huge network of minor roads, a much more sparsely populated country, and a motoring public who are, by and large, aware of cyclists and considerate towards them.
Britain has a particular problem because of dense population and a policy of promoting road use at the expense of public transport.
As for helmets, I have never been convinced that they have much to offer, and my views are broadly confirmed by recent reviews in the CTC magazine and the journal ‘New Cyclist’(neither organisation being anti-helmet; the reviews are widely based and fair).
It looks to many of us as if the Government are using the helmet issue to divert attention from spending money on real facilities for cyclists.
Yet motor traffic too would benefit from these, because cyclists can hold up traffic on narrow, congested roads.
I write as one who has cycled for over 40 years and who rides between 8,000 and 9,000 miles per year (I am an occasional motorist too).
I hope you will follow up your cycling experience by campaigning for real improvements for this most environmentally friendly form of transport.
Yours sincerely,
(Dr)
Dear ,
Thank you for your letter of 15 May, and the leaflets enclosed, which I read with interest.
It is indeed pleasing to see that developments and experiments are taking place in cities such as Nottingham and Cambridge.
You mention that I should write to my local authority; in fact here in Edinburgh we have a very active pro-cycling organisation called Spokes, which was instrumental in getting a cycle team established by the Regional Council.
This 3-man team has been in post for three years and results are being seen on the ground.
However, it would be unwise to rely on the initiatives of local authorities alone, because of the severe financial restrictions under which they operate (I found out today for example that Edinburgh District Council's ENTIRE budget for maintainance of paths and bridleways amounts to only £5,000 per year), but also because many routes of interest to cyclists coincide with trunk road routes, which are D o T responsibility.
This is particularly the case in Scotland, where often, for geographical reasons, there is no alternative to a trunk road.
I am particularly concerned about the impact on the tourist trade, because safe facilities for cycles outside urban areas are virtually non-existent, and I would like to mention two specific examples and ask you what action the Department might take, to improve the situation.
The first is Edinburgh.
I am concerned about the absence of provisions for cycle tourists to get out of the city in the most desired directions, viz westwards along the A8 (trunk road), and north-west along the A90 (also trunk road) to the Forth Bridge.
At present I would advise any potential tourist contemplating starting from Edinburgh, that facilities are very poor.
The second example is in Kent.
Dover is a major point of entry for tourists, and Canterbury an obvious first destination.
But cyclists have no alternative but the A2, a road so awful that I have heard of tourists giving up at Canterbury, fearing that the rest of Britain is just as bad (which on trunk routes, it is!).
I would have thought that it is the DoT's responsibility to make some provision for cyclists on main routes like this.
It may be true, as you say, that most types of continental facility can be found in Britain (if you look hard enough), but conditions on the continent are so superior that visitors to this country must get quite a shock.
I have cycled in several  countries of Europe and have nowhere found conditions as bad as they are here.
The Department of Transport surely has a role to play in making improvements.
I am sending a copy of this letter to Mr Malcolm Rifkind, the Minister of Transport.
Yours sincerely,
Dear Sir,
LOCAL GOVERNMENT REORGANISATION
As a cyclist who rides for both leisure and commuting I am very concerned about the proposed local government reorganisation into unitary Councils.
Improved facilities for cyclists have started to happen at local level, largely because Lothian Region now has a 3-person cycle team, the existence of which was fought for, long and hard over many years.
If the Region is fragmented, no one small council will be able to support a team of this size, and you will appreciate that two or more one-person teams cannot be as effective.
Furthermore, if councils are fragmented, political control could be different in each, which would make co-operation across boundaries difficult.
Yet long-distance routes are just as important for cyclists as for motorists.
The mistakes of fragmentation have already been made in London, with disastrous results for cycling facilities.
For these reasons, Option 1, the largest unit, is preferable.
Another part of the proposals which worries me is the Scottish Office taking responsibility for more of the main roads.
While it may be exaggerating to say that the Scottish Office is anti-cycling, it has in the past done far less for us than the local authorities have, and despite changes of public opinion the Scottish Office still views cycling as a (road safety) problem instead of a solution to traffic congestion which is healthy (cf. the BMA Report, ‘Cycling: Towards Health and Safety’, 1992), cheap, quick and pollution-free.
The Scottish Office commissioned John Grimshaw's report on long-distance cycle routes as long ago as 1983, but has failed to implement the proposals in it.
For these reasons, Scottish Office management of a wider road system would not be in the interests of cycling and I would wish to object to this particular proposal.
Yours faithfully,
Dear Richard,
LOCHSHOT BURN
I would like to offer my congratulations to the Cycle Team and anyone else involved in the construction of the Lochshot Burn path.
I wasn't at the official opening on 14 June but discovered it two days later.
This path is a good example of just about exactly what cyclists want.
It avoids some nasty main roads and busy junctions, including roundabouts;
It is direct;
The surface is excellent;
It is sheltered by the forest (particularly useful when heading west against the prevailing wind);
It is evenly graded (and avoids some of the climb of the main-road route);
It is scenically attractive.
The final section must have been built very quickly, because the path finished at the forest edge when I was there a couple of months ago.
All that remains now is the publicity (eg via the Region's route leaflets) to let people know about it!
I will ask ‘Spokes’ to sing its praises in the next newsletter.
Yours sincerely,
CENTRAL EDINBURGH LOCAL PLAN
Dear Sir,
I have enjoyed the opportunity to read and study the principles and proposals of the Central Edinburgh Local Plan, and would like to submit some comments.
I am particularly encouraged by the references to better facilities for pedestrians and cyclists, and to see that routes for them have been incorporated into all the major development sites where appropriate — and indeed given some prominence in the site maps.
I am also encouraged by the stated principles of conserving the appearance of the central city, and of protecting and enlarging the open spaces, which in some areas are at present lacking.
There are three main comments I would like to make.
First, about the impact of the private motor car on the urban environment.
The need to restrict vehicle movements and access is mentioned in many places in the document and the Core Strategy (p.4) rightly seeks ‘a reduction in the adverse impact of road traffic on the quality of the environment’.
Yet the proposals for the 12 major development opportunities still include large numbers of parking spaces, and one wonders how this can be compatible with the strategic aims.
Is it not possible to think in terms of the central area becoming virtually car-free?
Could the 12 sites conceivably include NO parking provision at all?
This seems not unreasonable in view of the provision for public transport, present and proposed (ie the metro).
Furthermore, the need to include parking spaces always puts undesirable constraints on the development itself, by for example limiting the areas of open space available and by vastly increasing the costs of building; underground carparks are not only enormously expensive but also ‘unnatural’ in a Georgian/Victorian city like Edinburgh.
Above ground, car lots are unsightly and inconvenient to pedestrian movement.
Turn them into public gardens and you create an attraction instead of an eyesore.
Secondly, cycle routes.
The bicycle is the ideal mode of transport in a car-free city.
Yet despite the impressive cycle/pedestrian routes marked within and through the development sites, the Local Plan shows no overall strategy, ie network, of routes.
Routes have to be worked out on the basis of destinations and topography.
Some specific proposals could be made here, for example(1) a link between the St Leonard's cycleway (see Opportunity No.9) and the east end of the Meadows cycle route — eg via a suitably traffic-calmed Montague St.;(2) a link from the West end of the Meadows northward to Princes St. A north-south route through the new developments to the west of  Lothian Road is not suitable (for this purpose) because it would involve too long a deviation and the crossing of major roads.
But a better route could be devised eg via Lauriston Gardens, then Lauriston St or Lady Lawson St., and Castle Terrace;(3) a link from the top of Meadows Walk into the university complex and Potterrow;(4) for topographical reasons, South Bridge and George IV Bridge will continue to attract cyclists and have the potential to become major north-south routes.
Might it be possible to restrict the use of these two streets, during day hours, to public transport, coaches and cyclists?
This would at once limit access to the city by private vehicles and improve access for buses and coaches.
If a new bus station is built next to Waverley Station to replace St Andrews Sq (which seems a good idea), coaches could then use South Bridge as the main route out to the south (as they do at present— but it's very congested).
But these are just a few specific ideas; what's really needed is an overall plan for a cycle network linking the city centre to routes in all the main directions.
Third, I think there are good reasons to encourage at least one food supermarket in the city centre.
Office workers etc would then be able to do food shopping during lunch hour and after work.
Since they would do this on foot, many vehicle journeys (and hence a lot of pollution) would be saved.
For tourists it is also very frustrating to have make journeys out to the suburbs to shop for food.
The success of the food halls in Marks and Spencer and Littlewoods, despite their high prices and the fact that they are not primarily food stores, is surely due to their convenience and availability.
Traditionally, city centres always included food shops and they complement stores of other kinds; if they are presently deterred by high rates it might be worthwhile for the Council to offer them concessions; the benefits to the public and the city would surely outweigh the loss of revenue.
In summary, the Local Plan should aim for an overall network of cycle routes and take a much bolder approach in its strategies for reducing the impact of the private car.
A cost-benefit analysis of the proposed parking spaces in new developments should count the costs of environmental degradation as well as of the actual construction, and the alternative of no parking provision might then appear reasonable.
Car-free city centres work well in other parts of Europe, and could be ideal for a city of unique qualities like Edinburgh.
On reflection, it may be the only possible solution if the city is to function on a human scale.
Yours faithfully,
Dear Mr. Magnusson,
UNION CANAL TOWPATH IMPROVEMENT
On behalf of‘Spokes’, the Lothians Cycle Campaign, I obtained permission earlier this year from British Waterways for volunteers from Spokes to upgrade parts of the Union Canal towpath from Hermiston (just west of the Edinburgh bypass) to Ratho, the aim being to provide an all-weather surface, suitable for all groups of users, on a route which will eventually form a continuous link from the centre of Edinburgh to the countryside of West Lothian, and thus provide an excellent means for city residents to enjoy the amenities of the countryside in environmentally friendly ways, ie. by walking and cycling.
At present, parts of the towpath are usable but several sections are so overgrown, muddy and waterlogged as to be virtually impassable.
Some sections of the total route are to be upgraded by other authorities (eg. Slateford to Merchiston); our volunteers will work on sections not otherwise covered.
Getting British Waterways approval was itself something of an achievement, in view of their reluctance to accept use of towpaths for cycling.
I approached the Edinburgh Green Belt Trust, who thought the project a good one, and promised us a grant of £3,000 for materials and hire of equipment, subject to SNH approval.
Spokes volunteers and EGBT had previously collaborated on a very successful project, the upgrading of Donkey Lane in Currie, in 1991.
As you will appreciate, the best and possibly the only time to carry out such projects is the spring/ early summer period, partly because of the weather, partly because volunteers tend not to be available in the summer.
Accordingly I went ahead and circulated all potential volunteers with a call for the weekends of June 12-13 and June 19-20, which at the time was two months away and I assumed this would allow enough time for SNH approval to come through.
However, I have now been told, by EGBT's director, that SNH approval could take some time, possibly months.
This puts me in the position of having to either cancel the project — which would be a great discouragment to the volunteers, who might be reluctant to come forward again having been let down over this one — or risk going on without funding (and then perhaps being told that funding cannot be granted retrospectively?).
This then is an appeal to you to save our project.
As an ‘outsider’, I find it difficult to understand why applications for funding have to go through TWO (I appreciate the need for one!) bureaucratic systems before they are approved, particularly for such relatively small amounts as this.
The EGBT have been in existence for some years and have proved themselves a respectable and reliable organisation with several completed projects to their credit.
Would it not be possible to give them an annual grant to spend on projects they approve?
If every project has to be referred to SNH, why have an EGBT at all?
The procedures which voluntary bodies like ourselves have to follow to obtain small amounts of funding are so intimidating that one wonders whether the effort is worth while, because funding is only the beginning — we have to organise the supply of materials, hire or loan of equipment, payment for purchases, as well as getting the volunteers on and off site and ensuring the work is carried out properly.
On the other hand, so little is being done to provide ‘on-the-ground’ facilities for cycling by anyone else.
The District Councils have no money, the Government is not interested in cycling as a mode of transport, the Region does have a limited budget but most of it goes on the cycling team.
This means that if the voluntary sector does not take action, virtually nothing gets done.
Procedures for obtaining funding, however, seem designed to stifle any enterprise and initiative.
(Perhaps that is the intention — maybe everyone would be happier if we didn't exist!— but one hopes this is not the case).
If therefore you could do something to help our project go ahead, we would be most grateful.
Yours sincerely,
(Dr.)
Dear Mr. McGregor,
TRANSPORT POLICY
I wrote in February to the Secretary of State for the Environment, advocating higher taxes on petrol for environmental reasons.
I am pleased to see that the Chancellor has taken a step in this direction in his Budget, though it is nowhere near enough.
In my letter I mentioned the particular case of the Times Motoring correspondent who found that the return Brighton — Birmingham rail fare would cost him four times as much as the price of petrol for a car journey, despite driving a not especially economical car.
The Department of Transport's reply to my letter (12 March) seems to have missed the general point I am making from this specific case, namely that travellers normally choose their mode of transport on the basis of perceived marginal costs (ie the cost of petrol) and conclude that it is a lot cheaper to use a car if you already have one.
This means that, to compete, rail prices have to be pitched at these marginal costs.
Since the rail network has plenty of spare capacity and is environmentally more benign, the logical solution is either to subsidise rail fares, which the present government is obviously unwilling to do, or to increase the cost of motoring to the point where rail has the advantage (and since rail is sometimes less convenient, it needs the edge on price).
An increase in motoring costs would also bring revenue to the government, and could be made acceptable by being earmarked for corresponding improvements to public transport.
I hope therefore that the Department of Transport will do whatever possible to increase motoring costs by such methods as petrol taxes and road pricing.
Although I am a motorist myself I use the car as little as possible, prefering to cycle for all urban journeys.
I do this because cycling is cheap and (from the point of view of physical exercise) healthy and creates no pollution and virtually no congestion.
You can imagine my annoyance, then, that a) there are no fiscal financial incentives whatsoever to encourage more people to cycle, and b) that my health has to suffer from car-induced pollution although I do not contribute to it myself.
Is it not ironic that the company executive driving the Jaguar which I overtake in every traffic jam, is being subsidised by the government to produce the fumes which are damaging the health of every individual, cyclists, pedestrians, motorists themselves, not to mention the ecological damage?
Even worse, the government's roads programme is guaranteed to bring even more traffic into circulation, the lessons of the past 50 years, that more roads generate more traffic, apparently not having been learnt.
The government has belatedly recognised the danger to health of smoking and of passive smoking, but the health menace created by cars is far worse.
Yours sincerely,
(Dr.)
Mountain Bike Code launched
PH writes:
and , members of the Scottish Cycling Council (the CTC in Scotland) travelled to Aberfoyle in the Trossachs recently for the launch of the Scottish version of the Mountain Bike Code.
The code was written by the Council but its publication has been sponsored additionally by the SCU, Scottish Natural Heritage, and the Scottish Sports Council, who organised the launch at the rather odd time of 11 am on a weekday morning.
The press were there, and a handful of officials, and that was all — a gaggle of local mountain bikers had been promised, but failed to turn up.
Once the press had exhausted the possibilities of interviewing the two of us, and had decided that our unregenerate and politically incorrect tourers were not what they wanted in a photograph, one enterprising organiser set off in search of better material.
He came back with a young fellow in lycra suit, dark glasses, poser gear and all, whom he claimed to have grabbed off the streets of the town with a £10 inducement!
This at any rate satisfied the photographers, and the Code was duly launched.
Peter and Graham later featured in a lengthy interview on Radio Scotland.
Dear Sir or Madam,
SPONSORSHIP APPEAL: SCOTTISH CYCLING COUNCIL
I would like to ask NFC plc to support the running of the Scottish Cycling Council, of which I am the Treasurer.
I have been a shareholder in NFC for the past three years, making the maximum permitted investment in its PEP.
The Scottish Cycling Council is the Scottish ‘arm’ of the Cyclists Touring Club, the national organisation which promotes touring and campaigning.
The SCC is particularly concerned with campaigning: we aim to promote cycling as a partial but significant solution to the problems of urban congestion and pollution, because cycling is not only pollution-free but also flexible, cheap and above all, healthy.
We also promote recreational cycling in the countryside.
Our campaigns are for better cycling facilities, especially in urban areas, by encouraging local authorities to provide cycle lanes, segregated paths, joint pedestrian-cycle zones and crossings, parking racks etc.
At first sight an association between NFC and a cycle campaign organisation might seem a little unusual.
However, we think we have plenty to offer you.
First, we are, obviously, environmentally friendly and I am sure that this aspect of the connection would be of benefit to NFC (I note, too, that the NFC Foundation already support environment-oriented groups such as Intermediate Technology.
I did consider writing to the Foundation for sponsorship, but feel that the Company is more appropriate).
Second, we also promote good health: in 1992 the BMA published ‘Cycling: Towards Health and Safety’(OUP), which points out the health benefits of cycling, and they have since issued the leaflet ‘Bike for your Life’, which has been distributed to all GP's — a copy of this is enclosed.
Cycling to work is particularly beneficial because it combines physical exercise with an essential daily task.
Cycling is also a very ‘democratic’ activity which can be (and is) enjoyed by anyone and everyone, including the young.
NFC impresses me as a democratically managed organisation.
Third, a switch by car drivers to cycling, which is what we campaign for, would clearly benefit the majority of NFC employees by reducing car-induced congestion.
Fourth, we represent a membership of about 2,000 living across the whole of Scotland.
The Council is made up of representatives from each local District Association.
Our publicity is distributed to participants of mass bike events such as the annual Edinburgh — St. Andrews ride which attracts over 600 entrants, and this publicity could include information about NFC.
If NFC are keen on publicity, T-shirts and sweat shirts worn by commuting and recreational cyclists are particularly effective because they are designed in bright colours for conspicuity and would be highly visible to the travelling public.
News of your sponsorship would of course be published in the CTC's national bi-monthly magazine Cycletouring, which has a readership of over 40,000.
Unlike many organisations with sporting connections we are not oriented to competition but to participation.
We are committed to a saner transport policy including better public transport and this, as I mentioned, must ultimately benefit the majority of NFC employees.
Our requirements are fairly modest; we are looking for about £700 per annum.
Our costs are: 1) secretarial and postage — the distribution of information to members; 2) production and distribution of publicity material, eg at bike events; 3) subscriptions to organisations working in Scotland for the interests of cycling; 4) travel expenses to our Council meetings, which are held four times a year.
Our total annual budget is about £1,000.
Most of this has until recently come from a grant from the CTC, but that has now been reduced to £300.
Obviously it would be better for both parties if all the sponsorship we need comes from a single organisation.
We could then concentrate on mentioning NFC in our publicity.
Yours faithfully,
NEW ZEALAND CYCLE TOUR 1993: First Circular
Thank you for enquiring about the cycle tour to New Zealand in early 1993.
I have so far had 4 people interested in travelling from the UK, and another 3 who would like to join us for part of the time in NZ.
My original thoughts were for a 3-week tour but after consideration and discussion a longer period seems preferable; I'm therefore thinking of 8 weeks, from mid-Feb. to mid-April, but of course if your time is limited you could return independently.
I have made enquiries about air fares and as Auckland is considerably easier and cheaper than Christchurch, I would like to start the tour from Auckland.
There are plenty of fine areas for cycle touring within easy reach of Auckland.
We could start with the Coromandel Peninsula, then on to the East Cape and the ‘King Country’ in the heart of the North Island, ideal for cycling and with superb colours in autumn.
If we are feeling ambitious we can then take train and ferry to the top of the South Island and proceed down the West Coast.
As you may know, our family lived in NZ from 1969 to 1978 and last year we returned for a 6-month tour, but I've never been over the Haast Pass so that is a personal goal for me!
I envisage however not more than 50 to 60 miles per day.
The terrain varies greatly, from relatively flat to quite hilly, so you'll need to be reasonably fit.
Accommodation in NZ is generally quite plentiful and cheap.
As we are small in numbers we can find it as we go, for maximum flexibility, but I will book us into a lodge for 2 nights on arrival to give us chance to find our feet again.
Since NZ is so good for walking, I recommend bringing a pair of boots; we can then do the occasional walk for variety's sake.
At that time of year the weather should be quite warm and dry, but you'll need a jersey, windproofs, and a pair of long trousers, plus a summer-season sleeping bag or similar.
I'll send, later, a list of suggestions for what to take.
The best maps are the 1:50,000 series which can be bought in NZ; for guide books I recommend Bruce Ringer's ‘Cycletouring in New Zealand’ and the Mobil Guides to the North and South Island; I'll have a copy of these with me.
The best deal I can do on the airfares is £870 — this includes a small fee for myself for the administration.
As it's a special deal, the money will have to be paid all at once, and the sooner the better in case fares go up; so I suggest 8th December (ie one month from now) as the provisional date for payment.Accommodation costs depend on whether we can share — for example , a motor camp cabin for 4 costs about £12 per night (ie  £3 each!), whereas lodge accommodation is £5-£7 per person.
Food, drink and eating out are rather cheaper (and better!) than in Britain.
I suggest the following dates: depart Gatwick Thurs. 18 Feb., 1345 hrs; return from Auckland Fri. 16 April, arriving Gatwick 17 April, 1125 hrs.
The flight is via the USA with only one stop; travel time about 30 hours out and 27 hours back.
I need to make arrangements with the travel agents as soon as possible, so please let me know whether you will be joining us.
Yours sincerely,
HIGHLIGHTS (and LOWLIGHTS!) of NEW ZEALAND, 1991-92
On the second of October 1991 the Hawkins family left Edinburgh to visit a country they had last seen 13 years before.
The timing was opportune because Ned was able to take a year out from his university course; Matthew had just finished school; Val got 6 months’ leave of absence from her job; and I had just been given early retirement.
Even William, though still at school, was in a year with no major exams at the end.
Never again, we reasoned, would there be a combination of circumstances like this!
Even so, the beginning of the trip felt like the end of something, at least for me and Val.
For the previous six weeks we had done nothing but make preparations; buying the tickets, finding tenants for the house, and, hardest of all, putting the house in a fit state to receive tenants!
The day before we left, we celebrated Ned's 21st with lunch in a good restaurant (the popping of the champagne cork causing much alarm and despondency among the old dears at the next table).
Then Matthew went out to take his driving test — and passed!
This was very useful, as he became our chief driver in NZ.
Every good trip begins with a disaster and this was no exception.
The problem was that we had to get to Gatwick Airport by 7.30 am for the 8.30 flight to Paris.
In NZ this would be no problem as there would be loads of backpackers (cheap accommodation) within cooee of the airport, but Britain being a backward country there is nothing like this and we stayed with friends who live 20 miles away in the heart of the Sussex countryside.
Val and the others got a taxi to the airport, but as I had my bike to take I had to ride it there.
I set off at 5 am but those Sussex lanes are pitch dark, and hilly!
Even so I wasn't too late arriving and the check-in girl said our seats would be saved.
But with delays in getting the bike to pieces, and in getting it through security, we arrived at boarding after the 15 min deadline and our seats had been given away.
By missing the first flight we of course missed the connecting flight to the USA.
I had visions of having to pay vast amounts as ‘punishment’, but in the end they just re-scheduled our flights for one whole day later.
This turned out to be a bonus, because we had to stay overnight in Paris and by good luck, our friends the family Toulagian were in, and happy to put us up at no notice.
Val did a brilliant job getting everyone else to Le Bourget using public transport; I went on the bike with no map and only a vague idea where Le Bourget was, and every Frenchman I asked just waved me straight on (lies!), but I got there somehow and we had a very enjoyable, if unscheduled, visit.
When we reached Auckland we had no plan of action at all, and as we knew no-one there was no-one to meet us.
Some people like to plan their trips in meticulous detail, but there's a lot to be said for this ‘open-book’ approach.
For one thing, you don't get frustrated when things don't go to plan.
Finding accommodation and getting to it proved as easy as falling off a log; there were free-phone backpacker ads in the airport, we rang one of them and they had a (free) minibus waiting right there, which took all of us including bike.
The hostel was fairly close to town and no-one could complain about the prices.
What's more, David who was the senior figure running this hostel, had his fingers in every tourist pie going and could get for us whatever we needed.
So we stayed five days in this backpackers', had a look round Auckland, visited MOTAT the Museum of Transport and Technology, opened a bank account, sold the Krugerrands which had been left to us by my Mum and which financed at least half the trip, and recovered from jetlag by sleeping only at night.
We thought it a good idea to start off by hiring a motor caravan, or camper van as they're called in NZ, but as it was quite expensive we took it for a fortnight just to try it.
It was a massive vehicle with a 3.3 litre diesel engine, and it was marvellous because we could park for the night where we happened to be.
It had a shower inside, and a porta-potty toilet mounted on rollers inside a cupboard.
This proved rather funny because when we went round a sharp bend, the cupboard door flew open, the porta-potty rolled out like a cheap-thrills show, and on the next bend it rolled back in again and the door closed!
Communication between the front of the vehicle and the back was via a small hatch, but because of the noise of the engine you could only be heard by putting your face close to the hatch and yelling.
If you hit a bump you banged your head on the top of the hatch.
My second disaster of the trip happened in the very minute of taking the camper van onto the road.
I'd put the bike on the rack at the back and secured it with a bungy strap.
At the first bump the strap sprang off and the bike fell onto the road, but as the front wheel was still tied on, the bike was dragged behind for over a mile, until vehicles hooting from behind warned me something was amiss.
A hole was worn into the side of the saddle, the rear carrier was a write-off, and the saddle-bag was badly mauled.
Some tyre levers and allan keys were missing but by driving slowly back I (or rather we, as I'd offered some fellow tourists a lift back to town; what with delays getting started, and then this to-do, I bet they wished they'd never bothered, it would have been quicker to walk!— and when we finally did set off again, I accidentally left one of them behind, running along the road behind us waving and shouting!)— we, as I say, found most of the missing items.
And luckily the bike had fallen on its left side so the gears and chain ring etc weren't damaged.
In this hilarious fashion we left Auckland and made our way north through the imaginatively-named Northland.
The weather was quite warm and sunny and we found some superb over-night sites, often right by a beach with lovely views over bays, islands and headlands.
I soon had the bike back in working order and if the distances weren't too great, I would ride while the others rode in the van.
We thought we knew no-one in this part of the country, but I had a hazy recollection that our English Department secretary at Vic., Pat Lawn, had retired with husband Ken to this area.
I'd thought it was Dargaville but when we reached the small town of Warkworth, the name ‘rang a bell’.
I looked up the phone directory and, sure enough, there was a P.Lawn,(luckily not a common name!), from which we surmised, correctly, that Ken had died but Pat was still there.
There was no reply to the phone, but as we were going that way to spend the night at Sandspit, we called at the neighbours’ and found that Pat was away for a few days.
We managed to visit her on our way back, however, and she was very pleased to see us and made us most welcome.
Chance encounters!
We found hot springs to bathe in and waterfalls to admire but our first outdoors adventure was near Whangarei, where Mount Manaia rises very steeply and with spectacular jagged outcrops to about 1500 ft.
Most of the climb was through bush and we almost reached the top, but the outcrops were a rope job and we knew when to admit defeat!
We were however rewarded with spectacular views over the extensive harbour.
The northernmost town is Kaitaia, but there is still a further 80 miles up to the tip of the island at Cape Reinga.
You can drive via 90-mile beach but it's a rough road, so we decided to do this excursion as a day trip on a bus, and this proved good value.
We stopped off at Wagener's Museum, a one-man collection of nearly everything; Maori artefacts, washing machines, gramophones, even chamber pots of every size shape and colour.
Much of the machinery is in working order and I was so fascinated to see it actually in operation that I was late getting back to the bus; driver sitting with engine running, and the eyes of every accusing fellow passenger upon me.
There are unspoken rules of behaviour on bus tours…
Northland prospered in the 19th Century from the logging, especially of kauri trees, and the digging of kauri gum.
Now that's all gone, as has the wealth and a lot of the people, but the local museums have recorded it all, often very realistically.
One of the best museums was at Matakohe.
But in the end we felt we'd seen enough of logging and gum-digging.
We drove back down the West side, through the Waipoua Forest which is still quite extensive and contains a few giant kauris, magnificent, almost unbelievably huge when you get up to them.
The road through the forest twists and turns like a corkscrew, there isn't more than 100 yards of straight in about 40 miles, and it's narrow and gravel.
Ned was happy to drive our massive van with consummate skill down this road, and we were only too happy to let him!
We stayed a couple of nights at Kohukohu, a pleasant village  beside the Hokianga harbour.
This region once had a gold rush but is now a backwater, inhabited by quite a few ‘alternative lifestylers’.
I did an evening ride along some backblocks roads, all gravel, and the next day we all hired bikes and did a similar route.
It was interesting to compare the performance of my tourer bike and the mountain bikes we hired on these roads.
The mountain bike was much easier to handle, and though I normally wouldn't prefer them they certainly do well in this kind of terrain.
By this time the van was distinguished by a banner in the rear window proclaiming SCOTLAND FOR THE WORLD CUP!! and a Saltire, but sadly Scotland lost in the semi-final and FOR THE WORLD CUP was quietly removed!
We returned the camper van to the hire centre and had a conference to decide what next.
Using public transport seemed out of the question and renting a car was expensive, so we decided to sink some of our capital, buy a car, and sell it again before leaving.
There was certainly no shortage of vehicles available.
The ‘wanted to sell’ ads stretched for pages, and one main street consisted of wall-to-wall car lots for over a mile on both sides!
The result of an unfettered market and cheap Japanese imports!
It was hard to know where to start but we went for a private sale and a Mazda 323 on the basis that Dave Baker (our friend in Christchurch) has a Mazda 323 and what's good for Dave is good for us!
This narrowed our market and the prospective sellers were only too keen to bring their vehicles to our immobile selves for inspection.
We chose the best of a not too brilliant bunch, made a ludicrous offer which to our astonishment was accepted, and we were on the road.
There was even a tow-ball, for which we bought a carrier to take the bike.
Ned at this point went off on his own, on the ‘Kiwi Experience’ bus which specialises in taking young folk to the more adventurous tourist offerings.
This was fortunate for us, as the car with four large occupants and all the luggage was on the verge of overload.
Using Pope's ‘Mobil Guide to the North Island’ we were able to look up what was worth seeing in each of the towns we passed through.
Additionally there's lots of information in the backpackers’ and motor camps, and the boys were pretty quick to suss out where they wanted to go and what to do there.
Our first destination was the Waitomo Caves, and we stayed the night at Te Awamutu, some miles away, in a pleasant motor camp (these are camp sites, but often have cabins for rent as well; often fairly basic, but cheap — about $30-40 (£9-13) a night for 4 of us; most towns have at least one).
At the Caves, Val and the boys did blackwater rafting.
This consisted of going down a river, rapids and all, in a caving system, armed with only a wetsuit and a rubber ring.
You got a bit of training first and the adventure took a whole afternoon.
It didn't appeal to me (I don't like cold water or caves — at least that's my excuse, the boys said I chickened out!) but the others really enjoyed it.
I was happy to do a signposted walk up  the valley to see the caving system.
I met not a soul on the walk, but the path was in very good condition, a feature we noticed many times in NZ, that the tracks are well looked-after even when apparently hardly used.
From Te Awamutu we went east to Rotorua and found a wonderful motor camp on the edge of town with its own hot pools.
What luxury to go and bathe there after a day in the outdoors!
There was plenty to do in Rotorua.
We visited the thermal activity at Tikitere (’ Hell's Gate’) and did a day trip to climb Mount Tarawera, a volcano which blew up in 1886, burying a Maori village and creating a big lake.
From the top you can go down into the old crater via a scree slope which, viewed from the other side, looks impossibly steep (’ I'm never going down there!’) but is actually quite easy (the descent is 600ft.).
The rocks are all the colours of the rainbow, with reddish pink and yellow dominant.
Another day we hired bikes and rode through the forests, seeing the Blue Lake and the Green Lake, and William and I went to Buried Village (where we found a nice cafe with a superb carrot cake, for which I got the recipe).
And on another day we split up and Val and I did the Western Okataina Walkway, while the boys visited some more thermal activity.
With Matthew able to drive, he dropped us at the start and picked us up at the other end, and we arrived within 2 minutes of each other, which was remarkable because we were all 3/4 hour late!
Val and I had met a party of school children with the master giving them a botany lesson as we walked, so we tagged on and saw a lot we wouldn't otherwise have noticed.
After 5 days in Rotorua we went south to Taupo, a disappointing touristy place except for a lovely walk to the Huka Falls beside the crystal-clear, swirling waters of the Waikato River, and a visit to Cherry Island (in the river) where you are warmly greeted by numerous tame animals and birds as you roam around.
From Taupo we headed south-east through some wild and hilly country to Havelock North in Hawkes’ Bay, to visit our first lot of friends, the McKenzies and Mrs Styles.
The neighbouring city of Napier was entirely rebuilt after an earthquake in 1931 and this is not only a feature of the museum but many of the buildings are still in the style of the period, Art Deco.
We also saw an exhibition of paintings by Sydney Lough Thompson, one of my favourite NZ artists.
From Havelock North we went on south to Wellington, driving through the Manawatu Gorge in a thunderstorm so heavy we had to pull up.
Let me not forget to mention the bakery in Waipukurau, which served us the most magnificent cream (real cream!) buns filled with delicious real fruit conserve — wow!
We stayed first with Gary and Kaye (Burns), who live near the top of Seatoun Heights with a stupendous view down the  harbour and up the Hutt Valley.
They were out at work often till late evening, but gave us the run of the house and William had the chance to get on with some schoolwork.
Gary helped him with his chemistry and deserves much of the credit for the good grades William got in tests when he got back (the teachers were amazed!).
We revisited some of our old haunts like Butterfly Creek, and old friends like the Lawrences whose house is approached by their own private cable car (very scary the first time you ride it).
Standing in the main courtyard of Victoria University, seeing pass the faces of people you last saw 13 years ago, was a strange experience.
Some of them even recognised us!
We were invited to Stuart Johnston's retirement party in the English Department (Stuart met us off the ship when we first arrived in NZ, in 1969); but Val didn't make the party as she tripped in a gutter and pulled her ankle (she got free treatment for it from the doctor, thanks to NZ's Accident Compensation scheme!).
One afternoon we went up to Croydon St. in Karori to look at our old house.
The others went in the car and when I arrived on the bike a little later they'd been down the 51 steps to the house and found it like the Marie Celeste, everything open, radio playing but no-one around.
As we spoke, a car drew up in the carport (which incidentally was still just as I'd built it 15 years ago!) and to our astonishment (because the ownership had changed since we sold it) the lady recognised us (she'd been given our Edinburgh address by a mutual friend and had actually called on us once, which we'd totally forgotten!).
This was Elisabeth Lee; she invited us down to look round while she went off to collect her child.
So we explored the house and garden, and it was amazing how little had changed.
Our cooker was still in the kitchen and we even recognised the vinyl on the floor!
Peter Walls and the Baroque Players did a concert of Rossini's Petite Messe Solonnelle while we were there.
After about 9 days at Gary and Kaye's we moved to Caroline Lock's; she has a small flat under the house, and it happened to be vacant for a week.
It was very handy, being so close to town, and as the Lock family are much of an age with our boys we had a very jolly time together.
One day it was decided we would take our dinner to eat in the nearby Botanical Gardens, and we staggered down there laden with dishes, plates etc., Mary-Anne hiding under her coat from embarrassment in case she passed anyone she knew!
My third misadventure of the trip happened while we were in Wellington.
I did a combined cycle and hiking day; rode over the hill to Wainuiomata and down to the Rimutaka Forest Park, then tramped through the bush and up a long ridge to the top of Mount McKerrow.
The weather closed in and it was misty and raining.
On the return ride my pannier fell off but I didn't discover this until I reached Petone.
I retraced my steps, by this time it was 7 pm and I'd done a long walk and about 45 miles on the bike.
I went right back to the top of the Wainui hill, but there was no  trace of the pannier.
I reported the loss to Lower Hutt police the next day, certain that it would be handed in; but it never was.
I even retraced the route again in March, just in case it had been thrown into the undergrowth, but again, nothing.
I lost a sodden pair of boots and socks, and William's day bag, which I'd borrowed for a rucksack.
The week at Caroline's went all too quickly and we then took the Picton Ferry, across Cook Strait and through the Marlborough Sounds, a journey of about 3 1/2 hours.
We stayed overnight in a motor camp in Picton and continued next day, southwards down the east coast to Kaikoura.
We walked round the beach and got very close in to a colony of seals, and later, the others had a trip in a glass-bottomed boat to observe marine life.
I cycled the spectacular coast road (Highway 1, but not very busy!) to Cheviot, an easier ride than anticipated because Ringer's ‘Cycle Touring in NZ’(the cyclist's bible) mentioned a strenuous climb to 800 metres which turned out to be 800 feet!
An afternoon's drive brought us to Christchurch, where we stayed with the Bakers.
This turned out to be a preliminary exploration, because we returned after Christmas intending to spend a further 3 weeks here, and ended up staying 7 weeks.
I got in touch with the linguists in the University and the College of Education, and was asked if I could do some teaching in March (March seeming a long way away, I agreed).
On the way to Dunedin we stayed 2 nights at Omarama, a quiet junction village recommended by cousin Ian.
We discovered a little-known mountain area near Ohau, and did a walk up the Temple valley which turned out quite exciting.
It was a hot day but the valley was all bush apart from some enormous landslips, which we found were frozen underneath, like walking on a glacier.
The valley ended quite suddenly in a massive amphitheatre of surrounding mountains rising to 7,000 ft, and as it had been a cold spring there was still a lot of snow.
We climbed far enough to find some specimens of the Mount Cook lily (which isn't a lily at all, but a giant buttercup found only at altitude in this part of the South Island), and while the others rested I went across to investigate a steep track up a snow-filled gully.
William whistled to me at a distance, and Val said ‘don't do that, you'll start an avalanche’.
Suddenly there was this tremendous roar, and we looked up to see a mass of snow and rocks rolling down a gully.
Post hoc ergo propter hoc?
I wonder!
It was far enough away to be no real danger, but it certainly stopped me going any further and was probably a timely warning!
We cooled off on our way back to camp with a swim in a roadside lake; a memorable day.
On to Dunedin.
Ian and Anne live about 8 miles out, on the Otago peninsula.
Their house was too small to put us up so we stayed in a new motor camp a few miles further along the road, in Portobello (odd to get all these Edinburgh names, 12,000 miles  away!).
The road continues to the end of the peninsula and here is one of the most remarkable bird reserves in the Southern Hemisphere, an albatross colony.
Albatrosses never come to land except once every two years, to breed.
The colony has been established since the 1930's and is gradually growing, but some of the original founders (the birds I mean, not the humans) are still around.
The best time to visit is in stormy conditions when the birds are on the wing, but the day we went was calm and we saw them only sitting on their nests.
The visitor centre tells you a lot about their lives and habits.
On the other side of the peninsula we found colonies of seals and penguins.
Ian took the others to the baths to practice canoeing skills, Eskimo rolls and so on, and later he got his own boats out of the garage and we canoed the Otago harbour, very beautiful in the evening sunlight at low tide.
Anne worked hard on William's French, and again he was later able to surprise his teachers with his performance in tests.
Aren't we lucky to have friends with such skills!
We went in to the University and met up with Ian Jamieson, who invited us to come and stay with them for a few days.
It was difficult because Penny, who is now the Bishop of Otago and Southland, is extremely busy and often not at home, so we really appreciated going to stay with them.
We wondered what a Bishop's Palace would be like, I think William had expectations of maidservants and throne rooms, but it turned out more like a typical Kiwi residence.
The only one of the three daughters around was Dorothy, who acted as our guide and mentor and came with us, first on a visit to Speight's Brewery which was memorable for the guide, who delivered her monologue in a deadpan voice and an accent so broad that even Dorothy had trouble understanding it, heaven knows what all the Japanese tourists made of it!— and second, on the Taieri Gorge railway, an afternoon's ride up into Central Otago, with stops along the way.
We chose a good day to go as it was their pre-Christmas trip and we were served cake and liqueur!
The Art Gallery had a nice exhibition about slices of NZ history done on a ‘time-travel’ theme; a teenage girl travels back to visit Abel Tasman's ship, Joseph Banks’study etc and sends aerograms ‘home’, full of description but made realistic with 20th century NZ teenage jargon.
Dunedin has what the Book of Records claims to be the world's steepest street, with a gradient of 1 in 1.4.
This gradient is maintained for about 100 metres.
I had trouble even pushing the bike up, but cars were going up (and down!) to the houses.
By this time it was mid December and Christmas was only a week away.
We were invited to spend it with Bill and Claire, who have a small farm about 15 miles outside Invercargill (which is right at the bottom of the South Island).
Claire is Anne's  sister, so I suppose we were with family even at some remove (ie Val's cousin's wife's sister!).
On the way we decided to visit the Catlins, a little-known forest area on the coast, near Balclutha.
We did a day walk up the Catlin's river valley; I dropped the others at the bottom, drove round via forest roads to the top with bike on board, left the car at the top and cycled back.
This meant we could walk much further up the valley without re-tracing.
It was a great walk, with swing bridges across the river, and we never met a soul all day.
Yet the path was in good order until the last half mile, when we got lost.
We eventually found the car by good luck more than good management; I wished we'd had time to start from the top end and find how we'd gone wrong.
Ian and Anne also came to Invercargill for Christmas.
On Christmas Day Bill's family, who live locally, came for the dinner.
It was a hot day so we were outside, which was lucky as we were quite a crowd!
I spent the morning doing my usual, a 40-mile ride to the seaside town of Riverton, to work up an appetite.
On Boxing Day, which was really hot, a party of us drove to Riverton and had a good laugh about Riverton Rocks, which were given maximum rating (3 stars) in the Guidebook but turned out to be just rocky outcrops offshore.
The town itself was quite charming, however, and we enjoyed an icecream on the beach before visiting Bluff, the southernmost point of the mainland.
Our next destination was Queenstown, a tourist centre set amid mountains and lakes, and offering every conceivable kind of outdoor activity including some you've never even heard of.
Here we met up again with Ned, and stayed with Deryn Williams who is a niece of Anne's and teaches at the local High School — we camped in her garden.
Queenstown was the departure point for our tramping trip over the Routeburn track and back along the Greenstone track, a journey of 5 days.
Ian came with us part of the way, so we took two cars and left ours at the finishing point and Ian's at the entrance to the track.
Doing a round trip made sense, because otherwise you come out on a road with a 200-mile journey back to the start!
The Routeburn is a popular track and was very crowded at this time of year.
We stayed in the huts, which are run by DOC (Department of Conservation); you buy tickets in advance, but they don't guarantee you anything; however, if the hut is full, there are usually extra mattresses available.
The first hut was about 3 hours’ tramp from the road-end through a bush-lined valley.
The next day we did a heavy climb to the Harris saddle which is the summit; unfortunately there was heavy mist after a rainy night and we didn't get the views.
The second night was at the McKenzie hut, beautifully sited by a lake in a steep valley.
We watched white cloud pouring over the tops and then ‘melting’ as it reached the valley floor.
The hut was designed for 40 but there were 80 in that night — wall-to-wall mattresses!
The huts  provide water and toilets, and cooking is done by bottled gas which is flown in by helicopter; there's no electricity, of course.
The Greenstone track was a lot quieter.
Ned went out by a parallel track, the Caples, so as to get back to Queenstown for New Year festivities.
The rest of us saw the year in in a hut halfway down the Greenstone valley; the warden brewed her own beer, and brought us generous supplies of it!
We certainly hadn't expected that!
On the afternoon of New Year's Day we reached the road end, picked the car up and returned to Queenstown.
The campsites in town were all full but we found a cabin at Arthur's Point, about 6km out.
From an old book of local walks I read of a route up the Remarkables, the jagged range of peaks which overshadow Queenstown across the lake, and which rise to nearly 8,000 feet.
Somewhat on impulse I decided to try this route.
I rode 12 miles to the start, hid the bike and set off.
There wasn't a trace of the path, and the first part was tough going, bashing through wild roses, lupin and matagouri, a local shrub renowned for its sharp thorns.
Higher up the vegetation thinned out, but the climb was so steep I didn't care to look down.
I was re-assured however by an old sheep fence which guided me — incredible that anyone could put a fence on such a slope!
Towards the summit I had to cross a couple of snowfields, and there was a final rock-climb to get to the top.
The ascent had taken 4 hours!
I wasn't too happy about getting down the rock-climb, but luckily there were two other fellows doing the same thing so we egged each other on.
Instead of returning by the old fence, however,(which looked much worse from the top), I continued down the main ridge until the final spur, but this was just as steep.
I lost my footing at one point and collected a few bruises.
The sun was also blazing onto this cliff, and I was feeling distinctly battered.
It was a relief to find a stream lower down, to drink and bathe swollen feet.
Once I reached the ski-road I thought I was ‘home and dry’, until turning a bend I was confronted by a bull.
We stood eyeing each other for a few minutes and then to my amazement a jeep came up; the farmer saw my problem and not only gave me a lift past the bull but took me right to the main road where the bike was.
The next day was the boys’ turn for adventures, in fact the real highlight of the whole trip for them.
Canyon Capers — an organised 3-event excursion of jet-boat ride up the rapids of the Shotover River, a bungy jump of 280 feet from a bridge into the Shotover gorge, and white-water rafting back down the river.
They left Queenstown at 7 in the morning and weren't back till 2pm — high as kites!
The bungy jumping was filmed on video; Ned went first and you can see him dangling upside down against a cliff, shouting ‘hi mum!’;
William was next and jumped feet first, so he does a flip half way down; and Matthew looking distinctly queasy on the platform but not wanting to back out after the others had already done it!
Val and I set off with intentions to watch the jumps, but  the Skippers road to the bridge is specifically excluded from motor insurance policies and when we saw it, we understood why; it's a dirt track along a precipice.
No way was I going to drive along that!
We said goodbye to Ned again and headed north from Queenstown back towards Christchurch, staying overnight at Ruataniwha in huts built for the workers at Twizel dam.
In Christchurch we were fortunate in having a house to go to; the Scraggs, friends of the Bakers, were away overseas for 3 weeks and were happy for us to ‘sit’ the house for them.
It was quite near the Bakers too, and had a nice garden with a walnut tree and plum trees.
We paid for our ‘tenancy’ by cleaning and tidying the kitchen, gardening, clearing out the gutters etc.
I wish someone would come and do the same in our house sometime!
The stay in Christchurch gave William a chance to get on with his schoolwork and he did this, with a remarkable strength of purpose.
When the 3 weeks were up and the Scraggs returned, we looked for other accommodation and found a flat in Riccarton, close to Hagley Park and only a mile from the city centre, and we liked it so much we stayed for four weeks having intended two.
We saw a lot of the Bakers, and did day trips; one to the historic railway at Weka Pass; another to Mt.Herbert, the highest point on Banks Peninsula (wonderful views over Lyttleton Harbour) and Pigeon Bay; and several visits to local beaches at Sumner and Taylor's Mistake (a bay named after a captain who thought it was the entrance to Lyttleton Harbour).
Another outing we enjoyed was to Mayell's Chocolate Factory, where for $2 you can tour the factory and eat as many of the products as you want.
Most of them are pretty yukky but the chocolate cookies are superb.
Definitely the place to go after a good bike ride.
I got in touch with the Cathedral choir and was invited to sing with them, though they actually had plenty of quite good tenors and were I think doing me a favour rather than the reverse.
In any case other activities got in the way of getting to the Sunday services, but I managed the rehearsals and some weekday 5pm services.
I also made contact with the local cycle touring group and did several rides with them at weekends and on Tuesday evenings.
It was through them that I heard about the forthcoming penny farthing races at Ferrymead Historic Park, on Waitangi Day (the NZ national day, Feb. 6th).
Rashly volunteering to be a contestant, I went along the previous Saturday to practice.
After numerous attempts I was getting on quite well, managing to get right up onto the bike.
Then suddenly the bike stopped and before I knew what was happening, I'd fallen off.
A horrendous gash to my left elbow, and severe bruising on the hip put me out of the races, and I appreciated the advantages of the safety bike that quickly replaced the penny-farthing!
I was lucky not to break the elbow — a colleague in the cycling club appeared that week with arm in sling, having fallen off exactly as I did.
While we were in Christchurch there was a ‘Festival of Romance’, in which we went to several concerts, exhibitions and lectures, and on the final night the orchestra played a fireworks concert beside the lake in Hagley Park.
Unfortunately the fireworks must have seeded the thick clouds overhead because it absolutely poured with rain, and we got soaked.
The Bakers had to take all our clothes and put them through the tumble drier!
The weather was however kinder for an open-air performance of ‘Midsummer Night's Dream’ in the grounds of Mona Vale Homestead, disturbed only by rumblings from the Grand Trunk railway which runs alongside!
By a remarkable coincidence of timing, a train sounded its horn just as Theseus (Act IV Scene I) proclaimed ‘go bid the huntsmen awake them with their horns’!
We visited Ferrymead on Waitangi Day to see the penny-farthing races and a staged Victorian wedding, and I had a ride on a ‘sociable’, a bike from the 1890's where the riders sit side-by-side sharing one set of handlebars.
We also did some more conventional shared riding by borrowing Chris Parkin's self-built tandem for a week to do trips to New Brighton and along the Summit Road, which winds along the top of the Port Hills giving views over the city in one direction and Lyttleton Harbour in the other.
The Port Hills rise to 1500 ft., in complete contrast to the flatness of the city below.
So we spent seven weeks in Christchurch altogether.
It gave us a break from constant travel, enabled William to get some work done and Ned to find a job, and gave us the chance to get to know one place really well, while enjoying the company of old friends and making new ones.
Our next destination was the West Coast and we stopped first at Arthur's Pass, where we'd been invited to stay in a tramping hut but it was under repair, so we stayed in a backpackers'.
The boys and I climbed Avalanche Peak (5,500 ft), from the top of which you look almost vertically down onto the village.
The path comes straight down too; my legs went wobbly long before reaching the bottom, by evening they had stiffened up, and I could barely walk for the next three days (the boys were alright!).
Luckily I could still ride the bike.
The entrance to the West Coast is very spectacular, down the steep and narrow Otira Gorge, the sides covered in dense bush with the deep red of the flowering rata.
If you stop to admire the view, you have to stay out of reach of the keas, an over-friendly mountain parrot which likes tackling anything shiny on a vehicle.
We went to stay with Ian Williams (Anne's brother) in Moana, a beautifully sited village by Lake Brunner.
During the week the village is deserted; there's no work there, and the ‘permanent’ inhabitants like Ian commute to Greymouth, 30 miles away.
The only shop burned down two years before, but the garage sold basic essentials.
Even the pub had closed by 9.30!
While Ian was at work we did trips to Shantytown (a reconstructed gold-mining town), and Woods Creek, where you can do a walk through old  mining tunnels and realise the incredible harshness of the miner's life, digging drainage systems through solid rock.
To return, we took a ‘short cut’ along unsigned forest roads and got quite lost (roads bore no relationship to what was shown on map!), a bit worrying as we were short on petrol; but we made it.
At the weekend Ian took us out sailing on the lake.
This must have been the only totally calm day of our whole trip so we didn't get far, but it was very relaxing trailing fingers in the water and enjoying the sun (NB water too cold to swim!).
We made better progress in the canoe, which Ian lent us.
From Moana we went down to Hokitika on the Coast, a town which now makes its living largely from the sale of bone and greenstone carving, of high quality and quite reasonable prices.
Then we headed north, through Greymouth and past the famous Punakaiki (Pancake) Rocks to Westport.
We spent a morning going round the Coaltown museum which gave an excellent presentation of the coal-mining industry which used to be the life-blood of the Coast.
We then drove inland, through the Buller Gorge and Murchison and up to St. Arnaud, a village at the head of Lake Rotoiti in the Nelson Lakes National Park, where we stayed at the backpackers', the only accommodation available.
We were just cooking dinner in the kitchen when in walked Audrey Fyfe and Margaret Russell, friends from the Lothian section of the CTC!
They hadn't known we were in NZ and we hadn't known they were.
Yet another amazing coincidence, to meet in such a small place more than 100 miles from the nearest town!
Lake Rotoiti is quite unspoilt and we did a day's walk right round it; had lunch at a hut by the head of the lake and waded through rivers to get to the other track.
It was a fine sunny day but a long walk, about 30 km.
We met Audrey and Margaret on the way, and we saw them again at the next stop, Motueka, 60 miles to the north.
Here we definitely parted company, as they went east to Nelson while we continued north to Marahau.
Marahau is the southern starting point for the Abel Tasman tramping track, the best-known in NZ apart from the Milford, and the boys were keen to do it.
It takes 4 days, following a very beautiful rocky and indented coast.
At low tide you can cross the bays on the beach but at high tide you have to go inland, a lot further round so timing is important — we got it wrong once or twice!
The track is popular and the huts were pretty full, mostly with Germans and Swiss.
At one hut out of 40 occupants we were the only English-speaking!
We had good weather apart from one day of heavy rain.
From Totaranui at the north end of the track you can return to Marahau either by bus, inland, or by boat.
I chose the bus.
The corkscrew mountain road over to Takaka had been recently graded and smoothed, in preparation, I discovered, for a visit by the Queen of the Netherlands.
Further south, the bus has another massive climb, 3,000 feet over the Takaka Hill and the same down.
A challenge to cycle over, maybe for my next visit!
We liked the motor camp at Marahau so much that we stayed two nights, giving us a chance to wash and clean up after the  Abel Tasman.
Then it was on to Nelson, where we had lunch with Chris Williams (mother of Ian, Anne and Claire), looked round the Art Gallery, and continued 35 miles to Pelorus Bridge.
Here there are several short bush walks through stands of original forest, totara, rimu, matai and kahikatea.
Heading now for the Picton Ferry to the North Island, we passed through Havelock and took the scenic (and shorter) route along Queen Charlotte Drive beside the Marlborough Sounds, stopping briefly at Momorangi Beach, which is where Ned, at the age of one, did his ‘Jesus act’ by walking, fully clothed, into the sea!
For our last week in NZ and as a final fling, as it were, we had booked a number of events in the Wellington International Festival.
We got the ferry from Picton but left the car there, the intention being that I would return, take it to Christchurch, and sell it there.
I had been asked to teach a course of lectures at the Teachers’ College, which is the only place in NZ to run a speech therapy course (run jointly with the university); so I was staying on for an extra 4 weeks, while the others (except Ned, who was also staying in Christchurch with his job) headed for Auckland to fly home.
While in Wellington we stayed with the Davidsons in Karori.
It was quite a busy week, going to the concerts and the theatre and visiting friends again, as well as seeing some we hadn't managed to see earlier, such as Maria and Mike who'd just had their second baby, and Robert (Easting) and Christine who had also just had a baby.
The highlight of the Festival for us was really the International Violin Competition, which went on all day for 4 days; 28 competitors played three different programmes, the ‘survivors’ being whittled down at each stage.
It was a mystery to know how the judges made their decisions, they were all so good (indeed, the 28 had been culled from over 100 initial applications).
We ended up knowing certain pieces of music — unaccompanied Bach, Paganini Caprices, the Mozart concertos, and showpieces by Ravel and Bartok — very well indeed!
We also enjoyed a film, NZ-made (and based), called ‘The End of the Golden Weather’, based on a play by Bruce Mason, which had just been released.
Then it was the parting of the ways.
Val with Matthew and William took the train to Auckland — a trip they recommended so much that I did it as well, 5 weeks later — and after staying overnight with the Hartleys they flew out on 23rd March — five and a half months after our arrival.
I took the ferry back to Picton, drove to Christchurch, and moved in to the flat in the university Hall of Residence which had been reserved for me.
This Hall was unusual in being modelled on an Oxbridge college; we had formal dinner 4 nights a week, where everyone including the 120 students had to wear gowns.
Tony Brough (the Principal) and I sat at High Table, but it was very democratic because the students also took it in turns to sit at High Table — and to be invited to the Principal's office for pre-dinner drinks!
Not only did I have to borrow a gown, I was even lent a jacket to go under it!
My  flat had a sitting room, bedroom, bathroom and kitchen, looking over a tree-lined courtyard, and I got 3 meals a day every day including Sunday.
So I spent the 4 weeks living in a style to which I was not accustomed, but found no difficulty in adopting!
My teaching finished just before Easter, and on my way north I went to the national cycle rally, which was held in a motor camp near Blenheim over the long weekend.
We did a series of rides, and a wine trail round the vineyards, and had talks and slideshows in the evenings.
There were only about 50 participants, which meant you got to know most of them.
I had sold the car, without much trouble (surprising, in view of recession and glut of cars on market), and now carried my remaining possessions on the bike.
I'd already posted off loads of stuff, but there was quite an accumulation from 6 months, including the tent and camping gear which was only used, in the event, at the Easter rally.
Thus laden, I rode the 20 miles to Picton and caught the ferry; stayed overnight in Wellington and then took the train to Auckland — no problems in putting the bike aboard; and this journey lived up to expectations and surpassed them; the scenery through the ‘King Country’ in autumn is quite unrivalled, and again looks like a superb area for a cycle tour.
A good ending to an eventful 6 months!
PAC NEWSLETTER
December 1992
Dear Members,
The Club evenings have been well-attended so far, despite a few people receiving the new programme rather late (our apologies!).
We would also like to welcome the following new members:
Betty King
Pauline Brown
Fiona McMaster
It is great to see so many people turn up and we hope this level of support continues during the cold winter evenings ahead.
By way of encouragement we are organising
FIRST
A Mince Pies and Punch Evening on Dec. 17 at 10 Woodhall Terrace, Juniper Green, from 7.30 to 10.00.
Bring a guest.
There will be a charge of £1 per head at the door to cover costs; and
SECOND
A Cakes and Wine Evening on Jan. 7 at the usual meeting place at Balerno High School.
It is important we know how many want to come for each event, so PLEASE CONTACT Val Hawkins (453-3366) or David Cameron (445 1154) or sign the list to be circulated, as soon as possible.
On Dec 10 we shall be doing some quick figure drawings.
Don't be put off if you ‘can't’ draw figures.
How about some Picasso-style pin men?
Or more seriously bring along a book on figure drawing to help you and don't be afraid to hold a pencil at arm's length to measure proportions.
Our ‘ad hoc’ group has had two meetings so far, some folk crawling out of hospital to attend (!).
Anyone else interested?
You don't have to be a patient, just patient!
(Phone Jean Craig 453 3277).
As a result of the article on the PAC in ‘Leisure Painter’ last October, several groups around the country have expressed interest (eg Derby Sketching Club) and we have sold 9 more copies of ‘Art of Midlothian’.
Finally, the Committee wish everyone a Happy Festive Season and a fruitful and healthy New Year!
The Committee
PEDESTRIAN-FRIENDLY AREA
Dear Sir,
Having studied the leaflet on the pedestrian-friendly proposals, Middle Meadows Walk to Princes St., I think the proposals are very good and to be warmly welcomed.
As a cyclist I would like to suggest one or two changes to make the scheme safer also for cyclists.
First, there have for some considerable time been proposals on the table for cycle facilities around Teviot Place.
For instance, a letter to me from the Highways Department mentions a Forrest Road — Lothian St. cycletrack, which it says has had preliminary approval from the Transportation Committee and was ‘shortly to be forwarded to the Department's design and construction staff for detailing the works’.
That was as long ago as 8 May 1991, but nothing has been done.
Is it not reasonable to ask that these proposals be carried out in conjunction with the pedestrian scheme?
Second, in the same area, again there have been proposals for a cyclists’ crossing of the traffic island to link Bristo Place to George Square, which should also become part of the scheme.
Third, the ‘pinch point’ at the entrance to St. Giles St. is a good idea in that it slows traffic intending to turn left off The Mound; however, there is a similar problem at the top of Market St., and a raised paved crossing there, perhaps also with a pedestrian crossing, would be an improvement.
It would also be beneficial to extend the cycle lane right up The Mound to the top of Bank St., for uphill cyclists, even if the lane has to be a narrower one, since this would increase protection against turning traffic.
Finally, the double ‘green man’ phase at the Lawnmarket intersection could incorporate the cycle symbol in the lights, so that cyclists could cross with pedestrians.
In fact, there seems sufficient room at this junction for parallel pedestrian-cycle crossings in all four directions, similar to the type of crossings found in Belgium and Holland.
I think the number of cyclists in this area of the city fully justifies the implementation of these additional measures.
Yours sincerely,
Dear Sir,
I travelled with a friend on P & O from Dover to Ostend on 5th Oct. (2pm. sailing).
When we bought the return tickets (return date left open), we were given a single piece of plastic for the ticket.
We paid £44 each.
In the event, we had to return at separate times and as the friend, Mr. Robin Townsend, was to cross first, he took the plastic ticket and we agreed he would arrange to have the ticket divided, and leave my part at your Ostend office.
He returned on the night sailing on 14th Oct.
When I reached Ostend at midday on 16th there was no ticket but only a message to the effect that I had to buy another one.
Furthermore, I found this had to be paid for in Belgian francs (1400 Fr.), and that sterling was not accepted without conversion.
Since I had, naturally, got rid of all my Belgian francs, I had to convert sterling in your Ostend office at a somewhat unfavourable rate (47.5 Fr to the pound; the day's tourist rate quoted in the newspaper was 49.5, and the previous day I got 50.1 in an Antwerp bank).
The one-way ticket thus cost me £29.50.
Mr. Townsend reported that he had difficulty getting any sense out of the staff at Ostend, and in the end he completed an adjustment voucher given to him by the purser on the ship.
This he has now sent off.
As you can imagine I was pretty upset when I found no ticket on arrival at Ostend.
I cannot understand why we were issued with a single piece of plastic in the first place, unless it was to save you money, since there was certainly no reduction for us.
Having already paid for my return ticket I was cross at having to buy another one, and even more upset at having to pay extra for the one-way ticket and convert sterling at an unfavourable rate.
The episode cast a shadow over what had been, till then, a very pleasant holiday.
I'm sorry to sound somewhat negative but I'm sure you can understand my feelings.
Trying to look positively at the situation, could I suggest that in future, passengers are advised/warned that they will need separate tickets if there is a possibility of them returning separately.
You might consider, too, whether the costs saved by single-ticket issue aren't more than offset by the (unquantifiable but still real) costs of customer aggro., and the costs of administering a refund, as in my case.
I enclose the one-way ticket counterfoil as proof of purchase, and look forward to hearing from you.
Yours faithfully,(Dr.)
Dear Sir,
I am not satisfied with your reply of Oct. 26 to my letter of Oct.20.
You say, ‘I'm sure you'll understand it is impossible to issue all our tickets separately’.
I'm afraid I do not understand.
If I buy a bus ticket for two persons, I am issued separate tickets.
If I buy a rail ticket for two persons, I am issued separate tickets.
My wife and I have travelled P & O from Dover to Oostende and Dover to Zeebrugge many times in the past and we have always been issued with separate tickets.
So how come this is now ‘impossible’?
You say, ‘we will naturally assume that the party is travelling together’.
Why should you assume that?
There must be hundreds of passengers who go out together and return separately.
And then you say, ‘if you had stated that [the passengers were returning separately], you would have been issued two tickets.’
Precisely.
But why should the onus be on me to make this request?
If we had been asked, at the issue desk, whether we wanted to return separately, then I could understand it; but we were NOT ASKED.
As this was the first time this had happened, how could we be expected to know in advance?
In these circumstances I feel it is perfectly reasonable to ask for the full refund of £29.50, not to mention compensation for all the vexation and trouble I have been caused.
If I do not get a satisfactory reply I intend to pursue every possible means to draw the public's attention to this iniquitous state of affairs, which for a big company like P & O is an absolute disgrace.
(Even British Rail manage to issue separate tickets for passengers travelling together.)
I am forwarding copies of this correspondence to the BBC's ‘Watchdog’ programme, as I believe it is in the public interest that these facts are made known.
Yours faithfully,
Sir —
As the cyclist who organised the commuter challenge, I agree with Bernard Povey (letters, 5 July) that the route from Currie to the city centre is downhill for part of the way.
It is also (usually!) down wind.
What made this challenge unusual and original, however, is first the distance, of nearly seven miles; most such events are inner-city only.
Second, the event was held on a day when the University, Art College and other institutions were closed, making traffic density much lighter than usual.
Third, the motorist did NOT (contrry to The Scotsman's report) spend any time looking for a parking space or walking from it to his destination.
The bicycle is not only a fast means of commuting; its progress is consistent, as shown by the locations of the contestants at intervals during the race.
A cyclist knows, to within 2 or 3 minutes, how long a journey will take.
All other modes are dependent on conditions beyond their control, which means generous allowances have to be made to guarantee arriving on time.
As for being ‘an ordinary bloke on an ordinary bike’: the latter is a 12-year-old 5-speed tourer with straight bars.
Its rider, at 52, is even foostier.
But at least the money saved over the years by cycling has enabled me to afford early retirement, and escape the commuter rat-race!
Next year I hope to organise a homeward-bound challenge, uphill and upwind, to Juniper Green.
Perhaps Mr. Povey would like to take part?
Dear Mr.Green,
CYCLE CARRIAGE REGULATIONS
I am very concerned to read about the proposed restrictions and charges, which will from 16 May onwards ban tandems, tricycles and Rann trailers altogether and will make the charges for an ordinary bicycle payable on all journeys no matter how short.
Since tandems etc are at present being carried, and there are no substantial proposed changes to the rolling stock, the ban cannot be justified by space constraints.
The extending of the charges will only encourage cyclists to take their bikes by other means, thus losing revenue for the railways.
A £3 charge for cycle carriage is reasonable if the journey is of some length and I don't object to it on, say, the Edinburgh-London route.
This charge would be acceptable as long as it constitutes not more than, say 10% of the passenger fare.
But to make this charge for all journeys regardless of length is unreasonable and unacceptable.
I and my family are probably typical of many potential rail customers.
We travel (with bikes) by rail as often as possible, because rail is an environmentally-friendly way to travel.
But because of increasing restrictions over the past few years we have now bought a rack to carry the bikes on the back of a car.
Lost revenue for you, and more congestion and pollution for us!
What sense does that make?
The proposed restrictions will be just another nail in the railways’ coffin.
It is ironic that those of us who want to live in an environment-friendly style, and are really ‘on your side’, should have to fight an increasing plethora of restrictions and regulations designed, it seems, to discourage us from using rail at all.
If the current (and proposed) restrictions were eased, and cycles were carried on a ‘first come, first served’ basis, you would find many customers willing to accept this.
Perhaps you could therefore explain why you are turning away potential business.
In view of these comments, I would be grateful if would re-consider the proposed ban and the extension of charges.
Yours sincerely,
(Dr.)
Dear Mr.Bleasdale,
CYCLE CARRIAGE REGULATIONS
I am very concerned to read about the proposed restrictions and charges, which will from 16 May onwards ban tandems, tricycles and Rann trailers altogether and will make the charges for an ordinary bicycle payable on all journeys no matter how short.
Since tandems etc are at present being carried, and there are no substantial proposed changes to the rolling stock, the ban cannot be justified by space constraints.The extending of the charges will only encourage cyclists to take their bikes by other means, thus losing revenue for the railways.
A £3 charge for cycle carriage is reasonable if the journey is of some length and I don't object to it on, say, the Edinburgh-London route.
This charge would be acceptable as long as it constitutes not more than, say 10% of the passenger fare.
But to make this charge for all journeys regardless of length is unreasonable and unacceptable.
I and my family are probably typical of many potential rail customers.
We travel (with bikes) by rail as often as possible, because rail is an environmentally-friendly way to travel.
But because of increasing restrictions over the past few years we have now bought a rack to carry the bikes on the back of a car.
Lost revenue for you, and more congestion and pollution for us!
What sense does that make?
The proposed restrictions will be just another nail in the railways’ coffin.
It is ironic that those of us who want to live in an environment-friendly style, and are really ‘on your side’, should have to fight an increasing plethora of restrictions and regulations designed, it seems, to discourage us from using rail at all.
Although ScotRail faced a barrage of bad publicity over the cycle ban in 1991, and although some of the present restrictions remain irksome, on the whole I personally have had only good experiences when taking a cycle by rail within Scotland.
The station and train staff are always very courteous and helpful; quite often the guard takes the trouble to help me on or off with the bike; and station staff are good at guessing in advance what part of the train will take the bike, hence where to stand on the platform.
Thus, the present arrangements are working reasonably well.
If the current (and proposed) restrictions were eased, and cycles were carried on a ‘first come, first served’ basis, you would find many customers willing to accept this.
Obviously there has to be ‘give and take’ on both sides; for example, I would not expect to be guaranteed a space for the cycle if I turned up without a reservation.
In view of these comments, I would be grateful if would re-consider the proposed ban and the extension of charges.
Dear Mr. Rifkind,
CYCLE CARRIAGE REGULATIONS
I enclose copies of letters I have been obliged to write to the Managers of InterCity, Regional Railways, and ScotRail, and I would be grateful if you could take up these issues with British Rail on my behalf.
I should perhaps add that British Rail, in announcing these changes, claim that they are in line with the Passengers’ Charter (and hence, by implication, with the Citizens’Charter).
The claim is based presumably on the notion that the new charging system will be simpler.
This is false, because some parts of the rail network will still not be imposing the charges, so there will be no gain in ‘simplicity’.
In addition, one cannot see how the imposition of a charge which is the same whether the journey is one station down the line, or from Inverness to Plymouth, can be considered fair and reasonable within the confines of any Charter.
Yours sincerely,
Dear Mr. Rifkind,
RAIL PRIVATISATION
Thank you for your letter of 23 Jan. about carriage of cycles under the proposals for rail privatisation.
There are a number of aspects about this privatisation which are already giving cause for alarm.
One is the likely reduction in rail carriage of freight, and the consequent increase in road haulage.
A number of articles I have read all seem to indicate that rail freight will decline, for example the report that French Railways might sue for damages because of loss of freight revenue (The Times, 30 Jan.).
What sense does it make to put yet more freight onto already congested roads, when the rail network has capacity to spare?
For all sorts of environmental reasons rail should be encouraged to increase its share of freight traffic.
In the same edition of The Times, their motor correspondent describes how he considered making the return journey from Brighton to Birmingham by rail, but found that he could drive for one quarter the cost of a second-class fare, despite being the sole occupant of a largish estate car.
In my experience I have found exactly the same; driving is cheaper than rail, even on one's own and on routes with special rail fares available, like Edinburgh to London.
Of course, if the real environmental costs were taken into account — the costs of road building and maintainance, the costs of oil production (not excluding disasters like Piper Alpha and the Braer), and the pollution attributable to motor vehicles, which is affecting everyone's health far more than, say, passive smoking; not to mention the ruination of vast swathes of countryside through road building — then rail would win hands down.
Is it not therefore time, and isn't privatisation the opportunity, not just to give rail a ‘level playing field’ but to ensure a) that the ‘playing field’takes ALL costs into account including the real environmental ones; and b) that the rail network gets used to its maximum capacity, both for passengers and freight.
To get motorists to switch modes there must be financial incentives, such as a big environmental tax on petrol, the revenue from which goes to improve public transport.
If motorists could see that the tax was being used for that purpose, they would be much happier about paying it
If the taxpayer is providing the infrastructure for roads, which includes the track, maintainance and regulation (= signalling), then it seems only reasonable that we should be providing exactly the same for rail — and allowing operators to run trains just as coach operators run buses.
Obviously this wouldn't be quite enough — the rail rolling stock, for instance, has a higher initial cost (but a longer lifespan).
But surely something of this kind can be worked out.
The privatisation proposals we have seen so far look very inadequate and are likely to decrease rail's share of the market, if anything.
Environmental considerations and costs do not even seem to merit a mention.
I would be grateful to hear your views on these points.
Yours sincerely,
Dear Mr. Rifkind,
RAIL PRIVATISATION
As a cyclist who regularly uses rail to travel longer distances, I am concerned that the proposals to privatise BR should lay down the right conditions for operators from the outset and that any legislation involving the obligations imposed on operators should specifically mention the interests of cyclists.
First, it is essential that cycles be accepted on routes where they are at present accepted — and preferably on all routes.
Second, to do this requires adequate carriage space.
This has been a problem on some of the new designs of Sprinter and at present, it is often quite uncertain whether one can or cannot travel with a cycle on specific journeys, which discourages cyclists from using rail at all .
There must equally be space for wheelchairs and pushchairs, which can be shared with bicycles as in the old guard's vans.
Third, because of the problem of connections, there will need to be an overall national timetable with information on what space is available for cycles.
Fourth, if a cycle reservation fee is required, then it must be valid for the whole journey including changes of operator.
And fifth, if individual stations are sold off, then proper access for cycles (ie ramps not stairs) and parking racks should be included.
There are sound environmental objectives for encouraging cycles on trains — fewer cars on the roads, hence reduction in congestion and pollution.
BR have not been able to very helpful in this direction, largely because of the financial constraints imposed on them.
Let's hope a privatised network can do better.
I would be grateful if you could convey these views to the committee which is considering the legislation.
Yours sincerely,
Dear ,
RA POLICY ON MOUNTAIN BIKES
I've been reading a copy of the above document and I must say I am very disturbed by its proposals, and disappointed at the negative attitude it conveys.
I write as a long-time walker and cyclist and member of the Scottish Cycling Council.
Whatever ramblers may think of mountain bikers (and I will be the first to admit that they can occasionally be annoying), the fact is that they are mostly young people, enjoying the countryside, keeping fit and getting fresh air, which is surely something we all subscribe to.
Would you rather have them roaming the countryside on trail bikes or all-terrain vehicles?
The reasons given in para. 2 for finding bicycles ‘unacceptable’ are quite spwcious.
For example,(a) damage to paths, is also caused by walkers, witness the problems of erosion on many popular tracks;(b) the passage of cyclists requires walkers to step aside (!!)— this and para (c) sound really churlish, I might almost say childish, and give the impression of an RA membership composed entirely of geriatrics — which I'm sure is not the case.
Certainly one can agree with para. 3(b); and a further point here is to promote the use of warning devices viz. a bell or a hooter.
For some strange reason bells have gone out of fashion with the young, but it only needs some careful marketing to bring them back in again (something computer-controlled, with buttons?).
In Scotland we have a Mountain Bike Code of Conduct which is about to be published and distributed on all new sales.
The difficulty for cycling organisations is in communicating with the riders.
They often go out as individuals, and where there are clubs we either do not hear from them, or their existence is short-lived.
I do not think the prohibitions outlined in 3(a) would do any good.
They would be difficult to enforce, and in any case we should be encouraging young people to be active in the countryside.
I hope therefore that your Executive Committee can come up with something more positive than the present draft.
Yours sincerely,
Dear Mr. Rifkind,
EFA (and other issues)
Thank you for your reply of Nov. to my letter.
I don't know if you saw a recent programme on BBC TV called ‘Not Made in Scotland’.
It was about how difficult inventors find it to raise finance to bring their inventions to market, no matter how promising the inventions may be, and how many potentially marketable creations are languishing for lack of capital, since the financial institutions are either not interested or not prepared to take risks with anything which is not already established.
In many countries the government stimulates such enterprises by providing some start-up capital, but the spokesman for our government came across very poorly, with totally negative comments to the effect that if inventors thought they could rely on the government for help, they were wrong.
Obviously one doesn't believe everything one sees in the media, but this programme seemed to capture in a nutshell what is wrong with our economy.
I would have thought that support for marketing new ideas in the difficult early stages is an excellent investment of taxpayers’ money.
Some inventions may not ‘make it’ but others will, thereby creating new jobs and wealth and taking people off the dole queue.
Despite the risks this must be a better investment of public money than the massive R and D devoted to defence, most of which will never give an economic return, and which cannot — or certainly should not — be exported, for strategic reasons — not to mention moral ones.
Yours sincerely,
Dear Mr.Rifkind,
EUROPEAN FIGHTER AIRCRAFT (and related issues)
I read recently that the German Defence Minister, Volker Ruehe, claimed that Britain was ill able to afford the EFA in its proposed form.
Well, perhaps he is right.
Maybe we should listen to our friends when they tell us a few home truths.
When this country is already committed to the highly expensive Trident (which, from changes in global politics, has become a complete white elephant); when the need for the EFA is also, to say the least, questionable, as recognised by all the partners in it and particularly Germany; and when our own government accepts that public spending cuts are essential; then surely the EFA should be the prime target for those cuts.
What alternatives (to the EFA) has the government considered?
I read, for example, that the Russian MiG fighters are built to very high specifications and that the Russians are keen to sell them to raise hard currency.
Would it not be killing two birds with one stone for the West to purchase the remaining MiGs, together with the factory that produces them, and then close it down?
This may sound far-fetched but it is surely worth considering as a co-operative European venture.
After all, it would be highly dangerous if the Russians start selling these aircraft anywhere else.
The EFA should therefore be a prime target for spending cuts, but at the same time, doesn't it make sense for the Government to ‘bite the bullet’ on another contentious issue, viz. the future of the Rosyth dockyard?
Both these decisions would mean job losses, but what is the point of employing people on very expensive projects that are no longer needed?
Eventually these jobs will have to go and it might as well be now.
The whole economy has to be re-built onto a commercial, instead of a defence, footing.
Britain has for years spent more, per capita, on defence than any other European nation.
No wonder our economy is in bad shape, when 60% of all R & D goes on defence-related projects.
The Germans, the Japanese, even the French, have taken a more realistic approach and this has become very obvious.
One has only to return from a trip to the Continent, for example, to see what a shabby and second-rate country Britain has become.
We really do belong in the Second Division but this should not and need not be so.
We need money put into our worn-out Victorian infra-structure of housing, drains and railways, and this would in itself help to get the economy moving.
A third area which should be a target for spending cuts is the new roads programme.
It is already evident that new roads only generate new traffic, and the environmental impact is an absolute disaster.
We have been warned about global warming, but even more urgent is the threat to public health.
Amounts of toxic gases in our cities have already reached unacceptable levels and this is showing up in the big increases in respiratory illnesses.
We just cannot go on like this.
It would make more sense to put some of the money to improving the surfaces of the existing roads, which again compare very unfavourably with our European neighbours.
And the rest of the money should go towards more ecological transport systems.
Finally, the Government's proposals to achieve savings by cutting public sector pay are mean and cowardly.
Cowardly, because the public sector is an easy target, people who can't or won't hit back.
Yet these are the very people our community needs most, the teachers, nurses and health workers.
When have they ever had a reasonable pay deal which puts them level with the private sector?
We can function perfectly well with less defence and fewer new roads but not without the public sector, who have already become pretty demoralised.
Our loyalty as taxpayers should start with them.
Yours sincerely,
Dear Lord Rosebery,
Just before Christmas I had a telephone conversation with your factor, Mr. Findlay.
I had inquired about the ownership of the south bank of the River Almond, along the perimeter of the airport, and about the possibility of making a cycle path along it to link Turnhouse village with Carlowrie, and thus provide a relatively safe route from Edinburgh to West Lothian, basically following the route of the old A9.
As you will appreciate, the airport section is the missing link.
I feel I must reply to some of the points Mr, Findlay made during the course of the conversation (I was told that these were not just his views, ie. he had discussed the matter with you).
To summarise, he felt that (1) a minority of mountain bike riders cause damage to the land and (2) that therefore you would be opposed to the idea of the path —‘the majority must suffer for the misbehaviour of a minority’.
This line of argument is never applied to other modes of transport — and could have interesting results if it were!
Take motoring for example.
Plenty of evidence for the misbehaviour of, in this case, a very substantial minority (have you ever, like me, driven at 30 in a 30mph zone and been constantly overtaken, even glared at for going too slowly?); yet this is never put forward as a reson for stopping road construction.
Or take pedestrians: again there's a minority who step off kerbs without looking, or ‘jay-walk’ among the traffic, but would this be an argument against better facilities for pedestrians?
Quite the opposite — the more they can be segregated from motor traffic, the better.
And the same is true of cycling.
One of the commonest reasons given for why more people don't cycle is ‘danger from other traffic’.
Next time you are stuck in a traffic jam, you might reflect that if facilities were better, some of those motorists would be on bicycles.
Motorists would benefit in other ways too, eg. the difficulty of overtaking a cyclist on narrow streets when something is coming from the opposite direction.
As a man with agricultural interests you will appreciate the importance of living in harmony with nature and of conserving the environment.
Cycling is a totally sustainable form of transport: it creates no pollution, and minimal congestion.
It also does not kill or maim (death and serious injury to cyclists in the absence of motor vehicles being very rare).
In connection with a suggested airport perimeter path, I think you would find that the route would not have the slightest attraction for the ‘misbehaving minority’ on mountain bikes — simply because the terrain is flat.
Motorcycles would be kept out by barriers at each end — this is normal practice for cycle/pedestrian paths.
In this case there is the advantage of no other points of access except at each end.
Cyclists who would use the path are most likely to be for recreation at weekends, as a means of getting from the city to the countryside.
It is also possible that the route would be used on weekdays by small numbers of commuters from Kirkliston, and possibly South Queensferry.
I do agree with Mr. Findlay that the public should be prepared to pay for access to private land.
In this case I have talked to Council officials, and I think they would be prepared to offer to buy the land.
First, however, it needs to be ascertained whether this land is still owned by you, or has become the property of the airport authorities.
I would be grateful if you could take steps to find this out, and let me know.
I hope you will agree that cycling is beneficial to the environment and that trends towards more sustainable forms of transport should be encouraged.
I look forward to hearing from you.
Yours sincerely,
(Dr.)
Dear Sir,
Safe Travel to School
I was interested to see that Currie High School has been included among the schools selected for investigation of safer travel to school.
For some years I have been campaigning to open up the unofficial footpath along the north edge of the field bordering Baberton golf course, which links Muirwood Road to Bloomiehall Park.
This path would enable children from Baberton and Juniper Green to cycle or walk to Currie High School by a shorter and safer route than the present route, which involves negotiating the busy and dangerous Lanark Road (cyclists have to cross it twice).
The problem has been that the field is owned by the builders Wimpey Homes, who refuse to allow the path to be developed unless they are given planning permission to build on at least part of the field.
Currently the District Council are investigating the possibility of a Compulsory Purchase Order.
If the Capital Budget for safe routes could be used to acquire the land, we through ‘Spokes’ and with the involvment of the local community could provide volunteers to do the upgrading of the path.
There are however other measures which would need to be taken in conjunction with the path; in particular, the route to school would continue along Muirwood Road which is at present used as a ‘rat-run’; traffic-calming would be needed.
The benefits of this route could be substantial: about half of the Currie High roll comes from the Baberton and Juniper Green area, and when I carried out a survey, among parents, of travel to the school from these areas last year, a substantial number of families were in favour of opening up this path.
The results of the survey were published in the June 1992 issue of ‘Currie and Balerno News’, and I enclose a copy for your information.
One finding, for instance, was that cyclists can leave home in the morning later, as late as 8.15, and still get to school in good time.
Currie High has an early start to the day (8.35) and most children leave home in the dark on winter mornings; but there is always some daylight by 8.15.
I would be grateful to hear your views on this proposal, and if you could let me know whether we could be of assistance in the project.
Yours sincerely,
Scottish Accident Prevention Council:
REPORT of Council Meeting of 3 Feb. 1993
This was the first meeting of the SAPC to which SCC has been invited to attend, and  went as our representative.
The SAPC consists largely of representatives from Regional and District Councils, plus a few other organisations such as police, motoring associations etc.
Much of the discussion at the meeting was about issues not directly related to cycling, such as the wearing of rear seat belts.
The most relevant items were as follows:
1) A campaign against pavement parking.
A leaflet issued by the Pedestrians Association outlines what actions to take against offenders, including: complain to police, giving relevant details; complain to local Council; put stickers on offending vehicles (Peter has a copy of the leaflet — and a sheet of stickers!)
2) A cycling awareness programme promoted by RoSPA, called ‘Right Track’— aimed at educating youngsters, but with the emphasis on them working out solutions to problem situations (eg turning right) themselves instead of the trad cycle proficiency ‘do it like this’ approach.
3) An investigation of the safety aspects of nudge bars — the ‘designer’ bars seen on the front of some trendy 4WD vehicles.
Council members mostly agreed they are a hazard, and Peter pointed out that if the car that hit him on a roundabout had been fitted with them, he wouldn't be here now.
Peter has a 1-page info sheet.
4) The joint RoSPA/SAPC Newsletter, issue 10, Winter 1992 has a headline ‘Scotland's Health — a Challenge to Us All’.
The Scottish Office White Paper includes as priority areas: Coronary Heart Disease, Cancers, and Road Accidents (among others).
For the latter, the aim is to reduce casualties by one third from 1981-85 levels by the year 2000.
The BMA has already pinpointed cycling as a way of reducing Heart Disease and cancer, so we clearly have grounds for promoting better facilities for cycling for health reasons and not just to reduce accidents.
Come on Scottish Office, let's see if you mean business!
5) The same issue contains info on the 1991 Road Traffic Act.
It ‘clears the way for camera technology to be used in detecting speeding and red light offences.
It also allows police to seize vehicles used to commit offences under the 1988 Act, such as manslaughter or furious and wanton driving.
Penalties have also been revised and those who cause death by dangerous driving or driving under the influence face up to 10 years in prison, an unlimited fine and a minimum 2 years’ disqualification.’
In the light of this we should monitor news reports of lenient sentencing for driving offences — such as the one in the Scotsman (5th?
Dec.) in which a joyrider driving at 90mph killed a 12-year-old and was fined £250.
A number of conferences and seminars are being organised.
The Annual Conference was held on 11 March — Peter considered going but the one-day rate, at £50 plus, seemed too expensive to warrant it.
Dear Editor,
Along with other members of my family I have been able to take a cycle on trains from Edinburgh to Stirling or Dunblane.
For about £6 each (off-peak day return) we have enjoyed days out in the Trossachs, Callender etc.
All this will cease after May 16th, thanks to new regulations to be introduced by ScotRail, who propose to charge £3 each way for a cycle, no matter how short the journey.
So the cycle will cost as much as the passenger!
If however we put the bikes on the car, the return journey to Dunblane will cost us about £5 in petrol, plus say 50p. to cover other marginal costs.
Hundreds of others in the same position, will doubtless make the same decision to switch from rail to car.
ScotRail must indeed be a wealthy company, if they can afford to turn away customers like us.
Yours sincerely,
SPOKES PATHWAY VOLUNTEERS
PROJECTS PREVIOUSLY UNDERTAKEN
1.
DONKEY LANE, CURRIE, EDINBURGH
Donkey Lane is a path, about 600 m. in length, which links the residential area of Currie with a minor road leading to Hermiston and the campus of Heriot Watt University.
The path was upgraded by Spokes volunteers in May 1991.
Before the upgrading it was a muddy, virtually impassable track.
The improvements were funded by Edinburgh District Council and the Edinburgh Green Belt Trust, and the work carried out with the co-operation of Lothian Regional Council and Sustrans.
We were also grateful to SCP and Lothian Conservation Volunteers for the loan of hand tools.
As the track is used by horses, members of the local branch of the British Horse Society were also involved.
The upgrading has been very popular locally, and the path is now well used by local residents especially to exercise dogs; it is used by cyclists, esp.
by students for access from lodgings in Currie to the University; and by local horse riders.
The project has been submitted by Sustrans for an RICS award.
2.
UNION CANAL TOWPATH
Volunteers are currently working on the upgrading of parts of the Union Canal towpath in the area of Hermiston, near Edinburgh.
As with Donkey Lane, the improvements will benefit different groups of users.
3.
PROJECTS IN PREPARATION
If the upgrading of the canal towpath is successful, we hope to work on further sections of the Union Canal to provide a continuous link of servicable footpath.
We shall be co-operating with Lothian Regional Council, who already are preparing schemes for upgrading sections of towpath close to Edinburgh.
A further project in preparation is the bank of the River Almond in the vicinity of Edinburgh Airport.
A one-mile link from Boathouse Bridge to the East Coast Railway bridge will connect with minor roads to provide routes from the centre of Edinburgh to the lanes of West Lothian and the Forth Road Bridge.
The Regional Council have already offered a contribution to fund this project.
SCOTTISH CYCLING COUNCIL
APPLICATION for GRANT: Section 6 (Proposals)
The Scottish Cycling Council promotes recreational cycling and cycle touring.
As such, we are interested in participation rather than competition.
Cycling, along with walking is already enjoyed by many, but could have a much greater potential if facilities were better.
The S.C.C. campaigns to achieve this.
Cycling is the ideal form of ‘green tourism’, since it brings people into the countryside to enjoy it (thus also bringing economic benefits to rural communities).
Unlike the motor car, cycling creates no congestion and no pollution and it provides the rider with essential healthy exercise.
It is a very cheap form of outdoor activity which can be (and is) enjoyed by anyone, irrespective of sex, age and class.
Scotland has great potential for an increase in cycling for recreation and touring.
Millions of cycles are sold every year, but usage is still fairly low.
An increase will not be achieved without hard campaigning, particularly in view of the present government's policies with regard to road-building (high priority) and investment in public transport (low).
It will be obvious from the description of the Council's activities (below) that word-processing facilities are essential.
Our Secretary at present has to manage with an ancient typewriter.
However, in purchasing the hard- and soft-ware we feel it is important to seek more than just a word-processor, because in future, publicity will play a major role.
This requires the production of leaflets and other publicity material, eg. to accompany cycle events (such as the popular annual Edinburgh — St.Andrews ride, the ‘Tour de Forth’, and charity rides).
A DTP software package, and the associated hardware, will enable us to produce such material cheaply and quickly.
The Council's activities include:
1.
Monitoring of planning applications in all the Regions of Scotland, especially those relating to roads, transport, parking etc, and putting in amendments and objections where needed;
2.
Campaigning for carriage of cycles on public transport (we don't like people having to use cars to get their bikes into the countryside!);
3.
Liaising with the transport committees of Regional and District Councils, the Forestry Commission etc. to further the interests of cycling, especially in seeking financial committments and the implementation of local routes;
4.
Supporting other organisations working for cycling interests, and exchanging information with them, eg. APRS, SYHA, SRoW and Sustrans;
5.
Production and distribution of publicity material (eg at bike events);
6.
Distribution of information to Council members and the wider membership.
The S.C.C. operates mainly on a grant from the CTC, but as this amounts to only £600 per annum our resources are extremely limited.
A word-processing and DTP package is urgently needed and we appeal to SNH for the maximum 60% grant to help us acquire it.
Dear ,
ENJOYING THE OUTDOORS
The Scottish Cycling Council welcomes the recent publication of SNH's countryside access report as an opportunity to make new initiatives in the countryside.
The Report itself is, as it says, largely a description of the present situation; its value is therefore the opportunity it offers for new proposals to come forward.
With landowners and farmers facing big changes in land use, and the taxpayer faced with increasing levels of agricultural subsidies of all kinds; and with urban communities having the leisure to enjoy the countryside to a much greater degree, now is surely the time to see if common interest can be pursued.
Although writing on behalf of cycling interests, these do coincide to an extent with the interests of walkers and horse riders.
We all want quiet, off-road and preferably long-distance routes, and many of us want simple self-catering accommodation.
I have recently been in New Zealand and I think Scotland could benefit from the kind of facilities they have.
I was very impressed by the network of long-distance tracks (’ trails’), which are well-maintained despite, in some cases very heavy levels of use and in other cases very low levels.
New Zealand has a series of National Parks and most of the path maintainance is done by a nationally-funded body, the Department of Conservation.
New Zealand goes to the expense of maintainance because it takes tourism seriously.
If the tracks are there, visitors will find out about them and use them.
The huts we stayed in were full of tourists from every corner of the globe.
The scene for long-distance tracks in Scotland is, by contrast, pretty depressing.
The West Highland Way crosses vast tracts with no accommodation or other facilities; the Southern Upland Way is a dreary slog over bleak, windswept and desolate hilltops, likely to attract only those who do it ‘because it's there’.
Because of the lack of long-distance tracks, many keen walkers are reduced to ‘bagging Munro's’ and other such pointless pursuits (I speak as a keen walker as well as cyclist!).
Cyclists fare a bit better, thanks mainly to Sustrans.
The paths they have built benefit the local communites as well as the users themselves.
The Glasgow to Killin route, for example, is excellent because it follows valleys, it is scenic and sheltered, and it passes towns and villages where food, drink and accommodation are available.
Parts of this route have deservedly become very popular.
In view of the potential benefits to be gained by local communities from providing food and accommodation and other requirements, one might expect every small town and village throughout rural Scotland to be demanding a long-distance recreational route on their doorstep.
Tourists create jobs and keep these communities viable.
But Scotland has a long way to go before the symbiosis of locals and visitors becomes a reality.
Apart from the absence of tracks, there are big gaps in the accommodation market.
What many people need is simple self-catering cheap overnight stays, now satisfied in a few places by Youth Hostels but in need of a much more extensive network.
New Zealand has a network of ‘backpackers’— small hostels, independently run, with a variety of sleeping facilities (dormitory, family room, double room etc), and costing about £5 per person per night.
Many people do not want the excessive comforts (and expense) of bed/breakfast every night, especially young people.
Youth Hostels are not as popular as they might be because the type of accommodation is limited, the hostels are over-regulated and wardens aren't given enough scope for private enterprise.
Scotland could have NZ-type backpackers in towns and villages, and in more remote areas farmers could convert barns, stables etc for accommodation.
The decline in revenue from traditional farming means that farmers must diversify.
Farming subsidies at present are running at £1m. per day.
This is taxpayers’ money and it seems only reasonable that the public should get some recompense in the form of better access.
The subsidies could in fact be used for converting barns etc for accommodation, and for path building and maintainance.
Probably landowners’ main fears, and their reluctance to allow better access, are damage to stock, litter, etc from the minority of the public who don't know better.
Again, however, is there any reason why rangers or wardens couldn't be employed, using subsidy money, to clean up litter and maintain the countryside in good order?
This would have the added advantage of bringing some employment to rural areas.
One great advantage that Scotland has over New Zealand is that nearly every small town and village is rich in history.
Walkers and cyclists can be attracted to long-distance tracks by the chance to discover and learn about the history of the local communities they pass through.
Local information offices, open at times when visitors are around, could supply this, along with information about local accommodation.
Most recreational cycling at present takes place on public roads.
Access to the countryside is therefore a problem only where potential routes are broken; for example there could be a very attractive circular route based from Braemar, proceeding west up the Dee valley to Bridge of Dee and then east along the north side of the valley to return to Braemar, but the final link is blocked by the Mar Estate.
On public roads the real problem is the amount of motor traffic.
Cycling would become far more attractive and have greater tourist potential if car movements were restricted, or alternative segregated facilities are built.
One example of good practice is the road around Loch Katrine, which is open to cyclists but restricted to local use for vehicular traffic.
In summary, the proposals are:
1) to provide a network of long-distance tracks for walkers, cyclists and equestrians, concentrating on scenic, sheltered and traffic-free routes;
2) local communities to provide cheap self-catering overnight accommodation (’ backpackers’);
3) landowners and farmers to use farm subsidies to provide and maintain a network of paths, to convert buildings for overnight accommodation, and to employ wardens to care for the countryside;
4) local economies to benefit from symbiotic relationship with un-motorised visitors (’ green tourism’).
Yours sincerely,
Dear SPOKES PATHWAY VOLUNTEERS
Volunteers from Spokes have now contributed to a number of path-building projects, and for most of these I have acted as the co-ordinator.
I feel it is now time to put these arrangements on a slightly more formal basis, in particular because we might thus be eligible to affiliate to SCP, and get a start-up grant from them, and possibly from other bodies, to equip ourselves with tools.
This would save us having to keep borrowing from LCV and SCP for each project.
I chose the name above, using path- rather than cycle- in the title because a) our paths are used by others and b) we are more likely to get grants if we are not cycle specific.
I have already applied to SCP for affiliation (June 1993) and am awaiting a reply.
They might contact one of you to find out more about Spokes.
I would like SPV to be run as a group like the other Spokes groups, with a minimum of three members.
Rosemary has said she is willing to be one, and I'd be grateful if you could suggest names for others.
Projects undertaken so far include: Pilton Path; Pilton Path clean-up; Donkey Lane; Blackridge landscaping; Union Canal towpath; Barnton Golf Course.
Dear Secretary,
Invoice Ref. 93/067
I am in receipt of your invoice for membership fees for 1993.
For the past 4 years we have paid a subscription of £12 per annum and unless we can continue at this rate, we shall have to consider whether we wish to remain a member.
Like many organisations we have to review our costs very carefully and I doubt the increase from £12 to £25 could be approved.
We have not had a great deal of communication from you over the past two years, and it is questionable whether we are of use to you, and you to us.
Please let me know therefore whether you would like us to remain as a member, at the old rate.
Yours sincerely,
(Treasurer)
Dear
UNION CANAL TOWPATH
I am writing to all Spokes members who offered, on their membership form, to help with cycleroute construction.
We are planning a major project to upgrade parts of the Union Canal towpath over the weekends of June 12 — 13th and June 19 — 20th, with possibly some mid-week work in between.The aim is to produce a cyclable path right through from Calders Crescent (where the canal begins again, west of Wester Hailes) to Ratho.
This is a beautiful section of the canal and will make an excellent route out of town to the south-west, as well as providing cycle access to Heriot-Watt campus.
(The Regional Council already propose the upgrading of the towpath EAST of Wester Hailes, and of the short section from Calders Cres. to the aqueduct over the new city bypass, so eventually we shall have an almost continuous route to/from the city centre).
Some parts of the towpath are already in a cyclable condition; we shall be working on the parts which are not — a total distance of about one mile, so we need plenty of volunteers!
The work will involve removing the overgrowth of grass and then laying and rolling a whindust surface to a width of one metre.
The meeting point is where Hermiston House Road crosses the canal, just off the A71 (Calders Road).
Hermiston House Rd. is almost opposite the gates to Hermiston Walk, which leads to Heriot-Watt campus.
There is limited car parking available.
LRT bus no. 9, or any bus along the A71, eg to Mid-Calder, Livingston, passes the end of Hermiston House Road; alternatively, get the ‘bus and alight where it leaves the A71 at Hermiston.
Starting time each day is 9.30 am.
You will need to bring stout shoes and a packed lunch (we hope to provide tea/coffee).
Tools such as a spade, mattock and wheelbarrow would be very useful if you have them.
Please indicate, below, which day(s) you will be available to help; either tear off the slip and return it to me, or phone me on (031) 453-3366.
Look forward to seeing you!
Dear Cllr.
Tulley, TWEED CYCLEWAY
A letter from the Director of Planning dated 3 Mar 1993 mentions your interest in a leaflet about the Tweed Cycleway.
I think it would be a very good idea for the leaflet to be written by a cyclist, and I would be interested in doing something myself.
(I am Treasurer of the Scottish Cycling Council (the Scottish ‘arm’ of the CTC), and I do quite a bit of cycling for leisure, including much of the Borders Region which is, in many ways, ideal for cycling).
I am not quite sure what is meant by a ‘consolidated description of the route’, as mentioned in the letter.
I would quite like to include historical information about many of the places of interest along the route, but that would be a lot of work for £75 and I imagine the Council already has plenty of material which could be easily incorporated.
What I have in mind then is a description of the route from a cyclist's point of view; distances, gradients, junctions; alternative routes, eg longer loops for the more adventurous; cafes, pubs, tearooms, and public places with benches (because cyclists often like to ‘eat their piece’ out in the open); some illustrations of landscapes (these could either be line drawings based on sketches, or photographs); and perhaps something on the history of the place-names, which is of interest to many cyclists (eg where did Biggar get its name?).
There could also be a brief introduction on which direction to do the route; and the eventual booklet should include information on how to get back (? by public transport) to the starting point — this can, I imagine, be supplied by the Council.
Please let me know whether you think this is what you have in mind.
I think it could make a very interesting project.
The booklet would be too big to be given away, but could be available in tourist offices etc for a reasonable price.
The Cycling Council badly needs some income, and I suggest that we might be given a percentage of the revenue, say 20%, in addition to the initial £75.
Yours sincerely,
TWEED CYCLEWAY OPENING
The afternoon of Wednesday 24 Feb. saw the official opening of the Tweed Cycleway, which was held in Galashiels.
The venue was the carpark of the College of Textiles, but as this was not a particularly photogenic location we moved down to the river, a short distance away.
There were about a dozen ‘ordinary’ cyclists and a contingent from ‘Neatwork’at Coldstream, who brought a couple of recumbents, a duette (rickshaw-type wheelchair), and a bike with a two-seater kiddy-trailer, fully occupied.
An official from the Region had a post with a Cycleway sign attached; this was duly knocked into the ground beside the river for the ‘photo opportunity’ and then removed, as we were nowhere near the actual Cycleway route.
Dear ,
Planning Application 0747/93
With reference to the application to erect 2 retail units at the Bus Depot, Whitburn Road, Bathgate, we would be grateful if the development could include racks for cycle parking.
The racks could be of the usual ‘Sheffield’ type.
Please let me know if there are any problems with this.
Yours sincerely,
(Planning/Rights Officer)
COUNCIL TAX
You will probably be aware already that the houses numbered 7 to 16 in Woodhall Terrace have been put into Band G for the purpose of assessing the Council Tax, and that for Edinburgh District this means a tax of £1,217 per year — a very big increase on a two-person poll tax for 1992.
There may be transitional relief, but the maximum for this band is £169, and we are told the maximum is unlikely to be paid.
Band G is for properties assessed at upwards of £106,000, and according to a recent information leaflet the assessment is based on 1991 values.
It may be correct that these properties would fall into this Band at 1993 values, but values have risen over the past two years (despite national trends in house prices).
One of these houses (No.9) was in fact put on the market in 1991, for an upset price of £90,000, and was valued at £100,000 — considerably less than £106,000.
I think therefore that we have grounds to appeal against the banding.
It is also relevant to point out that the upper limit for Band G is £250,000, and it is hardly fair to bracket our properties with properties of that kind of value.
Since we are borderline between Bands F and G, we should be given the benefit of the doubt.
If the properties were placed in the next lower band, F, the Council Tax reduces to £1,085.
With transitional relief we might reduce this below £1,000.
We are not allowed to appeal until April.
If only one household appeals this may not carry much weight, but if several of us do, and give similar grounds for the appeal, then we stand a better chance of succeeding.
Please let me know if you support this suggestion