

GREY FRIARS
Martin walked slowly down the street, pausing at each shop in turn to flash his beat lamp at the doors and windows.
He glanced nervously about him but it was 2. a.m. and Dobson and the other yobs had long gone.
He didn't have to worry about them now — not for the rest of that night as least.
It was just as well.
He had other worries, other fears.
He raised his hand to wipe away the trickle of sweat that ran over the soft stubble on his cheek.
He hadn't shaved before coming on duty but then he didn't have to shave every day yet.
Martin's steps grew slower, more hesitant as he passed the bank, the post office, the chemist and, finally, the art shop.
He lingered to shine his lamp at the half-finished water colour in the window before turning at last into the alleyway leading to the churchyard.
The light from the street didn't penetrate there and he hurriedly switched on his lamp.
A few more steps and he was confronted by the high rusting gates that guarded the church and the graves beyond.
The torchlight flickered over gilt lettering at the top of the gate and the two words ‘GREY FRIARS’ glinted briefly before disappearing into the darkness again.
Martin was afraid of the churchyard but he knew he had to go inside.
The shops he had just examined stretched all the way back to the churchyard wall and their rear windows, set grimly amongst the headstones and mausoleums, had to be checked too.
Maybe they're right, all of them, thought Martin.
Maybe I'm just not cut out to be a policeman.
The Inspector had seen him earlier that night and made it plain what he thought of him.
His cheeks burned as he remembered the older man's words.
‘Look son, you'll have to act a bit more positively.
Be a bit firmer with the neds or they'll walk all over you.
Dobson and his mob just laughed you off the street tonight and we can't afford that.’
It was true of course.
Dobson was an expert at knowing just how far he could go without actually breaking the law.
Martin had confronted him — and lost.
It was Dobson and his gang who were left on the street, laughing, while he had to slink shamefully away.
That wouldn't have happened to McEllhoney, the big Glaswegian who worked the next beat to his.
McEllhoney would have know how to handle Dobson.
Was that what the Inspector wanted?
Did he want him to be more like McEllhoney?
‘No!
Not ever!’, thought Martin fiercely.
No matter what happened he would never let himself become like the brutal, foul-mouthed McEllhoney.
Martin's hands shook as he opened the heavy gate and relocked it behind him.
The graveyard was in total darkness.
He took a few steps forward and tripped over a heavy iron grill set over one of the graves to protect it from the resurrectionists who had once supplied Dr Knox's anatomy classes.
The torches beam picked out a notice telling of the Covenanters who had been imprisoned there three hundred and fifty years before and another commemorating the once famous Scots buried under the damp, heavy earth.
Martin walked carefully along a narrow path that would tortuously between ancient graves and heavy, ornate  tombstones until he came to the first of the family plots.
It was a large walled-in structure containing several graves and a plaque stating that underneath were deposited the remains of Mary, who had been the daughter of somebody and the wife of someone else.
The rear window of one of the shops looked out over poor Mary's deposited remains and Martin had to go in through the narrow entrance to flash his lamp on it.
He did this quickly and rushed out again.
His heart thumped painfully and his hands began to shake again causing the light from the beat lamp to flicker wildly over the gravestones.
Shadows leapt and danced away from the light as he fought to steady himself.
Christ!
What was that!
One of the shadows hadn't disappeared when the light touched it.
It remained for a moment, a definite form, before moving off at a half-crouched, shambling run to hide behind one of the gravestones.
Martin pressed himself back into the burial plot, his fear of it temporarily forgotten in the face of this new terror.
There it was again, moving from grave to grave in the moonlight.
Martin thought about remaining still, about hiding until it had gone.
But no.
That wasn't right.
He would have to do something.
‘Hey!
Hey you!’, he yelled.
The figure stopped, turned towards, him and snarled something before moving off again at the same queer, shambling gait.
Martin moved after it, slowly at first, but then faster and faster until he was running full tilt after the intruder.
He stumbled over graves  and bumped into headstones — but he didn't stop.
The figure was always just ahead of him, crouched low but quick and stealthy.
It hid for a moment  behind a large ,domed mausoleum before running past the gates of the Covenanter's prison and through the archway leading to the rear of the graveyard.
He was just behind it now and could hear its heavy, throaty breathing, almost a growling sound, as it reached the back wall of the churchyard.
The figure leapt for the top of the wall and was almost over when Martin jumped, grabbed its leg and pulled down as hard as he could.
It was only then that he became aware of the stench of fetid breath as the figure drew its lips back over yellowing teeth to snarl at him again; only then that he saw raging, bloodshot eyes glaring out at him from the hair covered face.
The figure leaned over, struck once and Martin felt his face tear as long, jagged finger nails ripped into him.
He fell back at once and lay quietly on the damp earth staring up at the now empty wall as his blood soaked into and congealed darkly upon the white of his shirt.
McEllhoney found him still lying there more than two hours later.
Later still, at the nearby hospital where they had taken Martin, the Inspector and his sergeant talked in muted tones in the darkened corridor outside the casualty department.
‘It doesn't make much sense to me, Tom.’
said the Inspector.
‘He says a dark shape with glaring eyes, a hairy face and yellow teeth was prowling about inside Grey Friars at half-past three in the morning.
I mean, Christ!
It just doesn't make sense.’
‘Probably one of the Grassmarket winos too pissed to find his way home,’ sneered McEllhoney.
He was leaning against the casualty department door leering at the nurse  who was dabbing gently at the three parallel scratches on Martin's face.
‘I suppose he might be right, Tom’, said the Inspector.
‘I honestly don't know what to do about Martin.
I just don't think he's going to make the grade.’
‘Give him time, sir.
He's not nineteen yet, he'll learn.’
A young Asian doctor, small and brisk, came out of the casualty department.
‘Well now, I think he'll be all right,’ he said.
‘Just a mild case of shock.
I've given him an  anti-tetanus injection and told him not to shave over those scratches for the next few days.’
‘Thanks doctor,’ said the Inspector.
‘We'll take him home now.
His digs are quite near here.’
‘He has no family in Edinburgh then?’
‘No,’ said the sergeant.
‘But his girl friend will probably see to him all right.
She's a nice lass.’
‘Aye.
Very nice,’ said McEllhoney loudly.
‘She's got a great wee figure — face like a tram smash though.’
The doctor looked up, startled, and the Inspector his face reddening, turned to the sergeant.
‘Get — him — out — of — here,’ he hissed.
‘I'll see Martin home myself.’
It took Martin a long time to get to sleep and even when he did he turned and twisted in feverish attempts to escape the nightmarish pursuit of red, glaring eyes and enormous yellow teeth.
He was still in bed in the late afternoon when Mary called in to see him.
Mary was seventeen and plain.
Martin didn't mind that.
He liked her quietness, her gentleness and he thought he would probably marry her one day.
‘Oh, Martin, your poor face,’ said Mary.
She leaned over to stroke the three livid scratches on his cheek but he grabbed her wrist before she could touch him.
‘Hey, steady on,’ she said.
‘Sorry,’ mumbled Martin.
‘You don't look well.
I'll get you a cup of tea.’
Martin watched her as she moved quietly around the room.
McEllhoney's right, he thought.
She has got a great wee figure.
Mary laughed as Martin pulled her down on the bed beside him.
‘On no you don't,’ she cried, pushing him away.
‘No sex in the afternoon.
This is Edinburgh after all.’
Martin growled and pulled her down again.
This time she didn't resist.
They had made love before of course, a gentle, tentative, lovemaking that never came to fruition.
He had kissed and fondled her and she had responded as well as she could but they had both been too aware of each others inexperience and uncertainty to achieve fulfilment.
This time it was different.
Mary felt at once his sureness, his determination, his new strength.
She moaned softly as he caressed her and again Martin growled.
Mary didn't resist the first time — didn't resist when he kissed her and she felt the strange, hard stubble on his face, nor when he moved on her, not even when he hurt  her.
The first time she was glad.
But then Martin grabbed at her again, and again, and again.
And now Mary was frightened.
She sobbed and fought and screamed but Martin pinned her down with his new strength.
At last she stopped struggling and lay beneath him, white and shaking.
‘Oh, Martin, Martin,’ she whispered.
And somewhere, far away, the old Martin heard her.
The glare left his eyes and he looked down at her uncomprehendingly.
‘Mary?
Oh my God, Mary!
I'm sorry.
I'm so sorry!’
Martin's remorse was genuine enough — Mary could see that.
It was tinged with panic too for finally he could only babble again and again how sorry he was.
In the end it was Mary who had to calm Martin down, reassure him and promise to come back the next day.
Martin's remorse did not last long.
Almost as soon as Mary had gone he began to rationalise his behaviour.
After all, she had consented, or at least not resisted, on the first occasion.
So what if he had lost control a bit?
She hadn't really been hurt had she?
As he made his way to work, Martin felt strangely elated and filled with the need to tell someone about his new experience.
He told McEllhoney.
He used the same foul language and coarse expressions the big Glaswegian would have used and, of course, McEllhoney laughed and made the expected ribald comment.
But the big man's laughter was uneasy and he muttered, ‘Aye well, take it easy, eh,’ before giving Martin an odd look and returning to his own beat.
Martin was deflated by McEllhoney's lack of response and the feeling of elation soon left him.
He wondered what on earth had made him talk like that and why had he told McEllhoney of all people?
His face flushed as he  remembered what he had said about Mary.
Poor Mary.
Wasn't it enough that he had violated her?
Did he have to boast about it too?
Martin's remorse was real, his guilt admitted as he turned away to check his beat.
The moon came out, full and white, flooding him with its hard brightness.
His steps grew brisker and he punched and thumped at shop doors, crashed padlocks against their cold chains and hanged his hands on the windows.
A stray cat dashed out in front of him and stopped, paws splayed out, eyes wide with fear and fur raised in terror.
He kicked out at it viciously and it rolled, screeching and spitting into the roadway.
Martin laughed and walked on.
McEllhoney walked the adjoining beat in silence feeling strangely uneasy about his conversation with Martin.
The big man wasn't given to introspection and he certainly wasn't known for his sensitivity but even he was aware that the conversation had somehow been wrong, that it shouldn't have taken place, not with Martin.
He turned a corner deep in thought and saw Dobson and his mob spread out across the pavement.
McEllhoney was surprised, unprepared for the confrontation and Dobson sensed it at once.
Dobson, ugly and cretinous, was compensated by a sense of animal cunning that could smell out weakness in others and advantage to himself.
And Dobson played his advantages ruthlessly and to the full.
McEllhoney found himself fighting — not just Dobson but four or five others too.
Fists struck, heads butted, feet flew and he went down, still fighting but hurt now and aware of real danger.
Suddenly there was noise.
It rose above the animal grunts of Dobson, the curses of the yobs, the panting of McEllhoney and hung — long, howling and furious in the night.
McEllhoney looked up and saw Martin.
Martin charging down on Dobson; Martin, eyes glaring and lips drawn back in a feral snarl; Martin, arm raised and baton coming down again and again on Dobson's head; Martin, growling savagely at the yobs, daring them to interfere; Martin, turing angrily as the sergeant pulled the baton from his hand; finally, Martin, white and shaking, as he looked down disbelievingly at the unconscious Dobson.
Later, the Inspector's anger raged around the police station, buffeting Martin again and again.
‘and I'll tell you something else,’ he shouted.
‘If Dobson had been any more seriously injured you'd have found yourself in a cell by now.’
‘But sir, you told me to be a bit firmer with him,’ said Martin.
‘Christ Almighty!
Firmer, yes!
More assertive, yes!
But I didn't tell you to beat his bloody brains out did I?’
He leaned forward and looked into Martin's face.
‘It's all a matter of judgement, son.
Maybe you'll learn and maybe you'll not but don't let's have any more incidents like tonight's.
All right?’
‘Yes sir,’ said Martin.
Martin was sorry about Dobson.
He hadn't meant to lose control like that and didn't really know why he had.
That was  the frightening part, losing control, just as he had with Mary, not being able to do anything about it — not knowing when it would happen again.
The moon came out as Martin entered the graveyard.
He switched off his lamp to watch the cold, silver light settle over the church and headstones.
It was strange but he wasn't afraid of the place any more.
A feeling of elation came over him, the same feeling he'd had when Mary had left.
Poor Mary.
He was glad she was coming back tomorrow but he didn't think he'd marry her now.
Martin watched, almost idly, as the figure slipped quickly between two gravestones not ten yards ahead of him.
It moved in the same half — crouched, shambling run as it had the night before, quietly, stealthily, purposefully.
Martin had no fear of it now.
He touched his torn face and his lips drew back in a snarl.
The figure looked back saw Martin and began to move more quickly between the graves and mausoleums.
Martin didn't shout this time.
He drew his baton and moved after it, faster, faster and faster still.
He didn't stumble this time.
He was sure, strong, confident — and enraged.
The rear wall of the churchyard loomed ahead of the figure and it sprang for the top.
Martin leapt after it, clawing his way up the face of an ancient tombstone set close against the wall.
He fought his way upwards, fingernails tearing at the ornate carvings, hands reaching to grasp the top.
The tombstone was surmounted by a sculptured angel, its wings spread, arms folded in repose, face calm and at peace, Martin grasped it, pulled himself forward and glared at his adversary on the wall.
The figure's breathing was harsh and uneven now and it seemed  incapable of further movement.
Martin leaned forward, his face touching that of the angel's, as he raised his arm to strike.
It was then that he remembered Dobson, then that he thought of Mary.
Twice more he drew back his arm and twice more failed to strike.
At last a long despairing cry rose from the back of his throat and screamed shatteringly across the churchyard as he threw the baton away and clung sobbing to the angel.
He did not feel the movement below him as the tombstone, old and crumbling, began to settle in the ever — soft earth, failed to sense the gentle, swaying motion as it broke away from its anchorage on the wall.
Confusion, despair, futility and  hopelessness reached out from the darkest corners of Martin's mind to engulf and possess him utterly.
He felt nothing as the angel bore him to the grave below, no pain as the solid granite drove shattered ribs deep into his lungs.
He looked up into the eyes of the figure on the wall and saw pain, and sorrow and pity there.
His throat filled with blood, he coughed once — and died.
They buried Martin in a secluded plot in the churchyard in which he had died.
Mary watched in tearless silence as the coffin was lowered into the damp earth.
She had seen Martin earlier that day in a quiet room in the undertakers where she had touched his soft, gentle face for the last time.
The scratches on his cheek had healed quickly and he had died unblemished.
Mary shivered and turned away as the first clods of earth thudded onto the coffin.
She remembered the old Martin, gentle and caring, and the new Martin, savage and determined.
She had loved him but she knew that she would not come to Grey Friars again.
SATURDAY AFTERNOON
It was cold in the stadium and a leaden sky threatened to weep down at any moment on the small crowd assembled below.
The grey steps of the terracing, the rust coloured stand and the sad green of the pitch shaded together in common contribution to the drabness of the day.
A group of small boys behind one of the goals attempted to dispel their own personal depression by waving blue scarves and chanting familiar slogans.
A patch of red soon appeared in retaliation at the other end of the ground but both were quickly silenced by the twin evils of an unimportant match and a cold, dull afternoon.
The man stood alone, a little apart from the crowd.
‘A gey driech day,’ he thought as he adjusted the grey woollen scarf tied as a muffler at his throat and pulled down his large, cloth cap against the wind.
Ten minutes to kick-off.
The crowd began to swell a little and the man was joined by a friend.
He too was dressed in thick muffler and flat cap.
‘No’ many here the day, Tam,’said the newcomer.
His companion glanced around the ground.
‘Five, maybe six thousand,’ he replied.
‘Aye, an’ there used tae be at least thirty thousand here every Saturday in the auld days.’
‘Changed days, Jimmy.
Folk'll no’ come oot oan a cauld day now when they can sit by the fire an' watch wrestlin' oan the telly.’
Both men lapsed into silence as they searched for familiar  faces amongst the last of the crowd trickling into the stadium.
‘A lot o’ the auld crowd still here Tam.’
‘Aye, but a’ dinnae see Willie.’
‘He hasnae been for the last three games.’
‘Dae ye think he's…moved oan?’
‘Aye, looks like it.’
The men fell silent once more, each lost in his own thoughts
The teams ran out on the pitch to a half-hearted roar and began to boot practice balls around the goal-mouths.
The crowd stirred in expectation and a chatter of conversation flickered around the ground accompanied by the stamping of cold feet.
‘A’ dinnae think much o' this new centre half,’said Jimmy.
‘Naw,’ answered Tam.
‘They ca’ them sweepers these days.
That yin couldnae sweep the streets never mind a loose ba'.’
‘Dae ye remember Big Erchie the day we won the League Cup.
Noo there wis a centre half.
Nothin'goat past him!’
‘Aye, an'wee davie tae.
Remember him, Tam?
He used tae jist rise above the big fellas in the goal mooth an’ bang!
There it wis, right in the back o' the net.’
‘Ach they're too busy playin' tae a system now tae score goals.
Nae individuality, that's the trouble.’
A child, dressed in anorak, blue scarf and woollen hat wandered disconsolately along the terracing.
He stopped in front of the two men, fingered the white bandage around his forehead, and looked up to scan the crowd anxiously.
Tam called to him.
‘Hey son, whay are ye lookin' for?’
‘Ma Grandad,’ replied the boy.
‘Ma advi…advis…he stumbled over the unfamiliar word, ‘Ma advisor said he would be here the day.’
‘What's yer Grandad's name son?’ asked Jimmy.
‘Mr. McLaughlin,’ answered the child, a little fearfully.
‘Jock McLaughlin?’
‘Aye, that's him.
Dae you ken him?’
‘Aye son.
He stands up there, jist under the score board.’
The two men laughed as the boy scampered up the steps.
‘Poor wee fella,’ said Jimmy.
‘He's scared daft.’
‘Aye.
Mind you so wis a’ the first time.
It's no easy til ye get used tae it.’
The match started and the men watched intently as play moved from one end of the field to the other.
Red shirts clashed with blue, sometimes one of each but occasionally in bunches.
‘Ach, the games too physical now,’ said Jimmy.
‘That's most o; the trouble,’ said Tam.
‘There's no enough skill.
It's a' boot an' rush and the  wee fellas don't get intae the game at a'.’
‘Did ye see the wife this week Tam?’
The question, coming suddenly as it did, caught Tam unguarded.
‘A' dropped in oan Tuesday,’ he replied after a pause.
‘Is she a' right?’
‘Oh aye.
Well it's been a long time now.’
‘Aye,’ said Jimmy.
‘How's your family?’ asked Tam.
‘Oh fine, jist fine,’ said the other man.
‘Billy's goan tae the University next year.
Imagine that eh!
Ma laddie at the college.
A' never thought Ah'd live tae see the day.’
he began to laugh uproariously and glanced at his companion.
‘Jimmy,’ said the other thoughtfully.
‘Dae ye ever find yersel' losin' interest?’
‘How dae ye mean — losin' interest?’
‘Losing’ interest — in the family like an' fitba' an' a' that.’
‘Sometimes a' feel like that, no' often though.
Dae you?’
‘Aye a' feel like that a lot these days.
A' sometimes think it's a sign a' wish movin' oan.’
‘It's no’ up tae you tae say when ye move oan.
Ye know that.’
‘Aye, but a've watched some o’ the others.
When they've felt like a' dae it's a sign they'll be movin' oan soon.’
The men looked at each other for a moment, then glanced away quickly.
‘Jimmy.’
‘Aye.’
‘Dae ye ever wonder…like, well what happens now?’
‘A’ used tae, but a' never expected tae come here in the first place so a' gave up wonderin' what comes next.’
‘Aye,’ said Tam.
The Referee glanced at his watch and blew the whistle for half-time.
Mud covered players trooped off the field while the spectators made a concerted rush towards kiosks at the back of the ground to secure hot bovril and lukewarm pies.
In the stand the Directors' Box emptied quickly but two men, sitting together, did not join in the rapid movement towards the Board Room.
Both wore bowler hats — the only two in the entire stadium — and their longish black coats were more than a little out of fashion.
‘Well George, poor stuff today,’ said one.
‘Yes Donald, the team has undoubtedly deteriorated over the past few years.’
‘I must say I hold this new Manager largely responsible,’ said George.
‘Yes, he had a very good record in England but I feel hi is sacrificing skill at the expense of power — or brute force if one is to be honest about it.’
‘He is,’ said George, ‘a very forceful personality, in himself  I mean.
I sat in on a board meeting the week before last and the Manager's alleged report was nothing more than a series of orders closely followed by a succession of demands.
I don't know why they put up with him, I really don't.’
‘Of course the character of the club is changing you know,’ Donald replied, thoughtfully.
‘In the old days we could rely on the same spectators attending match after match, whatever the weather or the results.
But now that football has to compete with so many other attractions, good results and big names are demanded as the price of continued loyalty.
I feel somehow that the old family spirit is missing from the club.’
‘It's the only spirit that is missing then,’ snorted George.
‘They've fitted a cocktail bar in the board room now.’
‘Good God!’
‘Yes, and I hear there are plans to open a licensed supporters’ club just outside the ground.
You know Donald, I feel oddly discontented with the way things are done these days.
Oh not only in the club but in everything I see and hear.’
‘There is not much you can do about it.
You know the rules.
 Look and listen all you want to, but don't try to interfere in any way.’
‘Yes I know that, Donald but you will agree it is a rather negative existence.’
‘There's no alternative.’
‘One could always — progress.’
George spoke the word tentatively and glanced sideways at his friend.
‘Progress is not at your discretion, George,’ said the other man.
‘I know but I feel it is becoming more and more appropriate to my response to everything and that it must come soon.’
‘If it does,’ said Donald, ‘then I shall miss you old chap.’
The match resumed and the two sides remained locked in fairly even combat until, in the last few minutes, a goal-mouth scramble enabled the home team to snatch the solitary goal and two points that would take them nowhere near the top of their league.
The goal was, however, enough to sent the bonnets of Tam and Jimmy and the bowlers of George and Donald flying into the air.
The crowd dispersed quickly and in the rush for the exits, Tam was glad to see old Jock McLaughlin holding firmly on to his Grandson's small hand.
George and Donald decided against looking into the board room and made their way together and silently from the ground.
In the press-box a tired sports  correspondent finished his report with the words ‘Attendance, 6,000’.
His figures were correct — up to a point.
About that number had passed through the turnstiles and his experienced eye estimated no more in the crowd, but…how many other, unseen, watchers had witnessed that particular match?
THE HIJACK
‘Boy, this is terrific!’
I thought.
‘Really great!
In fact it's probably the most exciting thing that's ever happened to me.’
It was half-past — two in the morning and I was sitting in the front  passenger seat in dad's Cortina while my sister Jean, who was driving, sent it hurtling down the road towards Carlisle.
There wasn't much traffic about at that time of the morning and Jean was driving faster than she'd ever done before; trees, hedges and fields just flashed past as the Cortina fairly gobbled up the miles.
So how did I come to be in the car in the middle of the night when I should have been in bed sound asleep?
Well, I had been in bed and asleep earlier in the night.
It had been one of those deep, deep sleeps; the kind when you don't know a thing until your mum starts yelling at you for the umpteenth time that you're going to be late for school if you don't get up.
That would have happened too — if Danny hadn't left his C.B radio rig switched on when he left to go on hight shift.
Danny's my older brother and he's an absolute nut about Citizen Band Radios.
He has one rig in our room, another one in dad's car and a third in the big truck he drives for the frozen meat company.
Well, like I said, I was sound asleep when Danny's  receiver started crackling and jerked me awake.
‘Hello!
Hello!
Calling Butcher's Boy! come in Butcher's Boy!’
I knew ‘Butcher's Boy’ was Danny's call sign but who on earth could want him at two 0'clock in the morning?
I flipped the transmitter switch and said, ‘Okay, Good Buddie, this is Butcher's Boy.
Who's sending?’
That's when I got my first big shock of the night for the caller was none other than Danny himself!
‘Listen Tommy,’ he yelled, ‘I'm in the truck.
Three guys hijacked it from the Company's yard but I saw then and climbed into the refridgeration unit at the back.
They've gone into a ‘Chew and choke’ to get some sandwiches but they'll be back soon and I don't have time to call the ‘Bears’
That was Danny for you.
Once he started transmitting he couldn't help using all that C.B slang, even in an emergency.
A ‘chew and choke’ was a transport cafe and the ‘Bears’meant the police, but it was no use expecting Danny to use plain English on a rig.
‘Okay, Danny,’ I said, ‘I'll call the cops.
Just tell me where you are?’
‘There's no time for that now,’ he answered.
‘I'm just about at the limit of my transmitting range and anyway I don't know exactly where we are, although I think it's on the A7 road to Carlisle.
The Hijackers don't know there's a C.B. in the truck so I've managed to feed the mike through to the back and I'll keep sending as much information as I can.
You get dad to bring the car south and keep in range of my signals.
You'd better hurry ‘though before I freeze with the rest of the neat in there.’
‘Okay, ‘ten — four’, ‘Roger’,’ I answered.
By this  time I was getting as bad as Danny.
I was half — way to dad's room before I remembered that he and mum were spending the night at Gran's.
Just for a minute I panicked.
I couldn't contact the truck again because the hijackers would be able to hear my signals coming in, even
though they couldn't hear Danny transmitting.
I couldn't ‘phone the police because I didn't know where to sent them.
There was only one thing for it; I had to waken Jean.
I was a bit nervous about that because, even at the best of times, Jean thinks I'm a pain in the neck.
I don't know why; it's not as if I do anything wrong.
It must be because she's seventeen or something.
Seventeen's a funny age for a girl.
Sure enough, as soon as I woke her up, Jean started yelling.
Mind you, I will say that when I explained things to her she was up and into her jumper and jeans in a flash and in no time at all we were hammering down the road towards Carlisle.
Jean hadn't long passed her driving test and I tried to help by pointing out when she should be moving up through the gears.
I stopped when she hissed at me to shut up and let her get on with it.
‘All right,’ I thought huffily, ‘go ahead and burn out the clutch.’
There's just no pleasing some people!
I turned to the C.B. rig in the car.
It was on channel 20, the same as the rig in our room, but there was no signal from Danny.
I tried all the channels from 1 to 40 in case the hijackers had been messing about with the rig in the truck, but still got nothing.
‘We must be nearly in range by now,’ I said to Jean as I turned back to channel 20.
She didn't answer, just put her foot down and sent the Cortina faster and faster through the night.
Two minutes later we heard Danny's voice again.
‘Tommy, listen to me but don't try to answer.
These  guys are heading for the Motorway.
If you can hear me you must be within five or six miles of them but if they get to the Motorway first they'll be able to lose you.
Put out a ‘Ten, thirty — three’ emergency call on all channels.
You can't contact the ‘Bears’ direct on that rig but they might just be able to pick up an  emergency signal.
When you send out tell them not to put on a road block because the guy driving the truck is a real ‘Harvey Wallbanger’ and he'll go straight through a patrol car.’
I gasped out loud.
A ‘Harvey Wallbanger’ was the most dangerous kind of driver — a real nut that no trucker would go anywhere near if he could help it.
‘What are we going to do?’
I yelled to Jean.
‘Even if we do contact the police they'll have to try to stop Danny's truck and the driver will smash everybody up, including Danny!’
‘They might not set up a road block,’ said Jean, biting her lip.
‘They could just follow the truck; after all the hijackers have to stop sometime.’
‘Yes, but that might be too late for Danny,’ I answered.
‘Remember he's stuck in the refridgeration unit and he'll be frozen solid if we don't get him out of there soon.’
I started sending out a ‘ten, thirty — three’, the Citizen Band S.O.S., on channel 1 but I knew that by the time I got through all 40 channels, Danny's truck would be on the Motorway and we would lose it.
Then I had my great idea!
‘Channel 19!’
I yelled at the top of my voice and Jean got such a fright she sent the Cortina swerving all over the road.
‘You fool!’ she said.
‘We almost crashed.
Anyway why channel 19?’
‘Because it's the truckers channel and even at this time of the night there's always long distance drivers on the Motorway.
They'll help us, won't they?!
I turned to channel 19 and started sending.
Sure enough, within a couple of minutes I had raised a trucker.
‘Break, Break.
Big Ben here,’ said the voice.
‘Who's sanding that end?’
‘This is Butcher's Boy with a ‘Ten, thirty-three,’ I answered.
‘Where are you Big Ben?’
‘I'm in a convoy heading north on the M6 Motorway, Butcher's Boy.
What's your problem?’
I told Big Ben all about the hijackers, Danny being in the  refrigeration unit and how Jean and I were following them.
‘Okay, good buddy,’ he answered.
‘There's four big trucks in my convoy and we're all double crewed.
We'll stop Danny's rig at the start of the Motorway.
You get as close to it as you can and get your brother out while we deal with the hijackers.’
‘Ten — Four, Yorkie Man!’
I yelled and Jean grinned and sent the Cortina racing and bounding down the road.
Soon after that we saw the tail lights of Danny's truck in the distance and in no time at all we were right behind it.
‘How far to the Motorway?’
I asked.
‘'Bout a mile,’ said Jean.
‘I hope Big Ben and the convoy made it in time.’
About two minutes later Danny's truck, with us following close behind, turned a corner and there was the slip road leading to the Motorway — only nothing was ever going to get far down that road for there were the four big  trucks in Big Ben's convoy lined up wall to wall across the road facing us.
Even the ‘Harvey Wallbanger’ wasn't going to try going through that lot and Danny's truck pulled up with its brakes squealing and hissing furiously.
The driver looked back but with Jean and I in the Cortina close behind him he couldn't reverse.
The hijackers jumped down and for a minute it looked as if they were going to try to fight their way out.
But with eight big truckers forming a circle around them they soon decided against it.
The rotten cowards!
Jean and I dashed to the back of Danny's truck and wrenched open the door.
Boy!
You should have seen Danny!
He was covered in white frost from head to toe and he couldn't stop his teeth from chattering.
‘Th…
Thanks, G…
G…
Good Buddies,’ he said to the truckers, ‘t…
T…
Ten — ten,’ and then he passed clean out.
Well, that's Danny for you; he can't even faint without saying goodbye in C.B. 
GRANNY'S SPRING CLEANING
Morag's Granny and Grandad lived in a small, white house deep in the countryside.
Morag liked to visit them whenever she could and Granny and Grandad were always pleased to see her.
Granny said it gave her someone to talk to when she was baking or doing the housework and Grandad liked to take Morag to the farm next door to show her the hens and pigs and the other animals who lived there.
Morag stayed at the small, white house at different times of the year and she could never make up her mind which particular time she liked the best.
It was very nice in the summer, of course, when the sun shone and sparkled on the wee burn that ran down the hill behind the house.
But it was nice in the winter — time too when the snow lay like a thick, white blanket over the house and the fields beyond it.
Now although Morag liked both the summer and the winter, there was one other time she always looked forward to and that was the spring — time when the snow melted and green leaves began to appear again on all the trees and hedges.
It was on a bright spring morning, while Morag was eating her breakfast, that Granny said, ‘Auch, this house needs a good clean — out after the winter.
Just look at the state of the floor and those windows.
I think it's time we did some spring—cleaning.’
Grandad, who had been reading his paper, said, ‘Eh, I'd like to help with the cleaning but you see I promised Angus up at the farm that I'd help him with the lambs today.’
When Granny heard this she just sniffed and said, ‘Well Morag, that means we'll just have to do all the cleaning ourselves, eh.’
All that day, Granny and Morag worked very hard.
They dusted and polished the furniture, washed the floor, cleaned the windows and hung up new curtains and cleared out all the cupboards.
At the end of it all the small, white house was as bright and clean as a spring morning.
‘There now,’ said Granny.
‘The only thing left to do is to sort through that pile of things we cleared out of the cupboards and throw away what we don't need anymore.’
Morag and Granny started on this job right away but they soon found that it wasn't as easy as it looked.
The first thing Morag picked up was an old, lace shawl.
‘Oh look, Granny,’ she said.
‘Here's your old shawl.
Will I throw it out?’
‘Och yes,’ said Granny.
But then she said, ‘Eh, well, just a minute Morag.
That old shawl belonged to my mother and her mother before her.
I think I'll keep it a bit longer yet.
Put it in the pile of things to go back in the cupboards.’
And every single thing they found was the same.
An old tea pot with a cracked lid turned out to be a present Granny had received on her wedding day and so, of course, it had to be kept.
A pair of old shoes was put aside to be thrown out before Granny remembered they were the most comfortable she'd ever had.
Even a biscuit tin full of buttons and other odds and ends was finally put back in the pile of things to be kept because, as Granny said, ‘You never know when they'll come in handy.’
Well, this went on and on until the pile of things Morag and Granny had cleared out of the cupboards was nearly all gone.
The trouble was that the pile of things they had put aside to back in the cupboards again was almost exactly the same size as the first pile.
‘Dearie me, Morag,’ said Granny.
‘We haven't done very well have we?’
‘Never mind, Granny,’ said Morag.
‘There's still one thing left.’
Granny picked up the last of the things they had cleared out of the cupboards and looked at it.
‘I remember this,’ she said.
 ‘It's that old hat your Grandad wears when he's working in the garden.
I never did like it and now is a good time to get rid of it.
Away and throw it in the bucket, Morag.’
Morag was taking the old hat to the bucket when Grandad walked in the door.
‘Well Done, Morag,’ he said.
‘You've found my good gardening hat.
I wondered where it had got to.’
And Grandad took the hat and hung it up in a cupboard.
Morag and Granny looked at one another and began to laugh and laugh.
‘Ach, never mind, Morag,’ laughed Granny.
‘We'll maybe have better luck with our spring cleaning next year.’