

LEITH AND HULL
The Shipping Connection
Trade between Leith and Hull can be traced back to the beginning of the 19th Century when the Hull and Leith Shipping Company was formed.
In 1816 the Leith and Hamburg Shipping Company commenced operations and in 1936 the two companies merged to form the Hull and Leith Steam Packet Company.
Trade between these two ports was covered by the wooden paddle steamer PEGASUS.
As trade increased she was joined by the GLENALBYN and the MARTELLO, the latter being the first iron paddle steamer owned by the company.
A further merger took place in 1847 when the Edinburgh and Dundee Steam Packet Company joined the fleet and in 1852 when regular sailings to Hamburg commenced the name was changed to Leith, Hull and Hamburgh Steam Packet Company (the spelling of the word ‘Hamburgh’ was not to change for some years hence).
Screw steamers were used on the Hamburg run while paddlers continued on the coast.
In 1862 James Currie joined the company.
His brother Donald had already opened up the route to South Africa with his famous Castle Line and occasionally vessels were transferred to supplement the respective fleets.
Regular passenger and cargo sailings between Leith, Hull, Copenhagen, Hamburg and the Baltic Ports were now being made.
Paddle steamers gave way to screw steamers.
Competition on the Leith-Newcastle-Hull route become particularly fierce as other companies tried to break the monopoly and prices for Leith to Hull around 1874 were as low as two shillings for the single journey.
In 1895 Sunderland was added to the ports of call down the East Coast now being served by four steamers.
Unfortunately heavy losses occurred during the First World War with all four being sunk.
By 1919 much of the passenger traffic had moved to rail and road and only cargo steamers were then employed.
This continued until 1940 when sailings were suspended.
The name of Leith, Hull and Hamburg Steam Packet Co. was altered to Currie Line Ltd as business was concentrated on the Baltic Ports.
The rights to operate the coastal service were sold to the Dundee, Perth and London Shipping Co. and cargo movements continued by sea until the early 70's when all regular sailings were suspended.
Today there are still cargo movements between the River Humber and River Forth, mainly refined oil products.
Sadly, very few coastal passenger movements exist today.
Whisky and Salmon, two of the main commodities moved in the past now travel in container and freezer lorries and coastal shipping companies with famous names have all but disappeared.
The Training Ship ‘Dolphin’
The ‘Dolphin’ was built by the  Middlesbrough shipbuilders, Dixon & Co.
Ltd., and launched on December 9th, 1882.
A three masted auxiliary barge, she was equipped with a horizontal engine in accordance with the naval policy of the time.
The structural requirements of a ship in the 19th century differed greatly from today.
The framing was hand made by anglesmiths, a trade no longer in existence.
The hull of the ‘Dolphin’ was planked with four inch thick mahogany covered by a two inch layer of teak, then sheathed with heavy gauge copper.
The main deck forward was ten inches thick and further reinforcement was fitted both fore and aft.
The ship, of 925 tons was commissioned at Sheerness in 1884 and immediately attached to the Mediterranean Squadron.
In 1885 a landing party from the ship's crew of 113 formed part of a naval brigade which landed at Suakin (a small port in the Red Sea near Port Sudan).
The first real action took place in 1888 when the vessel was engaged in the defence of Suakin against Osman Digna.
Digna featured prominently in the early history of the ‘Dolphin’.
He was a Sudanese Chief who operated a slave trade with his headquarters in Suakin.
When the British began to capture his slave cargoes he suffered heavy financial loss and regularly threatened Suakin until he was killed in 1900.
The ‘Dolphin’ was paid off in Sheerness in 1896 and after her engines had been removed she became a seagoing training ship.
She was then based at Portland from where she sailed on four month training cruises.
In 1907 she was de-rigged and taken to Portsmouth.
The ‘Dolphin’ was then used as a submarine depot ship with H.M.S. ‘Mercury’at Gosport until 1924.
In 1925 the ship was bought by a Glasgow shipowner who planned to convert her to a nautical museum.
The plans, however, were interrupted when the ship was being towed up from Portsmouth.
While approaching the Firth of Forth the ship took on a lot of water during bad weather.
The tug crew noticed the ship was lying low in the water and began to worry about her sinking.
It was decided to beach the ‘Dolphin’ on the southern shores of the Forth near Fisherrow.
She lay there awash for almost eight months before being salvaged by the Leith Towage & Salvage Co.
Ltd. who towed her into Leith for dry docking and repairs.
She was then removed to the Metal Industries Yard at Rosyth where she was refitted with materials taken from the battleship ‘King George V’ which was in the process of being broken up.
The ship ended her seagoing life when she was berthed in the West Old Dock, Leith, in 1928 where she remained until moved to the Newcastle Quay in 1969.
The idea of making her into a museum was abandoned and instead she was turned into a Boys' Club.
During the Second World War the ship was used as a barracks.
Men from the Argyll & Sutherland Highlanders berthed on the ship and on one occasion she had war scars inflicted on her when a bomb fell on Portland Place and debris rained down on the top deck gouging pieces out of the timbers.
In 1944 the ‘Dolphin’ settled down to becoming a training ship.
Leith Nautical College agreed to operate a pre-sea training scheme for Cadets and Deck Boys on board the ship and the vessel was handed over to the Dolphin Training Ship Society, the ship in turn being rented to the College.
Residential accommodation on board was provided for up to 92 and the ship was maintained by those in training at the time.
Over 240 boys passed through the ‘Dolphin’ every year to join the many shipping companies requiring of their services.
When a decision was reached to infill in the West Old Dock, the ‘Dolphin’ was moved to the berth behind the Customs House (Newcastle Quay) where she lay until 1977.
Some attempts were made to raise an interest in preserving her but without success and eventually she was towed to the breakers yard at Bo'Ness in July 1977 and broken up.
Coal on the Move
Transport of raw materials for energy use has long been a major sector in marine commerce but coal in particular has been the dominant single energy cargo.
At one stage in the 19th century the tonnage shipped coastwise alone in Britain exceeded all other types of cargo put together.
Coal was on the move when Leith was first recognised as a port back in the days of Robert the Bruce.
The Laird of Piltencreif was supplying the monks at Dunfermline Abbey around the same time.
Coal was imported throughout the 15th, 16th and 17th centuries when tolls were imposed at 1d. per chalder which was a measurement of about 2 tons.
The early style of ships used to move coal in quantity was the collier brig and the collier barque.
They were short and squat, stoutly built for the  rigours of the trade and the even more difficult conditions often experienced in the North Sea.
The brig was around 25m × 8m capable of carrying 150 to 200 tons while the barque was about 30m × 9m and capable of carrying around 300 tons.
These traditional carriers were built in great numbers throughout the 18th and 19th centuries.
A report in Lloyds in December 1837 listed 741 sailing colliers arriving on the Thames from the East coast ports on one day following a period of head winds.
They were very susceptible to weather conditions.
Most operated from ports in the NE of England but there were also a number from the Forth.
The trade was extremely  competitive and the vessels were run on a shoestring resulting in many losses.
With the advent of steam power there was a marked improvement in the movement of coal.
Up to that time coal was chiefly used as a domestic fuel but from 1812 onwards it went to sea as bunker fuel.
The world's first gas company — Gas Light & Coke was formed in 1812.
Early supplies of coal were moved by the sailing colliers but in the mid 19th century the steamship was evolving rapidly.
By 1860 the steam colliers were in demand because of their larger capacity and reliability.
They had been challenging the sailing colliers for a number of years and the movement of coal was so important that the nautical press carried a daily feature and report on the coal trade.
It is interesting to note that of 660 new companies formed in 1871, the largest single group were mining companies and many of these had associated shipping or forwarding companies.
Many new shipping companies formed in the late 1800's were set up on the strength of the coal markets.
Cormacks, Mackies, Craigline, Henry & MacGregor and Salvesons of Leith, Denholm of Boness, Gillespie & Nicol and Shield Line of Grangemouth but to name a few.
Matthew Taylor in Methil formed his company on the strength of the bunker trade serving the drifter fleets of the North East of Scotland.
alone had three dozen fish curers and the demand in Shetland alone could be as much as 1500 tons per week at the height of the season.
In 1879 the first of the Thames upriver colliers was built to pass under Westminster and Vauxhall bridges.
They were called ‘flat irons’.
They were designed to carry the maximum possible tonnage of coal under the Thames bridges with the minimum of clearance both under keel and overhead.
Initially they served the many gasworks but as generating stations were built they served them too.
This style of ship lasted until the 1960's many being built in Burntisland and loading in all the Forth Ports from time to time.
Gas and Electricity Authorities generally operated their own fleets but by 1930 the balance was changing and the electricity industry was seriously threatening the gaslight industry.
It made little difference to the coal industry which continued to serve both.
Propulsion of steam colliers was mainly by coal fired boilers providing steam for the engines.
Some were changed to oil but even in the 1950's the question was strongly debated as many thought they should continue to burn the fuel they carried.
Even in the 1970's a number of coal fired ships were still operating.
Like movement in general, movement of coal from the Forth increased pace through the 1800's first by sail and  then by steam.
By the end of the 19th century Leith moved 400–500,000 tons per annum.
One of the main shippers was James Waldie & Sons Ltd. who had been established as coal merchants in 1784.
They were agents for Edinburgh Collieries Co., Arniston Coal Co., Hirst Coal Co. and Birkley Coal Co to name but a few.
In fact they owned Hirstrigg, South Blair and Braehead Steam Coal.
Coal was handled all along the Forth with Charlestown, West of Rosyth being the early front runner shipping 250,000 tons in 1869.
By 1880, however it had dropped away to under 200,000 tons.
Boness handled 125,000 tons in 1860 and increased steadily from thereon.
Burntisland shipped 190,000 in 1876 and jumped to over 500,000 tons by 1880.
Methil was only developing between 1875 and 1900 but still shipped 400,000 tons in 1888 and was up to 1.7m by 1900.
Leith in 1895 shipped 500,000 tons but was over 2.0m tons by 1911.
Grangemouth was also developing rapidly although it was the early part of the present century before substantial tonnages were handled.
Likewise Granton where the Duke of Buccleuch had constructed the harbour for his own needs in the mid 19th century.
Granton was shipping around 300,000 tons per annum by the start of the present century.
Business generally increased until the First World War when tonnages dropped away.
Recovery was slow but by 1938 the Forth could boast over 30 Coal loading plants and 10 steam coal cranes.
Smaller ports such as Charlestown had all but disappeared but ports such as Methil 3m tons, Leith 2m tons, Burntisland 1.5m tons, Grangemouth 1.8m tons and Granton 0.8m tons had steadily increased.
World War II had a disastrous effect and tonnages were never to rise again to the levels of earlier years.
Methil remained the dominant Port in the Forth throughout the 60's and 70's.
By the mid 70's it was decided to build a new loading plant in Leith and for Methil to be run down.
The new plant loaded the first ship ‘Sir William Walker’ on 16th August 1977 but has never been operated at full capacity.
Occasionally it will handle up to 500,000 tons per annum but in general loads around 200,000 tons per annum mainly for Scandinavian receivers.
This is mainly opencast coal and even its continuance is in doubt.
THE PORT OF LEITH
ITS HISTORY AND DEVELOPMENT
The Port of Leith is situated on the southern shores of the Firth of Forth in position 55°59 North, 3°10 West and approximately thirty miles from the open sea.
Nature was never especially kind to Leith in regard to the formation of the harbour, having placed a large stretch of sand across the mouth of the stream and with no sheltered bay or inlet, the approaches were often hazardous.
This resulted in the need for protective piers and breakwaters which required to be extended and strengthened over the years to allow further development.
Heavy  reclamation walls were built from time to time as the docks were extended seawards and today, the dock estate lies entirely on land reclaimed from the foreshore.
The enclosed water area now covers some 89 hectares whilst the land area is in excess of 150 hectares.
The town is now part of the City of Edinburgh to which it was joined in 1920.
Leith has been the scene of many interesting events and developments over the years and proof of this can still be seen today in some of the old buildings and narrow streets, and to a lesser extent, in the docks.
Some of the more important happenings are listed in chronological order throughout the following pages, starting from the early days of a town with a small harbour on the Water of Leith and becoming a modern port serving a city and its hinterland.
1329
Leith is mentioned in historical records as far back as 1128, but its authentic history as a port dates from 1329 when King Robert the Bruce granted a charter of ‘The Harbour and Mills of Leith’ to the City of Edinburgh.
The harbour at this time was formed on the bed of the ‘Water to Leith’, a small stream with its source in the Pentland Hills and flowing for thirteen miles or so through Edinburgh and Leith into the Firth of Forth at this point.
The harbour had stone quay walls founded around low water level on either side of the stream but principally on the South bank where they extended for over half a mile.
The berths were practically dry at low water and vessels lay aground on the mud bottom whilst loading and discharging their cargoes.
The depth of water alongside was about twelve feet (3.65 metres) at high water neap tides and sixteen feet (5.15 metres) at high water spring tides.
This governed the vessels draft and deep laden ships often lay in the roads awaiting suitable tides before entering harbour.
The mills were built for grinding grain and made use of the water of the steam for their power.
They occupied sites along the course of the Water of Leith past Canonmills and up as far as Dean Village.
1400
Henry IV had the Port of Leith taken into his possession.
1423
James I and his Queen, Jane, landed at Leith on 20th March.
1428
A charter by James I gave for the first time, the power to levy a tax on vessels entering the port and also on the goods they carried.
1438
James II was conveyed by  stratagem in a chest to Leith from Edinburgh Castle and then on to Stirling by sea.
1449
Mary of Gueldres married by proxy to James II at Brussels, landed at Leith on 1st April.
1469
Margaret of Denmark arrived at Leith and was married in Holyrood Palace to James III.
1511
Leith has long been identified with the craft of Shipbuilding.
It was inaugurated by James IV who formed a dockyard at Newhaven (then called ‘Our Lady's Port of Grace’) and on 1511 he ordered the building of the ‘Great Michael’, a naval vessel 73 metres long and 11 metres beam with massive sides of oak 3m thick.
This was to be only the first of many special vessels to be built in the Leith area.
Unfortunately  following the death of James IV at the Battle of Flodden, the ship was considered to be of little use and was sold to the French.
1537
James V and Queen Magdalene landed at Leith on 28th May.
It is written that the Queen ‘kneeled on the quayside, kissed the stone and prayed to God to bless the people’.
1544
Invasion by Earl of Hertford — Port of Leith burned.
1555
Mary of Lorraine, Queen Dowager, Regent, resident in Leith.
1557–1560
John Knox preached the reformed faith in Leith.
The town figured prominently as the Citadel of the Regent Queen, who, with French mercenaries, withstood attacks of the Lords of the Congregation reinforced by English troops.
1561
Mary, Queen of Scots returned to Scotland after an absence of thirteen years and landed at Leith on 19th August.
1571
The Duke of Lennox, Regent, and the Earl of Morton, his Lieutenant, established headquarters in Leith and erected a Council Chamber on the Coalhill.
1572
The Society of Free Fishermen took over the interests of Newhaven and continued to look after the port for the next two centuries.
1589
James VI and Anne of Denmark married in Norway and landed at Leith on 1st May.
1600
James VI crossed from Kinghorn to Leith.
1638
Solemn League and Covenant signed on Leith Links and again in 1643.
1645
Leith suffered plague and famine.
1650
King Charles II visited the troops on Leith Links and was resident at the time in the mansion of Lord Balmerino, Kirkgate.
1682
James, Duke of York played golf on Leith Links.
Mons Meg burst on being fired in honour of his Grace.
1685
Windmills, which had begun to come into existence during the 16th century were by now a common sight  throughout the Lothians.
Robert Myle built one such tower on the Shore at the corner of Tower Street in 1685.
It was shorn of its sails around 1805 and with added battlements, became the ‘Signal Tower’.
Extensively renovated in 1986, it remains a Leith landmark and the last remaining example of a windmill tower in this area, other than a number of ‘doocots’ still dotted around the Lothians and barely recognisable as windmill towers of the past.
1698
Darien Expedition, consisting of five frigates, with ‘1200 men and 300 gentlemen’ sailed from Leith Roads on 26th July.
1710
The determination to improve the harbour to admit larger ships dated from the middle of the 16th century.
Although some remedial work had been carried out the first major improvement was made in 1710 with the completion of a new stone pier.
1770
The first dry dock for repair and painting of ships appeared in 1770 when Messrs. Sime & Rankin built a dock between the Shore and Sandport Street.
The Company were already building ships at their yard which was sited opposite the Customs House and the dry dock helped to consolidate the repair side of the business.
In later years the dry dock was under the control of Marr & Co. but following the building of the new bridge at Bernard Street, only small vessels and yachts could pass under the bridge and reach the dock.
It was closed and infilled shortly before Leith Docks became impounded.
1745
Arthur, sixth Lord Balmerino, left his mansion in Leith and joined forces with Prince Charles, after the Battle of Prestonpans.
1751
Turnpike Road Act — Newhaven became an important Ferry & Packet Station as a result of sand bar restrictions at Leith.
The Ferries connected Newhaven with Pettycur in Fife.
1754
Mons Meg removed to the Tower of London.
1763
Stage coaches operational between Edinburgh and Leith, taking one hour to accomplish the journey.
1779
Paul Jones arrived on Leith Roads on 17th September.
1791
A regular coasting service between Leith and London was established using smacks rigged as cutters sloops or yawls.
These vessels carried passengers and cargo, making one call on their way south at Berwick to load salmon for the London Markets.
The Leith and Berwick Shipping Company established their headquarters at Leith in 1791 and were so successful that in 1802, the merchants of Leith organised a direct service of their own under the name of the Edinburgh and Leith Shipping Company.
Other services were established during the next few years.
1792
Menzies shipyard established — continued until the 1960's.
1797
One of the more prominent buildings in Leith having strong connections with the sea is that of Trinity House, an imposing Georgian structure.
Up to this time, the Trinity Association which was called ‘The Corporation of the Shipmasters of the Trinity House of Leith’ had been a charitable institution but in 1797 it developed those functions with which it was to become chiefly associated, that of examining and licensing Pilots.
The Association had been first instituted in 1380 and given the status of Corporation in 1555 by Mary of Lorraine who founded Trinity Hospital.
It was on this site that Trinity House was established in 1817.
1799
Increasing commercial activity encouraged the Edinburgh Authorities who owned the Port of Leith, to provide improved harbour accommodation.
The magistrates obtained an Act authorising them to borrow £160,000 to build part of a range of docks designed by John Rennie.
1801
The foundation stone of the East Dock was laid by Robert Dundas of Melville, Deputy Grand Master of Scotland.
On top of a cavity in the stone in which had been placed contemporary records and coins was placed a plate with the inscription:
‘In the reign of the Most Gracious Sovereign, George III and under the auspices of the Right Hon. William Fettes, Lord Provost of Edinburgh, the Harbour of Leith, though formed at a remote period and as commerce in the course of ages increased often repaired and extended, yet being still narrow and incommodious, Robert Dundas of Melville, Esq., in absence of the Right Hon. Charles, Earl of Dalkeith, Grand Master of Scotland, laid the foundation stone of these docks in which the numerous vessels arriving from every quarter of the globe might receive ample and secure accommodation on the 14th day of May in the year of our Lord 1801 and of the Aera of Masonry 5801, John Rennie being Engineer.
May the undertaking prosper by the blessing of Almighty God’.
1806
The new East Dock was opened on 20th May by the Lord Provost of Edinburgh.
The Fifeshire packet and a smack called ‘The Buccleuch’ were the first vessels to enter the dock with the civil dignitaries on board.
Artillery fire from the Fort and from His Majesty's warships in Leith Roads signalled the opening.
The dock was the first of its kind in Northern Britain and was wholly built within the High Water mark and measured five acres.
The surrounding area was later used for graving docks, building slips, sheds and warehouses with the total  reclamation measuring fifteen acres.
1809
A ‘Martello’ tower was erected on Mussel Cape rocks at a cost of £17,000 as part of a scheme to defend the new docks and the city against possible attack by the French during the Napoleonic Wars.
The tower was about 10 metres high and had solid masonry of brick and stone about 2 metres thick.
The invasion never came and the tower was left to decay until 1850 when it was renovated by the Royal Engineers and occupied by artillerymen from Leith until 1869.
It was abandoned and never again used.
The tower is now land-locked and a key remains in the possession of Forth Ports Authority.
1813
In 1812 Henry Bell with his ‘Comet’ pioneered excursion steamers on the Clyde.
Few people are aware that he also pioneered a long line of excursion steamers on the Forth starting in 1813.
He had actually served an apprenticeship with the shipbuilders Shaw and Hart at Boness and he brought his steamer to the yard through the Forth and Clyde Canal for overhaul at his old employer's slip.
It was while in the Forth that he started an excursion run between Boness & Leith at a single fare of 7/6d. (35½p).
The ‘Edinburgh Courant’ of 21st May commented ‘The Comet of Helensburgh, a vessel worked by steam and the first of the kind ever seen in this quarter, is at present lying in Leith Harbour’.
By the middle of the 19th century vessels of varying description were plying a passenger trade to over fifty calling points throughout the River and Firth of Forth.
1817
A further expansion of the harbour was completed in 1817 with the opening of the West Dock entered by a bridged passageway from the East Dock.
This doubled the size of the enclosed docks and from a dry and inconvenient harbour Leith became a port not surpassed by many in the country.
Vessels could now lie afloat throughout their stay in port.
The East and West Docks, adjoining quays, graving dock and other incidentals had cost in the region of £300,000.
Each dock measured approximately 230 metres long by 90 metres wide and they were entered by a lock 46 metres long, 11 metres wide and with a depth on the sill of 5.20 metres at high water spring tide.
They could accommodate over one hundred ships of the type operating at that time.
1822?
George IV landed at Leith on 15th August for a two week visit to his Northern Capital.
A plaque commemorating the occasion can be seen on the quay by the Shore.
1829
Extensions to both East and West Breakwaters were completed giving added protection to the approaches to the Harbour and Docks.
1835
Around this time the finances of the City of Edinburgh became seriously embarrassed.
The Corporation had borrowed large sums of money, used, amongst other purposes for the construction of the Docks.
Trade had increased considerably and security on the borrowing was based largely on the Dock rates.
Continued allegations were made that surplus revenues were being applied for civic and municipal purposes and not for the improvement of the Harbour in accordance with the Acts of 1799 and 1826.
An inquiry instituted by the Government resulted in the  mercantile and maritime affairs of Leith and Edinburgh being separated.
1837
Messrs. Menzies & Co. who operated a shipbuilding yard close to the East Old Dock gates launched the Sirus, the first steamship to cross the Atlantic Ocean.
The voyage lasted some eighteen days, and after running out of coal, the crew were forced to burn timber and resin to keep steam on the boilers.
1838
Under an Act of Parliament, a public autonomous trust was formed called ‘The Leith Dock Commission’ in which the undertaking of the Harbour and Docks was vested.
Eleven Commissioners were appointed, three each by the Town Council of Leith and Edinburgh and five by the Lords of the Treasury.
It was specially enacted that no members of either Town Council could be elected as Commissioners of the Harbour and Docks.
1840
The Leith Chamber of Commerce was instituted in 1840 and in 1852 the Directors petitioned for and obtained a Charter of Incorporation on their representation ‘That the town of Leith is the principal seaport in the East of Scotland and it would tend much to the encouragement and promotion of the trade and manufacture already extensively established and carried on there, if the Petitioners were incorporated as a Chamber of Commerce and Manufacturers, with the powers and privileges usually conferred on such bodies’.
1847
The consent of the Treasury was obtained to the adoption of a plan presented by Mr. James Meadows Rendel to construct a new dock.
This was eventually to become the Victoria Dock.
1852
The Victoria Dock was completed at a cost of £200,000 and was officially opened in July.
This was a great advance and enabled the port to take much larger ships.
The development of the steam engine had resulted in a rapid growth in vessel size and the opening of the dock enabled Leith to keep in step with facilities suitable for the handling of modern tonnage.
The new dock was 230 metres long, 92 metres broad with an entrance 18.3 metres wide.
The depth over the entrance sill was almost two metres lower than that of the Old Docks.
Around the same time, the new West Pier was opened and both East and West Breakwaters were extended further to seaward.
A sand bar was dredged, allowing the passenger and excursion steamers to make better use of the port.
Up to this time, Leith had not been considered suitable for some of the larger excursion steamers.
1859
The Leith Dock Commission continued to use the services of the Rendel family and on their advice it was decided to reclaim an area along the East Sands and to construct another dock.
1864
The Prince of Wales Graving Dock was completed at a cost of £60,000.
With a length of 116 metres, a width of 18 metres and a depth of 6.9 metres over the sill, it enabled the larger steamers now frequenting the port to have repairs and maintenance carried out in modern facilities.
1869
The Albert Dock was opened on the 21st August with the arrival of the S.S. Florence.
Part of the East Breakwater was removed in order to construct an approach area to the new lock.
This area, named Albert Basin, allowed vessels to clear the effects of the current in the Water of Leith before entering the lock.
The lock measuring 107 metres by 18.3 metres had a depth over the sill of 7.62 metres at Spring Tides and 6.40 metres at Neap Tides.
The gates, constructed largely of yellow pine and greenheart timbers, were operated by hydraulic machinery, the first of its type installed anywhere in Scotland.
The Albert Dock cost almost £300,000 to construct and measures 335 metres in length by 137 metres in width.
1874
The Victoria Swing Bridge was completed, alleviating the serious communication problems which had arisen since the opening of the Albert Dock.
Two bascule bridges and one swing bridge further upstream had become totally inadequate.
The new bridge with an overall length of 65.5 metres and a clear span of 36.5 metres cost £32,000.
Constructed of main braced girders it carried a double rail and road track with a footpath along either side.
When open to shipping, the large clear span allowed easy axis for vessels navigating into the East and West Old Docks.
At the time of construction the bridge had the distinction of being the largest swing bridge in the United Kingdom.
1876
As a result of the ‘Leith Harbour and Docks Act’, the membership of the Commission was increased to fifteen.
Six of these were elected by Port Users paying £4 or more per annum in dock dues, three by the Owners of ships registered in the Port, three by the Edinburgh City Council (representing both Leith and Edinburgh) and one each by the Edinburgh Chamber of Commerce, the Leith Chamber of Commerce and the Edinburgh Merchant Company.
This new arrangement was to last virtually unchanged until the advent of the Forth Ports Authority in 1968.
1877
Ramage & Ferguson established at Victoria Shipyard.
1881
Soon after the completion of the Albert Dock, it became apparent that further dock accommodation would be required and the construction of the Edinburgh Dock was undertaken.
This dock was opened by H.R.H.
The Duke of Edinburgh who arrived on July 26th about the Leith Hull and Hamburg Steam Packet Co. vessel  s.s.
‘Berlin’.
The ship's bell from the ‘Berlin’ can now be seen in the boardroom of the headquarters of the Forth Ports Authority at Tower Place, Leith.
This dock, to the east of the Albert Dock and connected by a passageway 19.8 metres wide at coping level measures 457 metres long by 198 metres wide with a jetty 305 metres long by 76 metres wide in the centre adjoining the east end.
The dock cost upwards of £350,000 to build and included a drydock cut into the west end of the centre jetty measuring 91.44 metres in length by 12.2 metres in width.
1896
The Czar and Empress of Russia landed at Leith on 22nd September.
The Alexandra Dry Dock was completed with measurements of 100.58 metres length, 14.48 metres breadth and 5.67 metres over the sill on Spring Tides.
This facility helped to further enhance the rapidly expanding ship building and repair trade within the port.
1903
The first Grain Warehouse at Leith Docks for the storage of grain in bulk, as distinct from sack, was completed by a private firm at the East end of Edinburgh Dock.
It had a capacity of 20,000 tons in timber silos and was taken over by the Commissioners in 1906.
In addition, an elevator for discharging grain from ships was completed on the South side of Edinburgh Dock and connected to the warehouse by a large conveyor band erected on brackets hung from steel principals of a long iron shed.
The discharge capacity of around 220 tons per hour made Leith one of the leading ports in the United Kingdom for handling grain in bulk.
1904
Soon after completion of the Edinburgh Dock, it was decided that further expansion was required to meet the demands of an ever increasing trade.
An area to seaward was reclaimed by the formation of a new sea wall, this wall being completed in 1896.
By June of that year the water had been excluded and thereafter the new dock was constructed.
The Imperial Dock which had cost £600,000 to build was finally opened by Provost Aitken on 8th November 1904 when he arrived in the S.S. Peveril, a vessel belonging to the well known Leith Shipowners, George Gibson & Co.
Ltd.
The new dock measured 580 metres long and 168 metres wide over 335 metres and 85 metres wide over the remaining 245 metres.
The lock entrance measured 107 metres by 21.34 metres with a depth over the sill at ordinary Spring Tides of 9 metres.
Trade around this period was approximately 3 million tons per annum and the new dock able to accommodate much larger vessels was to further increase this total over the next few years.
1912
The Imperial Dry Dock was completed and opened by the arrival on 30th September of S.S. Silverton, a vessel owned by Chapman & Willan Ltd, of Newcastle.
Once again, the repair facilities had been improved to meet the demands of the Port users.
The Imperial Dry Dock measured 167.6 metres by 21.3 metres with 7.7 metres at ordinary Spring Tides over the sill.
1916
An air raid on Leith by a German  Zeppelin on 2nd April resulted in damage to a bonded warehouse.
Leith remained active throughout the period of the first World War but traffic decreased from 4.8 million tons in 1913 to 1.7 million tons by 1918.
The dry docks and shipbuilding yards were extremely busy providing the facilities for the repair and refit of ships damaged by enemy action and the production of new tonnage to take the place of numerous losses.
1921
Ramage & Ferguson completed five masted sailing ship KOBENHAVEN — one of the largest sailing vessels ever built.
1925
Trade gradually increased after the war to reach 3.5 million tons in 1925.
The import of grain and export of coal being the two main cargoes.
This level of trade was to continue throughout the next fifteen years with the exception of 1927 the year of the general strike when only 2.7 million tons was handled.
1928
Sir Alan and Lady Cobham landed by flying boat on completion of their world tour.
1928
Up to 1914 almost 80% of the annual import of grain continued to be discharged from grain vessels by the highly skilled labour force expert in the use of hand tackle with the remaining 20% being mechanically handled for bulk storage in the warehouse.
This labour force was dispersed by the war with a consequent requirement for increased mechanical handling.
The demand was met in 1928 by the opening at the Edinburgh Dock of a new reinforced concrete building with silo capacity for a further 16,000 tons.
The warehouse was opened by Dr. Cowan on 20th July with the first vessel to discharge being the S.S. Wilhelmina on 24th November when two new pneumatic elevators were commissioned giving a discharge rate of 400 tons per hour.
1930
The original timber Warehouse was entirely destroyed by fire which started on 12th January and burned for three months.
1933
Many well known companies built ships in Leith over the years.
Names like Menzies, Hawthorns, Mortons, Crans and Ramage & Ferguson to name but a few.
Henry Robb had arrived in Leith in 1913 as yard manager for Ramage & Ferguson but in 1918 decided to branch out on his own as a ship repairer.
When Hawthorn's yard became available in 1924, he decided to enter shipbuilding in his own right and soon expanded his operations by purchasing the business of Cran & Somerville in 1927.
Robb's went from strength to strength and in 1933 when Ramage & Ferguson went out of business his takeover of the Victoria Shipyards was complete.
1934
The Imperial Grain Warehouse was opened on 28th May by Sir Frederic C. Thomson providing modern concrete silos with a total capacity of 20,000 tons.
Two associated pneumatic grain elevators with a combined discharge rate of 400 tons per hour were completed soon after.
The first ship to discharge at the new facility was the S.S. Ebbrix, a small vessel owned by T. R. Rix & Sons Ltd. of Hull which arrived on 23rd August.
1936
Work commenced on the Western Harbour Extension Scheme.
This involved the construction of East and West Breakwaters, enclosing the Western Harbour and providing a protected entrance to the port.
This increased the dock undertaking by some 93 hectares (230 acres) and was completed in 1942.
1939
September 3rd marked the start of World War II.
The Port of Leith again played a major role in the war effort with Henry Robb Ltd.
Shipbuilders and Repairers completing no fewer than 42 naval vessels, including Corvettes, Minesweepers, Frigates, Tugs, Trawlers and other miscellaneous craft.
In addition, 12 Merchant Ships were built and repairs and refits were carried out on 370 naval vessels and 2437 merchant vessels during the period 1939–45.
Trade during the war years declined from over 2.5 million tons in 1939 to just over 1 million tons in 1944.
This was mainly due to the restrictions on foreign trade and the general shortage of all types of goods.
1940
H.M.S. Cossack arrived in Leith Docks on 17th February with 300 British seamen and others rescued from the German raider ‘Altmark’.
They were mainly survivors of the South Atlantic sinkings by the battleship Graf Spee and her raiding group — wiped out in turn on the Battle of the River Plate.
The Altmark was on her way to Germany when she was boxed in a Norwegian Fjord and Cossack's crew boarded her and released the prisoners many of whom were in a poor condition and requiring medical attention.
1942–1944
The success of the D-Day operations was dependent on the provision of suitable landing points for armaments and equipment.
The heavily defended ports along the French Coastline left no suitable sites for this purpose and various schemes were devised to build an artificial harbour.
The Mulberry idea was first suggested as early as 1942 and Naval parties made repeated night crossings to take soundings and measurements from which charts were prepared for various landing sites.
Details of the artificial harbours were finally complete and one of the great technical triumphs of the Second World War began to take shape.
The whole idea of the Mulberry Harbour was to enclose a basin of calm water with service quays and equipment connected by pontoons to a suitable beachhead.
The breakwaters were built in England to lessen the difficulty of long distance Towage.
They were secured in deep water some distance offshore and connected to the beach by a system of floating pontoon bridges, many of which were built in Scotland.
Before the building of the pierheads and bridges commenced, tests were carried out in the Solway Firth.
Four months elapsed before the first section was satisfactorily completed.
In the meantime, a search for a suitable building site had been carried out and it was decided that ground at Leith being prepared before the war for the Western Harbour extension was ideally suited for the purpose.
It was rapidly cleared and building commenced at the end of 1943.
The first launch was made on January 26th 1944 and the remainder were completed at Leith by a workforce of 600 men.
The extent of the undertaking was not generally known nor the supreme effort required to complete it on time.
1942
The new East and West Breakwaters were completed by giving a wider entrance to the port.
This new entrance measuring 256 metres between the breakwater heads with a dredged channel 120 metres wide was controlled by a new set of port locating lights and signals, including leading lights to position a vessel in the channel.
The new channel was dredged to about 10.3 metres below high water ordinary spring tide which means at low water of the same tide approximately 5.5 metres of water was available.
1949
A flying boat landed at Leith on 6th August bringing thirty two crewmen from Norway to join a new vessel named ‘Tento’ built by Burntisland Shipbuilding Co.
Ltd. for E A Aaby A/S of Oslo.
1950
The Ministry of Civil Aviation granted a licence to the Port of Leith to operate a Marine Airport for flying boats.
A service by flying boat was scheduled to commence on the   July 1950 between Southampton and Leith but the service was postponed indefinitely due to lack of support.
1952
On 4th September, four American Mariner flying boats landed, but the facility was seldom used and when the licence expired in 1959, it was not renewed.
1953
The assets of Leith Salvage & Towage Co.
Ltd. were acquired by Leith Dock Commission.
The tugs Croft, Mickry, Oxcar and Kalisco were all steam driven and over thirty years old.
Nevertheless, they were a valuable addition to the services under control of the Commission who continued to operate them both in Leith and in the Firth of Forth.
1955
The Caledonia Flour Mills and Grain Warehouse with a capacity of 20,000 tons was completed by Joseph Rank Ltd. in the Western Harbour.
Two associated berths, one equipped with two pneumatic grain elevators were also completed allowing vessels drawing up to 9.6 metres ordinary spring tides to discharge to the new facility.
Length of quay at the discharge berth measures 130 metres.
The Mill was officially opened by the Lord Provost Sir John G. Banks on 13th April 1956 but the first vessel to discharge, Rochester Shipping Co.
Ltd. 's .
m.v.
Confiance actually arrived on 3rd November 1955 with 430 tons of English wheat.
1958
In response to the demands of the Grain Trade, further expansion was carried out to Imperial Grain Warehouse resulting in additional bulk silo storage of 15,000 tons.
Delivery was taken of two new diesel tugs.
The ‘Martello’ was built by W.J. Yardwood & Sons Ltd. of Northwich while the ‘Craigleith’was completed by Henry Robb Ltd. in the Victoria Shipyard in Leith.
Both tugs are fitted with a Kort Nozzle to improve their efficiency.
The ‘Kalisco’ had already been sold when the new tugs were delivered.
1959
Approval was given and  reclamation started on an area of over 20 hectares to the North of Imperial Dock.
This was aimed at establishing an industrial site requiring close access to import/export facilities.
1960
Tug ‘Croft’ departed Leith in October in tow of Tug ‘Airman’bound for Rotterdam for scrapping.
1961
King Olaf of Norway landed at Leith from the Royal Norwegian Yacht ‘Norge’ on 17th October at the beginning of his state visit to Scotland.
1962
Fison Fertilisers Ltd. established a bagging and distribution plant on the North side of Imperial Dock with the intention of importing bulk materials from their factories in England.
1964
Government approval was given in September to a development scheme to transform Leith into a deep water Port with impounded water.
This was to involve the construction of a new Entrance Lock out at the main fairway into the Western Harbour and the fitting of large capacity pumping machinery to enable the total water area within the enclosed system to be maintained at an almost constant level.
It was also aimed at increasing the capability of the Port towards larger vessels.
1965
Work on the New Entrance Lock began in January with the dredging of a channel to divert shipping during the construction period and to remove the old West Pier.
In May, the construction of a sheet-piled cofferdam commenced.
Completed in the Spring of 1966, it was then dewatered to allow the actual construction of the lock to take place.
Other work being carried out simultaneously included the construction of a new lead in jetty, widening of the Imperial Entrance and various buildings and associated machinery installations.
1967
A regular short sea container service between Leith and the Continent commenced in August under the name of Macvan.
This joint venture between George Gibson & Co.
Ltd. and Scheepvaart en Steenkolen Maats of Rotterdam was to operate from the Albert Dock.
A major redevelopment of the area including the provision of a 20 ton Derrick Crane to handle the containers had already been carried out.
This was to be a temporary measure while further preparations were made for the erection of an Anderson Clyde ‘Giant Colossus’ gantry type crane which would work to both ship and vehicle.
This crane actually came into use in January 1969.
1967
A new Suction Discharge Tower was constructed by Simon Handling at Imperial Dock, with a rated capacity of 200 tons per hour.
Two new tugs were added to the towage fleet during the year.
The practice of naming tugs after geographical locations in the Firth of Forth continued with ‘Gunnet’ and ‘Inchcolm’being chosen for the new arrivals.
These tugs built by John Lewis & Sons Ltd. in Aberdeen and more commonly known as water tractors were the first of their kind in Scotland.
The Voith Schneider propulsion system provided the high level of  manoeuvrability required for port operations and for barge handling in the estuary.
In the meantime the old steam Tugs ‘Mickry’ and ‘Oxcar’were sold to James A. White & Co.
Ltd. of St. Davids for demolition.
1967–1968
On 6th December 1967, the Forth Harbour Re-organisation Scheme became law by virtue of a Confirming Act passed on that day.
The new Board of the Forth Ports Authority first met on 15th December and on 1st January 1968, a new role commenced in administering and operating the Ports of Burntisland, Grangemouth, Granton, Kirkcaldy Leith and Methil as a single unit.
The Board of Directors was appointed by the Ministry of Transport after consultation with, and nominated by the National Ports Council, the Chamber of Shipping of the United Kingdom and Firth of Forth Shipowners Association, the British Shipper's Council and Forth Ports Estuary Committee, Edinburgh Corporation, Buckhaven and Methil Burntisland and Kirkcaldy Town Councils, representatives of the Organised Labour, plus two Principal Officers of the Authority Management Group.
1968
The storage space in Imperial Grain Warehouse was again extended providing an additional 20,000 tons of bulk silo capacity.
The total storage available at Imperial Dock to meet the increasing demands of the Distillers now amounted to 55,000 tons.
1968
Chancelot Flour Mill and Warehouse was completed in the Western Harbour adjacent to the Rank complex by the Scottish Co-operative Wholesale Society.
The silos, which were built almost exclusively for the storage of milling wheat have a capacity of 33,000 tons.
It is worth noting that the total grain storage capacity in Leith Docks was now in excess of 124,000 tons.
1969
The New Entrance Lock was opened to shipping in January followed by the official opening by H.R.H.
Prince Philip, Duke of Edinburgh on 28th May.
Measuring 259 metres by 33.5 metres and with a depth over the sill of 12.3m at Mean High Water Spring Tide the new lock was built to allow ships carrying in excess of 20,000 tonnes of cargo to enter and leave the port.
As from this time, Leith became an impounded dock where the water level remains almost constant.
A new entrance capable of allowing these larger ships into Imperial Dock was completed in September while the fitting out quay at Victoria Shipyard incorporating new gates on the slipways also came into use during the year.
East & West Old Docks infilled.
1970
The provision of floating timber fenders in the Entrance Lock effectively reduced the width to 31.6 metres but gave added protection to ships using the facility.
These fenders rise and fall with the lock water level and prevent  ships' hulls from making contact with the concrete lock walls.
1971
Reclamation of the foreshore to seaward of the Imperial Dock was extended to the Eastern Breakwater to complete a scheme which had been in progress for several years and which would provide additional space for industry.
In addition, the infilling of the East and West Old Dock had been completed early in the year while 5 hectares of foreshore at Seafield was reclaimed by the Authority on behalf of Edinburgh Corporation.
1972
Bredero Price (U.K.) Ltd. established a pipe coating plant at the North Side of Imperial Dock.
Numerous other companies were attracted to the port by the increased activities in the North Sea.
The majority of these companies were directly involved with the emerging oil industry and had strong American connections.
1972
A common user oil berth was created at the Imperial Basin concentrating in one place all of the oil tanker operations and releasing the berth on the North Side of Imperial Dock for bulk handling activities.
1973
The Forth Ports Authority (Constitution) Revision Order 1973 came into operation on the 23rd July.
The Board of Directors was reconstituted to consist of a chairman and five other members appointed by the Secretary of State for the Environment, a General Manager of the Authority, and two members being full time officers of the Authority.
The new Board consisted of members with knowledge and experience rather than representatives of particular interests.
1975
A decision to pipe crude oil from the B.P. Forties Field in the North Sea to a new terminal at Hound Point from where it was to be shipped outwards, raised doubts about safety of navigation in the River Forth.
In order to alleviate the fears and objections associated with the movement of large tankers in narrow waters a radar navigational system covering the deep water channel from the Fairway Buoy of Inchkeith Island to the Forth Bridge came into operation on the 1st September.
The radar scanner can be seen on the top of the Lock Control Building at the Entrance Lock.
1976
The erection of two 225 tonne per hour Grain Suction Towers and the upgrading of ancillary plant within the Imperial Dock Warehouse was completed by the end of the year.
The new machines built by Simon Carves increased the discharge capacity by around 60%.
1977
A new Coal Handling Plant was commissioned during the summer on the North Side of Edinburgh Dock.
Associated road and rail work was also completed.
The new plant rated at 3,000 tonnes per hour was designed to load vessels up to 7,500 D.W.C.
1977
Lothian Regional Council's Sewage Treatment Works at Seafield was commissioned.
The Works are connected by pipeline to a holding tank and loading arms at the North Side, Edinburgh Dock.
The Sludge Disposal Vessel ‘Gardyloo’ built to operate from the new facility was in fact completed in August 1876 and immediately chartered for work on the Clyde while awaiting completion of the Seafield Works.
The vessel now sails two or three times per week to dumping grounds off the Bell Rock and St. Abb's Head.
1978
The towage capacity of the Authority fleet was greatly increased in July with the arrival of the tug ‘Oxcar’.
Built by Richard Dunstan Shipyard at Hessle on the River Humber, the new tug was again fitted with twin Voith-Schneider propulsion units and has a bollard point of 27 tonnes.
The ‘Martello’ had already been sold to Taylor Marine at Inverkeithing for further trading.
1979
Tug ‘Craigleith’ was sold to Frank Pierce Tugs Ltd.
Poole, and sailed on 14th December to join her new owner's fleet.
1980
A totally enclosed Siwertell archimedean screw ship unloader was erected on the North Side of Imperial Dock for the dust free discharge of bulk cargoes.
The machine has a capacity of approximately 300 tonnes per hour and will be used primarily by Scottish Agricultural Industries for the import of raw materials used in the production of farm fertilisers.
1982
Further modernisation was carried out at the Imperial Grain Warehouse.
New automatic weighing scales by Molenschot (U.K.) Ltd. came into use at the Back Delivery Section in April.
Dust extraction plant had been installed and a vacuum cleaning system became operational.
Edinburgh Grain Warehouse was closed on 12th February.
1982
Forth Estuary Towage Limited was established to undertake all the Authority's towage activities including the handling of vessels at the new Braefoot Bay Terminals due to come into operation in 1984.
1983
Two new tugs were delivered to Forth Estuary Towage Ltd.
‘Seal Carr’ and ‘Beamer’arrived in May and July respectively, both built at Bromborough by Mactay Marine Limited, and again fitted with Voith Schneider omni-directional thrust  propellers .
The tugs were built primarily for service at the Braefoot Bay Terminal and are fully fitted for fire fighting and pollution control.
Each tug has a bollard pull of 19 tonnes and will add flexibility to the fleet both in Leith and in the river.
1983
A new radar Surveillance system giving a wide coverage of the estuary was commissioned in December.
Built by Norcontrol, this highly computerised system was installed to provide better navigational control of the increased tanker movements expected as a result of the opening of the new L.P.G. and Ethylene Terminals at Braefoot Bay due in 1984.
Radar Scanners are now positioned at Port Edgar, Burntisland, Archerfield, and Leith with the operation still controlled from the Harbour Master's building at Leith Lock Entrance.
The estuary is now covered by radar from Grangemouth to the Isle of May and Bass Rock and is one of the most sophisticated systems in the United Kingdom.
1984
Demolition of redundant sheds and railway lines and the subsequent asphalting of the quay apron of the Harbour Berths for the export of barley in vessels up to 20,000 D.W.C. was completed in April.
Two 30 metre Fyson mobile conveyors with twin feeders were purchased, each machine with a rated capacity of 600 tonnes per hour while a twin 50 tonne Shering road weighbridge was installed to meet the requirements of the grain trade.
The first vessel to load at the new facility was the ‘Secil Angola’ which arrived on 27th April to load 3945 tonnes.
The new berth will also be used for the import and export of a wide range of other cargoes.
A new 50 tonne Avery road weighbridge was also installed at the Edinburgh Dock and is operated as a Public Weighbridge available to both dock and non-dock traffic.
1985
H.M.S. Edinburgh a type 42 destroyer was commissioned on 17th December by the Right Honourable Michael Heseltine Minister of Defence at the Cruise Liner Berth in the Western Harbour.
1985
The ‘City of Edinburgh’ Lifeboat was officially accepted by the Duke of Atholl, Chairman of the R.N.L.I.
at a ceremony held in the Passenger Reception Hall in the Western Harbour on 21st November.
The boat built by money raised by the City of Edinburgh Appeal Fund is now stationed at Fraserburgh.
1986
Modernisation of the South Side of Imperial Dock was completed and officially opened on 3rd October by Lord Brabagon of Tara, Parliamentary Under-Secretary of State for Transport.
A new Transit Shed measuring 4500m 2 and a covered storage area measuring 840m 2 has been provided while the surrounding areas have been concreted to allow easy movement of cargo handling machinery.
Five quayside cranes of up to 10 tonne capacity serve the berth.
1986
Two Redler conveyors were purchased to improve the facilities for the intake of grain by road at the Imperial Dock Warehouse.
Each machine has a rated capacity of 150 tonnes per hour.
Aeration equipment was installed to serve six 200 tonne bins in order that new harvest grain could be taken into the warehouse and aerated if required.
1987
Leith was the British stop-over port in the E.E.C.
‘Tag Race’ for multihulled sailing vessels