

INTRODUCTION
 "La victoire de Charles-le-Chauve sépara la France de l'empire d'Occident et fonda l'indépendance de la nation française" .
That was how, in 1860, Frenchmen commemorated the battle of Fontenoy in 841, fought between the grandsons of Charlemagne around a windswept hill in northern Burgundy.
The issue was mastery of western Christendom, over which Charlemagne had been crowned emperor on Christmas Day 800.
The victory of Charles the Bald (823–877) and his brother Louis over their elder brother the Emperor Lothar resulted in a division of Charlemagne's inheritance that has proved permanent.
Charlemagne himself, at once "French" and "German" , has always been a powerful symbol of European domination, a model for both Napoleon and Kaiser Wilhelm II.
Modern Frenchmen and Germans have disputed possession of Charlemagne.
Charles the Bald, by contrast, could be appropriated by the French in the nineteenth century: hence the erection of the obelisk at Fontenoy by a group of local patriots.
Charles was often to be invoked in the 1860s: Napoleon III's choice of Compiègne for one of his favourite imperial palaces recalled the French nation's ninth-century "founder" .
It was an understandable choice in an age of burgeoning national myths.
Caesar's Gaul had been bounded by the "natural frontiers" of the North Sea and the Mediterranean, the Pyrenees and the Rhine, and France was its direct descendant — via the "French" kingdom of Charles the Bald.
In fact French unity and French nationality were largely post-medieval; and they were unnatural.
For Charles's was a kingdom of manmade frontiers, superimposed on nature.
The Carolingians' heartlands, that is, the area where most of their estates were clustered, and where Franks had been settled for centuries, spanned modern Belgium and the Netherlands, northern France, and western Germany, thus lying athwart the "natural" frontiers of the Ardennes forest, and the rivers Meuse and Rhine.
Carolingians also flouted "natural" frontiers when they divided their lands.
In 806, for instance, Charlemagne imagined for his second son Pippin a regnum (literally: area ruled over) comprising Italy and Bavaria, which made sense because of historic links between the two regions but overrode the Alps.
Charles the Bald's brother Louis, who (though the Frenchmen of 1860 chose to forget it) had fought alongside Charles at Fontenoy, was called rex Germaniae ( "king of Germany" ) by contemporaries who knew the classics, because his kingdom was (like Caesar's Germania) "across the Rhine" .
But in the ninth century, it was only writers in Charles's kingdom who labelled Louis thus: in his own kingdom Louis was known as "king of the eastern Franks" .
In fact that East Frankish kingdom included lands on the west bank of the Rhine, as well as, further east, regions inhabited by Saxons, Bavarians and Alemans.
In the eighth century, as the Franks had imposed their domination over those they called "subject peoples" , Frankish kings had come to rule over many regna, not only far west as well as east of the Rhine, but beyond the Alps and beyond the Pyrenees.
Regna were artificial things.
Carolingian rulers didn't just receive them as a given: rather, they created, recreated, shaped them for themselves.
Aquitaine, for instance, was the name of an old Roman province; but the shape of the Carolingian regnum of that name was a Carolingian creation — which also was quite different from Eleanor's twelfth-century duchy.
There were some striking continuities in terms of the survival of Roman law and custom and language.
But it is easier to show that the Aquitanians' identity as a people was imposed on them rather than felt by them in Carolingian times.
The political units of the ninth century were thus very different from those imagined by nineteenth-century patriots.
Nowadays, for  convenience, modern historians label Charles the Bald's kingdom West Francia.
But no-one used that label in the ninth century; nor did Charles ever call himself king of the West Franks: his own royal title was simply "king by the grace of God" .
His contemporaries spoke of "Charles's kingdom (regnum)" , and distinguished within it peoples and regna: Francia, Burgundy, Gothia (or Septimania) and Aquitaine.
This group of regna had seldom been ruled by the same person before 840; and after 840, continuing or permanent union was not foreseen.
Charles the Bald himself divided his kingdom, as his predecessors had done theirs, between some of his sons, recreating regna within his own regnum.
Throughout his reign, Charles coexisted with other Carolingians (his brothers and nephews) in territories that had once been ruled as an empire, the regnum Francorum, by Charles's grandfather Charlemagne and his father Louis the Pious.
Thus the same word — regnum — was used for the whole and for both larger and smaller parts.
For us this is confusing.
Why did mid-ninth-century people see no incongruity there?
To pose the question is a form of anachronism.
Hindsight makes it possible to distinguish ideal from reality, illusion from conceivable outcome.
It takes some imagination to share the contradictions, the unrealised hopes, the might-have-beens, of the past.
Who in the ninth century could have foreseen modern France?
In Charles's generation, rival Carolingians competed for royal resources within a regnum francorum which, however divided, had been, and might again be, one.
(The late-twentieth-century history of "Germany" shows that collective memories of unity can outlast a generation of partition.)
Hence Carolingian diplomacy was not like modern international relations, where each state recognises the others' rights to permanent existence and a defined territory.
In the ninth-century "state-system" , each component was itself unstable.
Just as within a family holding, division in each generation was partly offset by not just accident but longer-term strategies (cousin-marriage; the offloading of surplus heirs into the Church) that restored unity, so shifts in the shape of the royal family, unpredictable but generally divisive in the short run, were offset by a longer-term impulsion to re-form a united whole.
The ninth century's ambiguous use of the term regnum, therefore, accurately  reflects this historic indeterminacy and open-endedness.
It was the kings' collective identity as a family, clearly marked out by their distinctive names, that gave the Carolingian world a political unity underlying successive partitions.
The interest shown by so many ninth-century chroniclers, wherever they were based, in what was going on in other parts of that world, and specifically, in what kings did, reflects a persisting reality.
Charles's position in the family remained that of younger brother almost throughout his life.
Lothar, the eldest of Louis the Pious's legitimate sons, had acquired the title of emperor even before Charles was born, and dominated his generation until his death in 855.
Thereafter Louis the German was the senior member of the family: some seventeen years older than his half-brother Charles, he lived to the ripe age of seventy.
Charles outlived him by hardly more than a year: his life was thus in a sense overshadowed by Louis, constantly subject to fraternal political pressure, his kingdom twice fraternally-invaded, his ultimate imperial plans beset by fraternal rivalry.
Louis's and Charles's careers were intertwined, therefore; and neither can be fully understood in isolation, still less within the frame of a national history.
The recent treatment of Charles the Bald alone, or in a "French" context, by several British historians has tended to obscure this broader geographic dimension of Carolingian familial politics.
Nevertheless, two hundred years after Charles's death, the inhabitants of the lands he had once ruled were identified as Kerlinger, Carlenses: "Charles's men" ; and in the thirteenth century, when King Louis IX arranged at St-Denis the tombs of the kings who had preceded him, he left two in positions of special honour, the Merovingian Dagobert, greatest of the First Frankish dynasty, and Charles the Bald.
The pages that follow will help to explain how this could have come about: how Charles, partly by conscious action, but also in spite of himself, played a crucial part in France's making.
That is only a secondary aim of this book, however.
My prime aim is to understand Charles in his own times: what he did, what world he moved in, what sort of man he was.
Evocations of Dark Age kingdoms are often a Grimms' fairy-tale picture of huge dark forests, dwarfing the puny efforts of humankind.
For Charles and his contemporaries, the forests were a resource, in part artificially maintained, and certainly systematically exploited.
Cultivation of the land was intensive in some areas; and settlement quite dense.
For nearly everyone, the countryside was home, not a wilderness or place of exile.
Great rivers functioned, in ninth-century reality and in human imaginations, sometimes as arteries, sometimes as boundaries, and political units (counties, for instance) often straddled them.
Take the Loire, for instance.
Modern travellers going south from Paris are awestruck by its scale (though they cross, conveniently, by bridge).
In the ninth century, one poet praised its beauty, while another drowned in it; salt-traders and vintners plied it as a matter of routine; nobles and religious communities with estates on both sides of it had boats ready for regular crossings and landing-stages where their men could send off surplus produce for sale and unload imports for their masters' consumption; Vikings contemplated arduous upstream journeys, but quick getaways; Charles the Bald, worried over strategic problems, planned the river's blocking, and policing, and also exploited the symbolic possibilities of meetings at Orléans, Fleury, Cosne, Meung, Pouilly to which nobles must come from Aquitaine by crossing the river while Charles himself received his visitors on the Frankish side.
So, any reading of landscape as evidence needs to take account of the varied meanings as well as uses which people imposed on their environment.
Ecclesiastical geography again shows the ninth-century landscape manmade.
The civitates where bishops had their palaces and churches were inherited from Roman times.
(I use the Latin term to avoid anachronistic associations: though nearly all civitates have become modern towns and cities, their urban character in the ninth century is problematic.)
The distribution of monasteries and cult-centres in the rural landscape reflected the location of royal and noble estates, and lay patrons' choices of holy men.
Religious communities at St-Martin, Tours, or St-Denis near  Paris, had grown up at the tombs of martyrs in cemetery sites outside Roman civitates, and by the ninth century housed over a hundred clergy or monks apiece.
Other monasteries — St-Riquier near Amiens, and St-Vaast at Arras, for instance— were certainly centres of economic production and exchange in the ninth century.
The label "proto-urban" fits none of these places very comfortably, however.
Little ninth-century architecture remains above ground in any of these sites, though a rare surviving ninth- century crypt, as at St-Denis, or still rarer frescoes, as at St-Germain, Auxerre, or (perhaps most impressive of all) the sombre magnificence and elaborately-structured space of Charlemagne's church at Aachen, give the modern visitor a unique insight into the religious experience of Charles and his contemporaries.
Even where documents are available, historians need a lot of imagination to reconstruct any kind of Carolingian site.
In Britain, archaeology has thrown a great deal of light on the Dark Ages: but British students, when they turn to the ninth-century Continent, are in for a disappointment, for relatively little has been done.
Recently, however, in June 1989, the skeleton of Charles's cousin Nithard was disinterred in the graveyard at St-Riquier; and archaeologists are confident of having located Charles's fortification at Pîtres (near Pont-de-l'Arche, dep.
Eure) and the ninth-century emporium at Quentovic (near Montreuil, dep.
Pas-de-Calais): both remarkably extensive sites.
Other kinds of non-written material offer crucial evidence.
Coin finds can help in reconstructing the economic history of this period.
The material environment of secular life at any social level has to be reconstructed from even less direct evidence, since, unfortunately, very few ninth-century weapons or jewels, tools or items of household equipment, survive.
The lists of possessions bequeathed in aristocratic wills — horses, hunting-dogs and hawks, swords and daggers, belts and baldrics, body-armour, spurs, cloaks and furs, bracelets and rings, drinking-cups and silver dishes — allow a glimpse of this world we have lost.
The same wills also list the liturgical objects — crosses, plates, censers, bells, candle-sticks — that furnished these nobles' chapels, and the reliquaries made of precious metals and precious stones and housing fragments of saints' bones, hair and beards, or even the names of holy men, which the rich and powerful kept in their treasuries, or even wore around their necks.
Poor people, unable to privatise the holy in this way, crowded to shrines where they were welcomed by the custodians of miracle-working relics.
Books used in the liturgy were holy objects, often encased in jewelled bookcovers, and placed on altars or carried in processions to inspire and impress the faithful.
On the other hand, the audience for the images that were sometimes drawn and painted inside such books — portraits of the evangelists, for instance, or (like the picture on the cover of this book) of a royal patron — must have been very restricted.
The written word more generally is another story: its wide dissemination then is very good news for the historian now.
An enormous quantity of written material was produced in Charles's kingdom — from huge, splendid documents to crudely-penned words on small scraps of grubby parchment.
The relative importance of these items to those who wrote and kept them can't be assessed in terms of size or splendour.
Charms, relic-labels, records of land-grants or dispute-settlements often strike modern palaeographers as unimpressive objects.
Ninth-century users had their own criteria of utility, and they preferred to use oral alongside written communications in most contexts.
Their attitudes to written records can seem cavalier, and contradictory.
Even scholars intent on appropriating the classical inheritance did so for their own reasons: Abbot Lupus of Ferrières made his command of Cicero's letters serve as a sort of code in communicating with learned friends, while Archbishop Hincmar of Rheims compiled extracts from the Theodosian Code and then cited them to suit his own book.
Still, the Carolingian Renaissance in the mid-ninth century touched far more than just a select clerical few.
Charlemagne had begun with the clergy, encouraging them  to learn and write correct Latin for the liturgy; two generations later, the lay elite in Charles's kingdom used writing in several different forms, from books of private prayer to family archives, while many laypeople of lesser rank wanted documents as evidence of their own property claims and legal status.
Surviving written texts thus reflect (directly or indirectly) the concerns of a much larger proportion of the population than we have evidence for in the period before the ninth century.
The amount of material available to provide a context for Charles the Bald is very extensive indeed.
Evidence for political affairs comes in a variety of genres: some apparently unlikely sources — theological treatises, for instance, or accounts of the translations (that is , the carryings to new locations) of saints' relics, and collections of miracle-stories — turn out to hold a good deal of information about (and reactions to) war and politics.
This makes sense: war and politics were perceived by lay participants as subject to supernatural interventions that could be magically invoked as well as interpreted — hence the important role of churchmen and their rituals in these areas of public contestation and conflict, for instance in not just the retrospective presentation but the preliminary "staging" of battles as Judgements of God.
Ninth-century annals and histories deal directly with public affairs and provide a more or less reliable framework of political events; but they too are shot through with perceptions of the miraculous, and they are, at the same time, highly personal works (as historical writing usually is), full of bias and image-making, whether written (as many were) for the king's entourage, or for an audience far away from the court.
But the sheer quantity of such texts and the variety of their intended readers and hearers means that some cross-referencing is possible.
This is the nearest ninth-century specialists can get to methodological rigour: we should have no illusions about our limitations, nor about some still-enormous gaps in available evidence.
The so-called Annals of St-Bertin (so called simply because one manuscript survived later in the Middle Ages at the monastery of St-Bertin) were produced in Charles the Bald's kingdom, more or less contemporaneously with the events they record, throughout Charles's  reign.
The AB do not constitute a court chronicle: successive AB authors (Prudentius, then Hincmar of Rheims) had their local concerns, their blind spots, and their own axes to grind.
But their unofficial quality brings gains as well as losses: these writers are often passionately involved in the events they record.
There is nothing dry-as-dust about their testimony.
Further, it can be checked against other contemporary annals, whether produced in Charles's kingdom but giving a perspective very different from the AB's (the brief Annals of the monastery of Fontanelle, or St-Wandrille, near modern Le Havre, for instance, have their own house-based story to tell), or written in another Carolingian kingdom, like the East Frankish Annals of Fulda which are just as slanted as the AB, but in a different direction.
One type of evidence comes in very much larger quantities from Charles's kingdom than from any other in the ninth century: capitularies — that is, lists of points (capitula literally means "headings" ) discussed and/or adopted as law by assemblies where king and aristocracy met to settle public affairs.
Plentiful capitulary material means that a good deal can be said about Charles as a ruler.
But for the politics of the reign, two kinds of material are still more useful — and available in quantity: personal letters; and royal acta.
The letters of Lupus, for instance, reveal networks of personal connections, links between court and local community, workings of assemblies — and their egocentricity can, again, be turned to the historian's advantage.
Royal acta, especially charters, but also letters and judgements, allow the pattern of royal patronage to be reconstructed; and incidentally give information on the king's itinerary and sometimes his entourage.
Last but certainly not least, all these materials have been expertly edited, and discussed in a great many learned articles, by earlier generations of Continental scholars.
Anyone in the late twentieth century who studies Charles the Bald is perched on the shoulders of those giants.
The writing of a biography is simply impossible for more than a few major churchmen and even fewer secular rulers in the early Middle Ages.
In the case of Charles the Bald, though, given the rich documentation, and the giants' spadework, the surprising thing (to invert Dr Johnson on women preachers) is not that it's been done badly, but that — with two partial exceptions — it has not been done at all.
The exceptions deserve attention.
Paul Zumthor's short book, published in 1957, is the work of a historian of culture: a dramatic sketch, full of passion and tragedy, brilliant on some ninth-century writers, but with little reference to capitularies or charters, long on psychology, but short on political analysis.
This is literary biography at its most stylish.
There are no footnotes.
At the opposite historiographical pole is the study of Charles's reign projected by Arthur Giry (d. 1899) in the late nineteenth century and pursued by Ferdinand Lot and his young collaborator Louis Halphen in the early twentieth.
Giry's models were the volumes of Jahrbucher (year-books) which German scholars had produced for the reigns of other Carolingians: strictly chronological accounts conceived quite literally as annals.
(Giry had also begun a translation of the AB.)
Lot was inspired by Ernst Dümmler's Geschichte des ostfränkischen Reiches, to write not annals but a history of Charles's reign: "But we have kept tightly within the frame of our subject: while M. Duemmler, under colour of writing the history of the East Frankish kingdom, has dealt almost as much with the history of Italy, of Lotharingia, of West Francia, we have devoted ourselves uniquely to the study of this last country, seen from a political point of view" .
For this kind of history, Lot like Giry thought charters of fundamental importance, and he "encumbered his footnotes" (his own deliciously ironic phrase!) with charter-analyses.
Lot and Halphen's "volume 1" (1909) covered the period 840 to early 851.
It is magnificent, but it is not the kind of historical writing that brings a dead world to life for late twentieth-century students.
The projected three further volumes never appeared.
Lot confessed that the preparatory work  seemed "endless" .
I can sympathise with him: but I have not attempted to write his kind of history.
Since my focus is on politics, why write a biography?
Studying the past by reigns is certainly artificial, and risks obscuring in this case, for instance, the intimate links between the various parts of the Carolingian world, and the profound continuities linking the mid-ninth century to the immediately preceding and succeeding periods.
More seriously, it may be anachronistic to highlight one man as the unit for study — for it could be argued that "the individual" had not yet been discovered.
Instead, early medieval literature and iconography alike focused on exemplars of a type, a group or a status: royalty, for instance, or the royal family.
So-called "ruler-portraits" nearly always turn out to be stereotypes: in the context of Carolingian group-identity, the precise point about images of Charles the Bald was the resemblance to Louis the Pious and Charlemagne, his father and grandfather.
We have what sounds like an accurate personal description of Charles: "of middle height, good-looking, fit for all sorts of exercise, bold, generous, shrewd and good at public speaking" .
In the same breath, the writer attributes identical traits to Charles's brother.
In other words, both kings are being depicted as kingly.
Charles and his contemporaries did not appeal for authority to individual judgement or experience: instead they invoked shared role-models and peer-group pressure.
Isolation was a prospect Charles would confront (so Archbishop Hincmar reminded him) terrifyingly in the next world: "when the soul has left power and riches and the body itself, and is left naked and alone, without wife and children, and without the comfort and fellowship of followers and vassals" .
The king's life in this world was anything but private.
Yet a royal biography has two great advantages.
First, its concern with a king, his personality and his personal relationships, goes with the grain of early medieval politics.
The  qualities of individual kings really did shape events, and accidents of birth and death in a royal family could determine not only short-term alliances and conflicts, but the long-term destinies of peoples and regions.
A fairly long, extremely active and relatively well-documented royal life like that of Charles the Bald can serve modern students as a thread through the maze of complex power-relations, and at the same time it leads back to the heart of events.
Second, an individual's life has an intelligible shape and built-in human interest.
 "The affairs of mortals touch our hearts." 
Historical biography may be hard to write, but it draws more readers to history than any other genre.
Historical biographers tend to work within their own national boundaries, and to prefer as subjects the Good Kings of national history.
Though my "frame" is a life rather than a realm, I think an understanding of the Carolingian world requires the transgression of modern national boundaries.
I certainly do not share the view of Charles Plummer nearly a century ago (when the fate of Napoleon III was still fresh enough to point an implicit moral), that Charles the Bald was "a typical Frenchman in many respects, intellectually clever but caring only for the outward pomp and circumstance of empire without the strength of character to grasp and hold the reality of power" .
I hope that French as well as British and other readers will find Charles the Bald interesting — but not because he was French.
Charles has never been cast as a Good King in the nation-building mould of his contemporary Alfred of Wessex: he would surely not have minded — for he was a Frank, not a Frenchman.
On the other hand, Charles had an undeniable impact on the subsequent history of France — arguably no less of an impact than Alfred had on the subsequent history of England.
What makes all the difference is the perceived nature of the impact.
In Charles's case, Montesquieu has a lot to answer for.
In The Spirit of Laws, Charles's was identified as the reign when "the whole of the French political state" was changed and weakened.
Montesquieu did not omit the deficiencies of Charles's father Louis the Pious, nor the contributory factors of French fickleness and Viking destruction: but he put the chief blame on the "weak  spirit of Charles the Bald" and, in particular, on the heritability of fiefs which Charles had permitted.
Thus France after the high ground of the early Middle Ages descended into a trough from which the nation would be raised only centuries later by the great Capetians Philip Augustus and St Louis: feudal monarchs who defused feudalism.
This still widely-held interpretation of ninth-century history, and of Charles the Bald as a Bad King, is there in embryo in the final section of Montesquieu's book.
It proved remarkably durable — leaving its mark, for instance, on two of the medieval history-books most read by Frenchmen in the twentieth century: Marc Bloch's Feudal Society and F.L. Ganshof's Feudalism.
Yet, at last, in some cases surprisingly recently, most aspects of this picture have been revised.
National prejudices have waned; stereotyped "feudalism" has been demolished; Carolingian government has been newly appraised; reassessments have been offered of Louis the Pious, of the Vikings, even of the ninth-century Frankish nobility.
It seems high time that Charles the Bald too was reconsidered.
Charles's nickname has not helped.
More than one modern historian has enjoyed wrestling with the question: was Charles the Bald really bald?
The nickname was a contemporary one, a means of distinguishing this Charles from other Carolingians with the same name.
It may have been not descriptive but ironic (implying Charles was exceptionally hairy).
In the ninth century as later, baldness struck some people as funny.
Then as later, bald men liked to rebut the jokers by recalling great bald men of the past.
Charles the Bald, if he was bald, was no doubt happy to be classed with famous emperors of antiquity.
But what mattered more to him was his given name: Charles.
He had been named after his grandfather, whose nickname magnus, originally meaning the "elder" or "senior" one, was already in the ninth century acquiring the connotations of greatness it has kept ever since.
Charles the Bald was said to resemble his grandfather physically.
The only contemporary image of Charlemagne is on a few of his coins.
Nine "portraits" of Charles the Bald are extant: five depicted in  manuscripts; one carved in ivory; two cast in metal; and finally a coin-image.
Some of these images may be partly taken from life, not just from stereotyped Carolingian ruler images.
Charles is depicted with a distinctive long, thin moustache (not quite like his eldest brother's), a long, heavy-jowled face, square chin and a large nose.
He must have been physically fit to survive the punishing schedule to which he submitted himself.
The bouts of ill-health occasionally recorded (they were always politically inconvenient) became frequent only during his last years, but even then scarcely diminished the pace of a very active life.
(Charles may have picked up malaria in Italy in 875: he was seriously ill from late July to mid-August 876, and from December 876 to January 877.
And his personality?
Lupus of Ferrières reveals something of what it was like to be within close range of Charles.
Lupus feared his anger and advised others not to provoke it ( "I consider it dangerous to obstruct the king's orders" ); felt hurt when Charles very obviously "doesn't care about the things that matter to me" ; appreciated Charles's personally "asking me at Bourges not long ago what I felt about Predestination" ; and was well aware that Charles "has a face that he puts on when he wants to be charming" .
Charles the Bald, in other words, had the two-facedness of successful medieval kings: his friendly smile could win loyalty, his frown could terrify.
He was a man of exceptional persistence, who confronted his many setbacks with an apparently inexhaustible supply of energy and  resourcefulness.
It was no wonder that Hercules seemed an apt role-model.
In many ways Charles was a man of his time.
He was personally devout: participated enthusiastically in the cults of saints, especially St Denis; begged saintly intercession when he had toothache; requested the compilation of an exhaustive martyrology; wanted an explanation of a puzzling passage in the Song of Solomon.
He possessed a little book of private prayers, with an image of himself kneeling before Christ on the cross captioned with a prayer that Christ "absolve my wounds for me" — a reference to sins which also likened the king's sufferings to Christ's.
The book's ivory covers depicted, on the basis of Psalms 25 and 27 (Vulgate 24, 26), a biography of David that implicitly was also Charles's own — from secure childhood with the support of "father and mother" , through the assaults of "wicked enemies" with the support of "the innocent and upright" , to a secure sanctuary with Christ.
Charles's personal copy of the psalter (a manuscript designed for daily devotions) also had ivory covers, showing the prophet Nathan's rebuke of David for his liaison with Bathsheba (Ps 51, Vulg 50) and the protection of David's soul (Ps 57, Vulg 56) depicted as a little child on the lap of a kindly angel.
Charles's court-scholars often encouraged him to find inspiration and confidence in the story of David.
Charles's relationship with each of his successive wives seems to have been harmonious, and (unlike David's) fitted contemporary conventions.
No infidelities are recorded.
Charles saw to the liturgical commemoration of his parents and grandparents, his wives and offspring, but not of any more distant relatives.
He seems never to have  been close to his sister.
With his children, he had problems fairly typical of medieval royal families.
He could be ruthless, even to the extent of having his own rebellious son blinded.
(Contemporaries accepted that violence even within the heart of the family might be a cruel necessity.)
But Charles could prove himself a good lord: when his fidelis (faithful man) Adalgar was captured by Charles's half-sister (she supported her full brother Lothar in the fraternal conflict of 841) and taken to her stronghold of Laon, Charles rode through the night with a small retinue to achieve Adalgar's release.
(A contemporary was equally impressed by the fact that Charles was able to restrain his men from sacking Laon.)
Loyal service was recognised when Charles arranged for the commemoration at St-Denis of two particularly close fideles, extending to them benefits until then made available only to the king's blood-relatives.
Throughout his life Charles attracted the young and ambitious to his court.
In his entourage of personal servants and clients, along with an Irish doctor and scholar-poet (who seems to have stayed for nearly thirty years in Charles's circle), he had a court-jester.
The king's sense of humour seems to have been appropriately dark.
One possibly apocryphal joke of Charles's own was made late one night "after many dishes and many cups" at the expense of the Irish poet: Charles leaned across and asked: "Quid distat inter sottum et scottum" (what separates a drunk from an Irishman?)
But that time at least, the Irishman (it was John the Scot) got his own back by replying: "My lord, only this table" .
Two other traits Charles may have owed to the influence of his father Louis the Pious, though he pursued both a good deal further than Louis.
First, Charles was highly-educated (and here he seems to have benefited from his mother's personal concern), not only sharing the interest of ecclesiastical contemporaries in theology and political ideas, but learned enough to pose convincingly as a philosopher-ruler and knowledgeable enough about Roman Law to attempt self-conscious emulation of Theodosius and Justinian in his own capitularies.
Second, he had a strong visual sense and a taste for ritual.
He made far more play than his father (or other ninth-century Carolingians) with the penalty of the harmscara — a public humiliation imposed at the ruler's discretion which involved the victim's carrying a saddle on his back.
Charles repeatedly threatened this for those who flouted his authority.
He staged lavish spectacles to signify the granting of favour to a subordinate-ruler, again "in the style of Roman emperors" and made the most of the great assemblies in which king and aristocracy joined to "maintain the healthy condition of the whole realm" .
He also mobilised the resources of Christian ritual (again following in his father's footsteps but going far beyond him) in the royal and imperial consecrations staged not only for himself and his son but for Ermentrude and Richildis; in the development of royal funerary cult at St-Denis and in the lavish endowment of liturgical commemorations of himself, his family and friends, at a number of churches; and in the use of spiritual kinship, especially the godparental bond, in political dealings with neighbouring princes as a paradigm of beneficent authority.
All these demonstrations of rulership had an afterlife long after Charles himself had gone.
Even when assemblies rarely if ever met and capitularies were  no longer read, the idea of the realm survived in myth, symbol and tradition.
It was at that level that a thread of continuity linked Charles with his Capetian successors, and his realm with later medieval France.
Charles's reign therefore is interesting both in itself and for what came after.
This book's purpose is to show Charles as an archexponent of Carolingian political practice in an age when new (as well as old) problems beset all Charlemagne's successors but none more so than Charles.
At the same time, this book helps to explain why Charles's exercise of rulership had long-term effects, and why his kingdom lasted.
THE CAROLINGIAN ECONOMY AND THE STATE
 "It was the best of times; it was the worst of times" .
Characterisations of the ninth-century Carolingian world have been almost as polarised as Charles Dickens's portrayal of the French Revolution.
When Henri Pirenne placed the demise of the antique state, with the collapse of its increasingly ramshackle economic life-support system, in the mid-eighth century, he identified the moment of transition from the sub-Roman world to the Dark Ages.
Much subsequent historiography has been in the nature of post-mortem investigation.
Some have suggested that the time of death should be postdated to the ninth century, arguing that while the reign of Charlemagne (768–814) saw a last futile effort to revive a state-run fiscal system, rigor mortis finally set in with the new barbarian onslaughts of Vikings and Saracens.
There is agreement on the fatal symptoms: a stubborn refusal of the population to increase, a hardening of the arteries of exchange, a closing-off of transfusions of bullion from outside western Europe, a sclerosis of the fiscal and administrative body of the state.
The process of post-mortem decomposition has been traced through the ninth century.
Archaeologists have come up with data at Dorestad, the trading emporium through which the Carolingian court had been supplied, showing protracted decline with, allegedly, a sharp downturn c. 830.
Some  numismatists have confirmed the picture of terminal decay: the Carolingians minted few coins, of which still fewer are said to show signs of having been used.
In the course of the ninth century, the minting of coins to pay tributes to Vikings exhausted supplies of bullion that were already meagre.
The renunciation of any attempt to tax was at once cause and symptom of the state's demise.
Other historians, archaeologists and numismatists, especially in recent years, have offered a radically different view.
They do not deny change; but where Pirenne's followers saw decomposition, they detect signs of economic activity of a new kind.
They regard it as significant that the eighth and ninth century saw an increasing volume of exchanges not initiated by the state, but "privately-generated" ; and they look for the new wealth-creators among lords and peasants, finding in rural markets crucial mechanisms of exchange.
They advance evidence for population increase in the countryside, and for the expansion in agrarian production.
They claim, further, that all this stimulated urban development.
Against Dorestad's decline (which they attribute to particular local difficulties) they set the origins and/or thriving of Ghent and Bruges, Cologne and Mainz, Nantes and Angers.
Some scholars, especially those who have worked on English as well as Continental evidence, have recently been arguing for the role of kingship, if not in initiating, then in profiting from economic activity in both town and countryside.
They point out that whereas merchants had always been welcome at royal courts as vendors of precious things, in the eighth century, and increasingly in the ninth and tenth centuries, kings embarked on more ambitious attempts to exploit systematically the resources of their realms.
It would follow that rumours of the death of the state have been exaggerated — or, at any rate, that early medieval conditions did not preclude the state's rebirth.
These two views of the early medieval economy are irreconcilable, but they have something in common.
Both  assume that the nature of government, indeed the existence of a state at all, depends on the type of resources available to a regime, and the ways in which these resources may be transferred.
On the first scenario of catastrophic change, a crucial, redistributable, element in the Carolingian king's wealth was acquired largely from outside the realm.
The king had at his disposal, not tax revenue, but plunder and tribute amassed through warfare.
His armies consisted of nobles and their warrior-followings: hence instead of being a paymaster, the king allocated the proceeds of war through a network of personalised, "privatised" relations of dependence that replaced public agencies of control and exploitation.
The options boiled down to two: expand or die.
Without constant inflows of external wealth through territorial acquisitions or through raiding, royal power could be maintained only through granting out bits of the fisc, that is, of royal estates.
Hence the early medieval kingdom was not only fundamentally different from the tax-based Roman Empire, but inherently weak and unstable.
On this scenario, Charles the Bald, whose reign (840–77) fairly straddled the mid-ninth century, was doomed to failure: like Charlemagne, he lacked the institutional means to exploit even what wealth there was within his realm, but, unlike Charlemagne, he could no longer lead successful plundering raids against the surrounding peoples, nor keep his aristocracy happy with regular share-outs of loot.
Charles's only alternative was to use royal lands to "buy" support: a long historiographical tradition casts him as the archetypical squanderer of the fisc.
It was monarchic suicide: "the worst of times" .
Hence some recent advocates of Charles the Bald's partial "rehabilitation" have damned with faint praise: the art-historians' artful exponent of royal style remains, for the historians of politics, a ruler without substantial authority.
But the ninth century was neither the worst nor the best of times.
It was an age of possibilities.
Though Charles the Bald could not evade the type of political problems just outlined, he was predestined neither to success nor to  failure.
He had some room to manoeuvre.
So too has his historian, confronted by a growing body of evidence for change in the ninth-century economy.
In the rest of this chapter, I shall argue that options were widened for Charles in part because increasing resources could be tapped within his kingdom.
The first type of evidence to consider is the polyptychs or estate-surveys.
All relate to ecclesiastical estates (church archives have far better chances of survival), but there is fragmentary evidence for similar surveys on royal estates too, and it seems fair to suppose that lay landlords could also have had them made.
Given the fundamental importance of demography for any assessment of a pre-industrial economy, it is not surprising that economic historians have pressed the surveys into service (historians of medieval England have done the same sort of thing with Domesday Book) as sources of demographic data.
Size of population is the first question: some polyptychs enumerate not only peasant households but individual members of them (as for instance: "X, his wife Y, and their three children A, B and C have one mansus [peasant-holding]" ).
By totting up numbers for one group of estates, adding a notional 22 per cent for unrecorded children under twelve, and a further 25 per cent for other omissions, and then multiplying these for the whole of France, Lot calculated a population for Charles the Bald's kingdom of 26 million.
Most historians at the moment would regard that as a wild overestimate.
But the polyptychs' data, even if it's unwise to generalise from them to the whole kingdom, may still be taken to show a relatively dense, if patchily distributed, population in the area they best cover, namely, that between the rivers Seine and Rhine.
It just so  happens that this region includes the heartland of Charles the Bald's kingdom.
A further question relates to possible movements in population size.
The subdivision of mansi into fractions documented in some polyptychs has been held to suggest the pressure of rising population on land-holding, and evidence of land-clearance and the extension of the cultivated area could point the same way.
There is a speculative element here, for such patchy symptoms could be explained in other ways (for instance by increased consumption of cereals, or by the increasing impositions of lordship in some localities).
But on the whole, a gradually rising population throughout the ninth century seems an acceptable working hypothesis.
Polyptychs were not made to reveal population statistics.
They record dues owed by peasants to landlords; and they are snapshots of particular points in time.
Still, it is sometimes possible to infer alterations over time, and one direct conclusion that can be drawn is that part, at least, of landlords' rationale was economic: within a situation affected by such non-economic factors as pious donations, landlords organised estates and renders to maximise resources.
This was a function of the domanial estate-structure (sometimes known to English-speaking historians as the manorial system), that is of a central directly-farmed agricultural unit, having peasant-tenements grouped around it and owing labour-services on it, and more distant tenements associated with it owing other types of dues and services.
This domanial regime suited large-scale landlords with far-flung holdings (great monasteries were landlords of this type), and by Charles the Bald's reign, it had become general in much of what is now France north of the Loire with some examples also further south in Poitou.
The combination of labour-services, other services, and renders in cash and kind needed careful management.
Take the example of St-Germain-des-Prés on the west bank of the Seine at Paris: here the landlord, the monastic community, organised peasant transport services not only so as to ensure the abbey's food supply but to permit the sale of surplus wine and corn.
This landlord was clearly profiting from involvement in the  market in basic foodstuffs: a market which stray references in contemporary chronicles and letters show to have been lively in the Seine basin during the ninth century.
In other words, the great domain, far from being a closed unit, required the market to dispose of its surpluses and to meet its needs for extraneous products.
A great monastery might thus in the same year be an importer of quality wine (for consumption by the monks and their noble guests) and an exporter of poor wine (for the other end of the market).
The polyptychs reveal another important feature of economic management: the requirement of cash payments from peasants.
How did a tenant acquire the pennies (say, 6d. -12d.) to pay his annual rent?
The inference that he did so by selling is supported by the incidental evidence of miracle-stories: one from St-Benoît-sur-Loire, for instance, recorded in the 870s, tells of two "comrades" (compares) at the monastery's weekly market, who quarrelled over the 12d. they had made on their joint transactions; another story of similar date from St-Hubert in the Ardennes has a peasant (rusticus) stating quite explicitly that he has come to an annual fair "to acquire the wherewithal to pay what I owe to my lord" .
A charter of Charles the Bald in 875 exempted the peasants of St-Philibert, Tournus, in Burgundy from market dues "whether they are trading for the abbey or for themselves" .
It's true that surpluses were accumulated, and transferred in non-economic transactions, and peasants had non-economic reasons for acquiring cash: at the monastery of St-Riquier c.830, the offerings that came in (and even if the largest of these came from nobles, the majority, to judge from the beneficaries of miracles, were from peasants) were worth 300 lb of silver per week.
Further, peasants had ways other than involvement in the market of raising cash: there is charter and capitulary evidence for peasants mortgaging, and sometimes selling, land to their local priests.
What the polyptychs clearly suggest, however, is that in areas west of the Rhine, landlords' cash-demands (backed as they were by the threat of force) drove peasants to acquire coin through transactions on their own account.
Cash was a preferable form of income when the landlord could not, or preferred not to, consume a farm's primary product directly.
Transport services were costly and hard to organise (though in many cases they were extremely carefully organised).
But cash might be preferable when surplus artisanal production was not needed by the lord, and could be sold on the spot.
The polyptych of St-Germain records one group of 14 women (ancillae) who "if supplies of material are given to them, make shirts" .
The next entry lists 19 other women of rather higher legal status (lidae): "All these women either make shirts of 8 alnae or they pay 4 pence." 
Cash had the advantage of flexibility.
Its usefulness presupposed markets where the lord's agents, or the beneficiaries of lordly gifts, could exchange it for consumables.
But cash payments could favour peasants too.
Once you had gained the pennies due to your lord, any additional profit went into your pocket.
You might use such money to buy or lease land, and so increase the holding you had inherited.
Whose had been the initiative in settling the 4d. requirement from the lidae of St-Germain?
How were the surplus shirts sold?
By the monks' estate-manager?
Or by the women or their kin themselves?
In some localities distant from estate centres, often around the edges of existing tenures, the polyptych-surveyors listed mansi absi — literally "absent manses" .
Economic historians used to interpret these as "uncultivated holdings" and inferred that they represented a total loss from the landlord's standpoint.
Recently, however, it has been pointed out that mansi absi were often registered as owing dues, which were always in cash rather than labour services.
The inference has been drawn that these tenures, often (though not necessarily) on land newly cleared from forest or heath, were offered by landlords as  an inducement to tenants to extend their operations, whether through crop-growing or animal husbandry.
Hence the mansi remained absi, in the sense of not having a dwelling on them, since those who worked them came out from existing farms and it was from those that dues were paid.
Tenants working mansi absi were often registered as "strangers" , that is, they hailed from other villages.
So, the sort of man who took on a mansus absus might have been an immigrant attracted by freedom from labour services; or a son who feared that his patrimony, or his share of it, would not be big enough to support his family; or a rich peasant with several adult sons and labour to spare.
Any temptation to idealise the life of a ninth-century peasant should be resisted.
Still, there were opportunities for the enterprising.
In Septimania, aprisiones, that is tenures on waste or deserted lands, held directly of the king free of rent, were made to encourage settlers.
In the Seine basin, landlords created hospitia, free tenures, presumably for similar reasons.
Neither aprisiones nor hospitia are documented before the Carolingian period, and they occur more often in the reign of Charles the Bald than previously.
As in the later Middle Ages, individual interest won out over class interest in landlords' poaching of peasants from their peers' estates.
In 864 a royal assembly at Pîtres near Rouen dealt with the problem (without indicating how widespread it was) of migrant wage-workers in vineyards: clearly some landlords were short of labour at least at harvest-time, and to persuade such migrants to return to their original farms were willing to reassure them that they could keep their earnings.
The same assembly also forbade peasants to sell the holdings on which the bulk of their dues were assessed.
There is nothing implausible in the argument that peasants, especially better-off peasants, managed their holdings, and their familial strategies, as adroitly as did some people higher up the social scale.
Even if mansi absi, or aprisiones, or hospitia, as a proportion of the  total number of holdings in any area, remained small, they were a sign of "dynamism" particularly visible in the heartland of the kingdom of Charles the Bald.
What was the outcome of all this activity — of peasant responses to seigneurial pressures, and conjunctures of peasant and lordly interests?
Did it do no more than keep a subsistence economy running?
The whole idea of economic growth in the early Middle Ages is sometimes dismissed as anachronistic.
One frequently-cited piece of evidence is that of desperately low yields for cereal crops (even as low as one measure reaped for one measure sown — compare modern farmers' ratios of up to 18:1) suggested by a fragment of an inventory of the royal estate of Annappes during Charlemagne's reign.
Quite apart from the dubious legitimacy of generalising from one such fragment, it is uncertain how the data itself should be interpreted.
It is, for instance, quite possible that the grain found on this particular estate by the royal surveyors was what was left after the deduction of food-distributions to slaves and other dependents.
Yields of 1:1 cannot have been normal — or we should be dealing with a sub-subsistence economy!
But no sort of quantifiable data are available for anything but small, and possibly atypical, areas.
A further problem is lack of evidence on farming methods.
It is impossible to say whether use of the heavy iron ploughshare or the horse-collar became more widespread during the course of the ninth century in Francia.
One technological improvement is a little better-documented: water-mills proliferated, with references to them in Charles the Bald's charters, for instance, becoming increasingly frequent as the reign went on.
Unfortunately there is hardly any usable evidence on price movements (apart from obvious dramatic rises during famine-periods), though capitularies document the notion of the local or market price.
I accept the term "growth" on the basis of the probability  that both population and (though this is harder to demonstrate) productivity were rising during the ninth century.
Such growth is documented before the reign of Charles the Bald: the polyptych of St-Victor Marseilles dates from the later years of Charlemagne's reign, that of St-Germain (probably) from the earlier part of Louis the Pious's.
But those of St-Bertin, St-Remi Rheims, Montierender and Lobbes date from the period between c. 840 and 870, as did the now-lost surveys of St-Riquier, Notre Dame Soissons, St-Vaast, and Hautvillers.
Peasants' renders in cash, the proliferation of markets, a growing volume of coinage in circulation, are all demonstrable in the reigns of Charlemagne and Louis the Pious.
During the reign of Charles the Bald, however, such developments not only continued but showed cumulative effects.
Hospitia were numerous enough in 866, for instance, for a special rate to be assigned them when Charles "imposed a payment throughout his whole realm" to pay tribute to Vikings.
Small though the total take was in 866 (4,000 lb of silver), the significant point was not its size but the fact that it was raised in cash through a generalised tax.
The king was impinging on the economy in a new way.
The courts of Charlemagne and Louis the Pious had constituted major centres of demand not only for peasant surpluses but for items of conspicuous consumption purveyed via emporia like Dorestad and Quentovic.
But by the reign of Charles the Bald, while the court remained a large consumer, demand had spread more widely among the elite, and cash transactions multiplied in the countryside.
The possibility of more generalised exactions on the internal economy became a real one.
It was limited in practice by the power of the aristocracy.
Some historians have been arguing recently that payments of census and hostilicium specified in some polyptychs are forms of tax collection and demonstrate the continuity of taxation, and of the administrative structures to exact it, from the late Roman period to the Carolingians.
But it seems more likely that ninth-century  landlords, still using (why not?) the old terminology of the Roman fiscal system, were exacting on their own account dues that had once been owed to the state, rather than acting as tax-collectors on the state's behalf.
(Had ninth-century rulers really been able to collect a generalised army-tax, their armies would surely have been very much larger than they clearly were.)
Ninth-century aristocrats competed with central power for peasant surpluses and commercial profits.
True, they had done so in Roman times, but since then the state's institutional decline meant that the terms of the competition had shifted in favour of the regions and the aristocracy.
Charles the Bald though he tried to regulate some forms of relations between landlords and peasants was in no position to intervene in those relations extensively.
Nevertheless, to raise tribute for Vikings, he did tax, and more than once.
In 877 he imposed a levy on both peasants and nobles which discriminated in the peasants' favour and seems to have provoked noble disaffection.
Charles had not entirely abandoned the efforts of his father and grandfather to protect the pauperes: at the same time, he had done what neither his father nor grandfather had attempted, in imposing public exactions in cash on the economy at large.
The polyptych evidence shows that the peasant economy was well able to sustain these royal demands.
As monarch, Charles had other key resources.
The church's vast wealth was accessible to the king on a scale denied even to the greatest of landed magnates.
Charles exploited it on a scale his predecessors had not needed to try.
The church's ideology not only gave powerful support to kingship: it sustained the very idea of the state as a permanent complex of institutions, because therein lay the best prospect of defending ecclesiastical interests.
The church was therefore prepared to put its money where its mouth was: churchmen in Charles's reign might complain bitterly of the economic burdens of military service and fiscal exactions borne by their particular churches, but they  never questioned the right and duty of kings to impose these on the church at large in order to ensure the well-being of the Christian people.
By its example, and also by its preaching, the church sought to impress these ideas on the laity, including the secular aristocracy.
The church's provinces, dioceses and parishes gave it an extensive infrastructure, its carefully-ranked personnel and tiers of assemblies a hierarchy of control into which the king could tap.
But Charles the Bald also had a communications-network of his own: in his kingdom, many Roman roads had survived, with a system of public provision of food and transport at regular staging-posts at least along some routes.
Royal agents were equipped with letters of credit to enable them to use these services.
It looks as if , in western Francia at any rate, it was possible to reactivate some of the infrastructure of the late Roman state.
The evidence for market-control shows how such a system responded to and impinged on new forms of local power and local initiative.
Charles's charters include 19 grants (15 of them dating from the second half of the reign) of rights over markets, often specified as weekly markets rather than annual fairs.
The Edict of Pîtres in 864 strongly suggests the combination of political and fiscal reasons behind Charles's determination to keep control of markets: others, presumably local magnates, had been setting them up on their own initiative, but the king now decreed that such markets were to be banned unless they secured royal authorisation, and royal agents were told to keep lists of those so authorised.
It is a reasonable inference that the running of a market was profitable; so, no doubt, was the issuing of authorisations.
Charles's charters include some 25 references (outnumbering those in the charters of other Carolingians put together) to places identified as mercatus, portus  or burgus: all terms that imply some commercial activity.
In many cases, these are the earliest references to trading at the places concerned; and in some, the record has been made precisely because the king is granting the right to run a market.
There are many incidental references to traders in Charles's kingdom.
In 860, for instance, when Charles needed cash to hire a Viking warband, he taxed not only churches and peasants but also "traders, even very small-scale ones: their houses and all their stock were valued and on that basis a rate was assessed and required" .
The much more varied and extensive evidence for Charles's control of the coinage has important implications for both government and economy.
In the last decade or so of his reign, approximately 100 mints functioned (even if not all did so continuously): for the volume of the coinage they produced, only a "ball-park estimate" can be given — perhaps tens of millions of coins — but the quality of the coins has recently been very precisely determined: whereas before 864 many coins were debased by up to 50 per cent, after 864 a silver-content of well over 90 per cent was secured across the board.
Since every coin bears a mint-name, and most hoards containing Charles's coins are dateable to within a decade or so, it has been possible to show that the coins circulated rapidly, soon after they were issued.
Total output seems to have increased in the course of the reign; the issuing of a larger proportion of half-pennies after 864 implies a growing demand for a smaller denomination of coin, usable for smaller transactions.
The 864 legislation mentions en passant in what sounds like an urban context the selling of bread and meat per denerarios: by pennyworths (ninth-century hamburgers?)— which may imply more about normal price levels than Charlemagne's decree in the famine year of 794 that a penny should buy 12 two-lb. wheaten loaves.
The miracle-stories quoted above indicate that this was a coin-using peasant society: every household wanted coins some of the time — notably  when it came to Martinmas (11 November), the customary time for paying dues to landlords (as it remained in the nineteenth century).
Increasingly widespread use probably accentuated a chronic shortage of coin.
In permitting the bishop of Châlons-sur-Marne to set up a mint in 864, the king acknowledged difficulties in suppling the new currency.
The cathedral clergy were to take the profits from the mint they ran, but in the short run they were evidently short of cash.
They were just the sort of purchasers on whom peasants relied.
(It was no coincidence that the bishop's request came in November.)
But clergy could have other business too: at Rheims, Archbishop Hincmar found them using the leaves of ancient manuscripts to make envelopes "in which to keep the pennies they gained from trade" .
In issuing coinage on a larger scale, the king was meeting the widely-felt needs of "private interests" .
He was also suiting his own book.
In the first place, the king too was a landlord — the biggest in the kingdom.
Cash-rents were exacted on royal estates.
Charlemagne's managers were told to present a series of accounts each year in writing, and Charles the Bald's were warned not to have more in their strongboxes than they should.
It is no coincidence that a number of smaller mints are located at royal estate-centres, and there was one quite important mint at the palace — that is, within the king's peripatetic household.
(An early medieval mint, as recent reconstructions have shown, could be set up, and packed up, within hours by experienced moneyers.)
Secondly, the king exacted tolls on trade within his realm.
It was worth a monastery's while to gain exemption for its own boats, for instance, and then as now, the great rivers of France lent themselves to bulk traffic.
Thirdly, the king had an indirect but extremely effective way of taxing external trade: only his silver pennies and halfpennies were accepted within the realm, so any foreign coins brought to a port, whether by a homecoming Frankish trader as profit or by a foreign trader to  purchase Frankish goods, had to be converted into Charles's currency.
We know from records of royal instructions that these regulations were made: what the evidence of extant coins proves is that they were actually carried out.
In eight major hoards found on French sites and containing coins of Charles the Bald, there are no foreign coins.
Yet hoards found elsewhere — in Scandinavia and in northern Britain, for instance, where no such royal controls operated — show that there was plenty of "international" trade going on in the ninth century.
It seems likely that the king profited directly from this by setting a charge for the conversion of currency: you brought in, say, West Saxon pennies containing 20 ounces of silver to the mint at Quentovic, and you got back pennies of Charles containing 19 ounces of silver.
On at least one occasion in his reign, in 864, Charles applied this conversion system to the currency of the realm in an exercise known as a renovatio monetae: a renewal of the money.
And the money needed renewing: the numismatic proof of the debased state of the currency at this point has already been mentioned.
The regulations issued in 864 give debasement, and ensuing loss of confidence, as the reasons for the recoinage.
The evidence of the coins again proves that the recoinage was effected.
The argument that Charles needed sound money to pay off Vikings is not convincing.
It's true that Vikings demanded tributes in good silver.
But why not simply pay in ingots?
Why bother to make pennies?
There is no sign that silver was running short by 864, as it should have done had tribute-payments made huge inroads into the total supply.
Not only were the coins issued in 864 and after much purer, but there were considerably more of them.
Further, mints continued to issue the new, sound, coins throughout the rest of Charles's reign yet, no tribute is recorded between 866 and 876.
When he acquired new territory in 869, some twenty new mints were set up there.
This distribution, as Map 4 shows, extended an existing regional concentration of minting in the north-eastern part of Charles's kingdom.
Here lay the focus of royal fiscal control.
The way in which the coinage circulated can be deduced from the proportions in hoards of coins from different mints.
A two-fold pattern emerges.
Coins circulated vigorously within each of three major regions of Charles's kingdom: Francia between Scheldt and Seine, Neustria between Seine and Loire, and Burgundy between Seine-Yonne and Rhône.
Secondly, coins travelled to a rather lesser extent between these regions with the flow being mainly from Francia to the other two.
It was of course in Francia that over half the mints of the realm were located.
Elsewhere, in Aquitaine, the hoards show a very low level of mixing of coins from various mints, suggesting only local circulation around a single centre, and there is virtually no sign of coins entering the region from the north or north-east.
It may be that royal involvement here was less intense: Aquitaine contained only five mints of any size, and these did not implement the recoinage of 864.
But the fact that Aquitanian hoards contain no foreign or older coins suggests the maintenance of some form of royal control.
Though the weight of royal government impinged unevenly, there was no region that did not feel it.
The king expected direct benefits from the recoinage.
Since he wanted people to pay him in cash, and to stimulate the transactions that enabled them to do so, it was in his interests to restore confidence in the currency.
This was clearly true of peasants on royal estates, which is where many smaller mints were located.
Further, though no source states this explicitly, the recoinage, like individuals' conversions of imported coin, presumably gave the king, as well as the moneyer, a cut.
In other words, a recoinage was a massive, realm-wide, form of taxation.
The first Carolingian king, Pippin I, in 754/5 had specified "concerning the mint, that of each pound of silver, not more than 22 solidi were to be minted, of which one must go to the moneyer and the rest to the lord [king]" : since the account pound used in normal business reckoning contained 20 solidi, Pippin was in effect decreeing a royal mint charge of 1 solidus, i.e. 5 per cent.
In the twelfth century, when the issue of coin had in many areas ceased to be a royal prerogative, this sort of charge was known as seigniorage — a valuable perquisite of controlling a mint.
Then and later, we know that local lords engaged in renewals of the money to make a fast profit.
It was a risky game: played too often, it caused widespread loss of confidence in the currency, hoarding, and commercial bottlenecks.
Handled skilfully, it brought long-term as well as short-term advantage.
The evidence for the continuing large-scale production and brisk circulation of a high-quality currency from 864 to 877 in Charles's kingdom suggests that his recoinage had been, from the king's standpoint, a financial success.
Aristocratic criticism of royal rapacity was a backhanded tribute to that success.
Rebels in 875 complained on just this score against Charles; and the amount of treasure he fielded in 876 and 877 bears them out.
The complaint was not new: in 858, rebels had accused Charles of extorting "whatever the Vikings had left" : again, Charles's conduct in the ensuing years — and notably the 864 recoinage itself — suggests that once he had re-established his political grip, he was able to reimpose fiscal demands.
The political and the economic were of course inseparable.
But they could be seen to be so "from below" as well as "from above" .
A sound currency is one of the things that people expect from a government that is working well.
A revaluation of the coinage could reflect a regime's high morale: it could also, whatever immediate sacrifices it imposed, raise the morale of the ruled.
The revalued currency was a remarkable demonstration of political will, and effectively generated user-confidence.
It harked back to the world of the fourth- and fifth-century Christian emperors; at the same time it signalled a new world of money-using economic agents including peasants and small-scale traders.
What did Charles do with his money?
Some uses were not new: Charles's father Louis the Pious had also minted coins on a large scale and very probably paid cash (as well as bullion) for allies and for imported luxuries.
In the reigns of Charlemagne and Louis the Pious, workmen engaged in large-scale construction-projects had been paid in cash, and Charles no doubt hired skilled labour for his  ambitious building-programme at Compiègne later in his reign.
Charles had new cash-needs, however.
One was to pay off Vikings.
Another was to pay hired troops.
In addition to his military household, rewarded with "annual gifts" of clothes and equipment, Charles had to field armies for the sort of warfare that did not appeal much to Frankish nobles — namely, defensive or non-expansionist war; and here the availability of cash stipends may have helped recruit professional warriors (including Vikings).
Charles also needed cash to supply his court.
Though the direct consumption of the product of royal estates remained important, the extent to which Charles was a migratory king has been exaggerated.
Portrayed over the reign as a whole, his itinerary looks extensive; but looked at year by year, season by season, it shows a heavy concentration in the region bounded by Pîtres, Servais, Attigny and Paris, with the great majority of known stays between October and June being at palaces within that quadrangle.
In the last years of the reign, Charles was developing Compiègne on the River Oise as his "capital" : his Carlopolis.
His stays at or near civitates were relatively frequent compared with his predecessors'.
His increased cash resources, and increasing commercial activity in the Frankish heartlands, made it possible for Charles's household officers to organise the provisioning of the court by buying from local markets.
Charlemagne's "system" of funnelling trade through one or two frontier emporia, like Dorestad, was rapidly being replaced by a much more widespread diffusion of commercial sites (denoted in charters by such terms as portus, mercatus, burgus) at or near civitates in the realm's interior.
When Hincmar urged that Charles and his entourage should live off royal estates in the traditional style, he acknowledged — in backhanded fashion — the novelty of Charles's freedom of manoeuvre.
In the last 15 years of Charles's reign, at least four winter assemblies were held in civitates in Francia.
Increased economic activity in these locations can be seen in  Charles's grant to the bishop of Paris of the Grand Pont with its mills and, later, of the right to dispose of some newly-built houses; in the mint (with its profits) conceded to the bishop and cathedral clergy of Châlons; in the trading interests of the clergy of Rheims; in the monks of Corbie's intended purchase ( "if we have enough money" ) of pepper at Cambrai; and in the scattered but widespread references to episcopal and monastic building works (not all of them ecclesiastical) and, more rarely, in archaeological traces or architectural remains of these constructions.
Civitas populations surely grew.
In 860 Charles had valued the houses and stock of small traders.
In 877, to pay a tribute to Vikings at the mouth of the Seine, Charles demanded cash contributions from "traders and people living in civitates according to their means, in proportion to their resources" .
These Viking activities and Frankish responses to them will be looked at later in this book.
But here is the place briefly to consider the overall impact of the Vikings on the West Frankish economy.
They used the great rivers of northern and western France to penetrate far into the heart of Charles's kingdom.
According to one modern historian, their "systematic destruction of all that had made western Europe a going concern economically" marked the definitive break between the sub-Roman and medieval worlds.
Others have cast the Vikings as archetypical "market-men" (perhaps the literal meaning of the word Viking: wic-ing), releasers of hoarded wealth, stimulators of social movement and peasant production: in short, as agents and prime movers of the economic growth which was to characterise western Europe in the High Middle Ages.
We are back with the ninth century as a historiographical battleground: "It was the best of times, it was the worst of times…" 
The Vikings certainly did cause extensive damage to property in the short term.
But there is no evidence that  they either intended or effected systematic and long-term destruction.
Despite repeated attacks on Quentovic in the 830s and 840s, for instance, the output of the Quentovic mint, meagre in those decades (but also in the 820s), became large in the latter half of Charles's reign; in 858, the monks of St-Wandrille fled for safety to Quentovic.
The Vikings certainly caused some upheavals in the countryside.
In 864, the Edict of Pîtres ordered that peasants who had fled because of the Vikings should not be oppressed by counts or others in the places in which they had found refuge: they were to return home to their original lordships but they should be allowed to keep their earnings from working in the vineyards; on the other hand, if they had married and fathered offspring while resident in others' lordships, the wives and children were to remain with those lords.
The legislation makes it clear that peasant migration was no new phenomenon, only that the new bout produced by Viking activity was causing some headaches for landlords.
As in the Statute of Labourers in England immediately following the Black Death, a ruling class was attempting to reassert control in a situation where its grip had been temporarily shaken and labour shortage threatened.
There is not much sign of peasant migrants escaping seigneurial control altogether.
The Edict of Pîtres (unlike the Statute of Labourers) may have been a response to a situation that was only local — confined, that is, to the lower Seine valley.
The landholding of few of the great monasteries of northern Francia shows anything more than temporary dislocation.
Where lands were lost by churches, as in Aquitaine, the main beneficiaries seem to have been the local aristocracy — who traditionally cast greedy eyes on ecclesiastical wealth.
There is very little evidence for Viking slave-raiding and slave-trading among the peasant population.
A reference to Vikings seizing mancipia (slaves) may reflect attempts to exploit their labour directly.
Much more frequent mentions of captivi seem to refer to nobles, and one writer explicitly  says that the reason the Vikings having arrived by boat then used horses was "so that they would be able to capture some nobles for the sake of money (ransoms)" .
An overland slave-trade from Central Europe to Cordoba via Verdun predated the Viking incursions.
Historians who hypothesise large-scale sea-borne slave-trading in this period should give more thought to logistics.
Such trade was difficult enough in the seventeenth century.
The Vikings' impact on peasant-farmers was two-edged.
In the Seine and Loire valleys, for instance, the presence of Viking warbands over fairly long periods may well have stimulated local producers and sellers of horses and weapons and, above all, food and drink.
In these same areas, Vikings also caused the kind of short-term, local damage which provoked peasants to flee.
Peasants might flee, however, not only from such "natural" problems as local drought, famine and disease, but from the ravages of their "natural lords" .
A Viking raid, and the passage of Frankish warriors who "lived off the land" , left similar trails.
In terms of their material culture and lifestyle, the Vikings were really not so different from the Franks: hence the speed with which they adopted Frankish military and diplomatic conventions, and, where they settled, assimilated with the local population.
Historians looking at the early tenth century find it difficult to identify the Vikings any longer as an "external" force.
But in the ninth century too, Vikings belonged in the mainstream of economic activity within the Frankish world.
In some places, Nantes and Rouen, for instance, they contributed to commercial activity already under way .
Elsewhere, it was not Vikings but local producers and traders and lords who made and benefited from the growth of markets.
If, so far as the Continent is concerned, the Viking impact is essentially a West Frankish phenomenon, that is because the Vikings went where they knew moveable wealth was to be had.
This raises one last point about the geographical distribution of the symptoms dealt with in this chapter: each can be found outside Charles the Bald's  kingdom; but the syndrome of generalised cash-relations in the countryside, the proliferation of markets and mints, extensive activities of traders including small-scale ones in civitates, and a pattern of frequent royal residence in or near civitates, can be found only there — and specifically in the north-eastern part of the West Frankish kingdom.
East of the Rhine in the kingdom of Louis the German, for instance, there were no mints, and there is much less evidence for markets and traders, while in the Middle Kingdom (Lotharingia), the volume of coinage in circulation was much smaller than west of the Meuse.
The West Frankish syndrome is difficult to account for unless we assume a measure of sustained interest on the part of Charles the Bald himself.
The causes of increased monetary use and commercial activity were largely out of his control: but he knew where and how wealth was being generated, and was intent on exploiting that wealth systematically.
A renovatio monetae does not just happen: it is conceived of, then planned, and executed by many agents.
The next chapter examines the governmental context of Charles's fiscal and monetary methods: his imitation of late-Roman emperors was something more than a charade or a figleaf for impotence.
THE CONTEXT OF POLITICS
When the noblewoman Dhuoda saw off her fifteen-year-old son William to join Charles the Bald's court in 841, she gave him a book of advice.
Most of it was personal and spiritual.
Dhuoda thought of the palace as a place of great temptations.
She also thought of it as a great household, in which her son could find a favoured place.
He would meet many kinds of influential people.
Most important, thought Dhuoda, apart from the royal lord himself, were the royal kin: persons to be especially cultivated by an astute and aspiring young man.
Then there were great men, the king's trusted advisers: men with much to teach and many ways of helping William.
And there were wise priests: William should have dinner in their company and learn from their conversation.
Later on, his mother hoped, when William married and set up a household in his turn, he would make it like the royal one, a model of harmonious order.
As Dhuoda sat writing at Uzès in Septimania, another writer, Nithard, was hard at work at the other end of Charles's kingdom, in Francia.
His audience may have included William, and since he wrote history rather than moral instruction, Nithard had much more to say than Dhuoda about politics.
For him too, the ruler was a central figure, but Nithard was primarily interested in depicting the relationship between kings and their great men.
Nithard admired Charlemagne, who had known how to tame Franks as well as barbarians.
He also (at any rate while writing the  first part of his book) admired the young Charles, who consulted with his nobles and followed the good counsels of bishops.
(Nithard saw no inconsistency there.)
Nithard wrote in the midst of war.
Shame and honour were what motivated men.
To die for your lord was noble, to betray or forsake him was base, while to outlive him in battle brought disgrace, not only on you but on your kin.
Good faith was the hallmark of nobility, and it was displayed most clearly in fidelity to your king.
 "Horizontally" , nobles shared values as well as status.
Nithard also reveals something about "vertical" relationships between nobles.
Though himself the king's cousin, Nithard had another patron too, the king's right-hand man, the seneschal Adalard.
In a Carolingian court, a post like Adalard's (the seneschal organised the feeding and accommodation of the royal household) gave access to the king and also control over others' access.
Nithard was very probably also a blood-relation of Adalard: kinship could give an extra claim on a magnate's patronage.
Nithard thought a good king should be able to handle competing claims fairly, and maintain solidarity among nobles whose rivalries might otherwise tear the realm apart.
In making his decisions about gifts or patronage, a king had to bear in mind that his nobles too had clients, and obligations of their own.
A noble individual, such as Nithard himself, could reasonably expect his royal lord to look after his interests and reward faithful service with beneficia (literally "good deeds" ), meaning grants of lands or of honores, "offices" which carried lands with them: hence the linguistic distinction between honor and beneficium became blurred.
When disputes arose between nobles, or between lay and ecclesiastical landlords, each party would expect "justice" , meaning a settlement, often a compromise, that was acceptable to both parties and seemed fair to others of their rank and status.
But nobles within a realm had collective interests too.
A king should rein in the aggression of warriors, especially of young men; he should punish crime, keep his court a place of peace.
No realm was an island: to those ambitious young warriors, the courts and the largesse of  neighbouring kings presented a continual counter-attraction.
A king therefore had to keep control of his own: he must inhibit opposition within the realm, and exile the faithless, but be sufficiently fair in his distribution of patronage to forestall the defection of valued supporters to other realms.
A king had to be able to create a sense of solidarity among his men.
Nithard gives more information than any other contemporary about how kings, and especially Charles at the very outset of his reign, measured up to these requirements.
Just four years after Charles's death, Archbishop Hincmar of Rheims, who had been an important political figure throughout Charles's reign (though not consistently close to him), wrote a treatise, The Government of the Palace, for the young King Carloman, Charles's grandson, and lent it an air of authority by claiming to incorporate the work of Abbot Adalard of Corbie, who had died nearly sixty years before.
What influenced Hincmar most (though his description idealised it a little) was the regime of Charles the Bald, especially its latter years.
 "The king, his queen and their offspring" , wrote Hincmar, "are in overall charge." 
Here Hincmar touched on the nature of medieval royal government as a family firm.
He did not elaborate on the usual roles played by a king's sons, who in fact were expected from an early age to join in their father's business, as envoys and generals, counsellors as long as they remained in their father's household, and rulers of sub-kingdoms as and when regna were available.
Perhaps Hincmar's silence here was tactful, since Charles the Bald's sons had not distinguished themselves in the traditional roles.
Nor did Hincmar say more about a king's daughters: in Charlemagne's later years, the political influence of his womenfolk (mistresses as well as daughters) at court had been notorious, but his successors had either used their daughters in marriage-alliances, or, more often, placed them in convents, either way removing them from the  political centre.
The queen's central position, by contrast, was an ex officio one, and Hincmar therefore highlighted it (c. 22): her most important responsibility was for the "good order [in both practical and model senses]of the palace, and for the dispensing of the annual gifts, apart from their food, drink and horses, to the king's warrior-retinue" — the latter a quasi-maternal role which enabled the queen to form a network of personal relationships with a younger generation of budding leaders.
Hincmar noted too the queen's special tasks in the overall management of the provisioning of the royal household, and sometimes (when the king commanded) in gift-giving to foreign embassies.
In his section of the AB, Hincmar attributed many crucial diplomatic and political activities to queens: since some were activities of which he approved, and only some queens were credited with such roles, it seems less likely that he obsessively exaggerated the nefarious influence of women (though misogyny was in the air breathed by medieval churchmen) than that he accurately portrayed a feature of Carolingian political life underrecorded by other contemporary writers.
The king's wife, like the wives of other potentes, often remained at home while her husband journeyed and campaigned: throughout the medieval period, for as long as kings led armies in person, the queen's role in household management could become tantamount to a regency.
Hincmar fills out his palace-picture by listing the rest of the household personnel: the apocrisiar, responsible for ecclesiastical business, and the archchancellor, in charge of the notaries (who alone issued valid royal documents).
Then come the secular offices: those of chamberlain or treasurer (the treasure was kept in the king's chamber), the count of the palace, who handled legal appeals not heard by the king himself, the seneschal, the butler, the constable and a string of other household officers.
Hincmar confirms much of what Dhuoda and Nithard say or imply about the workings of a political system centred on the court, adding details and assigning plausible  motives and explanations.
He underlines Nithard's insistence on what nowadays might be called line-management: he reveals that a manager's problem in the Carolingian palace was the maintenance of good order and morale among the often unruly yet indispensable "crowd" of young noblemen who were deployed on a variety of tasks and errands, especially of a military sort.
The chief officers of the household had to ensure that "hearts were kept aflame for the king's service" .
Hincmar reveals more than Dhuoda about eating arrangements, and, incidentally, about the lay-out of the palace-complex.
The Carolingians had come a long way from the single ancestral beer-hall: the chief officers would invite groups of the young men to their houses (mansiones) for dinner, "not to encourage gluttony, but for the sake of promoting true rapport; and rarely would a week go by without each [youth]receiving one such invitation from someone" .
It might be impossible to keep all of the boys happy all of the time, but the majority of them should be "cheerful and quick to smile" , as well as alert.
(c. 27)
Hincmar also shows how the chief officers kept "the confederation of the whole realm glued together with the palace" .
(c.17) They should always be available to needy and oppressed persons "from whatever part of the realm" and of whatever rank, to bring their cases to the king's ear.
(c.25) If such an office-holder died, he had to be quickly replaced by a suitable man.
(c.26) "Since the kingdom consists of different regions, officers of the first, second, and indeed any rank should so far as possible be picked from different regions, so that[men from]the various regions should be able to come to the palace with a greater sense of knowing their way around (familiarius) since they would know that men who were from the same kin-group (genealogia) or the same region held a place there." 
(c.18)
Having depicted the palace not just as a multitude of busy people and face-to-face relationships, but as an arrangement (dispositio), an apparatus to be efficiently designed and maintained, Hincmar moves on to a second institution, the assembly.
Two sessions took place each year: their rhythm suited the seasonal character of early medieval warfare and travel generally.
A small winter meeting of select counsellors considered issues likely to arise in the  coming year: an example, says Hincmar, is the decision on whether to renew or break a truce on a particular part of the frontier, given that trouble in one part must be offset by stability in another.
In summer (usually early summer), a much larger gathering met.
Its time and place had been circulated well in advance.
It was attended by a "multitude" of lesser aristocrats as well as by magnates and leading clergy.
Its agenda was prepared by the king in a written list under chapter-headings — capitula.
First, at one or more morning sessions, the counsellors met as a group to consider the capitula, discussing each point, sometimes seeking clarification from the king.
Sometimes the clerics among them met separately from the laymen.
Meanwhile the king held informal discussions with the multitude.
If the weather was nice, these meetings took place outdoors.
When the counsellors were ready, they met again with the king and agreed their proposals.
A plenary meeting (perhaps in the afternoon) involving the multitude as well as the greater men then "received the proposals, and sometimes meanwhile deliberated on them too, and confirmed them" .
At this point, what had been enacted became law.
(cc. 29, 30, 35)
Hincmar is perfectly explicit about assembly management (as an archbishop, he had much experience of running synods) and about the crucial need for confidentiality on the part of counsellors.
Matters in fact agreed at the winter meeting were kept secret and brought before the summer one "as if nothing had been previously worked out concerning them" .
At summer meetings, a leak from the counsellors' morning session could be especially dangerous.
 "For it often happens that in such discussions, in order to promote the common good, talk has nevertheless centred on a single individual." 
It was particularly vital that no counsellor mention that man's name"to a servant or to anyone else: for the individual concerned is all too likely to become very upset, even desperate, or, worst of all, to fall into infidelity.
Thus a man who could have done all sorts of good things is rendered useless; and the same sort of outcome could follow in a case involving not one but two men, or a hundred or more, or even a whole branch of a family (progenies) or at the same time a whole province — if you're not very careful!"(c. 31)
It would be false to infer (any more than it would in comparable modern cases) that such management made a mockery of the deliberations as a whole.
Hincmar suggests that assemblies held the realm together in two main ways.
First, in "vertical" sociological terms: the minores were not just being cheated when their consent was called for.
Their voices were heard.
And their informal contact with the king on such occasions was basic to the whole process of government.
Charles the Bald's capitularies were issued "with the counsel and consent of the people" .
That was not just empty rhetoric.
Hincmar puts in a significant phrase when he says that the minores who "confirmed" assembly-decisions did so "not because they were forced to do so, but because they understood them in their own minds and agreed with them" .
(c. 29) Hincmar implicitly contrasts this situation with others — common enough no doubt— when men felt themselves coerced or duped.
West Frankish dispute-settlements of the mid-ninth century show that lesser landholders were perfectly capable of taking evidence on board, considering it rationally and reaching recognisably fair conclusions; also that they could distinguish between genuine verdicts and frauds.
Hincmar may have idealised ninth-century consensus politics; but his picture had a basis in reality.
The point is reinforced if we consider the king's personal conduct at assemblies.
Hincmar describes how while the counsellors deliberated, the king spent time (outdoors, weather permitting) among the minores, chatting with them in a familiar way, listening to their grievances.
(c. 35) He was open with them: so men were able to tell him openly about their quarrels and rivalries.
They had views on major political issues too: it's no coincidence that well-informed contemporaries mention the existence of an East Frankish "public opinion" in the context of Carolingian invasion plans in both 858 and 876.
Assembly proceedings also had a crucial function in "horizontal" geographic terms.
Hincmar had already observed that "because the realm consists of many regions" , court officials should be selected from different regions so that provincials with problems would feel confident of a  hearing at the palace.
A similar point is made now in the context of assemblies: "When a man came to the assembly from one of the regions, the king was concerned to ask him what news he had brought with him that ought to be reported and discussed, and he would be strictly required before he next returned to the palace to make exhaustive enquiries outside as well as within the realm, getting information from outsiders as well as from his own people, and from enemies as well as from friends, without concerning himself overmuch about how any person questioned had come by his information." 
(c. 36) Whereas outside the realm, the king needed warning of any rebellion by subject peoples, or any imminent attack, "inside the realm [the vital point was to find out]if the people (populus) in any part, region or corner of the realm was in a state of disturbance, then what was the cause of it, and if a complaint of the people was becoming serious or if a noise was being made about some injustice about which it was necessary for the general assembly to deal" .
What the king did, in other words, was to use the assembly to defuse trouble in the provinces.
Rumblings of complaints, of accusations of injustice, were to be dealt with before they escalated into rebellion.
Then the assembly could be brought into play as well— as a forum for airing grievances and settling them — and, again, making men feel that their concerns and feelings were being taken into account.
Hincmar in The Government of the Palace was writing a prescription for effective rulership.
But his choice of detail, and his treatment of practicalities seem to reflect experience.
His account of how government worked in the ninth century is plausible, not least because it squares with what we can infer from Dhuoda and Nithard, despite the differences in their aims and standpoints.
The crucial point on which all three writers converge is the role of the aristocracy as the collaborators and agents of the king.
The point is important, because much of the modern secondary literature on Charles the Bald's reign, and on the Carolingians generally, has depicted the aristocracy as greedy and boorish, incapable of sharing the higher aspirations of kings or clergy, lacking any sense of public interest.
Michael Wallace-Hadrill saw their epitome in the "repulsively realistic…hairy nobleman" depicted in a late eighth-century  Frankish Sacramentary.
A variant theme in recent historiography has been that by the mid-ninth century, nobles had been too much influenced by the church's stress on peace, and had thus become unfit for military service.
Either way (and the suspicion must be that some historians are determined to have it either way), blame for the collapse of the Carolingian state is laid at the door of the Frankish nobility.
Our three ninth-century writers lend such views little support.
All three, from their different perspectives, and each with bitter experience, saw the dangers of noble egoism.
But all put their confidence in noble service and loyalty as guarantees of the realm's prosperity: this was the lesson of history, whether sacred or Frankish, ancient or contemporary.
Pope Gregory the Great had spoken of taming the wild unicorn, symbol of the man of power.
These three ninth-century writers purveyed a similar message in their own times to audiences made up wholly or in part of lay nobles.
Dhuoda and Nithard wrote at the very beginning of Charles the Bald's reign: Nithard believed the young king showed promise, Dhuoda that this generation of Carolingians were predestined by God to rule, and with His help would shine forth in their success.
Dhuoda addressed her "beautiful boy" where others might have seen just another hairy Frank.
Hincmar in his very first sentence, made clear his assumption that "great men" could also be "wise" .
(c. 1) Writing shortly after Charles's death, he believed that a new generation of both kings and nobles could preserve the realm so long as they had the right personal qualities.
In other words, the descendents of Charlemagne and his faithful men had their opportunity as Dhuoda put it (iii, 8), "manfully to rule, defend and govern their world" .
What Hincmar the theorist skates over lightly (c. 35) is noted more deliberately by Hincmar the annalist: the presentation to the king of "annual gifts" by those who attended assemblies.
This too was a kind of taxation, an institutionalised imposition (in cash, bullion, and kind) by the king on the lay and ecclesiastical elite.
Arbitrariness was surely  involved, the king intimating what size of gift was acceptable.
Room for royal discrimination meant grounds for others' resentment.
Assemblies were the pivot: so long as the king could secure attendance, he could refill his coffers, exercise patronage, and maintain consensus at the same time.
There is just about enough annalistic evidence to suggest that Charles operated this system at least in the second half of his reign.
So far, this chapter has dealt with ninth-century perceptions of the working of politics at the centre, through palace-organisation and general assemblies.
But how exactly did men "govern manfully" in the ninth century?
How did the king administer his territories at a distance?
And how did the aristocracy, whose economic power was based on local landlordship, participate in ruling the realm?
Using other kinds of evidence, we must move out to the localities, and the counties.
In the lands west of the Rhine, there was in principle, as there had been in late Roman times, a count for each civitas, though in practice, one man often held two or more neighbouring civitates.
Demarcation problems were foreseen if a county court had to deal with a dispute involving men of different counties, or when a "criminal" fled from one county into another.
It is impossible to say, even for the relatively well-documented western part of the Carolingian Empire, how many counts there were at any one time, let alone identify the personnel.
(A recent guesstimate suggests "600-700 counties" in the Carolingian Empire as a whole of which perhaps 100 would have been located in Charles's western kingdom; but given the frequency with which multiple countships were held by one man, there can be no straight translation from numbers of counties to numbers of counts.)
Quality mattered, in any case, more than quantity.
Some countships were more equal than others: a "greater" count was presumably so called in part because his civitas was richer and more important, for instance, as a central place in one of the regna (like Angers in Neustria, or Autun in Burgundy).
A "greater" count operating on a frontier or elsewhere, called a marchio, or "marquis" would have large military resources, and "smaller" counts under his sway.
In practice, counts had autonomous sources of local power.
Where evidence is available, some kind of hereditary comital succession seems always to have been normal.
Studies of the countships of Paris and Autun in the eighth and ninth centuries show that if a count had no son (or no adult son), a brother or nephew or cousin would often succeed.
Counts who possessed inherited lands within their counties (and often elsewhere besides) could grant benefices thereon to vassals of their own.
They kept their own warrior-followings, companions in hunting and in "private wars" (werrae) with rival magnates and their men.
Counts can be found as often in big houses on estates in the countryside as in their civitas—centres.
In the regions west of the Rhine, the ascendance of bishops within many civitates may have strengthened counts' preferences for the country life.
There is little sign of comital residences in civitates, nor any evidence of a comital archive being kept in a civitas (as they still had occasionally been in seventh-century Gaul).
Carolingian sources usually refer to counts without specifying their civitates at all(which explains why it is impossible to give a complete list of counts for any ninth-century county).
In the reigns of Charles the Bald's predecessors, the count's first main function was to look after royal estates (fisc-lands) and royal income (for instance from tolls and fines) within his county.
Second, he was expected to lead to war the king's benefice-holders (vassi) from within his county.
Third, he exercised jurisdiction over the pagenses (the "men of the pagus" or county): replicating the assemblies of the realm at local level were the county assemblies which were supposed to be held three times every year, and met either in the civitates or elsewhere in the county.
(Smaller-scale gatherings could be held more frequently at meeting-places in the countryside, at the count's discretion.)
All three comital functions are documented in Charles the Bald's reign, though royal instructions have a good deal more to say about the first and second than about the third.
Counts can be seen as royal servants; but at the same time they used their position to entrench their local power.
Charlemagne had complained, for instance, that some counts held too many assemblies — in order to extract "gifts" from those forced to attend.
When he presided in court, the count was accompanied by a panel of local boni homines, "good men" , that is, more substantial landholders with perhaps further qualifications of age and experience and personal prestige, in whose selection an element of peer-group choice was acknowledged.
Judgements were given with their collective approval.
In practice, counts no doubt often had local boni homines in their pockets.
Charles the Bald's counts, helping the king, also helped themselves.
Their supervision of mints and markets in their civitates would give plenty of opportunity for taking a cut.
So too would the confiscation of misappropriated royal lands, or the dismantling of unauthorised fortifications.
Charlemagne and Louis the Pious had found ways to forestall their losing out too much by such cosy local arrangements.
To supervise for instance the selection of "good men" to serve on local panels, they sent missi from the palace.
The term is significant: the passive past participle (missus literally means "the sent man" ) implies a stress on the sender, and it is quite unspecific, again implying an agenda at the sender's discretion.
Charlemagne often sent missi in pairs, one ecclesiastic (usually a bishop) and one count, on annual tours of duty, each pair given responsibility for a group of counties, their missaticum.
Missi were supposed to hear and remedy complaints against counts and generally to function as direct lines of communication between court and locality, reporting difficult cases back to the king.
Who was sent?
A contemporary of Charlemagne's observed that a missus who lacked local  clout would be far too susceptible to local pressures.
More effective might be a missus sent to his own home-territory where his power was trusted and feared.
He would then use his office to pursue his own interests.
Well, potency was preferable to impotence.
So long as the missi remained royal appointees, and in regular face-to-face contact with the king, the substance of royal interests too could be preserved.
Missi were enthusiastically deployed by Charlemagne and Louis the Pious.
They continued to be used in the next generation by Charles the Bald.
In fact they are well-attested then (in descriptive as well as prescriptive evidence) only in Charles's kingdom, especially in Francia and Burgundy, but also in Aquitaine.
Missi continued to be expected to supervise counts, and to act as vital links between palace and counties.
It is precisely in reference to such functions that the issue of royal control arises.
For if Charles the Bald profited from the increased resources generated by the ninth-century economy, so too did the aristocracy.
Their power grew.
But did it necessarily grow at the expense of royal power?
Montesquieu posed the question in the eighteenth century (it was still topical then) and gave the answer: yes.
He saw what he took to be Charles the Bald's institutionalisation of hereditary countships in 877 as clinching his case.
In fact, there had been a tendency for countships (and benefices) to become hereditary long before the mid-ninth century: it was inherent in a social organisation where power and property in general were inherited.
Nor did that tendency in itself inevitably  mean loss of royal control.
One crucial factor was whether the king in appointing a count or missus had any real choice: for instance, as between kinsmen, or between an outsider and a local man.
The evidence from Charles the Bald's reign is surprisingly clear: he could and did intervene thus — on numerous occasions and in counties that were vitally important politically and militarily.
The converse, although more difficult, was also possible: Charles could remove a count from whom his favour was withdrawn.
Last but not least, he was able to maintain contact with his counts and missi through meetings at assemblies.
Counts had their subordinate officers, viscounts and vicars, and beneath them hundredmen (centenarii) and (perhaps only in some areas) Franci homines ( "Frankish men" ) who were tenants on royal land (hence, royal vassals of a special kind) and owed special obligations of service in return, notably in reporting and repressing crime.
Charles the Bald's capitularies presuppose the effectiveness of these local "agents of the state" in requiring decisions to be transmitted to lower-level "assemblies in dioceses or counties" and then carried out.
Viscounts apparently helped to run mints, while hundredmen received oaths from Franci homines.
There is a frustrating lack of the sort of corroborative evidence for the carrying-out of functions which we occasionally have in the case of counts and missi.
Equally scarce is information on royal estate-managers in Charles's reign.
Royal charters and letters show, as do capitularies from beginning to end of the reign, the king's keen interest in exploiting landed wealth; but as in the reigns of Charles's father and grandfather, the great bulk of the evidence is prescriptive rather than descriptive.
At the end of the day, the efficacy of Charles's control over his local agents must be gauged from the political action with which the rest of this book is mainly concerned.
The most influential model of ninth-century political  change since Montesquieu's has been that of the Belgian historian Jan Dhondt.
Charles the Bald remained the villain of the piece.
In Dhondt's view, Charles was the arch-squanderer of the fisc, his reign the critical period in the formation of territorial hereditary principalities in what would become France, for it was Charles who allowed the amassing of countships and once-royal estates by great regional magnates.
Dhondt had an important point: the ancestors of some of the great houses of the twelfth century are indeed to be found among the recipients of Charles's favour.
There is a frequent absence of straight lines between the two periods, however.
Take the example of Robert the Strong, ancestor of the Capetians: Robert, Count of Anjou, was killed in 866 and his two sons were disinherited by Charles, only recovering their father's Neustrian honores in the 880s, after Charles's death.
Dhondt's argument seems to fit Flanders best: but the Count Baldwin (died 879) who held some counties in that region in the latter part of Charles's reign is never called "Count of Flanders" in any ninth-century text; the hallmarks of entrenched territorial power (systematic fortifications; minting of coins) are not to be found during his lifetime, but rather in that of his son; Baldwin had no monopoly on power in Flanders, for other magnates operated in the same region; finally, no hereditary transmission of the "principality" can be demonstrated here during Charles's reign but only, again, after Charles's death.
Though some of Baldwin's kinsmen found favour with Charles the Bald, there is no evidence that they formed a consistent political grouping — any more than Robert and his relatives did.
In the ninth century, members of this magnate stratum, this "imperial aristocacy" , could still move about the Carolingian world; and they moved nearly always as individuals, no doubt with retinues, but not (an exceptional case apart) concerting action with groups of kinsmen.
There were two interlocking reasons for this individual mobility.
One was that patrimonies were not large enough to maintain several brothers in the style to which they were accustomed: perhaps because the survival of several brothers was becoming more common at this social level, noble younger brothers often had to seek their fortunes far afield, whether in an ecclesiastical or in a secular career.
The second reason was precisely that a single Carolingian world still existed, and men of the high nobility moved within it.
Kings — Charles the Bald and his brothers and nephews — competed for their talents and support.
Charles's maternal uncles and their sons provide good examples of the geographically-disparate fortunes of different descent-lines and individuals within Charles's own lifetime.
Younger men sometimes criss-crossed the frontiers of Carolingian regna: middle-age brought a tendency to settle down in the regnum where closeness to the king (modern German historians have coined the useful term Königsnähe) had brought greatest rewards.
But a great man, a potens, in Charles's kingdom could quit the scene as completely as he had momentarily seemed to dominate it: if he died leaving only young sons, or no sons at all, or if he moved to another Carolingian kingdom, Charles might redistribute his honores as he put it, voluntarie — "in accordance with my will" .
The king could also transfer such men from one region to another within his own kingdom.
They might be given no time to put down territorial roots.
It is this footloose quality of so many of the potentes in Charles's reign which belies Dhondt's tidy territorial model.
Magnate moves were critically affected (if not determined) by the decision of the king, and what bound such men to the king was their dependence on Königsnähe: in Baldwin's case, the abduction of that most desirable of treasures, a king's daughter, was the highroad to fame and fortune.
The king derived further freedom of manoeuvre from the existence below this "imperial aristocracy" of a lower stratum of regional nobility.
These men had strong territorial roots, but at local level.
Within a region, several noble families competed for influence.
The king could intrude on the local scene by bringing in an outsider (perhaps with some local associations) but he also had the option of picking a talented man from a local family to endow with countships or abbacies.
There was nothing inherently subversive of royal authority here.
On the contrary, such dispositions of honores and patronage were, as they had been for Charles's predecessors, crucial instruments of royal power in the regions.
Within the region of the Seine basin where Charles's power was concentrated and where he most often stayed, the counts were of the "lesser" variety.
When Charles sat in judgement, he had a whole entourage of such counts beside him.
But it may be no coincidence that counts of Paris, Rouen, Senlis and Rheims are un-documented in Charles's reign.
Here in his own heartlands, his home-base, the king alone stood tall among lay potentes.
He was helped by ecclesiastical wealth and power.
Charles the Bald's ancestors, the eighth-century founders of the Carolingians' family fortunes, had taken control of the church and its resources on a massive scale, and systematically: they had incorporated the church into the state.
Though some churchmen protested, on the whole they accepted royal exactions as the price of protection and corporate power: they saw that the alternative was the wholly unsystematic despoilment and privatisation of church property not only by laymen but by individual ecclesiastics too.
(A bishop or abbot might be tempted to put the lands and treasures of his church at his family's disposal.)
Archbishop  Hincmar of Rheims endorsed the Christian monarchy whose laws promised both security for ecclesiastical wealth and firm support for the church as an institution with its own hierarchical structure, as well as investing Charles's kingship with new forms of legitimacy, Hincmar, as he wrote proudly to the pope, regularly supplied the military aid he owed to the king.
The "aid" took the form of contingents of warriors maintained on the lands of the see of Rheims, but still available for service at the king's behest.
Contingents organised and supplied by churches formed a significant part of Carolingian armies (a proportion that may have grown larger during the ninth century), complementing the king's own military household and the troops led by lay nobles.
A bishop's military resources were also an essential part of his local lordship.
Like any other landlord, he relied on his men to coerce his peasant tenantry.
The bishop's kinsmen and clients would tend to receive grants of lands belonging to the see, and would appear in lawcourts as the bishop's friends and witnesses.
An archbishop was a regional magnate.
Hincmar of Rheims wrote to give orders to a neighbouring count who just happened to be his kinsman: it is not hard to see how an archbishop might refer to the local counts collectively as "his" , or the draftsman of a capitulary write in general terms of "archbishops and their counts" .
Such accumulations of local power were not antithetical to royal government, however, but rather its potential agencies.
At Rheims, Rouen, Sens or Bourges, the archbishops may well have assumed the functions (and resources) of those "greater" countships.
Again, the vital questions were: could the king appoint archbishops? and could he keep in regular contact with them once appointed?
In both cases, the answer was an unequivocal yes.
To reward the faithful service of count or young man in the palace, the king granted, out of the extensive and farflung royal estates, beneficia — benefices: the very term, meaning "good deeds" , implied something personal and arbitrary, outwith the normal regulations governing family inheritance.
The grant was to an individual, and could be  revoked if the recipient lost the king's favour; but the son of the original tenant would expect, other things being equal, to "inherit" the benefice.
The king might be happy to comply; on the other hand, he had a strong interest in maintaining his pool of benefices, and sometimes tried to resume a grant on the death of a tenant, especially if the potential heir was a child.
If the heir's family or friends objected, they might over time persuade the king, or his heir, to a change of mind.
A chance mention in a letter written in the 820s shows that one card in a Carolingian king's hand was the existence of a "solemn custom" whereby any recipient of a benefice had to come to the palace in person and ritually "commend" himself to the king.
Even when a benefice was in effect being inherited, it was accepted that the king's right should be acknowledged at the moment of succession.
The worried son of a deceased benefice-holder mobilised two great magnates, one of them well-placed at court, to ensure his succession to a beneficium non grande when he himself was prevented from coming to the palace.
Plausible excuses had to be offered.
( "he is not old but he suffers terribly from gout" ).
From the king's standpoint, the vital consequence was that in each county he had a loyal cadre of men whose services and renders he could call on directly when he chose.
According to Notker the Stammerer (whose Deeds of Charlemagne, written at St-Gall in the 880s, reveals much of the workings of ninth-century government),"Charlemagne was very prudent…he never gave any count more than one estate at a time…unless there were special reasons for doing so.
When asked by his closest advisers why he had this habit, he replied: With this income or that estate,…
I can make as a good a vassal out of some faithful man as can any of my counts, and maybe even a better one".
Counts needing the wherewithal to attract service were likely to cast greedy eyes on royal benefices within their counties: but in the West Frankish kingdom, the earliest evidence of such "mediatisation" of vassi dominici comes only after the death of Charles the Bald.
What sanctions existed to enforce compliance with the orders of missus or count?
The king's "boys" were trained for war, and could in the last resort be used as a sort of flying squad to coerce a recalcitrant local potens on his home-ground.
But potentes too had their squads of trusty vassals.
To have such a group under one's roof making their own vociferous demands imposed certain constraints and posed problems of control.
The retinue of Count Hugh of Tours, for instance, sang rude songs to mock his alleged cowardice: "He daren't come out of his own doorway!" 
When lords met, especially if they spoke different languages, it was expected that their followings might quarrel.
Mock battles were quite likely to turn into serious ones.
These young men's violence could be unleashed almost at random.
En route to assemblies or campaigns, they were liable to ravage and steal and rape.
An able lord could redirect his men's energies to his own ends in the avenging of a slight, the quest for an heiress or the prosecution of a claim.
Such violence was an everpresent threat to, but at the same time always a potential instrument of, Carolingian government.
Charles the Bald could warn or punish by leaving a trail of havoc along his line of march.
Yet many had a strong interest in the control and positive redirection of violence.
This was what kingship promised to the church and to the pauperes — the powerless ones who suffered.
Potentes themselves often preferred a peaceful alternative.
Kings found many kinds of entrée into local politics.
Though property-disputes were no doubt very often settled informally, through arbitration by senior family-members, for instance, and so have left no trace in the written record, some recorded cases arose over property-claims held or transmitted through women, especially widows.
The protector of all such "weak persons" was the king and so such disputes invited royal as well as ecclesiastical intervention.
Another common cause of recorded disputes was the "theft" of church property by laymen.
Such thefts often arose from grants of benefices known as precariae (from preces, the "prayer" or "request" which had to be offered by the recipient) on church lands.
It was the standard form of patronage operated by ninth-century ecclesiastical potentes.
In principle, a precaria was temporary (often limited to three lives: typically the recipient, his wife, their son).
The recipient, however, had a strong interest in reducing the precariousness of his holding: he could hope that, over time, the grant would be merged in his patrimony.
Such a neutralising of the grantor's intentions was not something that evolved in Charles the Bald's reign, a degradation of a once-pure system: rather, there was always, from the time when the earliest precarial grants are documented, a tendency for grants to be assimilated to hereditary lands, and then be passed along with those to the beneficiary's heirs.
When disputes arose out of such situations, both parties might turn to royal justice.
Royal power worked through the church in more direct ways.
Not only archbishoprics but episcopal sees were filled by royal appointment from among the pool of palace clerks.
Charles the Bald did this effectively throughout his reign.
Lay-abbacies, though not his invention, were deployed by Charles with a new frequency.
This entailed a dual arrangement: an ordained regular abbot (i.e. a monk, one who followed a regula, or rule) ran the community's liturgical work and day-to-day upkeep from the inside, while, from the outside, a lay aristocrat assumed control of  the community's landed endowment along with responsibility both for the military service owed to the king from the men beneficed on the monastery's lands, and often for hospitality at the monastery for the king and his entourage.
In many cases, the community's total landholdings were divided, so that a share known as the mensa ( "the table" ) was earmarked for the community's maintenance, the rest being available for the lay-abbot's management and the king's service.
Royal guarantees secured such a division.
Very similar in practice to a lay-abbot's was the position of a secular cleric (that is, a man in holy orders, often a deacon or sub-deacon, and not a member of the monastic community) appointed to an important abbacy.
In both cases the king secured political and military service without the loss of fiscal lands.
The secular cleric had the further advantage from the king's standpoint that he was strictly a life-tenant, unable to transmit his abbacy to a legitimate heir.
As for the religious communities themselves, they had long since sought the protection of local potentes to speak for them as advocates in legal disputes or to put in a word with the king.
Lay-abbacies formalised such arrangements on the king's terms.
Like all early medieval lordship, a lay-abbacy carried responsibilities.
Its holder cared about his reputation in this world and the next, hence often brought protection and prosperity to the community in his charge.
Above all, he had to care about satisfying the king, maker and beneficiary of such appointments.
During Charles's reign, lay-abbacies contributed significantly to the maintainance of royal power.
At St-Denis, from 867 onwards, Charles himself was lay-abbot.
It was to him as king, however, hence as guarantor of all rights, individual or collective, of free men in his realm, that a group of St-Denis tenants came in 861, seeking a royal judgement against the abbey's local representatives.
Charles's tribunal sat at the palace of Compiègne.
Twenty-three men (including a notary) came from St-Denis's estate at Mitry (dep.
Seine-et-Marne) some 60 km away, bringing with them 18 women (including ten "with their children" , because the case turned on legal free status which was transmitted through a mother to her offspring).
 "They claimed that they ought to be [treated as]free coloni by birth, and that Deodadus the monk [responsible for  running the Mitry estate]wanted unjustly to bend them down into an inferior service by force, and to afflict them." 
Deodadus naturally contested the claim (the men, he said, were serfs (servi), "hence bound in right (per drictum) to inferior service" ) and won: that is why St-Denis preserved the evidence.
There is no way of knowing if other cases were judged by Charles's tribunal in favour of peasant groups complaining against their lords.
But the peasant plaintiffs in the Mitry case presumably made the journey to Compiègne believing they might win.
Peasants certainly lacked the spatial mobility required for regular participation in the politics of the realm.
Yet even peasants, bounded through their lives mostly by their immediate vicinity, could sometimes travel further afield, whether pursuing a legal claim, like the Mitry group, or about their lords' business, like the men of St-Germain-des- Prés who owned transport-services between Anjou and the Paris neighbourhood.
Capitularies reveal landlords' anxieties about peasant emigrants who transferred their labour elsewhere; polyptychs show landlords welcoming peasant immigrants onto their lands.
On the whole, however, it was the powerful who travelled in the Carolingian world, following the economic and political requirements of the seasons: winter would be spent at a home-base, whereas in summer men took the road when summoned to assembly and/or campaign.
The letters of Abbot Lupus of Ferrières allow us a glimpse of his contradictory attitudes to involvement in state affairs.
For potentes like himself, such involvement was an overriding moral obligation.
Yet Lupus, awaiting a royal summons, was torn between hope and fear: attendance (and to ignore an invitation was dangerous) threatened new burdens, yet being with the king (though to appear uninvited was unthinkable) offered the prospect of benefits.
What Lupus could be sure of was that invitations would be sent: the attendance-lists of assemblies are evidence of invitations received and obeyed.
A system of post-horses and vouchers for supplies and hospitality ensured that royal messengers and royal agents (including  Lupus himself) could move around the realm.
Information of most political importance, such as news of the death of a king or queen, went astonishingly fast, both within Charles the Bald's kingdom and, over great distances, between Carolingian kingdoms.
When Charles left for Italy in 877, among his chief concerns was the maintenance of efficient communications with his faithful men back in Francia.
The frequent meetings between Charles and his Carolingian fellow-rulers were co-ordinated between the courts concerned.
Of course the transport-technology of Charles's regime, as of any ancien régime, had its hazards: once crowns were mislaid in transit (though unlike the baggage of the English King John three centuries later, they were soon found).
But the "miracle" that Nithard saw in the safe delivery to Charles at Troyes of regalia from Aquitaine was in the eye of the beholder.
For the most part, the political history of Charles the Bald's reign which is this book's prime focus was the concern of an aristocratic elite.
Though king and magnates depended (as Chapter 2 showed) on the labours of a vast peasant labour-force for the surpluses that sustained and funded their activities, their direct personal contact with peasants seems to have been rare, even within the lands they ruled most intensively.
Royal and local government often give the impression of operating independently of each other, on two separate planes.
Yet against apparent distinctness of structures must be set evidence of linking, and overlapping, relationships.
Lords and peasants shared attitudes and beliefs.
The Mitry peasants (like the proverbial cat) could look at a king, and they spoke the same legal language of customary rights and fairness as Charles and his faithful men used in their capitularies.
Every coin in those peasants' purses bore the royal monogram and title prescribed by the king.
Political events from time to time touched peasants directly: war and external attack  harmed their lands and families, while Charles the Bald's fiscal demands affected all levels of the peasant work-force at least on royal and ecclesiastical estates.
Quite small-scale landholders, and not only in Francia proper, but in Brittany and the Auvergne too, used royal reign-years, as magnates did, to date their transactions.
The vast majority of cases involving peasants were heard in local courts, but the judges in those courts wielded an authority devolved in principle from the king.
The ideology of royal power was already widely diffused in Charles's kingdom after centuries of Merovingian rule.
Under the Carolingians, churchmen preached it still more intensively.
The religious life of Charles and his contemporaries is not the main theme of this book, but no political study can ignore it.
Ritual observances punctuate Charles's story in the chapters that follow; churchmen intervene in politics not only as purveyors of ecclesiastical resources and institutional support but as counsellors and monitors, sometimes interested parties, but sometimes too, as more or less disinterested arbiters and spiritual guides.
For the ninth century was a crucial period in the ecclesiastical history of western Europe.
At one level, that history was (and remains) one of particular churches caught in webs of local traditions, loyalties and observancies, dependent on local patronage and personnel.
Nevertheless, the church had an institutional existence on other levels.
It was the "frail aqueduct" across which late Roman administrative practice, with its geographical division into provinces and dioceses, passed to early medieval successor-states, including the kingdoms of the Carolingians.
Charlemagne and Louis the Pious and their counsellors had strengthened the authority of archbishops, and promoted regular meetings of councils of one province or of several provinces: trends that continued after 840, and especially in the kingdom of Charles the Bald.
The evidence lies in two imposing series of texts, the records of church councils, and the statutes (regulations for the performance of sacramental and pastoral duties) issued by bishops and archbishops for their lower clergy.
In both cases, though some parallel texts survive from Lotharingia, from East Francia and Italy, the bulk of the evidence comes from the kingdom of Charles the Bald.
A third kind of evidence points the same way: the great collection of canon law known by the mythic name of "Pseudo-Isidore" , the substantial and, despite the inclusion of some forged papal letters, for the most part perfectly genuine residue of the western churches' institutional life over eight centuries, was produced in the heart of Charles's kingdom, in the province of Rheims, about 850.
One of its main purposes was to defend the integrity of the church by affirming both its institutional property-rights and its hierarchical internal organisation.
The "Pseudo-Isidorean" team could have accomplished their work nowhere else in the Carolingian world, any more than the series of conciliar acts and episcopal statutes could have been produced anywhere else on such a sustained large scale.
For it was in the western part of Charlemagne's Empire that a particular combination of conditions — persisting Roman administrative and legal practices, well-organised provincial churches with longstanding traditions of conciliar meetings and the issuing of legislation, elites long-christianised and committed to their local churches, the written word in a language not too far removed from the spoken vernacular — favoured a particularly strong corporate awareness and activity on the part of churchmen within a group of provinces.
Hincmar of Rheims played a crucial role; but alongside him were colleagues with similar training, shared traditions and experience.
It makes sense, therefore, to think of the ninth-century West Frankish church, deeply implicated though it was in secular politics, its personnel largely recruited from the indigenous nobility, and often riven by factional rivalries, yet with its own corporate self-consciousness and distinctive goals.
Charles the Bald did not simply exploit the church within his kingdom: he had to work with not against the ecclesiastical grain.
And, a point of critical importance, he himself had been educated by churchmen and shared, if not their institutional loyalty, then many of their aims and ideals.
Embracing local and provincial churches was the  Church, headed by the papacy.
On this level too, there were important changes in the ninth century.
 "From below" , provincial churchmen in the various kingdoms from time to time demanded authoritative rulings, arbitration, and leadership, to maintain their churches' own new-won institutional integrity, or to fight more particular battles involving the interests of ecclesiastical individuals or groups; and lay persons sought the pope's protection.
 "From above" , a line of exceptional popes asserted the authority of their office and the universal scope of their pastoral care, willingly responding to appeals from the rest of Christendom.
In the 860s, a new bout of jurisdictional conflict with the patriarchate of Constantinople gave Nicholas I an opportunity to speak for "the Latin Church" against "the Greeks" .
In the 870s, his successors Hadrian II and John VIII exploited an impending imperial vacancy (Louis II of Italy lacked a male heir) to claim for the papacy the right to choose emperors.
At the same time, the growing threat of Arab expansion in the western Mediterranean evoked passionate pleas for help from the beleaguered popes.
It was no coincidence that these decades saw new programmatic statements of papal ideology and a revitalising of contacts between Rome and all parts of the west.
It was equally predictable that these contacts were liveliest with the West Frankish church; and that it was Charles the Bald who responded most strongly, both positively, to papal appeals for help, and also aggressively, to what he saw as papal interference in the West Frankish church's political concordat with his own regime.
Ramshackle, held together by a thousand personalised special arrangements, a state existed, still, in the ninth century, capable of being operated by a skilful king.
The central subject of the rest of this book is the way in which  the operation was managed by Charles the Bald.
Ninth-century writers when they wanted a metaphor (and a paradigm) for the system at work invoked the familia: the patriarchal household, the big house (as Dhuoda called it):— the palace.
This too was in some ways a ramshackle world: where rotten beams could give way, hurling king and courtiers to injury or death; where everyone's dinner might depend on the day's hunting; where an often crude and cruel humour mimicked life.
The king's son had a young man's idea of a joke: he thought he'd test the courage and much-vaunted toughness of Albuin.
One evening when they were coming back from the hunt, he pretended to be someone else and, all alone, jumped on Albuin pretending that he was going to steal by violence the horse Albuin was mounted on.
Albuin, little knowing he was the king's son, unsheathed his sword and struck him on the head…
When Albuin realised whom he had struck down, he fled.
Such was the fate of Charles of Aquitaine, second son of Charles the Bald: horribly wounded, he lingered on, to die two years later.
Yet this was also a society with its own code, its own strict tempo of liturgical observances, its own rituals of rank and solidarity, honour and shame.
Some acts put a man outside it altogether: at a summer assembly in 846, a man guilty of sodomy with a mare was condemned "by the judgement of the Franks to be burned alive" .
On the other hand, outsiders could be welcomed in if they acknowledged the basic rules: a Viking recruit could "swear fidelity in his own fashion" or, better still, accept Christian baptism.
At the king's table, as in the great processions from residence to chapel that marked the church's great feastdays, men knew their places.
When the king held court, nobles in attendance participated in the giving of judgements; brought and received gifts; joined royal feasts or fasts; heard royal speeches.
From the palace, they went out to hunt, or to make war, together.
At home, their life-style aped that of  the royal household: a great magnate had his own jester, his band of retainers who hunted and ate with him, his chapel and his chapel clerks.
Because they all spoke the same language of fidelity, of joint interests and common belief, the great assembly could bring men together with their royal lord psychologically as well as physically.
This was a court society: not in the sense sometimes imputed to the ancien régime of a parade-ground where a despot brought his nobility to heel, but an elite world where within shared conventions political conflict was contained and consensus was continually re-formed and re-enacted.
Notker has a story about Charlemagne: "he had given his brother-in-law Udalric a number of grants of land, but after the queen's death, he revoked them because of something Udalric had done.
A jester said in Charlemagne's hearing: "Now his sister's dead, Udalric's lost his lands, those in the east and those in the west" .
Hearing these words, Charlemagne wept, and he gave back to Udalric all he had formerly held".
Notker thought Charlemagne's reaction showed him a "just ruler" .
If personal relationships counted for a great deal more than structures in such a world, nobility and kinship gave a man claims on royal favour; and the most influential men — the holders of the key household offices, for instance— were those with special Königsnähe.
The king retained some freedom of manoeuvre: he could not choose his blood-relatives but when bestowing patronage, especially with more distant kin, he could choose between them.
He could choose his wife: her close kin would acquire their own claims on the king; but as Udalric's case showed, a king's in-laws could not count on keeping royal favour.
The jester in Notker's story conveys the anxiety of men at the mercy of the king's will.
There was the other, fearsome, face of royalty.
The 830s offer two particularly clear examples of aristocratic dependence.
Bernard the chamberlain held his high office for only a few months, in 829–30.
He lost both office and influence at court as a result of factional enmity, but Louis the Pious's disfavour ensured that the losses were permanent.
Adalard the seneschal is first documented in 831, and apparently kept his post through the 830s.
He received the lay-abbacy of St-Martin, Tours; and in December 842 Charles the Bald "married Adalard's niece Ermentrude…in order to win the support of most of the people" .
The antecedents of both Bernard and Adalard had risen along with the Carolingians themselves.
Bernard's father, a kinsman of Charlemagne, had been count of Toulouse, and several of his sons had shared his inheritance of land and position in the south-west of Gaul (though only Bernard achieved high favour at the court of Louis the Pious).
Adalard's grandfather had been Pippin I's choice as count of Paris, a countship then held successively by Adalard's uncles and his brother.
Both Bernard and Adalard were born with prospects of wealth and power in the Carolingian world.
Rulers had to reckon with them.
But both depended on Königsnähe.
Both were accused by some contemporaries of pursuing their own interests, cynically exploiting their position, betraying the ruler when it suited them.
Yet both defended themselves against the charge of infidelity.
Birth and inherited status played only a part in the stories of Bernard and Adalard.
The family connections that some historians have reconstructed, and alleged to explain the rise of both men, are curiously neglected by contemporary sources.
Perhaps they were too well-known to need spelling out; but it is just as likely that the personal qualities which contemporaries did stress were what really accounted for both men's influence at the courts of successive Carolingians.
Behind the monolithic abstraction "aristocracy" was a real world of competing noble individuals, often threatened rather than supported by their own  kin, lacking a strong enough local base, needing royal patronage and support.
Even marriage into the royal family only assured such support in the short term.
For space close to the king was limited, and few occupied it for more than a decade or so, partly through accidents of mortality, partly through a career-structure in which the holding of high office in the royal household was often the prelude to a provincial post, but most of all through the play of faction around the king.
A poet in the 870s imagined Charles the Bald controlling the wheel of fortune, throwing down one man, and raising up another.
This was no mere poetic fantasy.
A fallen favourite had little to hope for unless he could find an alternative royal patron.
What kept such hopes alive was conflict between royal kin.
In the early Middle Ages, every royal family, as generation succeeded generation, seemed to be unhappy in its own way.
If a ruler had a brother, or nephews, rivalry was virtually inescapable; if he had an adult son, or sons, tension was likely and open war an everpresent possibility.
The women of the family often saw advantage in fomenting such disputes.
Charlemagne was lucky in that his only brother, four years younger than himself, died in 771 after a short period of increasingly fraught joint-rule; but it took more than luck to remove that brother's sons — they, and their mother, disappeared when their uncle defeated and imprisoned their protector, the Lombard king.
In his own sons, Charlemagne's fortunes were mixed: the eldest rebelled and was incarcerated; the ambitions of the remaining three legitimate sons were contained when each received a substantial part of the empire to rule while Charlemagne remained in overall charge.
The illegitimate sons were too young to pose much of a threat during Charlemagne's lifetime.
Half-brothers and cousins and in-laws were given large shares in the benefits accruing from Königsnähe: they commanded powerful military retinues, and were assigned large shares in the rewards of imperial expansion.
Charlemagne used his womenfolk indirectly as  safety-valves for the resentments of male kin, and directly as props to his own authority.
As a paterfamilias, Charlemagne did well.
Even so, there is a note of baleful realism in his injunction that: none of our own sons should in any circumstances cause any [of our grandsons]accused before him to be put to death, or corporally mutilated or blinded or tonsured against his will, without lawful trial and inquiry.
When he succeeded in 814, Charlemagne's sole surviving legitimate son, Louis the Pious, faced a family-situation in some ways more difficult than Charlemagne's.
Though Louis had had plenty of time to gain experience of ruling and to form a court of his own in the subkingdom of Aquitaine (he had been king there since the age of three), he had had to wait a long time for his father's inheritance.
This meant that some of his own sons were already adult when he succeeded at the age of 35: his eldest son Lothar was nearly 20 — old enough to provide an alternative focus of loyalty for aspiring nobles.
The first thing Louis did when he reached Aachen was to clear himself some political space.
Inevitably there were losers.
Charlemagne's daughters and granddaughters (Louis's sisters and half-sisters and nieces) were sent away to convents, and Charlemagne's cousins to monasteries: Wala to Corbie, Adalard, Wala's brother, to remote Noirmoutier on an island off the coast of Aquitaine.
There were also winners.
Louis's young half-brothers, the bastard sons of Charlemagne's old age, were recruited into Louis's entourage, joining his own sons; Louis's son-in-law Bego became count of Paris and his foster-brother Ebbo became archbishop of Rheims.
On Maundy Thursday, 9 April 817, while Louis and his retinue were processing from a service in the splendid church at Aachen, the timber roof of a walkway collapsed on them, injuring several men seriously and giving the emperor himself a nasty shock: it was time to think hard about  the distribution of power within the royal family.
Louis and his great men deliberated, and decided: at the summer assembly in July, the Ordinatio Imperii accommodated Lothar's ambitions by giving him the title of co-emperor forthwith and promising him the whole of Francia on his father's demise.
This strategy revived the division-project that Charlemagne had adopted in 806 but never implemented.
Earlier Frankish successions from the sixth century onwards had divided the heartlands, the patrimony, between royal brothers as well as assigning whatever acquired regna were available: the 806 and 817 projects, by contrast, gave the first-born son the patrimony entire, leaving the younger brothers only acquired regna.
In 817 this meant that Aquitaine went to the 19-year-old Pippin, and Bavaria to the ten-year-old Louis (the future Louis the German).
The scheme swept up one problem but shovelled others under the carpet.
Lothar was happy; but what what was to become of Bernard, Louis the Pious's 19-year-old nephew, who had been ruling Italy since his father's death in 810?
The Ordinatio assigned Italy to Lothar "if God wills that he lives to be our successor" (c.17), without mentioning Bernard.
Seeing his own disinheritance as imminent, Bernard rebelled.
Louis the Pious reacted with devastating efficiency.
The revolt collapsed, Bernard was captured and condemned "by the judgement of the Franks" to be blinded, and died two days later, on 17 April 818.
Bernard's fate was blamed, not long after, on Louis's wife, Lothar's mother the Empress Ermengard.
Only six months after Bernard's death, Ermengard too died.
Louis's prompt remarriage, in 819, to Judith, daughter of Count Welf, opened up a Pandora's box of possibilities.
From the standpoint of Louis's existing sons, it was a provocative act.
At about the same time, Louis's young half-brothers were tonsured and sent away from the court to monasteries.
It was not long before Judith gave birth to a daughter, named Gisèle after Charlemagne's favourite sister.
Louis was reconstituting the royal family, keeping his adult sons on tenterhooks.
The coexistence in Francia of Louis and Lothar as co-emperors was possible so long as Lothar remained  unmarried.
But in October 821 Lothar acquired a wife of his own.
Two imperial households inevitably caused friction.
In 822, Louis sought reconciliation with his half-brothers, pardoned the rebels of 818, and restored Abbot Adalard and probably Wala to favour.
Louis then took the occasion of the summer assembly at Attigny "with the counsel of bishops and magnates" to perform public penance "for his own and his father's misdeeds" .
What motivated Louis was neither political weakness nor a suddenly-discovered conscience.
He was posing as a new Theodosius, evoking the "happy Christian emperor" who had performed penance for a political massacre, made his peace with his critics, and won the praises of St Augustine in The City of God.
Louis too was determined to wipe the slate ritually clean of recent conflicts, in order to secure agreement for a new disposition of power within the royal family.
That Louis's basic intention was to reassert his own control emerged in the immediate sequel to Attigny: he "sent Lothar to Italy" ; and he engendered another child by the Empress Judith.
That child was to be Charles the Bald.
823–840: YOUTHFUL TRAINING
Charles was born on 13 June 823 in the palace of Frankfurt on the Main.
The very fact that we have these details is significant.
Birthdays, in the modern sense, were rarely recorded in the early Middle Ages: it was the "heavenly birthdays" (the earthly death-days) of saints and martyrs that were celebrated in liturgies.
We don't know the exact date of birth of any early medieval king before Charles (nor of most for centuries afterwards).
There is no direct evidence at all as to even which year Charlemagne was born; in Louis the Pious's case, the year (but not the exact date) of birth was recorded by the Astronomer, his anonymous biographer, because Louis was exceptional as the survivor of a pair of twin boys.
Even the births of firstborn royal babies were rarely noted by contemporary annalists.
High infant mortality made such events of doubtful political importance.
Thus no writer of the 820s or 830s mentioned the birth of Charles.
The Astronomer, writing some twenty years later, noted its occurrence in 823.
It was Charles himself, reviving the practice of Christian Roman emperors, who arranged for the annual commemoration of his "nativity in this world on 13 June" at a number of ecclesiastical centres.
There is a second, and paradoxical, significance in the birth of "the first king of France" at a location in "Germany" .
The Carolingian Empire in 823 was at its furthest  extent, and Louis the Pious had numerous palaces in his Frankish heartlands.
In the earlier years of his reign he had tended to stay in the central area of Francia proper, often at Aachen, his father's old base, or further west, for instance at Compiègne on the River Oise.
From 822 his itinerary shifted eastwards: in 822–3 Louis and his court spent the whole winter at Frankfurt where "he had had buildings newly constructed for this purpose following his orders" .
Frankfurt was to be a frequent residence in the later 820s.
The main explanation lies in shifting relationships within and around Louis's family.
Louis was determined to assert his own authority throughout the heartlands, and to keep Lothar confined to Italy.
Further, Louis's wife Judith hailed from the eastern part of the empire: her ancestors' connections with Alemannia, in particular, offered hopes of support in that region.
More generally, it was in the 820s that Louis favoured transrhenani ( "men from across the Rhine" ) which gave him a strong network of loyalties in the east, though it came to be bitterly resented in the west.
According to Nithard, Louis was "anxious" from the outset about the future of the new child,"because he had already divided the whole empire between his other sons.
Then [Louis]asked his sons on behalf of this son.
At last Lothar consented on oath that the father should give [Charles]any part of the kingdom he wanted, and moreover that he [Lothar]would be his guardian and protector against all his enemies now and in the future".
This passage was written in 841, and it reflects the hindsight knowledge of events in the 830s.
The likelihood of a redrawing of the 817 project had surely been on the horizon since Louis married Judith (especially so if, as seems likely, she had already given birth to a daughter, Gisèle, in 821).
What seems more doubtful is that Charles's future share in the realm was overtly discussed in June 823.
Curiously Nithard does not reveal at this point (though he does so later) that Lothar stood godfather to his little half-brother.
With the Frankish Church's new emphasis on godparental  obligations, such a reinforcing of a biological kin-tie by a spiritual one became an adroit response to the dangers set out by Charlemagne in the 806 division-project.
Lothar, as primogenitus, and future family-head, was the obvious choice as protector: he was also the worst threat to Charles's survival — literally, perhaps, as well as politically.
The news of Charles's birth must have been exactly what Lothar had feared since his father's remarriage.
By contrast, Judith's influence was considerably enhanced.
The sense of relief, and the newfound power, of a queen who has successfully produced a healthy boy emerge in an anecdote told by Charles himself over forty years later: "In the very hour of my birth, my mother Judith sent a ring to Ebbo [archbishop of Rheims], asking him, since he was an archbishop, to pray for the newborn baby.
She also promised that, if he returned the ring to her whenever he was in trouble, she would help him."
Ebbo, added Charles, often took her up on this promise.
Before 823, there is no mention of Judith's influence: assorted scraps of evidence thereafter attest her efforts to bolster her own position by collaborating closely (some said, too closely) with her husband's chief counsellors.
No information survives about Charles's infancy.
He may, like his father, have had a wetnurse (though his father as one of twins was atypical), and if so he may not have remained with Judith when, for instance, she travelled to Rouen to meet her husband in November 824.
For us, Charles makes his first public appearance as a three-year-old, in the bosom of his family.
The occasion was the baptism of a Danish king, Harald, at the palace of Ingelheim in June 826.
Louis's use of baptismal ritual to suggest his own imperial status vis-à-vis Harald was modelled on Byzantine practice, and Louis was seeking, as his eastern counterparts so often did, to promote imperial interests through intervention in the dynastic conflicts of a barbarian people.
Harald, challenged by rival kin, was willing to become the Franks' client.
On Louis's part, the offer of patronage was an imaginative strategy for dealing with the Danes where  conquest was simply not an option.
The rituals of Ingelheim were original too in their extended use of godparental bonds: Louis stood godfather to Harald, Judith was godmother to Harald's wife, and Lothar was godfather to Harald's son.
The brief accounts in the narrative sources say nothing about Charles.
The spotlight first falls on the little prince in the verses of Ermold the Black.
Aquitanian by origin, Ermold had been disgraced (for unknown reasons) and sent into exile at Strasbourg: a striking intervention by Louis in the affairs of the regnum of his son King Pippin of Aquitaine.
Ermold wrote his verse biography of Louis to win back imperial favour.
For all its bias, such poetry written for a specific occasion has some obvious advantages as source-material.
Ermold's final section covering the reception of the Danes at Ingelheim was written within hardly more than a year of the event, and with an explicit purpose: every detail was calculated to please Louis and Judith in 827.
The account of the great procession into the palatine church at Ingelheim conveys the splendour and wealth, but also the order and control, of the imperial court.
Roles, costume and gesture are meticulously assigned; everyone has his or her place, alongside, or following, the emperor.
Just one person in two lines of the poem breaks the formal pattern: Ahead of his father, the lovely boy Charles, resplendent in gold Merrily goes, pattering with his feet across the marble floor.
This could just possibly be accurate reporting of a three-year-old show-stealer.
In any event, Ermold assumed that the parents would relish the description of their son, and be amused by the contrast between the adults' formality and the child's spontaneity (though such licence may have been permitted only to under-sevens).
Charles's presence in the scene squares with evidence for comparable  participation in public ritual by Charlemagne and Louis the Pious when aged six and three, respectively.
This was a central part of the training of a prince.
Royal parents could also use the medium to convey a dynastic message: the ritual role identified the child born to reign.
To return to Ermold's procession: Charles's mother Judith follows, flanked by the magnates Hugh (count of Tours and Lothar's father-in-law) and Matfrid (count of Orleans).
The passage belies Nithard's suggestion that these two were already in the mid-820s goading Lothar to harm his young half-brother.
Assuming, still, that Ermold wrote to please, it follows that Hugh and Matfrid must have been especially close to Judith in 826, which in turn implies that she had indeed been successfully cultivating Lothar's sympathy for the interests of herself and her son.
Similarly calculated, and again perhaps no mere "encomiastic vignette" but drawn from life, is Ermold's picture of the little Charles at his father's hunt: By chance a little doe with the pack of hounds behind her flees Through the shady grove, and leaps through willow-woods.
See, the very place where the mighty throng and the Empress Judith Had been standing, and with them the boy Charles himself!
The doe swiftly runs past, her only hope in her own feet.
Unless flight brings her help, see!— she will die.
Catching sight of her, the boy Charles — see him now!— wants To follow his father's model: he asks, he begs for a keen horse, Urgently demands weapons, quiver and swift arrows, And craves to go chasing after the doe, just as his father himself would do.
He redoubles plea on plea.
But his beautiful mother Forbids him to go, will not give way to his wishes.
If his tutor and his mother had not restrained him despite his desire, The boy, as boys will, would have rushed off on foot.
But other young men go off and capture the fleeing Little creature, and soon bring it back, unharmed, to the boy.
His weapons, specially made for one of tender years, he then seizes And the boy strikes the beast's quivering back.
The glory of boyhood is all around him, embraces him: The manliness of his father, the great name of his grandfather, adorn him: He shines like Apollo, striding the summits of Delos, Bringing great joy to Latona his mother.
Echoes of Virgil, and of earlier Carolingian epic, are incorporated in Ermold's poetic offering.
In these 21 lines, where the word puer occurs seven times, he contrives to praise the father in the son, and the grandfather's greatness in the promise of this new Charles.
But the hunt is a setting of more than ornamental significance: when the young men of Judith's retinue aid the display of the prince's virtue, they symbolically carry out their political roles of aides and adjutants.
Ermold depicted scenes of concord in 826.
In the years that followed, the factional conflicts that centred on Louis's court were coolly observed by Hincmar, the future archbishop, then a young monk at St-Denis, close therefore to Abbot Hilduin, Louis's archchaplain.
Hincmar in The Government of the Palace noted the repercussions at court of rivalries in the regions.
A good example occurred in 827–8: a noble from the Spanish March, disappointed at the palace, had gone home and allied with the Muslim amir of Cordoba to pursue local claims against Count Bernard of Barcelona.
Louis the Pious was Bernard's godfather  (and distant cousin) and had recently appointed him count.
Perhaps Louis was also stung by the threatened negation of his own youthful exploits on the March.
He sent an army under Counts Hugh and Matfrid to help Bernard; but the two commanders delayed so long en route that Muslim troops were able to ravage the county of Barcelona.
It was alleged that the delay was deliberate.
At the Aachen assembly in February 828, Hugh and Matfrid lost the counties of Tours and Orléans which they had held since Charlemagne's reign.
The court annalist thought it was "what they deserved" .
The distribution of power, regionally in the middle Loire valley, and centrally among the great men at the court, was violently shaken.
Louis reallocated Orléans and Blois to the brothers Odo and William, men who were his own mother's kin and also allies of Bernard, and probably Tours to Vivian, one of the local nobility.
Judith for her part sought security for Charles and herself in new alliances.
The youngest of Charles's half-brothers, Louis the German, was married to Judith's sister Emma in 827.
Bernard, count of Barcelona, the most obvious beneficiary of the disputes, in 829 was appointed chamberlain, a post that involved close collaboration with the queen.
At the same time, Louis summoned a series of assemblies involving both bishops and lay nobles.
The result was the biggest administrative programme seen since 817–18.
Louis's aim was twofold: first, to cope with the tensions that had arisen from the implementation of ecclesiastical reforms, for instance by sending out missi to settle disputes between clergy and laymen over the appropriation of tithes; and second, to tighten control of local government, for instance, by asking missi to draw up lists of all those liable for military service in each county.
Other instructions readjusted local power politics in line with the personnel-changes in 828: on 4 April 829, missi were instructed to investigate Matfrid's "misdeeds" in the county of Orléans, and to encourage complainants to come forward.
Charles the Bald was later to find inspiration in these measures.
At the time, what can hardly have failed to make a strong impact on the boy were the great ritual events, including the assemblies, which punctuated the life of the court, and which Charles presumably was brought out by his nurse from the women's quarters to attend: the arrival of envoys from Constantinople at Compiègne in September 827; the public deposition from office of Hugh and Matfrid in February 828; the reception of the relics of SS Marcellinus and Petrus at Aachen a few weeks later.
As striking for an impressionable child would have been the earth tremor on 27 March 829 which brought down houses in Aachen and damaged the roof of the palatine chapel.
What was the meaning of such an extraordinary event?
No doubt his nurse had her answers.
It was at about this time that Charles acquired a tutor and through him began to look out on the world through a learned man's eyes.
Walahfrid Strabo, a monk of Reichenau in Alemannia who had spent the years since 825 at the great monastic school of Fulda, was already known to some of the court clergy.
In an early poem, he had skilfully enhanced Louis's reputation as a reformer by criticising moral shortcomings inherited from Charlemagne's regime.
His plea that Louis stop appointing widows as abbesses may have been a response to the installation of Judith's mother Heilwig as abbess of Chelles.
But Walahfrid's most earnest request was for patronage; and Judith had enough political sense (a clever critic was the very man to disarm) and sympathy for a fellow-provincial to offer Walahfrid the post of tutor to Charles.
Judith may also have admired Walahfrid's poetry.
Certainly it was she, rather than her husband, whom scholars praised for such discernment, and she who apparently took a personal interest in the literary side of her son's education.
(None of his half-brothers seems to have received anything like it.)
Louis himself, enthusiastic huntsman that he was, no doubt saw to Charles's acquiring of physical skills.
But if Charles was the first Carolingian, and perhaps the first medieval king, to show an insider's appreciation of contemporary scholarship, he had (directly  or indirectly) his mother to thank.
He studied with Walahfrid for the best part of nine years, from 829 until 838.
What did Charles learn?
There is little direct evidence.
His few surviving letters bear the hallmarks of Hincmar's style, though Charles may have personally dictated some; otherwise no work of Charles's is extant.
But from the indirect evidence of books dedicated to him, scholars patronised by him, and texts produced in his name, a picture emerges of a man genuinely interested in learning.
To know the Bible was to trace divine and human action in this world through history.
It was also the key to understanding the workings of power in the present and the future.
Old Testament kings were to be taken as literal models, the measurements of the Temple in Jerusalem as a blueprint for the palatine chapel.
To grasp the mystic significance of numbers — for instance, the two poles of Solomon's litter, and the four struts that supported its canopy — was to acquire (as some wielders of power in modern times have done through astrology) a sense of control over the contemporary world: to explain the failure of some policies, to plan and time others more effectively.
The study of the Old Testament also had the practical purpose of explaining and justifying the organisation of the Church which was foreshadowed in the history of Israel and now through the sacraments offered all peoples the hope of salvation.
Further, to share such knowledge and such assumptions united "the wise" in a strong bond.
What in the case of Alfred of Wessex is explicit can be inferred for Charles too: the inculcation of wisdom among the nobility was designed to strengthen their commitment to the king.
Direct shared access to the written sources of wisdom was, for both Alfred and Charles, perhaps the most attractive of the uses of literacy.
A king who drew scholars to his court from afar, surrounded himself with them, sought their help in formulating his edicts, used them as his agents and publicists, was following the example of the most successful rulers of antiquity.
A learned court was a prestigious court in the eyes of the realm's elites; it impressed Greeks and Muslims too.
Learning, in short, was useful because it enhanced the  style and substance of rulership.
There was also a particular association of such patronage with Carolus Magnus — "senior Charles" who from young Charles's earliest years was held up as a role-model for him.
The conduct of Carolus Junior (he seems to have approved this epithet) as king, casting retrospective light on his own formative years, suggests that his teachers vigorously instilled the lesson of wisdom's utility.
It lies at the heart of the two-volume world chronicle of Bishop Freculf of Lisieux, who dedicated Book II of these gesta imperatorum to Judith, for use in the education of her son.
Freculf also sent Charles a copy of the fifth-century military manual of Vegetius, an exercise in practical wisdom.
The same lesson can be found in the works of Walahfrid.
He made short (and useful) summaries of the lengthy biblical commentaries of Hrabanus Maurus.
He produced a practical edition (with chapter-divisions) of Einhard's Life of Charlemagne: in his prologue, written after 840, Walahfrid held up for emulation both Einhard's scientia and the preference of the "most powerful and most wise" Charlemagne for the company of wise men.
The Life made an excellent "mirror" for a future ruler, and may well have been studied by Walahfrid and Charles in the mid-830s, soon after it was written.
That joint reading perhaps lies behind the appeal in Walahfrid's prologue that the quest for wisdom be revived and widened "in modern times" .
The linkage of wisdom with power can hardly have escaped a student-prince.
Another work of Walahfrid's, though written after his days as royal tutor were over, lets us guess what tutorials might have been like.
The Origins and Development of Ecclesiastical Equipment and Ritual is the clear, systematic work of a very good teacher.
It explains the ritual practices of the "modern" church, ranging widely in space and time to assemble comparative data.
It also contains an agenda for reform in emphasising the pastoral and teaching services of the priesthood.
Finally, Walahfrid demonstrates the workings of two parallel hierarchies of office in church and state: each is animated by the vital flow of communication through it, and each buttresses the other.
The work as a whole reflects the experience and preoccupations of a palatine cleric, and it addresses the questions of someone reared in that milieu.
The palace was also Charles's religious school.
The cults of the saints were the very heart of its curriculum, and if the translations of relics were highdays and holidays, the liturgical calendar supplied its everyday timetable.
Louis the Pious had a particular devotion for St Denis, and he conveyed this to his son.
Charles perhaps still more than his father regarded St Denis as both personal and dynastic patron; and though the earliest evidence of this comes from the early years of his own reign, it was surely rooted in childhood habits.
Like other boys, Charles almost certainly had the Psalter for his primer, and the Wisdom Books of the Old Testament for further reading: his later ecclesiastical correspondents quoted especially profusely from these texts.
But the Psalms were also the basis of private spirituality in the ninth century: Dhuoda recommended daily readings to her son.
As a man, Charles possessed his own copy of the Psalter.
David, an obvious model for early medieval princes, could have had a special appeal for Charles (as we know he did for Alfred).
Charles (like Alfred) was a youngest son, the boy who unexpectedly surpassed his elder brothers.
The Latin Psalter points towards Charles's acquisition of literacy.
What language did the boy speak?
Though the court of Louis was surely bilingual in Romance and Germanic, Charles's birthplace (and hence the implied origin of his nurse — which may be more relevant here than his mother's), and the likely residence-pattern of his early years suggest (again paradoxically for a future "French" king) that his native language was, as in Walahfrid's case, a form of German.
Tutor and pupil may, however, have spoken Latin to each other.
For the Latin that the adult Charles read, and presumably wrote, so fluently, he must have owed Walahfrid a large debt.
His taste for poetry too reflects his tutor's skill.
It is no coincidence that our next piece of biographical evidence, like that for 826, is poetic, the work of Walahfrid himself.
Theodoric's Statue was written soon after the poet's arrival at Aachen in 829.
Its audience was familiar with the statue which Charlemagne had brought from Italy and set up in the courtyard at Aachen.
Whatever meaning this image had had in Charlemagne's day, Walahfrid invited his contemporaries to compare and contrast the miserly, heretical, tyrannous Theodoric with the generous, orthodox and merciful Louis.
Most modern commentators have seen in this poem intimations of conflict.
But only hindsight casts such a shadow.
Though the poet, in broad terms, castigates greed and disloyalty, his message is one of optimism rather than foreboding, and his concern is not with general crisis but a particular, personal cause for rejoicing.
Walahfrid pictures Louis, the new Moses, with his family and entourage in a procession that aptly symbolises order and unity.
First comes Louis himself, followed by Lothar, then Louis the German: each is described in fulsome, if rather conventional terms.
Pippin of Aquitaine is mentioned extremely briefly: he was not at Aachen in the summer of 829, says the poet.
With Charles's appearance, Walahfrid's tone becomes more specific, warmer and more personal: I saw too how lovely Rachel led forward Benjamin, comfort of his ancestors, with her right hand, in due order: His great well-being is for long to nurture someone's holy old-age.
For him, a fifth share, which the other one joyfully acquired, Is left over, I think, for he will shine forth with an honour of his own: He himself will create a tribe and a lineage with his pious virtue…
Happy the line that continues with such a grandson: grant, Christ, that he will follow in deeds him whom he follows in name!
The "honour" referred to here is the grant of Alemannia, which Louis conferred on Charles in August 829.
An older historiographical tradition depicted Louis as an impulsive weakling, at the mercy of his overbearing wife.
This denigration of "the great emperor's weak son" had a long run for its money.
Only recently has Louis been reappraised as an effective ruler in his own right.
He had long intended, and prepared the ground for, some landed provision for Charles.
Walahfrid's "other one" who had enjoyed Alemannia before this, must be Louis the German whose marriage to Judith's sister in 827 had created a strong axis of solidarity between this son and his father.
The emperor and empress had foreseen and tried to forestall resentment on Louis the German's part at the grant to Charles.
There is little evidence of such resentment in 829.
Neither the RFA nor the Astronomer links the rebellion of Louis's elder sons in 830 with fraternal hostility to their half-brother's "promotion" .
Nithard does so, however, while the author of a curious single annal for 830–1, tacked onto the Prior Metz Annals (the last entry otherwise was for 805) makes Judith the central figure in the story, and explains the 830 rebellion in terms of her stepsons' hostility to her and her "very goodlooking son Charles" who "they feared might succeed as heir in his father's realm" .
No reallocation of the family-holdings could have avoided upsetting someone.
The grant of Alemannia, where none of Charles's half-brothers had a prime interest, was the least provocative way of making reasonable provision for Charles's future.
As Walahfrid put it, this honor remained "left over" .
He glossed over the fact that Charles was also granted Alsace, Chur and part of Burgundy: areas in which Lothar (and his supporters) certainly did have interests.
Still, Lothar, who in September 829 had again been "sent to Italy" , was not the leading spirit in the 830 rebellion.
Louis the Pious seemed to have  the situation firmly under control when in the autumn of 829 he took the six-year old Charles to make a kind of joyeuse entrée into his intended realm.
Walahfrid's choice as tutor made perfect sense: it was in his Alemannian "tribe" that Judith's Benjamin would "create a tribe of his own" .
When Charles visited Walahfrid's old monastery at Reichenau, the poet produced an appropriate encomium: Due glory we accord To the power of the Trinity Which conveyed you here safe and sound Through the realms of the Franks!…
Hail, O holy offspring of kings, Charles, dear to Christ!
But Charles was never to make his home, or his realm, in Alemannia.
Instead, his half-brothers' unfilial behaviour spurred Louis the Pious to change his plans.
The standardbearer of the 830 revolt was the second of Charles's three half-brothers, Pippin of Aquitaine.
Walahfrid in Theodoric's Statue had already hinted at his disaffection: Pippin was not among the family party at Aachen in August 829, but stayed at home.
Pippin's grievances had, unsurprisingly, nothing to do with Alemannia but a lot to do with his father's interference in and around Aquitaine which had once, of course, been Louis's own realm (he had ruled it as sub-king from 781 to 814).
The instigators of the revolt were Hugh and Matfrid, the dis-honoured of 828: it was Pippin they turned to first; and when Charles's mother Judith was taken from her husband's side, and accused of adultery with Bernard, she was sent to custody in Aquitaine, at Ste-Croix, Poitiers.
Lothar then joined the rebels: his great expectations affirmed in 817, he had never reconciled himself to the role of mere "emperor in waiting" , ousted meanwhile from the Frankish heartlands and "sent to Italy" .
Lothar, his sights firmly focussed on Francia, wanted once more to make an immediate reality of his co-imperial title, as he briefly had done in 821–2.
Louis the German, by contrast, refused to join the rebels, and played  a key part in ending the shortlived revolt.
There is no record of any action taken by the rebels against Charles, nor of his reaction to these events.
When the revolt collapsed and Judith was released, Charles rode out with his uncle Drogo bishop of Metz to escort her home to a ceremonial reception at Aachen in February 831.
The boy was presumably present when his mother stood before a Frankish assembly "declaring her willingness to purge herself on all the charges levelled against her" — and no accuser appeared.
Since Charles figured in later medieval tales as the killer of Bernard to avenge his mother's honour, or, alternatively, as Bernard's bastard son, it is worth stressing that the charge of adultery against Judith is mentioned only in 830 (Bernard is first documented at the palace in 824) and that no contemporary source ever cast doubt on Charles's paternity.
References to Charles's physical resemblance to his grandfather and namesake can be taken seriously.
The real issues in 830 thus scarcely involved Charles.
The fundamental conflict was between Louis and Lothar; and its outcome now was that Lothar was, once more, uncompromisingly "sent to Italy" early in 831, while his leading supporters, Hugh and Matfrid, were imprisoned and exiled.
With Pippin, his father decided to deal in more conciliatory fashion.
It may have been now that Ermold was returned to his beloved Aquitaine, and favour at Pippin's court.
Louis the German deserved reward for unswerving loyalty.
At Aachen in February 831, Louis the Pious's counsellors canvassed a revised division project: though much of its text was based on that of 806, it reverted to more traditional Frankish practice in dividing the heartlands.
Pippin was assigned Neustria, but the two main beneficiaries were to be Louis the German and  Charles, leaving Lothar with only Italy.
There is nothing to show that this plan was "officially adopted" : if anything, it was a shot over Lothar's bows.
In May, he was "honourably received" by his father at Ingelheim, and his supporters recalled from exile (though not restored to their lost honours).
It was understood that Italy alone was on offer for the time being; but the imperial prospects of 817 were undimmed.
Nevertheless, the revolt of 830 had transformed Charles's prospects: the 831 draft-project for the first time gave him hopes of a share of the heartlands of Francia itself.
At the same time Louis the Pious firmly reasserted his power to alter the arrangements of 817.
From now on, Charles would have to be taken seriously by his half-brothers as a potential heir to Charlemagne.
It was probably now that Charles, at his father's behest, stood godfather (and gave his name) to Pippin's newborn second son.
In 831, Charles was assigned a new importance in Louis the Pious's reconstructed family.
But the reconstruction was shaky.
Pippin too now had new hopes in Francia which seemed to be threatened by his father's rapprochement with Lothar.
When Louis summoned, exceptionally, a third assembly in the same year, at Thionville, Pippin failed to appear; and when he did turn up for Christmas at Aachen, there was a family row.
Pippin "fled" back to Aquitaine, and welcomed an unexpected ally: Bernard, who had lost forever any chance of recovering great influence at Louis the Pious's court.
A few months later, Louis the German, thinking his loyalty in 830 inadequately recompensed, marched into Alemannia.
Louis the Pious, taking Charles with him, moved quickly to reassert his control.
Louis the German was forced to withdraw: he would have to be satisfied with his Bavarian regnum.
In the summer of 832, Louis the Pious met Lothar at Mainz and again floated the idea of dividing Francia between Lothar and Charles.
Apparently no definite arrangement was made.
By October, Louis had decided on  immediate action elsewhere: Aquitaine was to be taken from Pippin and given to Charles instead.
At a great assembly at Limoges, Charles was presented to the leading men of Aquitaine, who swore oaths of fidelity to their new nine- year old king.
Pippin was given a public dressing-down, and ordered to precede his father to Francia; Bernard was deprived of his honours.
But Pippin escaped, returned to Aquitaine, and forced Louis to withdraw across the Loire "in less dignified fashion than was suitable" , taking Charles with him.
They spent Christmas at Le Mans with the newly-appointed Bishop Aldric, a trusty supporter of the emperor.
Nevertheless, Louis's position was dangerous, for inconclusive talks had failed to secure Lothar's support, while both Pippin and Louis the German had turned against their father.
Early in 833, rumours were rife of the political conjuncture Louis the Pious had most feared, and hitherto avoided: the alliance against him of all three adult sons.
Lothar, back in Italy, had seized his chance, to co-ordinate revolt — and to secure papal support.
In June 833 when Louis the Pious, with Judith and Charles beside him, tried to face down his opponents in Alsace, his own supporters quailed at the size of the army ranged against them, broke faith and fled.
Within a year or two, the place had become known as "the Field of Lies" .
Many years later, Charles recalled the defection of "the whole people" , the emperor's capture, the sending of "his wife" (this, interestingly, is Charles alluding to his own mother) into exile in Italy, and "the treatment of me, a mere ten-year old, as if I had committed huge crimes" .
In this phrase, there is an emotional ring totally absent in Charles's recollection of his mother's fate.
Louis was "made very sad indeed" when Charles was taken away from him and sent to the monastery of Prüm in the Ardennes.
There he stayed for some eight months, in the care of Abbot Markward.
Separated from his tutor, Charles nevertheless  found himself in a fairly congenial environment: Markward was a noted scholar, and Prüm's library was well-stocked.
So too were its larders.
Charles is unlikely to have suffered much in physical or intellectual terms from his enforced brief stay.
More importantly, he was not tonsured: Lothar, perhaps moved by the obligations of a godfather, could not bring himself thus to exclude Charles from the ranks of the throneworthy.
Thirty years afterwards Charles still felt deeply the humiliation he suffered at this time; but unlike some little princes in similar situations, he lived, politically as well as literally, to fight another day.
He also survived psychologically: later in life, his favourite role-models were David and Hercules whose virtues were indomitable courage and perseverance in adversity.
Charles's boyhood sufferings taught him a patience far removed from defeatism, reinforcing Christianity's message that to be humbled was the prelude to triumph.
Only five months after Ebbo and a handful of episcopal colleagues in the church of St-Medard at Soissons had ritually deprived Louis of weapons and insignia, he was restored to power.
Looking back from the 860s, Charles saw this as the direct result of divine intervention.
More mundane reasons were growing rifts in the ranks of the rebels and Lothar's overall loss of control.
Before the end of February 834, Charles was reunited with his father at the abbey of St-Denis, and Lothar was on the run.
Charles had almost certainly not witnessed his father's effective deposition, but he now looked on while "faithful" bishops reclothed the emperor in his royal robes and rearmed him with his weapons.
By May, Judith had been rescued, and restored to husband and son.
Walahfrid wrote a poem to celebrate the virtues of Ruadbern, the young fidelis who escorted Judith home.
The last years of Louis the Pious have been seen (where they have been "seen" by historians at all) as a period during which Judith gained an increasing ascendancy, as the old emperor lost his grip.
It is often said that no political recovery from the trauma of Soissons was possible.
Louis's  own behaviour belies such a gloomy diagnosis.
The bewildering swings of fortune in 833–4 had in fact resulted from shifting calculations of self-interest and public interest on the part of magnates, and fractures of aristocratic consensus that could be healed.
As Walahfrid put it, "the glory of ruler and state were always reparable" .
During the six years that followed his restoration, Louis put together again the coalition of ecclesiastical and secular support that had sustained him in the 820s.
He reigned alone in the Frankish heartlands, and prevented filial or factional hostility from coalescing into any major revolt.
The future of Lothar and his supporters was settled when Louis met them at Blois in September: The emperor sat in his pavilion which was set up in the middle of a wide field on a hill where the whole army could see him, and his faithful sons [Pippin and Louis]stood beside him.
Lothar came and fell at his father's feet.
His father-in-law Hugh the Fearful followed him, then Matfrid and the other ringleaders in crime.
They all confessed their great wrong-doing.
The upshot was that Lothar was sent to Italy, "never to leave it unless on his father's orders" .
In reasserting his paternal authority, and finding his old political touch, Louis showed himself in his last years a conspicuous success.
Charles was old enough now to begin to play a hand of his own.
Unfortunately there is no direct evidence from this period about his personal relationship with either of his parents.
In 835, his influence with Louis was being solicited by Hrabanus Maurus: not yet a man, Charles was already a potens.
His mother's friends at court became his: in time they included, along with Walahfrid, Lupus of Ferrières (welcomed by Louis and Judith at Frankfurt in autumn 836), the palace clerics Prudentius, Wenilo and Berno, and the seneschal Adalard.
In 835 and 836, Charles  presumably itinerated with his father, joining in the autumn hunting in the Ardennes and in the forest-area around Frankfurt, wintering at Aachen.
He learned at first hand the economic geography of the regnum francorum.
At Louis's side, he saw how to meet Viking attacks by diplomacy and a mixture of force and guile.
To watch his father conduct assemblies, disgrace and dismiss incompetent commanders, was the most useful kind of political training.
Louis was determined that Charles should have a share in the Frankish heartlands.
At a Christmas assembly at Aachen in 837, having carefully built up aristocratic and episcopal support, and secured the agreement of Pippin (whose own ambitions in Francia now looked blighted) and Louis the German, Louis solemnly conferred on Charles "a part of the regnum" , with the following boundaries: the greater part of the Belgic provinces, in other words, the whole of Frisia from the North Sea and Saxon frontier as far as the frontier of the Ripuarian Franks, and along the latter, the counties of Mulekewe, Ettra, Hamarlant and Maasgau; then all the territory between the Meuse and Seine as far south as Burgundy, including Verdun; and going from Burgundy, the counties of Toul, Ornois, Blois, Blaisois, Perthois, the two Bars [i.e. Bar-le-Duc and Bar-sur-Aube], Brienne, Troyes, Auxerre, Sens, the Gâtinais, Melun, Etampes, the Pays de Châtres, and Paris; then along the Seine to the Channel and up the coast as far as Frisia again: within these, all the bishoprics, abbacies, counties, fisclands, and all pertaining thereto.
At the emperor's command and in his presence, the bishops, abbots, counts, and royal vassals holding benefices in the above-mentioned places, commended themselves to Charles and confirmed their fidelity with an oath.
The real resources of the area from a royal standpoint are implicit in the listing of "bishoprics, abbacies, counties, fisclands and all pertaining thereto" : in other words, all  rights over moveable and immoveable property involved in royal lordship of churches and in direct or indirect royal exploitation of fisclands, as well as in the disposition of countships.
The prime agents of royal control were the men bound by oath to a particular king: the bishops, abbots, counts and vassi dominici.
Nithard names two of the great men who took these oaths in December 837: Abbot Hilduin of St-Denis, most royal of western Frankish abbeys, and Count Gerald of Paris, a city which had once been a residence of Merovingian kings.
Hilduin and Gerald had both been appointed to their posts by Louis; though their loyalty had wavered in 833, both had soon recovered imperial favour.
Hilduin's kinsmen held important ecclesiastical posts in the heart of the empire.
Gerald enjoyed Königsnähe with the Carolingians several times over: his wife and Lothar's wife were sisters, and his brother was the seneschal Adalard.
These were the men to underwrite Charles's new status in the region north-east of the Seine.
Why did two contemporary annalists call this "the best part of the regnum francorum" ?
The answer is that it included particularly rich concentrations of royal resources: Dorestad with its emporium and mint; major churches, including the metropolitan sees of Rheims and Sens, and rich abbeys like St-Denis and St-Wandrille, on whose endowments the Carolingians had laid their hands; a number of royal palaces, and many royal estates and forests, both Carolingian patrimonial lands around the lower Meuse and old Merovingian ones in the Seine basin, especially along the Oise; and last but not least, good communications, including a surviving Roman road-network.
All this turned out to have long-term significance for Charles the Bald, for much of this region was to be the central zone of his future kingdom.
The identity of those annalists is important too: they reflected the views of Lothar and of Louis the German, whose interests were adversely affected by this grant to their young half-brother.
Lothar had designs on Frankish lands west of the Meuse.
Both he and Louis the German had hoped to get their hands on Frisia, and on Dorestad.
In 838, both reacted to Charles's promotion by plotting against the old emperor; and when Louis the German answered his father's summons to an assembly at Nijmegen in May, there was another unseemly row, which ended in the son's being formally deprived of all he held outside Bavaria.
The evidence for the years 838–40 scarcely ever allows us to differentiate Charles's political activity from his father's.
But perhaps Charles's realm was intended to be rather more than a prospective one.
He did not yet have a chancery of his own, but it seems he did have his own chapel, that is, a team of household chaplains (presumably equipped with relics).
Twenty years later, Charles reminded an assembly of how"a part of the realm was assigned me by my lord and father…and in it the metropolitan see of Sens then lacked a pastor.
For its good government, I committed it to Wenilo, who was at that time serving me as my clerk in my chapel".
It was a good choice: Archbishop Wenilo was to be one of Charles's key supporters in the critical period after 840.
In mid-August, 838, with Louis the German now in disgrace, Louis the Pious summoned his summer assembly to Quierzy on the River Oise.
Charles had had his fifteenth birthday just two months before, reaching the Frankish age of majority.
Now his father "conferred on him weapons and a crown and the part of the kingdom between the Seine and the Loire" , that is, the region known in the ninth century as Neustria.
The event was doubly significant: first, as a sort of dubbing to knighthood, the ritual demonstrated publicly that Charles as a grown man was now able to rule and ready to fight.
(There is no evidence that he had yet gained any military experience.)
Presumably now, if not before, he was given the wherewithal to maintain a military retinue of his own.
He no longer needed a tutor: Walahfrid was paid off with the abbacy of Reichenau, where he could help hold Alemannia against Louis the German.
Charles now journeyed independently of his father, and with his own men, to Le Mans, to receive the oaths of the people  he was to rule.
Further, the "kingdom" he now acquired, with Le Mans as a key-place (and Bishop Aldric a strong supporter), was one that carried exceptional prospects.
It contained a large number of royal estates: perhaps a third of those which have been identified in the Carolingian Empire.
As a political unit, it was a Carolingian creation.
Pippin, the first of the line, had destined it for his first-born, the young Charlemagne in the 750s; Charlemagne had assigned it in 790 to his son Charles, later labelled primogenitus and designated heir to the regnum Francorum (though he predeceased his father in 811).
Lothar's marriage, and some of his activities in 833–4, suggest that he had designs of his own on Neustria.
In making this grant to Charles, Louis the Pious was asserting this son's special status within the family: though the last-born, Charles was now, so to speak in the primogenitus slot.
It was necessary to bolster his position elsewhere too, however.
In 838, Louis the Pious assigned Charles a bajulus (literally, guardian, or superviser), Atto, who held a countship in the Rhineland near Mainz and (along with his two brothers) was now being promoted hard by the emperor to keep Louis the German in check.
Charles needed Atto's help: the emperor was clearly anxious about his future in the heartlands of Francia.
All three of the boy's half-brothers had had claims there.
The risk of denying all of these at once had been painfully clear in 833.
Louis's age — he was sixty in 838 — made it urgent to find a succession-settlement that had a good chance of sticking.
It seemed to [Judith]that the emperor's good physical condition might not last much longer, and his death would threaten danger to herself and to Charles unless they could win over one of Charles's elder brothers to work with them, and they calculated that none of the emperor's sons would fit this role so well as Lothar.
The Astronomer enters this under the year 835; but his chronology goes awry from 835 onwards, and the developments described in this passage seem in fact to belong later.
Nithard puts them in 839: Charles's mother, and the magnates who had worked on the will of his father to promote Charles's cause, fearing that if Louis were to die before matters were settled, they would risk incurring the hatred of Charles's brothers to their own ruin, advised that the father should choose one of those sons to be his helper so that, even if the others refused to remain at peace after their father's death, these two at least would have been so firmly united that they would be able to withstand the hostility of their rivals.
There was nothing sinister in Judith's role in all this.
 "She counted for a great deal in the palace" in the sense that she had privileged access to Louis and thus could be a helpful patron.
She had her own circle of friends and clients at court.
She had a strong and (as the years passed) increasing interest in securing her own future through that of her son.
On the other hand, there is enough evidence to show that Louis the Pious remained in personal control of political and military affairs.
His grip on his episcopate was secure.
It was his arrival at Nijmegen in 837 that made the Vikings withdraw, and his leadership of the Rhineland campaign in the winter of 838–9 that caused the rapid collapse of Louis the German's revolt.
Despite Viking attacks in 834, 835, 836 and 837 on Dorestad, Louis's coinage issued from that mint in increasing quantities in the years 834–40 was of consistently high quality and output.
No contemporary source attributes Louis's firm dealings with Lothar, Pippin and Louis the German to the designs of Judith rather than to the emperor's own wishes.
The picture of a pathetic old man in the hands of a scheming young woman is the fantasy of nineteenth-century, not ninth-century, historians.
Charles too had a voice: the Astronomer credits him as well as Judith with the idea of a  new rapprochement with Lothar.
But as Nithard went on to observe, the policy had originally, back in 823, been that of Louis the Pious himself.
In 839 several things helped revive it.
Lothar had suffered from an exceptional mortality-rate among his leading supporters in 836–7.
A terrible epidemic in Italy in the Astronomer's phrase "widowed Francia of her nobility" .
These were noble Franks who had followed Lothar into exile.
The dead included Lothar's three closest counsellors, Lambert, Matfrid and Hugh, his father-in-law; and Lothar himself was so ill that his life was despaired of.
These losses, politically damaging, and bad for morale (they were seen in Louis the Pious's entourage as divine retribution on former rebels), weakened Lothar's resistance to his father's pressure.
Changes in the configuration of the royal family had a similar effect.
Lothar's attempt to form an alliance with his brother Louis the German against their father had failed dismally in 838.
When in the winter of 838–9 Louis the German rebelled openly, the emperor crushed him completely in a swift campaign, and sent him back to Bavaria.
The bajulus Atto may have failed to uphold Charles's cause in the Rhineland as the emperor had intended: no more is heard of that guardianship.
Better prospects had by now opened up for Charles elsewhere with the death of Pippin of Aquitaine in December 838.
Louis the Pious decided to disinherit Pippin's sons, though the older, also called Pippin, was by now fifteen.
Here, two sets of values conflicted.
Louis was within his legal rights, for he had never relinquished his reserve powers over regna; and there was no doubt of his grandparental position as head of the family.
Nevertheless his action seems to have struck contemporaries as flouting legitimate filial expectations: there was a flagrant contrast with his treatment of his own 15-year old, Charles.
But when Louis showed his claws, Lothar knew he meant business.
Aquitaine was back in the pool of available regna.
Thus, in 839 the emperor was in a position to offer to divide the whole empire (save only Bavaria) between Lothar and Charles.
It was an offer Lothar could not refuse.
The division made at Worms in 839, unlike the grants to Charles in 837 and 838, was prospective only.
The emperor told Lothar to define the two parts, and let Charles choose which he wanted; alternatively, said Louis, "we'll divide, and the choice of parts will be yours" .
Lothar having tried for three days to do the dividing, said he "could not do so because of his ignorance of the places involved" and so finally left that task to his father.
The boundary-line was drawn northwards from Italy, via Geneva, the Jura and the Meuse valley to the North Sea.
"Lothar chose the eastern share, then the emperor gave Charles the second part.
After the emperor had received all sorts of oaths from Lothar, he let him return to Italy."
What did this division mean to the people involved?
One way to answer is to look at the interests converging in two marriages probably dateable to 839.
The first was that of Gisèle, daughter of Louis and Judith (hence Charles's only full sibling), with Eberhard, duke of Friuli in north-east Italy and a leading supporter of Lothar's regime.
The offer of Gisèle as bride was a spectacular gesture: legitimate daughters of Carolingians were usually placed in convents.
In choosing Eberhard as a son-in-law, Louis and Judith expressed their confidence that he would help reinforce their entente with Lothar; at the same time, Eberhard gained access to Gisèle's generous dowry of estates in Francia.
The second marriage united Judith's brother Conrad with Adelaide, who was Lothar's sister-in-law.
Conrad was securing his own interests in Alemannia while acquiring, it seems, Adelaide's dowry in the region of Auxerre.
Judith was constructing another axis of alliance for herself and Charles within the wider imperial family-circle.
At this point in Louis's reign Nithard comments: "the emperor could now feel confident that the aristocracy would not desert him for the rest of his life" .
Eberhard and Conrad, leading members of that aristocracy, had each acquired landed interests in more than one of the regna.
They had invested for the long term, if not in imperial unity (and significantly, nothing was said at Worms about emperorship or empire), then in the coexistence of Lothar and Charles in the regnum francorum.
Everyone had hedged bets.
For Charles, this division was a mixed blessing.
He was to retain the valuable regions already granted him, and though he would in the future have to share the heartlands with Lothar, still, for a last-born son, he had done rather well.
The immediate problem lay in Aquitaine, where some of the nobles who had been close to the defunct Pippin I, had refused to accept the "disinheritance" of Pippin's son and instead recognised him as their king.
Charles had to make good his own claims at once, and so, significantly, he gained his first experience of war in campaigning against, not foreign foes, but a Carolingian rival.
Though some contemporaries based in Francia (Nithard, and the Astronomer, for instance) seemed to regard Aquitaine as a faraway country of which they knew little, Charles did not share that view.
Aquitaine was, after all, his father's former realm, hence could be regarded as Charles's inheritance.
It was known to Charles too, for in 832 he had been installed as king there, briefly, at Limoges.
In 839, some powerful Aquitanians supported him: they included Bishop Ebroin of Poitiers, thanks to whom Charles was well-informed about the region's political geography.
He went directly from Worms to Chalon-sur-Saône: Louis had summoned a host there for the beginning of September.
Joined by both his parents, Charles advanced to Clermont, where his Aquitanian supporters came to affirm their allegiance "with their accustomed oaths" .
From here, while Louis took personal command of operations against strongholds held by Pippin II's supporters in the Auvergne and Quercy, Charles and Judith moved north to establish their base at Poitiers.
Bishop Ebroin certainly, and possibly also the local count, were committed to Charles's cause.
To that part of north-western Aquitaine can probably be assigned Count Rainald, and several other counts and vassi dominici who witnessed a document in April 838 as Louis's faithful supporters.
Just what kind of opposition did Charles face in Aquitaine?
It is not only shortage of contemporary evidence that makes the question hard to answer.
The reconstruction of the eleventh-century historian Ademar has been eagerly accepted by twentieth-century historians predisposed to believe in the existence of an Aquitanian national identity in the ninth century.
Ademar's evidence is demonstrably unreliable, however; and without it, there is nothing to show that Pippin II's support was at all widespread.
The regnum of Aquitaine was the Carolingians' creation.
Its aristocracy included a large infusion of Franks, whose kin-ties and political interests drew them often towards Francia.
Pippin I's recurrent problem had been the meddling of his father, ex-king of Aquitaine.
The personal loyalties of the aristocracy were torn.
Not long before his death, Pippin I had married one of his two daughters to a noble whose support he must have been especially keen to hold, Count Gerard.
Crucial evidence on Gerard's conduct after Pippin I's death is supplied by a letter of Lupus of Ferrières written in July 840: Gerard, it says, "the former prince and favourite (princeps et carus) of Pippin [I]" was now one of Charles's right-hand men in Aquitaine.
Lupus was in a position to know.
A substantial contingent of men from his abbey had been among Louis the Pious's forces in Aquitaine since the previous autumn, and when they returned to Ferrières in July 840, they brought first-hand news of Gerard's appointment as commander of Charles's garrison at Limoges.
One other supporter of Pippin II can be identified with some certainty: that was Bernard, the former chamberlain, whose downfall in 830 had been so dramatic.
He had never recovered his position at court (perhaps that was not surprising, given the rumours that linked his name with Judith's in 830).
After appearing in Pippin I's entourage in 832, Bernard had incurred the emperor's lasting disfavour.
Later in the 830s, Bernard had improvised a career in Septimania, outside Pippin's kingdom, abandoning his old base in Barcelona for a new one in Uzès, where his wife  Dhuoda was installed, and acquiring resources by appropriating local church lands in the Narbonnais.
Louis the Pious had done all he could to oust him by encouraging opponents in the region.
Bernard spent little time at home.
The developments of 839 cast further doubt on his future.
There was unlikely to be a place for him in a reconstituted kingdom of Aquitaine that included Septimania and was ruled by Charles the Bald.
Bernard therefore turned to Pippin II, not because of residual devotion to Pippin's father, still less from a sense of Aquitanian identity, but because he needed a Carolingian alternative to Charles.
From Pippin II's standpoint in 839, any support was welcome; and Bernard had useful contacts, through kinsmen and inherited lands, in Septimania and in Burgundy.
Two charters survive given by Pippin II as "king of the Aquitanians" in 839 and 840.
One was issued from the monastery of Figeac; its beneficiary was the abbot of Solignac near Limoges.
The other's beneficiary was the fidelis Rodulf whose lands also lay in the Limousin.
(His father was the count of Turenne.)
The basis of Pippin's support was narrow, but its geography meant that Louis's autumn campaign against him had to be fought in difficult terrain: this part of Aquitaine was a region of hills and crags, deeply-wooded, and crossed by great rivers that impeded north-south communications.
Warfare in this region was always about sieges.
Louis did well to take Carlat, its fortifications natural as well as man-made.
But before he could besiege Turenne, sickness among his men caused him to withdraw.
He spent Christmas at Poitiers with Charles and Judith.
But in February he returned to the Rhineland to deal with yet another raid by Louis the German there (this time the emperor drove his son out so forcefully that he had to seek refuge with the Slavs before making his way back to Bavaria).
Charles was left for the first time to conduct his own strategy in Aquitaine, no doubt with Judith to help him.
Perhaps it was now that he appointed Ebroin, himself an able military leader, to be his archchaplain.
In the four months following the emperor's departure, Charles's military moves are unknown.
By July, however, he was in control of three strongpoints that straddled central Aquitaine: Clermont, Limoges and Angoulême.
Numbers of his opponents had been captured or come over to him.
Lupus summed up the situation: "everything had gone well" .
Lupus exaggerated.
Pippin II was still at large and still had supporters.
Charles opted, realistically, for negotiation, and sent envoys to offer a meeting at Bourges in July.
Bernard seems to have been one of those who swore that Pippin would come.
But before Charles himself got to Bourges, he received news from the Rhineland: his father had died, on 20 June, near Ingelheim.
Charles and Judith had been in Louis's thoughts as he lay dying: he had left Charles a share of his treasure, and despatched crown, sword and sceptre to Lothar "to have on condition that he should keep his faith to Charles and Judith, and guarantee to Charles the whole share of the realm which with God and the leading men of the palace as witnesses, Lothar with his father, and in his father's presence, had assigned to Charles" .
But (as Hobbes observed), "promises without the sword are but words" .
Charles was soon to find out what Lothar's words were worth.
And that would depend, in turn, on whether other men kept their word to a dead emperor.
840–843: WINNING A KINGDOM
The death of a great ruler is a shocking event.
In the early Middle Ages it often meant kaleidoscopic change on the political scene but the new pattern (unlike a kaleidoscope's) took some time to form.
The 839 succession-plan was too recent and contentious to provide much of a guide for action in the summer of 840.
 "Men were driven by greed and terror" in their quest for a new lord.
For Louis the Pious's following, the choice was painfully hard.
Some preferred to lie low for a while.
But most staked their future on making a new commitment swiftly.
Nithard was one of the latter sort.
He was with Charles at Bourges in July (and had perhaps brought Charles the news of his father's death).
Most of Louis's entourage, and most of the Frankish elite, jumped the other way — in the direction of Lothar.
Since Lothar had been summoned to meet his father at Worms at the beginning of July, he was already in the far north of Italy en route to the Rhineland when news of the emperor's death reached him.
He moved slowly, according to Nithard, "wanting to know which way things would go before he crossed the Alps" ; only when it had become clear that plenty of support would be forthcoming did he decide to claim "the whole empire" .
Quite what that meant is unclear and perhaps was unclear then (the terms of the 817 Ordinatio would have needed updating anyway since Pippin I had died); but the one thing that was perfectly clear was that Lothar was abrogating the 839 division-plan. <pb n=106 This can hardly have surprised Charles: even before he knew of Lothar's decision, it seems, he had sent envoys to remind him of the previous year's sworn agreement; of the protection owed by older brother to younger brother and by godfather to godson; and (by way of quid pro quo), of the obedience owed by a younger son to the primogenitus.
Lothar's reply was cautious: his intentions towards Charles were benevolent, he said, but he asked Charles to "spare Pippin [II]until he [Lothar]might have a chance to speak with him" .
The threat was scarcely veiled; and Lothar had probably been in touch with Pippin already as an obvious ally against Charles.
It is a curious fact that, thanks to Nithard, we know far more about the years 840–42 than about any other phase of Charles's reign.
Nithard of course misleads.
He is consistently hostile to Lothar, and that means he has almost nothing to say about Lothar's case or about those who "bought" it.
Had a piece of Lotharian history survived for these years, it would have told a different story.
Still Charles's biographer should not look Nithard's gift-horse in the mouth!
Without his Histories in Four Books we should know virtually nothing of what happened in the months following Louis the Pious's death, and, more importantly, we should have had to guess at the motivations of those involved.
Nithard was one of the two envoys Charles sent to Lothar in July 840; he completed Books I and II in October 841, Books III and IV by summer 843.
His work has all the advantages (as well as the drawbacks) of a participant's testimony.
Even his elisions and silences are revealing.
It's significant too that, especially in the later Books, Nithard expresses increasing admiration for Louis the German.
Relatively poorly documented up to this point, Louis's career already showed promise: his conduct during the revolt of 833–4 had proved his capacity for independent thought and action, and his restiveness thereafter was understandable, given his father's evident preference for Lothar as guarantor of young Charles's claims.
After their father's death, it was Louis whose interests proved more closely aligned to Charles's.
In Bavaria during the  830s, Louis had established a firm power-base for an enlarged kingdom, and his epithet "the German" , though meant by contemporaries to convey simply that he ruled east of the Rhine, would turn out curiously apt in terms of modern state-geography.
During his long reign Louis was to prove one of the most effective of early medieval rulers.
His and Charles's lives were to run closely parallel — brothers who could never ignore each other, whether as colleagues, or competitors.
Nithard already seemed to sense that bond.
Nithard's main focus was on Charles; but in July 840 the eyes of most of the elite were on Lothar.
Those based east of the Meuse, in lands that had always been destined for Lothar, readily answered his summons to a great assembly at Ingelheim in August.
For Louis the German, this venue posed an immediate challenge.
In the meantime, he had to accept Lothar's control of the enclave on the west bank of the Rhine, including Ingelheim, Mainz and Worms, on which he himself had had designs since 831.
But in Franconia Louis the German clearly had a good deal of support, and his power-base in Bavaria held firm: no churchman from there attended Lothar's assembly at Ingelheim.
Charles's position was far more precarious.
Support was fraying at the edges of the realm promised in 839: the bishop of Toul, and the archbishops of Besançon and Tarentaise with their suffragans, all acknowledged Lothar in August 840.
There were ominous signs of crumbling in the heart of the Frankish kingdom assigned to Charles in 837.
Here all ten bishops of the province of Rheims agreed to the reinstatement of Ebbo, the fallguy of 834–5.
For Ebbo, after five years in custody at the monastery of Fleury, Louis the Pious's death unlocked the prison door: the abbot of Fleury brought him to Ingelheim, where Lothar took him under his wing.
The Ingelheim attendance list unfortunately does not include laymen; but Nithard says that "all those living between the Meuse and the Seine" sent an urgent message to Charles in Aquitaine, "telling him to come before they were taken over by Lothar" .
At least one count in this region, Odulf, had already defected.
Charles now found himself in a situation that would often recur: he had important unfinished business in Aquitaine, but his presence was required in Francia.
It was the sort of dilemma faced by any ruler of a composite state: different regna posed simultaneous conflicting demands.
This was something Charles would learn to live with.
Now he showed a keen sense of priorities, and, as vital, an ability to delegate.
In August 840, his decision to move swiftly north to Quierzy to bolster the nerve of his supporters, leaving his mother to take care of Aquitaine, was surely the right one in principle.
What hampered him in practice was lack of manpower.
Judith simply did not have enough troops to secure her position.
(She was probably at Bourges.)
When Charles got wind of a threatened attack on her by Pippin and his men, he returned southwards with unexpected speed, fell on Pippin's force and put them to flight.
But Charles's fundamental problem was Lothar.
He was threatening to dis-honour anyone who refused to come over to him: in other words, the price of continued loyalty to Charles would be loss of estates granted by previous kings (whether as benefices or as lands associated with office-holding).
Even before the Quierzy meeting, some of the aristocracy in the region between the Charbonnière Forest and the Meuse had defected from Charles.
When Lothar himself crossed the Meuse, probably late in September, and announced that he would advance as far as the Seine, Charles's support in Francia collapsed.
Abbot Hilduin of St-Denis and Count Gerald of Paris, key supporters of Charles's Frankish regnum from 837–8, went over to Lothar, taking with them many, perhaps most, of the nobles with honores in the region.
Among the defectors was one of Charles's kinsmen: his cousin-once-removed, Pippin,"son of King Bernard of the Lombards' (Nithard identifies him very carefully at this point).
 "They preferred to break their faith, the way serfs do" , comments Nithard scornfully of this whole group, "rather than part with their lands for a while" .
This of course was just what Nithard himself had not done: he had been willing, instead, to see his lands  confiscated by Lothar and, no doubt, regranted to one of Lothar's men.
Nithard pointed out that what Lothar had done to him was just what he planned to do to Charles.
This passage, in revealing Nithard's own personal concerns and hopes, also points clearly towards his audience.
He says in the prologue to Book I that Charles in May 841, asked him to produce a record of recent history,"because, my lord, you know that you and your men have suffered undeservedly the persecutions of Lothar…
"
Vos vestrique.
Nithard wrote of what he and his companions had suffered; and he wrote for them as well as for Charles — significant evidence for Charles's own constituency.
Charles's fortunes seemed to reach their nadir in October 840, when Lothar (having en passant, though Nithard does not say so, re-installed Ebbo at Rheims) pushed westwards across the Seine, aiming to gain control of Neustria.
Some of the nobles in that region were reputed to be wavering; and Lothar had support in Brittany as well.
What was Charles to do?
 "He summoned a meeting, where a simple plan was very simply found: since they had nothing left but their lives and their bodies, they chose to die nobly rather than to betray and abandon their king" .
In fact no such agonising choice confronted Charles's men: Lothar himself recognised that his own position was dangerously exposed; and winter was close.
No-one wanted a fight.
Instead, at Orléans in November, a truce was agreed until another meeting at Attigny the following May.
Charles was meanwhile to keep Aquitaine, Septimania, Provence and part of Neustria.
Lothar promised to attack neither Charles nor Louis the German — which suggests that Charles and Louis were already in touch.
Lothar believed that all he needed was time.
Already, in the regna assigned to Charles at Orléans, a number of important men had declared for Lothar.
According to Nithard, he set about "soliciting" Charles's supporters more insistently than ever, in the hope of "dissipating his realm" .
The monastery of Ferrières offers a good example of the sort of dilemma now faced both by individuals and by communities.
Ferrières itself was south of Paris, between Sens  and Orléans, both sees whose bishops were supporting Charles; but its rich dependent house of St-Josse near Quentovic was in the area that fell under Lothar's control in September 840, and Lothar lost no time in handing it over to one of his own clerks.
Odo, the Abbot of Ferrières, explained his difficulties to Abbot Markward of Prüm: "We are placed betwixt and between — and we float uncertainly.
If general opinion favours Lothar, and if you are in a position of influence with him, please don't forget us, and drive the wicked designs of bad men away from us, as far as you can."
A few weeks later, the monks of Ferrières wrote as a group to beg Lothar to return St-Josse to them: "incited by this beneficium (literally," good deed "), we would pray God more attentively for you and for your offspring" .
On the other hand, potential new beneficiaries were all too glad to accept beneficia like St-Josse.
And, on the other side, one outcome of the Truce of Orléans was that Charles took the abbacy of Ferrières away from Odo and gave it to a member of the community whose chief recommendation (with still more pull than his fine scholarship) was a readiness to commit himself to Charles.
The new abbot was Lupus.
Thanks to Lupus's letters and Nithard's Histories, it is possible to identify a dozen others who threw in their lot with Charles during the difficult first months of his reign: from Francia, Counts Adalgar (of Thérouanne) and Egilo, and the Seneschal Adalard (whose brother Count Gerald of Paris had defected to Lothar — perhaps the brothers had agreed to hedge their bets).
An important ecclesiastical recruit was Louis, a bastard grandson of Charlemagne and Louis the Pious's archchancellor since 835, who had transferred his post and his loyalty to Charles without hesitation in June 840.
Louis was also a monk of St-Denis.
When Abbot Hilduin of St-Denis defected to Lothar, Charles promised Louis that abbacy.
Southwards of Paris, the loyalty of Archbishop Wenilo of Sens and Bishop Jonas of Orléans probably helped Charles to install his men in the key abbacies of Fleury and (as we've seen) Ferrières, when the previous incumbents left to join Lothar.
Further west, the  adherence of Count Rainald of Herbauge was vital for Charles's prospects not only in the region of the lower Loire valley but in Aquitaine, where in July 840 Rainald commanded the garrison of Angoulême.
Count Gerard, in command at Limoges, and Bishop Ebroin of Poitiers, Charles's archchaplain, also maintained their support in Aquitaine.
Finally, from Burgundy, Charles early in 841 received two valuable recruits: Count Warin, and Bishop Theutbald of Langres.
The men whom Nithard terms the "sharers of Charles's counsels" included some magnates of first-rank importance who were clearly willing to stake their own futures on Charles's success.
These supporters were fairly well-distributed in Charles's regna, and, most crucial of all, their loyalty was to stand the test of open conflict in 841.
A worrying hole in Charles's position in Aquitaine had appeared late in 840 when Pippin II was able to install his fidelis Rodulf, son of the count of Turenne, as archbishop of Bourges.
For Pippin, this was a major coup (the silence of Francia-based writers reveals a chronic failure to appreciate the significance of events in Aquitaine), which extended his range far to the north of the Limousin-Quercy area.
Charles came to Bourges in January 841, hoping to meet Pippin.
Instead, Bernard appeared bearing excuses.
Charles was probably justified in suspecting bad faith: he and his men made a swoop on Bernard, who narrowly escaped with his life, leaving his men to be killed or captured and his baggage-train seized.
It is a telling comment on ninth-century political practice that this humiliation, according to Nithard, brought Bernard into a more accommodating frame of mind.
Promising to be loyal in future, he begged Charles for another chance to "deliver" Pippin.
The sequel to this episode suggests its impact on contemporaries.
A visit to Le Mans enabled Charles to reestablish the control there of his supporter Bishop Aldric and brought welcome new adherents in Neustria.
The Breton leader Nominoë promised to abandon Lothar.
Charles's  position in Aquitaine and in Burgundy was strengthened.
By March, support seemed to be flowing in "from all sides" .
The qualities these men admired included guile alongside bravery.
Nithard and his companions had sworn to the truce at Orléans "because they all had a lot of confidence in [Charles's]cleverness" .
But they were fairly sure that Lothar would persist in his old tricks, and in that case, as Nithard candidly admitted, "they would have to be regarded as absolved from the oath they had sworn" .
The truce, in other words, was merely a breathing-space.
Lothar immediately sent emissaries into the regna assigned to Charles "so that they [i.e. leading men there]should not accept Charles's lordship" , while Lothar himself moved south-east "to receive those who came to him from Provence" .
It followed that Charles and his men were no longer obliged by the truce-terms.
Nithard presented Charles as doing everything possible to avoid battle and to reach a settlement with Lothar.
Yet the record of Charles's actions demonstrates the very opposite: his determined pursuit of his own right to a kingdom in Francia set him and Lothar on a collision course.
They had agreed to meet at Attigny on 8 May.
To get there, Charles had to turn eastwards and to cross the Seine.
But he moved towards Paris in late March: everyone knew that it did not take six weeks to get from Paris to Attigny.
Lothar's new supporters east of the Seine, including Count Gerald of Paris and Archbishop Guntbold of Rouen, determined to stop Charles crossing the river.
They were helped by a Spring tide which caused extensive flooding and rendered all the fords impassable.
To these natural obstacles they added man-made ones, damaging or sinking available boats and destroying the bridges.
Charles was equally determined to confront the men who had so recently betrayed him.
He moved rapidly down-river to Rouen where a number of merchant vessels had been driven in by the exceptional tide, and requisitioned twenty-eight boats.
The crossing of the Seine, on 31 March, was carefully planned.
Messengers were sent on ahead with a manifesto: Charles was coming to make good his rights; there would be an amnesty for all who now came over to him; those who  refused to accept his God-given rule would have to quit his kingdom.
Fixing to his boat's prow the cross on which the oaths of 839 had been sworn, Charles led his flotilla over the river.
Gerald and the rest on the opposite bank watched their approach: "when they recognised the cross, and Charles, they fled" .
Only a delay in getting his horses across deflected Charles from instant pursuit.
Instead he went to St-Denis to offer thanks, and from there to St-Germain-des-Prés.
Despite the absence of Count Gerald, Charles did not enter Paris (perhaps it was fortified against him).
En route for Sens, he was joined by Warin and Theutbald from Burgundy.
From Sens, on 13 April, he pressed on eastwards by night through the Forest of Othe: he had heard that Gerald and the rest were there, and hoped to fall on them unawares.
Unfortunately for Charles, they were warned just in time, and escaped.
Again, Charles was unable to pursue the fugitives: horses and men needed a rest-day, before Charles could arrive at Troyes on Good Friday, 15 April.
Next day, that very Easter Saturday, a truly wonderful and most notable thing happened.
For neither he nor anyone in his following had anything at all apart from the clothes they stood up in and their weapons and horses.
Charles was just getting out of his bath and was about to put on again the same clothes he had taken off beforehand, when suddenly, there at the gates were envoys bringing from Aquitaine a crown and all the royal gear, and everything needed for holy rites!
Who can fail to be amazed that so few men (and virtually unknown men too), could carry such a huge quantity of jewels unharmed over so great a distance?
Even more amazing is how they managed to arrive at just the right place, and at just the right day and hour required, when not even Charles himself knew where he and his men would be.
It seemed that this could only have happened by God's grace and with his approval.
And through this, Charles inspired awe in those who fought along with him and encouraged  them all to a confident hope that things would go well for them.
And Charles and his whole exultant cohort devoted themselves to celebrating Easter.
This story derives its resonance from its specific timeframe.
The correct royal and liturgical equipment was required for the greatest feast of the church's year: its arrival from so "far away" (in fact, from northern Aquitaine) was timely in every sense.
It was hardly even a coincidence (Charles had told his Aquitanian supporters little more than a fortnight before to follow him northwards, and envoys from Lothar found no difficulty in locating Charles at Troyes on Easter Monday, 18 April).
But Nithard invited his audience to invest it with the quality of a near-miracle.
Perhaps echoing the ritual reality of an annual Easter reclothing of the royal retinue, the episode as recounted six months later to Charles's camp signified his political "resurrection" and the collective cleansing and rededication of his followers.
In his handling of the event at the time "to inspire awe in those who fought along with him" , Charles again showed a talent for exploiting symbols.
The appearance of the Aquitanian envoys also revealed more material resources.
They had evidently been sent by Judith: she had been in control of the treasure they brought with them, and, interestingly, of Charles's regalia.
She was also mustering troops, and planned to lead them northwards to join up with her son.
Charles urgently needed reinforcements.
Not only had Lothar consolidated his position west of the Meuse; he had heavily defeated Louis the German's forces in the Rhineland and driven Louis back to Bavaria.
All this was bad news for Charles, despite his own hopeful move towards Attigny.
When Lothar's envoys arrived at Troyes, they told Charles to advance no further, and were unimpressed by his complaints about the treatment of Louis.
For Lothar, the Attigny meeting had become irrelevant: Charles should be finished off quickly before he could implement the now-obvious policy of joining forces with Louis the German.
Lothar and Charles spent the next six weeks in manoeuvre and countermanoeuvre.
Neither as yet had a large enough force to risk battle.
Each feared the other's surprise attack before reinforcements arrived.
Both pumped out "information" — and feared "false rumours" .
Morale counted for much.
Men on both sides were jumpy; but the cause was not cowardice.
After all, Frankish nobles were trained from youth, as Charles had been, to ride and to wield weapons, through hunting, wargames, and fights over property and honour in which, according to at least one contemporary canon lawyer's opinion, killing was no sin.
True, the great days of Frankish imperial expansion had ended a generation before; but the 830s had seen campaigns against Bretons, Danes and Slavs.
Those who read history-books (and some laymen did) knew that the Franks had grown mighty by conquering "external peoples" : not since the battle of Vinchy in 717 had Franks slaughtered Franks in "civil war" .
The style of "internal" Frankish politics had involved many confrontations, many feints and pursuits, many rituals of rebellion, but all previous potential conflicts between rival Carolingians had in the end been resolved by talk and compromise, and rituals of conciliation like shared acts of worship.
Early in 841, Lupus was urging Charles to seek "a bloodless victory" over his brother, in traditional Carolingian fashion.
But by May, bloodshed was beginning to look inevitable.
Like all civil wars, this one would pit brother against brother, each with a recognisable "right" on his side.
For the truth was that both Charles and Lothar had good arguments, in law and in morals.
There were no absolute rules governing the succession to the regnum francorum or its division between royal heirs; and precedents pointed in different directions.
One oath could be overlain by another; obligations could conflict when a man had acquired successive lords — as so many had between 837 and 841.
Men could examine their consciences, and still opt for different sides.
Nithard, having chosen his, wrote for those still undecided, or agonising over the consequences of their choice.
That is why Nithard's account of the parleying of May–June 841 had to be lengthy.
His audience wanted to believe that battle had, in the end, been unavoidable.
What did the rival Carolingians themselves believe?
Were all the sendings of messengers, offers and counter-offers, a propaganda exercise, a charade?
Such an interpretation places the propagandists, as it were, outside the thoughtworld of those they addressed.
Charles and Lothar were not simply deceiving each other; still less did they try to deceive their own followers.
Realities were not so simple, men neither so cynical, nor so naive.
Charles had decided on battle as the only way to cut through the competing loyalties and quite literally, reduce the number of Carolingian competitors: thus, as the only way to secure himself a kingdom that included Aquitaine along with the lion's share of Francia (as promised originally in 837); but also, as the only way to secure an outcome all would accept as definitive — a Judgement of God.
He made this decision, to be sure, because he thought he could win.
By mid-June, two things had crucially altered his prospects of victory: first, at Châlons, Judith arrived with men from Aquitaine; second, Louis the German and a small but experienced force met up with Charles near Auxerre.
On 21 June, says Nithard, the two armies, of Charles and Louis on the one hand, of Lothar on the other, "were within sight of each other" .
Charles and Louis did not attack straight away.
Instead, they set out rules: the battle was to be "without any fraud" ; it was to be preceded by fasting and prayer.
Next day, Lothar withdrew southwestwards, to Fontenoy.
Charles and Louis followed, to encamp at the village of Thury, just over 7 km to the south.
On 23 June, Charles and Louis sent envoys with final offers: the Frankish heartlands should be divided three ways, but Louis would give up his claims to the Franconian lands west of the Rhine, around Ingelheim and Mainz, while Charles would yield his claims to the region between the Charbonnière Forest and the Meuse.
These offers were meant to demonstrate that the two younger brothers had gone to the very limit of reasonable  concessions, and hence would bear no guilt for the casualties of battle.
But they surely did not expect Lothar to accept these terms.
For they knew perfectly well that Lothar was waiting for one thing to happen before engaging in battle: one thing which would make him too feel he could win.
Lothar was awaiting the arrival of Pippin II and his men from Aquitaine.
Contemporary Frankish writers are explicit in making the timing of the battle of Fontenoy dependant on Pippin's appearance.
It was Pippin's help which ensured that the ensuing battle would be fierce, Pippin's arrival that made Lothar feel so confident that that night in his camp Archbishop George of Ravenna (an Italian supporter who had invested hugely in Lothar's cause) promised him that "Charles should be tonsured tomorrow" — hence, excluded forever from kingly power.
Why had Charles and Louis also been willing to wait?
The only possible answers are that they wanted to ensure that Lothar would not evade the battle, and that the battle would be decisive.
Lothar, the moment Pippin had joined him, flung down the gauntlet: he alone was to have imperial power, he said, and the interests of his brothers no longer mattered to him.
The issue was clearcut, and there could be only one response to a Judgement of God.
Even the date of the battle was not wholly fortuitous; nor did it lack significance for those who fought in it.
On Thursday 23 June Charles and Louis had announced a timetable: next day, 24 June, they would celebrate the Feast of St John the Baptist's Nativity; they would join battle on 25 June at 8 a.m.
(Nithard, quite exceptionally, repeats the day twice and the hour three times.)
There are two themes in the liturgy of the Feast of St John: the first is of release — the opening of Anna's previously barren womb and of Zacharias's dumb mouth, the washing away of sin; the second is of salvation — of baptismal rebirth, foreshadowings ended and prophecies fulfilled through the Coming of Christ.
Fontenoy too was designed to be a watershed — washing away the detritus of the past, opening up a clear future.
The battle, in Nithard's account, went according to plan.
At dawn Charles and Louis moved northwards with about a third of their troops to occupy the wooded hill overlooking Lothar's camp at Fontenoy itself.
Nithard's statement that they waited, as agreed, until 8 a.m. before joining battle, has been rejected by some modern historians, who think that Charles and Louis instead swooped before 8 on Lothar's sleeping camp.
All that is known of medieval warfare suggests that Lothar and his men would not have been sleeping after dawn — least of all when they knew that battle was imminent — and that Lothar's scouts would have kept him well informed of his brothers' moves.
Furthermore, no contemporary writer, even one who supported Lothar, alleges that Charles and Louis won this battle by a surprise attack (though that tactic was of course standard military practice, and quite familiar to Charles).
I think we can accept that Charles and Louis played by the rules they themselves had set.
The battle took place on three distinct sites.
In the first, hard-fought, sector of the battle, Louis put Lothar to flight; in the second, Charles had swift and complete success; conflict was fiercest, and most protracted, in the third sector, but "in the end, everyone on Lothar's side fled" .
Nithard leaves out Fontenoy's crucial Aquitanian dimension, which is recorded, fortuitously, in Italian sources drawing on the eye-witness accounts of Archbishop George of Ravenna and his men.
Andrew of Bergamo says that"great slaughter was made especially among the nobles of the Aquitanians…
To this day [he is writing c. 860]so wasted is the nobility of the Aquitanians that the Northmen take their land and they have no strength to resist".
Agnellus of Ravenna begins by stressing the large size of Lothar's army and Lothar's personal valour ( "had there been ten men like him on his side, the empire would never have been divided" ).
Nevertheless, Charles, helped by Louis, was victorious.
"But then Pippin king of Aquitaine came up  with relief for Lothar's army, and battle was rejoined.
A number of Charles's men were killed because they had strayed out of formation.
When Charles's troops had re-formed, battle began again.
More than 40,000 men fell on the side of Lothar and Pippin".
Archbishop George was taken prisoner and, with his clergy scattered, the wealth of his church looted and lost, was brought before Charles.
The king threatened permanent exile, but his mother Judith (her presence at Fontenoy is otherwise unrecorded) counselled mercy.
As George grovelled at his feet, Charles, resplendent in full armour, publicly condemned him: Why did you have to ruin your own church, to lose in a single hour all that your predecessors acquired?
Believe me, you won't get any of it back if you live to be a hundred!…
Weren't you saying in the tent only yesterday: "When Charles has been beaten and stripped of his weapons, I'll personally tonsure him as a cleric and take him back to Ravenna" ?
Why deny your own words?
Look here — you've done wrong twice over: what you said was wrong in the first place; but then you failed to carry out your promise!
God will give you your just deserts.
For my part, I'll let you go — as my mother tells me to.
Back to Ravenna with you!
This scene may give a rare glimpse of Charles's personal style as king.
The hard-headedness and the sardonic humour seem true to life; and Judith's role sounds as plausible as her son's wry acknowledgement of her influence and his own youth.
As for Agnellus's account of Fontenoy, if his casualty-figure is fantastic, his statements about Pippin's role, and his side's heavy losses, look factual.
Though we have no contemporary report from Aquitaine, tenth- and eleventh-century writers there complement the Italians' information by assigning a key role to "the men of Aquitaine" on Charles's side, with two Aquitanian counts named as among the slain.
In short, Fontenoy was a  battle between Aquitanians, as well as between Franks.
On Pippin's side there was also a crucial non-participant: Bernard "though he was only about 8 km away from the battlefield, gave no help to either side" .
Lothar's supporter Angelbert who wrote a lament over the fallen, may have had Bernard in mind when he attributed his own side's defeat to the last-minute defection of certain "commanders" .
Was Fontenoy decisive?
Charles and Louis saw it as a divine Judgement, confirming their claims to a share in the Frankish heartlands.
For Charles it may have meant political survival, for perhaps he really would have been tonsured had he been defeated.
Certainly he would have lost Aquitaine.
Victory meant, conversely, that in all the negotiations of the subsequent two years, Charles's claims to Aquitaine were never in dispute.
In that sense, though Pippin lived to fight another day, the future composition of Charles's kingdom was settled after June 841.
Victory also brought an immediate windfall of loot when Lothar's camp fell into his hands: Charles was able to offer gear from Lothar's travelling chapel in thanks to St-Benoît, Fleury.
Yet the fact that no Carolingian contender was a casualty meant that Fontenoy failed to resolve the central problem of the imperial succession.
Lothar's supporters implicitly recognised this when they tried to postpone the battle's political impact by spreading rumours that Charles had been killed and Louis wounded.
Lothar's survival allowed his side, anyway, to reject the notion of Fontenoy as a Judgement of God.
Lothar still hoped for "monarchy" , in other words the whole inheritance of Francia.
Charles's and Louis's conduct after the battle was conciliatory: they allowed fugitives to escape, and buried the dead on both sides.
Pippin was expected to capitulate; but there would have to be a settlement.
Charles while still at Fontenoy welcomed into his following a new recruit — Bernard's 15-year old son William.
(It was for him that Dhuoda, far south in Uzès, now began her book of moral guidance.
She still dated by Lothar's reign-years: it was not clear in whose  kingdom Uzès might end up.)
Bernard himself sent promises, this time with greater credibility, that he would "deliver" Pippin on Charles's terms.
While Louis the German went eastwards to the Rhineland, after agreeing to another meeting at Langres in September, Charles's first move after Fontenoy was westwards into Aquitaine.
Pippin eluded him (though some of his followers came over to Charles).
The problem, again, was shortage of time: Charles had to return with Judith to Francia to make the most of the expected strengthening of his position in the heartlands between Seine and Meuse.
Lothar's defeat, and his departure to the Rhineland to launch an attack on Louis, had left his more westerly supporters demoralised.
Charles's men gained control in Paris, Soissons and Rheims (whence Ebbo was again driven out).
There were prestigious recruits: Hugh, an illegitimate son of Charlemagne and abbot of the great monasteries of St-Quentin and Lobbes, Immo bishop of Noyon, and perhaps other Rheims suffragans.
Most encouraging for Charles were new supporters from the Meuse valley region, won over "more by love than by fear" (in sharp contrast to Lothar's "terror-tactics" ): Giselbert, count of the Maasgau, and Count Odulf (whose adherence had to be clinched by the grant of Ferrières's rich dependency of St-Josse — which did not please Abbot Lupus!).
After a stay at Attigny, not far from the Meuse, Charles returned to Paris early in September.
Lothar, in a last bid to shore up his power in western Francia, made a foray to the Seine.
Charles withdrew to the west bank at St-Cloud; Lothar stayed at St-Denis and sent envoys to talk of peace while still trying to reconstruct an alliance with Neustrians, Bretons and Pippin of Aquitaine.
It was too late.
His former supporters turned their backs.
 "He spent the whole winter in wasted effort" , while early in the new year his Rhineland civitates too fell to Louis the German.
On 14 February Louis and Charles and their followings met at Strasbourg to agree a strategy for forcing real and permanent concessions out of Lothar.
This meeting is famous for reasons not strictly historical.
Not only does Nithard say in which vernacular languages the two kings addressed their men (though he records the addresses in Latin), but he gives the ensuing oaths in vernacular texts that are among the earliest examples of Old High German and Old French.
Louis in the lingua teudisca, Charles in the lingua romana, purveyed an identical message: Lothar had rejected the Judgement of God, and he was responsible for the continuing sufferings of "our people" .
Only through "firm fraternity" would Lothar be brought to acknowledge "justice" , that is, the just claims of his brothers.
Louis then swore in the lingua romana, so that Charles's men would understand him: For the love of God and for the Christian people and for our common salvation, from this day henceforth, as far as God grants that I know and can, I shall so help this my brother Charles with my aid and in all things, as every man ought in right to help his brother, on condition that he does the like for me.
And I shall never accept [the offer of]any meeting from Lothar which, with my will, may cause harm to this my brother Charles.
Charles then swore an equivalent oath to Louis in the lingua teudisca.
Charles's following (populus) then swore "in its own language, the lingua romana" : "If Louis keeps the oath which he swears to his brother Charles, and my lord Charles for his part does not keep his, if I cannot make him refrain [from that action], then neither I nor any other whom I can make refrain will give him any aid against Louis" .
Louis's men then swore an equivalent oath in the lingua teudisca.
Clearly, everyone present had to understand what commitments were being entered into, and not everyone knew Latin or was bilingual in Romance and Old High German.
This suggests that all in the kings' followings, lesser men as well as great nobles, were involved in the action, and played a collective role in underwriting the kings' commitments.
In other words, the sanction holding Louis and Charles to their promises was the aristocracy's power to withdraw their loyalty.
Nithard went on to speak of a "pact" (pactum) between the two royal brothers and the primores populi, that is the "leading men" who presumably swore the oaths in person.
The maintenance of a united front between Louis and Charles was the only way to bring Lothar to negotiate the secure peace that would benefit everyone.
At this point in his narrative Nithard inserted a joint-vignette of Charles and Louis: "Both were of middle height, good-looking, physically fit.
Both were brave, generous, prudent and eloquent.
Even more important than all these noble qualities was the holy and respected concord between the two brothers.
They nearly always ate together; they gave each other all they had that was especially valuable; they shared the same house, slept under the same roof."
Nithard's aim here was not accurate physical description but the symbolic underlining of shared commitment.
The account ends with a vivid picture of military exercises, first involving feigned flights performed by two equal contingents drawn from peoples of the various regna — Saxons, Gascons, Austrasians and Bretons, then the "putting to flight" of all these by the two kings and their followings (omnis iuventus) on horseback, the whole thing characterised by "so many noble participants, such superb control" .
The control impressed Nithard, for such exercises, he noted, often ended in real fights.
Once Lothar had again spurned his brothers' messengers, and come southwards from Aachen to the Moselle, apparently seeking battle, the scene was set for a final showdown.
Louis moved down the Rhine by ship from Worms, Charles with his horsemen travelled overland across the Hunsrück ( "a difficult route" on which the benefits of hard training showed), to meet up at Koblenz on 18 March.
Lothar fled — first to Aachen, where he plundered the imperial treasury, and then southwards, leaving Aachen, the "first seat of Francia" , to be occupied by his brothers.
This was, as Nithard put it, "the end of Lothar's second contest" .
This time the victory was bloodless — but  its outcome confirmed that of Fontenoy.
Louis and Charles would have their shares of Francia.
At first, they gave every appearance of being determined to exclude Lothar from the Carolingian heartlands altogether.
A large assembly of bishops and priests declared that Lothar lacked "the knowledge of how to govern the state" , and had fled "by a just Judgement of God, first from the battle-field and then from his own realm" .
God had thus clearly transferred the realm to his brothers, whom the bishops now invited to take it up.
Perhaps Charles's hand can be seen behind this remarkable foreshadowing of a new style of king-making ritual.
The maintenance of both morale and consensus among his and Louis's supporters was especially critical now.
The two-way division agreed at Aachen in March 842 is best seen as a way of putting pressure on Lothar, convincing him that this time he had no alternative to opening negotiations in earnest.
The terms of this abortive treaty (gaps in Nithard's text seem to suggest that details were never agreed) are therefore less significant than the way it was drawn up.
Charles produced a panel of twelve commissioners (one of them was Nithard) and Louis did the same.
 "This division was adapted not so much to the fertility or equal territorial extent of each share, as to the family connections (affinitas), and the interests and commitments (congruentia), of everyone involved" — that is to say, not of the kings alone, but of all twenty-four commissioners and beyond them, of their comrades, kin, friends and clients.
This short passage makes crystal-clear the role of the aristocracy in Carolingian politics, and explains why Charles now and later worked so hard to carry his followers with him.
The sequel proved the wisdom of the brothers' strategy: within weeks, Lothar sent envoys to reopen negotiations, this time talking in far more accommodating tones than ever before.
But consensus had its limitations in practice.
Louis and Charles proposed to split Francia proper into three, giving Lothar all the lands between the Meuse and the Rhine.
 "Some people already thought this was going beyond what was fair and suitable." 
But Lothar then  extracted a further concession,"since he would not have, he said, in the share [of the regnum]they were offering him the wherewithal to make good to his own supporters that which they had lost.
The envoys — I do not know by what trickery they were deceived [here Nithard bursts out into the first person]— thus increased Lothar's share of the regnum so that it extended as far as the Charbonnière."
There seems little doubt that a personal disappointment dictated Nithard's reaction here, and the natural explanation is that Nithard's own lands lay within the newly-conceded region, that is, between the Scheldt and the Meuse.
Charles therefore failed to carry Nithard's full-hearted support in the further detailed negotiations after June 842.
On the other hand, disappointment did not drive Nithard to defection: Charles had nicely calculated, just as Lothar had done — and this surely was a prime requirement of successful kingship — whom he could, and could not, afford to disappoint.
Similarly, despite Lupus's heartful pleas, Charles decided to leave St-Josse in the hands of Odulf whose continuing fidelity it guaranteed.
Charles knew that Lupus's stern warnings to "avoid the company of the wicked" relieved his feelings without actually compromising his loyalty.
Once a three-way division had been agreed in principle, each of the three brothers spent the rest of the summer in consolidating his position where it seemed weakest.
Lothar remained in central Francia, perhaps tightening his grip on the region east of the Charbonnière.
Louis had a serious revolt in Saxony to quell.
Charles as usual faced conflicting priorities.
Vikings had just sacked Quentovic, probably in June 842, taking advantage (as other Vikings had done in 834) of conflict between Carolingians.
The raiders were bought off, perhaps by a locally-organised rather than a royally-directed payment.
Recognising a more serious problem in the fact that Pippin II remained at large in Aquitaine, Charles moved across the Loire, this time penetrating much further than before into the south-west, where Pippin's adherents were evidently still to be found.
On 23 August, Charles was at Agen on the Garonne, with men from Burgundy under his command."
He put Pippin  to flight", but again failed to capture him.
Before the end of August he was turning north again leaving affairs in Aquitaine to be looked after by Duke Warin and by Egfrid, whom Charles seems to have installed as count of Toulouse shortly before.
The three brothers had agreed to meet at the beginning of October, at Metz, where their father was buried.
There they were to leave commissioners, forty picked by each brother, to work out a detailed division of the heartlands.
If the choice of site was intended to reinforce fraternal solidarity, it failed: Lothar's palace at Thionville was too close for comfort, and his brothers still mistrusted him so much that they demanded hostages from him to guarantee the security of their own negotiators.
In the end they agreed that the 120 commissioners should hold their meetings in the church of St-Castor at Koblenz, lodging each night on opposite sides of the Rhine "to forestall outbreaks of fighting between the commissioners' men" .
The negotiators immediately ran into a problem: no-one on Louis's and Charles's side had a thorough knowledge of the whole "empire" (totius imperii).
They would have to send out missi to make detailed descriptions, they said — otherwise they would be violating the oath they had taken, to make a fair division.
A second problem arose when Lothar objected to the delay.
Bishops were again brought in to arbitrate; but they did not see eye to eye.
The bishops on Lothar's side declared that the involuntary sin of an oath thus broken could be expiated and that a speedy division would prevent further damage to the Church.
The bishops on Charles's and Louis's side, taking a firmer line about oaths, asked why anyone should have to sin in this case, and repeated the proposal that a complete survey of the empire be made.
When the full meeting of commissioners also failed to agree "without the authority of their lords" , they made a truce until 5 November and reported back for further instructions.
At the three courts of Lothar, Louis and Charles, the primores populi agreed on one thing: there was to be no repeat  of Fontenoy.
A poor harvest in 842, and the imminence of winter, strengthened their determination.
Louis and Charles conceded a tactful point to Lothar by sending their envoys to him at Thionville, but on the main issue they had their way.
A descriptio would be made, and the final division would follow after 14 July 843.
The three parts would be determined and then Lothar should have first pick.
Nithard's account hardly goes beyond this point.
I have followed it through closely because it shows the kind of diplomacy which, though no comparable evidence survives, has to be assumed for subsequent relations between Charles and his brothers (and later his nephews) throughout his reign.
Nithard reveals the contradictory values and expectations which otherwise have to be surmised.
He shows conflict in the very heart of the royal family, injunctions to "brotherly love" constantly at odds with manifestations of brotherly hate.
He shows commendable "guile" not far from deplorable "trickery" , the force of lordly authority belied by followers' barely-controlled violence.
He shows the struggles of individual aristocrats to reconcile public and private concerns, personal claims and collective duty to lord or king, competing obligations towards kinsmen and clients.
He shows genuine episcopal devotion to "the Church's welfare" crosscut by the commitment of individual bishops to their political masters.
On 13 December 842, at the palace of Quierzy, Charles married Ermentrude, niece of Adalard, because "he thought he could thereby win over to himself [the support of]the majority of the lesser aristocracy (plebs)" .
This is virtually Nithard's last word; and he offers an explanation of Adalard's power: "Caring little for the public good, he devoted himself to pleasing everyone.
He persuaded [Charles]to distribute privileges and public revenues to private individuals for their own use; and, since he caused to be done what everyone wanted, he reduced the [resources of]the state to absolutely nothing".
Adalard, in other words, had acted as a potens was expected to; what Nithard resented was his own absence from Adalard's honours list.
His sour grapes should not be mistaken for an accurate impression of the flavour of Charles's court in December  842.
Clearly Adalard's influence was great (Nithard was not alone in identifying Ermentrude as "Adalard's niece" rather than as the daughter of Count Odo of Orléans, Adalard's brother-in-law, though an obvious reason could have been that Odo had died eight years before, perhaps leaving Ermentrude in her uncle's care).
As lay-abbot of St-Martin Tours, Adalard occupied a key strategic position in the Loire valley.
Charles came to stay at St-Martin in February 843.
In 841–2, the prominent position of Adalard's brother Gerald at Lothar's court may have eased the route to a settlement between Charles and Lothar.
Charles's marriage probably further enhanced Adalard's influence, at least in the short run: about a year later, Lupus used the "cooperation" of this "most weighty man" (amplissimus vir) in pursuing Ferrières's interests at Charles's court.
But Adalard was not the only influential man in Charles's entourage at this time.
Vivian first appears as chamberlain in February 843.
He hailed almost certainly from the region of the lower Loire, where a close kinsman (perhaps his father) had been killed fighting for Louis the Pious in 834 and already before 842 another probable close kinsman, Rainald, was count of Herbauge and dux of Nantes.
Since queen and chamberlain had to work closely together ex officio, Vivian's promotion looks more like a counterweight than a complement to Adalard's.
So too does the position of Duke Warin, another potens in 843.
True, Lupus exhorted Charles "not to subject himself so much to the influence of one man so that he did everything according to that man's will" .
But the subtext of Lupus's letter was disappointment at Charles's withholding of St-Josse, and so the veiled reference here was evidently to Odulf.
Later in the same letter Lupus's warning had a plural object: "Fear not the potentes whom you yourself have made" .
Potentes of course played key roles at court: Lupus himself was happy to seek, and use, their "cooperation" .
Charles in fact avoided his father's tendency to rely on a single favourite: no-one was ever labelled (as Bernard had been) secundus a rege in Charles's reign.
Instead he took care to spread his special favour among several men.
His youth had perhaps exposed him to charges of being too much under the control of guardians (bajuli) but none is documented after Atto in 838.
Charles had perhaps depended quite heavily on his mother's support in 840–1.
His marriage was a declaration of independence: of personal and political maturity.
There is a noteable contrast with Pippin II who (so far as is known) never married.
Charles now placed himself on a par with Lothar and Louis the German (whose teenage sons had recently begun to play an active political role themselves).
Without waiting for the empire's division to be formally signed and sealed, Charles gave notice of his intention to father a progeny — his own royal line.
There is little evidence about Ermentrude herself at the time of the marriage.
She may have been aged as young as 12, the legal age of maturity for women (her parents' marriage can perhaps be dated to 829) and so about seven years younger than Charles.
He gave her dower-lands in the Amienois, near Corbie.
There is no evidence of what lands, if any, she brought her husband as dowry.
She had a (? younger) brother named William.
The fact that his life is totally unrecorded until 866 need not suggest that Ermentrude's own influence was limited, but shows that a royal marriage did not necessarily bring honours to the bride's close kinsmen.
Charles was free to grant or withhold the rewards of Königsnähe even to his own brother-in-law.
Adalard's enjoyment of Charles's favour was cause rather than consequence of his niece's match.
Within weeks of her marriage, Ermentrude was already on campaign with her husband in Aquitaine.
Her unique  closeness to the king gave her the influence of a special potens, to whom others appealed that she "suggest to the king" on their behalf.
Such appeals, fairly consistently spread over the twenty-seven years of her subsequent married life, constitute indirect evidence of an untroubled personal relationship with Charles.
Ermentrude faithfully performed the crucial function of a royal wife in producing a total of eleven children, and as late as 866, she was still ready to produce more.
Little more than a year after her marriage, Ermentrude had given birth to her first child, Judith.
The fate of the grandmother after whom the baby was named confirms the ex officio importance of the queen.
According to the author of the Annals of Xanten (he had been Louis the Pious's court librarian and perhaps a protégé of the emperor's wife in the 830s), "The Empress Judith, Charles's mother, died at Tours, having had all her wealth taken from her by her son" .
It seems likely that, as in other early medieval kingdoms, there was room for only one queen at Charles's court.
His marriage therefore meant Judith's enforced retirement.
 "Her wealth" may have consisted in part of lands earmarked for the queen: now she must relinquish them.
Judith, perhaps already ailing at the time of her son's marriage, may have accompanied him to Tours in February 843.
She died there on 19 April and was honourably buried at St-Martin's.
Charles later saw to her commemoration at thirteen other churches too.
Yet there is nothing in the wording of any of these charters (any more than in Charles's later recollections of his mother) to suggest special affection.
He wanted both Louis the Pious and Judith commemorated because they were his parents and because their imperial status rubbed off on him.
These arrangements thus say more about Charles's developing conception of his office than about his feelings as a son.
The timing of Charles's marriage suggests a further political dimension.
Adalard was not Ermentrude's only close relative.
Another was a young man named Odo.
Allied to him by region and (later) marriage, was Robert.
Ermentrude's father had originally come from the Worms area, but he had made his career, thanks to imperial favour, in the west.
In the next generation, Odo and Robert followed suit, receiving Charles's favour in the form of lands that in fact belonged to the church of Rheims (the see's continuing vacancy since Ebbo's second departure in 841 had left its property at the king's disposal).
When exactly did this happen?
The only evidence is a statement of Hincmar's forty years later, that the grants were made "when the three brothers Lothar, Louis and Charles divided the regnum between themselves after their father's death" .
This could refer to the period just after July 843, when the division was finalised, or, more probably, to a slightly earlier date, during the negotiations.
Either way, the westward move of Odo and Robert and the distribution to them of lands in the Rheims area, can be linked with Charles's marriage to Ermentrude.
Perhaps Charles met Odo and Robert during his visit to Worms in November 842.
The marriage, and the recruitment and endowment of the two Rhinelanders, had the same purpose: Charles wanted to strengthen his general position in the part of Francia which was to constitute the northeastern sector of his kingdom.
To secure that share of the Frankish heartlands, Charles had fought Fontenoy, and faced down Lothar at Koblenz.
To stake out part of his frontier he had spent Christmas 842 with Abbot Hugh at St-Quentin, and then moved on to Valenciennes.
During the spring of 843, the commissioners did their job of surveying the royal resources in Francia.
It was time, in July 843, for Charles to attend the long-planned meeting with his brothers to divide the regnum in the light of that survey.
He and his men took the road to Verdun.