

Corporate management
There is a three year cycle in the creation, testing and modification of school management plans.
The stages overlap with each other and the process is both continuous and deliberately visible.
Each part of it needs to be revealed and shared by the head and governors with other teachers, parents and those who have an interest in the school on behalf of local or central government.
In this process of revealing and sharing the head must manage the activities which add up to accountability.
This is not a matter of communication skills alone despite the emphasis which is placed on the open dialogue between schools and parents and on the need for active publicity.
If account is to be taken of what has been described as concern with the well-being of the system, then "the best way of earning public confidence is the most direct: to be clearly seen as doing a good job" (Becher et al 1981:156).
Performance should clearly speak for itself but the English and Welsh system for some time lacked (and now needs) evaluation and evaluation which can be clearly expressed.
In other words heads, governors, teachers, advisers, inspectors, researchers and evaluators (whether these come from education or from a broader world of audit) need to be trained to provide "the sort of information evaluatory mechanisms might provide…there is an informational feedforward and feedback need affecting all those personnel, both professional and lay, who make decisions associated with the system" (Watson 1980: 194).
How reports are couched is important.
If head statements to their governors are the key documents which they ought to be, they deserve all the care which drafting and redrafting can confer on them.
They are the raw material of governor discussions.
They can be bare records of numbers and events or they can be windows on a living school and most heads will be able to think of ways in which reports can be used to enrich governor perceptions, prompt good questions and solicit positive advice and support as soon as they have made a breakthrough into a sense of their responsibility for creating a favourable climate.
A good starting point is to think of how closed and impenetrable a school's affairs, particularly its curriculum, appear to governors and to visualise the report as a series of entry points.
Again I should emphasise the helpfulness of sharing problems and asking difficult questions (Sallis 1988: 158–9).
Reporting and questioning
The readiness of governors to ask constructive questions depends on how well the school can do its job.
If a school has to be defended in a head's report, the defence may take the form of not providing as much information as governors would want.
In the words of Sallis again,"If we know that the head's motive is to protect the school, and especially the more needy in it, from questions which are ill-informed, destructive or selfish, we have a clear objective, which is to make sure we don't deserve or unwittingly attract such accusation (1988:17).
The ways in which heads reported to governors before the 1980 Education Act, when there was less community representation, and after the 1986 Act which required governors to report to annual parent meetings (and for which the reports were largely written by heads), differ from the task after the Education Reform Act.
The changes of 1980 left local authorities in what was still a strong and, if they wished, an influential position in determining what it was that governors and schools should put their name to.
The changes of 1986 placed governors and parents in the front of the picture, with LEAs losing some of their power to central government and some to schools and their local managers.
The 1988 Act emphasized this shift by increasing the autonomy of schools both in making and implementing their own management plans and in organizing the balancing of finances behind those plans.
Helping governors and parents to see how well a school is doing and explaining or defending the school has now taken on another dimension: comparisons with other schools leads to one set of questions while the extent to which the school is organized in accordance with the national curriculum and within the national framework of pupil assessment leads to different, inward-looking enquiries.
Both approaches are reflected in the report to annual parent meetings and both require a looking back at a school's achievements in order that differences or improvements can be headlined.
Thus Anderson may have been more prophetic than was realized at the time (Earley 1988:61): Parents are basically looking for reassurance about their children's schools and teachers.
They want to have confidence in what the professionals are doing for their children.
If I were a head teacher or a chair of governors now, I would use quite blatantly the annual meeting and the annual report as ways of sounding the loudest and brightest clarion calls about my school's performance and achievements…
Major or sudden change creates uncertainty.
Implied dismissal of past achievements creates a lack of confidence.
I would make it clear that I was seeking to build upon a solid platform of achievement — whether true or not — with gradual developments that can be understood and accepted from the outset.
 "Whether true or not" does not stand up to what is needed in the formulation and review of school development plans and in the  assurance of quality.
In the four processes of that planning (DES 1989e and DES 1991a) the starting-point is audit, followed by and fed back from successive stages of construction, implementation and evaluation of a plan.
In answer to the question of how a school is further to improve the quality of its pupil education, more plans can be laid.
They need to be the product of shared work between head, governors, staff and, as far as possible, parents, but the main responsibility lies on the head.
Self-evaluation from which review and audit can begin has been at the heart of a long-standing national project, Guidelines for the Review and Internal Development of Schools (GRIDS).
The questionnaire connected with this review is aimed at identifying a school's needs in terms of the strengths or weakness of its individual parts.
This is an important aspect of the process of developing a school's strategy of in-service education but it also enables other parties to share in the awareness of what has been achieved and what needs improvement.
The GRIDS self-questioning approach has been analysed as to its advantages (Jones, Clark et al.1989): on the plus side, all staff are involved in decisions about priorities, the enquiry provides a system for moving from discussion into action and both stresses the importance of monitoring and evaluation and emphasizes the cyclical and ongoing nature of staff development.
Among the disadvantages, there may be an artificial limit of activity imposed by the need to work within pre-identified categories, and confusion both between the identification of broad as against specific needs and about the "invitation to identify weakness implies a deficiency-based model for staff development" (Jones, Clark et al.1989:43).
The School Development Plans Project (SDPP) broadens the basis of audit to include not only the aims and values of the school but also the policy and initiative of central government and the LEA.
It includes recent reviews of the school in the shape not only of self- evaluation but also of inspections and reports by the local authority and by HMI.
More difficult but, if practicable, very valuable are those views and perspectives (again acknowledged in the SDPP) which reveal how the school is seen by governors, parents, pupils and the community (DES 1989e).
When the manager extends his or her self-evaluation to the encouragement of others to reveal their own views as well as their estimate of their own capacities, the notion of self-certainty and self-esteem is crucial.
With the right kind of self-certainty goes sympathy with others and a sane balance of mind.
In the language of self-concepts,"self-esteem refers to personal feelings concerning one's own value, importance and competence.
It is a result of a long process of appraisal which is influenced by self evaluation as well as evaluation by others.
These evaluations of, for instance, values and capacities, vary over time and continually affect one's self-esteem"(Oppenheimer 1990:121).
The emphasis here on the length of time over which sound appraisal is built up, and the linking of self-evaluation with evaluation by other people, points to a broad approach to appraisal.
Also, the humanity, strength and potential for fallacy which lies behind the notion of self-esteem makes the idea of training for it appear mechanistic when, above all, it is sensitivity which must be shown towards all levels of expertness among partners in management.
The poor performer
Governors and teachers vary in their capacity to join in the management of a school.
If there are noticeably poor performers in the task of co-operation, the manager has to notice which form of inadequacy is revealed.
Withdrawal, deterioration in relationships, slowness in joining in, waywardness, emotionality — these and others are listed by Stewart and Stewart (1982).
A variety of causes can lie behind the poor performer's difficulty — low threshold to boredom, poor verbal facility in professional discussions with adults, inadequate job knowledge (whether or not as a result of inadequate initial training) or stress.
The work group in a school may exercise detrimental or divisive pressures, a school may have a history of tolerating poor standards, working conditions may be dispiriting and, after long neglect, may indicate that the manager does not notice or does not care.
Putting right the poor performer may need an approach from several directions.
Dilemmas can always arise since, while people are more likely to improve if they get feedback about their skills, "unless they have a sensitive or trained manager they are likely to get feedback on less relevant topic" (Stewart and Stewart 1982:169).
This is true of the manager inside a school.
But a head does not manage governors or parents in the same sense.
He or she knows how, and can be trained, to manage fellow employees; helping people to manage themselves is an essential core of management and managing relationships between people has to be concerned with always taking account of their attitudes and capacities.
In any management group its members have to disclose themselves.
No one member should always be the sole person to reveal himself or herself, nor should it be forgotten that there is no consistent pattern of when the process of disclosure is desirable and beneficial (Chelune et al.1979).
When confident awareness is not available to managers, they have to rely on intuition, judgement by analogy and the informed reports of other people.
These are shared by those who appoint heads and other teachers, who nominate governors and who entrust the representation of the views of a parent body to two or three of their number.
As the basis for shared judgement their views are as important as more formal criteria.
Although they carry the risk of overemphasizing the  subjective and personal make-up of a team they have to be taken into account in any scheme of training.
Training from starting points which are different towards an end which is uniform is not a unique aspect of voluntary partnership.
The work which has, since 1986/87, been achieved by Action for Governors' Information and Training (AGIT) took its beginnings from a very wide range of agencies: both through its original base at the Community Education Development Centre in Coventry and through its non-governmental funding, it has been able to take account of differing interests and pressures.
The training which has emerged from AGIT and from other less comprehensive but nevertheless comparable providers in LEAs, in the churches and in higher education means that Joan Sallis's prized ideal of "the precious light of ordinariness" has been allowed to shine.
It has come from people who are well informed about the governors' aspect of management, who know how to take the influence and information of parents into account and who, because they have taken part in one specific but widely shared exercise in adult education, have had the chance to understand and contribute to a wide field of public and community affairs (Sallis 1988).
It would be too much to hope that, once ordinary people became governors and once ordinary parents became involved in what (and why) a school chooses to do, then the process of improvement and development would look after itself.
There are others to take into account, namely those co-operators who come from the teaching body, from LEAs' advisers and from HMI.
Attempts in the past to ensure that the latter two groups shared their views about quality achieved worthwhile ends.
They were seen to be working in the same direction and although it has not yet been possible to gauge the extent to which they help in the task of managing new education, their contribution to quality assurance should, by tradition, be valuable.
Reviewing
At national level HMI customarily look back two years when an overall survey of progress is made.
When the restriction was lifted from the Senior Chief Inspector's annual report about examining the effect on maintained schools of local authorities' financial and finance-linked resources, it became a report about national quality.
Had local authorities still the influence over schools which was diminished by the Education Reform Act, it would have been commonplace for each authority to compare the performance of its own policies and of its own schools with a national standard.
Much the same impulse had been felt in the early years of reports by the APU.
Going further back again, local authorities had made good use, on a comparative basis, of national reading surveys.
In each of these contexts — HMI reports, APU exercises or national reading surveys — to move from national assessment to a local authority assessment and then to a school's performance (summed up in the achievement of its individual pupils) provided a method of finding out whether, in some of the measurable parts of schools' work, matters were standing still or edging forward.
If earlier national and local links still existed it would have given a helpful criterion to governors to know whether their school was being managed well.
But two things have happened: schools must now be uncertain in comparing themselves with each other because the Education (Schools) Act 1992 has created dilemmas about the mediation of inspectors' and advisers' reports.
Second, they have to work harder than in the past to find out how they are faring in quite basic parts of the curriculum.
Schools now compare themselves (or have themselves compared, by parents and others) with other schools within one neighbourhood or one sub-area of a county.
They have to handle quite parochial comparisons without enjoying much sense of how they stand in the national scene.
This may suit the trend to treat education as a local activity but quality assurance needs a comparison with broader standards.
Governors, parents, teachers and heads themselves cannot now take their eye — for too long — off their pupils' achievements in the basic curriculum.
They need to know how their standards compare with those of other providers but in ways which are less traditional and restricted than through the five key documents required by The Parents' Charter (DES 1991b:2—7).
As an example, personal, social and moral education was from the 1960s onwards a field where schools shared their experiences, their approaches and their materials.
It was an appropriate part of the curriculum for learning from each other.
Similarly, environmental education and world awareness were studies which fitted into the interstices of the main curriculum and were, in different ways, organized on a cross-curriculum basis.
This is still possible and it can also go further by sharing and co-operation between schools.
But in terms of comparison and competition the professionals who are responsible for one school's management may now have to justify to governors and to parents a consumption of time which some people might think would be better spent on raising pupils' performance in a limited field and in ways which are visible, competitive and market-orientated.
If quality is to be controlled in a tight and limited way, the price can be that of narrowness and aridity.
Present-day comparisons
There is little to be gained from looking at the past achievements of a school if the head and the governors treat their task as having been totally defined by the Education Reform Act.
A corporate view, instead, has to be taken of the school's comparison with others — and expressed in terms of measured attainment.
Nevertheless there will still be inter-school sport and competition at music festivals, chess championships and inter-school exhibitions of art.
Out-of-school behaviour will be a matter, as always, of comparison — as will the obligation to wear a uniform or the regular obligation to do homework.
These are traditional areas of distinctiveness and competition.
But there was, quite recently, a time when co-operative organizations of schools with titles such as academic councils brought primary and secondary schools within one area (sometimes, in country districts, quite a large geographical area) together for the shared planning of curriculum.
In other vicinities, clusters of schools shared some part of their staff in pursuit of a common curriculum entitlement for all those pupils who would transfer from, for instance, distant and isolated primary schools to a single country-town secondary school.
In schemes of sharing such as these, there had to be some form of common management.
Governors of individual schools needed to be at the same level of understanding and acceptance of what was being planned.
Parents, too, needed to know that their children's education was being enhanced by this system of sharing.
Some aspects of shared planning are valuable enough to survive regardless of the competition for school admissions.
This means that co-operation and competition will go along at the same time.
Only one form of training in managing this double act is likely to succeed: staff and governors need to be encouraged to support every movement which makes the best of their own school.
This joint commitment moves away from the idea of loyalty solely to a single school and from the idea of out-and-out competition.
It moves towards the acceptance of belonging at the same time to a larger enterprise which combines the strengths of sharing and collaboration and the sharpness of keeping an eye out for one's own survival.
When this is translated into personal terms, it means among other things that at some point in his or her career a teacher will have to look at its pattern and will have to pay attention to changes which ought to be made in his or her work-role.
This involves a difference in teachers' perception of themselves and of other professionals.
Governors, in trying to handle collaboration and competition with other schools at the same time, will not face a disturbing change.
There is, after all, a tradition of some governors serving more than one school and the bond between a governor and a school is less compelling than that between the teacher and the daily commitment to one organization and one ethos.
Parents, too, particularly when their freedom to choose and change their children's school is a central tenet of the organization of post-1980 education, will feel less difficulty in understanding a school which is an effective competitor but which nevertheless co-operates with others for the sake of ensuring a wider curriculum.
Working with, while at the same time competing against other schools, raises questions about management which bear on a point made by Rutter et al.(1979): a school can choose its values and norms.
In school, teachers show what they expect of children in terms of work and behaviour, they provide models for children by their own conduct and they feed back to children what they judge to be acceptable performance.
One commentator, while accepting the importance of Rutter's finding, then asks whether we have the means by which deliberately to create a planned organizational ethos in a school.
If we do, does this mean that the use of coercion, enthusiasm or the encouragement to be involved are equally acceptable?
(Reynolds 1985).
When the issue is not of a split in attitudes ( "I will compete but I will also borrow and lend" ) the head is unlikely to find enthusiasm or coercion an appropriate tool of management.
Instead, teaching colleagues need to be asked — with encouragement, admittedly — whether they wish to be involved.
The answer is likely to be more predictable if they are continuously kept informed of what the head and governors are seeking from other local schools and how they assess their own school's effectiveness.
In the picture
Keeping colleagues in the picture is more important than keeping parents informed about the minutiae of school management.
Ignorance and distrust go together.
To keep a large staff informed requires that senior staff are used by the head to spread information, to note reaction and to ensure feedback.
The process by which colleagues are kept informed may differ from what is expected of them in building up either a school development plan or a scheme of quality assurance.
Preparation for the latter may be regarded as a matter of self-training: it needs a comprehensive and co-ordinated approach to all aspects of planning, one which covers curriculum and assessment, teaching, management and organization, finance and resources.
From this type of starting-point the SDPP expected two things to flow, namely the capturing of a long-term vision within which short-term goals were to be set and, second, a relief in teacher stress.
Instead of feeling under pressure from the pace of change teachers would come to exercise greater control over it (DES 1989e: 4).
That the preparation of a development plan should be a matter of self-training follows from those steps which the SDPP suggests, for instance, in auditing the curriculum: check whether the planned curriculum meets the statutory requirement; identify possible gaps or overlap between subject areas; ensure that where two or more subjects or activities are concerned with the same range of objectives, this is recognized and used positively; analyse the curriculum for each year group in terms of curriculum objectives within and outside the National Curriculum; decide in which part of the school curriculum to locate work leading to the National Curriculum and other school curriculum objectives; assess how much teaching time is available and how best to use it; compare planned provision with actual provision; judge whether curriculum issues need to be among priorities of development (DES 1989e: 7)
This range of tasks is within the capacity of a large secondary school's staff.
It may be beyond the capacity of a 12- or 15-teacher secondary school, a 10-teacher middle school, a 10-teacher primary school or an 8-teacher first school.
These eight tasks of audit cannot be carried out in smaller schools — schools in which it has never been possible to develop subject differentiation to the same degree as in larger schools.
The three- or four-class primary school is left well behind.
However, if staff led by a head and one or two senior colleagues worked their way through these tasks (and it might be more likely that senior staff themselves would have drafted the audit and put it forward for discussion, alteration and approval by others), they would be familiar with most of the important issues concerning the national curriculum.
When confronted with the head's and the governors' account of the financial and other resources with which to achieve its implementation, few members of staff would feel able to contribute to the debate.
This can isolate the head; and the School Management Task Force has commented that"the absence of any direct supervision leaves the head vulnerable in making judgements about personal development and in locating support.
This has always been a problem for heads because the structure of the service puts them in an isolated position.
Heads have operated without a clear managerial line of accountability"(DES 1990a:18).
Whichever approach is adopted (that of the SDPP or of the School Management Task Force) the head has to decide whether it is practicable in his or her school to assume that the more that teachers are asked to do in the way of auditing, laying plans, implementing them and reviewing them, the more they will understand about the effectiveness of pupils' learning.
Will they know more about that than they do when they simply carry out what the curriculum requires of them regardless of how it is supported, budgeted for and described to parents by the governors?
And, if the line of the School Management Task Force is followed, how long will it take teachers to appreciate that what they are going through is an assessment"of the opportunities in each individual's working routine for acquiring positive experiences of  good practice and receiving support and advice.
Each individual needs to understand and share the purposes, goals and values of the organization, and feel able to make a positive contribution as a worthwhile part of the whole"(DES 1990a:8).
Separation of training In contrast to the government's approach to school planning and management in 1990, a report six years earlier aimed its message at heads and at an LEA.
It concentrated on the curriculum and organization of Inner London secondary schools and focused on those pupils who were underachieving, took few or no public examinations and showed their dissatisfaction with school by absenting themselves or by behaving in an uncooperative manner (ILEA 1984).
Good practice was described and 104 recommendations made.
These suggested changes in organization, assessment and teaching and recognized the key role of teachers.
The Report pointed at the level of resource needed in order to achieve improvements and it sought to improve the management of schools by making them more meaningful to a wider range of pupils.
That it was addressed to teachers and their employers and not to governors or parents mattered less when the report was published than it would now.
Most of the steps which are required in creating improvement are, after the 1988 Education Act, under school control.
That was not the case when the Hargreaves Report was published and was one reason for its being welcomed as being ahead of its time.
By now it is accepted among teachers that it is within the individual school that curriculum innovation and development, the implementation of whole school policies and the continuing development of professional skills must be initiated.
It is at grass roots level that teachers can best foster the development of existing good practice, identify specific professional needs, challenge their own attitudes, assumptions and values and analyse their practice.
Corporately teachers can plan and develop strategies, translate them into practice and monitor and evaluate their effect.
We believe that a prerequisite of this co-operative and corporate activity is a climate of open discussion and dialogue among the teachers, a willingness to share experiences and expertise and, most importantly, relationships of trust and mutual support (ILEA 1984: 111–12).
If radical alterations are to be debated and believed in by heads, staffs, governors and parents and if the management of improvement is largely in these same people's hands, the task is broader than the School Management Task Force's concern with national curriculum — and broader than the SDPP's recommendations about planning.
The preparation (it is difficult to think of it in terms of training) of those who put radical reform into action requires vision, strength of mind and persistence.
Can attitudes and dispositions be summoned up  at will?
Can they be trained for?
Above all, are they a reliable basis for believing a school's assurance about quality?
Conclusion
Preparation for the task of managing by means of a partnership is less a matter of structured training than a process of growth.
Each partner has to recognize his or her position and that he or she represents a group who have a legitimate voice.
This is a particularly slow matter for parents, who have a voice but who are only gradually being empowered.
For heads, other teachers and governors partnership needs, as a first step, self-awareness, self-esteem and a capacity to tolerate something less than perfection.
The aids which can be used in preparing for joint management are those of information derived from comparisons, clarity of purpose and a readiness to undertake corporate self-assessment.
Energy has to be devoted to making sure that the assumptions which lie behind these activities are genuinely shared; mistaken judgements can lead to ambiguity in the way in which people outside a school view its managers.
While uniformity of view between the managing partners cannot always be achieved every effort has to be made to avoid discrepancies.
The largest questions the members of a management partnership must answer are whether sharing is practicable, whether its members believe in it and how long — if it is a reality — it takes the outside world to believe that it can provide the promised level of quality.
Marshalling attitudes
Those who take part in change usually want it to succeed.
If they do not, they must leave the system in which it is taking place.
Those who do not want change are, however, unlikely to wish to leave a system in which they are already working.
The choice then lies between staying in and going through with the change despite initial disfavour or staying in and changing either reluctantly or superficially.
The initiator of change cannot, in the face of reluctance or merely token activity, be confident that every participant will end up as an active and confident partner.
Nor, in an atmosphere of reluctance, can the initiator be confident that a participator's initial dependence on other people's ideas and energy will in due course be turned into well-informed independence.
Reluctant participators who start off with a limited range of interest and involvement in management are unlikely to find it easy to commit themselves to new and broader aims.
Because training other people's feelings is not available as a method of reducing reluctance, the manager in a school has to choose which elements of the process of change will in themselves bring about changes of attitude.
Will the partners enjoy exercising new powers?
Will they be confident in reading between the lines?
Will they wish to look upon their school as a robust institution?
Above all, can they run the risk that it will not be able to deliver quality?
If change is treated at the large-scale level, teachers, non-teaching staff, governors and parents cannot deny the consequences of local financial management: "Pushing management decisions — for instance, about staffing complements and who should be appointed and dismissed — down to the schools will make it extremely important to know what they will do with their new-found power" (Maclure 1990:9).
In exercising that power, managers have to be ready to debate the issues.
In the shift from 1975 to 1990 away from "concerns about equity and fairness and a concentration on more practical and immediate questions of efficiency and relevance" , discussions have to "lie at the heart of the democratic debate between and within the parties, and a constant flow of messages, coded and uncoded, ensures that the discussion is never far below the surface" (Maclure 1990:14).
Debate and questioning are only threatening if an organization is weak.
The school may be a strong fortress: Most schools are robust organizations with many good management practices from which anyone in industry and commerce could learn; yet those same schools are likely to miss aspects of elementary motivation of staff and good housekeeping that are elsewhere taken for granted.
Many industrial companies devote considerable energy and funds in the development of organizational culture to overcome deep-rooted problems such as them-and-us alienation and a lack of commitment to organizational goals.
Most schools accomplish with ease what these companies seek, because schoolteachers know that their efforts can only succeed within an organization that is a community with ethos, spirit and individual commitment (Torrington et al.1987:23).
The process of building up the strength of shared commitment can seldom be consciously managed in a schools.
Instead there is what has been described as "the glue of schools" .
By this teachers are bound together in a whole school, managed by a head and others who can create moments to hear and see all aspects of the school.
Get togethers, huddles, working parties, visits, chats and the like, become the occasions when more is learned about the school.
At the same time the process of meeting and getting together does not simply afford times for the head or deputy to gain insights; because everyone participates, everyone's awareness is extended and engaged.
Whole schools do not happen because the head alone has a greater view of the school, they occur because everyone's view of the school is extended and embraced (Southworth 1988:327).
Another way of extending everyone's view of a school and of diminishing the opposition to change within it, is to acknowledge one of the less fashionable aspects of management and to make a virtue of it.
Packwood (1989) pointed to the bureaucracy of educational institutions.
He argued (1989:14) that since institutions, largely regardless of the wishes of their members, have retained a bureaucratic organization, it is important to use the bureaucracy well, to maximise opportunities for institutions to achieve their objectives and for individuals to succeed in their careers.
The underlying assumption has been that bureaucracy is desirable as an organizational principle because it attempts to clarify authority and accountability while depersonalising their application.
Work is too important and too unsure to be obstructed by the uncertainties of not knowing what is expected and by whom, and by having to continually negotiate what one can do with individual power players.
Avoiding long-drawn-out negotiations and yet ensuring that everyone is in the know is part of the task of governors.
When they were, by one LEA, advised about how to produce a management plan, they were told that there was probably "much information already in the school which would either be part of the plan or would help in the process of producing specific documents within it." 
The advice (Devon County Council 1990:12) was that Each school must decide for itself exactly what to include but it is likely that all schools will want to include the following documents: a statement of the school's aims and values; a statement of priorities chosen for development in the current year; a list of objectives to be tackled in the next two or three years; an outline of how the curriculum will be developed and specially of how the National Curriculum will be introduced; staff development plans, including the in-service education and a training plan for the current financial year; plans for the use and development of the school's resources; the school's approved budget for the current financial year.
Of those seven aspects of planning it is likely that all members of staff will have been previously involved in at least three.
Their involvement in those parts of the management plan in which they have not been previously interested will be taken on and driven by the possibly irresistible surge of the whole school's development.
As well as being influenced by what is required in local terms, schools are also bound, on a national scale, to be affected by statements such, for example, as those of the Secretary of State for Education and Science.
He set out his views, for instance, about the report of the 1989 Records of Achievement National Steering Committee.
He endorsed the aims of contributing to the raising of all pupils' achievement through and beyond the national curriculum, of improving pupils' motivation and increasing their participation in education, of preparing pupils better for the transition to further education, training or employment — and, all important in the preparation and review of management plans, of helping schools to consider how well their curriculum, teaching and organization enabled pupils to develop their all-round potential (DES 1990b).
Every picture of the broad purposes of a school's plan is drawn from a particular viewpoint.
When that viewpoint is outside the school it is of assistance to corporate management to weigh up its authority and seriousness.
To be given a steer saves time but regardless of whether the head or the local authority regards change as being large scale, well publicised, hotly debated or self-evidently necessary, it is still necessary, behind every broad picture, to make sure that the purpose and implications of specific change are explicit.
It must not be assumed that everyone initially agrees about the implications.
Teachers need to be clear about the way in which different issues are decided.
They need to know how senior managers set about making decisions.
In that process it is not the style as much as the consistency of those managers which is significant.
 "Nothing is more confusing to staff than not to be able to foresee with reasonable certainty how a significant issue is likely to be resolved" (Earley and Fletcher Campbell 1989:184).
Teachers will understand and support the way in which management decisions are made if they are fortunate enough to receive any management training and any assistance in their professional development, especially if it is linked with their working experience (DES 1990a:9): Training opportunities increase in value to the degree that they are planned to integrate with and enhance the experience of management in school.
Wherever possible, the project and surveys undertaken in training should be drawn directly from the working life of the participant and selected because they will contribute to the better management of the school.
If schools are to be better managed, the making of decisions in the course of managing has to be understood and shared by as many people as possible.
Simply to understand how a decision is made requires a positive interest, an awareness and a wish to see how the management process works.
This is partly a question of attitude, partly a matter of training.
But in reality there is little or no training for the assistant teacher's role in school management.
Attitudes of interest and awareness therefore are highly important and that importance will persist throughout the teacher's career.
From planning to implementation
The process of change is not something which is done once and then stops.
Four activities, in , matter: the way in which teaching and learning are conducted, keeping up to date in a subject, applying a new technology and managing the sequence of review, improvement and change.Particular parts may move more slowly than others.
Not all subjects are changing at the same pace although the national curriculum will in time no doubt reach some kind of consistency.
Other parts are continually on the move and the way in which teaching and learning are organised, in , has to be the subject of regular review and continuous overhaul.The application of new technologies will not take the form of a constant challenge.
Management, in contrast, must be a continuing process — always ensuring that the best use is made of time, human resource and money, taking up some slack, reinforcing successful practices, reviewing the state of staff development and offering encouragement: "Successful implementation needs continual support.
Sustaining commitment is a key task for the head, senior staff and team leaders.
The enthusiasm of even the most committed staff can flag when routine work and unanticipated events distract teachers from the targets and task"(DES 1989e:15).
The movement from planning into implementation has to be smooth.
The Development Plans Project commends the practice of senior staff showing interest, making themselves accessible and joining meetings.
But they need to make sure that implementation is evaluated.
It concedes that "many progress checks are intuitive, a" feel"for whether things are going well or badly.
This is a normal part of the monitoring of one's activities: it becomes more systematic if these intuitive reactions are shared within the team"(DES 1989e: 15).
Intuition is not enough when a school has to give assurances of  quality and has to prove that it can control that quality.
In addition to intuitive judgements a head, deputy and other colleagues need to make sense to outsiders.
There is little point in trying to transmit a professional's "feel" for something to a parent who is anxious about his or her child's education but does not know very much about the intricacies of teaching and learning.
For this reason the manager must go beyond the internal handling of colleagues' enthusiasms and transactions.
Unexpected difficulties which have prevented things from going well need to be identified and put right.
There are eight other lines of action which the Plans Project has identified as a means of recovering ground or of preventing mistakes from being compounded.
Some depend on the ability to find or switch extra support, to seek outside help or to use the skills of new staff.
Others are a matter of reassigning tasks, adjusting the timetable of a plan, scaling a project down or postponing the achievement of one or other of the targets which had originally been identified.
None of these is intended simply to mollify reluctant staff: each is intended to provide more time, to allow a fresh look to be taken or to try out different approaches when there are setbacks.
The management leader's understanding of the complexities and challenges of a school's work have to be displayed clearly.
Not all the attitudes which precede a review will survive once a management plan has been put into action.
This is because the process of planning has no alternative to that of moving continually forward and, in that movement, applying methods and ideas which have previously been untried.
The methods and tools which are available to the manager have been comprehensively reviewed by Earley and Fletcher-Campbell (1989).
The manager needs to know — and to make sure other people know — whether what is being practised is what has been described as transactional leadership (fixing and dealing) or transforming leadership (involving partners in raising one another to higher levels of motivation).
Transformation is preferred over transaction by those who believe that participative decision-making is crucial, but most managers — and the Earley and Fletcher-Campbell study underlines this — prefer to operate in both styles according to the nature of the task and the attitudes of those with whom they work.
Working with partners Because the effective leader must perform two functions successfully, namely the achievement of the task which has been set and the fulfilment of colleagues' needs, he or she must develop a role in which those broader needs can be taken into account.
In defining those needs it is important to pay attention to the teacher's self in the amalgam of teaching, managing, initiating, following  and criticizing.
Nias argues that the description of what the primary teacher puts into that amalgam is incomplete "if it does not make room for potentially dangerous emotions such as love, rage and jealousy on the one hand and intermittent narcissism and outbreaks of possessive dependence on the other" .
And although we may concentrate attention on teachers' socially regulated selves, "their own descriptions of their feelings about pupils, and their relationships with them and with their colleagues remind us that the regressive, passionate and unruly aspects of human nature are always present in the classroom and may sometimes escape from rational control" (1989: 203).
The truth of this does not make it easy to define the teacher's role in management.
But if the human component in teaching is important in securing a "substantial ego-reward" , it should be asked how heads can acknowledge that colleagues will endure low points in their morale (and there are certain numbers of compensating highs) and how, in taking account of this, they can work on assumptions about other people's attitudes.
Do the assumptions of heads have to attach less weight than might be reasonable to, for instance, a colleague's attitude of reluctance?
No, because the personal strategies which allow teachers to enthuse about one activity, put up with another and resent but simply get on with yet another can indeed be taken into account by heads.
Those strategies do not, however, normally form part of the plan of campaign of governors and parents.
Reluctance and misunderstanding must in their case be dissolved as far as possible by rational persuasion.
If after that the prime manager finds that there is still opposition to a management plan, losses must be cut and the required action put in hand, come what may.
For a head to override governors and parents in one sense contradicts the spirit of the manager as consulter but it still underlines the need to realize that consultation is not endless and that consensus cannot always be achieved.
If governing bodies set up finance committees as part of a school's organization to meet the requirements of local management, governors and parents are more likely to be able to be involved in management decisions.
"This is not the case of the head surrendering his responsibility but [of his or her readiness to consult]more and thus [enhance]his or her managerial role.
In this process of consultation, the emphasis moves from deciding how to spend available resources to identifying needs, establishing priorities and then deciding on the budget"(Nightingale 1990: 110).
There will be a difference between management by consultation within the school's staff and management by consultation with governors and parents.
In the first, if consensus is not achieved, more effort needs to be made to find how to agree a plan.
To treat governors and parents — and ideally non-teaching staff too — in a way different from teaching staff raises the question of why there should be differences if the process of management is a democratic activity which is conducted between equals.
Their starting-points, their work backgrounds and their position in the education system as users and receivers make it likely that the criticisms of non-teachers as well as their expressions and acts of support will differ from those of teachers.
And because the nature and significance of these differences are even now not fully appreciated by all heads there is a risk that the relationship will be treated in an over-simple way.
In other words, some heads may think that it is desirable and right to devote much care to management through the corporateness of professionals but, within the same code, to achieve as much agreement among the non-professionals as one can and then to stop trying.
If this is the approach which is adopted it means that when a certain point is reached the word of the head is final.
This will not always stand up to present day expectations about democratic management.
It was not, for instance, the intention of the Education Reform Act.
Yet there are unlikely to be many governors or bodies of parents who would disapprove of the more or less traditional approach of putting class teachers first, and there would be few who would persist in wanting the headteacher's draft management plan — his or her daily manner of organizing and managing the school — to be changed as the result of open and equal argument between staff of all categories.
There is, as reported by Baginsky et al.(1991:118) very little governor involvement in the production or implementation of management plans.
Visible democracy
Public disagreement about a school is sometimes said to be bad for the education of its pupils.
It is used as a reason either for not dissenting or for not admitting to differences in public.
If the disagreement is about a trivial matter it will be forgotten.
But the idea of shared management is not trivial and dissent will therefore either be camouflaged — but still be there — or the party whose views are overridden will feel that it was, after all, only a nominal attempt at agreement and partnership which was intended.
Governors, parents and others might become sceptical about the other people's intentions.
It is likely that most schools at some stage or another will fail to achieve managerial unanimity.
Compromises might be sought and the true weight of governors' opinions then known.
However, the weakness of setting out to find a compromise is that each side assumes at the start that its own view is the one to be preferred.
Each side then loses something if there is an attempt to meet at a mid-point.
This picture of the grudging but well-intentioned patching up of managerial differences is some way away from an ideal of quality control which relies on teamwork.
This represents a homogeneity of effort but is criticized because it is some way away from full partnership.
This is because those who are inside the system recognize that as  potential sharers they are not equal.
Thus teachers, on one side, can know everything about the technicalities of curriculum, pedagogy, the use of resources and professional standards.
Parents and governors, on the other side, know what they are told, what they sense through adult contact with schools or through the reports of children and the family.
Teachers claim that they deal in facts, measurements, definitions of aim, standards of attainment.
The other side concedes that it deals in reputations, gossip, intuition and the ambitions of private families.
Apathy is usually ascribed only to one side — the parents — and that is sometimes thought to give a sufficient reason for teachers and schools to give up the struggle of recruiting them as allies.
The Hargreaves Report (ILEA 1984) showed that schools can achieve a great deal on their own and that they can outweigh parental lack of interest.
But equally if a school does not matter to a pupil because the school itself does not try hard enough, there is as much risk to the achievement of a sound education as would arise if all the fault lay with the child's own family.
There has to be a new evenness of balance between parents and schools when it comes to making judgements about how schools should be managed.
To which activities should priority be given?
How can pupil assessments affect the organization of the curriculum?
Will staff development make a difference in improving the quality of team planning?
Balance
Four elements of interest and influence need to be weighed against each other, namely the effect of the parent as the educator who is helped by the school, the school as the institutional teacher who is helped by the parent, the school as the manager and decider (with the parent being kept informed) and the school itself as the only "real" provider of education.
The fulcrum of this balance has shifted.
A report of the Consultative Committee of the Board of Education in 1931 (The Primary School) contained words which were repeated by the Plowden Report in 1967, "What a wise and good parent would desire for his own children, that a nation must desire for all children." 
In 1968 Michael Young and Patrick McGeeney invented what they described as the "syllogism of parental participation: a rise in the level of parental encouragement augments children's performance at school, teachers by involving parents in the school bring about a rise in the level of parental encouragement and teachers by involving parents in the school augment the children's performance" (p. 107).
It was on the basis of that syllogism that the connection between schools and parents developed for another decade or more.
The 1980 Education Act increased parental choice and the 1986 Education (No. 2) Act increased parental representation on governing bodies.
To supplement, strengthen or, as some think, to contradict the legislation of 1986, the 1988 Education Reform Act made it possible for parents directly to intervene in their children's schooling through a complaints procedure (Maclure 1989:22—3): In terms of a market ideology, this gives the consumers (i.e. the parents, who throughout the Act are seen as surrogate consumers for their sons and daughters) a chance to act if they believe there is a failure to deliver the curriculum to which they are, by law, entitled.
In an ideal market system, pressure by consumers would be all-important.
Under the Act is seems unlikely to be of paramount significance but dissatisfied parents who might otherwise feel impotent are given a weapon with which to fight back.
It may also open up opportunities for barrack-room lawyers.
Its main significance is likely to be to keep heads and their staff — and governing bodies — on permanent guard against the possibility of local challenge.
They will watch their flanks with caution.
In contrast, Jones (1989) argued that "only the most myopic enthusiasts for parent power can believe that this constituency [the total number of 100,000 parent-governors]will, by being placed in a quasi-market situation, automatically start operating as agents of that system" .
He does, however, acknowledge that though "Conservative rhetoric is fundamentally consumerist rather than democratic, it has served to put the issue of school-parent relations near the centre of educational debate and has led to legislation which increases parental involvement" (Jones 1989:120).
Future policies of parental involvement were also examined by Macbeth (1989).
He outlined a basic professional minimum policy of twelve points.
This should be supported with a professional code of practice for teachers.
The aim should be to recognize that parents are consumers as well as clients and their schools and local authorities are the agents for implementing a closely knit policy of collaboration.
Several signs from differing sources point in the same direction.
Sexton quoted in Ranson (1990:115) argued that "it supposes that the wisdom of parents, separately and individually exercised, is more likely to achieve higher standards more quickly and more acceptably to the public than the collective wisdom of present bureaucrats, no matter how well-meaning those bureaucrats may be" .
Conclusion
To manage education through a partnership requires that those who are untrained and whose views and reactions are unpredictable must be treated nevertheless as full contributors rather than as nominal collaborators.
The process of consultation carried out by a head must take proper note of their doubts, resistances and rejections.
Finding a way in which fully to involve parents and governors takes time.
To regard them as a formal but irrelevant accoutrement of educational reform  would be a severe managerial mistake.
Each party has to be treated as an unambiguous, properly informed and fully participative element in the process.
Clarity, trust and a constantly explicit readiness is needed in seeking a view, a criticism or an improvement on the draft of any plan.
A development scheme which is produced by the senior manager may first produce disbelief or scepticism.
Consistency of attitude and a degree of persistence in time creates confidence.
Matters have to be handled on a basis of equal awareness between numerous potential peers in the management task but it is the school alone, led by the head, who can give an assurance of quality.
The school and its teachers alone can control the steps which produce quality.
Managing connections within education
The manager has to be clear about the purpose of improvement and will use knowledge and support which can be brought from other places into the field which he or she can directly manage.
For instance, a young child's capacity to read is improved because a parent or a playgroup or a nursery class gives a good start.
The primary-school headteacher then ensures that a clear message goes out to the effect that an early, informal, friendly or affectionate discourse in which printed words play a part is a welcome foundation for any school's reading programme.
Mothers, fathers, playgroup leaders, nursery teachers and nursery assistants who respond to this are accepted as initiators and supporters in the process of learning to read.
Beyond these, who are almost automatically involved in the process, stand librarians who make efforts to ensure that early reading is given prominence in both public and school library collections, social workers who know the importance of gearing the mind and interest of parents to the needs and interests of their children, and health visitors who encourage new mothers to talk and play with their babies in ways which allow growth and development to be marked by natural milestones of awareness and understanding.
In this example almost everyone knows what his or her task is — without very much management.
If there are problems with illiterate families or reluctant parents, their difficulties can be tackled not so much through decisions about resource and direction as through guidance and persuasion.
If a class teacher is unduly censorious about reading difficulties or if a parent who, in school, listens to children reading but shows impatience, all that is required of management is the gentle touch.
Phase to phase
By contrast, how is the primary school to manage what it is that passes to the secondary school?
If this were a simple and one-way movement, the answer would lie in ensuring that the record of achievement is up to date and intelligible, that assessment records are accurate and that the pastoral record, if any, is both just and constructive.
To manage a primary school, however, requires more awareness of the secondary school than is covered simply by passing on a record.
Just as those who at the pre-school stage help children to learn to read know that a structured effort to consolidate all the skills connected with reading will be made in the primary school itself, so teachers in primary schools need to know what will be built on the skills, knowledge, interests and attitudes of the children whom they will pass on to the next stage.
Secondary schools do not always tell primary schools in detail what they do in terms of pupil development on either the curricular or the personal plane nor do primary schools always set out to learn what comes next.
Where combined schools exist, usually in areas where primary and secondary schools have been replaced by first, middle and high schools and whole first and middle schools are occasionally run into a single (combined school) organization, there is some continuity of teacher programming from the age of 5 through to 12 years.
Even then there can still be a gap between the combined school and the high school.
To avoid the waste of pupil time which arises from duplication of teaching in differing phases of schooling when the gap itself creates discontinuity, a variety of organizations have been used by LEAs to make sure that primary and secondary schools make clear to each other, first, what is being provided and later, as achievements and the needs of learning change, to help them to plan together to create a complementary or continuous curriculum between the phases.
The advantage of this type of planning is considerable and, if the organization involves teachers other than heads and deputies, it can permeate a whole school without difficulty.
If only the head and deputies, on the other hand, can be involved (a limitation which is sometimes unavoidable unless lengthy and massive planning subgroups are to be put to work) then they, as managers, must make sure that the decisions about sharing are understood within their schools.
There is, even with a relatively sophisticated system of cross-phase planning, the difficulty that the children who are directly affected are those who are at the top of the primary school and at the youngest end of the secondary age range.
What happens in the middle part of each phase may seem — mistakenly — unimportant.
Two factors can improve this limitation of effect: government documentation about programmes of study and statements of attainment are available.
In theory, each phase of schooling can see at a glance what is to be built upon it — and can see the size of that future building.
There are bridging organizations too which already exist between primary and secondary and have ample outline information.
Neither a system of documentation nor a local bridging arrangement can change the national requirement but both have the opportunity to adjust to and to accommodate local preferences, strengths and developments of the curriculum.
The second factor lacks the structured objectivity of programmes of study and common statements of attainment.
It comes in the shape of parental and family information.
As information it is far from perfect but it draws its significance from the weight and faith which parents place on their view of which items constitute the stepping-stones of their children's ambitions.
They know that there will be subjects to choose between at the right moment (or, sometimes, subjects for which their children will not be chosen) and they associate the chances of doing well at, for instance, GCSE level in mathematics with being good at maths in the primary school.
They know that efficient reading is essential for all subjects other than physical education and they will in consequence watch very carefully the primary school's success with their children's capacity to read.
From bare bones such as these parents are able to relate questions about other types of learning: whether their children will do well in science in the secondary school can scarcely be judged if the primary school's own efforts in science are nervous or dull.
But the science programmes which are set out in the national curriculum can be of realistic value to the parent as well as to the primary teacher.
A foreign language, in contrast, carries the problem that there is virtually no evidence of capacity at the primary level — and a judgement or prediction based on an analogy with a proved capacity in a native language is open to doubt.
If the national curriculum and the process of assessment is intended to work through from Stage One at the age of 5-7 to Stage Four at the age of 14–16, there can be no reason for the primary and secondary phase of schooling to be in ignorance of each other.
Indeed the need to know about the earlier and later stages of a child's education becomes imperative when schools have to plan the next stage of learning on the basis of achievement so far, when teachers have to evaluate and — if appropriate — change their own teaching, when parents have to be told in detail how their children are progressing and when LEAs, parents and governors have to have information which allows the performance of the school as a whole to be evaluated.
The parents' part in the continuity of learning has to be recognized.
It is not a matter of simple sufferance on parents' evenings, with their lingering conventions that parents should not be encouraged to ask too many questions.
Nor can teachers any longer be allowed to say that they do not know what will be required of their pupils three, six or eight years later.
Being aware of what lies ahead is not a matter, that is, for teachers simply at the cross-over point.
Every teacher, from the reception class upwards to the age of 16, needs to have a confident grasp of what the whole process of schooling and education can provide for and require from the pupil.
If managers fail to ensure this confident grasp — together with an equally confident openness to questions about the future needs of their learners — they will betray the ideals of that type of schooling which  requires the co-operation of partners rather than the criticism of consumers.
They will, too, have little to contribute to managing the total quality of the education they provide.
Beyond schools
The primary–secondary continuum has the advantage that it can be managed by people who are at home with schoolteachers, parents and families.
The continuum between main secondary and post-16 education is more doubtful.
Certainly schools which have sixth forms try hard to make use of prior knowledge about each student's performance and information about his or her potential.
Such problems of internal management as may arise are likely to come from unfamiliarity on the part of individual teachers with the changing requirements of examinations and assessment.
More difficult for a secondary headteacher to manage is the feed-through to non-advanced further education (FE).
Both schools and colleges give prominence to the near-autonomy of their subject departments — and indeed heads of departments are sometimes regarded as those who really run an upper school or a college.
Organizations for linking, such as those which many LEAs provide for the primary-to-secondary move, have also done much to encourage the pooling of detailed information about the curriculum up to the age of 16 and the curriculum either in the technical or vocational context up to the age of 17 or 18 or in a tertiary college up to the age of 18.
When the non-school element of education and training after 16 is, in 1993, placed in a different part of the education system — even if it is only different for the purpose of separate funding — care will have to be taken not to lose the benefit of previous links.
Those links were particularly strengthened when a major test of the management of information which bore on student's continuity of study came with the Technical and Vocational Education Initiative (TVEI) in 1982.
It was regarded as a way of forcing the emergence of a new curriculum (Jones 1989) and covered the last two years of compulsory secondary education and two years in FE.
Technology at work, the world of business, personal and caring services were all, in one version (Ranson et al.1986), to be included — combining an orientation to the world of work with strategies for learning which emphasized relevance and inquiry.
The TVEI programme required clear management at the point of input, at the end of each of the years of a scheme's work (particularly at the cross-over from the main secondary school stage to the college phase) and at the stage of evaluation.
Not all the evidence about its early years pointed towards good management.
The question of how far TVEI ultimately succeeds or fails has yet to be answered.
So too an answer is needed to the question of whether the failure to manage  the transfer of information and the joint planning of a continuous four-year scheme between two different phases and organizations of education has led to the achievement of less than was hoped for, regardless of the fact that it has been very heavily funded.
Another example of the need for sound management between two phases of education comes with entry into higher education.
Schools and non-advanced FE colleges know the standards and the A level performances which will get their students into universities and institutes and colleges of higher education.
In the case of the universities there is still a tenuous connection with schools in the broad context of A level examination syllabuses.
There has been no comparable link in terms of examination syllabuses between schools and polytechnics.
The only real connections are those which are associated with selection and admission (the Universities Central Council on Admissions (UCCA) and Polytechnics Central Admissions System (PCAS)) and not with continuity of curriculum.
Higher education, like FE, is part of the total system of education.
Guarantees of quality have to extend through the system rather than at separate points and junctions.
Partners in the community
Governors, teachers, parents and the earlier or later phases of education need to belong to a partnership which is managed directly for the benefit of children and students.
Despite their all falling within the group of people who, trained or not, have like minds and common aspirations for the improvement of education, the management of even that partnership is not straightforward.
More complex still is the management of partners who form nine other agencies and influences.
Some have connections which are so close to education that they can be regarded as falling inside the group of like-minded supporters.
But their distance from the point where contact is directly made between teaching and learning is important.
They are not on the whole involved in direct teaching and, second, each of them has to have a separate viewpoint because the focus of the job is mainly outside that of any school.
Thus, health visitors have a specific interest in some individual children and a broad interest in, and view of, the local communities which each school serves.
Social workers in the same way have a specific involvement with some individual families and children.
Where they are still organized separately from social services, education welfare officers can sum up an area's state of mind as well as help — or question — individual families, at least up to the time when centralized social work services are cut back.
One effect of the local management of schools (LMS) might, ironically, be that no school can choose or afford welfare officers.
Their sole task would become that of the LEA duty to keep truancy in check (TES 1991e).
The police, in early schemes of proactive community work, also took an interest in a locality and its population at all ages.
The narrower role of school liaison officers to some extent diminishes the usefulness of the police in building up a cross-community view.
Housing officers, too, will provide important links between some parts of a local community and its schools but notably less than in the period before the privatization of subsidized housing.
Probation officers are less often in contact with a whole school.
In the secondary sector they may from time to time be concerned with defined localities and with those young people who come to their attention from specific communities.
But it is in their generalized role as the preventers and headers-off of criminality that they give the greatest value to schools as well as to young people and their families.
Local businesses are more directly involved in school affairs since the 1986 Education (No. 2) Act's change in the make-up of school governing bodies.
In the secondary sector they have a long history of influence as local employers.
The same connection exists in FE.
They are also suppliers of goods and services.
There can be an ambiguity about their standing but they are very often sponsors and supporters, in material and financial ways, of schools' programmes.
Two other types of body fall into a final category of partners: counsellors whether in Citizens' Advice Bureaux or in RELATE (the earlier Marriage Guidance Council) are often drawn into school connections — through parents rather than children.
The latter, however, also benefit from the type of counselling which schools, usually together, wish to provide or which churches on their own or through dioceses and joint ministries are ready to fund.
Other voluntary bodies, in youth services or adult education, can also be relied upon as partners but more often in the secondary and FE sectors than in primary schools.
With these nine potential partners in addition to teachers, parents and other phases of education, the manager has to decide whether to seek a broad partnership or the separate involvement of individual co-operators.
For the direct benefit of pupils it will be individual partners who will matter more than a grand design of co-operation.
But if a school sees itself as a community school, giving out as much as — or more than — it takes in in the shape of benefit to individual pupils, the manager must decide with some or all the partners on which aspects of community education to concentrate.
Later will come decisions which hinge upon the manager's having identified points of dissent or resistance.
Funds will then need to be found or diverted and teachers trained or retrained in their understanding of community education.
In the process of its development the manager must define the purposes of community education, identify the steps by which it can be provided, define responsibilities at each stage and operate some form of continuous monitoring.
It is a big move to concentrate not on the co-operation between a school and one useful ally but on taking an active position in, for instance, needs-orientated community education for the benefit of the community at large .
In the latter, the school which sets out to democratize education in its geographical or moral area (that is, in a context of those who share beliefs and values) or to enable more people to help themselves, brings with it a set of beliefs which go beyond the Plowden idea of the community making use of the physical amenities of a primary school.
They come nearer to the views of A. H. Halsey about educational priority areas (DES 1972).
And they go considerably beyond such statements as the government made about the connection between community and schools in the 1988 Education Reform Act.
To choose between individual partnerships which feed benefit into the school and large associations which have potential value for a larger community is a matter not of managerial choice from day to day but of planning and drafting at the level of the institutional development plan.
Those who draw up that plan should include — and not only because they are nominally represented on governing bodies — a wide range of community interests.
But the first move must come from the school itself.
This is because it is only the school and its daily managers who can assess what it can afford — and what it has to afford — to do in terms of staff time and money and because it is the school which has, in the end, to initiate any assessment of the type of community assistance which will provide its partners with the benefits they seek.
Appraisal and training
In contrast to the immediacy of assistance which can emerge from well managed relationships between phases of education and between schools and colleges and the external community, longer-term connections need to be created and nurtured.
For instance, primary schools are now involved, on a thin representational basis admittedly, in providing feedback to teacher educators.
This involves an awareness of the activities and requirements of the Council for the Accreditation of Teacher Education (CATE) and of the validation processes in higher education (particularly, until its demise, of the Council for National Academic Awards (CNAA)) which control courses of teacher education.
It means that the initial education of teachers has to be more open than in the past to the understanding of those who employ new teachers.
A broad awareness of the details of initial teacher education will not be of great assistance to a school other than to bring into some kind of focus an activity which used to appear to be both distant and unrelated.
However, when teacher appraisal is a firm part of educational reform, it would make better sense if certain aspects of management in initial teacher education could consciously be brought together with the assessment of teacher capacity.
This linking of two aspects of a teacher's professionalism would prevent appraisal being regarded as  simply a tiresome extra and could, on the positive side, help the process of planning (West and Bollington 1990:9—10): Planning for appraisal…needs to be carried forward in the light of the full range of the demands confronting the particular LEA, the particular school, the particular teacher.
The introduction of the national curriculum, for instance, could be significantly eased if the appraisal process is used to identify what changes will be necessary at school and teacher level and how and by whom these can be achieved.
Similarly, appraisal is capable of providing much of the data necessary for the production of a realistic School Development Plan, since the important part of the planning will not be identifying appropriate curriculum development goals but identifying who will be able to deliver these, and what preparation and support will be necessary if they are to deliver.
In a management plan which guarantees quality, those who manage are able to make a systematic connection between differing aspects of initial teacher education and differing types of teacher performance in the school.
It is possible, too, to link the implementation of a school plan with a ranking of priorities between a school's teachers and their needs for in-service training.
In the still longer term it would be possible for national planners and institutional managers of initial teacher education to adjust the mix of curriculum, pedagogy and school-based learning in such a way as to narrow avoidable gaps between initial and in-service teacher education.
Vocational education
While it may be straightforward to think of school development planning, teacher appraisal, the identifying of remediable faults and the training or retraining of teachers as one set of loosely connected but manageable disciplines, it is less straightforward but equally urgent to expect that other connections should be more systematically organized in order to give assurances of quality.
In particular, schools need a better working knowledge of the link between their own level of general education and the requirements of vocational education and training.
While one argument against expecting schools to carry an additional load of knowledge is that such knowledge, particularly in the vocational field, rapidly becomes out of date, two arguments from the other side have some lasting weight.
First, even at the primary-school age, parents are thinking ahead to qualifications and jobs.
To wait until their children are in the secondary stage may seem a long time for delay.
Second, the connection between the national curriculum and assessment at Key Stages Two and Three ought to show an understandable link not only with work at Key Stage Four but also with the examinations and qualifications which are either directly relevant to the final stage of compulsory schooling or into which work at that level immediately leads.
At that stage the equivalence between the final level of attainment in the scheme of national assessment with the grades of GCSE will for some years leave questions to be answered.
Nevertheless, because GCSE was planned for a decade before it was implemented, the debate about equivalence started early.
Those who managed it had access to information and carefully sifted opinion.
Less clear is the equivalence between the upper levels of attainment at the age of 16 and the exemption of a student from some of the requirements of qualifications which are administered by the Business and Technician Education Council (BTEC) and by the National Council for Vocational Qualifications (NCVQ).
There is confusion too about the future place of the Certificate of Pre-vocational Education.
The school manager, in contrast to his or her experience of GCSE, here has to struggle for clarity — a struggle which is made no easier by the over-simplified statements of policy about the unification of general and vocational education which are made by central government and by its political opponents.
This is because the fine detail of equivalence and exemption in the world of FE and vocational training is being handled by those who have a direct involvement in that field alone.
It does not, for instance, impinge on the fifteen or so criteria for sound initial teacher training which come from the CATE in its guidance about the professional education of those who teach in schools.
This can partly be excused on the ground that there is already a great deal for those in initial teacher education to do.
The student has to benefit from up-to-date practical experience on the part of the teacher trainer.
A broad range of non-classroom experience is also expected from the student.
He or she must know how to exercise pastoral care, what to do in order to observe requirements of health and safety, how to handle links with parents, how to weigh the significance of community connections, what to understand about the world of work and how to regard a teacher's individual position within the structure of the education service at large.
These have a practical usefulness.
They are not matters solely of philosophic awareness.
They are valuable parts of the network which the manager must handle.
But are they so important that the teachers should not be expected to know about technical and vocational education, about an important part, in other words, of the education service towards which many of their pupils will, in time, be moving?
However slight the contact may seem to be between certain levels of government policy-making and the work of teaching, managers of education at school level would be better placed if teachers were at least aware that programmes such as those connected with the TVEI can be altered by ministerial will — and can have their funding reduced.
It helps managers when teachers know, for example, that ministers in one government department (the DES) blame those of another (Department of Employment) for shifts in a national scheme of  vocational education.
It matters, too, that teachers should grasp the fact that the DES can lay down details of a policy but that the Department of Employment funds it.
Even the struggle for the control of the FE sector from 1993 between those same departments is not without significance for those who teach in schools.
Knowledge which teachers possess about other parts of the world of education and training allows managers to rely on a broader set of reference points when new policies are developed.
It also requires them to guard against their own tendencies towards myopia.
Managers need to feel, for example, that for teachers, maybe not directly involved but who, perhaps in primary schools, know that parents are aware of TVEI and expect some of their children to benefit from it, nonetheless know about any significant lack of governmental co-ordination.
For a teacher not to know which national policies exist and how financial considerations affect those policies creates — as far as parents are concerned who want information and advice — an unreliable ignorance.
Primary-school teachers have to work harder at reducing their remoteness from large aspects of policy than those at the secondary or FE stages.
It is secondary-school teachers who need to know how, in practical terms, reduced funding affects the work of a TVEI team and, more seriously, how it can affect a TVEI consortium.
Consortia reduce isolation, encourage curriculum planning across schools and colleges, allow joint in-service training and common timetabling and stimulate good marketing of courses for post-16s.
They also move well beyond simply the delivery of the TVEI programme (Cohen 1989:16): While…consortia were initially viewed as vehicles for "delivery" they have, in the extension programme, quickly incorporated other concerns which relate to the whole gamut of educational concerns and particularly those relating to the new curriculum changes of the Education Reform Act.
Moreover, as schools across the country have already discovered, curriculum changes initiated for 14–19 year olds inevitably impinge on the curriculum of younger age groups.
Hence national levels of support for what is essentially a late-secondary or post-secondary programme, the local organization which supports it and the commitment of teachers who contribute to it at more than one level — all these matter.
They matter, too, to the curriculum of younger age-groups — and it is difficult for any manager to justify omitting the primary school teacher from the long term planning of vocational education.
This last point is repeated in a study of the work of those who have co-ordinated TVEI clusters in Leicestershire (Edwards et al.1990:48): The introduction of the national curriculum requirements for primary science and technology emphasise the importance of primary/secondary liaison.
The cluster co-ordinators were beginning to find a role here, drawing on their experience of secondary/tertiary links.
Co-ordinators' ideas for improving links included a suggestion for staff exchanges for finding better methods of publicising choices for courses.
The effect on the education of younger pupils has been specifically highlighted by the Association of Science Education as a task for management.
Science as a vehicle through which the national curriculum's concerns can be met for equal opportunities, the heightening of economic awareness, the creation of links with industry, the enhancement of knowledge about the technological aspects of science and the effective use of information technology — these all mean that the principles of TVEI can be embraced at one and the same time.
And if the management of secondary school science departments includes the management of review and of staff development then the effect of a whole-team approach to TVEI and the sharing of ideas, expertness and good practice will be better than the effect of teachers accepting TVEI principles on an individual basis.
Beyond the team in the individual school"it is important to note that TVEI funding is aimed specifically at the 14 to 18 age range.
However, it is impossible to attend to approaches to teaching and learning for this stage without attending to how students are learning prior to this"(Versey 1989:23).
Helping to breach barriers
Most messages about the significance of the TVEI programme for the education of younger children come from the secondary sector or from those who speak for the ministries, either of Employment or of Education and Science.
It is disappointing that a comparable awareness of the inter-phase link is not commonly recorded in the primary sector itself.
Is that the fault of initial teacher education?
No, at least not as far as that will have been changed by CATE.
Is it the fault of an overburdened teaching force, for whom full time class teaching is the norm?
This is more likely, but there must also be some responsibility on the part of heads and governors.
Academic councils, professional resource centres and curriculum "clusters" all acknowledge the need to diminish isolation, but they do not all look forward with the same clear-sightedness further into any young person's life.
This being so, who, outside the schools, can provide assistance?
The most obvious answer lies in careers services and counselling.
The careers service works for secondary schools and, up to a point, for FE.
It does not penetrate the primary school although it is acknowledged that the earliest thoughts — mainly in the form of fantasy — about one's choice of life-work do formulate themselves when children are between 8 and 12 years of age.
In place of an external adviser drawn from the careers service, the primary school draws on the build-up of a pupil's capacities and potential as assessed by teachers in the traditional way and by the national system of assessment at two stages.
The secondary school can rely on further stages of national assessment together with recourse to a record of achievement which has to be provided for every pupil at the age of 16.
The putting together of a record of achievement and the formative use of assessment at every stage of schooling should mean that such patterns of feedback as well as prediction would in time be developed as would cross the divide between primary, secondary, sixth form, tertiary college, FE and higher education.
The manager at both secondary- and primary-school level, would, when that development is complete, find it possible to adapt to school use recommendations about the wholesale management and regearing of both policy and practice which is needed in FE in order to create a comprehensive setting for the introduction of new vocational qualifications (Haffenden and Brown 1989).
This in turn might be assisted or hindered by the treatment of vocational education as well as FE colleges, sixth form colleges and tertiary colleges as entities which are to be separately funded and managed under the Further Higher Education Act 1992.
As matters stand, the development and negotiation of student action plans point to the need for college staff to be aware of what happened before the age of 16.
It also requires that teachers in schools should know the purposes to which their assessments and predictions will be put.
And it is significant that, in the Association for Science Education, an introductory report (Billings 1989) drew attention to the particular importance, in the framework of new vocational qualifications, of the assessment of prior learning, an importance further underlined by Slusarchuk & Nicholl (1990:112).
Taking account of what has already been achieved by a student and breaching the barriers between separate sections of education and training calls for conscious management.
Careers advisers and counsellors can help.
But there are now other large sources of potential assistance.
Although the flow and use of information about TVEI and NCVQ have been patchy and limited, the aims, in contrast, of Training and Enterprise Councils (TECs) are all-embracing.
In trying to ensure that every young person has access to education and training leading to recognized vocational qualifications and a job"the TEC will determine how best to contribute to raising the achievement and practical skill levels of all young people.
Working in partnership with the education service, the careers service, training providers and employers, the TEC can help smooth the transition from education to work"(Department of Employment 1989).
In their work the TECs may either influence or take over the careers service (Farley 1990).
This would be an important symbol of a systematic connection between secondary schools, FE, employers and the world of work.
It would, too, be difficult for secondary schools not to concern themselves, across the whole picture of a student's achievement, in the preparation of what is described as "careership" (CBI 1990).
TECs are regarded both as regulators of the local training market in the transition between education, training and employment and as the channel through which employers can influence the vocational education  and training system.
A Vocational Education and Training Task Force, reporting to the Confederation of British Industry (CBI 1990) emphasized that the connection between training policies and employer involvement would enable one of four targets to be met, namely that "all education and training provision should be structured and designed to develop self-reliance, flexibility and broad competence as well as specific skills" (p. 19).
The same report referred to the priority of creating"a new culture in which the school leaving age ceases to be an end to education and in which the development of skills and knowledge continues throughout working life.
A greater self-development ethic is needed which builds on entitlements and responsibilities"(CBI 1990: 21).
That each stage of education and training can build on what has gone before requires that the manager at each stage should know what is happening elsewhere.
In the primary school, self-development means development which moves onward because the parent as well as the teacher can make use of the information and assessments provided by the school.
At the secondary-school stage it becomes less a partnership between all three and more a matter for the individual student and his or her advisers, whether from inside the school or outside.
The emphasis, after the age of 16, is on the young adult, the trainer, the employer or the pre-higher education tutor.
None can work well in isolation and for that reason it is reassuring that the CBI, in pressing its case for the TECs to be the local regulators of vocational training, stresses the importance of the young person's (and the adult worker's) "personal file" , building on the existing good practice of records of achievement in schools.
In the same connection, the CBI urges that profiles should not only bridge the gap between education, training and work but should also"be integrated into the learning process.
Appropriate time, resources and training must be allowed to ensure that [the profiles]are completed accurately.
It is important to market them to young people, teachers, parents and employers as well as to providers of further education and training"(CBI 1990:22).
In looking at training and education as parts of a whole process it is not surprising that TECs are encouraged to take responsibility not only for Youth Training Schemes and for Employment Training but also for non-advanced, work-related FE.
This development underlines the need for the manager of education to be knowledgeable about the broad field of government initiatives for employment training.
Managing onward connections
There is money and faith behind the TECs.
There is also a strong business-based drive for improved training.
Together they can quickly achieve an interplay of information and planning between different parts of the education and training world.
This is necessary too in the  management of primary and secondary education.
If such links are not built, schooling will suffer from being not only detached from the lifelong vision of education and retraining which is foreseen by the CBI, the TECs and the NCVQ but also from appearing not to care about continuity, feed-through and quality assurance.
This would deny the national curriculum one of its greatest strengths and would expose schools to blame for not playing a co-operative role in the mix of better education and training which is needed.
The messages for local managers are that there is a need to allow time to pass before the linked activities which revolve around the three major innovations of the 1980s (NCVQ, TVEI extension, TECs) reveal how much they can contribute to each other in terms of an essentially joint strategy.
Regrettably, time may be their undoing, particularly as the diminished funding for TVEI extension work shrinks and as criticism grows about the lack of control in its financing by government departments.
But there is at least some chance of cooperation, in contrast to the absence of an obligation to plan together between higher education, sixth forms in secondary schools and colleges of further as well as tertiary education.
This omission attracts attention but little action (Maclure 1991; Ball 1991; Finegold et al.1991).
Although institutions of higher education to some extent reshaped their admissions procedures before and after the Further & Higher Education Act 1992, they still appear to pay little attention to the effect which their policies have on schools and colleges.
Credit must be given to the continued efficiency of the UCCA, to the successful launch of the PCAS and to the swift amalgamation of their efforts as the binary division disappeared.
More is to be hoped, for there does need to be "a truly comprehensive and integrated system of admissions to (full-time and sandwich) higher education" (Ball 1985:83): Without some such system we shall always be guessing at the "real field" — the true level of demand from those who are able to benefit from higher education and who wish to do so.
But there is a more important issue.
Just as the student award regulations are the "hidden hand" of higher education planning, so also do our admissions arrangements determine more than just who studies where: they partly condition both the nature of our courses and the shape of sixth-form education.
Ball argues that the main engine in the shaping of higher education should be informed student demand, not manpower planning.
However, one consequence of relying on patterns of student demand is that those in higher education"rarely have to face directly the question of whether or not a candidate is suitable for higher education at all.
And yet this is the prior question, decided, as often as not, without reference to admissions officers, by school teachers or parents or by the lack of confidence of marginal candidates themselves"(Ball 1985:86).
This seems to be an accurate description of the initial decisions about seeking entry into higher education.
It is a long way from the  "careership" proposals of the CBI and a long way, too, from the systematic manner in which those parties argue who would wish to see TECs as the regulators of training and as the godfather of the careers service.
If schools respond in different ways to the requirement for guidance, special information and sometimes special effort which attends higher education entry as against guidance for entry into vocational education and training, is this because there are two cultures?
Or is it a conscious decision on the part of managers to handle the processes differently because schools themselves differ in their habits of work?
Part of the answer lies in the need, when arrangements are new, to create a structure which allows preparation for, and feedback from, newly initiated operations.
Plans are made as a whole and the analysis of failed innovations places particular emphasis on wholeness.
Connections between schools and the post-school system which have developed over many years lack simpleness of planning.
Some parts of the connection are old and in need of review.
The assumption that university matriculation still exercises any kind of influence on examinations at the age of 16 should be excised.
The idea that GCSE, A level and AS level results are predictive also needs to be put to one side.
At the same time it should be made clear that apart from false assumptions about matriculation, higher education should only have a small contribution to make to the range, standard and appositeness of 16+ and 18+ examination syllabuses and schemes of marking.
The lack of connection between schools and, when they were distinct from the universities, polytechnics is obvious: the latter played no formal part in examination boards.
The same was true of institutes and colleges of higher education.
Yet decisions about the significance, for entry into higher education, of school-level achievement in public examinations are made all the time — and it is odd that they seem to be made without reference to CNAA, BTEC or the NCVQ.
As a result these bodies are not yet in a position to influence the preparation of individual groups of students for higher education.
This is one of the results of there not being any systematic connection in the importance which government schemes attach to the flow of information between different spheres and levels of training, education and the use of skilled people.
It brings a certain hollowness to the concern to guarantee total quality in continuous education.
There is no need to make a new case for the improvement of management connections with higher education.
In the 1960s and 1970s the Standing Conference on University Entrance tried to deal with it on a large-scale basis but repeated efforts to bring about improvements of connection amounted to little.
The hope for the future rests on the merging of the separately funded worlds of universities and polytechnics.
As the binary divide recedes and vanishes a further revolution in creating links with schools will make the management of transition more rational.
Conclusion
It is the task of managers, across the phase gaps, to organize feedback from and into their own spheres of work.
They need to make a regular picture available to the national originators of change and to those agencies who are responsible for change being organized in specific way.
This is particularly true of the National Curriculum Council and the Schools Examination and Assessment Council.
That picture should be one of shared progress, shared failing, of fitness of match or lack of match between policies and funding.
The separate phases of education and training should be made visible to those who contribute to the process — teachers, employers, trainers and funders.
This should be accompanied by a view from the beneficiaries and users of each part of education and training.
In this way each partner can build up a capacity to contribute to the workings of an interlinked system.
Schools alone cannot make guarantees about the quality of education.
The whole range of contributors must join in the planning and control of quality.
All partners must show a confirmable commitment to quality.
Lessons from the past
Since the 1960s the impact of good management at school level has been increasingly clear.
Despite this there have been long-standing assumptions that management is the same as administration.
And administration was something which occurred in Whitehall or in LEAs.
The concerns of administration used to be the maintenance of law and regulation, the sustaining of working relationships with voluntary organizations and denominational bodies and the planning and maintenance of programmes across a range of responsibilities.
These were concerned with budgets, building programmes and staffing.
They were also concerned with curriculum development, advisory support and in-service education.
Administration at local authority level also took responsibility for public consultation about major changes in school organization, for trade union relationships and for detailed arrangements relating to transport, admission procedures, school records, statistics and public relations.
How matters stood, even as recently as 1980, can be seen in a summary such as this (Brooksbank 1980:201): Authorities are concerned to delegate powers, as far as is practical and efficient to do so.
Inescapably, they must retain such things as overall financial control, a determination of the size of a school's teaching and ancillary staff, and major decisions about buildings, although many conclusions on these matters are reached only after an ebb and flow of consultation and representation.
Equally, they wish to encourage local initiatives, and these are best taken by a partnership of lively governors and competent teachers.
This now seems a long way from the position taken in the Education (No. 2) Act 1986 and the Education (Schools) Act 1992.
It is also a long way away from the local management of schools (LMS): local authorities, chief education officers and elected members of local councils now have little of the power of the early 1980s.
Despite the scale and depth of change little was done to prepare for new demands of management.
Since the early 1960s there had been a movement for what had been described as organization development (OD).
There had been research and review carried out by the Organization for Economic Co-operation and Development (OECD) and by International Movements Towards Educational Change (IMTEC).
The essentials were described as a series of common understandings (Dalin and Rust 1983:21—2):
First, OD is an activity which relies on concepts and research findings from the behavioural sciences, primarily from social psychology.
Second, the purpose is to improve the health and functioning of school organizations.
In contrast to more conventional strategies for innovation, especially found in America, organization development is holistic or systemic in that it concentrates on the organization more than on the isolated individual or practice.
However, the system is not here interpreted to be the broad political and administrative superstructure, but the school organization…
Third,…it is a self-correcting, self-renewing process, undertaken by the members of an organization, although external support usually exists in the form of consultants or self-assessment instruments…
Fourth, organization development involves a deliberate set of steps including self-assessment, diagnosis, problem-solving, planning and action phases…
Fifth, it is a continuous or long term process rather than a one-shot exercise or a brief episode in the life of the school.
Sixth, it is usually evaluated in terms of its ability to enhance an organization's effectiveness and health as an organization rather than specific output criteria such as student achievement.
It was this last point which at the time led to some discomfort about OD.
Not everyone was sure what a school's effectiveness or health amounted to.
It was not conceived that these made up, in present-day terms, a system for securing and guaranteeing quality.
By now, in contrast, the summary of the six points is very much what school management has to cover in the practical arrangement for giving assurances about, and for controlling, quality.
The fact that the requirements are those of central government rather than those initiated by individual schools makes a difference to the process of development.
When Dalin and Rust were writing they pointed to a variety of stimuli for change: in the United States it had been competition with the Soviet Union.
In Europe social democracy had, they said, tried to develop schools by passing social reform legislation.
And it was thought that the movement in England and Wales in the late 1960s, towards the extension of teachers' centres was an attempt to create what was described as a focus for teacher renewal.
Management was scrutinized in the 1970s and 1980s as an instrument for innovation.
Much of that lay in curriculum and pedagogy rather than in the large-scale organization of schools.
It was not the administrative aspect, outlined in Brooksbank, which was in need of attention as much as the daily process of feeding change into a school through the conversion, retraining or updating of its teachers' skills and through the introduction of both new materials and new perspectives in the build-up of subject knowledge and human skills.
In this concentration of teaching and learning, school management pays less attention to three other categories of innovation listed in an OECD study, namely those relating to the objectives and functions of the school in its broader social and economic context, those concerned with the administration of the educational system and those which are mainly concerned with role definition and relationships (CERI 1973).
In the first of these categories, the impulse of schools to develop their community activities and the education of adults called for an approach which differed from the management of curriculum change.
Confusion arose when heads were unclear whether they were developing a social rather than an instructional milieu.
Confusion also arose when schools took over administrative functions which traditionally had been located in LEAs.
This movement of decentralization gathered pace in the late 1980s.
Less money was left within the control of local authorities.
They became less capable of providing central services on an economical basis (school transport, for instance) or on an equitable basis (such as evenly spread central library facilities or schemes of specialist instruction and the organization required in, for instance , music).
In the decentralizing of money management, ambiguities also arose in connection with buildings (where were the dividing lines between repairs, maintenance and improvements?) and in personnel (did governors have a different responsibility for teachers in contrast to non-teachers?).
Schools thus slipped into the danger of carrying out a new range of management tasks without the benefit of fresh definitions.
They could, with one part of their mind, cling to the idea of teacher autonomy.
With another part they asked for the benefit of good management but without too much external pressure.
In one study of primary schools, the 1918 Handbook of Suggestions for the Consideration of Teachers was quoted as making only one requirement of uniformity, "the Board of Education desired to see in the teaching of public elementary schools…that each teacher shall think for himself, and work out by himself such methods of teaching as may use his powers to best advantage and best suited to the particular needs and conditions of the school" (Kogan 1973:145).
This statement was not only made but meant, said Kogan, "When change has been positively mounted it has occurred through advisory teachers rather than inspectors, in-service training rather than managerially dominated systems" (Kogan 1973:145)
Because teachers' centres and the increase of in-service education in the late 1970s and 1980s occurred outside schools, there was some separation between the flow of curriculum development in the sense in which it was supported in schools by the work of advisers and advisory teachers and in the way it made its impact on individual teachers through regular courses of familiarization and in-service education.
Heads and governors were not required to manage these two main influences although headteachers themselves were often directly involved in the committees and working parties which steered the programmes of teachers' centres.
Governors were kept informed but as a decision of the headteachers rather than as a matter of right.
This changed when a specific part of each year's public expenditure at central government level was identified and earmarked for in-service education.
At first LEAs made annual bids and had to ensure that  money was passed to schools.
The management of in-service work became more complicated when it was a matter of delegation to schools.
The burden increased when it became clear that it was schools who would be held principally responsible in implementing the national curriculum, in taking the first steps in teacher appraisal and in managing their finances.
At the same time the Training Grants Scheme was specifically excluded from money which was allocated to LMS.
Added to this, the problem of teacher absence for in-service work and the difficulty of finding and affording substitutes meant that schools found participation in in-service education increasingly difficult (Williams 1991:189).
For managers to have information about what happens in earlier and later phases of education does not guarantee that they put that knowledge to good use.
When those at the level of schools read about allegations of incompetence on the part of the earlier separate Universities Funding Council and about the individual difficulties of separate universities, they felt frustration about the apparent misuse of money in other sectors or believed that if other people got their sums wrong, they in schools should also have been excused.
Schools at present can see that the same thing might happen to them — particularly when local decisions can be made about levels of pay and when local purse-holding is deliberately distanced from the machinery of national funding.
In the same way, information about how the National Curriculum Council (NCC) came down in favour of more information and factual knowledge in the history curriculum after months of comment and criticism led to a holding of breath as to what precisely would emerge in the shape of revised requirements.
No one immediately set to in order to work out how a well-publicized national response in terms of content and expectation of achievement would actually turn out at each key stage.
In other words, awareness that something was happening at national level did not provide workable lines along which local managers could shape their own efforts.
Nevertheless, each change had to be translated into local activity and if that translation did not take place, managers ran the risk of national decisions being superseded by yet further alterations.
A further example of national information about which local managers were unable to act came with the expanding of the National Diploma level of BTEC in schools: when it was shown that there did not have to be an exclusive choice of BTEC and A levels and that to offer both at the same time was not only permissible but also helpful, the manager was able to make new local choices.
Those new choices had to be afforded in terms of staff, accommodation, time, equipment and other items which needed a redisposition of money — but decisions about such items as these were already a normal part of management.
An extension of BTEC qualifications into schools, in the form of the one year First Diplomas, could not be supported solely by rearranging internal resources.
When the ban on schools in providing  these was lifted, it was made clear that schools alone could not afford them.
BTEC had to call on FE colleges to create closer working relationships with schools than most existing links provided — and the Council would only authorize a school to run a First Diploma course if it was satisfied that it could provide not only teachers with experience in working in business or in industry but also specialized accommodation and equipment.
Thus a local manager could make new arrangements about National Diploma work in a school but not about a First Diploma.
An improved version of the Certificate of Pre-vocational Education (CPVE) was on the stocks but a manager's negotiation about it would have to take place with the City and Guilds of London Institute (CGLI).
In addition to working out equivalences between Advanced level, a one-year BTEC diploma and one-year CPVE, the manager needed also to remember that the upper reaches of qualification under the National Council for Vocational Qualifications (NCVQ) would require another exercise in establishing equivalence and balance.
If the NCVQ was too narrow in its concern with those skill-based qualifications which satisfied employers, the local manager could only wait and see what the final outcome would be between the force of BTEC (arguing for greater breadth and balance) and NCVQ.
And in the end it would be national government which was expected to sort them out (TES 1990): Parity of esteem depends on more than assertions about which NCVQ level equals an A Level.
There is undoubtedly a growing consensus about the need for a radical rethink of the post-16 generation in both schools and FE colleges.
But opinion has been hardening towards more coherence on curriculum and qualifications, less separation between academic and vocational, something more like a British Bac.
It is not at all clear that stepping up the competition between schools and colleges, and between the territorially ambitious award bodies, will produce the broad choices in education and training that ought to be an entitlement post-16, just as much as the national curriculum is before that watershed.
The point at which the national curriculum begins to matter is the age of 5: assessment at each successive stage should in some way affect the ambitions and choices at each age.
As the scheme of national assessment develops, the less crucial will earlier stages seem to become.
Until then, having to provide a system of education which is nominally continuous but in terms of reality, disconnected and without knowing the full extent of its effects, is likely to lead to misunderstanding and tension.
Stress
The greater part of stress in education is described as arising from new pressures and, in particular, from new legislation.
This ignores repeated steps which have been taken at several levels of management to  reduce uncertainty.
That task of alleviating anxiety is a matter for a whole school or college; it is, too, a matter which requires commitment at a high level if its damage is to be reduced.
The points at which stress and anxiety emerge can be mapped.
Their occurrence can be predicted and it is helpful to have a guide such as that produced by the Education Service Advisory Committee (ESAC) of the Health and Safety Commission.
The two most important messages emerging from that guide are that stress is a permanent aspect of life and is not peculiar to the education service.
But if its harmful effects are ignored because it is thought that they are too generalised, too subjective or too difficult to tackle, then unnecessary ill-health will continue to occur.
There is clearly no panacea but there are improvements which can be made in almost all work situations, and which all reflect good management.
A more open and informed attitude to the problems of stress also allows more opportunities for individuals to emerge from the isolation of their own anxieties (ESAC 1990:26).
When the manager of any organization knows the worth of what he or she is doing it is easier to explain its purposes to other people and to seek their co-operation.
Isolation — in the terms of ESAC — is reduced.
But while "worth" in a school or college is measured in terms of the advancement of learning and the personal development of the pupil or student, the awareness of what that amounts to comes only gradually.
Evidence about it comes from a range of sources and that evidence is not uniform in the way in which it is presented.
Nor does each type of evidence carry the same weight.
What is easier to handle is information — and management information which is planned and delivered in predetermined packages should be particularly straightforward.
But even that has difficulties.
Information
Examples of confusion in defining and acquiring exactly the type of management information which is needed for specific tasks and policies emerged from a widely publicized aspect of management in further education in the 1980s.
The Further Education Management Information System (FEMIS) had been launched with DES funding in 1982.
It was designed for use in colleges and was based on the personal microcomputer.
The broad aim was to assist colleges with the monitoring of their performance and to enable them to demonstrate to both LEAs and central government that they were cost effective.
Four indicators were emphasized — staff student ratios, average class sizes, average student hours and average lecturer hours.
Difficulties about securing uniformity of approach to such seemingly uncomplicated measurements were experienced early in the trials of the system.
The main problem was the underestimating of the planning and management which was necessary at the stage of implementing the system.
Hopes were disappointed both among college managers and in LEAs.
Part of the trouble was that the information which colleges needed for their own purpose was on a scale different from that which was called for by local authorities and by the DES.
When the system worked at its best it realized the highest hopes: "The opportunity for college directors to purchase low-cost systems geared to institutional management, as well as to LEA or national data requirements, created a significant opportunity to improve strategic, tactical and operational management.
Equally, many LEAs can now purchase systems for colleges and thus improve their own information base on the colleges' (Gibson and Wickham 1987:463).
The transition from traditional management techniques to those based on personal computers revealed the need not only for good early planning but also for high-level commitment in directing what was to be implemented and for what were described as decision support systems.
Despite the care which was taken, notably by the Further Education Staff College, to achieve success in FEMIS, a shared confidence in the accuracy of basic statistics between colleges, local authorities and the DES was not achieved.
Hence an important tool of management whose common usefulness could be judged by the essential partners to collaboration failed to provide what had appeared to be promised — and one says "appeared" because it may have been the wish of some college managers not to allow information by which their efficiency might be judged to become available to other parties.
This is in contrast to that information which can be challenged and questioned which has to be made publicly available in support of quality assurance.
An aspect of this college view was revealed in one analysis of the advantages of introducing a management information system (MIS).
It was conceded that the advantages within a college are clear (Williams 1987:490): The increased awareness of the college environment which it offers the manager permits more forceful and effective action on his or her part…
However, coupled with this awareness of the benefits on offer must be a realisation that perceptions of management style, organization and staff development will be drastically altered.
The impact is often profound, with the MIS acting as a catalyst for developing a milieu in which the quantitative and qualitative aspects of approaches to systematic review can be balanced and integrated.
If this is translated into terms of school management, the combination of quantitative and qualitative aspects might entail the organization and measurement of effective learning.
But the information which was handled in FEMIS made up only the bones of college work and it seems likely that the initial difficulty experienced in FE about translating information into worthwhile knowledge about the improvement in learning would also be experienced at the primary or secondary levels.
Ideally, schemes of management information which are intended to help further and higher education should be of assistance to schools, both by pioneering new systems of analysing information and by making the resulting messages available to them.
This could, for instance, have happened with two other FE developments — one related to the Educational Counselling and Credit Transfer Information System (ECCTIS) and the other to an initiative in the mid-1980s launched by the then Manpower Services Commission to provide a computer-assisted local labour market information system (CALLMIS).
Had this been successful it would have been possible for managers of education and training at every level within a locality to identify major employment issues, to assess likely large-scale change in employment patterns and to identify educational links which might have to be developed or changed.
When is knowledge too remote?
The manager at school level could say that the plans and consequences of planning which emerge from employment strategies or from higher education are too remote to matter.
But they cannot be too remote if a school — primary or secondary — is working to a curriculum blueprint which has been sought by successive governments and if we now accept that schools have only a limited choice in any broader expectations which society imposes upon them.
Eight such blueprints have been outlined in one cultural analysis.
They point to universality of demand which range from those of socio-political and economic systems to those which embrace the importance of communication and technology and, further, which call for a balance of those requirements of society which are rational, moral, aesthetic and belief-centred (Lawton 1986).
As points of reference for the total curriculum of a school each of these falls within the usual definition of broad aims.
Each requires the headteacher, the governors and the other teachers to know about approaches to learning which are wider than those of single subjects.
Each also requires the managers and providers (whether as teachers, governors or the LEA) to be confident about the implications which emerge from the relevance to education of politics, economics, morality, technology and aesthetics.
If they are confident, they can commit themselves to the importance of each of the eight aspects.
If they are confident they can, too, justify that importance to parents and, at the secondary-school stage, to employers.
Above all they will find ways of pursuing broad aims in their regular reviews of schools, in their planning and in their schemes of teaching.
This is a complex task in the midst of implementing other aspects of the national curriculum.
Although that curriculum is often represented as diminishing teachers' choices and initiatives, it is important for heads and their colleagues to note how matters of culture which have many facets can be handled alongside a national concern that  schools should be more readily comparable with each other and should be readily accountable, not least in their pupils' attainment levels.
Lawton (1989) provides particularly useful guidance on this as a development on earlier work on cultural analysis.
One study of this issue was pessimistic.
Carried out by Sneh Shah (1990) in an analysis of the place of equal opportunities in core and foundation subjects and working from a number of final and interim reports by NCC working parties, three key points were identified, relating to the ways in which equal opportunities were handled in definitions and statements about syllabus content, in criteria of assessment and in statements of non-statutory guidance.
Although a picture of NCC confusion emerged from this study it still held out the hope, if only by implication, that more rigorous thinking would achieve better results.
As it stands, the NCC guidance to teachers is made worse by a random mix of explicit and unstated definitions.
Hence, although the Council can claim that their guidance documents have contained some reference to equal opportunities and that guidelines from the Secretary of State have included reference to issues of gender and the needs of ethnic minority children there does appear, however, in the words of Shah (1990:315) to be no consensus.
In some instances the term equal opportunities refers to the attainments of girls, sometimes to gender differentiation in assessment, in some instances to both boys and girls, and occasionally to ethnic minority pupils…
There is a reference to social class disadvantages in the English report, but overall there is no clear target group.
At the same time there are varying interpretations of equal opportunities or related aspects when other terms are used.
Some of the subjects like science and history have attempted to be positive in the curriculum content so that the children attain the targets for the subjects, but also become better educated in terms of quality issues.
The focus in the Mathematics report however is a reminder of the continued powerful opposition to equality, especially for black people.
Even when the working party has produced its final report as for History, or made strong recommendations after wide consultation, as for modern foreign languages, the Secretary of State may well have a strong influence on the final version that becomes part of legislation.
When teachers have received each final version of guidance and ministerial requirement then, despite the connections which will have been included in that guidance between a specific subject and a broader concern (such as the encouragement of multicultural or anti-racist education), school managers will still be faced with a problem.
Shah expresses this (1990:316): The overall effect of the National Curriculum will be the reduction of spontaneous teaching.
There is a real danger that the other perhaps even more important element, i.e. the hidden curriculum, may fade into insignificance.
In the past if children were being particularly racist or sexist, the committed teachers would deal with that in the way they felt most appropriate, and with as much time as was necessary.
With this loss of flexibility, an overall school policy, well implemented and monitored, is crucial.
Can an overall school policy which gives appropriate weight to equal opportunities, health education, political literacy, personal, social and moral education and the other emphases described in Lawton's analysis be planned, implemented and, in general terms, managed without a detailed understanding of what is needed to handle each issue?
Can the managers make any precise allocation of time and other resources to planning and defining their operational steps in these amorphous areas?
Can they reduce those steps to verifiable, traceable steps of quality control?
Conclusion
Management as local activity has taken time to distance itself from the field of administration which belonged, as recently as the 1980s, to varying tiers of government rather than to institutions.
The growth of management as a virtually separate discipline has been resisted.
The organization and the development of institutions and systems sometimes took their roots from broad ideas about the ownership of education as an aspect of a larger community's life.
At other times it was treated as a day-to-day activity, associated only with mundane needs.
The response of schools to the need to manage things for themselves has partly been linked with their development as organizations separate from central government and local authorities and partly with the preservation of teacher freedom.
Inasmuch as teachers by tradition are more closely associated with the planning and delivery of the curricular components of education than with arguments about priorities and about the distribution of resources, curriculum development has been a prime element of professional management.
Assistance was provided by traditional in-service education, by the activities of advisers and inspectors and, at one time, by activities which were sponsored or encouraged at teachers' professional centres.
LMS has moved the central concern of school management away from curriculum development and nearer to the heart of pedagogy, teaching and assessment.
Management now requires a larger perspective than in the past: the school manager needs to know what is happening in higher education, in technical education and in the vocational sphere.
Hence the world of other people's qualifications — and new schemes of qualification — must become familiar to the management team of schools, primary as well as secondary.
The need to become confident in one's knowledge about other phases and sectors of education can create stress.
That can be ameliorated if the manager reduces uncertainty by turning to those sources of information — of every kind — which are essential for good organization and by ensuring that those who provide the information are reliable and responsive.
The management of information systems in education is still not free from their chequered past.
Nor is management information yet available for every aspect of the variety of aim and blueprint which a school sets for itself.
In particular, those who manage individual schools have not yet had much experience in making a practical connection between defining their aims and implementing them within the framework of the national curriculum and in terms of quality assurance.
Managing the new
Management plans and schemes of quality assurance need time and care in being put together.
To move quickly into the management of new policies in a school carries the advantage that an innovation can be explained to others, defended or modified by the decision only of the initiator himself.
However, this carries the risk that what is being implemented may need to be later unravelled because of second thoughts and if the original putting together of a change costs effort and resentment, going back on it may create further difficulties of relationships.
The manager or the team must decide the pace.
If its speed of planning is uniform with that of others, the school may prefer to be cautious.
This in turn may make it difficult for the manager to evoke commitment and enthusiasm.
On the other hand to be slower than other schools in developing schemes of quality assurance may bring credit for prudence.
But this may also attract criticism from parents if they make their own comparisons about trends and innovations.
The options of speed or prudence are entirely open to the manager of a school in the immediate period after the introduction of the 1988 Education Reform Act.
The programme of trials and different phasings for entry into local management meant that some schools were well to the fore and were able to demonstrate both the advantages and drawbacks of early thinking on the part of central and local government.
Second-phase schools had the advantage of longer preparation.
Trial phases had revealed difficulties.
These emerged from the separation of different schemes of preparation.
In some instances governors, staff other than heads, those responsible for capital as distinct from revenue planning and those responsible, too, for maintaining the equitable treatment of personnel, all went through differing speeds of training and development.
Second phase schools should have felt — but did not always do so — the benefits of a process of policy-making which was homogeneous.
Evidence of this could be seen week after week from 1989 onwards.
The press gave the impression that governors were going through a series of complicated changes and that new puzzles and ambiguities about their powers were being constantly revealed.
Week by week Joan Sallis and others gave advice and placed the description of what were regarded as new problems against the background of why powers were changing and why the best use should be made of the  variety of forces, pressures and influences which supported governing bodies.
In the discussion about the exercise of governors' powers, the headteacher was usually brought in but other teachers left out.
Parents were often in the foreground of the picture but their relationship with teachers rather than with governors themselves was not often highlighted.
All in all, there was little to demonstrate that those who managed schools were working very closely together.
In particular the impact of governors upon the curriculum and upon the pedagogic aims of schools was obscure, despite the claim that their power was considerable.
Thus (TES 1991a:14): part-time governors are in no position to replace LEAs in the running of schools, says Ann Holt, director of the support group Action for Governors Information & Training (AGIT).
Commenting on the recent claim by junior schools minister Michael Fallon that "governors, not councils, now run our schools" , Ann Holt writes"My own experience as a governor, and as one who meets other governors, makes me less sure about the feasibility or desirability of Mr Fallon's ambitions.
Many governors are uncertain about the level of responsibility being urged upon them and everywhere the spirit is willing but the flesh is weak when it comes to course funding.
Governors are largely untrained volunteers doing what they can in their spare time.
Some had no intention of meeting more than two hours, three times a year.
The limited nature of government response to the process of national reform was explained by the relatively lower level of attention which was paid to curriculum than to mechanisms of money.
Two forces were at work: the curriculum requirement of central government changed sufficiently often for critics to claim that important changes in original policy were repeatedly taking place.
Also the day-to-day work of schools and the task of assessing pupils assumed a higher importance than the development of new curriculum.
This preoccupation with assessment was regarded both as demoralizing and excessively demanding on teachers' time in 1989, 1990 and 1991.
In the spring of 1990 particularly, trial runs of the assessment of 7-year-olds led to revelations about strain and frustration which led central government considerably to reduce its demands.
This led to sharp antagonism towards the full launch of assessment at 7 in 1991.
In July of that year the Prime Minister indicated that in future assessment at 7 would become simpler.
In December it was confirmed that the assessment would be confined to paper and pencil tests taken by whole classes of children.
At the secondary-school stage, anxiety about assessment at the age of 14 and 16 years again led to an alteration in government requirements.
Conflict about assessment at Key Stage 4 and about equivalence with GCSE ultimately led to the giving up of proposals for double testing.
Two further problems confronted the manager: was the national curriculum up to the age of 16 going to feed sensibly through to new  policies which were emerging from the combination of general and vocational education from 16 to 19?
Second, would assessments which had been made from the age of 11 up to 16 be reflected in the record of each student's achievement at the age of 16 plus?
In trying to find answers, managers — whether they were heads or governors — were caught between the need to make progress and to prepare for broad changes which had been widely publicized by central government and to prepare for the necessity that they should lead changes.
Some changes were small but others significant — and all were being made virtually each month by Secretaries of State, by the National Curriculum Council (NCC) and by the School Examinations and Assessment Council (SEAC).
In picking their way through these priorities, local managers lacked the benefit of being able to rely on the NCC and SEAC working in harmony.
At 16 plus the reforms in examinations which were proposed in 1991 added further complexity by implying the need for a new connection between SEAC and the National Council for Vocational Qualifications (NCVQ).
Although the need for one organization of policy-making for curriculum and examinations had been recognized as long ago as the mid-1960s (through the establishment of the Schools Council), it had been abandoned in the early 1980s in favour of centralized curriculum-making and a blanket acceptance that the assessment of individual pupils' achievement would lead to greater improvements in the system than the development of logically connected public examinations and national qualifications.
This development led, among some of the partners in the education system, to a sense of chaos (TES 1991b:12): A combination of over-prescriptive legislation, a well-meaning but disastrously complicated assessment system and an indefensible system to use GCSE for the statutory end-of-stage assessment, produce here a conundrum…
Even by definition, Key Stage 4 is a sort of disaster area: the implicit message is that education comes to a full stop at 16 and is the antithesis of what we need.
Admittedly assessment at earlier ages was not approached as so all-enveloping a concern as at 16 but warnings about the national curriculum were serious.
In terms, for instance, of the teaching of reading it was said that if children were not taught to read great books the result would be a wearing away of the national culture.
In history, the NCC working party after consultation revised (December 1990) some of its earlier recommendations.
It was criticized by the chairman of the Historical Association's education committee on the grounds that the whole syllabus had been created before the assessment system had been devised.
He was quoted as saying that without more being known about assessment in history it was difficult to register the true significance of what was being proposed.
He was also fearful that the increase of flexibility in the use of supplementary units (which were by and large non-British) would give greater weight to the largely British core.
One press comment on this was that in the eyes of some it was all too late.
The experts should have made stronger protests while the working group was still sitting.
More broadly, a leader comment of the same date drew attention to the confusion which arose when the NCC reduced the curriculum workload and concentrated a single obligatory unit on twentieth-century British, European and world history in a particularly busy part of a secondary-school student's academic life.
The whole point of a history curriculum might, as a result, be lost when what it should all have led up to, it was thought, was "the modern historical underpinning of every future citizen's understanding of an economic social, cultural and political development" (TES 1991c:13).
The confusion created by the NCC in history compared with the decision by central government no longer to insist on a ten-subject curriculum up to the age of 16 (January 1991).
If science, mathematics and English remained sacrosanct, compulsion on seven other subjects was removed.
Pressure on time was, it was said, part of the reason for allowing greater flexibility and choice because pupils over the age of 14 would then be able to study three separate sciences, an extra modern language, classics or vocational subjects.
This might have been regarded as making the local manager's job more straightforward but as one set of pressures was removed others made themselves felt.
The government's retreat did not mean, for instance, that pupils were free from compulsion to study some technology and a modern foreign language after 14 but that short courses, as the Secretary of State announced, and combined courses as well as syllabuses for qualification other than the GCSE would become available.
The easing of compulsion in one part of a school's obligations meant that those who managed curriculum balance, specific schemes of teaching and school policies of assessment at the primary as well as at the secondary levels grew uncertain about other issues.
The place of art, music, history or geography became open to question.
Any of these, it seemed, could be dropped after the age of 14.
This diminished their status below that age.
Because some discretion about the curriculum had been restored to the manager, this might have meant that the task of timetabling and deciding priorities in staff appointments became easier.
Instead, and linked with the Secretary of State's easing — at the same period — in the number of attainment targets in mathematics and science, the reduction in subject compulsions created an uneasy vagueness about where the boundaries of new management now lay.
It became more difficult to decide what total quality might amount to if there were optional gaps in what was being provided.
Fewer compulsory subjects and less assessment meant that each school's offering — represented to parents through school prospectuses and negotiated with governors and local authorities in compliance with previously agreed curriculum  policies — became more open than had earlier seemed possible.
It meant that heads had to discuss with governors and parents as well as with staff precisely how to make use of greater freedom.
This was not a freedom simply to return to the pre-Education Reform Act way of working.
The prescriptions which had emerged in 1988 and from those conditions of service for teachers which had been introduced by the 1987 Teachers' Pay and Conditions Act had, despite criticisms and resistance, created some new certainties.
These were by and large accepted by teachers, understood by governors and welcomed by parents.
There was an awareness among people outside schools that schools could choose between a range of approaches to the curriculum (Lawton 1986) and there was an expectation that the chosen curriculum in, for instance, each primary school was one which would create the basis of a rational, moral and enquiring attitude to learning and to future experience.
To some extent this made the definition of quality easier to adapt to the process of management planning.
Traditional expectations and traditional assurances could again come to the fore.
The benefits of changes in law and regulation were less obvious in the curriculum of secondary schools.
The need to build on that which had already been achieved at the primary stage appeared to be still undervalued.
This was perhaps not surprising when — with government pressure to introduce some degree of pre-vocational work below the age of 16, together with the interest of employers receiving young adults at the age of 18 who were educated enough to make use of further training — the secondary school curriculum looked forward rather than back.
Whether they served the primary or the secondary sector schools could take their management responsibilities in two ways: they could plan with the expectation that a larger degree of local choice and discretion would be gradually restored to them or they could look upon their job as one of responding to differing levels of pressure from central government.
As they went through their management tasks schools took soundings through their local groups, through professional associations, from in-service trainers and from advisers and inspectors.
There was a temptation to regard the headteacher as being the major or the sole activator and this was supported, in the secondary sector, when a Manchester study suggested that most heads were too powerful and would not delegate responsibility.
This, said the general secretary of the Secondary Heads Association, was slightly out of date.
There were no doubt bad heads who could not delegate but things had moved forward very satisfactorily in recent years.
It was suggested that a head who tried to do everything was on the way to an early grave (Torrington and Weightman 1991:6).
Did heads take in their stride counter-order and confusion in the implementing of the Education Reform Act?
If so, were they helped by other people?
Were these other people asked to advise only about  matters of process and technicality?
Did a manager's philosophy, overall sense of aims and sense of priorities in the curriculum come from his or her inner resources?
Who were the closest counsellors?
Some light on the answers is cast by typical heads.
The source of value
A head who already had eleven years' experience moved to a post in which he had to confront two one-time grammar schools which had been converted into comprehensive single-sex comprehensive high schools.
These, as he entered the headship, were coming together as a mixed voluntary-aided comprehensive high school.
Using his earlier experience, he felt, when he moved in, that he needed to gauge where the new school should be in five years' time.
His approach was to try out ideas, with which he had already been successful, on other people and to listen to what came back — particularly from governors and senior staff.
As he listened to the answers he learned more than he could have done in other ways about the existing culture of the former two separate schools.
He had also to tackle the technical problems of bringing two curriculum systems into one entity.
And he needed to judge what voluntary-aided status meant to a newly combined school in what were then the 1980s.
It was easier for this head to talk about methods of producing unity than about the ideals behind it.
There was openness of discussion with staff and parents.
There were balanced and professional newsletters.
One essential was that the head had to make it clear to his colleagues that he trusted them.
There could be nothing which might be regarded as clandestine.
There could be no secret hierarchy.
Bosses still had to be bosses when the occasion required but that was understood easily and early.
Suspicions were got out of the way.
Staff and head settled down to discuss and plan the curriculum.
 "Thinking forward" was their distinguishing mode of work.
It was assisted when, in a period before "Baker days" , the local authority agreed to the school having its own in-service training days.
As planning progressed the four groups into which the staff were easily divided (because they had taught on four different sites) came together in their views.
Once they recognized that their own groups' discussions were not very different from others, they began corporately to own the curriculum of the new school.
The head who described this process pointed to two matters of importance: "I wanted a systematic curriculum with the sharing of opportunities fully understood by parents and staff, and with the pastoral organization of the school running smoothly alongside the curriculum scheme." 
As he spoke he slipped into the description of what had been  achieved, emphasizing that staff, increasingly, described themselves as a single body ( "what we say clearly…" , "what we need to do next…" ).
It may have been because the school was voluntary-aided that the head also wanted religious education to have an important place, not so much in shaping the school but in underlining the requirement that everyone should at least think about his or her religious belief.
Nothing that the head could do would make religion pervade the life of the school but it had to be recognized, he believed, that religion does permeate some people's whole private lives.
This had to be known, understood and respected.
Another pervasive, and important, influence for this head was technology.
Here he knew that the school provided the only chance for its pupils to understand quite how much the newer technologies now mattered both in the life of work and in the daily organization of our private lives.
Once, this head felt, it was simply education which was regarded as a universal blessing.
It was the major enabler for social mobility and advancement.
Nowadays, it was technology without which you would fail.
In school — a view amplified by Eraut (1991)— information technology (IT) above all helped the pupils to see themselves.
It could, for literate people, provide a more interesting presentation of fact and argument.
For the person with special needs it could provide clarity of presentation.
It meant, through IT, that quickly improved drafts could provide alternative ways to arrive at a near-excellent final version of what was being said.
For those with special needs it meant that drafts were not something to be ashamed of.
The mechanical process of elegant correction and rephrasing cut out the ugly, self-stultifying labouring of mistakes.
This head felt that the re-expression and development of ideas which IT made possible allowed every pupil the chance to have second thoughts.
And in school subjects it was not those which depended on words alone which drew benefit from IT.
The rapid recording or repetition of the circumstances of longitudinal experiments in science meant that in a day and a night, without any intervention from a pupil or a teacher, the replication of two terms' work could be completed.
A third view of what he wanted came from the same head telling himself that he wanted pupils in his school to have a vision of learning as an embodiment of self-improvement.
No vision of self-improvement can be realized without a healthy degree of self-esteem.
To achieve these joint ends, the school had to have a smoothly working tutorial review system and a thorough approach to records of achievement.
Both had been implemented.
Pupils reached the point where they could say that they realized that someone — namely their teachers and their tutors — knew them very well.
This was welcomed by parents.
They and the school together planned ahead in order to make it possible for pupils to feel that they, too, knew themselves better.
The head knew that he needed strengths.
Two were particularly  important but the first of these was not his to organize.
He wanted his personal belief and his professional expertness to come out as a single attribute.
It then had to be left to his governors and his staff colleagues to make such use as they could of any combination of qualities which he revealed.
His own task was to make sure, no matter how it appeared to other people, that he constantly checked across from his private life of personal belief — and back again — to the professional, public and accountable life of a head.
This could be a highly self-centred, nervous process.
It needed robustness of relationships as well as discussions and arguments which were free of pomposity.
Good humour was needed — but the main message throughout the school's planning and implementation of change was that every party in the system had to trust everyone else.
No other key to good morale was as important.
Given trust as a first condition, the changes which followed each stage of review, assessment and evaluation came more easily — even if it did mean that some criticisms had first to be voiced and discussed (JM Dobson conversation, 1990).
A second head placed equal stress on the importance of trust in the promotion of good morale.
After two headships in Inner London he sought to keep his provincial school as one which was good at caring for its pupils as well as one which was well organized in providing sought-after subjects on top of the core curriculum.
The combination of these two aims could be managed, he felt, by giving every member of staff, including himself, a tutorial group to look after during the whole length of a pupil's high school life.
Within those groups he wanted to make sure that pupils who had special needs were not individually identified.
Each had to be in the mainstream, each had to be approached in and through a group of mainstream pupils.
The organization of this was not at first easily accepted by every member of staff.
It began to prove its value when the members of pupils' own groups helped each other and came not always to rely on the initiative or instruction of the teacher-tutor.
Although this active altruism was said to wane in the final year at school when each pupil had a wide range of other preoccupations, the strength, the compactness and the self-reliance of student groups only occasionally had to be challenged by teachers.
From time to time discipline required some distance, briefly, to be drawn between the adult and the student but managers deliberately kept such periods short, in order not to dissipate the strength of the group.
Both headmasters recognized the personal sources of their ideals.
Both acknowledged the lessons they had learned from mentors early in their careers and each accepted that as time elapses heads appoint other teachers who have something of their own style about them.
A management team takes time to build up.
Some of its members undergo a change of attitude as the team goes about its ordinary work.
But  what emerges is a team of people who do not simply acquiesce with the head.
When the team trusts itself it builds up a view not simply about the one school and what needs to be done in small detail but also about the pressures and demands of society as a whole.
Confidence on the part of the head is necessary if the senior team — and it always appears to be a group of three, four or five teachers — is to disagree, to question and to criticize him or her direct.
Once that confidence had been achieved, it was felt that the school would benefit if every pupil were given a three grade assessment (acceptable, unacceptable, exceptional).
This was not to be a matter of mark-books and tests but a freely managed regular assessment which depended first on the subject-teacher but which took in the view of everyone who had dealings with each individual pupil.
Teachers in their subjects and teachers in their year groups reviewed these assessments; all reached the head and his deputies.
Formative enquiry and discussion was then carried out between teachers and pupils.
From time to time, and not only when yearly reports were sent home, parents were involved.
They knew as did their children when things were going well and when they were not.
And above all pupils were the first to acknowledge the moment when they moved from acceptable to unacceptable standards.
The school did not take a very romantic view of these broad assessments: teachers knew when sanctions had to be applied but they were also aware that pupils realized the power of reward.
This vision of justice, sought and organized in a simple day-to-day manner, sprang from the head's experience, as he described it, of Division 10 in the Inner London Education Authority.
Acton and Shepherd's Bush, he said, were a long way from Islington but it had not needed the history and memory of Risinghill and William Tyndale to make headteachers alert to the damaging way in which matters of discipline, race, criminality and parental disquiet could be brought together into presentations of hot and not always accurate news.
He distrusted the media.
Instead, he felt, it was important that inside the school, inside the pupil and inside the minds of parents, a belief in justice and the importance of education and self-esteem should be genuinely stimulated and sustained.
School uniform, a build-up of service to charities, a development of sponsored activities by pupils to raise money for the school itself — each of these was part of the armoury of management.
Self-help meant that, for instance, libraries and resource centres within the school could be equipped, furnished and maintained in an unvandalized condition.
Staff were separated less and less from pupils; they used the same library and the same resource centres.
Being together in this way did not mean that either party treated the other with excessive informality but it did mean that teachers knew pupils well.
In particular the care system flourished, not least because the head had learned the benefit of a full support team in school in his previous authority (psychologist, social worker, counsellor and welfare officer) and had struggled  successfully with his new employers for one school-based counsellor.
He had swum against the tide at a time when schools to which specific counsellor appointments had previously been made had used a counsellor's vacancy, at a time of teaching staff reductions, for other purposes.
The employers felt that designated counsellors had outlasted their usefulness.
But the head in question did succeed in winning this point.
Nor had his management team, he felt, been complete until that bridging appointment had been made (I.M. Weir, conversation, 1990).
Using the past
Part of the equipment of a good manager is the experience and the bank of memories which he or she carries from one school, one area, one education authority to another.
It takes at least two terms even to become familiar with a new job but, after that, few management changes can be put off for more than a year.
Each alert head looks for problems but not for fault-finding.
Ideally each knows the strengths and disadvantages of small as well as large schools.
And it is the variety of a head's management experience which provides a sense of realism.
Ideals and a vision of education's unrealized potential have to go hand in hand with pragmatism.
Satisfactory staff relationships cannot be achieved simply by issuing instructions.
But heads do nevertheless need to say what has to be changed from time to time— and should see the need for change before their colleagues.
To insist on this would cancel out the mature, trustful, open and continually self-reviewing benefit of a good management team.
And above all, if the head, inside the school, is seen as someone who has a calm and consistent view of the rapidly changing priorities of school management, there is a chance that parents will come to the same view and will feel the same trust.
This is particularly important when the head has to be seen as one among many who play their part in a community.
However many communities a school serves, the head must represent a prime interest and involvement.
This aspect of a head's management is better understood now than it was thirty years ago.
The difficulty of a head was then highlighted when Leila Berg described the crisis which led to the closing of Risinghill Comprehensive School.
She quoted an education lecturer, "if Risinghill were a country place, the natural conditions of rural life would throw the teacher into the community, but in London social conditions do not do this; unless you see it as a need, you would go along quite happily thinking the community is not part of your job" (Berg 1968:273).
Community is part of the job but it needs good management (paying teachers, costing the use of premises, the division of time other than that which is needed to provide the national curriculum) as well as a personally felt sense of value.
The position of the head as manager and the position of the manager as leader needs to be thought out — and the head is likely to be more isolated in organizing a school's community role than in most of its other activities.
Leading by example is not enough — nor was it at the time of Risinghill.
Michael Duane, its head, then said (Berg 1968:283—4): I am under no illusion about the size of the task faced by this staff.
Some problems we have in common with other schools e.g. (a) Shortage of normally qualified and experienced Staff and high turnover of Staff, though our pupil/Staff ratio is the best in London.
(b) A school population of widely varying abilities and with very mixed ethnic and cultural backgrounds.
Some problems we suffer with other schools though perhaps to a more intense degree:(c) A complex site that is difficult to administer and to supervise.
(d) An open site with playgrounds and classrooms often in full view of the outside world and where every misdemeanour is likely to become the subject of exaggerated rumour in the locality.
(e) An immediate environment in which, during the past years, three murders have actually taken place, where prostitution, larceny and violence are commonplace in the lives of many of the children and where the hangings that take place at Pentonville Prison periodically create deep disquiet in the minds of all our children.
(f) A locality where a large number of the parents are antagonistic to the values and purposes represented by the school.
(g) A dearth of children with high levels of ability…and a plenitude of children in the lowest levels…with a corresponding difficulty of providing a full educational programme for both.
I am also in no doubt about the amount of devoted hard work that has gone on during the last four years.
No headmaster could have wished for more.
The head alone cannot overcome resistances and antagonisms which lie outside school.
Sometimes there is a uniformity of antagonism based on shared rumour and widespread disrepute.
If that is the case, the head of a school is no different from the head of any other unloved institution.
Isolation, the call for a lonely struggle against hostile critics, will not help.
W. H. Whyte (1956) appealed for the leader not to lose his identity inside his organization.
But Whyte's critics pointed out that his call for the individual to fight a lonely battle against conformity was never going to get very far.
Individuals already did and still do.
But the capacity to change realities is partly dependent on the availability of alternative methods of behaviour and structure.
For organizational participants in normal circumstances, such alternatives are inevitably restricted by their experience and the tendency to take what exists as natural, though constraining (Thompson and McHugh 1990).
This represents a limiting view of initiative.
Certainly previous experience shapes present and future conduct but the good teacher or the  good manager will not be contented simply with repeating what he or she has already been through without questioning the constraints of the organization which seems to stand in the way.
It is the putting together of thoughts about previous experiences and the emergence of new and hybrid ideas which enlivens a manager's approach.
Learning from experience is not, then, a straightforward repeating of what has gone before.
Nor is it the selecting and putting together of parts of apparently diverse lessons from the past.
There has to be another ingredient — the spark and the quick glimpse of something new.
That spark can set light to further proposals, ideas and chances in the manager's mind.
Personal ideas, however, cannot — any more than can experience, intuition and vision — provide a reliable base for quality assurance.
Acceptance by parents of the personal standards of heads and other managers has to be buttressed by activities which are verifiable and which are planned outside the framework of personal preferences and skills.
This is so because a limited accountability in terms only of satisfying employers in local authorities or inspectors of schools has given way to openness and to the multiplication of participators who claim a say in the running of education.
School-based choices about curriculum and curricular goals have given way to external requirements and to a greater measure of centralized uniformity.
The shifts of responsibility are sufficient to justify the claim that the education service being managed at the end of the twentieth century is different from that which was characterized by teacher-based choice, classroom autonomy, voluntary consensus and a supposedly new liberalism forty years earlier.
The fall of Risinghill in 1965 was as much a precursor of change as was William Tyndale in 1976.
The connections between the establishment of the Assessment of Performance Unit (APU) in 1974, the establishment of the Taylor Committee to study the management and government of schools in 1975 and the publication of the Black Papers from 1969 to 1977 have been charted.
Even in 1981 it could be claimed that those who held a "strongly anti-progressive, pro-standards line had been enjoying increasing credibility and increasingly strident support from most of the popular press" (Dale et al.1981:307).
What Dale et al.described as an atmosphere of growing disenchantment with the achievement of the education system as a whole and with some segments of the teaching profession in particular was made worse when troubles in schools increased sympathy for attacks from the right wing.
These undermined "the dominant educational ideology and the legitimacy of the teachers' authority both at classroom and national levels" (Dale et al.1981:307).
The dominance of teachers meant, in the 1960s, that the management of education was in virtually powerless hands at the DES.
The same was almost true of LEAs — men of goodwill who had, as Vernon Bogdanor described it, a concern to improve the service "and whose  reflective judgments remained untainted by the intrusion of party ideology" (in Dale et al.1981:308).
This changed when there was explicit recognition of the place of party politics in the shaping of education.
This was accompanied by a late acknowledgement that it was difficult or impossible to direct education into new pathways while teachers and their unions retained their power.
At the same time unusual changes were taking place in the late 1970s and in the 1980s because of the drop in pupil numbers and because an increasing number of interested parties were identifying themselves as appropriate new participants in its management (Bogdanor 1979).
Although the surprise which seemed to greet these changes now seems misplaced, they represented significant alterations in the way heads and others were to manage education.
Changed circumstances began to alter the criteria which were used for the selection and appointment of heads.
Laws and Dennison (1990) have traced the history of change in this connection between 1965 and 1982.
Changed circumstances also mattered to Waters (1979: 47) who described outstanding schools as places which were run by heads "with flair, wisdom, energy and that sense of knowing how things ought to be" but who emphasized, too, that these qualities needed to be partnered with an ability in organization and management in a wide variety of fields.
The increasing importance of a senior participant's ability in management and organization led to the conversion of traditional heads from being people of experience and goodwill (and who had a sense of how things ought to be) into planners and implementers.
At the same time it gave a signal to aspiring heads that a commitment to the improvement of education had to be accompanied by a capacity to marshal minds and money.
Certainties about new education were few: little was known about differences of quality.
There were few evaluations of successful innovation which matched, for instance, the clarity of Warburton and Southgate (1969) in their work on the initial teaching alphabet.
After sorting out their unequivocal conclusion from those which were divergent they ended their work with a statement which underlined how managers as well as researchers need to be ready periodically to go over old ground (Warburton and Southgate 1969: 284): It would be unfortunate if the mainly favourable tone of this report was taken to imply that the use of the initial teaching alphabet for beginning reading with infants was the final and only solution.
The experiments of the past six years have demonstrated that in many cases the usual ways in which children have been taught to read can be improved.
We should continue to investigate how children learn to read and the most effective media, methods, materials and procedures for helping them.
A comparable straightforwardness put an end to false hopes about the efficiency of the Nuffield/Schools Council scheme for teaching French to children in primary schools.
Few managers, at any level of  making decisions about budgets, training programmes or school organization, could ignore Clare Burstall's final word in her report of 1974: "Now that the results of the evaluation are finally available…it is hard to resist the conclusion that the weight of evidence has combined with the balance of opinion to tip the scales against a possible expansion of the teaching of French in primary schools" (p. 246).
Sources of clarity
Heads can create their own clarity if they organize their time in such a way as to digest and weigh reports, views and experiences from sources either outside the school or inside the staffroom.
They can give themselves time to reflect and to simplify.
But the surveys and researches reported by Laws and Dennison showed that while there is admittedly an increasing demand for a primary-school head's time to meet the requirements of legislation, the heightened expectations of governors and parents and the demand for ever-better presentations and public relations, they nevertheless devote the bulk of their time to brief, fragmented and highly intensive tasks.
Observations reported by Davies quoted in Laws and Dennison (1990:275) showed that "on average 60% of all activities were less than nine minutes in duration, while only 7% lasted beyond an hour" .
The largest sustained activity by heads in primary schools is said to be teaching.
In a study by Hall secondary heads were, however, said to devote only 14 per cent of their time to teaching, with 10 per cent given over to "ceremonial" , 10 per cent to educational policy and curriculum matters, 33 per cent to "operations and administrative management" , 22 per cent to human management (staff and pupils) and 10 per cent to external management (Hall quoted in Laws and Dennison (1990:276)).
There may be several reasons, concede Laws and Dennison (1990:276), why primary heads appear so attracted to doing many things themselves.
Others, and particularly the teachers, may seem too busy with their classes for the head to ask them to share this part of the school work-load, there is a shortage of clerical support, the heads want to be seen as in charge of everything as far as possible, and so on.
More generously, the head accepts a role which involves many menial chores and tasks as a means of encouraging continuity and high level performance from staff and pupils.
Although information about the roles of heads is argued as being incomplete, particularly if new bases are needed for management training, there seems little doubt that their willingness to help the performance of their colleagues by taking on more of the low-level chores of school life can be misdirected.
In response to increasing demands for expert self-awareness and self-evaluation in meeting the demands of the new curriculum, the new organization of school government and the new involvement of parents, a head's disposable time could be better  spent in grappling at his or her own level with those organizational, philosophic and marketing questions which lie behind the giving of a professional account of a school.
All these should add up, too, to guaranteeing the provision of quality.
In making time to provide reflection the head not only has to be clear about the relative priority of helping out, taking on chores and providing workaday leadership but also has to have confidence in the extent to which his or her colleagues expect leadership.
To think about this in terms of the relative roles of heads and other teachers is in the words of Campbell (1985:154—7) insubstantial and dated.
His preference for examining collegiality and for finding its stumbling blocks in the conditions in which primary-school teachers have to work seems more appropriate when real schools come to mind.
Staffrooms, for instance, are used during break-times, before and after school and during the lunch hour.
Their furnishing is seldom above the spartan level and the main focus of activity is made up of jars of instant coffee, electric kettles, a sink and a draining board.
Two teachers can just about find the room and comparative peace to talk together about the arrangements for the next lesson and next week.
The atmosphere is good-humoured, with a strong sense of relief that adults can for a few moments get together without thinking of what is to be done next with twenty or thirty demanding, stimulating and occasionally frustrating children.
They are not places for quiet reflection, they are not clubrooms in which plots and schemes can be laid nor do they have useful collections of books, journals and other aids to professional thinking.
They are centres of friendship where relationships which are light-hearted combine with the serious business of running a school on corporate lines.
That they are empty other than at times when children are out of their classrooms or outside the school premises is a constant reminder that primary-school teachers do not have time in the working day to do other than teach.
The 1987 changes in conditions of service did not alter that.
Those changes created a comparatively small number of hours in the year when planning and the exchange of ideas could be conducted other than in the helter-skelter of a school day.
 "Baker days" provided a very limited number of whole days for corporate preparation.
And, very exceptionally, a school's staff might be marginally increased in such a way as to allow time for a curriculum leader to do some leading or for the mentors of new teachers to provide their counsel.
Neither time nor space assist the head in reaching colleagues easily or regularly.
The smaller the school, the better is the chance of more frequent informal interchange.
But small schools are often those in which the head has to spend — and not simply as a matter of choice — a good deal of time teaching.
A detached head, who acts with detachment, coolly weighing matters up, allowing the mind to soak up ideas and to put them together in  new ways, is not a primary-school image.
He or she may choose to accept the load of small and troublesome issues and there may be no one else to take over certain tasks.
To clear the decks needs a double effort: the machinery of school organization has to be kept rolling, the crises and questions which start outside the school have to be dealt with.
At the same time documents have to be read, thinned down and explained to colleagues, usually with a footnote to mention that there is more documentation that the head will protect them from.
Reading, thinning out and explaining the demands of NCC, SEAC, local authorities and governors takes more time than a head can find during a school day.
It has to be seen to after the children and staff have left.
It has to take up private time — and at home.
This is the first source of isolation.
The manager does not have the opportunity gregariously to share and sort out ideas with staff colleagues.
The manager, whatever style of approach is adopted by outsiders who seek a collegial response, does not have an immediacy of contact with colleagues at the first, important stage when, after the preliminary reading of basic documents, thoughts are being formed about interpretation and response.
This isolation may be damaging to the manager.
Those who deny it will often be the same people who provide in-service training, conferences and seminars and who read or write articles in the educational press.
At worst the effect of their work is to produce a half-formed readiness for what is new, together with a half-understood response.
The gingerbread should not be robbed of its gilt and yet this is what happens whenever hot news about impending changes turns into the cold gruel of daily management.
The manager who does read the latest circular, the latest information pack, the latest draft of organizational requirements in the privacy of the weekend at home has already gone through the experience either of having an appetite whetted by prior knowledge or of a palate blunted by a flavour which is already old.
Few managers admit that boredom is a threat to the job but equally few would deny that being part of a pilot scheme or of being part of a trial run of new development can carry with it some air of excitement.
This, in England and Wales, was very evident in the early stages of Nuffield schemes for new approaches to mathematics, science and modern languages.
In the period from 1963 to the late 1970s, headteachers and other teachers enjoyed the frisson of being first, of lacking confidence but at the same time enjoying the mixture of sharing their nervousness with other people.
But as Nuffield schemes and Schools Council innovations petered out, so did the network of those study groups, clubs and coteries which the pilot schemes of well-known curriculum developments deliberately fostered.
If the manager lacks the chance to engage in a fully collegial approach, if he or she can only find or make time for the essential step of ingesting or thinking new ideas in an atmosphere of enforced professional seclusion, does this obscure his or her clarity of mind?
If the  subject-matter of management was a set of imperishable truths, the answer would be no.
But management is a mixture of knowledge, skill and judgement.
It is made up of tact and impatience, it is sometimes marred by self-certainty and is attended by the occasional shaft of diffidence and fear.
To be a good manager requires one to handle this array in such a way that education is fed and fostered — education which is provided by teachers, encouraged by parents, watched over by governors, expected to be accountable to central and local government and capable of satisfying everyone that high quality is delivered.
Because management is made up of virtually constant negotiation and adjustment it can only flourish in the context of other people.
It cannot see how good or bad it is in reaching its objectives unless it engages with them for most of the manager's time.
Some time must be found for first thoughts and to allow flashes of private insight.
That apart, there have to be limits to the manager's isolation.
The argument that those who teach — and one would add those who manage teaching — cannot be expected to go it alone was pursued by Clive Beck (1990).
If teachers were to improve, he emphasized that other groups and institutions in society would have to play their part.
His plea is powerful (Beck 1990:49): teachers must become "intellectuals" to a greater extent than they typically are at present…they should have greater awareness of the interconnected theory that bears on both the content and method of their teaching.
And this awareness should not be merely as a result of receiving more ideas from others (although that is important); teachers should not, any more than students, be the objects of a pure "banking" education.
Teachers must be intellectuals in the sense that they are engaged in constant co-operative inquiry into the content and method of schooling, an inquiry in which their own experiences and thoughts provide major input.
Beck goes on to stress that teachers must become more politically aware and involved, that they should adopt a thoroughly interactive role with those whom they teach and that they "must be growing in social, moral and spiritual characteristics" (1990:50).
These elements of teacher growth cannot be forced.
Instead, it is argued that they must be"impelled towards them not out of fear and guilt but because of a positive desire to build a better life for students, themselves and other members of society.
To a large extent they must come "naturally" "(Beck 1990:50).
Large-scale expectations may depend for their realization on changes in society and its value patterns.
But those who are already teaching should be given a lead by heads and by governors.
Each group needs to see for itself the importance of indirect and hard-to-define influences.
Each needs to find time to discover what exactly such issues as intellectualism, world consciousness, political awareness and moral values mean to their professional lives.
Some help in the process of internalizing these ideas will nowadays come from national curriculum guidance.
Of Beck's nine groups of  moral topics, for instance,(1990:148) virtually all have some coverage either in specific subject guidance or in recommendations about non-statutory cross-curriculum themes and activities.
This source of support can be used by a head in the management of the curriculum provided that there is some sharing with teacher colleagues.
Absolute word-for-word matching of ideals and practices cannot be expected nor should the manager slavishly seek that.
If, however, a head cannot show a personal commitment towards specific but nevertheless broad values, no amount of organizational skill will compensate.
And the test for the manager is not only whether there is this personal commitment but also whether it can be communicated.
Managing the natural process of teaching
Because teachers often cannot answer the question of why they teach as they do and because they refer to statements such as that they just know what to do or have a feeling or sense about what to do, it has been suggested that what guides teachers in making sense of their work and what commits them to action is a mixture of "personal knowledge, tacit knowledge, routine knowledge…when conscious thought is not permitted the time to percolate and inform practice" (Simons and Elliott 1989).
It is also pointed out that the danger of "hurrying" and teaching "more" is that time for gathering information and reflecting on practice and the implicit and explicit theories that guide it can evaporate easily in the busyness of increasing demands…
This "teaching as breathing" at first sounds appealing, almost natural.
After all how many artists have time to explain what they are doing while, or even after, they are doing it.
Upon reflection we realise that teachers do not paint on canvases; their work is not done in isolation.
Children do not hold still, nor are the consequences of effort always immediately apparent (Simons and Elliott 1989:106).
Reflection is the manager's ally.
If everything is taken on the wing, some planning, certainly, can be carried out.
But the quality of activity which then follows and the way in which that activity is judged (either as an event in itself or through the assessment of the child's learning which emerges from it) still needs patient examination.
Holly (in Simons and Elliott 1989) reminds us that Dewey in 1916 quoted, as the opposites of conscious enquiry and thoughtful action, the twin phenomena of routine and capricious behaviour.
Both the latter are more concerned with present action than future consequences.
Since working out the consequences is the most important result of the process of reflection, the exclusive adoption of either routine or capricious behaviour is not valuable.
What is the mid-point of the argument that some teachers do not want to reflect, others can never find the time for reflection and others feel it unnecessary?
Light was thrown on this, in the context of secondary  school departments, by Earley and Fletcher-Campbell (1989).
Apart from the singleness of subjects and the number of staff who are involved, their findings could, without stretching, apply to leadership of primary schools.
For instance, heads of department seemed to take an unselfconscious view of leadership and of their management style.
Headteachers were aware of differences of both style and strength among departmental heads and accepted those differences, possibly because the contexts in which each worked were different.
Heads differ in style and approach but at both school and department level one essential for successful management lies in keeping staff informed and in giving reasons for decision.
Prior consultation and participative decision-making has not always been regarded as a right but teachers' involvement should be regarded as a professional entitlement.
It is not something to be bestowed whimsically by a benevolent manager (Earley and Fletcher-Campbell 1989:203).
If teachers dislike the pseudo-democracy of being consulted after decisions have been taken, if they are irritated by being consulted over matters of little consequence and if they are satisfied that senior staff have the right to make decisions without staff consultation, they nevertheless expect to be consulted about major issues.
Added to this indecisiveness and slow decision-making were seen as undesirable qualities in school leaders, and teachers liked to see an outcome from the consultative process.
There is a need, therefore, for those in leadership positions to create genuine opportunities for participation and yet be prepared, on occasions, to make decisions with little or no consultation.
A lot will depend on the issue and the level of commitment that is required (Earley and Fletcher-Campbell 1989:202).
Commitment to the assessment of pupils is the requirement of the 1988 Education Reform Act which most directly touches teachers.
That directness of involvement was signalled by each teacher at the first stage of assessment receiving from central government late in 1989 and early in 1990 packs of materials, descriptions of policy, examples of assessment and timetables.
Assessment became the field in which there were the largest number of changes and retractions in government policy.
The manager's task was to remain up to date with the changes, to encourage a confident understanding of the purpose and methods of assessment and to make sense of the ambiguity which surrounded questions of parental and governors' access to the assessments.
In this issue there was little philosophy to unravel.
There were technicalities to handle and, above all, the management of time was important while heads and their deputies led their colleagues through new patterns of requirement.
In contrast, the national curriculum was not a matter in which government sought to address teachers individually and directly.
Working party interim reports, Secretary of State reactions, draft materials and final publications were all sent direct to schools but, unlike the organization of assessment, the mapping out of the curriculum and its proper  support through staffing, books and other resources, time and leadership were a matter for heads and curriculum leaders.
There was little reason, certainly in primary schools, to identify some teachers only with some subjects.
The core subjects of mathematics, English and science (and in Welsh-speaking schools, Welsh) were shared responsibilities and, in primary schools, much of the rest of the national curriculum was also a collaborative responsibility.
History, geography, technology, music, religious education, art and physical education were not dealt with in separate departments.
Because they were neither entirely new nor so complicated, the requirements of the national curriculum settled down more quickly than those of assessment.
Heads, deputies and curriculum leaders shared rather than led each school's preparations.
Localized planning for the use of common resources between schools (and in some instances the sharing of teaching staff) made demands principally on heads, who were involved both on their own account and in response to LEA initiatives.
Separate from curriculum and assessment, a third element in the 1988 Act, although it affects teaching staff only indirectly, still has the potential to affect the whole future of a school.
This is the reform of admissions policies and the introduction of open enrolment.
Parental wishes and the filling of every desk in the school (as it has been described) takes priority over matters of efficiency and economy.
No longer are local authorities cast in the role of protectors of unpopular, run-down schools.
No longer can parents' wishes be set aside.
In the organization of enrolment it is the headteacher who principally has to make decisions along which governors are guided.
Technicalities about the relevant standard number of places in the school are decided between the head and the local authority.
Some aspects of open enrolment go back to the 1980 Education Act.
Through the 1988 Act, however, it can affect the future of a school because it bears on competition for the school.
More pupils mean more money for the school.
More money means more staff.
More staff may mean a broader curriculum.
It is at this point that individual teachers become involved in the policy.
However hard a head or a governing body may try to remain outside the arena of competition, the insistence of parent interests and community awareness and the effect on even the price of houses in a local estate agent's listings will continue to make sure that parents believe that clever children, as measured in the national assessment, are produced by good schools and by good teachers.
Whatever the subtlety which is brought into arguments about the quality of teaching, those classes and groups within a school which, regardless of individual children's difficulties and disadvantages, regularly register high attainments will enhance the name of the school.
This view is hedged about with reservations — and indeed few parents who know both their children's capacities and their teachers'  helpfulness will expect schools to be measured entirely in this way.
But schools now inevitably become more tense about a failing teacher or a teacher with personal problems or problems of health who may not be able to concentrate on a pupil's assessable skills.
Teachers will help each other, and heads and senior teachers will continue to provide their traditional extra assistance, but in addition to a school being run happily it now matters that other verifiable indicators of performance which form the basis of outside judgement are also taken fully into account.
Judgements about the comparative quality of schools are a consequence of open enrolment and need good management.
Two other changes brought about by the 1988 Act make it important that other aspects of policy are also managed in as full and collegial a manner as possible.
These are the delegation of financial authority to schools and the rules about the appointment, suspension and dismissal of staff.
A school's annual budget share has to be managed by the governing body.
The governing body delegates the task of making broad recommendations and the task of day-to-day management to the head.
The policy itself has to be handled by the head as fully in collaboration as possible with all other members of staff — non-teaching as well as teaching.
Only by using as much knowledge and experience as resides in the whole school can both the broad issues of school management and the minutiae of its efficient operation be appropriately financed.
The head has to examine the balance between expenditure on maintaining the fabric of the school and its daily servicing and expenditures on unavoidable commitments as against the occasional opportunity for one-off changes.
The head, the deputy and the school secretary have to put together the information which can lead to first comparisons on the basis of the Guidelines for the Review and Internal Development of Schools (GRIDS).
Whether GRIDS themselves are used or another comparable scheme of self-review, choices slowly emerge about what should be strengthened, retained or phased out over the next four years.
The points of choice have to be put to other people and it takes patient consultation before everyone can agree about the management plan for a school in which social, academic, moral and community developments all have their place.
Alongside these developments the plan also has to cater for the projection of a school image which is honest and intelligible and for making and fulfilling promises about quality.
The whole process of review makes considerable demands (Bell 1988:231): the aim is to produce internal school development rather than to provide a mechanism for external accountability.
It demands the identification of a coordinator who should ensure that consultation with staff is genuine and that they feel involved; explain processes clearly from the outset; help teachers draw up a realistic timetable and ensure that deadlines are met; provide advice  and keep a check on what is happening at each stage; contact people outside the school who might be brought in to help; try to ensure that the review and the development are rigorous and systematic; and make some evaluation of the effectiveness of the GRIDS method after about twelve months.
A GRIDS-type review fits smoothly into the pattern of formulating, implementing and evaluating a school development plan as defined in the DES Circular 7/88.
That circular laid the duty on governors and headteachers of developing and carrying out a plan for the school — a plan which took account of the full range of their responsibilities under the 1988 Act.
Of the eight possible components of such a plan, a scheme of staff development to make sure that the other seven can be implemented has high importance.
The other seven emerge in one formulation (Gilbert 1990: 36–7) as a statement of curriculum objectives, a review of current provision, changes and priorities in the next immediate year, strategies for implementing those changes, a statement on the use of resources, a plan for monitoring and evaluation and a statement of development priorities for the coming three or four years.
If staff development is part of a management plan which in turn is controlled by governors this means that governors' powers are still further increased.
The local authority remains as the employer but all appointments are made by governors.
It is the governors, too, who manage the teaching and ancillary staff.
This means that in addition to staff appointments governors are involved in the responsibility for staff dismissal and for the distribution of incentive allowances.
They do not, unless they are particularly unwise, take action on staff appointments or dismissals without guidance from the head.
But because the way in which the 1988 Act was drafted appears to give them overriding powers, other teachers and the ancillary staff of any school are bound to ask for consultation about any staffing changes.
Unlike the other four main changes in the 1988 Act (national curriculum, assessment, open enrolment and local financial delegation) the alteration of power in the control of staff calls for a high degree of collegiality between the managers and the managed.
While, in this fifth major change, assistant teachers and ancillary staff have firm advice, support and representation from their trade unions, it is difficult to see who can help them with the sixth innovation, namely the possibility of a school's opting for grant maintained status (GMS).
Certainly articles in the press and in professional journals did not, for the first 100 aspirants for GMS, provide a clear picture of the position of the head, let alone the position of other teachers.
It is a political matter, weighed between a school's governors and its parents.
The latter can certainly be encouraged by statements made by the head.
But there is no literature other than in guidance papers produced by, for instance, the National Union of Teachers and the National Association of Headteachers, to show how far a head should consult other members of staff.
Because the choice of opting out is largely represented to parents, former pupils and the local community as a means of securing a better financial arrangement from the DES than has been possible with the local authority, it is sometimes argued that it is not ethos or education but funding which alone lies at the heart of the decision.
But this is not a satisfactory reason for leaving teachers out of the management of any attempt to opt out.
Nor is it a weighted argument to suggest that when teachers find that their school may be blackballed in future schemes of co-operation with other local schools they might not notice if in fact they had felt little practical benefit from any co-operation in the past.
Teachers, too, are assumed by some of the proponents of opting out not to care whether the school, with a changed status, has to buy in the traditional services of local advisers, librarians or in-service training.
Even if these are not services whose impact is deeply felt by teachers and by ancillary staff nevertheless they can enrich the school when they are provided as additional services and they can, if they are absent, narrow a school's horizons.
Does the same exclusion of teachers apply to the Act's seventh and final change, namely the enhancement of governors' powers?
Articles of government were altered in such a way as to increase the range of governors' overall responsibilities.
The role of the head has not been ostensibly diminished but, in the words of Maclure (1988:140—1): there is scope for an over-zealous governing body to get at cross-purposes with an over-zealous head.
The secret of a successful school will, as always, lie in the effective co-operation between professional leadership (the head and his/her staff), the lay government (the governors) and the local authority and its advisers.
The Articles of Government purport to clarify this relationship, but often this clarification takes the form of more ambiguities and blurred distinctions.
The power of the governors in relation to the ethos of the school will rest in their ability to call for reports and explanations — the ability to make clear their approval and their criticisms of particular aspects of the school, as they are aware of its reputation and character.
Whether this power is enough to justify the description of the governors as the body under whose direction the school operates, is a moot point.
It is this balance of power with governors which perhaps most intensely tests the management capacity of a head in relation to other teachers, but at the same time the power of teachers themselves to convert policies which are handed down from above into classroom practice by means of adaptation, domestication or subversion should not be overlooked (Shipman 1990:156—7).
Governors and staff
The ideal which has been referred to more than once in earlier chapters is that heads, other teachers, governors, parents and non-teaching staff should combine their efforts in some form of corporate management.
This is nearer realization than it was in the late 1980s if only because the practice and principles of GRIDS, together with further movements towards total self-evaluation, have removed some of each party's defensiveness.
But behind the ideal, the practical difficulties are still significant.
Joan Sallis (1988:170) summed up some of the common problems before the 1988 Act began to bite: Governors say headteachers are defensive.
Head teachers say governors don't show any interest — or in the very rare case show too much.
Headteachers say governors come to school on special occasions but don't seem disposed to become involved more routinely in school affairs.
Governors say they don't know how to advance beyond the ceremonial involvement to something more real.
Heads say governors are obsessed with lockers and lavatories and show no interest in the curriculum.
Governors say they are afraid of a rebuff if they venture too near territorial waters.
They stay with the paving stones and the plumbing because they understand them, and because they don't constitute a challenge to anybody.
Both the 1986 Education (No. 2) Act and the 1988 Act changed the attitudes of governors as well as their ways of working.
Many more parents became governors, governing bodies changed in their size and balance of membership and they were given at least a formal opportunity to exercise greater control over the conduct of a school.
As things stand, they are required to balance their own views, the local authority's policy, the head's guidance and the imperatives of the national curriculum in their school's curriculum statement.
They are given the opportunity to involve the local chief officer of police in their curriculum planning and they must make an explicit decision about the place of sex education in the curriculum.
They have some power over the length of the school day, they are an avenue for parental complaint and they have wider powers than in the past over matters of school discipline and in the appointment and dismissal of teachers.
Of these, the involvement of governors in the curriculum relies heavily on the guidance and initiative of the head.
Here above all he or she has to organize as far as possible a staff consensus, to present it to the governors and to explain any requests for modification back to the staff — and then if necessary to carry out the modification.
Complicated though this can be, nevertheless when firm-minded heads, firm-minded teaching staff and firm-minded governors learn how far to go, where to negotiate and when to stop negotiating the ground for curriculum debate and subject planning itself becomes more certain.
Less familiar to teaching staff are the details of financial management.
Many governing bodies appear to have at least one member who has some skill in financial planning and most governors are prepared to be sympathetic towards financial proposals from heads who show that they are competent.
That combination, too, is sufficient for staff members who do not wish — or who are unable — to engage in detailed arguments about resources.
Because financial management is a major part of the school/  governor relationship, it is particularly important that the head should handle affairs with a mixture of care, adroitness and vision.
Again, there is heavy reliance on the deputy or deputies, on one or two other experienced or senior staff and on the capacity of one or more of the governors not only to understand, to discuss and if necessary to change first ideas without bloodshed but also to explain the professional side to their lay colleagues.
An incompetent head is one who fails to master the task of reconciling a management plan with a financial plan, who fails to communicate and to ensure enough understanding for the financial plan with his or her teacher colleagues and who is unable to engage with governors at a level where there is both trust and understanding.
There may be cases where all the fault lies on the side of the head, and indeed in the earliest days of financial delegation many governors were said to have resigned because they could not find enough time to master the intricate responsibilities of new government and because a path through those intricacies had not been mapped by the head.
In contrast to the position of governors, the position of parents in coping with an incompetent head is confined to their power to complain.
They are likely always to complain less about bad financial management than about pupil assessments.
To complain individually is not as successful as to complain within a unified forum.
That forum, also established by the 1986 Education (No. 2) Act, is the annual parents' meeting (APM).
Even the earliest study of its effectiveness stressed the view that it should improve the degree of accountability.
In reporting a national conference in February 1988, Earley (1988: 64–5) reported: As for the future of annual governors' reports and APMs, most participants agreed they provided an opportunity for governors, teachers and parents to work together.
Lessons had been learned from the first round of these activities, especially about accountability and communication between the governing body and parents.
There was now a need to ensure both activities were seen by parents as having a purpose…
The APM and the report provided an opportunity for governors to explain, justify and evaluate what they had been doing, especially with regard to the quality of education offered.
Parents' main interest was seen as the opportunity to influence the quality of their children's education…the view was expressed that the APM should be seen as the climax to a continuous relationship between various parties and an opportunity for them to come together and ask questions about what had happened over the course of the previous 12 months.
Conclusion
The reforms of the 1986 and 1988 Education Acts cannot be handled through any single pattern of management.
The head is still the leader and acts as chief executive from the  viewpoint of governors — partly being told what to do, partly being expected to put forward alternatives of policy and plans for action, partly being used as their principal adviser and partly as the intermediary and negotiator with the other parties.
For parents too the head is the leader.
Past reputation, either in the same school or elsewhere, matters because it is slow to change and because laymen's views change equally slowly.
Many of the changes of the 1986 and 1988 Acts are new enough for heads to be given the benefit of parents' earlier trust.
In the eyes of the employing local authority the position of the head as leader-cum-manager depends on how much he or she can manage without the authority's assistance and on how correct his or her activities are in terms of fitting into national and local patterns of responsibility.
Otherwise, from the viewpoint of the local authority the head is treated as acting independently.
Collegiality in management matters if its absence leads to signs of misunderstanding and discontent on the part of other staff, governors or parents.
The style and method of management matter less than the question of whether the headteacher can collaborate with other schools and is prepared to make adjustments and concessions in the way the school is run in order to allow better pooling of time, staff or other resources.
It can certainly happen that a head might at the same time be expected to manage the school democratically by the staff, deferentially by the governors, assertively by the local authority and pliantly by parents.
Filling these four different expectations has to be consciously entered into.
Not to be aware of the differences of demand and not to pay heed to them would amount to disregarding the purposes and moral cost of adapting to change.
A manager's lack of awareness of how he or she should bend in the wind is a sign of poor intelligence or insensitivity.
On the other hand, to be too knowing about one's shifts of stance can amount to cynicism.
Between the two lies balanced self-awareness.
This entails personal views and values, a judgement about the degree of respect in which one holds the view of other people and a sense of whether something is being sacrificed or enhanced as a result of making adjustments.
Some adjustments can amount to a loss of steadfastness, others can lead to values becoming curtained or shadowed in such a way that they are no longer clear to other people.
Other adjustments may be so serious as to amount to jettisoning a carefully worked-out position.
The head does not always have the time to ponder the price of those personal and professional adjustments which have to be made in the regular course of management.
One reason which can be given for this is the claim that a head is simply a functionary and that his or her views and judgements have to be variable for the sake of other people.
This may not do justice to the proper degree of personal and professional self-regard which is expected of a head.
If positions and viewpoints  are too easily set aside they might be regarded by other people as not having, even in the first place, amounted to much.
But jettisoning a view can go beyond personal damage to the manager.
To write off the ideas and conclusions which one has reached in order to allow an accommodation with other people's expectations may mean getting rid of a conclusion which the manager had reached after listening to and observing other people's experience.
In other words, in addition to explicit consultation and the pursuit of a visible consensus on any matter, the manager carries within his or her subconsciousness the sediment of many terms and years of other people's wisdom.
To disregard that is to show disrespect for those who are colleagues, those whom the head is leading and without whose support he or she cannot manage.
When the manager faces in four directions — fellow-staff, parents, governors and local authority — the first need is to remember which type of management is being exercised at any one moment.
The second need is to be equally well prepared in six areas of management — the curriculum, the social organization of the school, the efficiency of assessment and the efficient feedback of assessment's findings, staff dispositions and changes, financial priorities and the triple task of giving account to governors, parents and the local authority.
Equal success in all six requires mastery by the head of the detailed requirements of those matters which are covered by regulation (curriculum, assessment, staffing, finance, accountability) and a well-formed, carefully agreed practical philosophy about social organization, the school's values and its ethos.
Each area of responsibility requires good preparation and hard work in sharing, adjusting and reaching agreed policies and practices.
The third need is to remember that while the 1988 Act changed many aspects of management from the point of view of the insider, it changed few things from the point of view of the parents, the employer or the public.
To the outside world what was happening was a tightening-up of some matters, a clearing out of unexamined clutter and the creation of a sense of accountability.
The purpose of the legislation was to get the education services to deliver what parents, the community and taxpayer wanted.
This means that the manager has to keep his or her activities tightly geared to the reactions of teachers, governors, employers, parents and of that part of the community to whom education matters.
It also means that the manager receives no plaudits for doing what ought already to have been done since.
Ideally, good management in education is a discreet matter but one in which nevertheless training can be offered.
Its concealed and overt sides reflect the balance of personal belief and professional judgement on the one hand and publicly assessed activities on the other.
The latter have been as well represented in in-service training courses since the 1988 Act.
But personal belief and professional judgement have not received the same attention.
Alan Coulson provided a summary of the balance of views taken about headship potential in the field of management in Clarkson (1988).
He included in his review a summary of eight characteristics which were consistently associated with successful school management and, in summing up, he pointed the way forward very clearly (Clarkson 1988:273): In schools, changes in legislation, organization and curriculum tend to attract considerable attention when they are first introduced.
Yet changes which at first seem major or dramatic often fade in significance as parts of them are assimilated into school operation or attention is diverted to newer concerns.
Regardless of the changes the near future may bring, the central importance of the head as an exemplar of personal and professional qualities will remain.
Since these qualities are fundamentally expressions of values, attitudes and feelings within the persons, traditional in-service training approaches which concentrate on conveying new knowledge, imparting particular skills or prescribing certain patterns of behaviour are insufficient for headship development.
To be successful, future education for headship will need to pay greater attention to the prime importance of the development and growth of heads as persons; it must therefore embrace consideration of their values and assumptions, their feelings and their intentions, and their relationships with others as much as their professional knowledge and teaching skills.
Some aspects of training and some courses of advanced qualification can meet this need.
New training for new management
The quality of children's learning is assumed to improve when education is managed well.
If aims and objectives are clear, if resources which assist the reaching of those aims are properly distributed and if other matters which bear on relationships, self-evaluation, assessment, planning and reporting are thought out and carefully put into operation, pupils will be better educated.
To achieve this, information has to be shared between several participants.
The importance given to better education and training differs from country to country.
In a comparison carried out by the National Economic Development Council and the Manpower Services Commission (1984:85) it was said that the concern for a sound basic education is voiced strongly in all the three countries [USA, Japan and the then Federal Republic of Germany]as it is in the UK, but nowhere more so than in the US.
Americans think they have lost more ground than others and are now making great efforts to catch up.
Competency testing in high schools is rapidly gaining ground.
A recent study…suggests that German basic education leads to better examination performance than does the British; and Japanese schools have always insisted on high achievement in basic subjects.
If there is a lesson to be learnt it is that success has been related to demonstrated achievement in a core of subjects…a qualification requiring a minimum level of achievement and minimum level of performance being set against specified standards.
It would appear that the objectives of many of the current measures of educational reform in the UK bring us nearer to the actions of our competitors.
The three other countries were said to have better systems of information — information used by communities, by employers and by individuals.
The consequence for the United Kingdom of the relative lack of public information is that "individuals are poorly placed when taking decisions which will affect their own futures" (NEDC/MSC 1984:89).
But while it is relatively straightforward to find what courses are available"it is much more difficult to discover what has actually happened, and is likely to happen, to people who have chosen one course of study rather than another…
The message from our competitors is that effectiveness is based upon (but not limited to) hard information about performance.
That information arises from what individuals and organizations collectively define and act upon.
The system has to be transparent"(NEDC/MSC 1984: 89).
The report called for the better organization of training and education between employers, trade unions and individuals.
Any faults which had to be corrected lay with weaknesses of management in not providing forums in which every interested party could combine its efforts.
Five years after the NEDC/MSC report Training and Enterprise Councils (TECs) were launched, with an emphasis on the need to provide a meeting-ground for several interests: "Each TEC will shape its own agenda to reflect the special economic and social needs of the area.
It will serve as a forum for business and community leaders to identify problems, set priorities, define strategies for change and divert resources accordingly"(Department of Employment 1989).
The introduction of TECs was critical of the past because matters had not been managed collaboratively: "We stand at the crossroads.
In one direction lie the behaviour and attitudes, the short term planning and the easy options which have so bedevilled our performance in the past"(Department of Employment 1989:19).
The criticisms were not specific: British people were not well enough trained in comparison with people from some other countries, their training did not take sufficient account of what employers wanted, there was too little emphasis on the connection between the launching of new enterprises and the training of people in readiness for and in order to follow the consequences of those launches — and the absence of collaborative management in the past had led to poorly organized training.
Opponents of the idea that the management of education and training can benefit from the lessons of business and industry found it ironic that the messages which were put out in the two documents criticized weaknesses in the world of employers rather than of educators.
Another approach which was more closely connected with general education in schools than with vocational training and employment training came from the Audit Commission (1989).
In looking at the way in which schools and colleges were managed after the 1988 Act, the Commission pointed out that LEAs would have a less directive role but would still have to monitor the services of schools and colleges.
This monitoring was needed in order to guarantee to the electors in a local authority that an appropriate service was being provided.
Monitoring meant assessment and the Audit Commission report was concerned with the local services of advisers and inspectors and with how schools and colleges were managed.
It pointed out that not all the monitoring carried out by an LEA required the application of professional educational judgement.
"Information can be collected by recording routine statistics; the professional judgements called for in considering financial probity or the condition of buildings are not educational.
But part of the necessary information can be gathered only by professional observation and requires the application of educational  judgement before it can be used to assist in the formulation of recommendations for action"(Audit Commission 1989:7).
Although not everyone will agree that the condition of, for instance, educational buildings can be adequately judged without an educational view, the main point which the Commission was making was that information was the key to the assessment of quality in education.
Examination results were limited, national testing and assessment would provide "a wider-based source of information" (Audit Commission 1989:7) but again this information would not reveal how much was attributable to the school and how much to the home.
Above all, it was necessary, in the search for quality, for LEAs to have their own direct observation of teaching and learning: "it is important to know whether improvements are needed in the organization of teaching, in the provision of equipment and materials, in the quality of teaching of one or more teachers or in some quite different area" (Audit Commission 1989:8).
In its recommendations the report noted that while some kind of internal evaluation is part of good management practice for all organizations there was nevertheless an absence of external moderation of those evaluations.
The internal measures which were often used (with a notable slant towards secondary schools) were examination results, tests of literacy and numeracy, attendance patterns, pupils' records of achievement, curriculum information and national testing and assessments.
Other measures came from budgetary information and, for FE colleges, the reports of vocational examining bodies, the views of the then Training Agency advisers and FE efficiency indicators.
The messages about the importance of using and sharing information were the same as those which emerged from the international comparisons of the NEDC and from the explanations of the work of TECs.
They are all linked with parts of educational activity which fall within a typical institutional plan and are now largely covered in the requirements for the publication of comparative information laid down in the Education (Schools) Act 1992.
Because an institutional plan has to guarantee quality at a level which is sought by parents and employers, the information on which it is based has to be that which they value.
Not all information will be regarded as of equal weight and therefore a truly total assessment is unattainable.
For example, HMI reports, which are consistently self-limiting in their commentaries, make it clear that they cannot, except in national surveys, go beyond specifics.
In such surveys, however, such as that of 100 primary schools implementing the national curriculum, the conclusion was that as long ago as autumn 1989 "the best work seen in year 1 classes fully met, and went beyond, the requirements of the National Curriculum attainment targets and programmes of study in the core subjects" (HMI 1990).
This reassurance about quality looked at management (HMI 1990:14): The leadership exercised by heads is of crucial importance in successful implementation.
Effective heads have realistic but challenging expectations of the  degree and rate of change that are manageable by staff; involve their colleagues in school-wide curricular planning and decision-making; delegate genuine responsibilities to subject co-ordinators; see staff development as one of their major responsibilities; and target resources of time, materials and personnel to areas of agreed priority.
Managing quality in this example is based on the assumption that long-term and medium-term planning of all subjects is important, that the analysis and modification of the use of time have to be repeated from year to year (if not from term to term) and that targets and statements of attainment should feature in schools' schemes of work "and provide a valuable focus for the planning and transaction of classwork by individual teachers" (HMI 1990:14).
The importance of programmes of study, too, is recognized, as also is the place of non-statutory guidance in the carrying out of review and further planning.
Most important of all, to ensure that a school's management plan makes a difference at the level of classroom management, there has to be an assessment of the extent to which the quality of individual children's work is affected by an individual teacher's classroom management and by his or her adoption of the relevant part of the school plan.
That plan must rest, in the first place, on an audit, and in its advice to governors, heads and teachers (DES 1989e) the School Development Plans Project (SDPP) gave some ideas about how a school would undertake that.
There had to be a clear decision about how to compile the relevant information and evidence and how to select certain areas for audit while others were postponed until later years.
The project pointed out that an audit is easier if it is carefully planned and responsibility for particular aspects is shared out.
For example a curriculum leader in a small primary school leads a small group to scrutinise a selection of pupils' work from different year groups to examine progression and continuity and their relation to the National Curriculum a department in a secondary school reviews its curricular provision; assesses the implications of the National Curriculum for that subject; analyses policies and practice on pupil assessment; analyses examination/test results; reviews pupils' written work to check on progression and continuity a team considers relations with parents and the wider community the head, a deputy or a senior teacher leads a working party on topics such as cross-curricular issues, curriculum provision as a whole, pupil attendance, school documentation the staff development or INSET co-ordinator leads a working party to review staff development, INSET provision and dissemination, teacher appraisal, care of probationer teachers (DES 1989e:8).
This breadth of preparing for and following up a development plan should then, suggests the Project Team, be broken down into detailed action plans with specific targets for the following year.
Examples are  given of the working documents which should emerge from this process, in keeping with a school's priority.
The examples are: "revising and improving the whole curriculum for a particular year group, taking account of the programmes of study and attainment targets of the National Curriculum; developing a whole-school assessment policy, including marking and recording; piloting a scheme for staff development and appraisal" (DES 1989e:11).
This represents a clear way of connecting a school plan and the daily practices of its teachers.
The same report also, when it turns its attention to taking stock, extends itself to pupils.
In particular, the collation of brief reports which can make up an evaluation at the end of each planning cycle should enable the head with both colleagues and governors to create a bridge between good management and good learning.
If the work of the SDPP is taken alongside that of another team on school management, the School Management Task Force (DES 1990a), the benefit emerges of seeing how detailed proposals for management and review penetrate deep into the daily work of the school and how that detail can be set in the larger context of characteristics (thirteen in number) of effective schools (DES 1990a: 5-6), set against six management tasks which are regarded as having high priority following the 1988 Act.
These are concerned with the local management of schools (LMS), national curriculum and assessment, appraisal and staff development, working with governors, strategic planning and monitoring and evaluation.
A common pattern of response is suggested: "Action is needed in four complementary areas, planned as a single programme: training opportunities, management information, practical advice and assistance and management tools and techniques" (DES 1990a:12).
The targets set by the School Management Task Force are realistic as part of large-scale management, and the detailed approach of the SDPP is likely to be more immediately valuable to schools.
Both provide guidance on the management of quality.
Both take us much nearer the heart of connecting management to learning than the broader approaches of NEDC/MSC and the TECs.
The views of the Audit Commission and of HMI provide further depth of guidance.
Each of the six noted different aspects of management and observed differences in importance and difficulty in each aspect.
They did not describe how managers would, separately from publicly shared measurements, make their judgements.
They did not, for instance, examine how a head looks at the development of fellow-staff after the time of first appointment.
Staff development
Schools choose teachers to carry out a specific duty, to teach specific subjects and to contribute to the school at large.
Heads take care to let  those who are interviewed for new posts know what sort of school it is, what it believes in, how it relates to its community and how it is planned that it should develop and improve.
Few teachers are appointed for only one of the three tasks and even if their hands are full with teaching or with a senior teacher's responsibilities or a large clutch of pastoral duties in their early days, they will know from the head what kind of organization they are joining.
If a teacher at the time of appointment has agreed to play a part in the larger framework and in the long-term plan for a school, the head will after a time weigh up the capacity of the new colleague to add his or her contribution to the larger task.
A staff development interview often reveals that the teacher, once settled in, wants to do more in order to extend the interest and the responsibility of teaching.
If everything goes well, the teacher grows.
It is part of the job of the head to make sure that the skills and gifts of teachers are allowed to develop.
And if it is part of the head's job to assist in that process, it should be part of the teacher's professional equipment to respond to stimuli and opportunities to do more (J. M. Worrall, conversation, 1990).
Heads as they appoint new staff have the chance to turn the long-term realization of a school's plan into a shared reality, but the same commitment can also be won from those teachers who are at a school when a new head arrives.
Frameworks of commitment have to be built and maintained with care.
Once everyone knows what the framework is, most will contribute readily to the development of the school inside that frame.
One or two will be unable to play a part, because of illness, personal distress or a preoccupation with unavoidable non-professional matters.
These are the teachers who, with one exception, will be understood and helped by the head and by other teachers.
The exception is the teacher who dissipates other people's goodwill by edging further into a personally disorganized life or by losing any real sense of what is required of a teacher.
By explaining the framework of a school's aims, by giving opportunities for growth, by bringing separate contributions together and by, as far as possible, helping the colleague who needs help, a head can both lead and serve as an equal in collegial management.
The head can then also decide whether the plan which exists in his or her mind is being realized.
If not, should heads settle for less than the whole of their ideal or keep on pressing their colleagues?
Good sense says that they should go as far as they can but return from time to time to those parts of the plan which have not at first been realized.
This will not always satisfy governors, parents, the LEA — or the church or religious order if it happens to be a voluntary-aided school.
Nor can an incomplete job description fulfil such requirements of good planning as those laid down by the two post-1988 Act teams on management (DES 1989e, 1990a).
Those two special projects are not likely to help the providers of  training in management to avoid the pitfalls which were noted by the National Development Centre for School Management Training in 1987 (Wallace and Hall 1989).
There were seven weaknesses in most of specially provided courses which from April of that year transferred from being funded by the TVEI-related In-service Training (TRIST) scheme — which had been managed by the Manpower Services Commission — to the LEA Training Grants Scheme (LEATGS).
Management training was designated by the DES at that time as a national priority area of work and received a relatively high level of financial support.
Despite being picked out in this way there were still failures and difficulties.
It is significant that one which was encountered more than once was a "lack of follow-up support after the course and a lack of procedures for evaluating impact on participants' performance as opposed to the quality of the training experience" (Wallace and Hall 1989:165).
Linked with this latter point, it was also reported that when it came to an evaluation of training courses "higher education providers revealed that their concern was very largely with improving the quality of their courses rather than assessing their effectiveness upon participants' management practice in school" (Wallace and Hall 1989:172).
Later, the point was made that the "development of systematic support for managers in schools has become heavily orientated towards the immediate needs generated by education reforms at the expense of that longer term development of heads and senior staff" (Wallace and Hall 1989:173).
Extended development of heads and others has in the past amounted to little more than the agglomeration of courses relating to specific short-term issues.
This approach is not the key to finding how managers can develop the combination of visionary gift and pragmatic skill.
Heads who are asked where that combination took its origin in their individual histories make it clear that it did not come from training.
Nor is there much evidence pointing to their general education as the origin of their vision and managerial skill.
The experience of working with gifted teachers and heads in their early career, the sense that they have in some cases been given the benefit of working closely with other wise and successful teachers — particularly inside a religious order — the fact that they in some cases went away from teaching and, having had time to reflect in quite unrelated work, then saw that teaching was an obligation which they should meet — these are among the backgrounds which heads are prepared to reveal.
They are hesitant about calling their sense of vocation as being in any way visionary.
They prefer to think in terms of gift, skill, interest, satisfaction.
Above all they regard as their major drive the obligation to help children and young people to grow (E.G. Howard, conversation, 1990; C. G. Teuten, conversation, 1990).
If managers say that they gain their vision and their pragmatic skill informally and from diverse sources, if they see their own development  as something which took many years and came from a wide range of contexts, it is unlikely that a short-term substitute can be found which will fit into either the narrow limits of brief in-service training courses, year-long secondments or part-time study in higher education.
In helping in their colleagues' professional development heads see this difficulty.
To overcome it some look upon their own experience and try to offer its essential characteristics to others.
One head may decide that the opportunity to understand other systems of education is a considerable stimulant for thought and professional reflection.
Another may see that a powerful and confident experience in one field — such as music — brings contacts and perspectives which remain useful.
Another will feel that a range of different experiences — not all directly connected with teaching — gives a depth of understanding and sympathy with other people.
The examples are not numberless nor are the responses.
In terms of giving teachers more chances to learn and to develop it comes down to releasing them for as long as they can with some financial help, some doubling-up of teaching and a well-organized use of locally managed funds.
Placed in a formal framework, it becomes a matter of staff development.
Less formally it amounts to providing trained and experienced adults with the opportunity professionally to expand (G.E.
Jones, conversation, 1990).
Providing opportunities runs through two aspects of management: unless colleagues are given the opportunity to understand the world outside education, unless they have the opportunity to look around and to come to some new conclusions of their own about what they are doing, the head will say that he or she is failing.
It is not defined how an opportunity should be used, nor can the head or the teacher know at the outset whether any development or new insight will emerge.
The head has to take the chance and to trust that an opportunity will in the end turn out to have been well handled.
A second example of the importance of giving opportunities to other people comes from the type of head who, in pursuing the argument that good management of a school should lead to good learning by the child, watches pupils for signs that they do in some way match hopes about independence of mind, wholeness and honesty.
Management here is aimed at giving pupils the opportunity to develop these characteristics.
How they emerge or whether they will always be visible and measurable is a matter of doubt.
Although a head's trust both in colleagues and in the capacity of pupils to use what teachers offer is an essential part of management, the uncertainty involved is, to some managers, frustrating.
But a head must in the end tolerate something less than the hoped-for whole being achieved.
Along with trust, patience is a characteristic needed by potential managers.
Those who feel that patience, trust and a capacity to put up with uncertainty are gifts rather than skills — and gifts which not all  adults share — will doubt whether these personal dispositions can be amenable to training.
If they are, they are likely to be shaped by management training which emphasizes the importance of personal factors as well as those which touch on performance indicators.
Thus, the good manager needs the energy as well as the interest to transmit to others an understanding of obscure but still important requirements and regulations.
Because they cover a wide range of responsibilities — about assessment, financial management, curriculum balance and accountability — the manager provides a better service to his or her partners if a single interpretation is provided and if disparate demands can be connected by a common thread.
To pursue with equal clarity the ideas which are associated with both the technicalities and the broad aims of management calls for reflectiveness.
The manager who can understand each issue clearly can develop a repertoire of managerial qualities.
Self-development
A typical school policy statement about staff development will include definitions such as "it is essential that we continue to grow in professional stature and experience, backed by the support of a comprehensive programme of in-service opportunities designed to help all of us to meet the growing demands with confidence, a sense of purpose and, as can be the case, an increased personal job satisfaction" (Hewton 1988:88).
The progress made towards that increase allows "individual staff to commit themselves to their own professional development and makes it possible for management to accept responsibility for implementation" (Hewton 1988:89).
Implementation includes establishing a structure and a sharing of responsibility between the head, other senior members of staff and individual teachers who carry out the tasks involved in identifying staff development needs, with formulating a programme and with evaluating its implementation.
In this last stage self evaluation is included and in a commentary on the White Paper on teaching quality (DES 1983a), John Elliott's characterization of three levels of professional development through self-evaluation was quoted as an argument against assuming that government policies of dealing out more doses of in-service education would improve teaching quality (Slater 1985).
From a combination of three levels of professional development — unreflective self-evaluation based on practical knowledge, self-evaluation as practical deliberation and self-evaluation as action research — it was assumed that teaching quality would most noticeably be improved through deliberation and action research.
 "A more thorough understanding of how teachers can evolve new ways of working as they move from tacit knowledge to practical principles will also contribute to making in-service education  more effective." 
But more in-service education may miss the point, because "day-to-day demands on the teachers will sometimes lead to gaps developing between what teachers say they are doing and what they are actually doing" (Slater 1985:51).
To avoid this confusion teachers need time for reflection and deliberation.
It is they who must first work out whether there is a gap between theory and their own activities.
The subsequent connection between a teacher's self-evaluation and the head's view of performance is a normal, if delicate, part of internal management.
The view from outside the school on the other hand, is more direct.
The Scottish Education Department's (SED) survey of parents' views on school education reported, in the particular study of teachers and headteachers, a wide range of parent opinion (SED 1989).
Of teachers, four examples, at random, covered approachability, humour and sensitivity (SED 1989:8): If you don't have a sense of humour and can't laugh with the weans, you'd crack up more easily.
Some teachers take everything a mite too serious.
They're quite strict.
They have to be or the bairns would knock a rise oot o'them.
But the bairns aren't feart like they used to be.
A good teacher is one who inspires confidence in the children and who can pick up problems early on before they get serious, and can bring the kids on.
She's been a wizard.
She never blames Andrea for not being able to do it.
She tries to find a way through and because she's patient and understanding she gets there.
She's been magic!
Comments of this type in one sense only reinforce the point that the quality of a school's management is judged by the quality of treatment which the child receives in the classroom.
The Scottish summary of what it is that parents value in teachers and what makes a poor (as well as a good) teacher (SED 1989:7—11) is in some ways an up-to-date version of parts of Enquiry 1 (Schools Council 1968).
It bears out the straightforwardness of parent comments, too, in its report of how they regard headteachers, good and bad, as in these examples (SED 1989:7—11): The parents used to have their own meeting room.
Now this head has pulled it back and parents have to meet in the playground.
He should be sent on a PR course.
He just can't deal with parents and adults because he's so used to talking down to students all day.
The school is a different place.
Friendly and welcoming.
I would never have gone there before.
Its down to the new heidie.
We have a great headmaster.
I guarantee he knows every child in the school…and their parents and who they're related to…where they live.
Few if any of the matters on which these parents commented would have been the subject of any explicit policy statement in a school.
Style, manner, sensitivity, humour, trust — all these remain undefined but essential parts both of good teaching and of the good management of public relations.
They are under the control of individual teachers.
As personal traits and gifts, as the fruits of experience or as the outcome of maturity they remain essentially a private matter, not amenable to management training but open to approaches which might be based on good practice in counselling or on well-handled programmes about the development of interpersonal skills.
Parents see teachers and headteachers as the shapers of quality and effectiveness in any school.
Their views have a reality which management must treat seriously, but to bring the worlds of common sense, theory and research together brings its own difficulties.
When a commentary on Michael Rutter's Fifteen Thousand Hours was formulated by Tizard and others (1980) it acknowledged in the first place that in the report an impressive base of data supported "an architecture in which many common sense perceptions about schools were co-ordinated" (Tizard et al.1980:11).
But one criticism made later in the same commentary drew attention to what was thought to be missing "above all, two things: one of them a sense of history, both a broad and more local framework within which the achievement of these schools can be placed and evaluated; the other a sense of the actual texture of the schools themselves" (Tizard et al.1980:13).
The texture of a school may be made up of old-fashioned and perhaps idealized certainties as far as parents are concerned.
Teachers on the other hand may nowadays feel certain only about where they stand in the curriculum.
They feel less certain about how the outside world will look upon attainments and assessments once the whole post-1988 process is open to public question.
It is the head's task to meet from among the more traditional views held by parents those which are still relevant to modern schooling and to affect, as far as possible, the way in which they look upon change.
The head, too, is the only leader who is in a position to handle professional uncertainties and tentative first steps in a process of professional enquiry.
For example, in looking at the way in which primary-school teachers respond to new ideas in environmental study and mathematics, Briault and West (1990:20) pointed out that teachers came to understand environmental studies more fully by engaging in such work [i.e. action learning], became more confident about investigative approaches in mathematics by undertaking problem-solving activities in a supportive, non-threatening climate.
Such approaches take time but…such shared activity helps to create a climate in which individuals may change themselves.
Many innovations have more to do with changes in the value systems of the individuals concerned than with the acquisition of wholly new skills.
Changing existing values is the key which opens the door of change.
Briault and West went on to comment that the headteachers in two of their studies gave a good deal of attention to the process through which individual teachers can change themselves.
 "It takes time for  staff to say openly" Can we say what we really feel?"
Openness in discussion, the acceptance of the searching question and the admission of uncertainty are all signs of the process of change proceeding at an appropriate rate for the individuals concerned"(Briault and West 1990:20).
Moving on to parental understandings of change, Briault and West concede that parents will in some situations hold traditional views on matters of classroom practice.
They add: "In any case, there is always a degree of uncertainty about outcomes at the beginnings of a new initiative, when alternatives are imprecisely mapped out and staff are to be engaged in a process of critical reflection.
This uncertainty is prone to be interpreted as "woolliness" by parents who prefer to trade in certitude"(Briault and West 1990:21).
As the views of parents as consumers become increasingly important so the need for sensitivity towards their views becomes sharper.
This underlines"the usefulness of collaborative approaches to school improvement and the ultimate goal of implanting inquiry as an ongoing process in the school.
These are major targets of organizational development and will thus take time and resources to achieve.
Those schools which have moved in this direction will find their responses to the National Curriculum much more easily managed"(Briault and West 1990:21).
This sentiment appeared to be accurately echoed in the terms of reference of the enquiry into primary school methods which were announced by the Secretary of State in December 1991.
In summing up what they learned from their primary and middle school case studies, Briault and West (1990:99) came back to the purposes of good management: The objective of management, in whatever sphere, is to improve the product and to meet the customer's requirements.
In simple terms, school management is for the children.
Many of our studies and our own commentaries have in fact made little mention of children…
But it is perhaps salutary to remind ourselves that the object of the enterprise is to provide every pupil with the best learning experiences.
These…necessarily relate to the physical, social, intellectual and aesthetic environments in which they take place.
Each of these aspects of the learning environment will now be even more fully under the control of the school than it has ever been before and this is the challenge to leadership and management in every school.
The price of failure is boredom.
The reward of success is lively and interested pupils.
In-service education
Reflecting the connection between good teaching and its management and good learning, institutional statements about the principles of in-service work include, as an example, "The ultimate aim of all in-service education for teachers is the improvement of pupil/student learning through the development of teachers as reflective, autonomous professionals who have not only developed a range of skills but  also a broad knowledge of understanding of subject content and of the conceptual framework of teaching and learning." 
(Polytechnic South West 1989:13).
In extension of this, in-service education and training at its best is responsive both to teachers as individuals and to teachers as they function in their workplace.
To be successful it has to be the "product of continuing negotiation between those planning and delivering the course and those for whom it is intended" (Polytechnic South West 1989:13).
Just as in-service education does not work if it has not been tailored to match the stage or condition of the teacher who is to benefit from it, so the manager cannot manage unless the method and style of management are acceptable and unless its purposes have been first unravelled and then knitted together after consultation between the manager and the manager's colleagues.
This was noted as long ago as 1975 (Hughes) when it was pointed out that the administrator had to present an acceptable change,"for today only acceptable schemes are operable.
In all parts of the world this is a task which is likely to prove a formidable and exciting challenge to the educational administrator in the years ahead"(Hughes et al.1985: 19, quoting Morris).
Acceptable training
Just as change has to be acceptable if there is to be success in implementing it, so training for management has to be acceptable.
The search for training which fits this description in the management of education is hindered in two ways: it has long been an area for tension between theorists and practitioners and it has from time to time been exposed to management models from fields where practice and purpose are very different from those of education.
The first has been very clearly described by Meredydd Hughes (Hughes et al.1985:3—33).
Recalling the emergence in the mid-1950s of the "New Movement" in educational administration in the United States and Canada, he refers to the intense romance with theory, "Sceptical practitioners were assured in the oft-quoted words of Dewey…that" theory is in the end the most practical of all things".
It involved nothing less than a new paradigm and a new approach to the relationship of theory and practice in educational management"(Hughes et al.1985:10).
But even in the early days of the New Movement there were critics.
Halpin is quoted: "There are scientists, and administrators too, who consistently soar in the clouds.
They forget that theory must be rooted in the actual world of experience."
Halpin later complained that theoretical modes were too rational, too tidy, too aseptic and that those who were responsible for school systems felt that there was an omission of "much of the palpable stuff which quickens his pulse in his daily job" (Hughes et al.1985: 32).
Although the New Movement faded in its significance, because it ignored parts of the practical experience of educational management which practitioners themselves regarded as important, what was left was still a recognition that education management is a field of application which allows fruitful connections to be made between theory and practice.
Again Hughes has clearly described the influences, movements and inputs which have questioned monolith models and which have drawn a distinction between the more and the less valuable insights of the practitioner.
The form in which, however, the tension still emerges in the in-service education of teachers and in such training as is provided for education management in the period after the 1988 Education Reform Act is that of a preoccupation with the separate skills and tasks of management.
Know-how is all important — and it is quite typical for a deputy head following an advanced part-time degree in education management to sigh with relief at the start of a module about, for instance, the management of assessment and to say that this was precisely what his head — with an eye mainly on the short term — hoped he would get out of the course.
One reason for seeking immediacy of value in management training is the absence of time in which to treat matters thoughtfully.
Despite the concern for promoting reflectiveness among teachers, their in-service opportunities have to compete with a week-by-week preoccupation with in-school organization — modifying the management plan, feeding information back into the cycle of formative teaching and testing and balancing the books in order to cover one more curriculum or non-curriculum speciality.
The practising education manager (or the potential senior manager who hopes to grow into that role through further professional education) may have, in other words, more to occupy the mind than was true in, for instance, the early 1980s.
At that time there was a more or less continuing concern with curriculum review.
There was a still young involvement in national pupil assessment and there were the beginnings of more power being given to, and accountability expected from, governors.
The pace of in-service education had already quickened.
But management still lay, in Britain, more with LEAs than with heads or governors because in schools — primary, secondary or special — daily management was still at some distance from the control of finance, from the decision about a school's total allocation of teaching staff, from the establishment of policies and schemes of priority in the school's curriculum and organization and from the presentation of the whole picture of aims, methods and performance to parents and to other members of the local community.
The late start on training
New demands on management led to some confusion as to whether there were in existence models which were still of value.
And, after the 1988 Education Reform Act, one question was whether that reform had led to a new education service in England and Wales.
If so, did managers have access to the type of training which would guarantee their quality?
If one looks at the diversity of approaches to the development of education management in the past four decades, it seems that there are two or three which will meet new needs.
That diversity, particularly in the field of structural models, has been traced (Hughes et al.1985:21) from concepts of structural relativism (which took the place of the idea that there was but one right model of organization, on the basis of a firm hierarchical structure) through structures of which some were mechanistic and others organic and into the realm of "contingency" models (structures of management which alter according to the issues with which they have to deal).
In this connection Hughes has described some work by Lawrence and Lorsch (Hughes et al.1985:21): They identified and produced measures of distinct organizational sub-environments, matching each sub-environment to an appropriate sub-unit structure.
 "Goodness of fit" became the important issue.
The more turbulent and uncertain the environment, the greater the tendency for a high level performance to be associated with high differentiation among sub-units, coupled with effective integration achieved by means of shared information, flexible procedures and open decision-making.
One application of the theory of the contingency approach (Hughes et al.1985:21) led to the view that belief systems and ideologies associated with religions deserved study.
Although this might be reinforced by the suggestion, earlier in this chapter, that vision and the ideals fostered by a head can shape the total approach to school management, it is the contingency model and its capacity to take account of turbulence which seem to fit the description of several management approaches in this final decade of the century.
But is turbulence the right word?
What principally affects the environment of management is not so much turbulence as the wave upon wave of not very closely related demands and pressures from public and governmental sources.
More apposite might be models of "loose coupling" , ascribed to March and Olsen (Hughes et al.1985: 22) and of "organised anarchies" , as approached by Cohen and March (Hughes et al.1985:23).
Of these, the first (loose coupling) is typified as signifying that "the parts of an organization are in some relationship to each other, but that the linkage is limited, uncertain and weak, and certainly much looser than the tight hierarchical control of bureaucratic theory" (Hughes et al.1985: 22).
One conclusion about loose coupling was that it "helps to maintain the facade that formal structures are really working when they are not" (Hughes et al.1985:3).
Taken to an extreme, this looseness led to "organised  anarchy" .
"In such an organization the goals are inconsistent and ill-defined, the technology for achieving them is unclear to the members, and those involved in decision-making vary unpredictably.
Thus problems, solutions and decision-makers are not systematically related to each other"(Hughes et al.1985:23).
Those management approaches which are presented in in-service education occasionally fall into the category of those which describe organized anarchy.
More often they pursue the model of loose-linked internal connections within a management structure, together with a strong belief that the structures of management are contingent upon the problems with which they have to deal.
This mixture of anarchy, looseness-of-link and contingency encourages the discrete offering of management skills which will help the student to cope with the four or five separable outcomes of the legislative changes of the late 1980s.
This discreteness does not encourage a unity of view about the way in which vision, total purpose and the management of whole-school quality assurance can be developed.
Skills of the manager as student
If the content of in-service work does not encourage the formulation of a unified way of approaching the purposes, implementation and evaluation of effective management, does the process of continued professional education promote a wholeness of view on its own?
In the case of short-term and occasional courses the answer is no.
Under the wide distribution of in-service funding, decisions will be local about which courses should be organized and sought from other people (from local authority advisers, educational consultants or higher education) and which courses the teachers of the school or group of schools which holds the purse-strings should be asked or encouraged to attend.
They will aim at bringing new knowledge and skill into a more or less parochial setting.
In longer courses, notably those which lead to postgraduate qualifications, not only is the view longer but the intellectual breadth is also wider.
The student is expected to acquire knowledge and has also to prove a capacity for wide reading and understanding, an up-to-date awareness of the state of both debate and development in educational ideas, a capacity to criticize in a constructive way and an overall capacity to link those skills with collecting and analysing data and with the planning of projects.
If these approaches are common to courses of study which advanced degree students follow regardless of the content (for some will be specializing, for instance, in the field of special educational needs, others in the arts and humanities, others in mathematics and science) it is because it is regarded as essential that the same grasp of knowledge and the same development of intellectual-cum-practical skill should typify all holders of a second degree in the field of education.
This is appropriate for those who pursue such a higher degree in education management.
Whether they are already leaders or aspire to more senior positions or are any part of those steadily developing collegial teams which are necessary to manage the diversity of educational change, then breadth of knowledge, a political awareness of the wider field of debate, the capacity to stand back, criticize and to argue to an acceptable and workable end, all these are essential parts of the professional's equipment.
This alone does not automatically encourage a singleness of view about management's purposes.
The process of approaching one end along four or five different avenues may be intellectually unifying but discrete definitions of course control, particularly in modularized courses, can lead to gaps.
A modular course in education management can cover broad issues such as the management of change as well as narrower questions of the management of time and money, the management of curriculum development, of assessment and review, of the handling of relationships both inside and outside schools and colleges and of the management of staff development policies and practices which make and sustain effective institutions.
On a taught part-time course with thirty hours of teaching for each module, messages about both the breadth of management's responsibilities and the quality of mind which it requires can to some extent be repeated.
Teaching and particularly a scheme of one-to-one tutoring and counselling has to encourage a response from each student which testifies to that student's commitment to thorough enquiry, hard thinking, self-scrutiny and honesty of purpose, all set within a context of the daily practicalities of management.
Little if anything beyond these qualities can be asked of any teacher or manager.
Well-structured courses prevent the sense of singleness of purpose from being dissipated.
Modularization alone carries a risk.
The absence of a sequential pattern of modules — for students may choose to pick and mix — can be regarded as the loss of the chance to develop one idea and one field of knowledge from another.
There may also be the loss of a chance to provide consistent and developmental counselling for the student.
The success of module-based part-time advanced degree work depends very much on the connection of studies between differing realms of subjects and differing fields of organization.
That relationship can be affected if the scale or seriousness of a student's compulsory assignments (knowledge of the literature, a capacity for critique and argument, ability to design a project and to collect and analyse data) is in any way diminished.
Rudduck (1991:138) draws attention to the weakness of some private, classroom-focused styles of practitioner enquiry: "What it ignores are the wider social and political frameworks, beyond the classroom and the school, that shape the parameters of education in ways that  teachers, with their eyes drawn to the minutiae of their own practice, too often fail to see.
The distinctive feature of teacher enquiry, the individual struggling to understand the events and interactions of his or her own classroom, may not be a powerful force for change".
But later, in answer to critics of the "soft approach" Rudduck (1991:139) responds: "Such research, they say, can run the risk of addressing trivial questions, lacks cumulative power and offers no collective, radical challenge — but on the other hand reflective, classroom-focused research is a way of building excitement, confidence and insight — and these are important foundations for career-long personal and professional development." 
This long-term view of the benefit of in-service work takes us back, in management, to the two major hindrances.
One, the theory/practice tension, has been referred to already.
The second, the inappropriateness of models from other fields, touches on the significance of teacher-led, classroom-based or school-focused enquiry and action research.
If the data and the questions to the answering of which the analysis of data leads are trivial, parochial or unrelated to larger issues, does this lock education management inside its own cell?
Is what is small scale and open to observation by only one teacher capable of demonstrating a broader relevance?
If the answer is no, there may be a case for dismissing the attempt to apply to education management some of the models which are drawn from business and industry.
If the answer is yes, is that to be taken as part of Rudduck's message which says that small scale studies are not trivial if they nevertheless provide excitement, confidence and insight?
Or is it that inside all organizations there are, continuously, small discoveries to be made in order to improve what is being done — and that schools do not differ from other organizations?
The double answer — schools are different from but they are also the same as other organizations — was confirmed when Handy and Aitken (1986:34) asked whether, in their essentials, schools were just like other organizations.
"If they are, then it becomes appropriate to learn from those organizations and to apply the theories and findings of organizational research to the running of schools.
Schools, however, and schoolteachers have instinctively felt that they were different, not unique, and have needed their own set of theories and precepts."
Both views are right (Handy and Aitken 1986:34): In that they are collections of individuals brought together for a purpose, schools are subject to all the problems, limitations and excitements that are inherent in getting people to work together, wherever they do it.
But schools are not businesses — it might be simpler if they were — and many of the organizational concepts were hammered out and tested in business organizations.
It is important, therefore, to be clear about the differences as well as the similarities so that one can know what to query as well as what to accept in the concepts.
Later, as though echoing their regret that schools are not businesses, Handy and Aitken (1986:45) sum up the question about differences: Schools are obviously different — and more complex.
A school is not a business, but it is important for a school to work out what kind of a business it is in order to make the complexity manageable…
A school has to decide what kind of organization it is (a factory, a work community, a market-place?), who its customers are, what they want and how that is to be delivered and measured.
If the students are workers, for instance, not raw material, then it makes sense to ask what products they ought to be producing and for whom; it is possible to work back from this to a process for delivering those products.
There is no reason at all why an organization should not be serving a range of markets with a range of products as long as this is deliberate and not accidental.
This, as an essential part of preparing a strategy of quality assurance, emphasizes for Handy and Aitken (1986:45—6) the point: assumptions about the way things should be run and organised have a major effect on the way people see themselves, the way they behave, think and react.
Even if the assumptions are unwitting or unconscious and have been around as long as the scenery, they are still potent.
Anyone who is charged with running classes, sections of schools or whole schools needs to be aware of what those assumptions are and of their effects.
This definition of the importance of a unity of view in management and of the importance of sharing interest and concern allows the significance of the classroom and of the small-scale, almost invisible base of experience of the individual teacher to take its place alongside larger aspects of policy and of governmental requirement in the total framework of a school's management.
The size and complexity of that framework are dictated by the interplay of national policies on education, local authority implementations, HMI monitorings, whole school policies, practices in evaluation and individual teacher input.
Many industries and businesses have the same range of control, freedom, accountability, autonomy and interrelatedness.
Other public services, notably the health service, have a comparable complexity even if they appear to have fewer levels of authority and discretions of autonomy.
But no business or any other public service other than education has — as have maintained schools and colleges — to engage with every family, child and parent in the land for a long, important and compulsory period of years.
Education and its management can learn lessons not only from the examples of individual industries but also from the movements which have stimulated the evolution of quality circles (Nissan), employee involvement (Ford) and participative management.
These have been subsumed under a quality of work life (QWL) movement which in turn has been defined as a managerial effort… "to involve workers in management decision-making, to systematically empower workers in management decision-making…particularly as groups" (Thompson and McHugh 1990:208).
Associated with the advocacy and development of teamwork and flexibility in management within industry is the "just-in-time" (JIT) system.
While this is basically concerned with "ensuring that the exact quantity and quality of raw materials, parts and sub-assemblies are delivered" just-in-time"for the next stage of production…[it]is not merely an inventory system.
To work properly it requires flexible labour utilisation and harmonising of tacit skills, close managerial involvement…
It feeds into the overall process of continuous improvement"(Thompson and McHugh 1990:203).
The relevance of these messages to any form of management, in education or elsewhere, is easy to see.
Equally important are two more statements, first (Thompson and McHugh 1990:362): A further reason for not regarding the worlds of today and tomorrow as wholly sealed off from one another is that there is much to learn from the existing practice of employees…
There is a massive "hidden history of the workplace" which needs to be recognised and uncovered.
That history is based on the self-organization of workers trying to resist and transform work relations…
Old-style movements for workers' control are no longer feasible in a world of transnationals and global production and semi-skilled labour.
But there remains a wealth of untapped experience and knowledge in employees' informal job-controls and patterns of organization.
In time teachers will learn from their European Community counterparts and from their newer international colleagues elsewhere how they might organize their work differently.
Management will move at the same pace, absorbing as proactively as possible those contributions to continued improvement which, regardless of their source, focus on quality assurance.
The lessons are varied.
Many of the items of management, quoted here from Landry already have a relevance to the management of that assurance (Thompson and McHugh 1990:365): There is a vital distinction to be made between "management" and those people who hold managerial positions, and "management" as an assortment of integrative functions which are necessary in any complex organization — planning, harmonising related processes, ensuring appropriate flows of information, matching resources to production needs, marketing, financial control and linking output to demand.
Conclusion
Good education is the product of good management.
There are ample claims that reflection, proactive planning and a defensible allocation of resources lead to improvements in teaching and learning.
Management is described in terms of change more often than in terms of standstill or consolidation.
Change is perceived in different ways by heads, other teachers, governors and parents.
A considerable part of the manager's task is to reconcile and be reconciled with other people.
Lest this become too amorphous an activity, managers concentrate  on discrete parts of the job — on improving the flow of information, on establishing practicable schemes of staff development and on self-evaluation.
Encouraging a manager to use and to enrich his or her own personal resources of belief and experience is not often a part of management training.
Nor does coping with uncertainty and living with mistakes often appear in the programme of a manager's preparation.
But taking the fact into account that schools have a history and a texture, the manager's armoury of awareness has to be constantly reviewed and expanded.
Some courses of management training reveal an unwillingness or incapacity of trainers to assess whether their courses affect the later professional behaviour of managers.
And because education is thought by some people to be unique, its very isolation seems to justify the fact that its management should not be evaluated on lines comparable to the management of business, industry or other spheres of large-scale public work.
But this is not tenable at a time when the voice of the consumer and the making of comparisons between education and other enterprises grows more insistent.
Approaches to management and training have to be sought which concentrate on meeting these demands.