

The intensional framework of syntax
1.1 The overall goal of this investigation is to argue that there is a very great deal that can be said, that has not yet been said, about the semantic value of fundamental syntactic relations.
It addresses this issue by looking at a large body of empirical evidence, specifically at examples of the relations between adjectives and other words in their phrases or sentences (these other words by no means always being nouns or noun phrases).
The observations which we shall make can be directly linked to an account of the overall possibilities of English grammatical structure; by this we do not mean to speak of the paradigmatic relationships between different clauses, but of the syntagmatic relations which construct the clause itself.
We argue that adjectives appear, diversely, in their own right, as syntagmatic structures unfold, and that clauses proposed to underlie them are illusory.
We confidently assume that the results set out here will, in their broad principles, be valid for any language; however, because of the limitless domains that would appear on the horizon if one were to include proper exemplification from other languages, and since there is ample material to consider in English alone, the latter is the basis on which the investigation will proceed.
If the approach to be found here can be tied to a previous tradition, it will be to the modern speculative grammar of which Jespersen and Sapir were eminent exponents earlier in the century; this tradition has become unfashionable in the past two or three decades, though distinguished work in this mode has still been produced by various scholars, for instance P. H. Matthews in England and Dwight Bolinger in America; in particular, if there are any worthwhile results in the present text, they owe much to Bolinger's example of investigation through careful scrutiny of what really happens grammatically when a  given expression is used.
However, even though the work described here is certainly concerned with grammar (and not, for example, based on sociological data or on lexical classification), it cannot be denied that it is remote from much of modern writing on grammar.
On the other hand, there are three points which may count in its favour: First, it provides a straightforward account of the very varied uses of adjectives in English, and points to a quite direct correlation between observable facts and a highly economical set of assumptions about basic grammatical relations.
Moreover, these assumptions can themselves be related to the nature of communication in a particularly simple way.
Second, it includes a description of the meaning of each construction, qua construction, where English adjectives are found.
The word meaning is to be taken seriously here.
We take it as obviously inadequate merely to assert that fundamental syntax is semantic; nor shall we believe that we have described (let alone explained) the meaning of a syntactic construction by simply giving it a name, such as attribution or predicative adjunction.
We do not intend to set up an alternative formal system (uninterpreted in itself) to act as the interpretation for our syntax, and we shall not just specify patterns of co-occurring word classes on the supposition that causal factors are described by exhibiting the phenomena they govern (or, worse, that the two are the same); this mistake, which has been widely made, reverses the logical priorities — rather as if one were to answer an enquiry about the underlying geological structure of a region by offering aerial photographs of the terrain.
In practice, this mistake has been responsible for much confusion in the discussion of syntactic possibilities and their means of expression.
Third, the account can explain some of the interpretative and grammatical facts of English, both general and particular.
This does not mean merely showing that two parts of the descriptive apparatus march in step with one another; the explanation here is a matter of showing that the facts in question are natural consequences of interaction between the meanings of the syntactic constructions as constructions, and the lexical meaning of the individual items that appear in them.
In order to be as specific as possible, we shall cite three examples chosen at random from the text that follows.
The account given in this book, based on the constructional meanings, enables us to give answers to these questions: Why does Oliver imagined her red-haired have two different meanings, one where he is trying mentally to change the lady's image, and the other where he wonders what sort of person he is going to meet)?
(Chapter 4) Why is the question in (1) grammatical while that in (2) is not?
(Chapter 5)(1) he likes his beef tea strong how does he like his beef tea?(2) muzak drives them mad *how does muzak drive them?
Why is the first sentence of (3) grammatical while the second is not?
(Chapter 10)(3) rarely do headmasters smoke in excess *generally do headmasters drink in moderation
1.2 It is tempting at this point to plunge straight into an account of the adjectival system and how it produces such results as those above; and in fact we should state clearly at this point that readers who prefer to build up the picture piece by piece, assessing the validity of the connexion between data and theory by starting from the evidential end, may pass immediately to Chapter 2 without any disadvantage.
However, to assert that there is a very great deal remaining to be said about the mutual effects of semantics and syntax may seem a bold claim, perhaps even a surprising one, given the number of those who have worked on both areas and the many publications with titles suggesting that the two have been linked inside their covers.
It may therefore not be entirely idle to try to hazard suggestions as to why the field should still be so open.
The best possible way to do this will be to set down the account resulting from a different approach, so that one can see what it is that has been overlooked so far; and this is something which this book sets out to do.
Beyond that, however, there are clearly certain factors which have acted to throw a kind of cloak of invisibility around the semantic contribution made by syntactic constructions.
Together these produce a powerful effect, and, after reviewing them and the way they work, it becomes very much less surprising that the semantic essence of syntactic constructions has proved so elusive in the past.
Since such a review stands rather apart from the rest of the material, it is presented separately, in Appendix A, where we consider what syntax is and is not, and the difficulties that have beset previous attempts to explain it, of which the principal result has been an implicit acceptance of what may be called the "perspicuity of grammar" .
In the remainder of this chapter, we shall present an outline sketch of the assumptions about the fundamental structure of grammar which form the background to our discussion of English adjectives, and  which allow us to derive the kind of detailed inferences about grammaticality and interpretation exemplified above.
It will be pleasing if the features of this sketch seem intuitively natural, as indeed we would claim, but justification for them is of course to be sought primarily in the observations of Chapters 2 to 10 and the way that these observations fit our assumptions about the bases of adjectival syntax.
Our treatment in this chapter will try to be as informal as possible in order to be comprehensible.
Notes towards a more formal account are offered in Appendix B.
1.3 At the simplest level, we assume that there are only two types of element possible in human linguistically structured thought, entities and properties.
Elements of these two types contract any of four "horizontal" relations, belonging to the same level, with other entities or properties or both, as will be described immediately below (it is probable that exactly one of these relations is specifically linguistic rather than being a relation implied by human mental activities in general).
Both types of element (or strictly speaking tokens or occurrences of both types) contract a "vertical" relation of instantiation with linguistic expressions, or more precisely with the meanings of linguistic expressions.
In all that follows, we shall assume that these basic linguistic expressions are words, as indeed they normally are, unless we have specific reason for focusing our attention on phrases or morphemes.
We may also say that the linguistic expressions (or their meanings) that appear in particular token constructions identify entities and properties (and we shall feel free to extend this use of identify to the activity of the speakers and writers who use the constructions).
Entities, being elements of a specifically linguistic domain which we shall call the intensional level, may or may not have a referent in some real or imaginary external world; we can certainly talk about an entity while uncertain of the existence of any related "thing" in the world about which we are speaking, or even while explicitly rejecting such an existence.
In precisely the same way, when we use the word property it will mean an element of this domain used by speakers in constructing their acts of linguistic communication, and not a property as perceived or conceived extralinguistically in a real or imaginary world, unless we specifically state that the latter is intended.
Another way of putting this is to say that human linguistic thought is such that all particular thoughts (whether expressed overtly or not) can be constructed only in terms of ideas classified as either entities or properties, and put together by means of some combination of the four fundamental relations already alluded to.
The first of these relations is what we shall call qualification.
Both entities and properties may be specified in more detail by extending them with elements of either type using this relation.
By virtue of being the additional "extending" elements, the latter are subordinate.
Let us clarify by giving some examples, assuming first a speaker who wishes to give linguistic expression to some part of the world which is perceived as an entity.
As a first step, he or she identifies it by using a word-meaning which is conventionally taken to match the nature of the perception.
(That is to say, the fit between meanings and perceptions is a matter of social convention, just as much as the historical process by which each language comes to have its own particular set of word forms for the meanings which it uses.
The paradigm example to remind us of the conventionality of the relationship between meanings and perceptions is the case of expressions for colour, and this holds good even if we are willing to accept a case for the universality of certain focal points of colour perception.)
The other constraint on the speaker is that the word-meaning chosen must also be one which is conventionally accepted as used for entities rather than for properties.
Let us choose, for the sake of a particular example, the word-meaning BOTTLES.
(Where it is necessary to distinguish explicitly between meanings and forms of words we shall follow the convention of Lyons and others in using small capital letters for the former.)
We may now represent this simplest of linguistic situations as follows (the minor complication potentially caused by the presence of PLURAL is ignored here): Naturally we shall use E as our symbol for the occurrence of an entity, and P for that of a property.
An alternative notation which may sometimes be more convenient is (5), with square brackets marking the fact that this word-meaning is taken to match an entity: If, however, the mind does not feel that BOTTLES is sufficiently specific to identify the target of its attention, then the identification  may be extended as in (6), where we adopt a plain arrowhead as our representation of qualification: We assume that a qualified entity remains an entity (see Appendix B), and this can more conveniently be represented by our alternative notation as in: It is quite important to stress the retention of the same subscript i in (7).
If we were talking in terms of the possibilities of identification provided by logical combinations of words from the dictionary, then (7) could not possibly identify the same entity, or set of entities, as (4) or (5).
But we are concerned with a fundamentally different matter, the possible ways in which some entity (or property), already accepted mentally, might be identified by a speaker, either for the purposes of his own thought or for communicating some idea to an audience; in the latter case, there is no reason at all to object to the suggestion that the same item might be referred to either by (7), or by (4) or (5).
As a detail of notation, if it seems useful to have a way to distinguish property-meanings from entity-meanings, then we may use round brackets for the former, thus allowing us to replace (7) by: We may also point out that the physical orientation of the arrowhead in our representations naturally reflects the direction of qualification, not the surface order of the instantiating elements.
1.4 We should now immediately take account of the fact that few words serve solely to identify entities that a speaker wishes to mention.
Possible exceptions are names, and in some languages perhaps certain deictics.
The case of ordinary nouns is more complex.
They are sometimes used solely for the sake of the descriptive properties which they express, as perhaps in: But the majority of their occurrences are aimed at identifying some entity.
Even in the latter instances, however, the entity is identified  by means of the properties which it designates.
To put it another way, a noun, as an item from the lexicon of the language, has descriptive content and may be considered as a property concept just as much as any verb or adjective, with only the exception that it is habitually used in individual acts of communication in order to identify an entity, by means of that descriptive content.
Thus we might, in the case of names, allow a representation like: The explicit omission of round brackets conveys the claim that the name identifies some entity directly, not through the mention of some properties.
(At the same time, we can very usefully retain the small capitals to indicate that, although no conventional property is involved, there is some body of cohesive information that corresponds to the form "Adolphus" , and that can be used to pick out some particular entity for discussion.)
However, ordinary nouns never strictly correspond to a structure like (10); the word bottles for example really demands an intensional representation which is already (minimally) complex; schematically, it is: Taking into account the particular word-meaning used we might write either:(The superscript e would tag the meaning as one which is conventionally used for identifying entities.)
Despite these remarks, it will be preferable to use a more compact notation, so, provided that it is understood that single nouns cover an intensional structure like that above (and this will matter in later chapters) we shall feel free to show them as simple occurrences of E, thus retaining  as our notation for the pattern of any of the following:(14) green bottles hungry marchers chocolate cake 1.5 It is inappropriate and indeed impossible to characterize the semantic, and purely linguistic, value of qualification in extensional or referential terms.
Certainly the range of types of referential relation holding between perceived properties corresponding to a qualifying adjective and perceived entities corresponding to its accompanying noun is enormous; a small random sample would include the cases that could be covered by (15) as well as by (14):(15) plastic bottles empty bottles useful bottles different bottles missing bottles It would not be correct, however, to conclude from this evidence that the meaning expressed by qualification is a broad composite notion, from a syntactic point of view.
One might try to construct formal models in which the phrases of (15) and others receive distinct representations, on the grounds that differences do exist in the types of situation which the phrases correspond to, and indeed such attempts have been made (cf. for example Kamp, 1975); but this is quite a different matter from trying to model the syntax by which the phrases are assembled as phrases.
As an analogy, one does not consider the notion of fatherhood a vague one, within the semantic domain of family relationships, simply because there is an immense number of types of relationship which may exist between actual fathers and their offspring; to do so would be a category error.
If qualification is hard to define, it is because it is one of the fundamental notions that are called on in building linguistic structures; it is one member of a subsystem which in its essence will actually reduce to three terms: qualification, equation (on which see Section 1.7), and absence of relation.
The right way to indicate its nature is, therefore, to give instances where it is present, and to describe its interaction with other parts of the system to which it belongs, in particular when the interaction leads to predictions which can be checked; simple as the system may be, we shall find that successive interactions can swiftly lead to structures of quite satisfying complexity (see Appendix B).
If any further immediate description of qualification is sought, we can only say that it introduces an element which the speaker does feel to be relevant to identification of a property or an entity, but subject to the constraint  that the element so introduced is not actually equivalent to the item qualified.
We should also, however, add a comment on a negative aspect, concerning the idea of applicability.
Although it is not in itself part of the system which generates intensional structures, and we shall not make the term part of our fundamental descriptive apparatus, we may say that the property of an adjective applies to an entity when the language user takes the property which it designates to be valid (in positive statements) for some entity which he or she also recognizes (even if the entity itself may be acknowledged as an imaginary one).
In the case where an E is extended by qualification in order to provide a more suitable identification to an audience, as in (14), it is entirely natural to assume that a P which does the qualifying — typically an attributive adjective, in traditional terms — will apply to or be valid for the entity identified by the whole pattern [P  E].
Yet, as we shall see in Chapter 2, this is not invariably the case.
The reason is that the main function of such an extended phrase remains identification of some entity or other; and there are occasions when that purpose can be helped along by introducing a P which applies to some other E.
However, this is the exceptional case.
We shall find that there is a very good general rule that, while adjectives may qualify verbs or verb phrases as well as nouns, the property which an adjective designates is understood to apply to the entity of that noun phrase with which it is in construction most directly (but not necessarily immediately, as we see in Chapters 3 to 9).
1.6 It is not necessary that an item qualifying an E should be a P. This is not the case in our next example,(16).
Here, since the word-meaning PLAYS is not enough to identify the target of the speaker's attention, it is extended by a subordinate entity: the subordinate linguistic expression continues to identify its own entity even though it is present in order to assist in the identification of a different entity, which is specified by the expression as a whole.
(Even if we do not accept the predominant view that names lack a meaning fixed by social convention, no alteration is required in the principles we are sketching here.)
Next, in (17), we have a minimal property complex made up of a property extended by another property, P  P, alternatively represented as in (18).
(The distinctions among different types of property complexes are considered in some detail in Chapter 8.):
Obviously in many cases such as(18) no confusion will be caused if we omit the inner pairs of brackets.
In (19) and (20) we have the less common case of a property extended by an entity, E  P; we continue to assume that a qualified property remains a property: Where we are considering some actual form of words with a view to describing their categorizations and relationships, and especially where the phrases are somewhat more complex, it may be appropriate to partly invert the notation, and to omit the separate representation of the word-meaning, as in (21) which so depicts the intensional structure of (18) and (19): Qualification is clearly an ordered relation and we shall assume that it is a binary relation; one of the two elements related is the principal element (on co-ordination, see Section 1.9 and Chapter 8).
Within the domain of syntax (though not necessarily within that of etymological morphology) the categorization of the extended phrase will be the same as that of its principal element; this is entirely natural, given that extensions are prompted by a desire for greater specificity.
To put it another way, if the principal element is an E, then the complex produced by such an extension remains an E; and if the main element is a P, then the complex is a P. Qualification has the effect of indicating that the subordinate element is to be used in the identification of a single entity or of a single property corresponding to the complex as a whole.
It is to be distinguished from the relation of assignment (below), notably because, in qualification, the property of the sub-ordinate element — even where that is an adjective — may not be true of the whole, despite the fact that it helps to identify it.
(For a full discussion of such cases, see Chapter 2.)
We may also note that it is  possible for the word instantiating the subordinate element to be otiose from the point of view of the speaker or hearer or both (see Chapter 7).
We are calling the level of entities and properties, together with qualification and the other fundamental relations, the intensional level.
There are good reasons for distinguishing it both from the level of the meanings of expressions, as will become apparent later in the text (see in particular Chapter 6), and from whatever more general non-linguistic level of mental activity has to take responsibility for human perception of external phenomena; a sufficient reason is that speakers of the language are well aware that they can seek to identify one and the same entity or property by using the meanings of various different expressions: Examples like (22) are familiarly put forward as showing the distinction between meaning and reference; they may serve that purpose but that is quite a different matter.
It may possibly be, as it surely is in (22), that, where a single entity is present to the mind of the speaker, the same speaker cannot simultaneously entertain the idea of more than one referent corresponding to that entity (though there may be certain problems for this view in the case of collective nouns such as government or congregation or quartet, for which see Chapter 8); however, it is much less obvious that, where there is assumed to be only a single referent, there should be only a single intensional entity present to the mind; rather, it seems to us that the separation of the referential and the intensional elements is precisely what lies behind such examples as (23)(from Searle, 1969), or (24):(23) Everest is Chomolungma (24) the sheriff did not know that he was Arthur's brother In the latter sentence, of course, we are interested in the interpretation which has he co-referring with Arthur's brother, and the reason that we do not find a reflexive in the final position is precisely that these two elements are distinct intensionally even though they share the same referent.
What is clear beyond doubt is that the level of intensional entities cannot be identified with any level or world of objectively existing referents;(25) is a perfectly coherent remark despite the fact that the speaker explicitly denies the existence of one of the principal participants in it:(25) If Jack had married, his wife would now be the dowager duchess of Luntshire
1.7 Example (26) shows us the second and less common relation contributing to the unfolding of syntactic structures, which we shall call equation, adopting the obvious symbol to represent it:(26) Fitzpatrick, our neighbour, used to plant potatoes the subject exemplifies the basic pattern [E = E],(as does the underlined portion of (22)); in more exact terms, what we have in this subject phrase is: As we have just remarked, equational phrases are rarer than phrases involving qualification; and, among them, there is a very large disproportion in favour of equation between E and E, rather than between P and P. Nevertheless, the latter can be found; two examples would be:(28) what I need is a cup of strong, dark coffee for a fast, convenient trip to the city, take the Skytram This is clearly not to say that strong and dark, or fast and convenient, are equivalent at the type level; only that on some particular occasion of use, as here, they may be regarded by speaker, or copywriter, as equivalent.
Once again we may stress that any attempt to describe syntax by assessing the logical possibilities of combination of the "type" meanings which words and other lexical items may have in the dictionary will simply launch us into the wrong enterprise.
The intensional level structures which we are describing here are not rules of logical combination, constrained by what may or must be possible, given the type meaning of the words which are combined; there is any amount of evidence to this effect if we simply allow our attention to rest on it.
For instance, there is a contradiction, in a strict interpretation of:(29) the circle in the left of the picture is essentially another rectangle The sentence could not be a usable part of the language if language adhered to logical conventions.
We shall not now make the point that contradictions and tautologies are often socially acceptable; the  important point is that we can only see that there is a contradiction in (29) because, as users of the language, we know how to interpret the rules of intensional combination, and those rules have not been broken.
The intensional patterns are generalizations from the ways in which language users assemble particular instances of P and E in their thoughts and their communication.
If we take sentences without contexts and devise interpretations for them on the basis of the mutual compatibility or otherwise of the type-meaning of the words in them, we are putting ourselves under constraints which have nothing to do with syntax; by thus restricting and deforming our appreciations of the structure we prevent ourselves seeing what the effect of the syntax, qua syntax, is.
In these purely syntactic terms, equation has the obvious value that the language user regards one entity or property, in some given context, as being equivalent to the other.
We have seen instances of equation between E and E, and between P and P. We assume that equations between P and E are fundamentally incoherent (though see the remarks below, concerning (37)).
1.8 The most important structure of linguistic communication at the intensional level is that of assignment.
Without this, human language would be limited to mentioning phrases, in principle indefinitely many, and in principle without restriction on their length, but still merely phrases, not construed into a whole capable of constituting a statement (or a question or a command).
Assignment is a relation in the technical sense, but as it is a unary relation, many readers may feel more at ease if we speak of it as a property (the two ways of speaking are of course completely inter-convertible).
It is not, however, a property in the same sense as we have used the term up to this point, since it is a second-order property; that is, it is a property of the other two relations that we have sketched so far (and only of these).
It is what makes the difference between the phrase (30), where the first-order relation is of course qualification, and the completeness of (31):(30) lucky Gomez (31) Gomez is lucky Similarly, this is the difference which opposes (32) and (33), where the relation assigned is equation rather than qualification:(32) the broker, a man in a grey suit (33) the broker was a man in a grey suit  The notion of "completeness" may seem vague; again, however, we should not expect it to be defined more closely for the very good reason that fundamental notions — and we take assignment together with equation and qualification, along with the ideas of entity and property, to be the bedrock of linguistic structure — do not allow themselves to be defined.
The only appropriate demands that we can make, as we have already remarked, is that we should be given clear examples where they are or are not at work, and that we should be shown how they interact with one another and with more complex factors in ways that lead to verifiable claims about data.
These things we do in detail in the chapters that follow.
But we may already point out that an objector who wishes to deny that there is any reality to the notion of assignment as distinct from qualification must pay the high price of asserting that there is no difference between (30) and (31), or between (32) and (33).
Completeness, however, is not the only characteristic of assignment when it is combined with qualification.
Although, as we have said, applicability of a property is not part of our descriptive apparatus as such, in Chapter 3 we shall point out that there is an inevitable consequence of the occurrence of assignment of qualification, namely that the qualifying property is taken to be valid for the entity qualified, by contrast with the case where qualification occurs alone.
Qualification allows this but does not require it.
One thing we must insist on is that, with assignment, we are not concerned with what Geach (1976) called assertoric force.
While assignment may go hand in hand with such assertoric force in positive statements, it clearly does not do so in questions, nor in subordinate clauses like that in:(34) I wonder if the taps were turned off Questions and such subordinate clauses show clearly that an idea of completeness which is independent of that of assertion is necessary.
With very few exceptions, in the chapters that follow, we shall need only be concerned with assignment that is combined with qualification; and, for the sake of brevity, we shall use assignment, alone, to mean assignment of qualification.
We shall adopt a small arrow  as our notation for assignment in this sense, so that(31)(excluding irrelevant details like number, and the particular tense employed) may be represented as (35), where we again abbreviate by passing directly from the word forms to the intensional pattern: We may note, by the way, that the copular verb to be is the direct formal representation of the relation of assignment; this has to be expressed overtly in English (as well as being indicated by the order of noun and adjective), although in many other languages, e.g. Russian and Arabic, no overt exponent is required.
If or when there is need to do so, we may represent assignment of equation by a double arrow  and we have an example of this type already seen in (33) above.
It is natural to assume that =, whether assigned or not, cannot normally relate intensional elements of different types, i.e. an entity and a property (but see (37)).
It is perhaps arguable, though, that we should recognize structures based on assignment of equation where the two intensional elements are properties; thus a sentence such as small is beautiful might be represented as:(36) small is beautiful On the other hand, it may be that the human mind only represents such an equational assignment to itself by first making an entity-concept out of the ideas on each side.
A resolution of this issue, which is not a pressing matter, would need also to take account of the fact that speakers do, in practice, use sentences which could be taken as instances of a third possible equational type (if this is not to be regarded as merely some kind of linguistic jeu d'esprit):(37) cautiously is the way we should proceed In both of these two cases, the question is whether a property concept can fill a position which would otherwise be reserved for an entity.
The discrimination is a subtle one, and, presumably, a satisfying answer would have to await a psychological test of some considerable finesse.
However, such sentences are at best marginal in English.
In any event, since this study is concerned with adjectives, and since, out of the considerable variety of adjectival constructions, very few involve equation we shall only seldom need to make any reference, in the following chapters, to structures built on this relation, whether combined with assignment or not.
1.9 There seems no reason to suppose that equation or qualification are relations specific to linguistically structured thought.
Equation is seen, for instance, when we recognize a picture of someone we know; and qualification was at work when a cave painter added the last few touches which made his bison look more energetic and more nearly alive than the others already on the rock face.
The same is true of the remaining relation co-ordination.
It is no surprise to discover its presence, since it must surely belong to a very early stage in the mental development of the human species; indeed insofar as it represents one aspect of the principle of treating like as like, it can be seen as common perceptual property for all sentient organisms.
The important point, however, is that the two "likes" must be treated as like in some respect; and in the linguistic cases this does not merely mean that the two items co-ordinated must be on the same level in terms of specific syntactic classifications, as has often been remarked; more importantly, it is clear that they must be alike in both bearing one of the other relations, already introduced, to some third element; thus, in:(38) Nora is Irish and beautiful the structure is such that Irish and beautiful are both related to Nora by assignment, while in:(39) bed and board is going to take half his wages the relation of instantiation links both bed and board to the single entity in the subject position.
(The fact that the entity is single at the intensional level explains why the verb is singular despite the plurality of nouns and of referents.)
Thus co-ordination is, in a sense, virtually always a derived relation or "para-relation" in that it can be theoretically discarded, provided only that one accepts multiple operation of the other relations.
The sole exception to this seems to be in the case of co-ordination of whole clauses, where the co-ordination would be a matter of like treatment in respect of assertoric or imperative or interrogative force (so that co-ordinations of, say, a command and a statement, if they ever occur, sound odd, or make one feel that the speaker has switched constructions in the middle of a sentence).
1.10 It appears that nearly all languages make at least one division in the words of their vocabulary, morphologically or syntactically, or in both ways, between those which commonly do instantiate and those which cannot instantiate entities; the former are traditionally called nouns, and there is a very high degree of intuitive agreement in cross-linguistic identification of nouns precisely because speakers of  even widely different cultures are disposed to agree in what they regard as entities rather than properties.
There may also be a large overlap between intuitive classification as a "thing" and lexical labelling as a noun, but this is a separate issue; the distinction for purposes of linguistic structure between entity and property is undoubtedly to be taken as autonomous.
Evidence for this is so freely available even within a single language that it may be overlooked; a random pair of examples from English, one abstract, one "concrete" , would be those in (40) and (41), each showing the same notion present twice but only once in the guise of a noun:(40) the male ape has amazing strength the male ape is amazingly strong (41) Steve's scarf was greasy there was grease on Steve's scarf The question is not essentially affected by the need to enter certain caveats related to the superficial grammar of the language concerned; thus in English, unlike for example Russian or Latin, there are relatively few nouns which can instantiate an entity without some article or other determiner playing a supporting part.
Most languages go further.
To take the particular case of relevance to this book, adjectives in English are, broadly, those words which can instantiate the P in both patterns of: Verbs can instantiate the latter position but not the former; the lexical meaning expressed by a given verb must, exactly, undergo a change of syntactic class in order to do this, this usually being marked by an overt morphological change.
For example,(43) is matched by (45), not (44):(43) frogs croak (44) croak frogs (45) croaking frogs Adjectives in English are also distinguished from verbs by the separate peculiarity (already implied) that in assignment they must be accompanied by a form of be which carries tense, and which more importantly helps to mark the relation.
1.11 Thus, our basic descriptive apparatus will consist of two (primitive) types of element, entity and property (each represented by indefinitely many tokens); and of the relations of qualification and equation, and of assignment (as well as— with certain reservations — co-ordination) which link entities and properties to one another .
All these are not merely parts of our descriptive model; we assume that they correspond very directly to aspects of the activity which goes on in the mind of speakers; by contrast the relation of instantiation which links particular items of the English vocabulary and the elements E and P is metalinguistic, since in any particular use of a linguistic structure the word-meanings which are present, supported of course by the word-forms which are the overt carriers of the meanings, are the Es and the Ps, rather than being related to them.
This holds good on condition that we are restricting our attention, as in this study, to syntax; once we take the broader view which embraces speakers' knowledge of vocabulary as well, then we must admit a real analogue to this relation since speakers are quite aware that their language habitually uses, for example this set of words to instantiate E, and that set of words to instantiate P (or, in most languages, various sets of words to instantiate the Ps occurring in various different intensional patterns; see Appendix B, Section 7).
In Chapters 2 to 10 we take the various constructions in which English adjectives actually appear, and consider the grammatical and interpretative consequences of the intensional patterns which are expressed by those constructions, before returning in the final three chapters to more general issues of syntax.
Attributive adjectives: the distinction between ascriptive and associative
2.1 In dealing with adjectives, we shall take the simplest and most straightforward cases first.
We shall postpone until Chapter 3 the task of setting out the full array of intensional patterns which are expressed in the syntactic structures involving English adjectives.
In this chapter we shall examine a construction which has the basic value of providing a subordinate property to assist in identification of some entity when this is not fully achieved by the noun.
In addition, it throws up a syntactic-semantic distinction which is important in its own right and which will make its presence felt in the other adjectival positions also.
The construction is, of course, that of the ordinary attributive adjective, the adjective which is the exponent in observable syntax of the subordinate property in the intensional structure: The essentials of the notation, for any who have taken the option of arriving at this point direct from the beginning of Section 1.2, are as follows: The basic elements in constructing linguistic expressions are assumed to be two: E = entity notion; and P = property notion The basic relations have these symbols: = = equation; = qualification  = assignment The direction of the arrow and the arrowhead indicates which is the major and which the subordinate item in the formula; it does not refer to order of appearance in surface form.
Square brackets may be used to surround formulae taken as complex entities, round brackets in the case of complex properties; scroll brackets will surround complete clauses.
In some languages, the status attributive has to be marked in moderately complicated ways; for instance, the adjective instantiating P may have to "agree with its noun" ; that is , it may have to take on affixes reflecting various features of the noun which instantiates the E in (1), such as its number or the noun class to which it belongs.
This type of marking is seen in the contrast of form between the French adjectives in (2) and (3), qualifying a masculine singular noun, and a feminine plural noun, respectively:(2) j'ai besoin d'un drapeau blanc (3) ils passèrent deux nuits blanches In English, however, the syntactic realization of this pattern is in a sense the simplest possible: the adjective realizing the P has to be juxtaposed to the noun which is the exponent of E. Ordinary attribution requires this juxtaposition to have the adjective preceding rather than following the noun (as we shall see in Chapter 3, there is rather more than one might suspect to be said about postnominal attributive adjectives).
The issue of interpretation concerns two different ways in which the property P may be related to the entity E.
In the next two sections, we shall draw attention to effects on interpretation and consider informally the basis of the distinction; in 2.4 and 2.5 we look at the grammatical consequences, and in the remainder of the chapter consider why the distinction may sometimes be hard to appreciate and argue that it is nevertheless quite generally available for the attributive adjectival construction.
2.2 Prominent among the basic types of phrase used in English (and many other languages) we find attributive adjective + noun (with or without an associated determiner according to such criteria as the "mass" or "count" status of the noun, and other requirements of specific grammars).
Out of the indefinitely large number of possible examples in English, we might suggest: Although the adjectives differ in many ways, which will be examined in the next nine chapters, these phrases all exemplify the qualifying structure of (1); the noun alone is not sufficient to identify the entity under consideration by the speaker so the adjective is introduced to aid the process.
Phrases of this sort are so familiar that it is not hard to understand a disposition which constantly interferes with attempts to understand syntactic structures, namely a tendency to regard them as transparently clear, with no need for a linguist to do more than record the existence of the surface construction.
There are, however, questions to be asked, as we shall see.
Let us first offer some more phrases sharing the adjective of the last example in (4).
(5) French wine a French kiss the French government It turns out that there is a split within this group of four apparently similar phrases.
In the second and fourth of those cited, the nouns wine and government each designate properties which are valid for a certain entity.
It will moreover be widely accepted that, in any proper use of these particular examples, this entity can truly be described as French.
To put it more briefly, the property FRENCH applies to or (other things equal) is true of that which is designated by the noun.
This, however, is not the case for the first and third examples using the same adjective.
The diagnostic test needed is obviously something like the following: Given a situation where a phrase composed of adjective A and noun N can correctly apply to something perceived by the speaker, is it possible in principle to say the following truthfully: "This N is A" ?
Some might set off from observations like these to construct a formal system which would provide different representations for the different types of non-linguistic referents (beings or situations or things) for which, logically, the various phrases could be used in our own or some other possible world.
Certainly this can be done, though whether it provides any sort of explanation is questionable.
However, we shall adhere to the view (treated more fully in Appendix A) that there are no good grounds for supposing that systems designed to model relationships in external worlds will give us any insight into the syntagmatic links used by human syntax when it joins words into phrases and sentences.
In the present case we shall take the view that  the perception of two distinct types of phrase here can be explained rather simply by a divergence of relation at the intensional level.
Moreover this divergence turns out to have other consequences apart from the difference of interpretation with which we have started.
It is no accident that there is a similarity between the diagnostic test, above, and the claim which used to be advanced in transformational grammar to the effect that an attributive adjective incorporated in a noun phrase is derived from some such structure as:(6) the N present BE ADJ This proposal was questioned quite early in the development of transformational grammar (see Berman, 1974), and a major reason for this was precisely the fact that too many phrases with attributive adjectives were discovered where the derivation does not seem to be usable; as we shall see later, there are other reasons why such a derivation may not work, apart from the issue discussed here.
In this book, we assume that the similarity between the transformational process and our diagnostic test arises because the former was formulated in response to intuitions about the fact that the properties of many (but not all!) adjectives could be considered valid for the E qualified in both the P positions in:(7) P  E E  P In any case, the test gives us two different ways in which the adjective French may be used with its noun, and the examples show that it does not always designate a property of the entity to which it appears to be attached syntactically.
It is not difficult to make similar observations in the case of other adjectives:(8) a meteorological expert romantic novelists foreign policy a nuclear scientist animate nouns the royal hatmaker All these are wholly respectable phrases of English (especially the last one) but, in every case, a test using the sentence "This N is A" will either give a meaning to the adjective which is different from that in the original phrase, or simply produce an unacceptable result.
The difference of interpretation is not some accidental effect arising from the combination of certain adjectives with particular nouns; some phrases are subject to both interpretations:(9) his Italian diary might refer either to a diary which is Italian, perhaps in the sense that it was manufactured there, or to a record made during a journey through Italy.
(There is also of course a third, distinct, possibility, that it is a daily record kept in Italian, but we shall assume that this uses Italian in the sense of Italian language — that is to say, as a noun — and is, therefore, an example of a different kind of syntactic phrase, the noun + noun combination, seen in fish tank.)
Similarly:(10) I only offered her legal advice will, under one natural interpretation, refer to advice on legal matters; and it will continue to do so even if in some rare case it is given under circumstances that mean it is offered illegally itself, for example if it makes use of secret information stolen from a government which prohibits unauthorized possession or transmission of secret government information; on the other hand, as a phrase of English, it can perfectly well bear the other interpretation under which it means advice which is itself legal, in the sense that it is legally given, in which case it may concern any subject under the sun.
Indeed, it is only matters of contingent fact which ensure that the phrase royal hatmaker cited in (7) will not be seen as ambiguous in this way.
If a member of, say, the Hohenzollerns decided to keep the wolf from the door by taking up this particular trade, then royal here clearly would be true of the hatmaker; i.e. the property ROYAL would apply to the E present to the mind of the speaker describing such an individual.
These ambiguous examples are particularly useful for bringing out the difference between the two types of interpretation.
In the one set of cases, the adjective is used not merely as a subordinate element in qualification but also to apply a property directly to the entity designated by the noun, the head word of the phrase; in the other the adjective mentions the same property but it is merely, in some way, to be associated with that entity; it is certainly intended to assist in entity-identification — and that is why it is there — but as a property it actually belongs to someone or something else.
There are two things here which need to be distinguished: one is the structural, intensional, association between the adjective and the noun (or, strictly speaking, between the property and the entity that they instantiate) that form a phrase together and are jointly engaged in the business of identifying some entity; the other is the referential link between the adjective and that to which it properly applies.
Mehmet Ali Agca, after his attempt on the life of the Pope, was described in a  newspaper report as a papal assailant (The Guardian, London, 10 July 1985).
The property PAPAL is here associated intensionally with the noun assailant (or, strictly, with the entity that is primarily identified by the noun assailant) in order to satisfy the writer's desire for specificity in putting across to the reader her idea of the person to be mentioned; yet the property PAPAL was referentially applicable to somebody else, a person otherwise known as Karol Wojtyla.
In just the same way, in any normal circumstances a royal hatmaker is a hatmaker who has some special relationship to a royal family or royal person without being royal himself.
Cases of the latter type, where the adjective is used only to aid identification and does not actually apply to the entity of the phrase, closely resemble the great bulk of noun + noun phrases in their structural value, examples such as:(11) army manoeuvres the piano factory a sea monster an angle bracket However, even among noun + noun phrases, certain specimens occur which are clearly analogous to the former type; as in:(12) a doctor journalist (or doctor-journalist) Chancellor Kohl a bed-settee These would permit an affirmative answer to our diagnostic test, although normally it is necessary to allow a little leeway in the shape of an added determiner to allow for this requirement of English:(13) Maurice is a journalist and he is also a doctor 2.3 It would be useful to have names for the two types of adjectival use, and there are fortunately two terms available which fall in the right semantic area and which have not been pre-empted for any other widely accepted technical linguistic purpose.
We shall therefore use ascription for the case where the adjective conveys a property which is valid for the entity instantiated by the noun, and association for the case where it is valid for something else.
A case of the contrast which may be helpful as a mnemonic is that between a symphonic overture (ascriptive) which is symphonic in and by itself, and an operatic overture (associative) which does not have the usual characteristics of opera (not only is it purely orchestral, it is often played with the curtain not yet risen) but which is, nonetheless, designated by a phrase where the property OPERATIC is associated with  OVERTURE in order to describe sufficiently what the speaker wishes to identify.
The difference exists, as such, synchronically; there is no need to import any knowledge of the history of the language that is not actually used by the ordinary speaker in the course of his or her normal unreflecting usage.
Thus it may well be that French Canadian is derived historically by the addition of an adjectival sufffix to the geographical term French Canada, but it is clear that in the mind of most users the adjective is used to take a subset out of the larger class of things or people Canadian, as shown, for instance, by the general refusal in Canada to use the historically natural opposite term English Canadian otherwise than for those descended from inhabitants of Great Britain and in particular England (see Orkin, 1971).
Similarly arable farmer is no doubt to be explained historically as derived from the term arable farm (in which we see an ascriptive adjective) by means of an agentive suffix.
But, in English of the present day, the word arable in the former phrase is clearly an associative adjective, setting off one group of farmers from others such as pig farmers.
Equally, we should remark that the interpretation of an adjective as associative does not necessarily depend on the existence of a noun from which the adjective can be seen as derived.
This can be claimed for romantic and romance, but is not appropriate in the case of arable farmer, nor of foreign policy or animate nouns from (7), nor of new in (17) nor naked in (18); and it would clearly not apply for nuclear scientist either; while there does exist a noun nucleus, which is certainly the etymological origin of the adjective, the scientist is, synchronically and in the usage of the ordinary speaker, to be connected with the indefinite notion of nuclear matters (where, for example, Latin would have used the neuter plural of an adjective) rather than directly with nucleus; one may reasonably guess that many speakers to whom the word nucleus is quite unfamiliar would nevertheless feel they understood quite satisfactorily a headline which read: TOP NUCLEAR SCIENTIST GOES MISSING!
Nor would the suggestion of a derivational link to a noun hold good for an associative use of young rather common in advertisements:(14) the young place to go young clothes the young thing to do Another thing to emphasize is that what we are considering does not depend on a change of sense in the adjective; in some cases, certainly, the shift from ascription to association or vice versa may be accompanied by or compatible with such a lexical change; but this may happen equally in cases of classical structural ambiguity, such as:(15) Charles will give a talk on the village green where two different senses of on are called upon, as one shifts from the one structure to the other.
However, the co-existence of a lexical ambiguity in no way alters the fact that in both types of instance — ordinary structural ambiguity and the distinction between associative and ascriptive — there are two different patterns of relationship holding between elements of the linguistic structure.
In any case, with many associative adjectives there does not seem to be any lexical variation.
For instance, the foreign in foreign policy is the same foreign as in foreign goods (where the adjective is ascriptive); likewise the associative abdominal of abdominal support expresses just the same idea as does the ascriptive adjective in:(16) this abdominal region is naturally more sensitive than the upper arm Similarly, in (9) we saw an alteration in the meaning of the noun qualified, but there was no reason to suspect the word Italian in itself of contributing two different values in the cases where it is used adjectivally.
One other possible objection is that the difference which we are describing may be real but should not be regarded as part of syntax, rather as a variation that comes into play only when we focus on the correlation between linguistic expressions and external non-linguistic phenomena.
This would imply an analogy with a variation of interpretation when, for instance, the pronoun they is used; it may refer to animate beings, or to objects.
This variation is not built into the word-meaning, but depends on what the word happens to correspond to extralinguistically on any given occasion when it is used.
In reply, we would point out that, before we can even raise the question of correlation between linguistic expressions and extra-linguistic phenomena, we have to know what the linguistic expressions are, and for speakers and hearers (even if not for strict behaviourists) this means understanding them.
And there is transparently more to this than knowing the meanings of individual units of expression; we have to grasp the syntax.
This will not be enough, either, if by "syntax" we agree to mean mere syntactic cohesion; by itself, this leaves us with simple facts about grouping and nothing more.
It is no improvement merely to add a label, saying — taking an example at random— that left for Scotland yesterday morning is a verb phrase if by that we simply mean that it consists of a certain sequence of word classes recognized as frequently occurring.
It is not until we broach such questions as, What is meant when a speaker sets an adjective in juxtaposition to its noun as opposed to linking it indirectly via a form of the verb to be? that we can start to give a full and proper account of syntax.
It is certainly not enough to say that the former position shows "attribution" and the latter "predication" ; one must go on to say what these terms of one's theory mean, and if our account is to be genuinely explanatory, we must do so in ways which can be related to concepts and phenomena which stand outside our initial theory.
In this book it is our aim to give such an account of the meaning of the various surface constructions where adjectives are found in English, doing so by relating these to such intensional notions as entity, identification, qualification and assignment (which can themselves be plausibly related to more general aspects of mental activity); and indeed we believe this is the task for syntax in general.
If we say that such-and-such a group of words are the "subject" or that some other group of words are the "predicate" in a copular verb phrase, we are, by such observations, recognizing the speaker's intention to construct expressions which will identify certain properties and entities, and to assign some of the former to one of the latter, so as to let an audience know what entities are under attention and which properties are claimed to hold for which entities; we take this to be the essence of what goes on in the use and understanding of linguistic expression (whatever the purpose to which individual acts of communication are directed).
As we have pointed out, the distinction between association and ascription is precisely such an issue of the application of properties to occurrences of entities.
We can perhaps clarify this particular case further by adopting a very simple notation, where r superscribed to a morpheme M indicates the entity (whether identified explicitly or not) demanded by the use of the morpheme M, which we shall call its referential locus.
This is not to be regarded as committing us to any of the values of the term "referent" accepted in philosophy.
A sufficient reason for this is that M may be an adjective or a verb, neither of which would normally be considered as having a referent.
Here, we shall provisionally assume that whenever an adjective, e.g. long, is used, there is in the world which the speaker postulates (if only for the sake of discussion) some entity of which it is used, directly or indirectly.
This would be equally true in a long tunnel, and in the giant's beard was long, and in how long is the interval?, where of course the referential loci of long are the entities corresponding to tunnel, beard, and interval respectively.
Now, given a phrase consisting of adjective + noun, we may say that, for ascriptive adjectives, the referential locus of the adjective and of the noun are one and the same, in other words that  but that for associative adjectives .
In the latter case, will, in general, not be equivalent to  for any other morpheme in the sentence;(17), in the following newspaper headline:(17) Laos threatens to attack new village the referential locus of new is the E of an implied nominal attack which does not in fact appear; it will in fact only be co-incidence if Ar is identical with the E of a morpheme expressed elsewhere in the same structure, as in (18), the title of an English madrigal:(18) as I go to my naked bed (We return to the notion of referential locus at several points in the remainder of our text.)
2.4 What consequences for syntax or morphological form does our distinction of adjectival use have?
Some may feel that differences of interpretation are all very well in their way (though the present writer would maintain that they are of first-rank importance), but what is really wanted is a correlation or two with data that can be subjected (in principle) to some basic observational test, such as "Is this grammatical or not?" 
There are indeed grammatical consequences.
It is true that when the adjective is used in attributive position there is no syntactic or morphological difference to reflect the two possibilities.
In both cases, we have a minor constituent of the category noun phrase without any special marking.
However, we have already pointed out, by implication, one very important syntactic consequence: only the ascriptive adjectives are eligible to appear predicatively, that is, in a position like that of hungry in:(19) the antelopes are hungry As was already indicated in Chapter 1, and as we shall see in more detail in Chapter 3, predicative position is the surface structure which expresses the intensional relation of assignment, and assignment does require that the property of the adjective should be construed as applied to the entity of the subject noun phrase.
But associative adjectives are not so applied; therefore they should not — and in fact do not — occur in predicative position.
This is the reason why the relationship between an attributive adjective and its noun is not the same as that between a predicative adjective and its noun (and why attempts to relate them systematically in grammar are misguided).
It is the major reason why there is a discrepancy between the sets of adjectives which can appear in attributive and predicative positions (other reasons appear in later chapters).
If we force an associative adjective into predicative position, a user  of English has to try to make sense of the result within a framework of interpretation, which already requires that the adjective should be taken as ascriptive.
Consequently, a predicative structure combining a noun and an adjective related to it associatively will either seem unacceptable, as in:(20) the visiting scientists are nuclear or, at best, demand of the adjective a different meaning (if one is available) from the associative one that it would have in the attributive position.
This is perhaps possible in a sentence like:(21) This Canadian is French given the existence of dual nationality (if, that is, any speaker should ever wish to make an assignment of one property in a sentence where the subject is first identified by a competing property of the same type).
2.5 We have, therefore, one very substantial consequence in terms of grammatical acceptability, namely exclusion of associatives from predicative position.
There are others.
Some of these appear in later chapters.
In addition to these, however, we may note that for ascriptive adjectives the possibility of using an intensifying adverb depends simply on its lexical identity; some, e.g. tough allow it, others, e.g. tubular, do not.
But when one is dealing with associative use, we have to do with a binary distinction; the adjective is introduced solely to indicate that its property, even though applicable to some other entity, is associated with the entity of its noun phrase, and here there are only two possible states — either the property is associated, in the view of the speaker, or it is not (and of course by a slightly curious consequence of the communicational process, the state must always be the positive one, since if the property were not felt to be associated with that entity and needed for identification, then the adjective which designates that property would simply not appear).
Thus associative adjectives should never admit an intensifying adverb.
This prediction is indeed borne out; for instance, both cases of (22) are anomalous:
(22) Margaret is a rather meteorological expert they bought some extremely clerical collars This effect is seen very clearly in the cases where the same word can be used in each of the different ways; thus the adjective musical can perfectly well be modified for intensity when it is used ascriptively:(23) even as a child Naomi had a very musical voice but when it is associative, the result is again unacceptable:(24) we've found a legal text and a very musical treatise 2.6 It is not necessary to be a linguist to feel that there is a difference in the two ways of using attributives.
For example, a listener was cited on the BBC World Service (30 March 1992) as complaining about a correspondent's use of the phrase humanitarian catastrophe.
Evidently the listener was choosing to interpret the adjective ascriptively, but equally obviously the correspondent had intended it associatively.
Beside such blatant instances, however, there are many more subtle cases.
Indeed the two values are often extremely difficult to disentangle and there is a good reason for this; for any given adjective, in many or most actual situations where the one interpretation may be applied correctly, the other will apply also; in addition, for many adjectives, even in principle, the semantic distinction may be vanishingly small.
Let us give examples.
First we may consider the phrase:(25) acrobatic performance In the light of the discussion above we may remark that this can be understood in either of two ways: first, as covering any performance which is so described because it is linked with the idea of an acrobat in the execution of his or her professional duties; this would include expertise in juggling, tightrope walking, standing on one's hands, and so on, even if they are performed by an amateur lacking any natural talent for the task; second,(25) may be used to designate any performance which is acrobatic in itself, even if not part of the normal repertoire of acrobats, for instance , grabbing hold of a branch growing out from a cliff just after falling from the top.
The former meaning may be loosely paraphrased as:(26) one of the feats commonly expected of acrobats The second meaning cannot be paraphrased by (26).
The distinction corresponds to the difference between association and ascription, respectively.
Now, in most of our utterances, the word acrobatic is obviously unlikely to appear at all; and this holds good even when we are talking of some fine physical performance, on the one hand, or of acrobats and their activities, on the other.
For instance, if we happen to witness  the fall from the cliff-top proposed above, there are many other ways in which we might think of the action apart from using the word acrobatic; we might describe it as athletic, agile, amazing, swift, cat-like, or we might employ any of an indefinitely large number of similes along the lines of with the speed of a gibbon.
Equally, we would seldom be likely to use the word acrobatic of acrobats themselves or their doings except, precisely, on occasions when they are exercising their special skills — the rest of the time we may speak of them, if a description is needed at all, as large, or rich, or charming, as standing on his dignity, or asking for black coffee, or younger than Aunt Mary, and so on .
In other words, the most likely occasions for associative use of the word to qualify what is in fact a performance from the professional acrobat's repertoire — as when we are confronted by the sight of a lady standing on a man's shoulders and juggling with Indian clubs — would be occasions when it is very likely that we can just as well describe the actions as acrobatic in their own right; and on the other hand, ascriptive use of the word is likely to be rather rare except, precisely, in those circumstances where professional acrobats form part of the context, so that an associative use would be equally justified.
Exactly comparable remarks can be made about:(27) criminal activity The distinction between associative and ascriptive interpretation is clear and can be paraphrased reasonably enough, by phrases like illegal activity versus activity connected with crime.
There may be rare instances where a situation can be covered by one meaning but not by the other; a police investigation might conceivably report that "criminal activity" (associative use) "in the southern suburbs includes ostentatious donations to charity in order to cultivate an image of respectability" ; a lawyer might jocularly speak of criminal activity having sharply increased in his legal chambers (though intuitive awareness of the ambiguity might just as well make him avoid the phrase); in both these cases the associative interpretation, only, is required.
But in most conversational contexts, if we think of an activity as connected with crime, we are likely to be thinking of an activity which is itself criminal; and on the other hand, in all cases, activity which is itself criminal is by definition connected with crime.
Thus, in nearly all its occurrences, either use of the adjective criminal would be equally valid.
For one more example, let us compare two terms which will be familiar to many readers; when the phrase logical theory is used, an obvious difference of meaning is involved, depending on whether we  are talking about a theory which has the characteristic of being logical (with ascriptive interpretation of the adjective) or about a theory which is concerned with aspects of logic (associative use).
We may contrast with this the phrase semantic components, where the two interpretations are virtually indistinguishable; it will be seen that this phrase will always come to the same thing in practical terms, whether we regard the components as being semantic, with ascriptive use of the adjective, or as components connected with semantics, taking the associative interpretation.
The situation is typical of that for very many adjectives.
In a large proportion of the cases, when they can be applied at all, both uses — associative and ascriptive — make equally good sense because the facts observed or imagined can be described equally well either way; the mental, linguistic, difference is there but both mental representations can be mapped onto the same single external situation.
This inevitably makes it hard for us to become accustomed to making the distinction explicitly.
2.7 The difficulty is compounded by the fact that the idea of association can correspond to a wide range of referential or "factual" relationships (just as can the ascriptive use of an adjective or the qualifying use of a subordinate noun); and, importantly, this is true not only of those relations that can ultimately be reduced to arrangements of objects in the physical world, but also of those that depend on human judgements and evaluations, e.g. relations of loving or resemblance; all these we shall consider as factual relations by contrast with syntactic relations.
This, however, introduces a further obstacle for anyone trying to discriminate between associative and ascriptive interpretation; for it is, of course, possible to regard the very fact of a connexion (associative) corresponding to any of these factual relations as being in itself a property — a property that can then be used ascriptively.
Let us take as an example the adjective bovine.
First let us exclude all cases where we are concerned with something which actually is, or is taken to be, a bull or cow or calf in a real or imagined external world, when the use is plainly ascriptive.
Then, out of the (indefinitely large set of) instances that remain, some will fairly clearly show association only, e.g. bovine tuberculosis; "this tuberculosis is bovine" would sound distinctly odd to the ear of the ordinary speaker of English.
But what should we say of, for example, bovine behaviour?
Is this conceived of as behaviour of a sort characteristic of cattle (associative), or is it behaviour felt to have a cattle-like property?
In many such cases, there cannot be a clear answer in favour of the one or the other.
Although many adjectives can, in this phrase or that, be  unambiguously assigned to ascriptive use or associative use there is undoubtedly a border zone where adjectives can be interpreted either way; there will be many phrases for which both interpretations can be mapped onto the same single situation, not just in some particular token occurrences, but in all cases.
Abundant evidence of ambivalence between ascriptive and associative use is to be found in examples of historical change.
Barbaric, for instance, began its lexical life as a designation for tribes which did not speak Greek (the Romans later amended this to embrace tribes which spoke neither Greek nor Latin); it is no surprise that it was extended to include behaviour held, rightly or wrongly, to be typical of such tribes and at the beginning of this stage it cannot but have been an associative adjective in these uses.
Since then, it has come to designate what is clearly perceived as a property in its own right, which, when used in an adjective, is ascribed to the accompanying noun (or, strictly, to the entity that is its referential locus).
Another similar adjective is platonic which equally clearly must have been used associatively, to mean having a link with Plato (as indeed it still does in one of its senses) before it came to have an ascriptive value roughly equivalent to chaste.
We have then no reason to be surprised if the distinction between ascription and association in adjectives is overlooked or mistakenly supposed to be a matter of "nuances of meaning" , rather than being recognized as a systematic variation.
First, the distinction may be irrelevant in a high proportion of situations where an adjective is used, since either interpretation will give the same practical result.
Second, there will be a border area where the two interpretations merge, in the sense that certain particular values for adjective and noun meanings, when joined in an attributive combination, will under either interpretation always correspond to identical external situations; hence even highly sophisticated investigators might be hard put to it to tell whether a given adjective is simply applicable to X or has as its value having the property of being-related-to-X.
Nonetheless, we should keep the two patterns distinct, first as a matter of proper investigative practice, because the distinction though subtle is real; second, because in a great many cases it does make a quite easily discernible difference to the interpretation intended and required; and, third, because it has some quite substantial grammatical consequences.
The instances where one can most easily make oneself aware of the distinction are perhaps the ambiguous phrases where the same adjective in construction with the same noun can be understood in either way with a consequent effect on the meaning of the whole phrase.
We conclude therefore with one further example:(28) the Algerian supplies have already been loaded On this occasion we shall leave the clarification of the two meanings to the reader.
Predicative and postnominal attributive adjectives
3.1 In the last chapter, we examined what is, in a certain sense, a side-issue since it dealt mainly with a particular variation of value found within a single one of the constructions open to adjectives in English.
It is time, now, to offer a conspectus of the positions which English adjectives may take, and what the functions of the adjectives appearing in them may be.
The term "position" should not be misunderstood.
In the past, both traditional and modern linguists have treated the relations of adjectives and their nouns or noun phrases as essentially formal matters, related to syntactic grouping or even to simple relative order of word classes.
However, formulae such as "adjectives precede their nouns" do not take us beyond a very shallow level of linguistic description; nor is it an improvement to find phrases such as  "an attributive adjective" unless the description proceeds in some way to give an account of how a term like attributive may mean something more than a simple statement about formal grouping.
We shall here use adjectival position to mean any construction which has the function of realizing some distinct pattern of intensional relations, and which meets the following criteria:(a) It contains an adjective as one of its elements;(b) It is minimally extended for that adjective, i.e. there are no further elements dependent on the adjective (since all such phrases will reduce in their structural effect to a single occurrence of adjective anyway);(c) It is minimally complete for that adjective; that is, the adjective achieves its structural effect within the construction, so that setting the whole pattern into a larger construction cannot change the effective value of the adjective.
(See further Appendix C.) We shall offer many instances to show how interaction, between the relations within that construction and the semantic identity of individual words, governs the grammaticality and interpretation of phrases and sentences, and influences the range of adjectives that can occur in any one position.
We shall assume that the syntactic positions for adjectives in English are as below; we give first the intensional pattern of which each is the surface exponent, as well as an example for each, and also an instance which is ungrammatical and where we shall later be able to suggest reasons for the ungrammaticality; in each case we shall underline in the intensional pattern the property which is instantiated by the adjective, merely for clarification and not as an integral part of the notation:[P  E]prenominal attributive position surface syntactic sequence: adjective + noun as in hungry passengers; but note that *asleep kittens is ungrammatical{[E](P)}ordinary predicative position surface syntactic sequence: noun phrase + be + adjective as in the critics were upset; but note that her husband was mere is ungrammatical [E  P]postnominal attributive position surface syntactic sequence: noun phrase + adjective as in the crimes alleged; but note that the road wide is ungrammatical ((P  E) P) predicate qualifying position surface syntactic sequence: verb phrase + noun phrase + adjective as in he brought his gun loaded; but note that she uses her mixer lightweight is ungrammatical [E  (P  P)]postverbal position surface syntactic sequence: verb phrase + adjective as in the crowd remained angry; but note that his brother resisted obstinate is ungrammatical ((P  P) E) adverbal position  surface syntactic sequence (usually): verb + noun phrase + adjective as in Ali rubbed the lamp clean; but note that Mark resembles the officer sinister is ungrammatical (P {E  P}) clausal position = surface syntactic sequence: verb + noun phrase (+ be) + adjective as in he considers the prosecution case hopeless but note that Sue reported the prizes aplenty is ungrammatical{E  P}P extraclausal position surface syntactic sequence (usually): adjective + clause as in furious, the king ordered many arrests but note that furious, the king had three wives is ungrammatical As we have said, these are the adjectival positions of English (and possibly of any natural human language).
In the chapters which follow, we discuss the constructional meanings that they contribute to the language; there are also one or two minor structures to be introduced later, and we shall have to take note of certain cases where apparently identical sequences of surface syntax correspond to different intensional patterns.
A quite important task is to try to show why the set of intensional patterns is not, as might at first appear, a haphazard collection but in fact the natural set that one would expect to find in a human language.
This is done in Appendix C, but to anticipate briefly, the reasons depend in essence on two facts:(a) Whenever a property is qualified it remains a property, so that e.g. (P  P) P reduces to P  P;(b) The property of an adjective cannot normally be applied to another property-word but only to an E. Thus while (P  E) P reduces from a purely structural point of view to P  P, it needs to be treated as a distinct pattern when the final P is an adjective, since, unless the E can be taken into account, the structure will be literally incoherent.
Thus the adjectival goals of this study are not only (1) to describe the various adjectival constructions of English and to show what they mean, but also (2) to use this account of constructional meaning in order to explain why many particular combinations of lexical items and constructions are ungrammatical when other similar ones are not;(3) to explain why many such combinations have the interpretations  which they do; and (4) to explain just why the above are the adjectival positions of English.
3.2 Having already examined the prenominal attributive position in Chapter 2, we shall now look at the next one, which we shall call simply predicative position, when there is no risk of misunderstanding.
Although such remarks are apt to change from limpid truths to self-evident fallacies under a sufficiently close inspection, let us take the risk of saying that predicative position holds no particular mysteries.
It is the position of the adjective which instantiates a property explicitly assigned to the entity already identified by the subject of the sentence but which does not take part in identifying that subject.
(As specified in Chapter 1, we shall normally use assign to mean assign the relation of qualification, although it is also possible to assign the relation of equation.)
This relation is marked constructionally by the use of a form of the verb to be preceded by an expression identifying some entity and followed by the adjective instantiating the property.
The combination of subject entity and adjectival property becomes structurally complete by virtue, and only by virtue, of their combination under this relation of assignment.
This sense of completeness, experienced in (2) by contrast with (1) is perhaps the one aspect of intensional structure which is purely linguistic:(1) angry residents (2) residents are angry
We might doubt the credentials of even this candidate.
Intuitively, one might claim that the need for completeness which is satisfied when are angry is added to residents in (2) is of the same order as that experienced when waiting for, say, the splash of a stone thrown out over the sea, or for the arrival of food in one's mouth when one has watched it being prepared.
Against this, it is arguable that one can feel the sense of waiting and subsequent satisfaction only when there is some expected framework, and the framework for language has no obvious parallels with non-linguistic ones; so we do have one autonomous characteristic of language, even if all the others — equation of two elements, instantiation of one element by another, and so on— are part of the much more general perceptual and conceptual apparatus of human beings.
Assignment, however, has a secondary characteristic which from the point of view of linguistic communication becomes equally important.
An automatic consequence of the completeness is that the property of the adjective is taken to be valid for, or applicable to, the subject entity, for current purposes.
Given a subject, already identified, and given the wholly reasonable assumption that in our linguistic thoughts we do not equate properties with entities, there would be no conceivable point in introducing a property, and introducing it with the sense of "this completes what I am about" unless that property is to be taken as applicable to the subject.
(This is not of course to say that assignment amounts to assertion; assignment is a necessary move in forming a syntactic-semantic construction, which may then be asserted or questioned or even indicated as the situation that the speaker desires to bring about.)
The adjective in predicative position, which is introduced to be "added" to an already identified subject thus has an altogether different function from that of the prenominal attributive adjective which appears in order to play its part in the identification of an entity.
This difference between the two structures accords very closely with the fact that while we can readily use nouns (including even proper names) in the prenominal attributive position to qualify other nouns, we seldom find the corresponding nouns distributed across subject and post-copular position:(3) the Atlanta flight his St. Francis medallion (4) the flight is Atlanta This medallion was St. Francis
The reason for this is that, overwhelmingly, nouns in post-copular position, as in (4), exemplify the construction with equation rather than with assignment.
The reason for this in turn is quite straightforward: in any language which makes a distinction between nouns and adjectives, it will be natural to use an adjective when assignment of a property is required; it may sometimes be quite easy to find an adjective and a noun which express near enough — or even exactly — the same properties, and differ only in that one is an adjective and the other is a noun, but to use the latter for assignment is to risk conveying the unwanted imputation of "entity-hood" on top of the semantic value required (see Section 1.10); therefore when a noun or noun phrase is chosen it will normally presuppose that the construction is not that of assignment of a property but instead one of equation.
Certainly there are exceptions:(5) Alec's shoes are real leather  Intuition leaves no room for hesitation in taking this as an example of assignment, with leather used purely descriptively, rather than of equation, but the occurrence of the adjective real indicates that leather is nonetheless a noun (this is no doubt partly possible because the adjective leathern has dropped out of use in modern English, and because leather itself is a mass noun able to occur without a preceding article).
Although we certainly do not wish to get diverted into a consideration of the nominal patterns of English, we may mention that even in a case like:(6) Claudia is a bus-driver we have no doubt that the relation is still one of equation.
The reason why (6) is perceived as if it was assignment is that the indefinitizing effect of the determiner means that the hearer is granted no more about the entity in post-copular position than:(a) The properties denoted by the noun used;(b) The fact that it is an entity; but the latter fact has already been given by the subject noun phrase; hence the effect, with such a determiner, amounts to the same thing, in practice (but not in terms of intensional pattern), as simple assignment.
None of this brings any need for adjustment to the principles outlined in Chapter 1, nor to what we have to say about adjectives.
We shall assume that, by definition, an adjective, which instantiates a property, cannot be related to a noun phrase identifying an entity by the relation of equation, and we have to deal in predicative position only with the other intensional relation found in items following a form of to be, assignment of qualification.
3.3 It has been a recurrent presumption that the attributive position is in some sense or other a disguised form of the predicative position.
We have already alluded in Chapter 2 to the prominent position this occupied in earlier Chomskyan grammar.
But it is also commonly found, more or less explicitly, in traditional grammar, as Chomsky himself pointed out, citing the Port-Royal grammar (Chomsky, 1968).
We may also refer to a writer like Meiklejohn (1909); his book is an excellent work of its kind, and despite the oft-repeated claims of more recent linguists that previous investigators had seriously neglected syntax, that subject receives no fewer than seventy pages in his treatment (even when the allocation of words to word-classes is excluded).
Meiklejohn says, "Every adjective is either an explicit or an implicit predicate" , the former corresponding in his book to  appearance in predicative position and the latter to attributive use; and he goes on to show, with examples, that he takes exactly the same view as is found later in accounts given within a Chomskyan framework.
The temptation to equate the two positions relies apparently on two things: on the fact that in each case we have an adjective and a noun or noun phrase, and on the supposition that attributive adjectives and predicative adjectives all share the referential locus of the head noun to which they are related.
As we have now seen, the latter supposition is by no means invariably true, and for this (and other reasons which we shall come to later) the ranges of adjectives that can be found in the two positions are actually substantially different.
Even when the referential locus of noun and adjective are the same, however, there is no general guarantee that the overall "output" , in terms of intensional entities (and the real or potential referents to which they may correspond) will be the same under these two ways of linking an adjective to a noun, which amount respectively to introducing a subject x identified in part through having the property F, and to introducing a subject x and saying that it has the property F. For instance, if we move from the predicative structure:(7) clouds are small to the phrase small clouds, we pass to an expression which identifies a certain group of entities but does nothing more than identify them; whereas expression (7) identifies a quite different (and much larger) group of entities, and says something about them (which, as it happens, is not true, even though small clouds certainly do exist).
Moreover, we may point out that even if corresponding attributive and predicative adjectives (occurring with the same noun) could be relied on to share the same referential locus, that would be no justification for leaping to an assertion that the two elements are actually "the same" tout court, and even less for claiming that the structural positions they occupy are alternative forms of each other .
(This would be roughly analogous to claiming that the two different posts in an organization are really the same because their occupants report to the same superior.)
We are already in a position to give reasons for many of the cases of uneven distribution, where an adjective is grammatical in one of the two positions but not in the other, beyond simply making some such observation as "the following adjectives are unacceptable in predicative position" .
One part of the explanation lies in the intensional value of the respective constructions, and the other in the meanings attached to the various adjectives by the speaker.
The largest group  affected is, as we have already noted, that consisting of the associatives discussed in Chapter 2.
By simply testing the instances of associative adjectives already given, we soon discover that they are subject to a general exclusion from predicative position.
The examples in (8) are representative:(8) the visiting scientists are nuclear farmers who will qualify are arable the expert was meteorological Ascriptive adjectives on the other hand may freely occur predicatively (although it is possible that in some cases an ascriptive adjective may be excluded for different reasons).
Thus the examples of (9) are acceptable:(9) your behaviour was barbaric this device is expensive his plan was inspired but impractical Where a prenominal adjective fits equally well with either relationship — ascriptive or associative — to its noun, we find that its occurrence in predicative position is acceptable, but only provided that the relation is taken as being ascriptive; thus (10) mentions an individual who either has Greek nationality (but the nature and region of the business which he or she deals with remain unspecified), or is a person who handles affairs connected with Greece (but who may well be of some quite different nationality, Belgian for example);(11) however unambiguously tells us that there is someone who falls into the former category:(10) the Greek representative (11) the representative is Greek
The reason for the exclusion of associative adjectives from predicative position is an immediate consequence of the fact that predicative position explicitly assigns the property of the adjective to the entity of the noun phrase in subject position, while associative adjectives are characterized by the fact that they are not taken as valid for the entity which they qualify.
Whereas identification of an E may quite easily be aided by the introduction of a P actually applicable to a different E, to claim completeness of an E and a P when the latter neither helps to identify the former nor is applicable to it is to leave us with a construction which does nothing coherent at all.
The exclusion of associative adjectives from predicative position is an automatic result.
As implied earlier, there are some other groups of adjectives which also may not appear in predicative position because of the meaning of this construction, but their introduction must await further discussion, in particular of the notions of sense-modification and separative qualification (Chapter 6).
3.4 Let us now turn to the postnominal attributive adjectives.
We shall first raise some questions which seem in need of answers, and then discuss some observations about their characteristics; in Section 3.8, we shall propose an account of their intensional structure, and in the remainder of the chapter show how this reflects their characteristics and answers the questions, as well as making possible coverage of some further data.
In some ways, postnominal attributives are also relatively straightforward; thus it is perfectly clear that they are like ordinary prenominal attributives in that they do not constitute a full sentence with the noun or noun phrase that precedes them, and that they are part of the same entity-identifying phrase.
In other respects they are rather mysterious — more so in fact than seems to have been widely realized.
Once we have put aside such relatively easy observations as the tendency or requirement for long or complex adjective phrases to occur postnominally, there are two fundamental questions which badly need to be asked about the grammar of postnominal attributives:(a) What is the difference in effect or value obtained by the speaker who uses postnominal position when prenominal position is equally grammatical?(b) Why is it that some adjectives (and some adjective phrases) can occur quite easily in postnominal position while others, apparently comparable, are limited to prenominal position?
There is also a puzzle linked to both these questions which concerns associative adjectives again.
We can quickly find, by taking the examples of associative adjectives in Chapter 2, that these do not normally occur after their noun either.
They might appear there when normal syntax has to be subordinated to the exigencies of poetry (or perhaps we should say "of unskilful poetry" ) and they may occur postnominally in prose in one or two special constructions.
By "special constructions" we mean in particular cumulative lists of adjectives as in (12), where, however, the order may be explained by the quite general if ill-defined tendency to leave "heavy" constituents to the latest possible point, as in (13):(12) policies foreign, social and educational  (13) that salesman has just come back who kept getting in the way when you were trying to vaccinate the ewes last week Postnominal associatives may also just possibly be admitted in constructions expressing sharp opposition:(14) scientists nuclear but not biological The latter type, however, is at best questionable; and, as a good general rule, we may say that associative adjectives do not normally occur in postnominal position.
This in itself is a mildly interesting observation and certainly needs to be made; but what we should go on to do is to say why they do not appear there.
After all, since there are postnominal attributives, and since attributive adjectives have the function of helping to identify some entity, and since associatives certainly do this even though their referential locus is different from that of the noun qualified, the reason for the gap is not obvious.
We return to this point in Section 3.8.
3.5 Let us start looking for answers to our questions by considering certain observations that have been made about the characteristics of postnominal attributives.
It has been said, in the first place, that they are used to throw into relief the particular property in the noun phrase which is of interest to the speaker; that is, that adjectives are used postnominally for the sake of emphasis.
This claim might not unreasonably be held to cover such examples as we see in the following subject phrases:(15) the bicycles damaged all had red handlebars the line defective is the one to the outside a dose strong enough would put him out all night In all these cases, prenominal position would also be acceptable and appears to give the same cognitive meaning for the sentence as a whole, hence encouraging us to accept a solution to the first question, above, in terms of "emphasis" or "focus" .
However, without discounting this possibility altogether, we should beware of falling victim to a fairly common fallacy: mistaking an easily observed but minor or accidental by-product of a phenomenon for the cause of the phenomenon.
In this case, the phenomenon is the appearance of attributive adjectives after their noun instead of before; the by-product is the opportunity for speakers to use this less usual placing, where it is available, as a marker of emphasis; the true cause of the phenomenon, in our view, is yet to be established.
We should remember, too, that "emphasis" has an insidious tendency to become an all-purpose cause credited for a whole variety of syntactic and phonological variations where intuition suggests that there is a difference to be explained but where no other cause can immediately be brought to light; all that is needed, apparently, is that a speaker (or even a linguist) should be able to imagine himself uttering one of a pair of variants with a certain emphasis on some occasion, while at the same time feeling that he could have said the other without any emphasis being implied.
From here it is a short leap to the conclusion that, in all comparable cases, a difference of emphasis is the reason for the variation.
We should also note that there are at least two different factors which may lead us to feel that some notion deserves emphasis; one of course is contrast with another property that might have been expressed; the second is salience of the notion within the particular situation envisaged; this would presumably be true for:(16) Geraldine told us a long story about bee-keepers With these points in mind, we should now compare (15) with (17) and ask ourselves how much emphasis of either kind is present in (17), provided that it is not "read in" in order to support the hypothesis:(17) the ideas discussed will be put to our colonel topics suitable could include divorce and bankruptcy buildings adjacent will be closed for three days Since there is no doubt that these sentences might be used in situations where the property of the adjective would not be contrastive, the only candidate which may have any plausibility is the "salient on this occasion" variety, though there does not seem to be very strong reason to believe that in all cases where these sentences could be used the adjective property will be salient; we return to this later.
If (15) and (17) provide only weak and uncertain support for the "emphasis" solution, the cases in (18) count as very strong evidence against it; in (18) no amount of determination to treat the adjectives as emphatic permits them to become postnominal:(18) a child intelligent could do that in five minutes the juggler skilful wanted a pay raise cranes squeaky were soon unloading the cargo Some further explanation is therefore clearly needed.
3.6 In 1967 Dwight Bolinger wrote an article on adjectives (Bolinger, 1967) which introduced a whole array of penetrating observations and posed some fascinating questions.
With the benefit of a later viewpoint, aided not least by the opportunity to reflect on Bolinger's own work, we would suggest that, in most cases, other answers are more appropriate than the ones which he offered at that time (nevertheless, we return to this article more than once in the chapters which follow).
For our present purpose, we note that Bolinger proposed that there is "a set meaning for pre-adjunct adjectives, which I have called" characterisation "" .
By pre-adjunct he means adjectives in prenominal attributive position; by characterisation he means something like inherent or permanent (to which one should perhaps add some cautious and flexible condition such as "in the circumstances" ).
It is opposed to the occasion value (true on or for some particular occasion) which Bolinger sees in adjectives in the postnominal attributive position.
(He considers predicative position able to bear either meaning.)
He exhibits a number of adjectives which differ in precisely the way required while maintaining the same or essentially the same lexical value (we modify his examples slightly where it is possible to do so without damage to his case, so as to make the distinction sharper):(19) visible stars vs stars visible the only navigable rivers vs the only rivers navigable a handy tool vs are your tools handy? guilty people vs people guilty As it happens, the examples which Bolinger uses employ words which can make the distinction a rather subtle one, with perhaps the exception of visible stars (a group recognized astronomically) beside stars visible; but it is quite easy to produce further instances which seem to confirm his view:(20) a complaining visitor vs a visitor complaining the eligible bachelor vs the bachelor eligible In other cases, the divergence of lexical value between the two positions may be greater but still with the characteristic value for the former, and the occasion value for the latter:(21) the responsible man vs the man responsible a sorry sight vs the girl is sorry He notes that the acceptability of an adjective in pre-adjunct position may apparently depend on whether or not it can be regarded as  indicating a relatively enduring characteristic of what is expressed by the noun, as in:(22) the faint girl vs the girl is faint an asleep man vs a man asleep This possibility of course depends not only on the adjective itself but also on the nature of the noun being qualified, so that "when one scratches one's head the result is not *a scratched head but when one scores a glass surface the result is a scratched surface" .
The distinction of meaning is especially clear with perfect participles; these show a well-known alternation between interpretation as expressing an event (therefore the occasion value) and interpretation as expressing a state:(23) labelled goods vs sent goods The word sent is unusual prenominally precisely because it has the sort of meaning which makes an actual or implicit reference to the event of despatch, and hence it is far more likely to be used post-nominally.
Thus there is no shortage of data to support Bolinger's claim handsomely.
However, there are several points of detail on which one might take issue with him.
For instance, in his discussion about "navigable rivers" he actually says that the phrase:(24) the only navigable river unambiguously expresses the characteristic notion, and not that of being true for some particular occasion; but this does not seem to give an indisputable picture of normal English usage, and the same goes for his remark about:(25) the only river navigable which he describes as "unambiguously occasion" .
More generally, it seems that there are many cases where prenominal adjectives express occasion values, and not a few where a characteristic, in his sense, is expressed by a postnominal adjective.
Among the former are many participles, both present and past:(26) the watching crowd started to laugh he was greeted by smiling well-wishers the injured man had been feeding the orang-utan  but participles do not exhaust the possibilities:(27) the angry bartender slammed the drink down five empty tumblers were standing by his elbow Notice, too, the clear ambiguity of:(28) a flashing light as meaning either a light which is flashing on some particular occasion, or one which normally has this characteristic.
Adjectives occurring postnominally with characteristic value are perhaps less frequently encountered, but they are still by no means uncommon; we have already queried Bolinger's view of the only river navigable; and in the third example from (17), it could hardly be claimed that the buildings were only adjacent on some particular occasion.
We could also cite such cases as:(29) some parts inaccessible will be mapped from the air the shelter required [for fishing boats]is provided by Cape St. James
Further, even if it may be true that characteristic adjectives are never barred from prenominal occurrence, there are certainly instances where occasion adjectives are ungrammatical in postnominal position, as in:(30) Eddy will present the cheque to the winner happy we have yet to overcome this obstacle immediate Thus, Bolinger's distinction between "characteristic" use and "occasion" use is neither necessary nor sufficient for postnominal occurrence, even if it overlaps to an interesting extent with the difference in position of the adjective.
3.7 Another answer which has been put forward is that postnominal attributive adjectives are abbreviated clauses.
This is the same proposal, associated with the Port Royal grammar and earlier versions of Chomskyan grammar, which has already been mentioned in this chapter in connexion with prenominal attributives (3.2 and 3.3); or rather it is part of the same proposal, since the full clause with adjective in post-copular position is claimed as the "origin" for both sorts of attributive.
We pointed out earlier that such a proposal cannot be accepted for the prenominal case because the prenominal and the clause structures are far from equivalent; they admit different ranges  of adjective, and the relation of the adjective to the head noun is different in the two cases.
However, a more modest version of this proposal, that postnominal attributives are equivalent to reduced relative clauses (see, e.g. Quirk, Greenbaum, Leech and Svartvik, 1972), seems to come very close to the mark.
It still faces certain problems.
Notable among these is the fact that the mismatch of range is even greater than in the case of the prenominal adjectives; it is true that one can usually expand a postnominal adjective to a relative clause containing be, though we should certainly note cases like:(31) he is dreaming of the whisky which will be galore with her arms which were akimbo she stared at Victor food which is aplenty is on sale in the end tent however, there is not the slightest difficulty about producing numerous examples where the relative clause with be is fully satisfactory but cannot be reduced to a grammatical postnominal adjective.
This would be true for at least two of the examples of (18), to which we may add at random:(32) some delegates who were German frowned the starling which is inquisitive is female It is emphatically not the answer to say, "those which cannot become postnominal attributives turn into prenominals instead" , for two reasons: first, as we have already seen, there is a major difference of function between prenominal position and predicative position as occupied by the adjective in the sort of relative clause proposed; and, second, this still leaves us facing the question of why some relative clauses can apparently be reduced to postnominal adjectives and others cannot (indeed this question, previously passed by, has been in serious need of an answer from those who want to relate prenominal adjectives — or simply attributives in general — to predicative position).
The second major defect in the relative clause proposal is that it does not actually explain anything unless it is supplemented by some account of what a relative clause is.
Simply to say that postnominal attributives are reduced relatives gives an answer to neither of our questions (p. 43).
3.8 A solution to these puzzles which, moreover, covers certain further data, emerges from the proposal we shall make on the interpretation of postnominal attributive adjectives: that prenominal and postnominal attributives are intensionally alike in one important respect but dissimilar in another.
They are alike in that both form part  of a single entity-identifier; this is reflected in surface syntax by the fact that they form part of the same noun phrase as their head noun.
They differ in the relation which binds the adjective into the phrase, and in this respect postnominal attributive adjectives are close to the attributive relative clauses.
It is no accident that certain adjectives which can appear as postnominal, but not prenominal, attributives do also appear in predicative position, while, on the other hand, certain adjectives which only occur prenominally cannot stand as predicatives:(33) the robber was asleep not noticing the robber asleep, they missed their revenge the asleep robber (34) their proposals are sheer lunacy their lunacy is sheer lunacy sheer of this sort is unsurprising
These give us further grounds for thinking that there is some characteristic which is common to the postnominal attributives and to the predicative position of the adjective in a relative clause, but which is not found in the prenominal adjectives.
The important aspect of the relative clause proposal seems to be that both relative clause and postnominal adjective share the characteristics of linking an adjective to its head noun by the relation of assignment, not simple qualification, while remaining within the same entity-identifying phrase as that noun.
Indeed these two characteristics are all that is needed in the case of the adjective; the relative clause is in a sense a stalking horse, convenient in that it is more tangible than the relation around which it is built, but unnecessary, and awkward in that it brings with it, in English, the requirement that it must express a tense; for while it is often possible to read a tense into an adjective there is no reason whatever to suppose that there is always some particular tense present to the mind of the speaker but suppressed, as can be seen from instances like (35), where more than one tense could plausibly be grafted onto the sense expressed by the phrase underlined, or, just as well, some adverbial notion like "because" or "if" without any specific tense being implied:(35) motorists guilty will have to pay heavy fines Likewise, the buildings adjacent of example (17) simply take their tense from that of the clause as a whole; if, for instance, we were to switch the tense of the verb in that example in order to shift the whole situation to past time:(36) the buildings adjacent were closed for three days it would be quite unnecessary to presume that an independent mental re-assignment of tense, from present to past, internal to the phrase buildings adjacent, has to take place as well .
Moreover, as we have remarked, many relative clauses with adjectives will not give postnominal adjectives.
Our proposal, then, is that postnominal position expresses the intensional pattern which contains an adjective linked to its head noun by assignment, while remaining part of the same phrase.
Thus the difference between prenominal attributive, ordinary predicative, and postnominal attributive adjectives is that they instantiate, respectively, the position of the P in the three intensional structures which, for the moment, we represent as follows:(37) Note that the structure in (b) is equivalent to a sentence, whereas that in (c) corresponds to a noun phrase; this is an issue to which we shall return at the end of this chapter, where we shall propose a slight modification to these representations.
There is no doubt that the three surface positions for adjectives can be correlated with the three intensional patterns given in (37).
But we need to make certain that this is not just playing with formulae; it is all too easy to produce "underlying representations" which are compatible with surface data, but which do not come with compelling reasons, based on other observable data and not on mere rejigging of the representational system, for being chosen in preference to various other compatible representations.
One of the most elementary and important lessons to be learned from model theory is that, even when we are tightly constrained by external correlations, it is still generally possible to construct a variety of models for a given set of data (cf. the extremely useful comments on model construction and evaluation in connexion with language in Sternberg, 1963).
What we need in the present case is further evidence to persuade us that the proposal to distinguish ordinary attributives as (37)(a) and postnominal attributives as (37)(c) goes beyond the mere possibility of correlating the two intensional patterns to the two different surface constructions.
The questions which our proposal can usefully address are:(i) Will it lead to any discriminating predictions about observable data which differ from what would be expected under the  assumption that postnominals are simply normal attributive adjectives?(ii) How might our claim relate to the characteristics of postnominal attributives discussed in Sections 3.5 to 3.7?(iii) Can it cast any light in particular on the fact that only a subset of adjectives can occur as postnominal attributives?
To answer the initial question first, it is certainly true that for ascriptive adjectives at least, with adjective and noun held constant, alternation between qualification and assignment can produce no difference in either the entity identified or the pattern of assignment of properties.
However, there is one sharply defined grammatical prediction which does follow from this proposal: An adjective which does not share a referential locus with its head noun should be unacceptable in postnominal position, since assignment specifically applies the property of the adjective to the subject.
This is exactly what we do find.
The major class of adjectives which fall under this heading is again that of the associatives discussed in Chapter 2, and as we have already noted these do not appear postnominally (thus we also have a positive answer to the third question, though there is quite a lot more to add, see Section 3.10):(38) Two scientists nuclear have joined the staff a hatmaker royal lives in our village (The Hatmaker Royal, if one existed, would of course, like the Princess Royal, be the holder of an office which has a name calqued on the French once spoken by the English aristocracy, and not one based on the patterns of current English.)
Moreover, associatives are not the only group that can appear prenominally but which do not assign their property to the entity identified by the phrase of which they form part; two other types (to be discussed in Chapter 6) are exemplified by former and sheer.
These also cannot occur in postnominal attributive position; we have cited the unacceptability of postnominal sheer in (34), and of course(39) is equally unsatisfactory:(39) a team-manager former was brought out of retirement We can also observe that, for the same reason, qualifying nouns, which do not instantiate a property of the head noun, are excluded as a class from postnominal position except, again, for phrases borrowed from French, such as Tournedos Rossini.
A further consequence for linguistic form exists in the examples  (40) to (43) but, before that, let us turn to our second question; we can now see why postnominals could often have an "aura" of emphasis, yet without this being clearly and consistently present.
The syntactic relation which underlies them, assignment, is just that: a relation of assignment.
The speaker who uses it feels himself or herself to be stating, with an explicitness not found in the merely qualifying adjective, even when it is ascriptive, that the property expressed does hold of the entity identified by the whole noun phrase; an inevitable concomitant is that the postnominal adjective must be to a certain extent salient in the situation where it is used.
It may also express other varieties of emphasis — for instance, contrast — but this is in no way required of it any more nor less than of a prenominal adjective.
Thus postnominal position does go hand in hand with a notion of emphasis, but only of one particular type, which is perhaps the weakest of those that might be considered.
Moreover, since postnominal position is not a device for marking emphasis as such, a mere desire for emphasis does not of itself make postnominal position possible.
The strong correlation between characterization and prenominal position, and "occasion" use and postnominal position also falls naturally into place, as well as the fact that it does not amount to a complete correspondence.
When one is aiming simply to identify an entity for a hearer, in the nature of things one will tend to find enduring characteristics more reliable as the means of doing so, although there will certainly be a proportion of cases where some "occasional" property is just as useful.
But if it is desirable to assign a property to an entity, then that will far more frequently, although not invariably, be needed precisely when the property is not an inherent quality of the entity in question; further, this will especially be so when the property is tied to some particular event — hence the high incidence of present and past participles among postnominals.
3.9 What now can we say about the restriction of postnominal occurrence to a subset of adjectives?
The discussion above by no means exhausts the observations that might be made about postnominal attributives.
We might mention, in particular, a rather striking point which somehow seems to have escaped notice and comment; it too is understandable on the account of postnominal adjectives advanced here.
It appears that there is an effective limit of one on the number of postnominal adjectives permitted.
This is the reason for the ungrammaticality of:(40) the only book missing readable is Twyford's Lives of the Slovak Saints  By contrast, the examples of (41) are fully acceptable:(41) the only readable book missing is the one I told you about the only missing book readable is the one already mentioned The same contrast is seen in (42) beside the two cases of (43) which are both grammatically acceptable (although not of course quite identical in meaning):(42) *one journalist striking accessible is Jana Flynn (43) one striking journalist accessible is Jana Flynn one accessible journalist striking is Jana Flynn The restriction is general, applying even if the particular adjectives concerned are ones which can normally appear postnominally.
It should be noted that the same is true of ordinary predicative adjectives — further evidence of their special similarity.
There, too, one can assign a co-ordination of properties, as in (44), or a single complex property,(45), but it is simply taken for granted that one does not produce grammatical monstrosities such as(46) and (47) with, respectively, simultaneous and successive (but in neither case co-ordinated) assignment of different properties.
It will be recalled that assignment is expressed in English by a form of to be (for a full discussion of adjective grouping see Chapter 8):(44) their host's beer was cold and refreshing (45) one pair of trousers was deep purple (46) the story is long sad (47) the story is long is sad This contrasts with the sometimes lengthy sequences of adjectives, whether grouped or not, which can occur in prenominal attributive position without causing the slightest frisson of grammatical disapproval:(48) the long sad story begins in Ottawa (49) Aunt Lou bought Oliver a charming little pink woollen romper-suit
These differences of acceptability between prenominal and postnominal adjectives agree excellently with the difference between  qualification and assignment.
Qualification represents the aggregation of whatever properties the speaker feels are needed to identify sufficiently what he wishes to talk about, and so it is entirely to be expected that, on occasion, more than one adjectival property should appear.
Assignment, on the other hand, requires a more explicit focus on the particular property assigned; what is assigned may be a complex property (like fairly acceptable), or even a co-ordination; but to expect a single linguistic faculty to make two separate assignments of properties to the same entity in the same phrase would be unreasonable; it would be analogous to expecting a physical eye to focus on two different objects at the same time.
Another matter worth commenting on is the noticeable disparity in acceptability for the same adjective qualifying the same noun but with the remainder of the phrase varying.
(In the following cases, the corresponding phrase using prenominal position only would be fully acceptable):(50) the handbook useful is in your out-tray a story interesting would be hard to find (51) the only handbook useful is in your out-tray a story less interesting would be hard to find Even here, the distinction between qualification and assignment may have a part to play in the explanation.
3.10 To see how, we must now take up again the question, Why can some adjectives occur in prenominal attributive position but not postnominally?
We have already seen clear-cut reasons in the case of the associatives (with the same reasons holding also for certain other types of adjective, such as former and sheer).
There remains the well-known case of the "short Anglo-Saxon adjective" .
We can have (52) but never (53):(52) Lewis left the bag in a dark corner his short answer irritated her (53) Lewis left the bag in a corner dark his answer short irritated her In suggesting the elements from which an answer can be constructed, we should bear in mind that here, as often in syntax, to assume a single explanatory factor risks oversimplifying matters.
The major premise from which we start is that prenominal attribution and postnominal attribution involve, respectively, qualification  and assignment.
Now, clearly, in many circumstances where the property of an adjective matches a speaker's perception, it may not need to be assigned — i.e. stated explicitly to be valid for the entity concerned — on the grounds that it is felt to be a characteristic sufficiently basic to the entity not to need assignment, as opposed to being called upon as an initial qualifying and identifying element.
This would quite naturally be true of adjectives of colour, size, and weight, and of other adjectives expressing basic perceptual notions.
In moving towards a satisfying identification of some entity, the mind of a speaker will naturally tend to describe it initially by matching its roughly perceived whole against those properties that are most common in use and perceptually basic.
Exactly because they are common and basic they are relatively unlikely to need an explicit statement, by assignment, that they are valid for any entity where they are perceived.
This will be the reason for the oddity of (54) where one such basic property is related to its noun through assignment, by contrast with the normality of (55) where it is given as one of the initial identifying properties of the subject entity (there is obviously no difference of truth-value between the two):(54)? a ladle which was heavy came down on his skull (55) a heavy ladle came down on his skull Thus, other things being equal we expect properties of such basic sorts to be used predominantly for identification by ordinary qualification.
On the other hand, it is inevitable that a property which, while still playing its part in entity-identification, needs to be explicitly assigned will nearly always be a more peripheral or unusual or occasional one.
The outcome is that adjectives expressing the more basic types of property can generally be expected to appear prenominally but not postnominally.
This will be the case quite regularly so that it is not in the least surprising if in many instances general expectations have crystallized into rigid habits (which might be called syntactic "rules" ) governing the possibilities open to an adjective as a type item, irrespective of the facts of any particular token occasion.
However, the distinction between characteristic and occasion use (Sections 3.6 and 3.8) must also have some influence.
Even if that, too, depended initially on the basic distinction of qualification and assignment, there is no reason to deny that finding each value preferentially in one of the two positions will lead to an association directly between value and position.
This is closely parallel to what has happened in respect of the serial order of classes of prenominal adjectives, categorized according to their pragmatic domain, thoroughly described by Martin (1969) or Warren (1984), to cite two of the many authors who have studied this topic.
Many have considered it uncontroversial to assert that there is an overall principle which tends to place the least inherent adjective furthest from its noun.
While this can only have arisen on the basis of particular cases, it too has now become fossilized; it is now described in terms of relative order of fixed groups of adjectives, and there are even cases where purely formal requirements concerning serial order actually override the organization appropriate to the semantics of what is intended (see Chapter 8 for some instances).
We should also not rule out the possibility that one may properly look to a historical explanation, just as a historical explanation underlies the fact that the comparatives of tired and spoilt — derived from verbs — are analytic, as in:(56) Declan is more spoilt than Karen Declan's mother is more tired than Karen's mother rather than the synthetic forms — tireder, spoilter — which we should expect from the monosyllabic adjectives which they have become.
In particular, the reason that adjectives such as alive and asleep do not occur prenominally is that they are derived from adverbial phrases, and they continue to occupy only those places available to adverbial phrases qualifying a noun phrase.
Likewise, the behaviour of galore should receive a historical explanation of exactly the same sort, being derived from the Gaelic gu leòr, an adverbial phrase that can be translated literally as to sufficiency.
Such considerations, sometimes working together, may debar many adjectives from ever appearing postnominally; in other instances, acceptability may be marginal enough to depend not only on these factors, but also on the particular circumstances.
For instance, there is the strict requirement of English that postnominal adjectives should be marked off by a pause in speech and by commas in writing, if and only if they are non-restrictive (see Chapter 7).
This explains the difficulty with the first sentence in (30), for example, repeated here as (57):(57) Eddy will present the cheque to the winner happy happy can hardly be anything but non-restrictive here by the sense of the situation, but the corresponding requirement of form is not matched by (57); hence the clear perception that the result is ungrammatical.
But while (57) is certainly ungrammatical, this is much less clearly true, if at all, of cases where happy is properly marked as non-restrictive:(58) Stephen, happy, seemed to have recovered all his lost energy
We may now return to the examples (50) and (51).
Adjectives like useful and interesting will normally be restricted to prenominal position.
But, if there is a further "selecting" qualifier, such as only, and if the speaker sees the latter as focusing on the property of the adjective, then it is quite reasonable that he or she may also feel it necessary to mark this focal adjectival property as one to be explicitly assigned, rather than being an ordinary part of the identificatory bundle.
Notice especially that the definite article may be one such further selecting qualifier.
We see this in:(59) the bicycles damaged all had red handlebars The article here has virtually no function except to commend the entity identified as one which the audience should be able to recognize, and recognition focuses on the property damaged.
Thus (59) is perfectly acceptable.
Possessive adjectives, however, do not produce a satisfactory result:(60) our bicycles damaged all had red handlebars your ideas discussed will be put to our colonel One may enquire why there should be this contrast, since it seems easy enough to see what meaning should be attached to each of the sentences of (60).
We suggest that, while bicycles may be recognizable by reference to the fact that they are damaged (as in (59)), we cannot easily describe bicycles as belonging to us in the same respect; nor can we refer to ideas as belonging to you inasmuch as they are "discussed" .
Thus, we can move far beyond purely descriptive statements recording that this or that apparently arbitrary subclass of adjectives is ungrammatical in this or that position; it is possible, even at levels of such fine detail as in the grammaticality of (60) beside (59), to find principled explanations for the patterns of grammaticality, based ultimately on the intensional distinction between qualification and assignment.
3.11 We alluded in Section 3.8 to the fact that the recognition of postnominal attributives as instantiating the pattern [E P]raises a question of a different order.
We there proposed the intensional structures (61) and (62) as representations of ordinary predicatives and postnominal attributives, respectively:(61) E  P (62)[E  P]How then might we distinguish between, on the one hand, a clause which has as its subject a noun phrase containing a postnominal attributive, and on the other — admittedly a much rarer case — a clause which has another clause as its subject?
(63) the student selected was fortunate (64) that the student was selected was fortunate Both (63) and (64) have as their basic intensional pattern (discounting minor dependent items like definiteness and number) an E extended by assignment to make up their subject, with the whole of this then extended by assignment again to give the full sentence.
The square brackets in (62) merely mark that the whole is to be taken as a complex entity, which is given anyway by our assumption that an E extended remains an E; if the brackets are not needed in (61) why are they present in (62); alternatively, why not write them in in both cases?
The assumptions we have been making so far about intensional relations and their combination and representation seem to deny us the chance of distinguishing two different structures here.
One very important datum for the answer is exactly the fact that, as users of the language, we do recognize a difference between sentences like (63) and (64); intuitively we are aware that if [E  P]is an intensional entity in (64), then it is an entity in some different way from the subject of (63).
Actually the evidence for regarding a clause as an E at all is rather equivocal.
In favour, are facts such as:(a) When a relative clause is attached to a clause as its head, then it is introduced by the "which" marker which follows noun phrases, and not the "as" marker used for verbs and verb phrases:(65) the mountain which they want to climb is Mount Elburz he swept the yard as he was instructed (66) McRowen queried the call, which infuriated the umpire McRowen queried the call, as (it) infuriated the umpire (b) Clauses take, in bigger clauses, positions that are commonly filled by noun phrases:(67) Marples heard the news (68) Marples heard that the soup was contaminated This is true even of so-called adverbial clauses:(69) Peggy realized her error after Christmas (70) Peggy realized her error after the Christmas season was ended
On the other hand, by far the commonest qualification of clauses is by single property words, and whenever there is a choice of form available, English shows unambiguously that these take the adverbial form, used in property qualification, and not the adjectival form needed for entity qualification:(71) the baker, finally successful, produced a wonderful cake (72) her final success was all the sweeter after the failures (73) finally, the droschke was repaired (74) final, the droschke was repaired
In fact, it seems inescapable that a special status must be allowed to the most basic layer of clause construction in any clause, joining the subject and the predicate, to use traditional terms, whether by assignment of qualification or assignment of equation.
In introducing the predicative construction in Section 3.2 we stated that it had two positive characteristics: completeness, which we regard as primary; and the secondary characteristic of making explicit the validity of the subordinate property for the entity qualified.
Our hypothesis is that, in the postnominal attributive construction, the latter characteristic has become not merely equally important, but the basis of the use of the relation.
It is no novelty to propose, in the study of language, that secondary characteristics can supplant primary ones.
It is for instance a continuous and powerfully effective factor in the change of lexical meaning; and as it happens, we have touched on a syntactic case in this very chapter, in the development of fixed relative order for classes of adjectives in prenominal position (cf., too, the emergence of "characteristic" and "occasion" values for prenominals and postnominals, respectively).
In other words, while there may be in some sense (possibly a historical one) a relatively simple form of language in which clauses contain only a single occurrence of assignment, there is also a more elaborate form in which complexes containing assignment can themselves be used as elements in the  construction of other clauses; acceptance of this conclusion is not particularly demanding, given the observable facts of language use.
Adoption of this view requires a small modification to the sketch of the patterns of linguistic construction given in Chapter 1.
From this point on, the brackets used in intensional formulae will be used distinctively.
Pairs of square brackets indicate that the enclosed formula is to be taken as an E, with round brackets for properties; where it may be necessary to indicate that a sequence of E  P is a clause within some larger construction rather than a simple entity-identifying expression, we shall use scroll brackets as our notational device.
(See further Appendix B.) A slight amendment is therefore needed to the formulae given in (37), with the intensional patterns realised by the surface structures containing ordinary attributives, predicatives, and postnominal attributives now represented respectively as in:(75)
Predicate qualifiers and clausal adjectives
4.1 Let us now consider the fourth position for adjectives: predicate qualifying occurrence, seen in:(1) Alastair likes his beef tea strong the jury found Ernest guilty she buys her dresses ready-made
The first, straightforward, prerequisite is to distinguish this clearly from the postnominal attributive position which we discussed in the previous chapter since they are, after all, superficially identical as sequences.
In this section, we shall present four types of evidence which plainly call for the distinction to be observed.
First, we may notice the ambiguity of many sentences containing noun + adjective sequences as in:(2) Joseph painted the general seated
One interpretation will make this equivalent to something like the statement that Joseph painted that member of the group of generals who is, or was, not standing; in this case it is indeed a postnominal attributive adjective joined with its noun in a single noun phrase, used for a single entity-identification.
The alternative version has it as a description of the style of the painting (and it makes no difference here whether the recumbent posture belongs to the living sitter or to the image in the finished picture).
We shall consider in Section 4.2 what precisely is the intensional structure for this interpretation.
Other examples of such ambiguity are plentiful; we offer at random:(3)(a) she wants to play the character limping (b) this process leaves the items date-stamped  (c) Elmer made all the excuses imaginable (d) our lawyer sent the packages registered For instance , taking example (c), under the attributive version, a speaker has a low opinion of Elmer as a man who prevaricates or procrastinates; but with the alternative interpretation she may be giving credit to him for lending colour and credibility to a defence which has to be put forward.
Second, there are often two different passives available when a sentence has a sequence noun + adjective following the verb; for instance, the fourth example of the previous set can be linked either to (4) or to (5):(4) the packages registered were sent by our lawyer (5) the packages were sent registered by our lawyer It is intuitively obvious that (4) corresponds to the postnominal attributive interpretation of (3)(c), but (5) to the other intensional pattern introduced here.
Third, it is noteworthy that the question appropriate to predicate qualifying position is different from that for the postnominal attributive adjectives.
The latter use the word which? or what sort of?, as in fact do all attributives, whereas the means for questioning the predicate qualifier is normally how?;(6) and (7) are examples:(6) they can't map the parts inaccessible: which parts can't they map? the book missing was stolen by Twyford: which book was stolen by Twyford?(7) Alastair likes his beef tea strong: how does Alastair like his beef tea? we find the prisoner guilty: how do you find the prisoner?
Similarly, for the first interpretations of the sentences in (2) and (3)(a), with the attributive adjective, the questions would be:(8) which general did he paint? which character does she want to play?
But for the other versions, the questions would be:(9) how did he paint the general? how does she want to play the character?
Fourth, we may point out that quite often the potential reference of the noun as modified by the adjective will not be the same in the predicate qualifying construction as it would be under the attributive version.
Let us assume that someone, speaking of George, utters:(10) he certainly didn't make the comments audible On the assumption that the adjective is here a predicate qualifier, George is innocent of responsibility for the comments which were audible, if indeed there have been any such remarks at all.
One result of this difference of reference is that it is possible to construct sentences which will be analytic or contradictory on the one interpretation but not on the other:(11) Nikolai offered us the message decoded but it was not decoded when he offered it to us 4.2 One curious feature about these adjectives is that they somehow seem to modify not only the noun which they accompany but simultaneously the verb as well; if this is a genuine observation it will be surprising on general grounds, since it would be decidedly abnormal in syntax for one element to simultaneously qualify two different items.
On the other hand, it fits very well with the fact that, while obviously having a relation of some sort with the noun, these adjectives are questioned not by the interrogative word usual for attributive adjectives, but by a word which typically is used to question adverbs.
We return to this point directly, but must first remark that, even if these adjectives do modify the verb, they certainly do not have the status of adverbs.
One might have suspected them of being adverbs that simply lacked the ordinary morphological marking, as in:(12) Grandmother took the corner too fast However, one can conclusively show that this is not so by finding examples where the predicate qualifiers fill a position which can also be occupied by a true adverb; here we observe that the effect is strikingly different.
Contrast the following pairs of sentences:(13) the ambassador left the party silent the ambassador left the party silently (14) Hooper built his boat slow but reliable Hooper built his boat slowly but reliably
We propose that the characteristics of these adjectives are accurately reflected by the intensional pattern:
(15) The constructional realization of this pattern is the structure:(16) As can be seen, the realization in the surface grammar is very natural and economical, English again representing qualification by simple juxtaposition, with linear order matching the unfolding of the intensional structure.
Thus, the adjective presents a modification of the complex idea, or situation-fragment offered to the mind by the combination of the verb and its object.
For instance, the basic activity in (2) is painting the general; but the sentence tells us more specifically that it is an activity carried out in a way that envisages the general as seated.
The initial verb + noun phrase combination shows in essence a property word extended by an entity word, and it therefore remains a (complex) property; the adjective then further extends this property; but because it is an adjective rather than an adverb, its own property is understood as applicable to the entity identified by the noun phrase, with the important reservation, demanded by the intensional structure, that it will not be applied to it unconditionally but only insofar as that entity stands in relation to the verb which accompanies it.
Indeed the adjective must be so understood; if we try to imagine using, in the structure of (16), an adjectival property which is not ascribed to the entity of the noun phrase (nor helping as a qualifier to identify any entity of the sentence), there will be only two possible outcomes: If it is a property semantically compatible with the verb, the result will be taken as an ungrammatical way of expressing a thought which should have incorporated an adverb:(17) Alastair likes his beef tea great Alternatively, it will be a property that is not compatible with the verb either; but, in that case, there will be no way of guessing what that property should be applied to — it will in effect be semantically "loose" , so that the whole will be incomprehensible:(18) the process left the documents puzzled Thus, the property of the adjective qualifies, in purely syntactic terms, the inner grouping of verb and object; it is applied to the entity of the noun phrase, but not directly, only as part of an interlocking structure with three elements — as in certain engineering and architectural structures, each of three elements needs the other two in order for the whole to function effectively.
4.3 Once again, our interpretation has consequences for grammaticality and linguistic form which match observable data: First, it implies, inter alia , that adjectives which cannot be ascribed to the entity of the noun phrase — such as the associatives — will be unacceptable here, just as they are in postnominal attributive position, and this is indeed the case:(19) how did the Ministry send their expert? they sent their expert well-briefed they sent their expert meteorological (20) how do you find the new flag? we find the flag gaudy we find the flag national
Second, we have already noted that the adjective is questioned with the word how?, generally related to adverbial elements, rather than the which? that is used for attributives, and this agrees well with the structure of (16), where the adjective property qualifies a verbal structure, not a nominal one (i.e. a structure centred on a property, not an entity).
However, there is more to say on the matter of questioning.
Another implication of (16), or (15), is that, apart from questioning the adjective, the language would also provide a means to question the noun phrase alone while "leaving behind" the predicate qualifier (even though one might not expect such questions to be particularly common in practice), and in fact such questions are perfectly grammatical:(21) who(m) did he paint seated? what did he send registered?
By contrast, the analogous question in the case of postnominal attributives, aimed at a determiner and noun but omitting a following  adjective, is not possible, as we can see from (22), whichever of the two ways we try to do it; and again this is predictable given the difference in structure.
(22) what inaccessible can't they map? what can't they map inaccessible?
There is one further point: we may wonder if we can question the verb and noun phrase together while "leaving behind" the adjective.
The comparable question when the qualifying property is instantiated by an adverbial element is possible, if unusual:(23) the lad measured the room competently: what did the lad do competently?
However, it turns out that the question is unacceptable when the final property is an adjective:(24) the jury found Ernest guilty: what did the jury do guilty?
This is precisely the contrast we should expect.
The reason is that despite the presence of what? in the formula what do/does/did…do? this question is really a substitute for the verb phrase as a verb phrase; it does not assume any object for the verb:(25) the nurses swam at the weekend: what did the nurses do at the weekend?
Consequently, when the question formula is used, the notion of a predicate is present, but there is no presupposition of an entity; therefore there is no problem in retaining an adverbial property, but an adjectival property is left without any entity to apply to.
4.4 We have left aside the suggestion that predicate qualifiers might perhaps be reduced forms of clauses even if postnominal attributives are not.
Example (3)(d), for instance, would be an abbreviated form of a structure that could perhaps be realized more fully as:(26) our lawyer sent the packages; the packages are registered It may of course be claimed that we should think in terms not of actual clauses but of some more hypothetical and abstract clause; maybe the last five words in (26) should be replaced by something like:(27)[subject the package plural]subject be registered
There will still be reasons, adduced below, for objecting to an account of predicate qualifiers as based on either clauses or abstract clauses, but on the general suggestion that an abstract clause, of this or that design, might be a useful grammatical device, we may point out that, as we remarked in Section 3.7, a claim that some structure is a reduced form of a clause is not explanatory; and it does not become more explanatory if the appeal is to a hypothetical or abstract clause.
Of course if such an appeal is in effect a way of jettisoning the unexplained clause and opening the door to an explanation in terms of some other theory — say, a theory of relations — then it may turn out in the end to have been a step forward, but no credit can be claimed for the step until a reasonably clear, comprehensive, and persuasive account of the alternative theory has been presented.
Apart from the fact that a fully satisfactory solution is available without the need to assume that truncated clauses lurk beneath predicate qualifiers, there would be good reasons for discounting the possibility, even if one did not initially accept the intensional pattern of (15) as valid.
First, such an "origin" can scarcely take any form other than one where the adjective is a predicative element following a form of the verb be.
Now, the relation introducing such an adjective is assignment; but there is no reason at all for taking the relation of the predicate qualifier to be anything other than qualification.
Second, there will be a problem concerning questions.
Let us first recall that the appropriate question for predicate qualifiers is how?.
Then let us observe that adjectives in the ordinary postcopular predicative position are often questioned by one of a number of set phrases relating to their pragmatic category, such as what shape?
If the speaker does not call on one of these, the interrogative word what? may sometimes be used:(28) my younger brother-in-law is Estonian our economic prospects are fair the mayor was vulgar (29) what is your younger brother-in-law? what are your economic prospects? what was the mayor?
(In practice, questions like this may be replaced by the mayor was what? or what did you say the mayor was?, but these will cover the point which we are about to make just as well.)
However, the standard question for a predicative adjective which does not correspond to some  other set interrogative phrase is what…like?
This would be the most natural way of questioning any of the predicative adjectives in (30)— and could be used just as well for the second and third cases of (28):(30) his accountant was sensible Helen's profile is striking the new coin is octagonal Just as the contrast between how? and which? reflects the contrast of structural position between postnominal attributive and predicate qualifier, so the contrast of question words between how? and what? or what…like? allows us to infer that an adjective in ordinary predicative position is not a plausible origin for the predicate qualifier.
Third, there would frequently be discrepancies between the meanings of sentences with a predicate qualifier and "fuller versions" when it is replaced by a clause; for example, consider:(31) the jury found Ernest guilty the jury found Ernest; Ernest was guilty (32) Alastair likes his beef tea strong Alastair likes his beef tea; his beef tea is strong In the latter case, for instance , there may not be any strong beef tea at all ; the point of uttering the sentence may be to complain about that very point.
Fourth, and in our view conclusively, there is another much stronger candidate for the post of postnominal adjective representing the abbreviation of a clause.
We now move on, therefore, to examine this type of adjective and its behaviour.
4.5 Consider the following sentences:(33) we believe the detective innocent Leonard proved the theorem incorrect Atkins will guarantee her picture authentic We can perhaps take it as self-evident that these do not contain attributive adjectives, but they also differ from predicate qualifiers.
For instance, they do not correspond in any coherent way to questioning with how?
Certainly, it may be possible to use sentences like:(34) how do we believe the detective? how did Leonard prove the theorem? how will Atkins guarantee her picture?
But it takes no long reflexion to see that, in this case, if the interrogative is acceptable, then it asks for a straightforward manner adverbial or its equivalent as an answer, and it is not directly related to the sentences in (33).
On the other hand, examples like (33) could be responses to questions containing what?
(35) what do you believe the detective to be? what did Leonard prove the theorem to be? what will Atkins guarantee her picture to be?
The fact that the sentences of (35) would be marginal or outright unacceptable if to be were omitted is in itself a datum worth taking into account, along with the further fact that to be can also be inserted into the statement forms in (33).
Additional evidence that this type of adjective is distinct from the predicate qualifier can, again, be provided by means of sentences which are ambiguous between the two.
Passive participles provide a rich vein of relevant instances; it is a commonplace that these can be construed either as related directly to a verb, and hence in many cases referring to some assumed event, or as being adjectives expressing a state that have lost their verbal connexion.
This is exactly the nature of the ambiguity in:(36) the façade was plastered When (36) is taken as a "state" adjective the most appropriate question would perhaps be:(37) what was the façade like?
But when (36) is taken as containing a real, passive, verbal notion the question will be something like (38)(a) or (b); and (c) will also be a reasonable response:(38)(a) what happened to the façade?(b) what was done to the façade?(c) when was the façade plastered?
Let us now consider (39) where the word plastered follows its noun (again, an attributive interpretation is possible in principle — Clara might be an offensively wealthy tourist who travels round Italy trying to buy buildings and parts of buildings to take home as souvenirs; but we shall assume that this meaning can safely be left out of account):(39) Clara wants the façade plastered It at once becomes apparent that this may specify either an event, with the façade on the receiving end of it, or a state which Clara wishes to see existing in the façade.
In the latter case, an appropriate question would be:(40) how does Clara want the façade?
This then assumes an interpretation of the adjective as a predicate qualifier with the structure of (15) and (16) as exemplified in, for instance,(7).
The other meaning uses plastered in the type of structure which we have introduced in the present section; notice that it allows addition of to be (and that it is parallel in its overall structure to (42) where there is a non-finite clause complete with subject, verb and object):(41) Clara wants the façade to be plastered (42) she wants the builders to plaster the façade Let us also take note of a subtle and rather interesting ambiguity, found in:(43) Oliver imagined her red-haired This may mean that Oliver is allowing himself to speculate on the effect of, let us say, adding a wig to a blonde lady of his acquaintance (and this may therefore be called the "cosmetic" version); or he may be trying to build a mental picture of someone he has never met (the "unacquainted" version), in which case imagined could be replaced by supposed with very little alteration in the meaning of the whole.
It is tempting to put this all down to a simple lexical ambiguity, but we should not do so before remarking that while question (44) can correspond to either version,(45) can only match the "unacquainted" version.
(44) how did Oliver imagine her?(45) what did Oliver imagine her to be? /what did Oliver imagine her to be like?
Thus,(43) has the same ambiguity as (39) between predicate qualifier, giving the "cosmetic" version, and this new pattern of interpretation, which must correspond to the "unacquainted" meaning, and the  distinction between the two senses of sentences like (39) should not be written off as a mere matter of "nuances of meaning" , but instead shows one sequence of surface syntax answering to two different intensional patterns.
There may appear to be a snag to this account: if how? is compatible with both versions, and if in the "unacquainted" version we could replace imagine by suppose, why is it that (46) is ungrammatical?:(46) how did Oliver suppose her?
Actually the solution to this minor conundrum is not all that difficult, but it takes us through some steps which are not relevant to our main line of discussion, and so we shall postpone it to an endnote to this chapter (p. 79).
If anyone at that point feels it is worth omitting altogether, no great harm will be done.
As we have already observed, the superficial sequence of syntactic categories in (33) and the other instances of this new pattern is identical to that of the predicate qualifying construction.
However, there is a distinct intensional structure underlying them (again, the underlining is purely to indicate which P we are interested in, and is not part of our notational system):(47) That is, users of English interpret the relation between the property of the adjective and the word or phrase which instantiates the preceding entity in just the same way as they would interpret the relation between a predicative adjective and the subject in an explicit clause; it therefore seems reasonable to call adjectives so used clausal adjectives.
4.6 There is ample further evidence for regarding the second and third elements in such sequences — unlike the others we have seen so far — as jointly equivalent to a clause at the intensional level; let us consider the four points which follow: First, most or all such phrases accept the insertion of the explicit predicator to be in front of the adjective (and to be seems to be more or less obligatory when such adjectives are questioned); we have already seen examples (e.g. (35),(41)).
It is revealing that, in a very similar way, to be can be present or omitted in an actual non-finite clause where it signals the passive of a verb phrase although its presence is generally preferred:(48) Cromwell ordered the Abbot of Reading (to be) tried and executed immediately The same insertion is sometimes superficially possible for predicate qualifiers; but in reality this indicates a main verb which is semantically compatible with the relation of either construction; an example would be like (or want) which makes it possible for us to set (49) beside (8):(49) Alastair likes his beef tea to be strong However, with most preceding verb phrases, such a change to the predicate qualifier construction will produce a result which is ungrammatical and may even present difficulties of interpretation:(50)(a) the children have kept the fish-tank clean: how have the children kept the fish-tank?(b) the children have kept the fish-tank to be clean
Second, in the case of these clausal adjectives, it is possible to specify a tense, which may differ from that of the main verb, just as may the tense of an explicit subordinate clause.
Certainly, the means of expression are limited and their values rather general, so that there is not the same flexibility of tense as in an explicit finite clause (but this is a common contrast found, not only in English but in many languages, between finite main verb phrases and other syntactic groups (see Ferris and Jah, 1989).
None of this alters the fact that it is possible to use these adjectives with a tense value distinctively different from that of the preceding verb; see (51) and the contrast in (52):(51) we all know Cerrutty to have been fortunate (52)(a) in the test my men showed themselves alert (b) in the test my men showed themselves to have been alert In (52),(a) would naturally be suitable when the men respond promptly during the test, and (b) when, for instance, they had been alert in paying attention to instructions given at some time before the test.
And although the expression of futurity is clumsy (and would usually be replaced by a finite clause) it is grammatical and does occur:(53) we understand it to be going to be taxable (if the bill is passed) our host thought you about to be offensive
Third, the coincidence between this group of adjectives and those that can occur in ordinary predicative position appears to be exact, and this is the more significant in that this is the only case where there is complete agreement between a pair of adjective positions.
Thus (54), with an adjective which can occur predicatively (but not in the prenominal attributive position), is quite acceptable; but (55), containing galore which is excluded from ordinary predicative position, is not:(54) the observers reported Her Majesty (to be) asleep (55) the observers reported the whisky (to be) galore We may further note that there are certain inherently restrictive adjectives (including superlatives and, under certain conditions, ordinals) which imply selection out of a known set, and which appear to occur (unlike most adjectives) in ordinary predicative position accompanied by the definite article:(56)(a) your slice is the largest (b) your slice is the small (See Chapter 7; and Ferris, in preparation.)
These adjectives also accept grammatical co-occurrence of the definite article in this clausal position, whereas other adjectives do not — cf. the contrast between (57) with a superlative and (58) with an ordinary adjective.
The coincidence between the ordinary predicative and clausal positions is all the more striking in that the inherently restrictive adjectives cannot be so used in predicate qualifying position (where restriction for identification is not appropriate); this is why there is a further contrast between (57) and (59), even though the adjective is one of this inherently restrictive group in both cases, and despite the fact that the property THIRD is certainly compatible in itself with the noun ox:(57) she considers the Admiral (to be) the worst (e.g. of the village's gardeners)(58) she declared the squire (to be) the lazy (59) the revellers had eaten the ox the third (60) they ate their steaks well done  Example (60) shows that eat can support predicate qualifiers, so that incompatibility between the verb and the construction cannot be given as a reason for the ungrammaticality of (59).
Fourth, structure (47) for the clausal adjective follows just the same general intensional pattern as will be needed for sentences which contain not an adjective but a (non-finite) verb phrase:(61) Leonard proved this theorem to rival the Nomination theorem in its scope Atkins will guarantee her picture to have fetched $100,000 at its last sale 4.7 It seems permissible to agree, in this case, that we do have good grounds for accepting that the adjectives are understood as part of a structure felt to be a clause, of which the preceding noun phrase would be the subject.
However, it follows at once that they do not strictly present us with a distinct adjective position, but just a special case of the predicative adjective already discussed in Chapter 3.
Nonetheless there are certain consequences which we may notice: First, an obvious prediction from (47) is that, once again, adjectives which are not ascribed to the entity of the noun would be ungrammatical if put into this position.
This will not be surprising since it has by now become apparent that such adjectives inhabit a very restricted niche in the world of English syntax; in fact they are limited to the prenominal attributive position.
That is a privileged environment, in terms of its frequency of occurrence in running usage (and perhaps also in its psychological salience for grammarians) but, nonetheless, it is just one out of the several adjectival constructions familiar to the ordinary user of the language.
However that may be, the prediction that non-ascriptive adjectives will be ungrammatical here is borne out by the evidence of associatives and others (this is the more revealing, since it might sometimes be possible to understand the meaning which would be intended by the construction where they could be supposed to occur):(62) Fanshawe reported O'Neill's collar clerical Jones could not imagine his wife former
Second, if we accept that such adjectives, unlike predicate qualifiers, are genuinely equivalent to a modified clause in conjunction with the noun phrase which they follow, then it is entirely predictable that this construction will demand, as the preceding main verb, one which customarily supports a predication expressed in an explicit subordinate clause; this will not, however, be demanded of the verb preceding a  predicate qualifier.
This does turn out to be the case.
Believe, consider, judge, think, declare, imagine, all may precede states of affairs set out in the form of an explicit clause; they may also precede a structure consisting of noun phrase + adjective, where the adjective is a clausal one.
However, keep, paint, leave, produce, drink do not support subordinate clauses; and, while they can be followed by the same sequence of noun phrase + adjective, the adjective is not clausal in their case but a predicate qualifier, and it shows the other characteristics to be expected of a predicate qualifier.
Compare, for example(63) and (64):(63) they believe the aircraft hostile they believe the aircraft to be hostile how do they believe the aircraft? what do they believe the aircraft to be?(64) Jesse drank the whiskey neat Jesse drank the whiskey to be neat how did Jesse drink the whiskey? what did Jesse drink the whiskey (to be)?
On the other hand, the group of verbs which occur with predicate qualifiers will be expected to exhibit some degree of compatibility with the noun phrase element of the structure which they govern, although this does not imply that they have to make exactly the same sort of sense when they occur with that phrase alone as they do when the adjective is present, for the very reason that the adjective provides the syntactic-semantic condition under which the relation between the verb and its object holds; compare leave the items and leave the items date-stamped.
For the verbs which accompany clausal adjectives, however, there is no need for any compatibility at all(although it may happen to occur if the verb also takes simple objects), since the noun phrase here has no direct relation to the verb which it follows but is simply one of the elements assembled within the opaque frontiers of the clause.
This, again, is the situation which we find.
While one may keep fish tanks, paint generals (artistically, at least), and drink whiskey, we do not "believe aircraft" , nor can our host simply "think you" , and while we might declare Philip to be infuriating, we do not simply "declare Philip" .
Third, a further set of predictions concerns the possible ways to ask questions.
Inspection of (47), repeated here for convenience as (65)(65) would lead us a priori to expect, first, that the language might provide  a simple way to question the noun phrase and adjective taken as a unit, and second that, if there are simple interrogations for the noun phrase alone and for the adjective alone, these would take a form parallel to that for the subject and (ordinary) predicative adjective of a normal copular clause.
All of these predictions do match real usage as shown in (66) and (67)(underlining, on this occasion, indicates the section of the structure which is to be questioned); we add (68) to offer the parallel with an explicit clause:(66) she needs the application translated what does she need?(67)(a) I would consider the tea-boy (to be) reliable what would you consider the tea-boy to be?(67)(b) I would consider the tea-boy (to be) reliable who would you consider (to be) reliable
(68) Amy said the tea-boy was reliable what did Amy say? what did Amy say the tea-boy was? who did Amy say was reliable?
We should not, however, expect a question for the initial verb alone since this is only possible in English for verbs which describe something as being, in some as yet ill-defined sense, "done" to their objects:(69) what did Rafferty do to the cistern? and this cannot be claimed for the verbs preceding clausal adjectives any more than for a verb which precedes an explicit subordinate clause.
We do not, either, expect a question for the combination of the initial property and the entity, and indeed there are no such forms of question.
Fourth, we can even go further.
We have seen by now in a good number of cases, including those immediately above, that when one takes account of the interaction between the meanings of particular  words and the value of the constructions in which they may be used, it is often easy to see why certain structures are grammatical, and others are not; this may enable us to say in turn why other related structures are ungrammatical.
To take a particular instance, we have seen that the form of question with how? is associated with predicate qualifiers but not with clausal adjectives, and also that the verb believe will only be compatible with the clausal adjective; it follows that the second part of the exchange in (70) should be odd or ungrammatical, which is indeed so:(70) LECTURER: The Venetians believed their proposals generous…(interrupted by sound of electric drill next door) MEMBER OF AUDIENCE: *How did the Venetians believe the proposals?
Superficially, such a judgement would have been rather puzzling, given that adverbs, including adverbs of manner, normally can qualify the verb believe:(71) we must reluctantly believe what she says 4.8 The proposal to treat the adjectives of Sections 4.5 and 4.6 as if they were part of a modified subordinate clause is not of course a novel one; notoriously, the postulation of modified subordinate clauses has been adopted by many writers in recent decades as a grammatical panacea for all manner of syntactic problems.
The remedy could have been more appropriately applied if those prescribing it had offered us a clearer understanding of what a clause is and how far it may be similar to various other structures.
The snare is that clauses let us see the fullest possible type of syntactic structure; therefore, any syntactic relationship or any other type of phrase whatever can always be seen as part of a potential clause, of which the grammarian can helpfully provide the "deleted" or "understood" remainder.
Having firmly rejected this device for the other adjective constructions discussed so far (not excluding the postnominal attributive), we consider that it is only in Sections 4.5 onwards that we have encountered a construction where the adjective can reasonably be treated in this way.
We close with a cautionary note: one should bear in mind that a source of potential confusion always present is the fact that certain verbs lend themselves to occurrence with more than one type of adjectival construction, and to illustrate let us observe that any of the following, with their different modes of interpretation, are fully acceptable sentences of English:(72) Mackay preferred the picture stolen (postnominal attributive)(73) Shelagh prefers her holidays adventurous (predicate qualifier)(74) we prefer the king (to be) beheaded (clausal)
Endnote
This endnote is concerned with some unimportant points of detail concerning example (46).
The first step is simple:(46) is ungrammatical because how? is linked to the use of a predicate qualifier while suppose requires the clausal construction.
But why is it that the predicate qualifier construction can carry both meanings while the clausal construction fits only the "unacquainted" version?
Bearing in mind that the meaning of imagine is something like construct a mental image without solid evidence, consider:(75)(76)(75) gives a single (complex) element as subordinate to imagine; consequently her is subjected to all the aspects of imagine just as much as red-haired.
But in (76) with the predicate qualifier the lady and her red hair are intensionally separated; therefore while it is still possible to use (76) to the same effect as (75), with everything that is constructed with the verb covered by without solid evidence, this notion may also be taken as only related to one of the two extending elements; that is, Oliver may reliably know her and what she is like — it is her image as red-haired that was constructed without solid evidence.
Her, by contrast with red-haired, is then understood as one of the "given" items that Oliver had to work with, rather than as one of the latent items that his imagination has to work on.
Compare the way that his brother may be part of the "given" starting situation, or part of the allegation in:(77) Wally says that his brother is an arms dealer Does this imply that there is a possible interpretation of (76) where red-haired is the "given" and her the item that is not solidly established?
We are inclined to think that this is a way of using the  structure in principle, but that this is simply the sort of thing that no speaker is ever likely to want to say.
For, to take it that the property of being red-haired is known reliably but that there is no solid evidence for its owner (in the same way for example as in (78) where her must be covered by the caveat without solid evidence:(78) he tried to imagine her) seems as near to self-contradictory as makes no difference.
Adverbal and postverbal adjectives
5.1 Despite having now examined three distinct structures which are all realized through an adjective immediately following a noun phrase, we have not yet exhausted the possibilities lying behind this simple sequence of English surface syntax.
The fourth type is exemplified in:(1) Ellen shook the keys loose the mixture will turn metal buttons soft muzak drives them mad Again, an easy way to detect the presence of a distinct type of adjectival structure is to consider the appropriate formulation for a question.
For none of the cases of (1) would the appropriate question begin with how?
Observe, for instance, the ungrammaticality of (2), and, while (3) is acceptable, it is only acceptable with an interpretation that bears no systematic relation to the sentence in (1):(2) *how does muzak drive them?(3) how will the mixture turn the buttons?
The word for questioning postnominal attributives, which?, fares no better:(4) which them does muzak drive?(5) which keys did Ellen shake?
Nor is what (…like)?— as for clausal adjectives — applicable:(6) what will Ellen shake the keys?(7) what does muzak drive them like?
We take it as self-evident that the adjectives in (1) are not predicatives, but the failure of the third form of interrogation confirms this.
There is, in fact, no monomorphemic means of enquiry for these adjectives in English; the simplest corresponding question has some such form as what…do to…?, as in:(8) what did Ellen do to the keys? what will the mixture do to metal buttons? what does muzak do to them?
It will not escape notice that, first, this question enquires about the verb and the adjective together, not the adjective alone; and, second, this is precisely the form of question that can be used for a single, unmodified transitive verb:(9) Lionel shredded the memoranda what did Lionel do to the memoranda? 5.2 For reasons which will become apparent, we shall call the adjectives in this structure adverbal adjectives.
For anyone who does not observe the difference of question word, there may be a temptation to put them down as merely predicate qualifiers with the addition of a resultative nuance.
It is true enough that there is often such a nuance (see Quirk, Greenbaum, Leech, Svartvik, 1972), but the proposal will not turn out to be satisfactory.
At the same time, it is worth asking just why such a nuance is generally, but perhaps not necessarily, found in adverbal adjectives; we suggest an answer to this question in Section 5.4.
There are several other means of drawing attention to the difference between these adjectives and the predicate qualifiers, with which the risk of confusion may be greatest.
First, there is a semantic variation to be observed.
Although many sentences with this surface sequence will always come to the same thing pragmatically, whichever of the two constructions is assumed (this is one of the features which can make careful syntactic analysis such a delicate matter), it is nonetheless possible to find some which are open to either syntactic interpretation but with a clear difference in meaning; this will then help to throw the syntactic difference into relief.
Consider for example:(10) Haberup made his golem angry If Haberup is the person who originally assembles the golem, he may, through design or carelessness, have produced it so as to start its "life" in an unpleasant frame of mind; sentence (10) will describe this situation on condition that the adjective is taken as a predicate qualifier, and in this case (10) does have a matching question with how?
If, on the other hand, the golem is already working, then Haberup (who may not this time be in a position to claim the patent rights) has presumably done something to annoy it, and in this case (10) may be used in the sense of an answer to the question:(11) what did Haberup do to his golem?
Notice also that there is an alternative and syntactically simpler way of expressing the second version, which is:(12) Haberup angered his golem We can see exactly the same type of ambiguity in:(13) Reg ran the engine dry The adverbal adjective version of (13) corresponding to the question what did Reg do to the engine? tells us that Reg reduced the engine to a certain unsatisfactory state (though he may at least have had the sense to stop at that point).
But when we understand the adjective to be a predicate qualifier, so that the sentence is the counterpart to how did Reg run the engine?, then it describes a different (and, in engineering terms, presumably worse) situation, in which he forces the engine to operate when it is already dry.
The particularly intimate link between adverbal adjective and verb is shown by the fact that a case such as(12) is far from exceptional.
It is very common to find that the combination of the adverbal adjective and its preceding verb can be matched by a single verb, without any change at all in the overall syntactic pattern or in the meaning: 14 (a) you should make the string longer you should lengthen the string (b) his sister wanted to set the owl free his sister wanted to release the owl or his sister wanted to free the owl (c) Liz had knocked her fiancè unconscious Liz had stunned her fiancè (The same remark can be made of what are plainly close relatives of this construction, namely separable verbs where the second part is an  adverb, or "particle" , as with put up (= accommodate), or pull off (= achieve.)
The significant fact about both phrase types is that we have two property words — a major one (the verb) extended by a minor qualifying one — and they are linked together to form a more complex property before they are permitted to enter into construction with a syntactic object.
How far these two constructions — the adjective with the verb and the adverb with the verb — should be considered in company with constructions such as:(15) Heidi saw the stork falter (16) kiss her goodbye! is an interesting question, but one which would take us well beyond the bounds of the adjectival study on which we are focusing here.)
5.3 There are two further reasons for not accepting any sort of identification between adverbal adjectives and predicate qualifiers, apart from the indications given by ambiguity, and by the fact that they correspond to different types of question, and by the intuitively close relationship which is found in many cases between a verb + adverbal adjective pair and a single lexical verb.
The first is that there is a clear tendency for adverbal adjectives to outrank predicate qualifiers in grammaticality when moved next to the verb and in front of the object.
Consider, in this light, the contrasts in (17) and (18), each presenting two sets of data; the first set includes an adverbal adjective; the second contains a predicate qualifying adjective, as indicated by the identity of the appropriate questions:(17) Ellen shook loose the keys what did Ellen do to the keys? how did Ellen shake the keys? the thief produced unharmed the goat what did the thief do to the goat? how did the thief produce the goat?(18) the raiders shot dead two vigilantes what did the raiders do to the vigilantes? how did the raiders shoot the vigilantes *Andrew wants milky his coffee what does Andrew do to his coffee? how does Andrew want his coffee?
This capacity of the adjective to stand alongside the verb is just what would be expected if there is a specially close link between the verb and the adjective in the case of the adverbal construction.
Indeed, the move seems generally acceptable for them, subject only to the natural constraint that it will be proscribed in certain cases where the adjective would consequently look as if it were attributive, with the result that an incorrect meaning would apparently be expressed; for example:(19) this potion makes dogs bald (20) this potion makes bald dogs For the second reason, we turn to some additional aspects of questions.
In order to do so, we must present the intensional structure which we see as underlying the structure of the adverbal adjective.
The characteristics of these adjectives correspond to occurrence in the underlined position of the structure in (21) where the verb and the adjective are immediately bound together to form a complex property-nucleus which then enters into construction with the object:(21)
The surface construction which realizes (21) is that seen in (22), although it is more common to find the serial order of the second and third elements reversed; this does not change their relationships in terms of intensional qualification:(22) It is curious that the verb and the adjective are so often separated in surface structure; the reason is perhaps that the noun phrase object is "pulled" into the position immediately following the verb because, in the vast majority of transitive verb phrases, that is where the object is found.
That aside, English follows its normal mode of realization — marking qualification by word order — and, as tends to be the case except in entity-identifiers, having the subordinate item follow the item qualified; the only overt marking is the choice of an adjectival rather than adverbial form for the second property, to show that this is  to apply to the entity of the noun phrase and not to the property of the verb.
If the structure of (22) is an appropriate formulation of the patterns followed by the language user, then certain facts about English questions again fall into place quite naturally.
Thus, it is quite predictable that there should be a means of questioning the verb and the adjective taken together, as indeed there is, although this happens to be a phrasal form — what…do to…?— rather than a single interrogative word; cf. (13) or (17) and (18).
Similarly, the noun phrase object can be questioned just like any other.
However, if one tries to envelop the noun phrase and the adjective in a single question, then, on the one hand, the result will usually or always be grammatical, because the verbs occurring in this construction can of course stand as ordinary transitive verbs, but, on the other, the question form will naturally be taken as related to the ordinary transitive verb with a simple noun phrase object — with a corresponding alteration in the meaning expressed;(23) is an attempt to put such a question:(23) his sister set the owl free what did his sister set? to which suitable answers could include the mousetrap or the first four questions.
There is, perhaps, especially strong confirmation that the verb and adjective properties are immediately bound together in the fact that there is no coherent way to question either the adjective or the verb alone while leaving the other in place; we cannot, for example, have:(24) what should I do to the string longer?(25) how did his sister set the owl?
And sentences (26), even if acceptable:(26) what did his sister set the owl? how did Liz knock her fiancè? would give us questions not corresponding to the types of statement in (1) or (14).
Finally, and unsurprisingly, the attempted questioning of noun phrase and verb together while "leaving behind" the adjectival property will again produce an incoherent result, as in (27) where the first sentence is ungrammatical while the second is grammatical but associated with the wrong sort of answer:(27) what did the raiders do dead? what should I do longer?
We should notice that, in this construction, as in the case of the predicate qualifier, there is no doubt but that the adjective is to be sharply distinguished from an adverb, as such, even though it qualifies a structure centred on a verb.
Observe the completely different effect produced by replacing the adjectives in (1) by the corresponding adverbs, as in:(28) Ellen shook the keys loosely muzak drives them madly And contrast the two sentences of (29)(b):(29)(a) what did the new system do to the motors?(b) the new system made the motors quieter the new system made the motors more quietly 5.4 Let us now return to the matter of the resultative nuance which can indeed be observed in all the examples we have given, reproducing the structural diagrams (21) and (22) to do so:(21)(22) If these diagrams represent the relations actually used in constructing such expressions, it follows that the entity of the noun phrase, as initially present to the mind of the speaker (and to that of the listener in the final interpretative phase of comprehension) lacks the property of the adjective since it is structurally separated from it; however, since that property is expressed by an adjective, then ex hypothesi it will apply to the entity of the noun phrase when the construction is taken as a whole; if not, then either the property would be expressed by an adverb, and apply to the verb, or the whole construction would be literally incoherent.
 "As initially present to the mind" is to be taken strictly in terms of the syntactic-semantic construction of expressions; it does not directly  refer to any aspect of an external situation which may be represented by an expression.
In particular if the external situation is conceived of as changing through time, the phrase "as initially present to the mind" by no means necessarily refers to an earlier state of a real or imaginary referent.
On the other hand, there is a reservation to be entered: that if the verb of the construction has a lexical meaning involving a change of state through time, then the two types of anteriority — constructional/linguistic and external/situational — will naturally tend to march in step.
Dealing with the structure (22), the mind will make the constructional connexion which allows the adjectival property to apply to the object phrase by the same process that introduces the verb — the item lexically correlated with an external change of state.
When the whole structure is still, as it were, in two parts we have a noun phrase such that there is no reason to suppose that it has the property of the adjective; when the structure is united we find first, that the property of the adjective does apply to the noun phrase, and, second, that the verb tells us of a temporal change.
Hence, we may reasonably expect a resultative flavour when an adverbal adjective is combined with a change-of-state verb.
However, this is not to say that the cause lies in the construction as such; indeed, as we shall see, there are instances of this construction which do not have any resultative nuance.
Notice that, if the adjective is not initially (in the constructional sense) applied to the noun phrase, it does not necessarily imply that an extralinguistic correlate of the latter must initially lack that property, and it is even compatible with the speaker or hearer knowing that the property does apply to the referent (see (36) to (40)).
All that we are entitled to draw from structures (21) and (22) is a structural conclusion: the adjectival property must apply to the object entity by virtue of the fact that the noun phrase is an integral piece of the whole tripartite construction.
(This of course remains true even if the whole structure is then subjected within a wider framework to negation, or presented as being hypothetical.)
5.5 This conclusion will actually exclude the great majority of verbs (or, more exactly, all normal uses of the great majority of verbs) from appearing in construction with an adverbal adjective at all, with or without the claimed nuance; either they will be related to their object in such a way that there is simply no need to mention any particular property of the latter entity, as in (30); or, even if there is some property of the object specially relevant to the notion introduced in the verb, that property does not belong to the object by virtue of the relationship between the verb and the object; for instance , even if Angela in (31) resembles her cousin in that they are both dark, her  cousin does not have that property because Angela resembles her, and even if the Prince admired his Chief Justice because of his disposition to clemency it is not the the Prince's admiration that justifies the applicability of the property merciful.
Hence the ungrammaticality of the structures in (31) which purport to offer us adverbal adjectives:(30) the Dean met Mrs Smollett and her uncle a Persian Kite costs $4,000 (31) Angela resembles her cousin dark the Prince admired his Chief Justice merciful
The main group of verbs which will both justify the singling out of some adjectival property of the entity behind the object phrase, and which, moreover, have a lexical value such that this adjectival property will be understood to apply to the object in some way especially relevant to the meaning of the verb are, as we have indicated, verbs which include the notion of a change of state.
However, not all change of state verbs can be expected to occur with adverbal adjectives even then; for instance, murder and burn do indeed produce a change of state that can be described by an adjective but one which is so intimately linked to the nature of the verb and so banally obvious that the adjective describing the object is otiose.
If sentences, such as those in (32), are not ungrammatical, it is still very unlikely that anyone will ever want to use them in practice:(32) Burke murdered many citizens dead the fire burned many priceless tomes burnt However, there are plenty of others where the state is less immediately predictable, and of course examples have already been given in (1),(10),(13) and so on.
We may also note that certain verbs seem to have the notion of change of state as the principal part of their meaning, not only make (in one of its values) as already cited, but also have (again in one of its meanings; see Chapter 9 for other uses), and render.
To the sentences in (1) we may therefore add:(33) the rains rendered his escape impossible
On the other hand, the notion of change of state does not have to be a criterial trait of the meaning of the verb (see Cruse, 1986); it is sufficient that a change of state is understood to be compatible with the lexical value of the verb.
Thus wiping and licking do not seem to require a change of state as a matter of their essential meaning, but it is quite accepted that one may be involved, so that we can have:(34) Rover licked his plate clean Wendy wiped the floor dry
Apart from these change-of-state verbs, are there any others which could allow an adverbal adjective to appear?
Most verbs which are used of situations where the object — talking strictly of the intensional level and not of the world referred to — does not change its properties (between the narrow focus on the object phrase alone, and the wider view when it is construed with the verb and the adjective as in (22)) will not be suitable; if a property that might be expressed by an adjective could be present in the wider structural context, then its applicability will not normally be connected with the link between the verb and the noun phrase.
Thus there seems no way of taking the adjective in (35) as adverbal (although (35) may be acceptable under one of the other adjectival interpretations):(35) the technician saw the machine faulty However, there remains the possibility of a verb which expresses the idea that some property is maintained in the object because of the action denoted by the verb.
Here, the fact that the adjective property is applicable to the object entity in a whole construction like (22) is intimately connected with the lexical meaning of the verb, and will thereby be understood to be applicable to the entity of the object even when that is considered in isolation.
There are indeed a few such verbs, keep being one of them.
And so we find that, apart from its use with predicate qualifiers, keep can also figure as the verb in an adverbal response to the question What…do to…?; as in:(36) what did the President do to the rebels? he kept them incarcerated in Castellòn till 1835 Notice the inappropriate relationship of the question with how? in this case, confirming that we are not dealing here with a predicate qualifier:(37) how did the President keep the rebels?
In other instances, the same surface sequence may quite freely be interpreted in either way, with no real difference in the overall effect; thus the following answer:(38) he always kept it frozen could respond equally well to either of the following questions:(39) what did Dr Hunston do to the Bremen material? how did Dr Hunston keep the Bremen material?
Another such verb is leave; hence example (3)(b) from Chapter 4, repeated here:(40) this process leaves the items date-stamped is in fact structurally ambiguous in three ways rather than two, since the final adjective may be a postnominal attributive, a predicate qualifier, or an adverbal; it remains true, however, that the ambiguity is one of structure rather than a matter of elusive "shades of lexical meaning" .
Before concluding, it is only fair to remark that there is in the use of adverbal adjectives, as of course in much of syntax, an element of idiomaticity.
This may operate in both directions.
As we have already observed (see (35)), the verb see, in its ordinary uses, cannot be expected to occur with an adverbal adjective, but this does appear to be the interpretation needed for (41) which may be considered substandard but is apparently possible in current British English:(41) even if the scheme does fail, I'll see you comfortable Much more often, the idiomaticity works the other way, so that a set of lexical items that could fit the structure of (21), with appropriate values, seem to give unacceptable sentences, as in (42):(42) Eva played her opponent exhausted Wendy wiped the floor moist
There is of course no need to be unduly alarmed at these discrepancies; we should reflect that any normal language presents numerous instances where certain recalcitrant items refuse to fit into a generally acceptable pattern (e.g. for no very obvious reason the "expected" adverbs difficultly and longly are not accepted in English and have to be replaced by the phrases with difficulty and for a long time.)
5.6 There is another important adjectival position which we should now introduce.
In fact, there remain only two major adjectival positions to be considered.
This is not an accident of English grammar; these are the only ones that can actually be expected.
For a detailed discussion of the restrictions and the reasons, see Appendix C. We shall adopt the term postverbal adjective for those which appear in  the structure exemplified by the following sentences:(43) last year, their best salesman fell ill the Irishman grew pale confidence tricksters seldom look nervous
Postverbal adjectives do not seem to raise any very difficult problems or any fundamentally new issues.
We shall take it that their surface structure is:(44) This may at first make them seem somewhat analogous to the predicate qualifiers, except that the noun phrase beyond the mediating verb is here the subject of the clause rather than the object as with the predicate qualifiers, and it is to the entity of this noun phrase that the property of the adjective applies.
The adjective must of course be one which can plausibly be ascribed to the entity of the subject if the whole is to be grammatically acceptable.
Perhaps the most important point to be made about postverbals is to distinguish them from the adjectives in the last remaining position, the extraclausal adjectives, which occur in an identical sequence of syntactic elements, but which correspond to a different surface structure as in:(45) the two reformers persevered undaunted two stagehands appeared, breathless They have the different intensional structure:
We will postpone discussion of the extraclausals until Chapter 9, but a reliable and well-justified rule of thumb is that extraclausals, unlike postverbals, are always equivalent, in their semantic effect, to otherwise similar constructions where the adjective appears in initial  position.
Both the following sentences may be accepted as grammatical, but only the second is equivalent to any sentence which has already been cited in this section:(46) ill, their best salesman fell breathless, two stagehands appeared
The intensional pattern corresponding to (44) is that of (47), where once more the property instantiated by the adjective is underlined:(47) The mapping of the intensional pattern onto the surface syntax of English is again very direct and very natural, being reflected solely in the order of the instantiating elements, with again adjectival form as an overt marker that the second property is applied to the initial E. What (47) suggests, however, is that the similarity of construction is not between postverbal and predicate qualifier, which has the intensional structure given in (48), but rather between postverbal and adverbal, the intensional structure for which is repeated here as (49):(48)(49) From the point of view of the adjectival property,(47) and (49) are essentially the same; the adjectival property syntactically qualifies another property word, while it is applied to the entity of the noun phrase in immediate construction with the property expression of which the adjective forms part.
The difference is only that for postverbals the property complex qualifies the E (and in surface terms we have an intransitive verb phrase), while with adverbals the property complex is qualified by the E (in surface terms, a transitive verb phrase).
As further examples of postverbals we may cite:(50) Lola felt angry (51) the victim was standing very erect (52) it was the oldest competitor who emerged victorious As was also true with the adverbals and predicate qualifiers, it is quite easy to distinguish postverbal adjectives from adverbs occupying the same structural position; in some examples we find a substantial difference of meaning:(53) Margaret was acting incompetently (54) Margaret was acting incompetent (See Ferris, 1983, though we would no longer seek to explain the data in the way proposed there.)
Obviously, Margaret's performance in (54) might be a matter of some considerable skill.
In other instances either the adverb or the adjective may apparently be ungrammatical although its counterpart is fully acceptable:(55) many cats seem intelligently (56) the old stationmaster winked outrageous
Just as with the predicate qualifiers, the occupation by postverbals of a syntactic position more commonly taken by an adverb seems to accord well with the fact that a favoured form for questioning them is how?, unless pre-empted by a question based on pragmatic categories such as what colour?.
How? corresponds to (50),(51) and (54).
However, one should record that a minority of examples respond happily neither to this sort of question nor to any obvious one of the "pragmatic" type.
Opinions are apparently divided on (57), some speakers favouring (58)(a), others (58)(b), and a good number seem to feel slightly uncomfortable with both:(57) Mario seemed regretful (58)(a) what did Mario seem?(b) how did Mario seem?
Curiously enough, it appears that there is no question at all which fits the adjective of a sentence like (59) closely, so that one must fall back on a metalinguistic one such as(60):(59) the sharks remain dangerous (60) what did you say about the sharks? 5.7 Since the property of the postverbal is one which the speaker deliberately chooses to clothe in the guise of an adjective rather than an adverb, it must, as we have already remarked, be one which is capable of being ascribed to the referential locus of the subject phrase.
A property which was neither helping — as a qualifier forming part of the same noun phrase — to identify that entity, nor ascribable to any entity within the sentence, and which was not simply adverbially qualifying the verb, would have no convincing reason for appearing in the sentence at all.
We should stress that we are talking of constructional applicability.
Whether the property expressed by the postverbal adjective can be taken as applying factually to the referent behind the subject, is quite another matter.
This depends on such considerations as whether the wider context includes an indication of negation or counterfactuality, and also on the lexical character of the verb with which the adjective is in immediate construction, since the property of the adjective is not applied to the entity in isolation but only as part of the property complex constituted by the adjective and the verb properties taken together.
If, therefore, the lexical meaning of the verb has any negative or hypothetical value then by that very fact the speaker wholly or conditionally withdraws any assurance that the adjectival property will hold factually.
Indeed, some verbs seem to have no lexical content beyond one which is aimed at providing some kind of reservation about applicability of the adjectival property, examples being become and turn which place a temporal restriction on the adjective's applicability; the subordinate property only holds after the time indicated by the tense of the verb.
The verbs seem and appear deliberately withhold applicability (thus permitting but not demanding the inference that it is inappropriate), as does the verb act where it can be taken that the property does not apply.
It is worth noting that there are not a few cases where constructions containing postverbal adjectives are equivalent to different structures having the same subject and the same adjectival and verbal properties, but with the former now in ordinary predicative position and the latter replaced by an adverb:(61) Mario seemed regretful Mario was apparently regretful (62) the sharks remain dangerous the sharks are still dangerous This is exactly what could have been expected, given structure (47).
This has two properties together making up a property complex; each property is applied to the immediately adjacent subject of the sentence.
The alternative version has the same two properties together making up a property complex that is applied to the immediately adjacent subject of the sentence; moreover in both cases the complex as a whole is assigned syntactically to the subject E; the sole difference is in the matter of which property is taken as "senior" to the other within the bounds of the complex, as in (63), and in such a case this will produce an infinitesimal semantic difference:(63) However this sort of syntactic trading is only possible where the language contains suitable lexical items; it must have an adverb and verb with the appropriate meanings; thus, in the absence of an adverb equivalent to after a change and a verb meaning to be orange, for instance, English cannot offer such an alternative for (64):(64) in spring, their skin turns orange 5.8 The range of verbs which can occur with postverbal adjectives is in fact quite wide.
Among those which might not initially seem to permit postverbal adjectives are that versatile element keep, and also run, and play; yet there is no problem about the following examples:(65) try to keep dry!
Pamella's clock is running slow the Gloucester team were playing rough A familiar example, which actually contains an adjectival phrase rather than a single adjective, is:(66) a rose by any other name would smell as sweet With this construction, too, there is possibly a certain element of idiomatic restriction; why for instance are the following examples unacceptable?(67) the guide was eating gluttonous Suzanne pirouetted sensuous We may at least hazard a guess as to why this construction is fairly limited in its occurrence: there are three intensional elements in operation, the entity phrase in subject position, the property which is to be instantiated by the verb and as a third item a property that can be expressed either by an adjective or by its adverb competitor; now where the lexical meanings are such that there would be an appreciable difference in the effect of applying the third property to the entity of the subject by contrast with the effect of using it to qualify the property of the verb (which is the case in (53) by contrast with (54)) then intuitive awareness that there is going to be a difference may generally allow the construction with the adjective to be available.
But where, as often, there is no such difference, the fact  that adverbs are far more common than adjectives in structures where a property extends a verb will discourage speakers from using the adjectival form.
This would be parallel to the fact that the object in an adverbal construction tends to separate the adjective from the verb to which it is most closely bound intensionally, by occupying the place immediately after the verb, as objects normally do (see Section 5.3).
In other words, we have another instance where common surface patterns are followed even when they may not be quite appropriate to the intensional structure (see Section 8.7; and Ferris, 1982).
Nevertheless, unless we are to fall back on the unsatisfactory practice of listing verbs which do support the construction and those which do not, some other factor must be waiting to be discovered, which will help to explain why (56) and (67) seem outright ungrammatical, and yet we can have either of (68) and (69):(68) Tania left despondently (69) Tania left despondent To conclude, we may point out that there will clearly be a close connexion, under certain choices of lexical items, between the surface construction (44) and ordinary predicative position.
If the reason is not self-evident, it soon emerges when we imagine an appropriate part of to be placed in the verbal position.
The verb to be functions as an explicit marker of assignment, but is otherwise semantically empty.
When an adjective A appears to extend, by qualification, something which is a semantic nullity:(70) the overall result is obviously equivalent to the property of the adjective alone.
This "combination" which effectively amounts to no more than the adjective itself is then linked by explicit assignment to the entity of the subject.
The structure will therefore match exactly what is achieved by the use of ordinary predicative position.
Thus any construction with an adjective in postverbal position should differ in its semantic value from one using predicative position insofar, but only insofar, as the verb differs in its semantic value from zero.
Minor Structures
6.1 We have now considered most of the major adjectival positions of English, with only the extraclausal to follow in Chapter 9.
There remain certain minor structural matters to be considered.
They are minor, in the sense that one meets them relatively infrequently, but they are also quite interesting because of the linguistic sophistication they reveal in the usage of the ordinary speaker.
We consider two of these in this chapter; a third similar issue affecting adjectival relationships must wait until Section 9.5.
Let us return to the paper by Bolinger (1967) already discussed in Chapter 3, in which he makes a second major claim (that there is a fundamental division among adjectives between those which, as he sees it, qualify the referent of the noun to which they are attached, and those which qualify its sense.
He uses the term reference for the latter, but as the term has become decidedly unusual for that notion (see Lyons, 1977, or other standard texts), we shall, with deference, decline to adopt his "reference-qualification" and "reference-qualifiers" , and, in general, substitute the word sense wherever he uses reference.
There is less reason to baulk at the term referent, although a referent is, by definition, something outside language, and although we should prefer to speak of syntactic entities in order to keep in harmony with the assumptions we have been following throughout this text; however the latter are the linguistic correlates of what are perceived as extra-linguistic referents, and the patterns of intensional relations are exactly the same whether there is an external referent or not.
To a large extent, Bolinger's division between those adjectives that qualify referents and those that qualify sense is presented as if it were a classification of adjectives as word types, that is, as one might find them categorized in the dictionary, thereby giving an impression that Bolinger might regard this almost as a lexical division, similar to that  dividing adjectives that can qualify animates from the rest.
But Bolinger also believes that there is a correlation with syntax, or at least with the facts of surface syntactic form.
The overall picture presented in his article is a little less clear than it might be, if only because of the multiplicity of interesting observations (fortunately Bolinger provides us with copious examples) but it may be summarized as follows:(a) Adjectives may qualify either the referent of a noun or its sense without simultaneously applying to the other.
(b) There is a definite bias towards interpretation of prenominal adjectives as sense-qualifiers; predicative position can accept either interpretation but there is an overwhelming predominance of referent-qualification (post-nominal attributive position is not discussed in this section of his article).
(c) Adjectives which, because of their lexical meaning, may only qualify sense find themselves restricted to prenominal position.
In fact, Bolinger seems to weaken this latter claim somewhat in his discussion of what he calls a "nominalised" predicative position, as in it was a plump one.
Actually, the use of this final pronominal element is quite transparently a way to regain attributive status for the adjective which precedes it, and its use with certain adjectives (to be introduced below) which do not genuinely occur in predicative position is thus much more significant than Bolinger allows for, showing that there are values attached to attributive status which are more important than mere position in the sentence relative to the verb, and that speakers will even seek to conform to these by devising an attributive construction which would otherwise not be called for.
It is not clear how claim (c) is to interact with the claim in the earlier part of his article that prenominal position is reserved for characteristic (as opposed to occasion) adjectives.
It should perhaps be presumed that the claims are additive, and that in Bolinger's view this position is both reserved for characteristic adjectives and favoured for sense-qualifying use.
6.2 We agree with Bolinger that there are such things as distinctively sense-qualifying adjectives (although not many of them, and certainly only a small proportion of those that he suggests); we shall take the view that these are restricted to prenominal attributive position, with predicative position reserved solely for referent-qualification.
This distinction falls beautifully into place with the view of syntax which we sketched in Chapter 1, but before explaining  precisely how the two sorts of qualification work let us consider some more data from English.
Bolinger gives the following set of examples, which do genuinely appear to show qualification of the sense alone, that is, of the property which identifies the entity, rather than of the entity itself:(1) total stranger lawful heir distant cousin mere kid To these, we might add the cases in (2); notice that the last example would be self-contradictory if the adjective were interpreted as an ordinary attributive:(2) Brent is a strong Republican the document was a complete blank (If faced with a claim that we can explain the peculiarity of these adjectives by simply stating that they are adverbial impostors, we may respond that, even supposing that , deep down, there may be something adverbial about them, nonetheless speakers have chosen to use an adjective rather than an adverb, and this adjectival use needs to be described and if possible explained.
For further arguments against re-assigning syntactic classifications as a descriptive device, see 10.4.)
In each case, our intuition agrees with Bolinger that the adjective acts to qualify the description inherent in the noun, rather than the entity identified by the noun; one may readily agree that there is a significant contrast between these and the following adjectives, in predicative position, which he gives as instances of referent-qualification (in our terms, instances where the adjective is straight-forwardly assigned to the entity of the subject and shares the same referential locus):(3) the student was eager the man was hungry the lawyer was criminal (One might, though, add the comment that criminal is seldom used ascriptively of human beings as opposed to their actions.)
However, while agreeing with Bolinger in almost every instance on his raw data, as to which adjectives are limited to prenominal position and which are ambiguous, we disagree with him in almost all cases as to the underlying reasons.
Bolinger himself expresses the difference between the two types of qualification as follows: "In the first, which is referent-modification, it [the adjective]is restricted by the  CATEGORY of the noun; in the second it may or may not be…
We see this more clearly with an ambiguous adjective: a regular policeman vs.
The policeman is regular.
The attributive refers to regularity qua policeman, the predicative to regularity qua human being."
This looks almost inescapably like a type of variation according to the referential category represented by the noun — i.e. not really a matter of syntactic relation at all— and this impression is strengthened by his further remark, "Having provided for the two extremes of referent-modification and reference-modification, we can now assess the blending that frequently — perhaps more often than not — takes place between the two." 
Yet this approach does not tie up very clearly with many of Bolinger's own examples.
In fact, the data which he cites lead one to a conclusion, which when transposed into terms closer to those used in this book, might be stated as follows: When an attributive adjective A qualifies a nominal head N, then, if we have referent-qualification (which is by far the more common case) the property of the adjective acts, in identification, independently of the property inherent in the noun.
[This is not to say that the adjective must be ascriptive; nor is it to require that the adjective should be restrictive — see Chapter 7; it merely states that there is no interaction between the properties as such.]
Where, on the other hand, we have sense-qualification, the property of A is not applied as a property in itself to the entity identified by N (nor are any referential and perceptual correlates of the intensional property to be looked for in the actual referent, if there is one, corresponding to that entity).
Instead it qualifies the property inherent in the noun used (see Chapter 1), thereby producing a complex property which is different both from the simplex properties and from their simple sum or union; and it is this property-complex which is relevant to the relation of identification.
This should not be suspected of being a new, strange phenomenon; it is no more than an adjectival version of a syntactic process that is actually very common in more extended phrases, such as:(4) oddly familiar faces sadly indifferent spectators slightly old-fashioned courtesy Here, one property-word is qualified by another, which therefore does not apply directly to the noun (or the entity behind it); the faces are in fact definitely not odd, nor are the spectators sad, and there is no  reason to suppose that the courtesy in the third case is slight.
If we take from (1) the phrase distant cousin, we can remark that it is closely analogous to another phrase — near relative — in which it is quite plain that the adjective is not assigned to the referential locus of the following word, but qualifies the property which it expresses in just the way that the same word does in:(5) a near impossible task The facts of intensional qualification are not in the least altered because traditional grammar has customarily described near as an adverb in phrases like (5), but as an adjective in near relative.
6.3 Bolinger was quite right to point out that what is in fact exactly the same principle may apply in the relationship between an adjective and its noun; in consequence, we must slightly refine our view of qualification as outlined in Chapter 1.
There are two different versions to be discerned of the intensional pattern behind the surface structure adjective + noun, depending on what exactly the adjectival property qualifies.
We can continue to represent the normal case, which corresponds to Bolinger's referent-qualification, by either of the types of formulae:(6) Although it is relatively easy to describe verbally the second version where the adjective qualifies the property of the noun but does not in itself qualify the entity of the noun phrase, it is not so easy to suggest a simple but appropriate diagrammatic representation for it; we may perhaps adopt a formulation as in (7) where the arrowhead representing qualification passes through the bracket into the property which is the descriptive identification resource of the noun:(7)[(DISTANT)(COUSIN)]We should still speak of the adjective as attributive, since it remains part of the same entity-identification as the noun; and it is still perfectly proper to describe it as qualifying the noun syntactically, inasmuch as it marks an extension of what would be achieved by using the noun alone.
However, what the adjectival property actually qualifies is the property, and only the property, of that noun.
One consequence of this is that we must adjust our account of the referential locus.
Up until this point we have assumed that a referential locus is quite generally available for property words, not only adjectives in fact but also adverbs:(8) Philippa comforted her lovingly the referential locus of the adverb is that of the verb; and the referential locus of the verb in turn is the entity of the subject phrase; that is why a sentence like:(9) the drink comforted her lovingly is unacceptable, despite the fact that lovingly can co-occur with comfort, while comfort is compatible with drink.
(Lakoff, 1966, recorded this phenomenon of a need for compatibility between adverb and subject though without offering this explanation.)
However, there are examples which show that we cannot always assume that a property word will have a referential locus.
Consider the sentences in (10) with their sequences of verbs followed by adverbs or adverb phrases:(10) Farjeon clumsily undressed the refugees gazed hungrily into the window the ship was drifting almost imperceptibly to leeward In the last of these three cases nobody would understand the ship itself to be "almost imperceptible" ; in the second sentence, on the other hand, it is the refugees who are hungry; gazes, whatever they may imply to a sensitive observer, do not experience hunger.
In the first case, either interpretation is fully acceptable — it can be either Farjeon or his style of undressing which has the quality of being clumsy; and quite possibly the existence and use of such sentences provide the interpretative syntactic basis for the type which follows it, which therefore represents in a sense a second order of syntactic patterning.
It is not obvious whether there are any other independent aspects of the syntactic structure which may influence the question whether a minor property qualifies another property or "passes through" it to reach a referential locus; we may provisionally assume that the nature of the individual lexical items provides the primary constraint on whether a property qualifying another property finds the latter to be permeable or not.
The examples of (10) have interesting implications, but we shall restrict ourselves here to those aspects which bear on adjectival grammar; we take them as confirming evidence that we are  justified in following Bolinger and recognizing that certain adjectives qualify another property, qua property, and are not to be assigned, independently, to any entity present in or assumed by the structure of the sentence in which they appear.
6.4 There is again a significant prediction about syntactic behaviour that follows from the above account; once again, we have in these adjectives a group which will be excluded from predicative position.
This is because, as we have already noted, the predicative construction has the specific purpose of marking that the property of the adjective is assigned to the entity identified by the subject noun phrase.
But that entity is not, by definition, the properties of the word or words by which it is identified.
Therefore an adjective which has the effect of qualifying a property rather than an entity will not occur in ordinary predicative position (nor in postnominal attributive position); this prediction is confirmed by the unacceptability of sentences such as:(11) the sum of $300 she had to pay was total the lecturer who is to greet the Queen is mere a scoundrel complete must have taken my umbrella the cousins distant were put at a separate table If the adjectives in (12) are acceptable, reflexion shows at once that they are adjectives with more than one meaning, and the one which appears in predicative position is not that in which they are sense-qualifiers:(12) their village is distant and hard to reach burning his licence was wholly lawful the set complete is worth 1500 francs
There are further consequences in terms of grammatical acceptability.
Let us test the combinatory possibilities of adjectives with indefinite pronouns and other similar words, first taking at random phrases composed of an adjective and some specific noun, and then replacing the specific noun in each case by some noun or pronoun with an indefinite meaning.
There is a sharp difference in the acceptability of the results, depending on whether the indefinite word is preceded by a sense-qualifier or by an ordinary adjective, and for obvious reasons.
When the adjective is one which qualifies sense, one would expect the altered phrase to have become quite useless — perhaps even to be designated as ungrammatical — precisely because such adjectives  require exhibition of the properties involved in the noun in order to have their own effect, by combining with those properties; so, if the noun or pronoun head of the phrase merely indicates entity-hood without mentioning any properties, there is nothing for the sense-qualifying adjective to work on.
Ordinary adjectives, however (which we may continue to refer to as referent-qualifiers), should still be serviceable since the basic requirement in their case is no more than that there should exist a referential locus which their properties can qualify, and evidence of a referential locus is given quite satisfactorily even by such a general word as one.
The prediction is indeed borne out; contrast (13) and (14):(13) a total one the mere one (14) a rudimentary one the deciduous one Even when we cannot tell what sort of being or object is designated by one in examples like (14), they will still be grammatically acceptable unlike the anomalous phrases in (13).
A stronger indication still of the difference between sense-qualifiers and referent-qualifiers is that the former examples will remain odd even when the relevant noun is indicated by the context (yet there will be no problem with the referent-qualifiers):(15) that stranger is a total one the kid was a mere one (16) his hut is a rudimentary one the tree felled was a deciduous one Again we may note that the other pair of sense-qualifying adjectives from example (1) do not sound odd when used with an indefinite head:(17) a lawful one the distant one but this is not surprising because they are adjectives with more than one meaning; in one of these they are ordinary referent-qualifiers and hence they may quite freely occur in (17) with a presumption that the referent-qualifying meaning is the one desired.
Thus (17) might refer to, say, a lawful action and a distant skyscraper.
Some explanation is perhaps needed for the fact that the same phrases also sound more normal in (18) than the corresponding phrases in (15):(18) the heir is a lawful one her cousin is a distant one Possibly we should accept that, even when used in a context of heirs and cousins respectively, these two adjectives occupy an intermediate position in the sense that they can be construed either way without any significant difference in the non-linguistic phenomena that can be designated thereby.
Either we may see them as qualifying the properties inherent in the nouns, or we may take the view that lawfulness and distance serve to mark out certain generally recognized subcategories of heirs and cousins (whereas one can scarcely argue for any generally accepted subcategories of strangers and kids marked out by totality and mereness), so that they can be treated as ordinary ascriptive adjectives.
6.5 An interesting result of testing the possibilities of occurrence with an indefinite head is that it brings out the doubtful validity of certain other cases which Bolinger cites (and which one might have regarded suspiciously on purely intuitive grounds anyway).
Thus he puts forward the very man as an example of an adjective which qualifies the sense alone.
We would certainly agree that it is an unusual adjective, and further that, as Bolinger says, it acts as an intensifier with the definite article, but it seems quite clearly to follow from this that it cannot be a sense-qualifier of the sort which Bolinger has in mind.
Accepting that very is an emphasizing device, it is seldom plausible to take it as an intensifier of the property or properties expressed by the noun which it appears to qualify syntactically.
Thus, taking the phrase which Bolinger uses as an example, it is certainly not the properties inherent in being a man that are strengthened when one utters a sentence such as:(19) walking into the bakery, I met the very man The same conclusion is indicated by the fact that it is perfectly satisfactory to use very in conjunction with a word like one (as Bolinger himself observes), and yet this does not express any property which can be intensified, except singularity which is of course intensified by a quite different word; note the following:(20) that is the very one (21) the supermarket didn't have a single one Actually, when very operates within a noun phrase it clearly acts as an  intensifier of exactitude, not of quantity, so it is entirely natural that it should focus on the article; that is , it does indeed qualify a property, but that property is, approximately, the notion "recognizable by my audience" , as expressed in the definite article.
This agrees extremely well with the fact that (20) is closely equivalent to (22):(22) that is precisely the one It also provides us with a very satisfying explanation of the subtle difference between (23) and (24);(23), with its non-restrictive relative seems at least somewhat odd, whereas (24) with its restrictive relative is quite acceptable, and so is (25) which has a non-restrictive relative but lacks the word very:(23) the very axe, which killed him, is to be sold (24) the very axe which killed him is to be sold (25) the axe, which killed him, is to be sold The reason is that the definite article indicates that some means of recognition is available to the audience.
When a speaker takes the trouble to use a restrictive relative clause in a noun phrase equipped with a definite article but no attributive adjective, it will naturally be presumed that it is this clause which makes recognition possible; there is no need for such an assumption when the clause is non-restrictive.
Indeed by virtue of the fact that the clause will be seen as merely adding extra information the natural presumption must be that this is not the basis for "recognizability" .
In a sentence like (24), the subject phrase includes a restrictive relative clause, a definite article which can rest on that clause, and an intensifier of the article; everything slots nicely into place and we get a naturally coherent sentence.
When, however, a sentence "has time" to introduce the supernumerary information contained in a non-restrictive clause, but apparently fails to introduce the information on which the definite article relies, despite the definiteness being felt important enough to deserve an intensifier, then the sentence has a dislocated feel to it and the very is left dangling; this is the case of sentence (23).
Our view of the value of very further provides a good explanation for its otherwise puzzling absence following indefinite articles:(26) this is a very oak in which King Charles hid after the battle (27) walking into the bakery, I met some very men  If very did indeed qualify some aspect of the following noun (sense or referent), the contrast of grammatical status between (27) and (19) would be quite puzzling.
To sum up, if examples such as those in (28) and that in (29) are all ungrammatical, as we can readily agree, it is for different reasons:(28) the sum of $300 she had to pay was total the lecturer who is to greet the Queen is mere (29) the man is very The adjectives in (28) lead to incoherence because, as already observed, they are specialized to qualify a property, and so they are incoherent in the predicative construction, which assigns the adjective property to the entity of the subject, not to its sense.
The unacceptability of (29), however, exists because the structure purports to assign very to the entity behind man, but the meaning of very demands assignment to the, and the notion of using predicative position to assign a property to a subordinate part of the subject phrase (the definite article) is altogether alien to English (and probably to any other language).
Before leaving this interesting adjective behind, we may note that it introduces a minor discrepancy from a rather general tendency of qualification which has been gradually emerging by implication in the text so far.
This is that within a structure X  Y based on assignment, the surface realization of instances of qualification within X (however many there may be) will tend to be such that subordinate items will precede, and within Y such that they follow the item qualified, provided in each case that no further instance of assignment supervenes.
This is, however, no fixed rule, and there will be a good number of other discrepancies, some optional, some like this obligatory.
Most of the other examples cited in Bolinger's article as adjectives capable only of sense-qualification do not seem to us to be properly so classified either; if they are felt to be atypical it is for some other reason.
Those in:(30) an eager student a poor liar a lousy saint (with the latter having here its informal sense of imperfect) are perhaps best considered as ordinary ascriptives which happen to be relativistic adjectives, so that their range of interpretation will vary according to the type of thing assumed to be described.
For instance, when poor forms part of an identifying phrase with liar it is natural that its notion of DEFICIENT should most readily be understood to mean a deficiency in the matter of lying; when a speaker chooses not to use poor attributively but in the predicative construction then a natural inference is that he or she intends the notion DEFICIENT to be taken in the way more typical of human beings in general , that is referring to their material resources.
None of this is a matter of syntax; the intensional relations and the syntactic constructions which realize them are just the ones we have discussed in previous chapters.
All we have is a difference in the referential relations between linguistic expressions and the world outside language.
Other examples from his list of claimed sense-qualifiers turn out to belong, instead, to a class of peculiarly restrictive adjectives which we discuss elsewhere (Chapter 7 and also Ferris, in preparation):(31) their main faults our prime suspect he was named first citizen These adjectives, unlike most, are inherently restrictive, and select the particular entity to be identified by a speaker out of an already assumed body of entities; thus the faults in the first example are not main faults in any general sense, as would be required if they were to be sense-qualifiers; they are those that come out in front, relative to the background group of all their faults, relevant on the particular occasion where the expression is used.
The examples of (32) are simply associatives, as treated above in Chapter 2:(32) a criminal lawyer subterranean explorer electrical worker 6.6 This leaves us with a small number of other phrases such as those in (33), which turn out to be worth further investigation:(33) a true poet our late president a sheer fraud a real friend the future king my old school We certainly agree that there is an intuitively different "feel" to these, and a few others which can be found in the corps of English adjectives, and we would agree also that this has something to do with  the distinction between referent (or entity) and sense; however, we cannot agree with Bolinger's verdict that they are adjectives which qualify sense only.
Although it only contains a small number of members, we have here a distinct and interesting adjective type, which among other things strikingly illustrates the unconscious linguistic skill of ordinary speakers (see also Appendix B Section 5).
Let us try setting some adjectives of this type into ordinary sentences:(34) our future chairman smokes heavily Lorraine showed herself a real friend Charlie's old school has some fine pictures The obvious points may be made: the "chairman" is already alive, there need be no doubt about Lorraine's existence, and Charlie's school may be relatively new.
We should not be misled by any temptation to assume that what we are dealing with here is the familiar disposition of many words, mentioned above, to vary in their referential effect according to the standard considered relevant for the type of the noun; as if , to take the last sentence in (34) it was simply a matter of adjusting our standard of what counts as old from the range suitable for schools to the smaller one which is appropriate to individual human beings.
One rejoinder to this would be to cite cases like:(35) our new neighbours said they had had their old house painted mauve where it is perfectly possible that the house is much younger than anybody in the family.
We may also draw attention to the fact that it is possible logically, even if not biologically, to use old, with the same effect as it has in the phrase Charlie's old school, in combination with the word mother; the incongruity of the result should give us a very sharp view of the difference between the ordinary referential variation of adjectives used relativistically, and the semantic effect produced by the difference in type of relation at work in (33) and (34).
What is it that all the examples of (34) have in common?
The important point emerges from the fact that in the first and third sentences we are dealing with a certain kind of disparity and in the second with the possibility of a disparity (albeit one that is denied).
The same point can be made about all the adjectives in (33), e.g. former:(36) the former king is in prison till next June
The nature of the disparity needs careful scrutiny.
In particular, since in several cases it seems to involve a conflict of time reference, we must note that what is involved is not the same as a superficially rather similar phenomenon which was the subject of a useful discussion by Bach (1968)— all the more so because some of his examples are ambiguous and could also be covered by this case.
He argued, convincingly, that noun phrases taken as a whole may quite often have a different temporal assignment from that of the verb which they accompany, as in:(37) I used to be a good friend of the police chief The underlined phrase may be understood as past relative to the time of utterance (and hence in agreement with the time indicated by the verb) or as present; the two different time-values correspond to the two different continuations in:(38)…before he joined the force…until he was shot for corruption The first continuation would be compatible with an expansion of the subject phrase to the man who is the police chief, while the second would support the man who was the police chief.
However, the phenomenon which we wish to bring to light is not the same as that treated by Bach.
In the first place, the adjectives with which we are concerned are certainly not all adjectives of time.
Second, where there is a reference to time, for instance the past reference of former in (36), it does not apply to the putative referent of the noun phrase, who still lives; nor does it apply to the intensional entity, which is still available to any speaker of the sentence; rather it applies in some way to the status of the property inherent in the noun (king, in this example).
We may call this a disparity of structure, as opposed to Bach's, which could be termed a referential disparity.
Note also that these adjectives are not sense-qualifiers.
In (36) the adjective former does not qualify the properties, as such, implied by the use of the word king; the sentence does not mention any entity that has characteristics formerly typical of kings — such as regarding oneself as the owner of one's subjects, perhaps, or believing that one is of divine lineage.
Likewise, Charlie's old school is not an entity that has the property of old-school-ness; this is not a property of which English speakers would make frequent use, but it might be possible employ it in cases where something had the characteristic of "being a school in an old way" — perhaps with extensive use of wax tablet and stylus, and possibly a slave or two for the menial work.
6.7 The thing which all the adjectives of the sort found in (33) have in common is that on the intensional level they qualify the relation between the entity identified by the noun phrase in which they appear and the description supported by the words making up the remainder of that phrase.
Thus, true poetry is an entity to which the property POETRY truly applies, while Charlie's old school is an entity such that the relation between it and the description CHARLIE'S SCHOOL belongs to the time labelled by the word "old" , and a certain winner (when not used with the indefinite sense) is an entity of whom or which the description WINNER certainly holds (or so the gambler hopes).
We shall therefore call all such adjectives separatives since they draw attention to the separateness of entity and descriptive property (see Section 1.4).
A good diagrammatic representation to match the adjectival behaviour we have just specified is not easy to devise.
(This may indeed reflect the fact that such adjectives seem in some way to constitute a more sophisticated manipulation of language than any we have seen in the adjectives discussed before).
Something like (39) might give the correct impression:(39) but this is unreasonably cumbersome.
We shall instead suggest (40), where the fact that the arrowhead passes through the square bracket is intended to show that the minor property does not simply qualify the entity as a whole, but the fact that it does not reach as far as the round bracket shows that the adjective is not a sense-qualifier:(40)
In Chapter 1 we proposed that our representation of ordinary nouns should, strictly speaking, include round brackets, to indicate occurrence of a property, inside the square brackets representing entity-hood, but that we should normally allow the round brackets to be omitted in order to simplify the notation, thus abbreviating (41)(a) to (b):(41)(a)[(NEIGHBOUR)](b)[NEIGHBOUR]In the present case, however, given that the function of the adjective is exactly to distinguish between property and entity aspects of a single syntactical item, we shall be obliged to use the fuller form.
6.8 The observations above on the behaviour of these adjectives may appear to suggest a surprising degree of linguistic sophistication on the part of ordinary language users; it may, though, seem less surprising now that we have recognized in the earlier part of this chapter the sense-qualifiers, since these distinctively qualify the property of a noun without constituting a qualification of the corresponding entity.
In any case, there is further good evidence for this type of adjective use.
There are certain adjectives or quasi-adjectives which make it rather explicit that they are directed at the relation between the entity of the noun phrase and its description.
It is interesting to find that they have somewhat unusual morphological forms, which may suggest that they do indeed make some sort of special call on speakers' capacity for linguistic construction.
Note, in particular, the form would-be which very clearly requires an implicit awareness of this mode of adjectival application on the part of the ordinary speaker.
Who or what is a would-be artist?
This is a person who wants, exactly, a valid relation to exist between himself or herself and the description "artist" ; what is wanted is the relationship, not the existence of the entity, nor the existence of the properties implied by the word artist which obviously exist quite independently as elements of the language.
There is also the adjective so-called, which in a comparably explicit way calls into question the relation between an entity and the description or properties which might be supposed to belong to it:(42) it is the so-called liberals who have closed down the press The author of this sentence is not casting doubt on the existence of the people he is writing about, nor on the existence of such properties as may be characterized by the word liberals (nor for that matter the existence of people who might be so described) but only on the validity of the relationship between the description "liberals" and the people who are acting as censors in the situation portrayed by this particular sentence.
Whereas adjectives of this sort in English only make their presence felt by their effect on interpretation, it is noteworthy that in at least some cases the peculiar relationship of comparable words in other languages may have an influence on observable form.
In particular, we may draw attention to the way that the two uses of the notion OLD — ordinary qualification of the entity of the noun phrase, and separative qualification of the relation between entity and descriptive property — are handled in French and in Thai.
Both uses can in French be covered by the same word ancien, but they are distinguished in that the separative use requires prenominal position, while the standard use has the adjective after the noun, as in:(43) l'ancienne école de Charlie a fait banqueroute (44) cette école ancienne a hébergé les fils des tyrans depuis des siècles The same distinction is also marked overtly in Thai; in this case it is realized not by a difference of syntactic position, but by a different choice of lexical item.
As a preliminary, we must note that Thai has two forms to correspond to the English word old; one is  (with superscript 2 indicating low tone) which is used of animate beings, and the other is , applied to inanimates.
Now someone whose doctor is elderly could quite naturally refer to him or her using (45) where superscript 3 indicates rising tone while mid tone is indicated by the absence of a superscript numeral:(45) The following sentence:(46) is also perfectly acceptable, and might even be translated by the same words of English but it carries instead the meaning that the person concerned (who might be twenty-six years old and a fairly fresh graduate from medical college) has been established as one's doctor for some time and is not, for example, another practitioner who has recently moved into the district.
It is striking that the form reserved for inanimates is used, as is appropriate when the item qualified is a relation, despite the presence of the animate noun [m .
In English, there is at least an indirect formal reflexion of the difference, in that the phrase an old friend has as its opposite either a new friend or a young friend, depending on whether it is used as a separative or an ordinary attributive adjective.
However, there is also in English a more substantial effect on linguistic form for all the separatives; they are ungrammatical in predicative position, even when qualifying the same nouns that they can accompany fully acceptably in attributive position:(47) the king is/will be future fortunately, Dostoievsky's execution was mock Likewise, in the attributive phrases in (48), possible and occasional are separative, qualifying the relationship between the entity of the  noun phrase and the descriptions RIVAL and SAILORS respectively, rather than directly qualifying the entity itself:(48) a possible rival now came on the scene Wilkes and Andersen are occasional sailors (the last pair of words has much the same meaning as the phrase week-end sailors).
But if we try to use the same two adjectives with the same two nouns in a predicative construction we shall find that the result is ungrammatical:(49) that rival was possible those two sailors are occasional As in other instances, it is not enough merely to record that possible, occasional and certain other adjectives are ungrammatical in predicative position when constructed with certain nouns.
We should try to give the reason (without, of course, assuming that the basis for their unacceptability will be the same as for other groups which share the exclusion from predicative position).
In this case, there is again no difficulty.
As we have already pointed out a number of times, the predicative position is the surface structure which marks assignment of the property of the adjective to the entity of the subject; but it goes without saying that the subject of a sentence cannot be merely a relation between two parts of itself; therefore an adjective which is specialized to qualify the relation between entity and description is automatically excluded from predicative position for that reason.
We shall end by observing that some adjectives (in fact most of those discussed in Sections 6.7 and 6.8, but not former, would-be, so-called nor late unless we give it an altogether different lexical value) can occur with more than one value, that is, either as separatives or as ordinary ascriptive adjectives.
In this case, exactly as one would expect, the adjective is acceptable in predicative position but only on condition that it bears the meaning it has as a non-separative.
This is why there is equal acceptability in the sentences of (50) and (51), despite the fact that there was a difference of grammatical status between (48) and (49):(50) a possible result would be the collapse of the whole company such a result is possible (51) his occasional visits annoyed my brother his visits were only occasional  Similarly,(52) and (53) are both admissible, but only provided that we are talking about the age of the institution and the accuracy of the narrative, respectively:(52) Charlie's school is old (53) my story is surprising but true 
Restrictive and non-restrictive adjectives
7.1 Grammarians of all persuasions have regularly commented on the distinction among qualifying phrases between restrictive and non-restrictive use; this sometimes has important consequences for interpretation.
We should, therefore, take the time needed to consider how this distinction fits into the framework of our discussion in this book, which we do in Sections 7.1 and 7.2.
In Section 7.3, we point out that an earlier finding of this text means that a very widespread traditional way of thinking about restriction is incorrect; we also look at the interaction between the notion of restriction and associatives, sense- qualifiers and separatives.
In Section 7.4 we look at the special case of inherently restrictive adjectives.
Examples of the contrast most commonly given use relative clauses as in (1) and (2), containing a restrictive and a non-restrictive relative, respectively:(1) silk which comes from Thailand is taxed more heavily than Malaysian silk (2) silk, which is a natural fibre, incurs less tax than artificial fabrics There are, of course, certain linguistic devices in English which can help to indicate which interpretation is intended (though surprisingly few, given that the difference in effect can sometimes be considerable).
The most notable is the relative pronoun that, which can only be used with a restrictive relative clause.
Other devices are less consistently adopted, but it will be noticed that in (2), as often, the non-restrictive clause is set off from the rest of the sentence by commas.
It has also long been recognized that the same distinction occurs in attributive adjectives (see, for instance, Jespersen, 1924).
Consider the two underlined phrases:(3) I'll get some German hock for the party I'll get some German beer for the party Speaking of the latter phrase, we may say that the noun gives us an initial outline "semantic target area" beer while the adjective, by specifying an additional property, restricts the issue to just that part of the target area which the writer wishes to discuss.
In the first phrase, by contrast, the general target area of hock is not further restricted at all by the use of the adjective German, since all hock is German, by the very definition of hock.
Thus, in the first case but not in the second, the adjective is non-restrictive.
Many of the phrases that have conventionally been offered as examples seem rather artificial.
Thus the philosophical Greeks and the industrious Chinese will do as instances of non-restriction only on condition that we allow ourselves a strangely overgeneralized view of the Greeks and the Chinese.
These examples show that, as in all cases, whether an adjective counts as restrictive or not depends on what exactly is in the mental focus of the speaker on any particular token occasion, and definitely not on any relation of inclusion that might exist between the meanings of the adjective and noun as type elements, such as could be found in the dictionary (or more accurately between those parts of an external world which might be correlated with the meanings of the adjective and noun).
Indeed this emerges immediately from the fact that adjectives which are plainly non-restrictive can accompany proper names:(4) the eloquent Dryden is too learned for some tastes clever Polly left before they called for volunteers Even if we accept the view, less than universally supported, that proper names do have meaning, being clever is certainly no part of the name Polly on the type level, nor is eloquence of the name Dryden.
However, to avoid irrelevant uncertainties that might result from relying on assumptions about particular situations, we offer in (5) examples that actually meet the unnecessarily strict requirement of inclusion on the type level, but which we might reasonably claim as sentences that could be used by ordinary speakers in the right circumstances:(5)(a) some of the Buddhists were sheltered in Islamic mosques (b) the carnivorous leopard has much larger teeth than an antelope (c) after the barren desert, Kano is like a garden 7.2 It will be immediately evident that the distinction between restrictive and non-restrictive does not concern any difference of intensional structure in the narrow sense, either in the relations involved, or in the nature of the elements related.
Both restrictive and non-restrictive adjectives in sentences such as(3) are alike in that they instantiate the P in:(6)[P  E]The difference between the two possibilities is solely that, in cases of non-restriction, the speaker is aware that the identification carried out by the noun phrase as a whole is the same as it would be if the adjective (limiting ourselves to adjectival instances) were not present; in essence, we have the situation as in (7)(where the sign =i obviously stands for equality on the parameter of identification, and not for the intensional relation of equation):(7) In practice, the situation is almost always somewhat more complicated in English, because there will nearly always be a determiner; thus the non-restrictive status of the adjective in the subject phrase of (8) can be represented by the formula (9), with Pb as the adjectival property and Pc as the property inherent in the noun (while Pa represents the word this):(8) this Christian Pope committed most unchristian acts (9) Nevertheless, the presence of other elements in a noun phrase beside the non-restrictive adjective and the noun itself in no way alters the principle involved.
Although non-restrictive adjectives are therefore not necessary to the entity-identification achieved by the phrase of which they form a part, there is no particular mystery about their appearance.
They may be used for simple emphasis, as in (5)(c), or to highlight some property, implied by the noun but still in some way surprising as in (5)(a), or for  the sake of a contrast, as in (5)(b).
Clearly there are no sharp divisions between these categories.
Nor from the point of view of the speaker, is there any hard and fast boundary between these and a non-restrictive adjective used in order to make explicit some property, when it is suspected that the hearer is unaware that it is implied by the use of the noun, as with poisonous in:(10) she threw Maisie's lunch-box out of the window because it had a poisonous red-back spider in it Note that (10) further exemplifies the fact that whether an adjective is taken as restrictive or not depends on the rest of the entity-identifying phrase rather than just on the head noun.
7.3 If they touch on the point, discussions of restriction invariably proceed in a way which implies that the property of a restrictive adjective stands for a property which is to be ascribed to the entity of the noun phrase.
For instance(using the familiar Venn diagrams) it will be said that the underlined phrase of (11)(which is, incidentally, a zoologically correct statement) owes its restrictive quality to the fact that there is an intersection between circle a, standing for the class of piranhas, and circle b, standing for the class of vegetarian creatures, and this intersection represents the beings denoted by the subject of the sentence:(11) vegetarian piranhas can be found in the Amazon (12) However, such implications are incorrect; it is by no means necessarily true that the property instantiated by a restrictive adjective is to be ascribed to the entity qualified.
For example, meteorological in the phrase meteorological expert can be, and will be, restrictive but, as we have shown in Chapter 2, it is not to be ascribed to the entity of its head noun; quite generally, there is not the least problem about using an associative adjective restrictively.
In fact, it seems impossible to find examples of associatives which are non-restrictive, and this is not accidental.
It will be recalled that associatives are adjectives of which the properties are specifically not ascribed to the entity of the noun phrase in which they figure.
But  non-restrictive adjectives, by definition, express properties which are perceived by speakers as present in the entity of the noun phrase which they have in mind; it follows immediately that associative adjectives cannot be non-restrictive.
It will further be recalled that the properties of sense-qualifiers and separatives are applied, respectively, to the property of the head noun, and to the relationship between that property and the entity of the noun phrase as a whole; not to the entity of the noun phrase.
It therefore follows for very similar reasons that they also will always be restrictive, as is indeed the case.
Thus any attributive may be restrictive, but associatives, sense-qualifiers and separatives must be restrictive.
7.4 It will have been noticed that all the examples offered have made use of prenominal attributives.
This is quite unsurprising.
The nature of the distinction, being a matter of identification, is such that it can be expected to make itself felt in attributive position, and only in attributive position.
Certainly, this does not have to be prenominal; we can also expect it to turn up in postnominal attribution, and it does, in sentences like (13)(a) and (b):(13)(a) the fish gutted lay waiting for the wholesalers (b) the fish, gutted, lay waiting for the wholesalers In the background of (a), but not of (b), there are other fish which have not undergone the same treatment.
Even though it is undoubtedly more common in practice to find phrases — such as perhaps gutted and cleaned — as postnominal non-restrictive qualifiers, the single adjective is also fully acceptable to English grammar.
Of course, it is quite possible to use in other positions an adjective that adds no fresh property to the entity to which it is applied, as in (14)(ordinary predicative position) and (15)(predicate qualifier):(14)(15) However, failure to contribute a fresh property is not the essence of non-restriction.
In any case, the vacuous character of (14) and (15) can apparently be reduced or even made to disappear by various means without changing the elements or touching the intensional relations which bind them together.
For instance, we could add the words we must accept that in front of (14), or the phrase by AD 1550 after (15).
The point is simply that in all positions, other than the two attributive ones, the entity has already been identified before the adjective is brought into direct or indirect constructional contact with it.
Likewise, there is no reason why adjectives which are restrictive in attributive position should not be acceptable if used, say, predicatively with the same nouns; only in that case, we do not normally expect them to have a restrictive value.
There are, however, certain observations that might lead us to question this latter, apparently reasonable, statement.
Let us start from an observation which may seem quite unconnected.
Some adjectives — notably superlatives, comparatives, and ordinals — appear to give a grammatically acceptable result when they occur in predicative position accompanied by an article:(16) Larry's answer was the rudest Waddington Junior was a third [e.g. boy caught cheating]the rat was the other [e.g. animal which solved the maze]Analogous sentences with most adjectives would be quite ungrammatical, even though it would sometimes be easy to see what the sentence "ought" to mean, as in the first case of (17) for instance:(17) Larry's answer was the rude [e.g. out of those we received]a red coathanger was the noticeable The reason for these facts is, ultimately, that the superlatives, comparatives and ordinals are unlike other adjectives in being inherently restrictive, and always presupposing what we may call an extraction set, within which the restriction is exercised.
Thus an ordinary adjective like that underlined in (18):(18) the black parrot soared up through the jungle cover certainly may be restrictive — there may be other parrots of other colours which do no such thing — but it may at least as easily be intended non-restrictively.
By contrast, the bird mentioned in (19) must be one selected from a group present to the mind of the speaker in the situation of utterance; this adjective cannot be non-restrictive:(19) the largest parrot made a good supper for the expedition that evening The extraction set in this case might be the parrots we had shot that day.
Notice that the extraction set is almost never the same as the denotation of the noun qualified.
For instance, the subject in:(20) the tallest rioter is carrying an effigy of you, Excellency is not the tallest of all rioters in the world, let alone of all possible rioters, but just the tallest in the mob outside the embassy right now.
Indeed, an extraction set may not be based on the denotation of any noun explicitly mentioned at all; an equally valid extraction set for (19) might be the creatures we had shot that day.
(It is, by the way, exactly the implicit reference to an extraction set that distinguishes English superlatives from forms considered broadly equivalent in some other languages, for instance those designated by the same term "superlative" in Latin.)
Now these adjectives clearly do retain a restrictive quality even in predicative position.
There is an implicit extraction set just as much in (21)— and in (16)— as in (20):(21) Gustav's chauffeur is the sanest the lady in the fur hat was (the) first In structures like (21) the extraction set is often given explicitly by means of a noun, but if not — as here — then it has to be derived from the context.
For instance, in the first example of (21) it might still be the mob outside the embassy, in the second, perhaps a queue for an exhibition.
But a little reflexion on such cases shows clearly that, whatever might be the element restricted by the adjective, it cannot be the subject of the clause.
In the first case of (21), the subject is unquestionably Gustav's chauffeur, and the range of possible referents or entities for mention is not further reduced when we come to the word sanest.
Likewise the subject in the second example is the lady in the fur hat, and it remains that even when we are told that she is first in some set other than that of ladies in fur hats.
What superlatives, comparatives and ordinals do is to pick some entity out of its extraction set by giving a property which identifies it relative to membership in that set.
In the mob at the embassy gates, there will be only one who is tallest; similarly, given one rosebush out of a pair there will be only one which is the other; and in a queue of art-lovers there will be only one who is first.
But the distinction  between, on the one hand, having the property of occupying a certain position in a set, and on the other, being the occupant of that position is vanishingly small.
It is the same for all the inherently restrictive adjectives; inevitably, an adjective which is always used as a way of selecting restrictively from a set of items present in the mind of the speaker is liable to be thought of as a means of identifying an entity.
Thus there are two different intensional relations behind the two different versions of the second sentence in (21), even though it is hard to think of any circumstances whatever (other than metalinguistic ones) in which they could have different truth values:(22)(23)(We use  as the symbol for assignment of equation.)
However, it is a standard part of English grammar to require an article with entity-identifiers when the entity is considered countable (and items selected from a set must be countable).
Thus both (22) and (23) are usable structures with virtually identical meanings but, if (23) is chosen, then it will be equipped with an article.
There are two very strong pieces of evidence confirming that the examples of inherently restrictive predicative adjectives accompanied by articles must indeed be regarded as entity-identifying expressions: First, they can quite generally appear where entity expressions appear, including positions which are not even superficially available to an ordinary adjective:(24) the rudest came from your cousin she gave motherly advice to a second, and a stern warning to a third the oldest of the aircraft should be scrapped (25) the honest deserves the appointment Bert offered a peanut to the untidy the elegant of the vases lay on its side
Second, they can be qualified by relative clauses:(26) the rudest, which was very rude indeed, is best forgotten now the longest that I have ever seen was about two metres and a half  (27) the fragrant, which comes from Japan, is a splendid choice the triangular which you wanted has been sold
Not only are these characteristics in stark contrast with the possibilities for ordinary adjectives, they cannot hold for these inherently restrictive adjectives unchaperoned by an article:(28) second had roses on it Max owns best that has been discovered so far
Thus the predicative cases with articles are not genuinely adjectival.
However, the same adjectives may perfectly well instantiate the P in (22), in combination with the same nouns.
In the latter case, they do have a restrictive value but one which belongs to their rather complicated lexical property, not to their structural function, and the target of that restriction is not the subject to which that property is assigned.
There is, therefore, no contradiction of the commonsense claim that, structurally, restriction must be a feature specific to the attributive construction.