

14
They drove back out of Bourton in the gloomy still gusty dusk but even in that light the village sprawled around shallow stream criss-crossed with toy bridges had an undeniable if rather practised charm.
And even in that season it was bustling with foreign tourists in foreign-tourist hats.
‘They ought to be buying jars of Cotswold mud ant water’ George grumbled.
‘Shake 'em up like those snowstorm globes to remind them of their holiday in Merry England…
Does it have to be tonight?
I mean, we could go back in a few days and I could distract her while you…’
It was cold feet, but probably only on behalf of the ministry the government the whole structure that George derided and had committed his life to.
Senior civil servants just could not be caught burgling cottages; Army officers had perhaps a more flexible public image.
‘The picture might not still be there in a few days’ Maxim said patiently.
‘If she's involved herself we've tipped her off.
If she guesses somebody she knows is involved — and she must know the fake cop in the picture — she could tip them off.
And start covering up for them.
And this evening at least we know she's out.
But I can do this by myself.’
‘No if you're in I'm in.
I started all this.’
That at least was an attitude that owed almost nothing to the Civil Service.
Then afraid he might have sounded gallant George added: ‘Somebody's got to make sure your military instinct for loot doesn't take over.’
Working on George's local knowledge — his father's home was less than an hour's drive away — they planned to reach Miss Tuckey's cottage at half past eight when the other committee members would have had time to digest and drive in from the countryside.
‘These committees  don't have the local roadsweeper on them.
Did you get all the kit for your nefarious trade?’
‘I think so.
And a better camera than I'd expected.’
It was a 35mm affair even if a rather simplified one with a built-in flash.
There had even been a cassette of fairly slow black-and-white film.
They had one drink — Maxim had never seen anyone order a triple Scotch before — and went on to eat at a roadside café.
It had a bright plastic deep-fried atmosphere and menu but the alternative as Maxim had pointed out was a long slow dinner at some hotel where they would have made themselves conspicuous by not, repeat not, ordering a couple of bottles of wine.
‘The Reznichenko Memorandum,’ he asked cautiously.
‘Is there anything I could be told about it?’
George thought shrugged and said: ‘Sprague told me in deepest confidence but…
It's a fake all right.
Five was tailing Ettington that night and he never met Reznichenko.’
‘Well if Security's in on that couldn't they be finding the same pattern that you have?’
‘The Old Guard there they might — but their new D-G's told them to lay off organisations like the Peace Crusade so how can they admit they've found a pattern?
That's why the only person they dared talk to was Sprague.
So I wouldn't hold your breath for them to move.
‘Well there's still us.’
‘So it would seem.
You're eating that stuff as if it were food.’
He was staring at Maxim's plate with real puzzlement; his own was still half-full.
Roadside diners were not George's environment.
Back in the car Maxim said: ‘I don't think I've ever heard you make anything but complaints about food.
The Whitehall canteens your clubs any restaurants we've been in…’
‘You've never heard me complain about Annette's cooking.’
‘I've never heard you say anything nice about it.’
‘'Well she knows it's good.
How are you — we-going to do this?’
‘The front door's a Banham lock I don't fancy my chances with that but the kitchen door's just an ordinary job and a couple of bolts.
She doesn't use the top one it's jammed with paint and I loosened the saddle on the other when I was pretending to have a piss.
You know’ he added thoughtfully ‘if she's keeping any secrets in that place she's not trying very hard with a back-door lock like that.
It should be easy.’
‘I'm glad more people don't take that view.’
‘Have you ever been burgled?’
‘Not in Albany but in Hertfordshire yes.’
‘Did they pick their way in neatly?’
‘The devil they did they broke about every —’
‘Exactly.
If you're going to strip a house anyway why do a neat job on the lock first?
Lock-picking's almost entirely an intelligence trade by now.
Can you pull in at the next lay-by?’
They stopped on a straight stretch of upland road blatantly obvious and since there was a can of oil in the boot Maxim opened the bonnet to give them a cover story of the oil warming light having come on.
The car itself a new Rover 3500 was far from memorable in Gloucestershire; it was probably the only British saloon a local landowner would think of owning.
He had bought three large tins of pilchards.
He took off their opener keys and with gloved thumb and a pair of heavy pliers bent the ends with the tin-opening slot to right angles.
With a small haw he cut the bent ends to fractionally different lengths.
‘I could have used nails’ he explained ‘but if you get one thick enough it's a bugger to bend without a vice.
And then you probably have to file a flat side on it: a real picklock's square-sectioned.
This should give a bit more grip on the bolt.’
‘I hope this is an inborn talent and not something you learnt at the taxpayers’ expense.
You don't think she'll suspect something?
Just by the coincidence of time: we visit her the same evening she's burgled.’
‘The whole idea is she won't know she's been done.
I could get in far easier by just busting a window.’
‘Sorry’ George said humbly.
‘In Whitehall one gets  too reliant on the old school tie to open doors for one.’
Although it must have been over a hundred years old the cottage was still on the edge of the village simply because there was no building land beyond it.
The back garden ended at a short steep scarp falling away to a small stream crossed only by a footbridge.
On the other side of the stream there was a collection of farm buildings but they linked to a different road further down.
Maxim bypassed the village completely map-reading George up a third road above the farm and they left the car there with perhaps a quarter-mile walk down into the valley and up again to the cottage.
The night sky was still clouded picking up just a hint of the glow from the street lights that silhouetted the church, trees and houses on the opposite crest.
They climbed one wall to get away from the car and waited for their eyes and ears to tune themselves to the darkness.
They heard and then stopped heading the wind breathing in the trees overhead and the stream rustling in the valley.
The silence grew very quiet and the occasional noises very loud and they began to belong.
Maxim touched George's arm and they moved carefully down the slope and well upstream from the farm stepped into the stinging cold water.
Maxim scouted the cottage to make sure it was empty then helped George over the comer of the dry-stone wall where it seemed strongest and guided him under a face-high clothes-line strung across the little lawn.
The kitchen door was much younger than the cottage with two frosted glass panels in the top half.
He tried two of the pilchard keys in the lock and put one away immediately.
He kept on with the other probing and turning gently, feeling the movement.
The Intelligence Corps instructor who had taught him the trade would have had such a lock open with one twist but Maxim was out of practice and the lock was old and arthritic.
‘Torch.’
George fumbled out the little pinhole torch and watched as Maxim delicately smeared a film of shoe polish on the  end of his key then probed ag in and immediately withdrew it to study the marks on the polish.
He did that several times until he had established the depth to reach the lock and bolt and he now knew a single spring-loaded tumbler holding it in place.
Depth is half the game in lock-picking; the other half is getting enough leverage for the turn, since even a proper pick has no shaft going right through to rest on the end ward like a real key.
He took out the pliers settled the pilchard key firmly in their jaws pushed it to a precise distance into the keyhole and turned.
For a moment he wasn't sure if the sudden give and click was the lock opening or the key breaking but then the door almost unbalanced him by swinging open.
He froze.
But no sound came from inside the house ant the lights, he'd already checked were all off He eased the door right open so it wouldn't swing and slam.
‘She didn't use the bolt’ he whispered.
‘I needn't have bothered.
Take off your shoes and socks: we don't want to leave wet prints ill over.’
‘I'll freeze.’
‘Tough.
Off.’
‘I remember now why I left the Army’ George muttered through clenched teeth.
‘It was pigs of majors like you.’
They left their shoes and socks outside.
Maxim shut the door behind them then fixed the loosened bolt saddle firmly with Superglue.
There was an unguarded wood fire flickering in the room where they had sat with Miss Tuckey, throwing deceptive shadows that stretched and shrank quickly on the walls.
All the curtains were already down.
George had wisely slipped into a pattern of complete obedience and moved silently around the room to establish aiming points with the torch on the pictures Maxim indicated.
Shooting at a slight angle to avoid the flash reflecting from the picture glass and cheating on the film speed setting because he was so close to the wall Maxim took three pictures of the man he had seen at the Abbey and one of every other recent-looking group or portrait.
It all went very quickly and smoothly and he still had half the film left.
He ran the torch over the shelves cabinets table drawers but there were no more photographs and no obvious photo albums.
Upstairs?
It didn't seem likely: the first floor was in the roof itself with sloping outside walls and few places to hang pictures.
The tiny beam of light flickered over the telephone — and back.
It was in its cradle but the mouthpiece end looked crooked.
He lifted it carefully and got no dial tone then saw the plungers were taped down.
He unscrewed the mouthpiece which had been hastily jammed on and caught by the thread.
By then he wasn't surprised at what he found.
‘What is it?’
George breathed in his ear.
Maxim said nothing.
He laid the telephone and torch back on the table then probed delicately with the end of a penknife.
Inside a minute he had the substitute microphone and its extra wires in his hand.
‘Okay’ he said softly.
‘Was it being put in or taken out?’
‘Don't know.
But they hadn't finished.’
He looked around the flickering shadows from the firelight.
‘I'm going upstairs.’
‘Harry let's just get out of here.’
He had to say it; he knew it wouldn't make any difference.
Maxim put the camera down picked up a poker from the hearth and started for the stairway.
The stairs creaked even where he placed his feet carefully at the wall side and the ludicrous self-portrait of himself as a householder properly armed with a poker going upstairs to hunt burglars made him stop to tauten his thoughts.
He reached the top charged with a cold dangerous instinct as he needed.
Street lighting seeped into the tiny landing from an open door so at least some curtains were undrawn and he daren't use the torch.
The open door might be an invitation but he didn't want to turn his back to it.
He planted one foot carefully to stop the door being swung in his face and took a breath of air that was wrongly warm and sour.
Then the door moved.
It jerked his foot banged his knee and was yanked back open.
He jabbed the poker at chest height of a moving figure and then his eyes were stung closed with pain.
He threw himself forward touched and held an arm was hit in the stomach but clung on dropping the poker and hauling the man to him.
The man clasped him foolishly because in Maxim's blindness contact was safest.
He jerked his arms loose and reached for the head trying to blink the searing pain from his eyes; He couldn't; in his double darkness he had no choice.
He killed the man.
In the gasping aftermath? he had no idea of where he was nor how much noise he had made.
It must have been a lot.
His blind hands fount the still-open door and then there was George very, close, whispering: ‘Harry what happened are you all right?’
‘I'm blinded.
Where's a wash-basin?’
‘Christ…’
Maxim swamped his eyes with water time and again dulling the pain except when he tried to see.
It was better to keep his eye
George was back at his shoulder.
‘How is it?
What was it?’
‘Chilli powder I think.’
Some of the water had stung Maxim's lips and tongue.
‘You know he's dead?’
‘Sorry.
I didn't know if he was armed or…
Who was he?’
‘God?
I don't know.
Come on I'll help —’
‘Get his wallet.
Something.’
‘Harry d'you know what they've done to her?’
‘What?’
‘She — she's dead anyway.
Come on.’
‘Get his wallet.’
George had himself once been a soldier.
He didn't tell himself that since he was no longer on spelling terms with himself he just obeyed an order and rummaged through the man's pockets as if he were checking a suit going to the cleaners'.
Then swabbed the wash-basin clean guided Maxim downstairs and found their shoes and socks moving with a numb efficiency that abstracted him from the terrors of his imagination.
The last minute had left him naked in a desert of infinite horror.
He would live for ever with the torchlight glimpse of a wide-eyed corpse dribbling blood from a broken neck and see Miss  Tuckey's eyes above the gag that smelled of vomit and was stained with more blood from he had to realise a deliberately bitten tongue…
From the ramparts of Whitehall he had got no glimpse of such realities of the secret world no hint from the sanitised prose of intelligence reports.
And if that showed how high the ramparts were they seemed immeasurably higher from the outside.
They would never accept him back.
Career family home — all had been ruined in a few seconds.
He found himself making imploring promises to God then retreated into hating himself and Maxim of course.
‘Take the picture’ Maxim ordered, still blind.
‘What?’
‘The photograph on the wall the one.
Take it.
It won't matter now.’
What could anything matter now?
And then they were in the sanctuary — however temporary — of the wide cool night.
15
He started the car by letting it run downhill — Maxim had insisted they park so that there would be no give-away noise of the starter- and drove steadily for several miles.
Almost as steadily he told Maxim of what had happened to Miss Tuckey.
‘Sounds as if she killed herself then’ Maxim deduced.
‘She was handcuffed…’
‘Who was the man?’
They were out on the anonymous A40; George pulled into a lay-by and gingerly fingered through the wallet with renewed twinges of horror.
There was only money and a driving licence.
‘Oldrich Praeger’ he read.
‘Address in SW16 he must be…thirty-four’ working out the age from the licence expiry date at age seventy.
‘Have been’ he added gloomily.
‘We can get it chased up but it's probably one they hand out to anybody about the right age when they're on the job.
’ Having no photograph a driving licence is thin proof of identity.
‘All it tells us is he must've had a foreign accent for them to give him a name like that.
I should have got you to photograph him’ he added.
George came close to retching.
When he'd swallowed he said: ‘The police will find him.
And then…’
‘D'you really think so?’
Maxim turned his red-rimmed eyes at George winced with pain even at the feeble car light and shut them again.
‘Those boys are going to go back.
They've got alot of clearing up to do — more than they expect now.
But the police won't find a thing unless we call them.’
‘Harry — you killed that man!’
‘I've said I was sorry-’
‘Sorry?
We were there illegally we broke in when they find that out they'll…’
But the future horror was too big for words.
‘George they aren't going to find out a thing if we don't tip them off.
Don't you see who we're up against?
Your Kilo Golf Bravoes.’
The truth was that George hadn't been thinking about anything except himself.
Maxim's assumption came as a relief- and a very obvious fact.
He had wondered how the KGB would react to the Reznichenko Memorandum; now he saw they must have been analysing the pattern long before it had occurred to him.
The Abbey would simply have stamped PROVEN on their file.
Maxim was well ahead un his thinking.
‘They must have bugged her for the same reason we went to see her: she was somebody unofficial but experienced in underground work — They'd know they were up against some British group not the CIA.
Perhaps they bugged a dozen other people as well but they'd only hear you and me talking about naming names on her bug.
It's probably one that picks up conversations in the room as well as just on the phone but I can show it to the boys at —’
‘Harry’— impossibly yet further darkness had dawned on the total blackness of George's conscience —‘then we led them to her.
We got her killed!’
Exasperated Maxim opened his eyes and glared through the pain.
‘They're killers.
They had her phone bugged before we even thought of going there — and they were never going to leave her alive once they'd started asking her questions; how could they?
Just as they couldn't leave that bug in her phone.
She did the one thing she could to screw them up by killing herself first.
So don't waste that: make an anonymous phone call.’
George turned the ignition key very slowly and jumped when the engine started.
‘But — what will the police think happened to…him?’
‘Who cares?’
Maxim sat back closing his eyes against his ineffective tears.
George came out of the call box sounding shaken and pensive.
‘I told them it was a murder and all they wanted  to know was my name…
Does holding a handkerchief over the mouthpiece really disguise your voice?’
‘I shouldn't think so but—’
‘They always do it in films.’
‘You're not a public figure nobody knows you voice.
What did they say?’
‘They wanted more details and I said it was a murder dammit and why didn't they do something about it and he said ‘Another of those’ and…well they must do something.
Mustn't they?’
‘It's Saturday night they probably get a lot of hoax calls from drunks.’
Maxim wished he had made the call himself even if George had had to look up and dial the number for him.
But the police would have to react wouldn't they?
George was in no mood to hang around: he wanted to be back in the safety — illusory though it might be — of the big city with a drink in his hand.
He had some memory of having promised God to give up drinking but God hadn't turned the clock back so that didn't count any more.
He skimmed Oxford on the bypass and settled to a steady seventy mph on the M40.
As London got nearer his confidence trickled back.
‘Do you think they got anything out of her?’ he asked.
‘Names?
No; she wouldn't commit suicide after talking.
But we didn't get them either.’
The thought damped George down for a few miles; then he asked: ‘How are the eyes?’
‘Getting better.’
‘Chilli — a new weapon for them.’
Maxim just grunted.
He was assuming that the slice had come from Miss Tuckey's kitchen a makeshift to arm ‘Praeger’ while the others went to get a van or just new instructions since they wouldn't have planned on removing a body.
On leaving her dead yes but a whiff from a cyanide gun would have brought an automatic verdict of heart failure on a stout elderly smoker.
The chilli also meant that Praeger had been just a wire man with orders not to kill anybody who came at him just blind them and run.
That seemed obvious now he  had had time to think.
He hoped George wasn't thinking the same thought.
But George was looking further forward.
‘With her background it'll be referred to Special Branch and Five…and that fiddled telephone…and Praeger without any background — we should have left his wallet, but they'll trace something about him anyway — and then we can admit we went to see her — once — and what we talked about and there we are.’
‘It'll all blow wide open — in a very narrow quiet way.
’ Maxim was fairly familiar with Whitehall by now.
‘Just so.
Even the present Cabinet won't want to admit it's had right-wing desperadoes running around interrupting the even tenor of its betrayals.
No there are Ways and Means and whether by way or by mean those persons will be traced and told to case and desist.
Or be charged with Barling's murder.
It must go that way — mustn't it?’
Only it didn't.
The local police had had a busy evening with an exceptional number of hoax calls that led them to non-existent road accidents drunken brawls and even — a touch that showed a nice appreciation of British susceptibilities — a rabid dog on the loose.
George's murder call had sounded the phoniest of the lot; it had certainly been the most amateurish.
A single policeman finally arrived to try the doors — all locked — and ask if the neighbours had heard anything suspicious.
They hadn't.
Not until Miss Tuckey had missed next morning's service did a neighbour with a key go in to see if she was all right.
By then the house was tidy — and empty.
Miss Tuckey's car was gone and so were some of her clothes and suitcases.
She did go away a lot but normally told somebody first so it was odd.
Eventually the police were called back but they found nothing.
The telephone was in one piece there were no bloodstains no signs of what they still call ‘foul play’ as if somebody had been kicked behind the referee's back.
There might have been a rug and a sheet missing from the bedroom a picture gone from the wall an incomplete rack of spice jars.
But imperfection and incompleteness are normalcy; sheets get tom rugs stained and sent for cleaning pictures need reframing spice jars  break on stone floors.
The police agreed that her disappearance was odd even suspicious but oddness and suspicion are on every breath a policeman takes — and meanwhile their offices are stacked with files of unquestionably real and still unsolved crimes.
So the vicar signed a missing person report to be added to the dozens of others filed that day all over the country and that until something else happened would be that.
16
‘The Army ought to start asking questions when she doesn't turn up for the nest course at the Fort’ George said hopefully.
‘And she must have relatives and friends.
With her special background somebody must get suspicious.
And if not I'll see if I can think of an excuse to try and contact her myself.’
‘If the bodies never turn up’ Maxim said ‘and I assume they won't I can't think what else there is to find.’
It was like a Monday at a football club with Saturday's umpteen-nil defeat to be analysed and an injury list that promised worse to come.
Knowing George despised soccer.
Maxim didn't mention the thought and in any case George's feelings were more compiles than his own.
No evidence of two deaths meant no evidence of his involvement in them.
In saving themselves the Bravoes had saved George as well although only from the consequences not the horror.
So perhaps God had turned the clock back in a very God-like way.
It wasn't George felt quite enough for him to renew any promises about alcohol.
Maxim just wanted to know where the battle lines now stood so that they could make new plans.
‘I could try going back to the Steering Committee’ he said ‘and simply tell them what's happened.
You needn't be mentioned; all my own work.’
‘I know you mean that Harry’ George sighed.
‘But as you say what's to be found?
Certainly nothing that proves a conspiracy.
You'd simply be committing suicide: you're either a killer or some fruitcake who thinks he's a killer and neither wanted in today's modern Army thank you.’
He glanced to see how Maxim had taken the word ‘killer’ but saw only the usual polite smile.
George lifted a stack of the day's and Sunday's papers none mentioned Miss Tuckey — and dropped them on the floor.
‘All right.
Concentrate on the second man at the Abbey: call him Person Y. Where are we?’
Maxim opened his briefcase on the desk.
‘I got the photographs.’
‘Painted already? it's quick.’
‘Friends.
They also looked at the bug from her phone.
It's a new model they were quite excited.
And it was most likely picking us up in her room as well as calls.’
George was sifting through the snapshot-sized photographs Maxim had taken identifying portraits of several people concerned with Resistance or Intelligence and mostly now dead.
Then he turned to the big original of the man Maxim remembered from the Abbey.
It was actually of two men smiling into the camera against a chunky city skyline.
And now it was out of its glass frame he could make out a faded signature at the bottom:
Jay Keyserling St Louis 1968.
‘Good God we're home and dry.’
Maxim shook his head.
‘Wrong man.
We want the other one.’
‘How d'you know?’
George peered closer.
Of the two men one was in indefinable but unmistakable details American; the other by seeming ‘normal’ was clearly British.
The American was wearing a lapel, badge, big enough for his own name and some other word.
George who didn't need glasses (as he kept telling people) reached for his magnifying glass.
‘That's Keyserling’ Maxim said.
‘The other word's CCOAC.’
‘Never heard of it.’
George glared at the picture.
The Briton would presumably have also been issued with a name-badge but with a British horror of self-advertisement had taken it off the moment he could.
Blast his idiot Britishness.
‘Some sort of business convention fairly respectable if you can have such a thing’ he ruminated.
The well-fitting lightweight suits were too expensive for academics  yet too fashionable for government officials and the ties were soberly striped.
‘ln Saint Lewis 1968.’
‘Is that how you pronounce it?’
Maxim was surprised, having spent much of his life listening to various versions of what most people called ‘The S'n Looey Blues’.
‘Yes and loud and clear on the Saint or they'll give you a ticket for Cincinnati and it would be months before your next of kin were informed.’
He ruminated a while longer.
‘You're sure this man the Brit —?’
‘As sure as I can be.
He's younger there but I'd think that man would be around fifty now.
About right.’
‘So we've got au identification on the wrong man but it's the only path through the mire.
Can you follow it up?
He's probably a prosperous American businessman prosperous enough to go to international conventions: try all the American and international reference books in our library then the London Library.
You're not a member are you?
I'll give them a tinkle.
But don't approach their embassy yet…
‘Of course’ he added, ‘our Brit may not have known Miss Tuckey at all since Keyserling signed this photo to her.’
‘Why not just send a picture of himself?
Keyserling looks as if he could afford it.
I think the Brit belongs somehow.’
‘Yes…and I suppose, if the picture wasn't printed until after he'd gone home Keyserling would send it anyway.
So action this day.’
‘Mind you’ Maxim said ‘I could go back to her cottage and have a second snoop taking my time.
There might be-’
‘Harry you are not to go near that cottage not even of going near it — and I can read your thoughts by now.
They are a hell-broth of ideas to provoke coronaries and hair loss in middle-aged civil servants.
Why don't you tie up a hobby with a purely personal risk like parachuting…
Ah sorry.’
He had forgotten Maxim' — Special Air Service background.
‘I've done thirty-two jumps and never quite got over the feeling that it would be better to arrive by chauffeur-driven Rolls.’
‘I thought it was supposed to be very exhilarating once the ‘chute opened.’
‘It is’ Maxim agreed.
‘If you think of the only alternative.’
Keyserling Jay Pedersen banker; b.
Jefferson City Miss., Mar 1 1912; s.
Frank Elmer and Ingrid…
Maxim copied it all out, just in case but without much hope because it ended: d.
Jan 7 1979.
‘So he was only sixty-six when God called in the loan’ George commented reading through it.
‘It's that Midwestern winter as does it; I was there in February once I nearly turned up my toes then except they'd have snapped off…still it's nice to have a banker dying early.’
George's brother-in-law banked.
‘Local bank Navy commission in the war Pacific executive at First Chicago back to home state at St Louis, rising to President of Merchants and Trappers (State) Bank a pillar of the Bogie Club the Board of Civic Progress and the Episcopalian Church…
He seems about as straight-forward a citizen as ever foreclosed on a widow and fifteen orphans not a hint of creepy-crawliness no European connections, not even any gaps.’
George was adept at reading entries in directories official lists and Who's Whos from many countless which tried to skip the most interesting parts of a subject's life.
‘Good Lord, he wrote books too: Foreign Debt: A Paupr's Promise, not exactly a snappy title but it sounds as if he saw something the New York banks didn't and The Credit of Faith.’
‘That one was published over here Parados Press 1965.
They dug up an old catalogue reference to it: it seems to be that honest banking practice and churchgoing come to the same thing ungodly Marxism leads to phoney exchange rates.’
‘You're paraphrasing I assume.
Well, well-a banker who can read and write yet.
I suppose the Midwest would be where you might still found one.
And it does tie up: I uncovered CCOAC in your absence.’
He hat eventually decided to ask Security's registry and its computers for a trace muddling the trail by getting a colleague to send the request for him and burying it in a  list of acronyms as if they had been collected over a period of time.
The prompt reply showed just how little Security now had to do: CCOAC translated as Churchgoers Concerned About Communism a one-off conference had in May 1968.
Initial funding had come from local businessmen and delegates — mostly businessmen themselves — from a dozen countries had paid their own air fares and hotel bills.
‘But claimed it off tax later no doubt’ George said sourly.
The conference had no covert political purpose Security believed even if one presidential and several senatorial hopefuls had demonstrated their statesmanliness from the platform.
‘In other words’ George interpreted ‘they couldn't trace any CIA funding.
But there probably wasn't any in the Midwest you wouldn't need it.
But where does it get us?
This CCOAC makes it more likely that Person Y was involved in the things we think he was involved in but…’
‘We still don't know who he is.’
‘Quite ant exactly.
Probably a British businessman with enough money to go romping off to America on some tax-deductible crusade — heavens you weren't anybody in the Sixties if you couldn't to that twice a year.’
‘We also know he's a churchgoer or was then.
Miss Tuckey was involved in church work.
Person X at the Abbey was dressed as a cleric…’
‘What are you suggesting?’
‘Nothing.
Or…maybe there's a crusade going on as you said.
Believers make good soldiers.
Miss Tuckey said they made good agents.
Does Security have a list of British delegates to CCOAC?’
‘No.
This is all they hat on it.
Why bother?
These people certainly weren't on Moscow's payroll.’
He brooded glanced at his wristwatch then poured more coffee from a big silver-plated flask which he had installed himself.
The room which looked over the Embankment site of the building was a mix of his own and Civil Service furnishings.
The desk and carpet were his badges of rank and he hadn't presumed nor even thought to change them.
But the drinks cabinet the expensive desk  chair —‘A civil servant's only assets are the strength of his back and backside; I am not having my career foreshortened by Her Majesty's fiscal indifference to spinal problems’— and the bits and pieces on the desk were George's imports.
They included an ugly marble penstand presented by the retiring Prime Minister which George never used but displayed as proud evidence of the biggest mistake a civil servant can achieve: becoming too identified with a political figure.
He stared moodily at the photograph at the thin face with its moustache and big ears smiling out at an unimaginable future.
Or had it been so unimaginable?
Was Person Y even then planning to tie up secret arms against a sea of predictable troubles?
No it was just a photograph.
But-’ Could this man have done something to stop you reaching Person X?
You must have turned your back on him.
—;
‘I thought he was a policeman.’
‘Quite.
But could he have tried something?’
‘That's what the Committee couldn't swallow.’
‘I can see their point.
And Person X could have taken a shot at you.’
‘He'd dropped his rifle in the Abbey.’
‘He could have had a pistol as well: sensible precaution.
Or really have thrown that grenade at you.’
‘Not a chance.
I was covering him with-’
‘Harry he was not expecting to meet a superman like you.
My point is neither of them even tried.
X just shouted something about you getting hurt.
If that wasn't a threat it was a Jolly Decent Thing To Do seeing as how he was about to blow himself up.
You see what I'm getting at?
They wanted to kill one person in the Abbey to shock everybody but do as little more damage as possible.’
He clasped his hands in among his chins and glowered at the desk top.
Behind him the rain tickling down the window made wavery verticals behind the strict horizontals of the venetian blind.
‘There must be a list of CCOAC delegates somewhere in St Louis.
I'll think what I can do about that; I don't want to go back to Security or through Six…when you come down to it how do we  know some of the Old Guard in those places aren't involved in this bloody attempt to run the country from the shadows?
I don't like the government we've got but nobody voted for men with rifles in the Abbey.’
He sat very still and spoke with quiet ferocity.
‘And they've let the Bravoes in given them a potential scandal that…
I don't know what.
But we're a small country now: we can't afford big mistakes.’
Maxim was smiling and nodding politely.
‘Anybody could see involved.
Going to Miss Tuckey was a risk but-’
‘D'you think she…?’
‘Very much doubt it.
She was too obvious with her lectures and books- and what access did she have?
No official standing.
Probably a few friends in high places but it would be better to recruit them instead.
No I think she thought she could guess at somebody who might be involved — like Person Y — but nothing more.’
‘Unless it was cover.’
‘Double cover.’
‘I know: rhinestones over amethysts over diamonds.’
George had lapsed into determined gloom.
‘That way you end by staring through a telescope poked up your own-’
‘The most she might have done’ Maxim said soothingly ‘would be to give them training in techniques.
She couldn't have been supplying Russian weapons typewriter unlisted phone numbers — oh were those two Second Secretaries on the No-go-Alone List?’
There was had to be a discreet list circulated naming those (mainly) Soviet Bloc officials in London with whom it was highly inadvisable to have a solo drink or dinner.
Maxim hadn't seen an update of the list since leaving Number 10.
‘They were on it’ George grunted.
‘How would she get hold of the KGB's local order of battle?
No whoever gave them the kit could give them the training to go with it.
These people have got good contacts — but with whom?’
‘You're getting grammatical.’
George sat looking like a frog who has no idea where his next fly is coming from.
‘All right.
You get back to the Playforce office and look busy.
I'll think whether I have any cousins in St Louis.’
Maxim got slowly to his feet his thoughtfull face sending a shiver through George, because that look usually meant he might be going to do something.
‘You took recording of the TV replay at the Abbey didn't you?’
‘It was you working that blasted machine.’
‘Can I come back with you and play it over — or borrow it?’
On Saturday Maxim had moved back into Wellington Barracks; he was supposed to be looking for a new flat to go with his London posting.
‘Of course.
I've got a meeting at four, should be through by half five.’
Maxim half turned away then decided he'd better say his piece anyway.
‘Would you mind if I followed you back — just to try and see if anybody else is trying to?
I'm not very good at that sort of thing but…one thing we do know is that the Bravoes know we're involved.
I mean we George Harbinger and Harry Maxim.’
17
As far as Maxim could see nobody followed George through the fading damp light back to Albany, although there was no way to be sure and less way of knowing if he was followed himself not over such a short and crowded distance.
He caught George up at the porter's lodge and they walked together up the Ropewalk.
‘Security here could be good,’ Maxim said tentatively.
‘Apart from once having a porter who was a burglar, I think it is.
The back gate's kept closed these days so there's only the one way in and I have to tell the porter the name of anybody who's coming — you know that.’
‘Even when you're throwing a big party?’
‘Well not then no just to warn him I'm expecting guests…
I see what you mean.’
It takes only one leak to sink a ship, one gate to let in a Trojan horse.
George was frowning in thought as they clattered up the prison-like stone steps to his set.
Annette greeted George with cheery concern and Maxim with he thought some coolness behind the immediate offer of dinner.
Suddenly he could imagine George on the Sunday after that Saturday evening at the cottage exhausted by nightmares pacing the rooms and jumping whenever the phone rang.
As a good wife, Annette would have blamed it whatever it was on Maxim.
Rightly so he thought sadly and I'm going to make it worse'.
He said: ‘Thank you no I'm just picking up a book George promised me.’
‘And a quick jar,’ George called from the cloakroom.
‘Go on in, Harry, help yourself, you know where.’
‘I'll get some ice.’
Annette vanished.
Alone in the big drawing-room where Annette's choice of bright fabrics had fought hardest, albeit still without  winning against her dead in-laws' passion for darkpanelled gloom Maxim went straight to the telephone.
It was the same old-fashioned type as Miss Tuckey's and he unscrewed the mouthpiece carefully but found nothing extra inside.
Looking around he remembered it was difficult to plant bugs actually inside panelling but even his half-trained eye could see that the elaborate cornices and mouldings gave a myriad opportunities to a good wire man.
Annette came back shining with suspicious goodwill.
‘You haven't got yourself anything yet Harry.
It's usually Scotch isn't it?
Water and ice?’
He took the glass although he disliked iced drinks after the brief British summer and asked: ‘Had a busy day?’
She ignored that.
Glancing over her shoulder she whispered: ‘What happened on Saturday night?
George came in looking like death.
Can you tell me what it was?’
‘Misunderstanding all cleared up now’ he said and her look told him how much use that reply had been.
‘I see’ she said smiling lopsidedly.
‘You are getting into our little Whitehall ways, Harry.
Oh well,’ gaily now ‘these things blow over.
Have I had a busy day?
I made it seem like one.
I got out to the shops this afternoon and have you noticed they're into Christmas already?
Two and a half months ahead.
The Americans do it much better having Thanksgiving to space it out so they only have a month of Christmas though they do seem to let their elections creep back just as we do with football…’
George bustled in rubbing his hands.
‘A drink a drink my kingdom for…’
He gave Annette a piece of paper and put his finger to his lips.
Annette stared but took it silently while George clanked and prattled over the tray of bottles.
‘Had a good day sweetie?
Harry the book I was forgetting it's over there…’
He pointed to a rack of video tapes.
‘Dig it out for yourself will you?
It's quite good on D'Urbino and Speckle particularly; if you were ever thinking of going back to that monograph.’
‘One of these days when I've got the time.’
Maxim found the tape of the Abbey shooting.
Annette passed the paper back to George her eyes wide.
‘Of course what I'm really interested in’ Maxim went on ‘is where D'Urbino got his ideas from.’
He looked at the paper George had out.
‘Was he really the innovator they make out?
I'm not trying to run him down but…’
He read:
The place could be bugged.
Did anybody get in here today?
Annette had written:
Somebody lost his way going to a lunch party at the Metcalfes', but I didn't let him in.
I was out for 2 hours from about 2.30.
Still talking about the designer of Antwerp's city walls Maxim reached and scribbled:
Exploration, then penetration.
‘I've got an idea’ George said.
‘Why don't we take Harry out to dinner at the club?
As long as he stops talking fortresses.
Or we can get that over with while you change — right?’
With silent frightened eyes, Annette went to the bedroom.
The cliché image of London clubs being full of government officials muttering Top Secrets over the cold steak-and-kidney pie had, Maxim was coming to see not only a lot of truth but also a lot of sense.
The essence of a club is that it is select and private; you cannot be followed in there.
A club servant might be taking Moscow gold so perhaps one should not share secrets with them and so might another club member — but since he is likely to be a government official as well you already have a far bigger problem than just his being a member of your club.
As to planting electronic bugs, you would need an ant colony of them and an army of listeners before you could be reasonably sure of covering every room in London where George Harbinger might whisper an indiscretion.
‘I'll put in a request for them to check out Albany’ George grumbled, ‘but it takes months to get them to do your office never mind your home.
I've been trying to get routine security stepped up but you come right up against the lords of the wallet: who's going to pay for it?
I've got another meeting tomorrow but…’
‘George are they really doing this to us?’
Annette demanded.
‘In our own home?
It's absolutely hateful.’
‘There's a war on.
Or they are determined there should be.’
‘But why now?
You're not even in Downing Street any more.’
She glanced quickly at Maxim then back to George.
‘Or is this something to do with last Saturday?’
George shivered.
‘Let's say it could be.’
‘Oh.’
She stared into the dregs of her gin and tonic.
‘If that was all to do with them, I don't mind so much.
That's a bit silly isn't it?
I just thought it might be something well personal and rather awful.
But I expect you'll tell me one of these days.’
‘One of these days’ George promised and they smiled quickly at each other isolating Maxim in a twinge of envy.
People who have been married apparently happily, for a long time can make you fed an outsider with just one private glance.
George went to make sure there was a table for dinner; Annette said: ‘I'm so sorry I acted the way I did with you…somehow I'd got to blaming you you know how it is…’
‘It could have been my fault.
Some of it’
‘No I'm sure you were doing your bat.’
With sharp memory of the darkened cottage Maxim wondered: my best?
My most direct but perhaps not my best.
‘I do trust George completely’ Annette went on ‘I just have to with his work and so much he can't tell me but when he come back in that state I just couldn't help…
I don't know if I was thinking about Another Woman but if George was being blackmailed about something like…and he'd taken you along because you were tough and…you see the silly fantasies I get into when I'm alone?’
‘It was nothing like that’ Maxim said with huge relief
‘I suppose I read too many thrillers but in the end I'd convinced myself you'd got too tough and killed somebody and George was mixed up in that!’
She laughed cheerily.
‘Ha, ha,’ Maxim agreed feebly.
Back at the Barracks Maxim had to wait until after midnight before he had the officers' mess video machine to himself.
He ran through the sequence of the shots listening carefully and timing the spacing with the seconds hand of his watch.
Then he picked up a long poker from the fireplace and had it like a rifle when he played the tape again.
At each shot he jerked the ‘rifle’ up as the recoil would kick it then re-aimed as fast as he could.
‘So you've finally lost your last marble’ a voice said from the far end of the room.
It was the duty officer prowling with a cup of tea in his hand.
Shamefaced Maxim twirled the poker casually.
‘It's that SAS training’ the duty officer went on.
‘Learning to live on seaweed and beetles.
Bound to have an effect.
Can I help by uttering a stangled cry and falling at your feet?
Anything for one of the Army's élite.’
‘Piss off’ Maxim suggested.
‘Or have I stumbled on the trials of the Regiment's new secret weapon?
Fear not my lips are sealed.
Gad I never realised what Total War really meant until this moment…’
Maxim left him cackling and slopping his tea with mirth.
In his room he unpacked the little portable typewriter that had once been Jenny's and stared at a blank paper until his embarrassment had faded.
Then he began to tap: ‘1.
The range from the firing point to where the rounds impacted was between 35 metres (the shot that hit Barling) and 30 metres (the ones that hit the pillar)…’
Twenty minutes later he had reached paragraph 9 when a voice from the next room told him that if he were typing anything other than his bloody resignation he should bloody well do it at a more civilised bloody hour.
It sounded a senior voice; Maxim went to bed.
18
‘All very competent’ George said ‘though I don't find any significance in the intervals between the shots — but what does it all prove?’
‘That they wanted to kill Barling.
Himself.
Not just smear the KGB by making them seem callously careless in their shooting.
The pause after the first shot making sure they'd killed him which isn't easy to do with a heart shot but they couldn't go for the head because the sight line wouldn't fit with shooting at the President's head —’
‘Harry, please.’
George put his head in his hands.
‘Anything you say except just don't say it this early in the day.’
‘Why Barling?’
Maxim asked bluntly.
George waved a hand vaguely.
‘He was an expert on Russian affairs — as much of an expert as MPs get to be on anything — and they made him a junior minister to add credibility to their soft-line policy.
He couldn't speak against that policy once he'd accepted a government post.’
‘Where did he stand on Berlin?’
‘Why Berlin?’
George asked suspiciously.
‘Miss Tuckey told us to look for a narrow objective within a broader attack.
Berlin seems the most immediate.
Are we going to demilitarise our Zone there?’
‘This is not your concern Harry.’
‘The government can give one of two answers to the Russians: we'll talk about Berlin or we won't talk.
After two months we haven't said we won't talk.
What the hell sort of secret d'you think you're keeping?
The time and place of the talks I'd say.’
‘I don't know about that’ George grumped.
‘Then I hope these people don't know either although they seem to know a lot.
They smeared Ettington they drugged Westerman they killed Barling: I call that escalation.
I think they're getting desperate and Berlin seems  the likeliest cause.
We can't defend on a broad front George not just two of us.
We have to find the next point of attack and be there first.’
‘I do hate this remorseless military logic particularly when — as usual— it is based on an incomplete knowledge of the facts.’
‘Any general would like to postpone his battles for forty years until the historians can tell him what to do.
But he's usually short of time as well as information same as us.
What difference could Barling's death make to Berlin?’
George sighed.
‘I may just be able to tell you after his funeral.’
‘Neither death nor life nor angels, nor principalities nor powers nor things present nor things to come, nor height nor depth nor any other creature shall be able to separate us from the love of God…’
‘Romans 8,’ Sprague whispered.
‘I believe Barling was quite a devout man.
By Parliamentary standards.’
‘Quite’ George said, as the coffin wobbled past his ear.
‘And we haven't had anything tactless about the Lord gave, and the Lord hath taken away, since your Committee hasn't apportioned the blame yet.
Book of Job, I believe.’
‘One possibly verse twenty-one,’ Sprague topped him easily.
The coffin reached the catafalque as the minister finished his intonation: ‘Let not your heart be troubled: ye believe in God believe also in me.
In my Father's house are many mansions.’
‘And doctrinally at least’ Sprague murmured as they sat down ‘the Church of England has a seat by the fire in every one.’
The crematorium chapel was a large modern redbrick structure with pews varnished to a garish yellow.
It was crowded despite its size for Mrs Barling had made no effort to keep it private and there were TV crews on the driveway outside.
A lady George thought sombrely, with a fine appreciation of the political timescale come the inevitable memorial service in three weeks' time people would already be asking ‘Barling?
Who was he?
Oh yes, him.’
‘I held my tongue, and spake nothing: I kept silence, yea even from good words; but it was pain and grief to me’ the minister droned his voice thin in the unfamiliar acoustics.
‘My heart was hot within me and while I was thus musing the fire kindled: and at the last I spake with my tongue…’
‘I do believe that the widow Barling’ Sprague whispered ‘is trying to tell us something.
She must have chosen this psalm.
Why not the dear old 23rd?— at least a decent bit of poetry.
But of course he never did speak with his tongue nor ever would have done if he wanted to hang on to his job.
They almost never do…is this the moment George to tell you something of uttermost Top Secrecy?’
‘…and verily every man living is altogether vanity’ the minister went on.
‘Something the Committee has not yet quite decided’ Sprague murmured thumbing through his hymn book ‘but I-believe will come to accept shortly.
If our dear departed were not going to speak out against the Berlin talks as seemed altogether likely suppose — I must say suppose — that some deranged mind decided to eliminate him under the guise of a Muscovite attempt on the dear Praident?
Consider that for a moment George.’
He raised a satisfied bright-eyed smile towards the pulpit.
‘Good Lord’ George said bowing his head.
Sprague's smile got even brighter.
‘If one thinks about it the President makes an ideal stalking horse.
Nobody else could possibly be the target.
But viewed in tranquillity that is pure theory so another theory is equally tenable.
Think on it George.’
‘Why Barling though?’
‘It frees his followers in the House.
He would have voted with the government they would have voted with him.
Now we have twenty-five Membas it could be more floating free and liable to vote their consciences.
A frightening thought for a coalition government.
However there are no signs of a foreign policy debate being forced at the moment and one rather doubts there will be unless something dramatic happens so one might say the assassin failed…’
‘You still believe it was just one man?’
‘What other evidence?
That mythical policeman whom your Major saw for just one second, as he admitted?
Amen’ he added, in perfect time with the congregation.
‘No, the lone psychopath all quite within the compass of one warped brain.’
‘And now a right-wing, brain which must sit nicely with our Mastas.’
‘You know me better than that George,’ Sprague reproved from the corner of his mouth.
‘And what conspirators were you favouring?
Charlie's Indians?
I won't deny that might find favour with our Masters.’
Sprague rose bright-eyed and smiling pleasantly, to sing the hymn.
‘Of course’ he said sitting down again ‘it would have been so much easier if we had the assassin alive and on trial.
But your Major alas…’‘…while we look not at the things which are seen but at the things which are not seen: for the things which are seen are temporal; but the things which are not seen are eternal…’
‘So like our dear friends from the secret services’ Sprague observed.
‘Conerning which, one hears a whisper that the Secret Service, the White House Protective Detail is holding a little affair called an After Action Study.
Presumably to find out what went wrong in the Abbey.’
‘Standard procedure’ George suggested.
‘Doubtless.
And far better than any Congressional inquiry or suchlike; I gather it's a totally private proceeding.
But since it didn't happen on their home ground they will be requesting witnesses from where it did happen.
You do follow me?’
Said reprovingly because George looked as if he might have been following the lesson.
‘Yes…they'll want some of our people.
You aren't thinking of refusing?’
‘Of course not.
Once the request becomes official, we shall send somebody from the very highest level of my Office nothing less.’
‘But not anybody who actually knows what happened.’
‘But who does really know?
Surely this is where the Committee comes into its own.
When we have resolved the matter we shall be in a position to give them all the reassurance they can ask.
And reassurance is what it comes  down to: security remains a national responsibility.
They can't ask for more than that we have reviewed and reformed our procedures.’
‘For we must all appear before the judgment seat of Christ’ the minister warned them; ‘that every one may receive the things done in his body according to that he hath done whether it be good or bad.’
‘Reassurance’ George agreed glumly.
‘The President was not after all harmed.
Nor were a dozen other heads of state who are not, I think going to request witnesses for an After Action Study.’
Sprague turned the last word into a throat clearing noise because the minister had finished just a head of him.
With a jerk the coffin began trundling on its conveyor belt towards the curtains and the waiting flame.
It was as always a moment of terrible sorrow and because of the creaking conveyor cringing banality.
’…the soul of our brother departed and we commit his body to be consumed by fire’ the minister gabbled trying to keep pace with the vanishing coffin; ‘ashes to ashes, dust to dust…’
In the moment of silence before the organ started and the congregation began to move somebody sobbed loudly.
It was a lonely world-wide world-deep sound.
‘So where’ Sprague asked ‘might it not all end?’
So far the autumn had brought gales soft bright days left over from summer misty still days, windy showery ones and now a fine drizzle.
Even the weather's become a bloody coalition, George grumbled to himself as he watched the politicians edging in front of the TV cameras and the civil servants edging away.
Sprague summed up: ‘So we can be united in this as all things?
Everything to be handled through the Committee?
Bless you George for being as ever so understanding…’
He drifted away towards his Minister's car.
Sprague never drove himself but was never short of a lift.
Walking towards his own car George passed James Ferrebee gulping at a cigarette behind a pillar.
‘Back to the pit-head?’ he suggested.
Ferrebee jumped at the offer.
‘My Masta offered my  seat to Mrs Barling.
Quite right and proper but I didn't fancy trying to scrounge a lift from a back-bencher.’
Farebee's status was not that of Sprague.
As they drove out the next funeral cortège was coming up the drive.
‘Production line business’ Farebee commented.
‘But, given a place like that I thought it went well.
Barling himself would have approved.’
‘He was a devout man I gather.’
‘I believe so.’
‘Only he wasn't going to resign on our Russian policy — like Berlin?’
‘He talked about it, but…when you finally reach a position where you might get something done you usually tell yourself that you can do more by staying trying to soften the effects of a policy than walking out and being replaced by somebody who gobbles up the policy flavour-of-the-month.
Civil servants as well as politicans.’
‘Power tends to castrate absolute power makes you forget you even had them, as with our current ministers.’
Feeling Ferrebee's cool glance George hurried on: ‘I hear the Americans are going to invite witnesses over for post-mortem on the Abbey.
Have you heard that?’
‘No.’
Ferrebee stared suspiciously.
‘Was that Norman Sprague?
I saw you two had your heads bowed and I was pretty sure it wasn't religious devotion.
That man's private translantic cable.’
‘Many would subscribe towards sinking him to the ocean bed.
But I assume he was telling me that they'll ask for Harry Maxim and the Committee would rather he didn't go.’
‘Sprague can't tell the Army what to do.’
‘No but there are policy matters I shall probably be consulted…’
‘Do you want him to go?’
‘The Americans aren't going to be impressed by somebody from Sprague's Committee who wasn't within miles of the Abbey telling them Not to worry old boy the Redcoats have muddled through again can't recall the details but just take my word for it…
If they want Harry I want him to go.
We've got some fences to mend in Washington.’
‘I gather he was suggesting a conspiracy theory to the Steering Committee.
If that doesn't fit with the Committee's findings — and we must be letting Washington have those eventually — will that really patch things up?’
George noted that Sprague — it would only be Sprague had been leaking a version of Maxim's performance at the Committee.
‘I think Harry learnt a lesson there and I could teach him a few more before he goes…
I wonder now: Sprague may have been a bit too clever in tipping me off.
Suppose when the White House Detail asks for Harry it isn't to give evidence, but advice?
Everybody's flattered to give advice; be churlish to refuse.
Suppose I gave Clay Culliman a tinkle on a secure line and suggested that?’
Ferrebee lit another cigarette.
‘If you think you can out-deviate Sprague, then I doubt my Office will raise any objections.
Only — don't let him shoot anybody over there will you?
It could be counter-productive.’
‘I'll search him myself at the security check.’
George was already phrasing his call to Culliman; perhaps the request should be for Maxim to ‘make himself available’ to the Study group a suggestion of staying several days give the chap a chance to see Washington in the fall…and make a quick trip to St Louis and back.
‘But I don't get to fly Concorde?’
Maxim asked.
‘Correct.
You do not get to fly Concorde.’
The Deputy Director of Crisis Relocation peered sternly over his spectacles.
‘You go on the regular RAF VC-1O from Brize Norton.
They run a perfectly good…well they probably can't miss something the size of America.
You've never been there before?
You should enjoy Washington.
See if you can get our people to introduce you to a few American officers; broaden your mind.
Only don't come home with the idea that the solution to every military problem is the helicopter.’
‘No sir.
It's artillery.’
The DDCR who had begun his career in the Artillery, became even more suspicious.
‘Correct again.
Why don't you tell that to the RAF and see where they make you sit?’
19
Long-distance travel is a fever dream where time and mood slip out of control leaving one unexpectedly early or late delighted or depressed until a mosaic of tiny things builds a flat earth beneath you again.
Things like understanding the coins in your hand and the meaningless greeting of a shopping like predicting the traffic behaviour and using a telephone without reading the instructions.
World-seasoned traveller that he thought himself Maxim sat glumly watching the dawn over the Washington skyline, having woken far too early and dry-mouthed from the air-conditioning in the aircraft and now the hotel.
He had already drunk all the ginger ale and soda from the room refrigerator, and was now sipping the tonic water which tasted hideously medicinal.
Outside, it looked like becoming a warm, sunny day, which increased his alienation after the British autumn.
It emphasised that he was not only far west of London but far south as well on a latitude with Sicily and southern Spain.
Later he would go out and stroll the city before his noon date at the Smithsonian and the afternoon meeting with the Secret Service.
Abruptly as with all cities and their tight schedules the street below was jammed with cars and Maxim assumed the coffee shop on the ground floor would be open.
In fact it had been open for some time already as had half a dozen other places within easy walk because America believes in man's inalienable right to eat whenever he is awake.
On a brief evening stroll Maxim had also noticed a few tourists who had clearly solved the problem of eating whilst asleep; it is an oddity of American that only tourists are truly fat never the locals.
The ceremony at the Smithsonian Air and Space Museum was for the presentation of an old Spitfire that had been  hauled out of an English lake and identified as belonging to 71 Squadron the first of the Eagle squadrons formed from American volunteers back in 1940.
Restored and repainted in RAF workshops it was being formally handed over — together with glasses of champagne Bourbon or Scotch — by the Ambassador's wife in front of a small and mainly military audience.
That was why the Liaison Office, looking to make some gesture of welcome had invited Maxim.
Agnes Algar was there because she had asked.
She freely admitted although only to herself that this was because Maxim would be there.
She did not quite admit that was why she wore her best summer suit and indeed had it rush cleaned for the event.
It had after all needed cleaning and there wouldn't be many more chances to wear it that autumn so…and anyway why shouldn't she look her best for once?
There hadn't been time to get Maxim's name on the usual notice of forthcoming visitors to the embassy; she had been signalled by the Security Service who shared the Steering Committee's deep distrust of the visit and wanted her to debrief him after his meeting.
‘Well if it comes to that I don't exactly trust the dear boy myself’ she had remarked to her mother who was winding up a short visit en route to stay with some Canadian cousins.
‘He has that Attila the Hun touch which rarely goes over big in diplomatic circles.’
‘I thought you rather liked him when you were at Number 10?’
‘Oh yes.
I dare say even Attila had his moments.’
‘I'm sorry I won't meet him.
At one time I thought that you and he…
’ There was a delicate relentlessness with which Mrs Algar pursued the main task of any mother with a long-unmarried daughter.
‘Mother dear he is Army.
Can you see me as an Army Wife?’
‘I don't know…
You always seem to pick rather dashing men.
I mean Graham with his yachts and David was a test pilot wasn't he?’
‘Graham was a snake.’
Said very grimly.
‘And David was another.’
‘Oh yes’ her mother had said with a smile of-surprisingly-reminiscence; ‘the dashing types usually are in the end.’
After the ceremony Agnes and Maxim walked through other halls of the museum where she displayed more knowledge of the aeroplanes and nearly as much of the rockets as Maxim — essentially a personal-weapons infantryman — could offer.
‘So what do you think of Washington after — what? eighteen or twenty hours?’
Maxim smiled and considered.
‘Green and white and wide and dusty.’
‘They're certainly tearing things down and putting them up at the moment.
Nothing more than that?’
‘It sounds a bit daft but…it looks like the capital of America.
Like they'd want it to look.’
‘Yes — the Founding Fathers and L'Enfant did a pretty good job.’
She stopped looking up at a rocket: a towering metal redwood that had never flown because the ones that flew were junk scattered across the Gulf of Mexico.
‘They do things whole-heartedly over here.
Even if it's some idea like building a restaurant like a ship.
They make it look like a ship with waiters like pirates singing shanties into your clam chowder.
We'd get scared half the way through and back off and just stick a few ship pictures round the walls.
It's good to see you again old sport although the reason could be more auspicious.
I wondered if it was you when we first got news of the Abbey — no insult just that some people get picked for some jobs.
How's George liking life back at MoD?
Not drinking too much more than too much?’
‘He's ticking over.
It's nice to see you too.
’ Perhaps it was the estrangement of Washington perhaps that he hadn't expected Agnes at the Smithsonian but it had been a surprising thrill to see the familiar smile in the crowd.
Although not all that familiar: her oval face was leaner now, her light ginger hair cut shorter and more clearly styled.
It might be something about blending with the efficient American women he had seen around the city or it might be a feeling of exile.
She smoked more than she  had done before too lighting a cigarette with real hunger when they came out into the sunlight.
‘Well you'll be seeing more of me.
You know I'm debriefing you this afternoon?
Maybe you'll feel like a drink after that.
I'd like to hear what you've been up to.’
‘Certainly.
Happy to.’
But there was a flat wariness in his voice and she didn't push it.
But I was right about him being up to something she thought.
20
The ‘Secret Service’ in America began and continues as a branch of the Treasury hunting down counterfeiters largely by undercover means.
Since it was the only nationwide law enforcement agency when McKinley got killed in 1901- making three presidential assassinations in forty years — it was the only group that could easily take on the job of bodyguarding future presidents.
So it was not to the White House but the Treasury Building next door that the embassy car delivered Maxim at three o'clock that afternoon.
He remembered a big elegant room — whose he never learnt — with wide-spaced deep leather chairs that created a literally hid-back atmosphere rather than one hunched over a table.
Only the agent from Dean's Yard the one person Maxim recognised was leaning forward and looking eager among his seniors.
A middle-aged woman silently traced his movements on a large-scale map board; there were photographs of the Yard and the Cloisters pinned up there as well.
The questioning was polite and leisured but thorough.
Then one of them asked: ‘Can you tell us what the Rules of Engagement were for your task Major?’
‘Generally that I had to be convinced any person posed a risk — and to give a warning before I fired.’
‘Did you give a warning then?’
‘I think I shouted something.’
There was a momentary pause.
An older more senior questioner asked: ‘Did your superiors accept that?’
‘I suppose so.’
The first one came back: ‘Did the police inspector you talked to confirm that?’
Maxim took a deep breath.
He had offered George the  idea of trying to leave Person Y out altogether but George hat been firm: the Secret Service would spot any gaps.
‘I think I'd better say that the Steering Committee didn't seem to believe I saw an inspector.
The police say they can't identify him.
It was all happening rather quickly and by now I'm getting a little unsure myself.’
That was strictly his own idea to try and cover any hesitations while he hid the trail that led to Miss Tuckey and the picture on her wan.
He sensed a mixed reaction of sympathy and severity.
‘Sure’ the first interrogator went on ‘but you are a career soldier trained to be at your best when things are popping — right?
And trained to identify uniforms and rank insignia straight off?’
‘I wish I'd made that point to the Committee.’
They smiled politely.
‘I guess it was just your British modesty.
But if we can assume the police inspector really existed — you did hear him speak?
Was his voice straightup English?’
‘He only said a few words’ Maxim said slowly trying to remember.
‘All I can say is he didn't sound odd for a London police inspector.’
‘Could he have been American?’
That startled Maxim.
‘He didn't sound American.’
What the hell were they getting at?
But there was a American connection in St Louis 1968.
He fought the idea down; they were recording him — quite openly — and would presumably analyse the tape for changes in his voice pattern afterwards.
He dung to bafflement.
The older man explained softly: ‘The President has more enemies in the United States than he does in England.
That's what we assume anyhow.’
Maxim nodded hoping his relief didn't show — or record.
A ripple of glances round the room and the older man said: ‘I guess that about wraps it up then.’
He stood up.
‘Thank you kindy for coming over to help us out.
We do appreciate it.
We didn't get around to any of that ‘advice’ you were going to give us but…’and they all laughed.
‘Are you doing anything else while you're over here Major?’ the other one asked.
It was the oldest trick in the book: lighten the atmosphere stir in a few laughs — and throw the fast ball.
‘Looking around Washington’ Maxim said evenly.
‘And I might run up to New York for the day.’
They were all over him with friendly jokey advice.
‘If you get talking to any New Yorkers they'll tell what a lousy dirty city it is all full of crime and weirdos and garbage.
I'm telling you Major the one thing you don't do is agree with them.
Or they'll push you under a subway train or force feed you kiwi fruit whatever the new thing is this week.
Take care now.’
But have I taken enough care already?
Maxim wondered.
Agnes's office in the Rotunda the wartime annex built beside the embassy was a rather different place.
Maxim would have known it for a British government office no matter where in the world he met it: small neon-lit with a hodge-podge of cheap furniture and painted to look scruffy even when it was surgically dean.
A room that British civil servants moan about but defend the way New Yorkers do New York because it shows how unique they are in coping so splendidly in such surroundings.
If that doesn't make you feel humble you must naturally be so humble that the hell with you anyway.
‘Sit down Harry’ Agnes waved at him.
‘Any wires sticking out of the chair are strictly HMG's parsimony nothing to do with your heartbeat or perspiration rate.
You can tell us all the lies you like.
You've met Colonel Lomax I think?
He's sitting in on behalf of MoD the Army and because he'll have to walk the dog if he gets home early.’
‘My daughter from dancing class actually’ Lomax said with a tight smile.
He was a small neat man with curly grey hair who had met Maxim at the airport.
‘We agreed it would be simplest if you only had to say your party piece once — once more I mean’ Agnes went on briskly.
‘We'd like to hear everything but paricularly what questions the lads in the Gucci shoulder holsters asked.’
It was like eating the same meal at every mealtime.
The restaurant changed, as did the maître d', but he still watched like a hawk and swooped with a pained query if you didn't savour every mouthful or tried to hide a tough end of meat under your lettuce.
And never a cigar at the end because there never was, quite, an end.
When Maxim hoped he had finished, Lomax glanced at Agnes, then said: ‘They brought up the Rules of Engagement business, then?
I don't see how it concerns them.’
Agnes answered before Maxim could think of anything.
‘Question of our Harry's vulnerability.
Is he looking to clear himself?
I fancy that's what bothers them about a possible American end: whether Harry's going to do any investigation of his own ideas over here.’
‘Why should he?
What ideas?’
Agnes smiled.
‘Why and what indeed?
If there was somebody dolled up as a copper at the Abbey, you've got a conspiracy, and it's only if there was a conspiracy that the Secret Service is really interested, because that means there's at least one bod floating loose who presumably still wants to kill the President.
If we believe Harry, then there was a conspiracy.
But since the alternative is that he's just a banana-brain who makes things up, he's got a natural bias towards proving a conspiracy — hasn't he?
What should we conclude, Jerry?’
The question turned off Lomax's interest like a tap that realises it had flooded itself into deep water.
‘Good Lord, we're just required to report what he told them, no question of…
’ But there was doubt in his voice.
He looked quickly at his watch.
‘It looks as if I'll make that damned dancing class after all.
Harry, if you're still around, we must…’
When he had gone, Agnes lit a cigarette, slumped in, her chair ant grinned broadly at Maxim.
‘Well, are we a little banana-brain after all?’
‘Thanks for bringing it up.’
‘It's what the Steering Committee's trying to prove, isn't it?
And knowing you, I doubt very much you're standing still for it.
So let's hear what jolly japes you and George have been up to since then.’
Maxim considered.
‘What are you going to tell your Service?’
‘I can't make any promises.’
‘Okay.
Let's see, now.
I spent that Sunday at Littlehampton; on the Monday I dined at one of George's clubs —’
‘Bugger you, Harry Maxim.
I want to know what you've done.’
He nodded placidly.
Anger didn't suit her friendly snub face, making her seem out of place in that aloofly cut suit and he realised he was mentally taking it off her.
He nodded once more and tried to remember that this was dammit, the British embassy.
‘I told the D-G of your Service what I thought, once.
At the Steering Committee.’
‘That old fart.’
‘May I quote you?’
A snap glance of fury, then a tired little laugh.
‘Yes, it has come to that, I suppose.
So you're out on a limb.
And I bet you're further out than anybody realises.
I know you, chum.
And George, too.
But what do I tell my Service?’
She took time to think about that, then lifted the telephone.
‘Algar.
I'm off now, going towntown.
I'll check in — okay?’
She looked back at Maxim.
‘You heard me.
Off-duty Let's have that drink.’
‘No,’ Maxim persisted.
‘You either tell your Service or you don't.’
She stood up, reaching for the desk lamp.
‘You like your orders cut and dried.
Well, I don't blame you, after…
All right: from here on you're totally off the record.
Do you believe me?’
‘Yes.’
‘Or one day…
I wouldn't want you for an enemy, Harry.
You take loyalty seriously.
God help me, I hope I still do’— she clicked off the light —’ where I can still find it.
I'm beginning to need that drink.’
They sat in thick wickerwork chairs on an open balcony a top one of the older hotels, close to the floodlit shaft of the Washington Monument.
Beyond it, the mild night sky was busy with lights arrowing down into National airport and jinking up away from it, following the curls of the river so that if one fell, it would fall into that.
Agnes had
brought him there for the view, but it was impossible not to watch just the aircraft lights, perhaps macabrely hoping one would lose its grip.
They reminded him of what the city was really about, more so than the near deserted streets below, dominated by monuments and government buildings that themselves became monuments after dark.
Agnes listened carefully and without interruption except to clarify a name or time.
They were halfway through their second round of drinks when he finished; she leaned away so that— sitting beside him — she could peer back at him through the dimness.
‘Golly, you do live, don't you?
Those you run into may not, but you soldier on.
Literally.’
‘Do you believe all this?’
She gave that only a moment's thought.
‘A lot of it's still guesswork by you and George, but the rest, yes.
If something like that were going to happen, now would be the time.
And you say my Service doesn't believe it?’
‘George didn't want to put the business at the cottage to them, you can see why, and it's pretty clear they don't want to believe in a conspiracy anyway, even when they knew about the Reznichenko Memorandum.’
‘That smelled bad even from here, but now you say they had proof it was phoney and didn't tell the Home Sec?
That means they didn't even tell the D-G.
My God, it's come to that pitch already.
This is the sort of thing my mob is supposed to be ironing out and they daren't admit they've even been involved — except by whispering to people like Sprague.
Sprague.’
‘You know him?’
‘Met him.’
She snatched a gulp of her drink and banged the glass on her teeth.
‘And the Bravoes seem to believe it…
They shouldn't have a team like that in Britain, acting so openly.
It shows how safe they feel; six months ago they wouldn't have dared…
And I believe you when you say you killed one of them.
I might not have believed it if you'd said you hadn't.’
‘The world is full of people I haven't killed.’
‘So far.
And you had George along with you on that?
Poor man.
His blood pressure must be stratospheric.
But the Bravoes aren't going to like that, you know.
There's  no rules in our business, but there's more or less a convention that we don't kill each other.
Once that gets started, you don't know where it could end.’
‘They must have been planning to kill Miss Tuckey.’
‘Oh yes, they've killed people in Britain before.
Usually their own defectors and so on…but outsiders, not professionals.
I know it sounds crazy to you, but that's the convention.
At the moment.
Now you've broken it…well, let's hope they count Miss Tuckey as a pro and call it quits.
If not, you could be a target.’
‘Just me?’
‘Just you.
You're thinking of your boy?
No.
That's more or less another convention- and they don't want to send you berserk, doing God-knows-what more damage.
It'll be you personally, but nothing personal, if you see what I mean.
Just getting across the message that ‘Oi, there's a convention about these things, remember?
Now we've squared it up, we can start again from scratch.’
I should keep your back to the wall.’
‘I'll try and remember.’
Looking at his face, calm in the faint glow of the awning lights, Agnes felt a flush of exasperation at failing to get her message across.
In fact, Maxim had listened and believed: she knew far more of that world than he did.
But his own world had stretched to the hinterland of the Gulf states, where a mixture of religion, politics and blood feuds made death a beginning rather than an end.
There were families and organisations out there which had sworn to kill him far less cleanly than the KGB would, and he had learned to live with that.
Not exactly with courage, which is a wasting asset, but with a soldier's fatalism that if it happens, it will be tomorrow and not today.
‘All right,’ Agnes said resignedly, ‘so what it boils down to is that, despite your assurances to the White House Protective Detail, you're sneaking off to do a little sleuthing on your own?’
‘If we can identify this Person Y…it seems the only thing to do.’
‘Sure.
But you'd better do it carefully.
Grow a long-lost cousin in Missouri, or something.
Have you booked anything?
Then don't until I've done a little looking up.
I'm supposed to be just liaison, and the climate isn't good for that.
But a list like that can't be anything secret…
Did George suggest you got me mixed up in all this?’
Maxim smiled and shrugged.
‘He suggested I contact you.
But I would have done anyway.’
, ‘However, not just for my big blue eyes and tiny morals?
And what's he going to be doing meanwhile?’
‘Nothing out of the ordinary, I hope.’
21
As it turned out, George had not had to stir up the matter of Miss Tuckey himself.
It arrived at his desk, as he had privately hoped, simply because he was the long-stop for security/intelligence matters that nobody else wanted to field.
It had not been the Army which first noticed her disappearance, but an old Resistance colleague.
Forty years after the event, the survivors were a sociable group with their own small London club and a way of closing ranks that, in wartime, had needed to be desperately widespread.
The file brought with it a twinge of now familiar guilt ant a covering note from Army Intelligence: Will you please try and persuade the creepy-crawlies that we have neither the facilities nor any reason to investigate this lady's apparent disappearance.
Even if she fails to turn up for her next set of lectures there is nothing we can do but not pay her.
Sir Bruce hat a low opinion of civilian intelligence officers.
The usual ‘open end’ at MI6 was a small bird of a man whose telephone voice sounded permanently pained.
‘My tear George, we haven't any interest in the woman, missing or not.
If the Army doesn't care what happens to its lecturers then that's no skin off our nose.
As you know perfectly well, and I'm sure they do, too, we can't mount any active investigation in this country’— just as if six had never done such a thing.
‘We only got involved because we're being badgered by one of our ex's, an old friend of hers, I believe.
They were in the Resistance together, that sort of thing.
We took him on after the war, when we were a bit short-handed.
He retired some time ago; had a stroke, I understand.’
The sentence ended on a high, uninterested note.
‘What's he worried about?’
George asked.
There was a pause; there almost always was when you asked a question of the Secret Intelligence Service.
After twenty years, George still couldn't decide whether they spent the time thinking or it was just to show they needn't really answer anything.
‘You've got our note?
That's really all we know.
She vanished, it was reported to the police, they couldn't find anything criminally suspicious.
We at least went to the trouble of asking them.’
‘Is he going to make a fuss?’
Pause.
Then the voice said distantly: ‘He certainly should know better.
But he was rather…wartime.’
‘If he had any idea of what she was doing for us, MoD doesn't want it spread around.
Would it help if I go and lend him a sympathetic ear?’
This time, the voice after the pause might, by MI6 standards, have been described as faintly eager.
‘If you really feel like doing that, George, by all means.
I've got his address around here somewhere.
It could be the best thing, might even do some good.’
Clenching his teeth, George had to remind himself that he had now got just the endorsement he wanted.
Edward Marriage, Secret Intelligence Service (retired) managed a small boat-hire yard on the Thames below Oxford.
There were five boats moored to the shored-up bank, all with names beginning Duke, hung with bright blue fenders that hadn't saved them from long scratches and stains.
Behind, in a tilting wooden boathouse, a youth with cropped hair was tinkering with a partly stripped engine.
The place smelt of oil, paint, damp and slow failure, and Marriage himself sat with his back to it in the cold sunshine, looking across to the willows and alders of the far bank and the fields beyond.
It was very still, with the landscape painted in shades of smoke.
They drank tea out of mugs labelled Captain and Bosun brought by his wife, who was small, bright-eyed and determinedly busy.
The stroke had left Marriage hunched and rigid; he turned his head slowly and his smile had become a lopsided leer.
His legs were wrapped in a tartan rug and he was fortressed by small tables, stools, a frame  to help lever himself upright.
George had an old kitchen chair brought from the boatshed.
‘We never met,’ Marriage said carefully.
‘I got my Little Problem before you became involved in our side.
You were at Number 10?
But you aren't there now?’
However carefully he spoke, he still released a little dribble from the stiff site of his mouth and wiped it away with a routine gesture of his left hand.
His right hand was permanently supported by a strap around his neck.
‘No, I'm back at MoD, security and intelligence, on the pol side.
That was why Miss Tuckey's file came across my desk.’
‘Yes…are you allowed to tell me anything about her?’
‘I was rather hoping you could tell me.
I'm afraid she's just a name to me.’
Marriage took a moment to assemble his thoughts.
‘I don't get out much, just sit here pecking out letters to old friends’— there was a portable typewriter on one of the tables —‘and she was coming to tea last Monday.
Liz had it all ready — but she didn't show up.
That's not like Dot, I felt if she'd been called away she'd have got word to me somehow so…so that's why I rang the Firm.
Of course, I hardly know anybody there, not now…’
The file hat shown that Miss Tuckey had had no official connection with the Intelligence Service since turning town a bedroom job there in 1946, the year Marriage himself had joined them.
After losing most of its wartime recruits back to the universities and the law, the Service was determined to maintain its new influence, in Whitehall if not the world.
The gap was filled with people who had learnt something about intelligence and too much (in the Service's view) about weaponry in the Resistance schools of the Special Operations Executive.
But they remained second-class citizens as the Service restocked itself with young men of the right background from Oxford and Cambridge.
After all, with the sunset of Empire and most departmental requests becoming for economic intelligence, you need trained minds who understood international banking, surely George could see that?
So the Resistance-trained amateurs were gradually shunted  to filing jobs or forgotten overseas stations where they needed do nothing but show an invisible flag and curl a lip at the way the CIA did the real work.
George asked: ‘Did she say anything about her job?’
‘Oh no.
Dot never would.
But I knew she was giving a series of lectures somewhere, and they weren't being reported, and there's only one thing you'd ask Dot to lecture on, so…’
The mouth did its best to become a wry smile.
‘I just guessed you were getting interested in the old Winter Garden stuff…’
‘Winter Garden?’
Marriage's smile became slightly superior.
‘Before your time, of course.
And that was the Americans.’
He called them Amurricanes, in a heavy stage accent that came over as an envious sneer.
‘An American Resistance movement?’
Mrs Marriage came up tentatively along the line of boats, making sure she caught her husband's good eye before she moved into their circle of secrecy.
She wore a faded anorak over her long cardigan.
‘I'm just popping into town to pick up a parcel from the station.
It could be the parts John was wanting.
Can I make you some more tea before I go?’
‘No.
We're both swimming in tea, we're both sinking in tea.’
Marriage's tone became abrupt and petulant.
She just smiled.
‘All right, dear.
And shall I see when the garage can take in the car?
The clutch really does need-’
‘There's nothing wrong with the clutch.
It's the way you drive it.’
‘It's snatching.
I really think it's getting dangerous.’
‘It's the way you drive it.’
‘I'll see what the garage says.
Don't get cold out here.
Get Mr Harbinger to help you if-’
‘Mr Harbinger's got better things to do than help an old cripple around.
I'm not getting cold.’
‘Very well, dear.’
She smiled at George and walked briskly away.
‘I don't know why I'm so bloody to her,’ Marriage grumbled, ‘except that she tolerates me.
God knows I got enough of that in the Service.’
They heard the car start at  the third try and roar jerkily up the track behind the boathouse, leaving a faint cloud of blue smoke drifting around the corner.
‘I should have asked you if you wanted more tea,’ Marriage said, suddenly remorseful.
‘But perhaps you wouldn't mind something a bit stronger?
There's a bottle of vodka in the cupboard over the desk in there.
It's all I can offer, but if you felt like pouring us a couple, then topping it up with water…
Liz doesn't like me having a snort before sundown.’
For once in his life, George would have been ready to forego a drink.
But there was a gentle desperation in Marriage's crooked face, and his hand crawled on the rug like a dying spider.
‘Don't worry about me,’ he said.
‘Half my brain cells are dead tissue anyway, so a few more won't make much odds.
She can't count them.’
Did one more matter?
The man was already living beyond sundown, George told himself.
‘Actually, I happen to have-a flask of Scotch on me, just in case I broke down on the road…
’ He tried to force the joviality that was usually so easy.
Marriage watched as George filled two of his silver cups, refusing water with it.
‘It's good to taste the real thing for once; that vodka's mostly water by now .’
He poured the neat whisky into the corner of his mouth and wriggled with slow, painful relief.
George's drink tasted of shame, but he needed it too, by now.
‘The American Resistance movement,’ George prompted delicately.
‘Was that Winter Garden?’
‘In the early Fifties, we all started setting up Resistance networks again, all over Europe, when it looked as if the Soviets were going to come west on the next train:, The Air Force was particularly interested: escape routes for aircrew and so on.
The Americans took it very seriously of course, it was the Company by then.’
If Marriage knew the current jargon for the CIA, he didn't bother with it.
‘And they'd learnt a fair bit in the war, with their OSS Office of Strategic Services, same as our SOE.
I know they were collecting recordings of all the national songs, so they could set up a Ratio Free Norway or Denmark or Italy somewhere, after…’
‘And a Radio Free Britain?’
‘Oh yes.
The trouble was, we could believe in the Continent being overrun again, but we couldn't face up to it happening here.
So the Amurricanes wanted to do it, and we let them.’
‘An American network in Britain.’
‘Probably quite a good one, too.
My Service wanted me to try and penetrate it, just on general grounds, but I told them: the whole point is not to have their names on our files, all ready for the Soviets to take over.
But I spent a few bob buying drinks for a couple of old OSS types who'd turned up in their London station and they took pity on me and let drop the codename: Winter Garden.
And flower names for the different groups.
At least that's what they told me, it could be sheer bull.
But it was before they went in for all the cryptonyms and digraphs and five-letter codes because that's what computers like…’
A lone motor-cruiser rumbled upstream, tidily cluttered, steered by an elderly man with a black labrador sitting on the cockpit seat behind him.
He waved and Marriage lifted his cup slowly in return.
‘One of yours?’
George asked politely.
‘Private.
Did you think this was a poor country?
Hah.
Just go and count the private boats up and down the river.
Most of 'em don't get used more than a few hours in the year.
A poor country.’
The boat left a wake that rocked the long drifts of dead leaves on the water and slapped against the quay below them.
Marriage finished his drink and put the cup down very obviously.
My God, George thought, cringing, he wants me to kill off more of that fossilised brain.
And I'm going to do it, so that he might, just might, tell me something useful.
Have I been sending people out to do this?
Mind, he excused himself quickly, this is exceptional, quite exceptional.
And difficult.
Even a trained interrogator would have I problem here…
Thus excused, he poured the drinks.
‘Did Miss Tuckey have anything to do with that?
Help them recruit or…?’
‘But then she'd have their lists, wouldn't she?
And they wouldn't want that, any more than they wanted the Firm  to have them.
Once you've got a list, you can drag in the whole network.
That's what I'm worried about: if your people are…working along those lines again, and Dot's been helping out, somebody might think she'd got your lists.
An old lady living alone in the country, you do see…’
George did, and yearned to tell him the Army had thought of it, that Maxim had mentioned how they worked under codenames, then wondered if the Army should tell Moscow that, too- and realised that he was after a list, as well.
Marriage misinterpreted his hesitation and said querulously: ‘Dot really didn't tell me a thing, nothing.
I was just guessing.
I don't want you to-’
‘Of course not,’ George soothed him.
‘I appreciate your concern.’
And that at least is true, he thought, because if I were a crippled old man living on an early pension filtered through the Secret Vote — and thus controllable — I wouldn't want any whisper of indiscretion getting back to the Service.
And probably you're in hock to the Service's being friends (the Service always had banking friends) for this boatyard, too.
They'll never foreclose, because they want you to die in debt.
Controllable.
‘Getting back to Winter Garden,’ George said confidently, no longer needing to invoke Miss Tuckey, ‘you might say it's up my street.
What sort of training did they get?’
‘Radio, cyphers, handling explosives, the sort of thing we got at Wanborough in the old days.’
‘Weapons?’
‘I doubt most of them would need it; everybody did national service in those days, some would have been in the war.’
‘They didn't issue any weapons?’
Marriage looked at him oddly, wilting George's confidence.
‘Our people made it pretty clear there were enough guns still floating loose from the war and getting into the wrong hands.
We did make them promise No Guns.’
‘D'you think they stuck to it?’
‘You know, I rather think they did.
Probably not for  the right reasons.
A Resistance group should use enemy weapons, or stuff that can take enemy ammo — and the Company just didn't have enough Russian gear then, in the early Fifties.
Now they could do you a boatload right off the shelf, nothing down and nothing to pay if you shoot 'em in the right direction.’
‘Would there have been any training in destabilisation?’
George had thought carefully about risking that word.
But one thing he was sure he had learnt was that Marriage was no part of any conspiracy, had indeed no useful friends left.
That was why he was reduced to talking to George Harbinger.
‘Destabilisation?
God, no.
You can't destabilise an occupying army, you've got to blow the buggers up.
All that came later, when the Company reached the big time.’
‘Sorry.
And you think Winter Garden's all withered away now.’
‘Just think about it.
They wouldn't have been recruiting schoolboys: they'd want mature people, organisers, types with a sense of responsibility and a bit of gloom, kids and a mortgage.
You need to be pretty gloomy to think of Resistance in peacetime, don't you?
So they'd have been picking people in their thirties then, now they'd be in their sixties.
Past it, except for running safe houses.
Dead of heart attacks, crippled old men like me.
It's long past, now.
‘As much as anything, it was the Company that changed,’ he mused into his cup, beginning to slobber the whisky now.
‘They got more confident — more money, too, of course.
Not just giving radio sets to bank clerks, they were giving bank accounts to politicians.
They didn't want to wait and react, they wanted the Other Side to react to them.
That's when they began the destabilisation thing…but Winter Garden, no that's long past.’
22
George could have cabled Maxim, but that would have meant a cypher clerk at each end reading the material, and a letter by diplomatic bag would have taken at least thirty-six hours.
So he settled for a secure telephone call, indifferent to what that would do to Maxim's reputation among the Defence Staff at the embassy.
Until then they had treated him with a mixture of sympathy as a man caught up, by line of duty, in a political imbroglio, and suspicion at what he might do to make things worse.
A long secret all from a Ministry of Defence civilian locked the pendulum on the side of suspicion.
Colonel Lomax contrived to bump into him as he left the booth.
‘Harry, I don't know what that was all about, and I'm not asking, but can I beg one thing of you?
Unless you've got a clear order through the proper channels please don't do anything over here.
I don't think London realises just how touchy things were even before the shooting at the Abbey.
With the Peace Crusade and the Berlin business, we've got so many fences to mend already that we just can't afford another broken strand.
So be a good chap and just look at the sights, do a little shopping, try to get to a football game…’
‘And of course, I do feed bad about it,’ Maxim confessed to Agnes a few minutes later.
‘They must.
have a rough time of it at the moment…’
‘Let 'em sweat a bit; Washington's a key career posting for most of them, it can't all bc cherry blossom and cocktails.
So what did George have to say?’
Maxim told her.
She ended up shaking her head in slow disbelief ‘It's too facile an explanation: blame everything on the CIA.
And it still isn't their scale of operation; they'd do it big or not at all.’
‘All right, but…these people have got connections with somebody.
The training-’
‘Out of books.’
‘Not a Russian rifle, grenade and typewriter, not out of books.
It's just the sort of kit Charlie would have been supplying.
Who else could do it?’
Agnes stood up slowly, stretched her back, lit a cigarette and sat down again, frowning thoughtfully.
‘Winter Garden was before my time, but I did hear about it in my training.
And there was a move to set it up again in the late Sixties, but that got sat on.
Do you know about the UKUSA agreement?
That was when they first created Central Intelligence over here.
It's all classified, but what it amounts to is that we won't play the Great Game over here and they won't play it in the UK.
So we invoked that agreement, and Charlie said Winter Garden had set a precedent and we said No it hadn't, it had just been a Cold War expedient and those days were over.
My own mob was right at the front of the fuss: we didn't want any more secret organisations on our patch.’
‘Could they have gone ahead and set it up anyway?’
‘No.
They could never have done anything wide-scale without us knowing — and a Resistance movement has to be wide-scale to be any use.
You must have learnt something about this in recent months?’
She said it with a sly smile; he hadn't mentioned any of his own stay-behind training.
‘Would you remember who was involved from Charlie at the time?’
‘Why?’
‘George read me over a list of CIA personnel who were in London in the late Sixties —’
‘A list?
He's barmy.
It must be like a telephone book: their London station's the biggest they've got, there would have been hundreds coming through…’
Maxim silently handed over his notes.
Agnes read them through, then said more calmly: ‘Well, he does seem to have got the top people…
I met most of these…
Bodey, but he's dead, now; Kilmartin was strictly an analyst, wouldn't have been involved…
I  think Foulque resigned way back…
Magill, yes, old Mighty Mo, I remember him.
But he retired, too; they're just about all gone, the old team.
‘Mo would know something about it,’ Agnes went on thoughtfully.
‘He was OSS, then in London at the time of Winter Garden, then he came back in the mid-Sixties.
A real player, that man; could charm the pants right off a girl.’
‘Did he?’
Maxim asked innocently.
‘No…but it might be worth talking over old times with him.
He's got a law office in New York; a lot of the old team were lawyers.
He must be sixty-something now…ya, I think I 'll give him a call.
D'you feel like a shopping trip to New York?
Everybody ought to get a bite of the Big Apple.’
In a way, it was a waste of the cover story Maxim had been kiting for his trip to St Louis, but if it was a step forward…
October is the cocktail month in Washington; the British embassy can be throwing three parties a week, and with the Liaison Office's yen to keep Maxim busy, he inevitably found himself sipping deep-frozen Scotch with a wing-commander from the Office.
‘How on earth,’ he wondered aloud, ‘does anybody stay sober in this city?’
‘Iron willpower and a stainless-steel liver.’
The RAF man peered into his empty glass, trying to decide which to rely on.
‘And the last man on his feet gets the extra hundred mil in foreign aid.
No’— he nodded at the babbling drawing-room behind them —‘this is just froth.
The real business gets done at working lunches and small dinner parties.
When they start feeding you, you'll know you're somebody.
Ah, I spy a presidential aide: that makes the evening A Success.’
A small crowd had knotted at the door where the ambassador was greeting guests.
‘Clay Culliman, you've heard of him?’
‘I met him,’ Maxim slid, stupidly slipping in a bit of inter-service one-upmanship.
‘Did you, now?— Where?’
‘The President's visit to London.’
‘Of course.
Yes, you were the chap at the Abbey.’
His round pink face beamed.
‘That's something to tell my wife.
We couldn't get a babysitter, so I was expecting a cold TV dinner thrown at my head when I rolled back.
Now I can say I've been mixing with both the noble and the notorious.
You won't mind being that, for the sake of a fellow warrior in the cold drinks war?
I think I can risk one more, in that case.
Nothing for you?’
He ambled off towards the nearest tray.
Disgusted by his own conceit, Maxim drifted out to the steps down to the lawn — the night was still warm enough for the big windows to be open-flanked by two huge, discreetly floodlit magnolia trees.
A few couples and small groups were there already, muttering and sipping in the half-shadows, but Maxim stayed clear, drowning his sorrow in darkness.
I wish I could be doing something, moving, he thought, with an infantryman's loathing of being pinned down in a known position.
Beyond the silhouette of the trees, flat black against the glow of Georgetown, lay Dumbarton Oaks, site of the 1944 conference that had shaped the United Nations.
Or maybe those trees were Dumbarton Oaks, and he had a momentary vision of the free world's foreign ministers sitting like Robin Hood's gang around a flickering campfire, greasy lumps of venison in their fingers, arguing about who should be permanent members of the Security Council.
But no, Dumbarton Oaks must also be a mansion or conference centre, and the vision faded, leaving an ember of a smile as he turned to find another drink.
His way was blocked by the Ambassador and Culliman, talking politely about gardens as they came through' the french windows.
Culliman glanced at Maxim, did a double-take, and stretched out his hand.
‘It's Major…ah…’
‘Maxim,’ before the Ambassador had to admit he couldn't remember, either.
‘Sure, we ma…yeh, just before things got exciting.
Good to see you.
You'll be over for the After Action Study.
Kind of you to come.’
‘No trouble.’
‘George keeping fit?’
Culliman chuckled at the idea; the Ambassador murmured something and backed into the room.
‘I guess you'll be getting back for the Soviet visit, now.’
‘The which?’
‘You haven't caught up with tonight's news?
Yeh, I know how it is when you're travelling.
It'll be all in the Post tomorrow.
Your government's invited a Soviet delegation to talk about Berlin next week.
All the details, place of meeting, flight times, everything.’
‘Did we announce all that?’
‘Doesn't make your job any easier, huh?
No, it wasn't announced: it leaked.
It's good to know ours isn't the only State Department with too many back doors.’
There was a hard edge on Culliman's tone.
‘I doubt I'd be involved,’ Maxim said slowly, thinking fast.
‘The President's unit was a one-off thing…’
‘Well, I guess once we hear it officially, I'll be drafting a note saying we don't think it's a frightfully spiffing idea.’
He grinned and shook Maxim's hand again.
‘Hope to be seeing you, Major.’
Maxim trailed into the room behind him, vaguely looking for a fresh drink and finding Ages instead, who had been more than vaguely looking for him.
‘Mixing in White House circles, are we, Harry?
What changes in
American policy can we hope for as a result of your high-level talks?’
‘He was telling me about the Russian visit.’
‘Oh yes.’
Agnes's face became grim.
‘I just got that myself.
Good old Britain: not only doing the wrong thing but unable to keep it secret.
Great start to a party.’
Looking around, Maxim saw the Ambassador already making defensive gestures to a couple of guests.
He also caught a number of covert glances at himself: was that what a few moment's conversation with a presidential aide did for you in this town?
‘Let's get out of here,’ he said irritably.
‘An old line, but welcome nonetheless.
No, Jerry, you can't have him-’ to Colonel Lomax, who was waiting to pounce.
‘Harry's carrying my books home from school  today.
And he's taking me shopping in New York tomorrow.
Christmas is coming and he thinks I ought to know about some little joints called Tiffany's and Bloomingdale's.
Is that all right with your Office?
He can't pawn his ticket home if he's flying Riff-RAF airlines…
‘He had the look of somebody about to invite you home to cold chicken and salad with a mug of real warm English beer,’ she continued as they walked the long black-and-white-tiled corridor.
‘Don't bump into those pillars, they're fakes, they don't really support anything except an illusion of Empire…
Yes, I spoke to Mo Magill, he'll see us tomorrow morning, we'll fly up on the shuttle, I don't know what we'll get, but…and I've got a line into St Louis: there's a thing called the Western Manuscripts collection at UMSL — ghastly word, but they use it themselves, it means University of Missouri-St Louis — that latches on to the papers of operations like CCOAC, and they've got them.
Can you imitate an academic?— like not washing or changing your shirt for the next few days…?’
Her car was utterly undistinguished, a distinction that would not please its makers, but suited Agnes's instinct to choose the average and inconspicuous.
Maxim had noticed how she had adopted certain American phrases and mannerisms as well, not because she was trying to pass as an American, but just to blend into the background.
That was something an infantryman could understand.
‘The Russian visit,’ he said.
‘What do you make of this leak?’
‘Have you thought how many departments would know anyway?
Number 10, the FO, my mob, Defence probably, and the Met.
It doesn't have to be your Abbey activists.’
‘Somebody might have let slip something, they wouldn't have let loose every detail.’
‘True…
Were you thinking that broadcasting it was another piece of the pattern?’
‘Could be.
And it does show these people are well connected.
Security for the Russians had better be good.’
‘D'you think it'll be you again?’
‘I don't think I'm our favourite guard detail commander, right now.’
‘But you'd do it.’
‘I'd do what I was told.’
‘And maybe a little bit more…
I wonder if those idiots realise just how much they frighten you and me…people who support a system because, in the end, the answers have to come through the system.
Throw out the rule of law and you throw out the string that'll lead you back out of the maze.
Live or dead, the Minotaur's won.
D'you know what I'm talking about?’
‘Greek legend, among other things.’
‘And all on two glasses of Diplomatic white wine.
You must have an intoxicating presence, Harry.
And while we're on the subject of law and order, were you planning to go West under your own name?’
‘I was going to ask: if I make a retum trip in one day, no hotel, I could buy an airline ticket for cash and give any name I like-couldn't I?’
‘They might ask for some identification: in this country, the man who carries cash is guilty until proven innocent.
However, I can do you one unused Canadian passport and a Saskatchewan driving licence, not even one previous little-old-lady owner.
Canadians don't need a US visa.’
‘I see,’ Maxim said thoughtfully.
‘And how does that fit into the UKUSA agreement?’
‘Imperfectly.
But very occasionally we used to get somebody who wanted to talk to us and had good reason not to talk to the Feds or Charlie, and the simplest thing was to slip him into Canada and cite the OldCommonwealth-Pals Act.
However, our current D-G's stopped all that, so you might as well use it before the date-stamp runs out.’
23
The bar/restaurant near Union Station was dolled up to look like an English pub and doing it better than most London pubs did, to Maxim's traditionalist eye.
In his view, London pubs were trying to be either video game arcades or sets for Oscar Wilde plays.
‘They sometimes have jazz here in the evenings,’ Agnes chattered, ‘although I don't know if it's up to your standards.
Oscar Peterson was in town the other week, I read — you like him, don't you?
Pity you weren't here, I could have rushed up a ticket or two and you could have explained the finer nuances.
Does jazz have finer nuances?’
Maxim thought briefly about a pun on Ray Nance, then just smiled into his beer: in a pub he felt duty bound to drink beer, although it certainly wasn't English (‘With all those lovely vitamins floating around in it, damn it, you can see them,’ as a fellow officer newly back from the USA had put it).
‘So you met our dear D-G at the Steering Committee,’ she went on.
‘Isn't he loveable?
Just what we've always wanted, an academic international lawyer running Security.
Can't think why we've stuck so long with people who knew something about the job.’
She stabbed out her cigarette and lit another.
She had plunked her pack with the lighter on top of the bar, as if she were planning to smoke the lot before she moved on.
It was another American gesture, though far fewer Americans do it in these cancer-conscious days.
‘There is a 1952 directive that's never been superseded,’ she said deliberately.
‘The Service should, and I quote: ‘be kept absolutely free from any political bias or influence’, unquote.
A pretty thought, and what it really means is  Try brothers Try.
You can't draw a hard line between international and national politics not these days.
Political influence is what the Other Side wants as much as anything and you've got to meet it in that arena.
But we did try damn it.
We knew what lay down any other road: a political scandal that made it worthwhile for Parliament to get involved in Security.
That's what happened with Charlie's Indians.
They'll never get away from Capitol Hill now and they'll have to keep playing politics just to protect themselves.
‘So we tried — and we got a political appointment anyway.
Now we're part of government policy which happens to be hear no evil see no evil…one bloody monkey's enough if he's in the top job.
’ She snapped her cigarette in her fingers and burnt her knuckle.
‘I'm getting all biker and twisted: you'd better feed me.
I just don't have many people I can say these things to.’
‘You didn't say it around the Service?’
‘Why d'you think I'm in Washington?
It's a nice place but my job's in London.
Oh well: it could have been Gibraltar.’
The eating at least was American at a tiny corner table lit by a single candle in a jar.
Agnes chose quiche Maxim hadn't been in Washington long enough to tire of seafood so he took crab.
On a small stage at the far end, a man with a neat beard began tuning a Spanish guitar to the piano.
After a while Maxim asked: ‘Why should this chap Magill tell us anything tomorrow?’
‘I don't know that he will: but he was in High Places at the right times so it's worth trying the Good Old Times routine…’
But just why am I doing this? she wondered.
Yes I believe those people exist and they frighten me and I want them destroyed.
But I'm sticking my neck out: one squeak from the FBI that I'm breaching the UKUSA agreement and my own Service will swing the big axe…
Pity about Agnes Algar could have gone a long way in the Service but went charging off on some unauthorised stunt in America typically female in the end trying to save the career of some soldier who'd got himself…
Is that why I'm doing this?
For Harry?
She glanced cautiously at him munching his crab in the candlelight.
He had a calm lean face never to be called handsome and if he looked up he would put on his quick protective smile to say Don't ask about me I'm all right talk about somebody else…
You're not all right chum.
I know that much about you.
But in this one you're right and that makes me right too without having to decide just why I'm doing this and perhaps doing more than I'll ever get around to telling you.
‘Why did Magill leave the CIA?’
Maxim asked.
‘Was it just retirement?’
Good old Harry: let's get back to facts.
‘No he left early.
I don't know quite when some time in the Seventies.
It was a bad time for Charlie's Indians: the White House cavalry was charging through the reservation every second day.
First Nixon purged them to get the spotlight off himself then Ford had a go and Carter ran his own massacree.
At one point they dropped seven hundred men — seven hundred — think what that does for morale.
Think what it could do to security.
I think Mo left in the middle of all that.
I imagine he just saw the writing on the wall and didn't like their spelling.’
Maxim had finished his crab and was pushing bits of salad around his plate trying to identify them in the dimness and listening with half-turned head to a tenor saxophonist who had joined the guitar to swap phrases of the Beale Street Blues.
Agnes watched with amusement as his interest quickened or faded with each phrase.
When the number ended he clapped in a careful way, unconsciously trying.to say exactly what he felt about it.
The other diners who mostly hadn't been listening just clapped.
‘Not so good hey?’ she asked.
‘A bit slick.
Too many notes from the tenor but…’
‘You'd better be a Canadian who knows about jazz.
And forgive me asking an indelicate question but how are you off for money — on the whole trip?
I don't imagine the Army's too generous.’
‘I've got my own credit cards.
And George gave me a  big lump in traveller's cheques.
He said money was one problem I didn't have to have.’
‘Good for him.
But he's got it so that it hurts.
However they're all signed Maxim right?
You'll have to cash in some and then buy more signed…
We haven't got a name for you yet.
How about Winterbotham?
I've always wanted to know a Winterbotham.’
‘I'm damned if I have.’
‘Good: you'll remember it.
Think of all those dreadful jokes you suffered at school.
Alan James?
I think that'll do: Alan James Winterbotham this is your new life.
Practise a signature — and initials.’
Maxim found a radish on his plate and ate it.
His expression changed.
‘That was a strawberry.
D'you serve strawberries with crab here?’
‘Live a little or at least die quietly.’
24
The ride down Northern Boulevard from La Guardia airport to the Queensboro bridge may not be the best way to see New York for the first time although Maxim caught glimpses of its towers jolting towards them over the grey horizon.
But does anybody see New York for the first time these days?
Most people have been familiar with its skyline since they were old enough to focus on a TV screen.
They may feel New York for the first time because its fast-dealing busyness is something the screen doesn't catch and may smell it for the first time if they come in high summer but one of the great first sights of the world is gone for ever.
Magill's offices were towards the top of a modest tower on midtown Madison.
They were kept waiting for just a couple of minutes —‘While Mr Magill completes a call’ in a cool-warm windowless reception area soundproofed so that even the loudest complaint about a bill would come out as a hushed croak then ushered through into an office that was almost straight from Charles Dickens.
Agnes stood and looked around then caught Maxim's thought by saying: ‘What no rolltop desk?
Cheap Mo cheap’ and Magill came out from behind his flat-topped mahogany desk with a shout of laughter and hugged her and patted her bottom.
He was a big man everything about him was big shoulders, chest, nose eyes and ears everything except his near-flat stomach and his hair which had faded on top and grown to wise-looking grey tufts over his ears.
‘Rolltops?’ he shouted over Agnes's shoulder.
‘This is genuine Sheraton sweetie except the asshole never made a piece in his life on account he was into franchising ahead of anybody except the Pope.
How're you doing?’— this to  Maxim over Agnes's shoulder stretching out a big hand’ you must be Major Harry Maxim.
Sit down children d'you want to get married or divorced or just sue each other?
Have some coffee.’
He poured it from a Victorian coffee pot waiting on a hotplate and launched into a description of a case he'd just won punctuated by blasts of laughter and big gestures.
Maxim sipped his coffee and glanced covertly round the room at the shelves of leather-bound legal volumes a row of Spy's legal cartoons framed degrees and photographs of Magill as a young soldier and he guessed General ‘Wild Bill’ Donovan the founder of US intelligence.
‘…the guy called me the minute he got back to his office and he said: ‘Mo do you agree with me that judge was as wet as hell?’ and I said: ‘If you so say but he was sure swimming in the right pool.’
’ He rocked his swivel chair back with more laughter.
‘Okay then what can I really do for you?— or did you just want to talk about old times?’
‘Just that Mo’ Agnes said.
She was sitting in the main client's chair wearing a dark brown suit with a faint orange check and clutching a huge floppy handbag in her lap.
‘Just old times.
Something's come out of the woodwork…
D'you remember Winter Garden?’
‘Sure I do but you don't.
You weren't even born then.’
‘Just barely.
But I heard about it in training.
Would anybody still have lists of those people Mo?’
‘Jeez no.
I never had lists myself.
All that stuff you just don't have lists.
Washington wanted them we said the hell the whole thing is busted if you have lists.
We gave them codenames and radio frequencies they never got lists out of us.
All this is long gone; long long gone.’’
‘Well…’
Agnes seemed momentarily lost; Maxim did nothing except sit still and watch as Agnes had told him to.
She fumbled a cigarette from her bag and lit it.
‘Well…did you ever arm these people?’
Agnes's head was down over her cigarette; it was Maxim who caught the moment of stillness in Magill's big restless body.
‘Arms?
Never no way at all.
This was then we were  indenting for paperclips one by one in those days.
We just didn't have arms.’
He laughed abruptly an afterthought.
‘Good that clears that one up.
So it can't be the old Winter Garden crop.’
Magill smiled.
‘I still don't know what you're talking about.’
‘I suppose I'd better tell just in case you've got any thoughts.
Things have been happening in the UK.
You must have read about the Reznichenko Memorandum?
Somebody faked it: Russian typewriter letter heading Reznichenko's signature — all backed up by a first-class tail job.
Then somebody got a leading anti-NATO speaker drugged and he blew an important speech.’
Agnes was putting all her cards on the table;’— and then there was the Abbey.
Somebody took a shot not at the President they could have killed him easily but knocked off a man who could have swung thirty votes in favour of a Berlin settlement.
That was with a Russian rifle; then he blew himself up with a Russian grenade.
How does all that grab you?’
‘Your people will think all that stuff ties up together hey?’
‘It's a pattern Mo.’
Magill put his elbows on his dak clasping the dainty china cup in front of his mouth with both hands.
He wore a plain white shirt as fresh as new snow tiny gold cufflinks and a polka-dot tie.
There was no sign of his jacket but there was a second door to the room so probably he had a private bathroom and clothes closet as well.
‘I don't know anything except what I read in the papers but from what I do read your government can't see this pattern.’
‘Governments?
When did you start caring what governments can and can't see?’
Magill grinned behind his cup.
‘Getting old I guess.
But your Service wants to get it all sorted and giftwrapped for them?
Or is it just you? and the unknown soldier here.’
‘Harry?
He was heading up the President's getaway operation at the Abbey.
He shot the chap who did the shooting.’
Magill gave Maxim a steady searching look and Maxim smiled self-consciously back.
‘Over here for the After Action Study, hey?’
‘Was that in the papers?’
Agnes asked innocently.
Magill gave another shout of laughter.
‘Okay…but I'll tell you what I think, sweetie.
I don't think your new Director-General knows anything about this.
I don't even drink he's the sort of guy who'd want to know anything about this.
And I further think you're working all on your ownsome on this and that's why you've come to good old Uncle Mo instead of going to the boys at Langley.
Am I right?’
Agnes's smile was small but seemingly frank and cheerful.
‘The boys at Langley don't do much talking to us just at the moment.
And suppose I did get through all they'd say is it's nothing to do with them they weren't even in the Company at that time — and how many of them were?’
‘If you're worried about Winter Garden there's nobody left who had any status around that time sure.
But I'm telling you forget Winter Garden.
It's long gone — we didn't give them arms we didn't give them the sort of training you're talking about.
And they're old men like me now.
Forget it.’
‘There was some talk of replanting it in the late Sixties when you were back in London.
That I do remember.’
‘But maybe you also recall how your Service dumped all over us on that one?
Hell, the first time we met you were bringing in some by-hand-of-bearer letter telling us we were trying to depose the monarchy devalue the pound and make the natives play baseball instead of cricket.
I recall that.
Great days great days.’
‘I do remember.
But actually’— Agnes's voice became pure Oxford (the university not the town)—‘that was just Track One wasn't it?— cover in case we noticed anything on Track Two which was a small destabilisation group.
The right training, the right arms, everything that's coming to the surface now.
Were you running that Mo?— or who?’
In his own gaping reaction Maxim almost missed Magill's.
This time the lawyer didn't freeze he wavered.
Between denying Agnes's guesswork and denying his own responsibility, as she had intended.
And now small and neat she overrode the big man behind his own — undoubtedly genuine eighteenth-century — desk as he opened his mouth to reply.
‘Don't say anything for the moment Mo.
Just la's look to see if we can make a case all right?
Those were the days when the Company was really into the Track One, Track Two stuff cover within cover mostly to fool Capitol Hill I dare say but other governments too and all to hide destabilisation.
That was something you were right into at that time: Africa Chile South-East Asia — so why not Europe?
We were all set up for it in Britain: a Labour government anti-nuclear movement swinging along on borrowed money with Carnaby Street and the Beatles — they were going to bring World Peace all by themselves — fat dumb and happy.
But your Company could see the writing on the wall, even my Service didn't like the way things were going.
They were positively glad when the Russians went into Prague: it reminded people…
But Mo don't snow me that the Company didn't see all that and start a Track Two behind the comeback of Winter Garden’
She was speaking quietly but fast, and pausing for breath in the wrong places the way politicians do when they fear interruption.
‘Well that's the case anyway: whether it would stand up in court you're the lawyer you'd know better than I but we're not talking about courts and proof just leaks and public opinion.
Because when my government does see the pattern — you're quite right they don't want to see it right now and my D-G isn't helping them — but when these people do the next thing, and it'll have to be something big — they're up against a deadline on Berlin they've already escalated it from forged documents to drugging people to shooting them God knows what comes next well when something new happens the lone psychopath theory will be dead, dead, dead.
And then what?
Who are they going to blame next?— Moscow Centre?
I'll tell you something Mo my government isn't in the business of blaming Moscow Centre right now.
I think it would  prefer to blame somebody who's already responsible — as you'll know if you really do read the papers — for every dead dog and blocked drain right across the world.
The Company.’
There was a silence then Magill heaved a grunt of laughter out of his big chest.
‘And you think it really is the Company?’
‘What I think won't matter by then.
It'll be what my government drinks.’
‘And you want to be first in line to give it them.’
‘Let's say I don't want to be last in line not if it's what they want anyway.
I'm a career-oriented girl.
Oh and there's one thing I didn't tell you: Moscow Centre's on to the pattern.
Not surprising really since they know they didn't do these things.
Harry ran across their tracks the other day; he killed one of them but he's a bit like that.
Career-oriented you know.’
Magill looked hard at Maxim.
‘That didn't make the papers.’
‘No’ Agnes said ‘and I don't think anybody can prove it.
Did you ever meet a Miss Tuckey?’
‘Dot Tuckey?
Sure she'd been with you, SOE.
I didn't know her then only later.’
‘They got to her too.
You tell him Harry.’
Maxim told him.
Only he left out — as Agnes had instructed — any mention of CCOAC and St Louis.
Magill listened then said: ‘Jeez.
You are deep into bear country Major.
Did you tell him?’
This to Agnes.
‘I told him.
You can see how worried I got him.’
‘Yes…so where do you want to go from here?’
‘What I really want is for us to reach these people before Moscow does: there's no argument about who they'll want to pin it on.
And after that — nothing.
Silence.
Blaming it on the Company would be just a fallback — you wouldn't believe me if I said I wasn't drinking of that but you might believe me if I say we'd prefer the good old British way: that nothing happened and there's no blame at all.
The psychopath theory can cover the Abbey and for the rest’— she shrugged —‘we can make sure there's no proof Moscow's got nothing but bodies and they aren't going to dig them up to prove us wrong.
But if we're to  handle it this way it's got to be fast and we need every lead you can give us.’
Magill leant back rocking gently in his chair.
‘You've grown up sweetie.
You've got style.
I'm truly sorry we never got to work together…
Now let me tell you where I stand.
I've got no official connection with the Company any more but it's still useful.
Even if I wanted to try and screw them I'd be stupid: it would lose me clients and money both.
So I tell you what I'll do: I'll look into a couple things maybe call somebody — can you get back here after lunch?
I'll clear my desk anything I've got for you I'll tell you privately.
Excuse me Major but I don't know you or your security clearance.
This way if anybody asks I may have talked to an agent from British Security.
That much I can carry.
Okay?’
Going down in the lift which was uncrowded because it was still early for lunch Maxim said: ‘I think he just wants to put his hand on your knee — in a purely uncle-ly fashion.’
‘Why Major Maxim I didn't know you cared.
But I'm a big girl now.’
Her face was controlled and serious.
‘How d'you think we're doing?’
‘Let's walk a bit.’
They walked uptown on Madison which quickly loses its advertising-agency and legal-eagle gloss in that direction with a chill wind in their faces.
A mere two hundred miles from Washington had brought them into a different season although it was obviously the first hint of real autumn in New York: around them others were hurrying because they were too thinly dressed or tugging at coats and gloves that were unfamiliar and awkward after half a year at the back of the closet.
Maxim felt smug in his thick car-coat for the first time in America.
‘Well at least we established how it all started’ he said.
‘Were you guessing at that Track Two business?’
‘More or less.
But Charlie's Indians’— she had avoided the British jargon with Magill Maxim had noticed —‘are a big outfit and big outfits tend to behave in patterns.
It was worth trying.
Yes we got that far but we didn't get any names not ya.
Are you hungry?’
‘So-so.’
‘I don't feel like anywhere too swank.
Do you mind missing Delmonico's on your first visit to New York?’
They missed Delmonico's by only a few blocks geographically but far more gastronomically — or so Maxim assumed since he also assumed that Delmonico's didn't specialise in hamburgers and tuna sandwiches for the decorators working on the shop next door.
But he felt securely anonymous jammed in a corner against the steamed-up front window and perhaps that was what Agnes wanted.
‘The trouble is’ she muttered through her sandwich ‘that we don't really have the leverage I was trying to imply.
Mo may just not care what gets said about the Company — it's all the new team now — as long as he isn't caught saying it himself And if he gas blamed for some dirty work that got started fifteen years ago — and I doubt he was directly responsible; he was too senior then — how much does it hurt him now?
His clients must know he's ex-Company and like it.
It suggests good Washington connections as he said and a certain fluidity of ethics as he didn't say.
Clients do like winning.’
‘He must still want the whole thing stopped.’
She raised her eyebrows.
‘I wish I agreed with you.
Look at it this way: Track Two is now doing just what it was set up to do in just the situation they foresaw: a weak British government getting too close to Moscow.
If Mo liked the idea then why shouldn't he like it now?’
Maxim chewed thoughtfully on something he had decided to eat rather than take out and look at; he had chosen the hamburger.
‘Do you think the CIA could still be running it then?’
‘No the old reasoning still holds.
If Charlie had triggered it there'd have been a big back-up of propaganda and so on.
I think the British end somehow managed to start itself up — though I'm damned if I see how.’
‘What's the problem?’
‘Because that's exactly what Charlie wouldn't want them to do: start anything without a clear directive from over here.
And there's only one sure way to do that: recruit and train them individually or in pairs but never let any one of them see the whole list.’
‘So somebody must have got hold of the list.’
‘That could be our strongest point: that things are running out of control.
But it depends on how much control the Company wants to have now…’
‘Not just a list though’ Maxim went on.
‘They got hold of a cache of arms and other kit.
That sounds like a base somewhere.
They wouldn't issue those things individually I'd think.
I mean if one of them steps under a bus and you start valuing his estate for probate, Ullo, ullo, ullo, how much is a case of Russian grenades worth?’
Agnes grinned quickly.
But Maxim was most likely right.
Spreading such immediately incriminating material around was more risky than one truly safe house.
‘It's something we'd like to know all right.’
‘You could ask.’
Agnes was about to say scathingly ‘Ask how?’ but caught herself in time.
‘So now you go and tramp the streets changing your traveller's cheques into cash and then into traveller's cheques signed Winterbotham.
Spread it around the banks-have you got both passports?
Clever fellow.
Think up a story why you've got cash and want cheques but don't tell it until they drag it out of you.
Sign of guilt.
What the hell business is it of theirs?
You're innocent remember.’
25
This time there was no waiting at the reception desk; Agnes carefully avoided the girl's eye as she was shown straight through to Magill's office.
The door to the inner room was open and Mo was standing watching a newscast on a TV set in the far corner sipping from a cut-glass tumbler.
‘Hi sweetie like a drink?’
He mixed her a dry martini from a collection of decanters on a silver tray — nothing so arriviste as a drinks cupboard or private bar — set on a small table.
The other furniture was a couple of wing chairs a single-ended Victorian chaise-longue and a fruitwood dressing-table.
The room was decorated in quiet tabby-cat colours, with style- and a purpose.
She sipped her drink.
‘I did some thinking’ Mo said ‘and I figured I didn't need to call DC after all.
Maybe I should tell you about one man.
D'you want to hear?’
‘I'm all ears.’
‘Not all sweetie not all.’
They sat in the wing chairs.
‘It goes back to the old OSS days and the crusade we were running against Hitler along with your SOE and Dot Tuckey and people like that.
Like Arnie Tatham.
Did you ever meet with him?’
‘The name sounds…
Didn't he get killed by Italian terrorists?’
‘Right.
I first met with Arnie it must've been ‘44, I didn't get to know him well then but he came out of that with one hell of a name as a field man.
He was a natural you find them sometimes if you're lucky and from the damnedest backgrounds.
Most anywhere except where you'd go looking.
Like Arnie: his old man was rector of an Episcopalian church in small-town Illinois.
I think his mother died when he was young and he grew up with  more books than friends maybe more Shakespeare than Mark Twain.
I guess if there hadn't been the war Arnie would be a professor at some small college writing monographs on how many times Hamlet called Ophelia ‘a dumb broad’.’
‘Mo…’
But Magill was already grinning to himself.
‘Okay but did you ever reread Hamlet as power politics destabilisation covert operations?’
‘And assassination.’
‘Plenty-of it.
Rosencrantz and Guildenstern would be working for The Mob these days.
And did you wonder how an Elizabethan audience would take all of that?
I'd say they loved it — and they understood it.
If that was what you did to keep control that was what was needed.’
‘So Tatham became a top field man by reading Shakespeare.
And was he running Track Two?’
‘He set it up I just ran interference for him trying to keep your people looking the wrong way with talk about opening up Winter Garden again.
I guess it worked too until you figured it out.’
Agnes noted the sly flattery and smiled.
‘But if you're going to ask me did I know who he recruited no I didn't.
I never wanted to.’
Agnes absorbed that and found that she believed it: Mo had been thirty years in intelligence work which trains up a determination not to know some things quite as strong as the desire to know others.
‘And Tatham got himself killed in Italy — what? four five years ago?’
‘Right.
He retired over there: his marriage had gone and so had his daughter's’— and so had Magill's first marriage she knew: marriages in the secret world had a high casuality rate —‘and she went over to keep house for him.’
He took her glass and freshened their drinks.
‘'Then some asshole of a journalist printed a story that he was still working for the Company and a couple of weeks later the Red Brigade snatched both of them.
It was the usual stuff: demands for money and release of terrorist prisoners…
I don't know how much pressure we put on for the police to get off their butts and do something.
I wasn't with the Company any more and Arnie didn't have much in the way of friends left in DC so…
Anyhow they killed  him.
In front of his daughter; they made her take pictures of his body…
Then the cops did do something but I don't know if it was a tip-off or dumb luck: they raided some farmhouse up in Tuscany and found her still alive.
They charged some people with the murder a year later.
It was that big show trial everybody charged with everything the Bologna train station bombing Moro's murder you remember it…
I don't recall if they got a conviction for Arnie.
What did it matter?’
Agnes sipped her drink assuming that Magill was watching her face for signs of disappointment.
‘That sounds like the end of the story then.’
‘That's the end of it sure.
What I haven't told you yet is the beginning.
When the war ended the OSS was busted up: they hung on to a few units — there was a whole alphabet soup of SI, SSU, X-2, CIG, for a time — but most of us just went home to build a brave new world with law books and Shakespeare.
We figured the United Nations could handle the rest.
‘So then it started over.’
He stood up ticking off the events with his glass aginst the fingers of his left hand.
‘The Sovin takeovers in Czechoslovakia Hungary Poland.
The Berlin blockade.
First Soviet nuclear test.
Mao in China.
The Korem war.
And when we could see some of these coming we didn't have the resources the agencies to head it off.
That's when Central Intelligence really got started.’
‘A new crusade?’
Agnes said quietly.
‘I guess we saw it that way: I did for sure.
That's why I came back when they called.
But I'd say a crusade was something you came home from for Arnie it was a way of life.
He was a believer.
Not a preacher just a quiet believer.
You know one of the things he believed in?
He believed in England — well Episcopalian is your Church of England and I think his grandfather was an immigrant back around the end of the century.
‘Now when I say he believed in England I don't mean your thatched cottages and warm beer he didn't think the place was cute, not just his grandfather's birthplace.
I wonder if Arnie even bothered to go there.
No he thought of England as Magna Carta and Shakespeare and  Churchill and Milton and the rule of law — a lot of great ideas and ideals that maybe you were going to just crumple and throw away.’
He had been pacing the room with slow majestic energy ending by peering down through the venetian blind at Madison below.
‘That's what made him a natural for Crocus.’
‘Crocus?’
After a moment Magill said: ‘Yes.
We called it that so if it leaked out it would get mixed up with the old Winter Garden names.’
He sounded annoyed at himself for letting that slip and Ages wondered how much was genuine: the codename the slip the annoyance.
You had to think like that with Magill.
Tatham might have been a natural but Magill had been the achiever in the secret world.
He went on flatly: ‘So I fixed things for him — he was posted to Germany; we didn't want him in London having to ride the cocktail circuit.’
That was standard practice: where possible you ran a group in one country from a nearby one.
Most Soviet espionage in the USA was directed from Canada and Mexico.
‘But he came through London when…when he needed to.’
‘And you never saw the Crocus List?’
‘Like I say.’
‘But somebody at Langley saw it.
If the time came they'd be directing operations from there and they'd want to know just who they were directing where they were placed in British society — everything.
And somebody must have taken over when Tatham resigned.’
Magill shook his head slowly.
‘No…
I didn't tell you how he left yet.
It was just after Nixon fired Dick Helms and was dumping all over the Company to get us to take the rap for Watergate and Congress was hearing words like assassination and setting up committees and…like everybody was pissing into our bathtub and hoping to stir up a U-boat.
At one time it looked like everything we'd done in twenty years was going to be spread out on the table — and that included sating up a group to destabilise our closest ally if it got needed.
Now do you think anybody who wasn't already tied in to that wanted to get tied in at that time?’
Shaking his big head slowly he lowered himself on to the chaise-longue and sat back carefully.
‘I said I said it to Arnie we had two choices: that file on the committee table or Crocus had never happened and surely wasn't happening now.
If we tried to keep it alive we had an open flank: some guy trying to save his own ass by telling them: ‘Jeez if you drink I did bad things just look at what Magill and Tadham were doing in London.’
Arnie was ready to take that risk but I wasn't: I'd been the one at London station.
I told him either that file went up the Hill maybe with the list he'd recruited or it all went in the shredder.’
‘Not much of a choice’ Ages said.
‘No I had him by the balls.
It wasn't the only operation that went into the shredder at that time — you could figure that for yourself So Arnie went to London and closed it off wiped our prints off everything and I shut down the Langley end.
And from then on it had never happened.
Only, he never spoke to me again.
He'd been all set to save England and I'd stopped him.
He put in his resignation took out his pension contributions and walked.’
‘But with the Crocus List in his head.’
Magill turned the heavy glass in his hand studying the reflections on his drink.
‘I'd assume he couldn't forget it if he wanted to.
It would only be ten names maybe.
Arnie didn't think that big was beautiful he believed small was secure-and Crocus had to be secure; the blowback potential was massive.
Natch if the operation had gotten the go-code, that List would only have been part of it.
The big push would be diplomatic propaganda screwing the pound sterling on the money markets…mugging the Mother of Parliaments would've been quite a job.’
He smiled lopsidedly.
—‘Only now your Crocus List is trying it all on its ownsome.’
‘Not mine sweetie nor the Company's neither.
I told you: it never happened.’
‘Why did you leave the Company Mo?’
The big man sighed heavily.
‘Maybe I'd stopped believing, started wondering if things couldn't have been just a bit different.
Maybe I'm just saying I wish we hadn't done  the things that went wrong — old men think like that kit themselves along.
You can't regret everything.
So…
I hung in there another year shredding a few more files saying maybe it was time I went back to the law and when I got this offer…
I took my medal and they all cried.
And I cried for Arnie because he'd trusted me.’
He sighed again.
‘Sweetie, you are looking at an old moose who just can't figure out where he took the wrong trail and he'll never get back up that hill again.
Maybe I should just've stayed here and untangled Mrs Wertenheimer's fight with her landlord.
That I could've got right.’
Despite herself Ages smiled with real warmth at the old crocodile-Magill was never a moose — shedding genuine crocodile tears.
She believed in most of what he'd been saying; she had no idea of how much he believed himself
Magill put on a brave wry smile.
‘And how's about you?
Is there still a crusade out there someplace?’
‘Perhaps.
Perhaps I'm on one now…
I like to think so.
He reached and took her hand.
‘That's what I like about you.
You belong to the good times…there were some had to be.
Tell me we can still win more than we lose.’
‘You and me together Mo?
Strictly under the UKUSA agreement?’
He threw his head back with laughter then hauled her to her feet and hugged her to him.
‘I should've thought of invoking that long since.
Yes you and me.’
Her body had stiffened for a moment but she made herself relax and huddle against him.
This was why she was there; this and something more…
‘Why Mister Magill’ she reacted with over-prim innocence.
‘You and me’ he repeated smiling reassuringly.
‘The ones who understand crusades.
D'you want…?’
He nodded at a door that must be the bathroom.
‘Won't be a minute.’
She took her big shapeless handbag with her.
She was unsurprised to find a long silk bathrobe neither masculine nor feminine hanging on the back of the door.
When she had undressed and put it on without catching her own eye in the mirror she went back to the other room and dumped the handbag on top of the  dressing-table.
As an afterthought she routed in it to find her cigarettes and lighter leaving it sloppily open.
Afterwards she sat in one of the chairs and lit a cigarette, still in the bathrobe; Magill seemed to like his women never quite naked.
He stayed stretched on the chaise-longue.
‘Fix yourself another drink sweetie.’
‘No thanks.
It's either too early or too late.’
‘Never too late…didn't we just prove that?’
He chuckled contentedly.
‘We should have got together a long time ago, when I wasn't an old man.’
‘You aren't old Mo’ she reassured him.
‘Not with you maybe…’
There had to be something left on the sideboard for her she had earned it.
But she was going to have to ask for it.
‘Mo — where did the Crocus List get its training?’
‘Germany.
We had so many military establishments over there the Company had its own place Camp King close off Frankfurt I guess most of it would have been there.
Good practice for them getting there: fly to Paris make contact with somebody who gives them a new passport find your own way to Frankfurt.’
‘They must have done some in Britain.’
‘I guess.’
Magill stretched lazily.
‘Arnie would've fixed it.’
‘And a base to store weapons and stuff.
That's something you must have known about.
It would have had to be protected by some sort of front for the gold chain to run through.’
Magill just said: ‘Long time ago.
All shredded and wiped clean.’
‘Then how did it self-start?’
‘Just a clutch of Britons getting together in a pub nothing to do with Langley.’
‘Except for what you've told me.’
‘We've been socialising.
You came up to socialise, we socialised.’
Agnes clenched her teeth recognising a dead end.
‘And what happened to Tatham's daughter?’
‘Sure, her…last I heard, she was living in the old family house in Illinois.
Matson, Illinois.’
‘Did she go back to the name Tatham?’
‘No, I think she stayed with her married name.
Hall.
Clare Hall.’
That was too easy; Agnes was immediately suspicious.
Magill went on: ‘You could write her.
Tell you what: I'll give her a call and say you'll be writing, okay?’
‘I might even drop in and see her.’
‘Well now, about that…with the UKUSA agreement and all…
You just write her.’
‘While time goes by.’
‘Sweetie, I wouldn't want for you to get in a hassle with our government.
That wouldn't help a career-oriented girl at all.’
‘Damn it, Mo, this is happening now.
Something your God-fearing Arnie Tatham set up and is happening now.
Because somehow that List got away.
How?’
‘I shredded it myself, without looking at it.
You look great when you're mad.’
That made Agnes even madder, because she knew her friendly snub-nosed face couldn't cope with anger.
She grabbed her handbag and went through to the bathroom.
When she got back she had put on not just her clothes but the cheerful little-girl smile that suited her far better.
‘I'll be away.’
Magill was mostly dressed, too.
‘Be seeing you, sweetie.
Next time you're in town, don't forget old Mo.’
‘Never.’
She reached and pecked his cheek.
‘Off to find your soldier friend?’
‘That's right.’
‘Seems a nice boy.’
Thank you, Mo, she thought: that'll do nicely.
She had hoped to end on a note of pure hatred.
26
She was meeting Maxim at Pennsylvania Station to take the Amtrak Metroliner back to Washington.
For no special reason except that it was something new to show him and it avoided the long grind out to the airport the brief shuttle flight and another cab queue.
Airlines were brisk morning things; in the afternoon you drifted home by train.
She bought first-class tickets and still had half an hour to spare.
She found a phone booth in the shapeless concourse and called Magill's office.
‘Sweetie what can I do for you that I didn't already?
If there's anything I forgot put it down to old age and I'll try and remember next time.’
If there was any post-coital tristesse about Mighty Mo Magill his lifetime in covert operations hit it well.
‘Couple of small things.
How secure is this line?’
A momentary pause then: ‘Holt on’ and humming silence.
He could have been warning his receptionist off the line or switching off — or on — a recording device.
She didn't care either way.
‘All secure.
Shoot.’
‘I've been thinking Mo.
I'd still like the name of the front for the Crocus List.’
‘Long gone I told you.’
‘I'd still like it.
If you can't remember it look it up and give me a call in Washington this evening.
You've got my number?’
‘You sound kind of imperative, sweetie.
Could there be any reason for this?’
The old crocodile was smelling hook not bait.
‘We were peeped Mo.’
‘No.
No way at all.’
‘Mo I'll tell you something now.
Your Company — my Service too — got itself into video and pin lenses and  ultra-viola light all wires and electricity.
I never could understand electricity: it bites you.
So I just staggered along with good old photography.
I found this sweet little man who fixed up a non-reflex 35 for me slowed down the motor wind so it wouldn't make a sound fixed in a timer to take a shot every thirty seconds.
Oh yes and a filter to make it like the cap of my handcream tube looking out of my handbag and on the dressing-table.
It's a lovely dressing-table that Mo.
I want you to know how much I appreciate your dressing-table.’
She turned to smile benevolently at the scurrying passengers behind her.
There was a rare pleasure in blackmailing somebody privately from so public a place.
‘You're in those pictures too.’
‘That's right Mo.
They wouldn't do me any good with my Service I grant-you that.’
‘Attempt to blackmail an ex-Company man.’
‘You're so right.
The whole thing could catch fire all over the front pages Crocus List and all.
But I'm on a crusade —’ As professionals they were cutting a lot of corners.
He hadn't suggested the film might not come out although she couldn't have had time to develop it yet and she wasn't working through a ‘friend’ sent round to sympathise with him deplore the whole thing and assure him it could be stopped if he'd only tell that terrible woman one little thing…’— And since I'm not married or anything I thought I'd stick to the personal angle.
I assume even your second wife would be used to this sort of thing by now but I looked you up: you've got a boy ant a girl both around college age and —’
‘You lousy little whore!’
Then she knew she'd won.
When he'd calmed down she said: ‘If whores don't get no respect they should at least get paid the rate for the job.’
‘Jesus.
Okay then call me in — make it fifteen minutes.’
But it was a long and lonely quarter of an hour.
Was there any way he could have traced her call or picked up background noise and was now rushing downtown in a wild attempt to snatch the film from her?
She stayed at the back of a shop until it was time to come out cautiously and find an unoccupied phone again.
Magill was still at his desk.
‘A limited liability company called Anglam Gateway.’
‘Registered office?’
‘Taplin Green and Keeley solicitors at Lincoln's Inn.’
‘Did they provide the directors?’
‘A Mr Wainwright and a Mr Nightingale.’
‘Great.
Thank you Mo.
And the other thing — now I think about it don't call Clare Hall in Matson.
In fact don't call anybody don't do anything.
Just work on Mrs Wertenheimer's problems with her landlord.’
‘Am I-going to get that film undeveloped?’
‘Mo you're too respectable to look at such things.
As long as nothing happens nothing will happen — okay?
The good old British way.
Be seeing you.
Or not.’
It was too late to ring Defence — early evening in London by now— but Maxim had given her the number of one of George's military clubs and she left the name of Anglam Gateway and its solicitors with the secretary there.
There was a certain reassurance in hearing the calm voice three thousand miles away scrawl the message down and ask politely: ‘May I say who —?
Miss Algar.
A-L-G-A-R.
Thank you Madam I'll make sure he is informed…’
Then she rang Information asking for the number of Clare Hall in Matson Illinois just to establish that it was real.
After that she practised her cheery-little-girl act to allay any of Maxim's suspicions which of course he wouldn't have anyway.
When he arrived he was doing much the same thing since he wasn't as naïve about the values of the secret world as she assumed: assuring himself there was nothing to suspect and being careful not to find any signs of it.
Anyway there was soon the train to look at.
He liked trains.
An airliner is an airliner anywhere in the world but a train is part of the landscape.
Sadly the Metroliner had lost confidence in being a train and wanted to be an airliner instead: the coaches were rounded like a fuselage there were airliner seats with fold-town tables from the seatback in front even a company magazine at each place.
Maxim found himself reaching for the non-existent seatbelt.
First class meant Amclub: everything on Amtrak was  Am: Amcoach Amcafé an effect slightly undermined if you recalled Batman ant his Batmobile Batcopter and even Batrope.
Maxim wondered if they would serve Amsandwiches.
The air-conditioning roared softly and they got their first drinks as they came out of the tunnel and on to the New Jersey marshes where gulls circled the refuse dumps among a forest of concrete stilts carrying the highways south.
Any big city has a dirty hem to its outskirts.
Agnes told him what she had learnt.
Condensed it sounded very little for an afternoon's talking but simultaneously it was a surprising amount from a man who had started the day denying everything.
Both ways sounded bad to Agnes herself.
‘D'you think this is the real info?’
Maxim asked.
‘I don't think he's trying to kid us’ Agnes said rather more grimly than she had intended.
‘I think he feels guilty about his old buddy Tatham and doesn't want to interrupt his posthumous triumph the Crocus List.
At the same time he knows a lot of this is going to get known by the people who matter and he doesn't want to be the man who hindered the investigation.
He wants us to get there but too late.
A lawyer's solution.’
‘Crocus List.
’ Maxim tasted the phrase.
It was good to put a name — totally meaningless though it was — to two faces he had seen so briefly.
‘Ten you said.’
‘Less by now I should think.
After fifteen years some may have emigrated died…would all of them spring to the colours when called?’
Maxim brooded for a time.
‘We should have the CCOAC list tomorrow.’
‘Yes…but don't expect too much from that.
Tatham wouldn't have recruited the whole Crocus List from that.
One or two, maybe, and I'm damned if I see how we'll identify them in a hurry but…’
‘I'll cable it straight to George and see what he can make of it.
If we can just identify Person Y…
I'd rather like to get home and talk to him myself.’
‘Harry, sticking a bucket over some citizen's head and beating it with a broomstick is not going to advance your career.’
‘Seeing imaginary policemen at moments of stress isn't doing it much good either.’
Agnes pondered for a while.
‘Matson can't be too far from St Louis.
Illinois is just across the river and turn left…’
‘I could stay overnight and drop in on her.’
They had planned his St Louis trip as a one-day event.
‘I wish I could go myself but if she complains and London hears about it they'll put a stop on me doing anything.
She may not say a word but — it's another base to be touched.’
‘All right.’
‘If you're away for a night…
I'd better start building you an alibi around Washington.
Would you mind if it leaked out that we were having an affair?’
After a moment Maim said: ‘No not at all.’
‘Just a teensy bit quicker next time Harry.
A certain enthusiasm lends conviction in these matters.’
But her own light-heartedness made her feel tawdry.
She badly needed another drink but Maxim hadn't finished his first yet.
She lit a cigarette instead.
‘I could check us into a motel out of town you give the number to the Liaison Office I'll give it to my office and hope their nasty little mints think that's all that's going on.’
They were both quiet for a long time both thinking much the same thing: was such a pretence a way of beginning or would it destroy the might have-been?
And both concluded with an inner shrug that it was the right thing for the job in hand; anything else could wait.
The train ambled out of the flat New Jersey landscape where the towns had a shapless unrooted look like a child's motel village that must be cleared away by suppertime.
Beyond Philadelphia, the farmland became vaguely English in the fading light with neat fields and little clumps of trees at the corners.
A claret jacketed waiter served them a warmed-up airline meal with little bottles of wine.
‘One thing you won't have out there’ Agnes said ‘is a credit card for Winterbotham.
That makes you a very third-rate citizen indeed but that's how they think of Canadians anyway.
The snag is it means you can't rent a  car: they insist on a credit card for that nowadays so you're going to see America by bus.’
A man in a dark suit across the aisle had been working on business papers since New York.
At Philadelphia he had been joined by two others in what was obviously a preplanned meeting since the moment dinner was cleared away and a new round of gin and diet tonics ordered they began a miniature board meeting.
Apart from learning something about front-end loaded deals and arbitrageurs Maxim found it restored his faith in American trains.
They might try to look like aeroplanes but at least there were still smart waiters serving drinks to tycoons as they shuffled papers where the noughts ran off the edge of the page building a case to be argued to some Washington agency the next day.
He murmured some of this to Agnes.
‘Poor security’ she said unromantically.
‘The government could save itself billions by hiring a few wide-eared gents to ride these trains and find out what new rip-offs are being planned.
Probably a violation of umpteen civil rights but…
‘Actually’ she went on quietly ‘there's a point in there.
People let their guard slip when they're travelling; they'll tell you things they wouldn't say to a neighbour they've known for years.
Probably something to do with it being a finite relationship but…
Sorry, you probably learnt all that on the Ashford course.’
‘It was a long time ago.’
‘Just what did they teach you there?’
‘Oh techniques of surveillance, when you're sitting alone in a car you move into the passenger seat, make it look as if you're waiting for the driver to come back…the trouble is, I never got a posting where I had to use it.’
‘If you're going on to Matson, you might find a bit of it useful.
One person alone can't do much but perhaps…
Would you like an hour or so's refresher course when we get back to town?’
‘Fine.’
‘All right.
I'd better go to the embassy to check if anything's actually happened today.
There's a bar on the north side of M Street, just before…’
27
Maxim made sure he got there well ahead of Agnes.
(‘Give yourself time to reconnoitre the Subject's area and known haunts.’)
It was a sprawling split-level place where you could take on board anything from a glass of beer to a four-course dinner plus the right wines at each course and with about as much choice about where to sit: at tables in the middle at booths and alcoves at the sides on the bar stools on other stools up against long shelves.
It had a friendly dark-panelled atmosphere with brisk service and most of the diners and winers were around Maxim's age.
Well so was Agnes — it was probably her local being only a few blocks from her Georgetown address.
Maxim took one quick drink at the bar went on back to the toilets (‘Establish whether there are any other exits’) and then chose a stool against the wall with a beer and the Washington Post.
(‘Generally choose a position towards the back of a bar or pub.
Make sure you have something to read; a single person doing nothing but drink and smoke looks suspicious.’)
He spotted the Subject the moment she came in.
She had changed her clothes — as he had himself in a sprint through his hotel — to a pale coffee-cream skirt and russet blouse under a hip-length waterproof jacket.
(‘Study the Subject's clothing to anticipate how it could be changed quickly: a reversible coat a hat that could be stuffed into a handbag or pocket.’)
The jacket could be reversible a different pattern on the inside but there was no hat and the bag she carried was tiny by Agnes's standards.
If she saw him he didn't see that she saw him.
And from the way the staff greeted her she was obviously a regular there; she had to chat to several before taking a  glass of wine to a booth towards the front out of Maxim's sight.
So probably she had spotted him.
But he was still covering the door and-to move his seat apparently just for the sake of moving would seem suspicious — and it occurred to him that Washington DC would be full of people who knew the surveillance trade that tonight a lot of people would be running genuine surveillances.
Perhaps in here.
The lively Georgetown faces suddenly looked like masks.
There was one lone man at the back of the bar fortyfivish reading a newspaper — but a real surveillance should be done by at least three people the A-B-C method although not all would come into a bar perhaps only one…
He shook himself out of a spiral of suspicion and isolation.
(‘lt is normal to feel self-conscious and conspicuous on your first few times in the field; do not let this distract you from the Subject.’)
And the Subject was moving.
He took his glass back to the bar glancing at his wristwatch as a reason for not buying another said good-night and ambled towards the street.
At the door Agnes suddenly turned round and came back.
Maxim was sure his amble had become a rigid march, but he kept going.
(‘If forced to come face to face with the Subject avoid catching the Subject's eye.’)
He went on out.
When Agnes had retrieved the paperback book she had ‘forgotten’ in her booth and reached the street Maxim was standing a few yards away studying the map in a pocket guide of Washington.
She waited for a gap in the traffic and scurried across the road.
Maxim began strolling on the original side perhaps fifteen metres back.
He was surprised at how light and lively M Street still was in the middle of the evening.
Not just bars and restaurants — and there were plenty of those — but most of the shops were still open: you could still buy a winter outfit birthday card book or a pressure cooker and lots of people were doing so.
The crowd gave him cover but gave it to Agnes too.
She was varying her pace moving briskly then strolling (‘Find an average pace between the Subject's two  extremes’) and carrying her light-coloured jacket over her arm.
The slope down to Rock Creek began to steepen and the shops thinned out as they moved away from the centre.
Agnes dived into one of the last a pharmacist's with tall free-standing shelves.
Maxim kept going.
(‘Follow the Subject into a big department store but never into a small shop.’)
In daylight he could have used a shop window as a mirror to watch the pharmacist's across the road but lit windows were no use and who stands staring into dark ones?
When he reached an angle where he could watch the shop-front without being seen from inside it he stopped and consulted his guide book again.
Time passed in very low gear.
Georgetown conversation swirled around him:
‘I'm telling you that was a great party really great…’
‘I'm talking about the 700 series…’
‘I'll take you to some place quieter…’
Maxim noted that he should start any remark in Georgetown with the pronoun ‘I’.
Meanwhile people went in and out of the pharmacy but only two women of conceivably Agnes's age: one very tall and striding in a long ethnic-of-somewhere skirt the other short and waddling, flat-heeled long blonde hair dark jacket and beret and a huge shoulder bag.
Compelled to move at last he crossed over and glanced casually into the pharmacist's as he passed.
No Subject in view.
He studied a restaurant menu a few doors along feeling confused and angry at his confusion.
(‘If the Subject appears to have been lost by accident continue in the direction the Subject was proceeding.’)
But this Subject hadn't lost him by accident: she had brushed him off within minutes in less than a quarter-mile of straight well-lit street.
He was going to be a star turn out West by himself
Then he knew where she was — or would be, moments after he committed himself in one direction: behind him.
By trade she was a hunter.
His one hope was to head for the small area of streets and alleys he had explored around the bar-restaurant before going inside (‘…reconnoitre the Subject's  area…’).
His own trade included the quick memorising of landscape and cityscape and at one corner there was an L-shaped alley that cut off the building on the corner itself giving an alternative route to making a left turn on the streets.
He lengthened rather than quickened his pace — difficult to detect from behind — stepped into the alley and sprinted as hard as he could.
It was hardly wider than a car and somebody had parked a van halfway along.
He brushed past it and ran stooping round the corner of the L where the only light was fixed high up on a wall.
He kept running up to the cross-street turned right back towards M slowing but glancing at his watch to excuse a half-jog
Right again on M completing the four sides of a small square and right into the first leg of the alley again.
It would be too much to hope to sneak up on Agnes peering around the comer under the alley light but — but a man was doing just that.
Ducking to put the van between them Maxim ran crouching his soft-soled shoes making the barest patter on the rough but thank God dry paving.
As he slipped past the van the man disappeared round the corner.
Maxim caught him three strides up the second alley.
The man heard or sensed him at the last moment and turned with his hands coming up to a fighting stance but Maxim feinted through them and hit him low in the stomach.
The man collapsed against the wall and slid down it making gurgling noises.
Up ahead cars and people moved undisturbed on the bright street at the top of the alley; Maxim had time to search the man's pockets — and then suddenly he hadn't.
A clatter of steps and another man swung under the alley light pistol in hand and coming to the aim.
Maxim ducked behind the first man who was hauling back his breath in short gasps.
For a moment there was deadlock then Maxim remembered his dark sunglasses case and took it out aiming like a gun.
The second man ducked back around the corner and Maxim backed off crouching and aiming until he was within a few metres of the cross-street.
He was twenty fast metres along it when a cockney voice said: ‘'Ullo sailor watcherdoin' ternight?’
It was the waddling blonde in the bera from the pharmacist's and under that Agnes.
He grabbed her arm and started towards the lights of the comer.
‘Did you know there were two blokes behind us?’
‘No I…’
She shut up and matched his pace.
Nobody came out of the alley.
They crossed M Street and kept going and in a doorway she snatched off the wig and beret and rammed them into the shoulder bag that had been expanded from the purse she had been carrying before.
‘Damn and I was being so clever fooling you I never looked behind.
What happened?’
‘I thumped one of them then another turned up with a gun.
I left.’
‘Did you kill him?’
‘Of course not.’
‘Sorry I never know with you.’
‘At least we know they've caught up with me.’
‘The Bravoes?
It could be doesn't have to be.
Your chums in the Treasury the Secret Service they could be behind you.
They were interested in whether you were going to start investigating anything over here…let's cross.’
She hustled him to the far side of the street.
‘With a gun?’
‘For God's sake the Secret Service carries guns like credit cards every enforcement agency does.’
‘Where are we going?’
They were getting away from the busyness and bright lights.
‘Just my car.’
They drove slowly around the streets of old houses now cramped by lines of parked cars.
‘But it could be Them’ Agnes conceded.
‘If they're after you all it needs is a telephone call to your parents: ‘A question about your son's camera insurance.
could you put me in touch?’ 'Sorry he'll be back from America in a few days' bingo.
Washington's the place to start and the embassy only uses two hotels here.
See how easy my job can be?’
‘Frankly, no.’
‘Okay.
I pulled a dirty trick on you in the pharmacy.
I  took too many risks putting on the wig and beret and changing my shoes.
You did fine up until then.
I screwed it up by not noticing somebody behind me.
They probably thought you'd added me as a convoy.’
(‘When it appears that the Suspect has somebody following them to detect any followers ignore the Suspect and follow the follower instead.’)
‘But’ Agnes decided ‘even if it was the Secret Service we don't want them knowing you're off to St Louis and points West any more then we want the Bravoes…
Can you travel with what you've got?’
‘Ye-es.
’ Maxim trusted neither his passport — now two passports — nor any money to the hotel room or safe.
‘I'd need to buy a toothbrush and a shirt —’
‘So buy ‘em.
I'd pack a bag at my place and we can make that motel alibi real.’
28
Agnes made no pretence of escaping any following car by ‘accident’.
Being a skilled driver particularly in towns, was part of her job, but the only skill she displayed that evening was in not actually hitting anything.
After making unsignalled turns and abrupt lane changes through Chevy Chase, and Bethesda, she blasted to a highly illegal speed south on the Beltway, ducked off it rejoined a few miles along and finally came down to a leisurely cruise through the Virginia countryside.
Maxim knew her driving well enough to be relaxed about it and spent his time folding and refolding a road map.
Finally Agnes said: ‘Do stop it Harry.
I know where we are.
Just trust me.’
‘It isn't that.
I just hate not being able to put my finger on a map and say ‘I'm there.’’
‘Oh Lord.
I suppose that's the soldier in you.’
‘Be thankful I'm not a Gunner: I'd've brought my theodolite along and surveyed us down to the inch every five minutes.’
‘A small mercy I suppose.
Where we are however is southwest of Alexandria.
From here it's a pretty direct route back to National Airport tomorrow.
Happy now?’
‘Yes.’
But she noticed he didn't put the map away until he'd located himself precisely.
They registered as Mr and Mrs Alan J. Winterbotham although the motel clerk was more interested in the car's licence plate.
‘That's America for you’ Agnes said shaking out her hastily packed clothes.
‘If you aren't on wheels you must be on the skids.
Some states even issue a non-driver's licence: it actually says This Is Not A Driver's Licence  because you need something for identification.
I thought you handled that well Mr Winterbotham.
Anybody would think you'd spent your life checking unmarried ladies into motels.’
Maxim looked back expressionless knowing she was babbling from nervousness knowing his own stolid attitude was nervousness too.
The motel was made up of separate cabins wide-spaced and private among trees — but more to the point the cabin had its own phone extension and twin beds.
‘I'm going to have a bath’ Agnes announced.
‘You'd better ring your hotel and leave this number there.
If Jerry Lomax or anybody tries to get hold of you…
I'll ring my office in the morning.
—’
She spent a long time in the bathroom.
When she came back in her long nightdress Maxim was in the bed by the window bare-shouldered and riffling through a handful of motel pamphlets.
She hopped into her own bed.
‘Are you reading?’
‘This stuff?’
She snapped off the light between the beds and lay listening to the night.
It was quiet except for the murmur of the highway a mile off.
After a time she said: ‘You did all right back there…followed the rules.’
‘I didn't follow you very far.’
‘I told you: I took a risk.
Sorry.
I just wanted to make the point that the rules aren't everything…it's an attitude.
If you're going to be Winterbotham out there think about him.
Not just job address past history — get into the habit of thinking Why am I here?
Where have I come from?
Where am I going next?
Have a reasonable answer ready at every point but don't be too quick to explain yourself Sorry I'm lecturing.’
She fumbled-for her cigarettes and lit one.
In the brief flare of the lighter she saw he was lying back hands clasped under his head staring at the ceiling.
‘Go ahead.’
‘I may as well…
Forget anything you've heard or read about ‘living the part’.
It can't be done, and if it could it wouldn't be any use; If you play innocent and unnoticing too well, you wont attract suspicion, but you won't  notice anything other.
Act the part and know you're acting it — and that they don't know.
‘That's really the key.
You've got to love that idea really love it: they don't know.
Relish it wallow in it.
Let it give an extra colour spice dimension to everything you do.
At the bad moments don't look back and think, Well at least I'm a major in the British Army.
And don't look forward to a time when you can tell somebody all about it.
You've got to live in the moment and the way to do that is to think they don't know and really enjoy it.
The only way.
Believe me.’
Halfway through her voice had become an echo disorientating Maxim until his memory came to rest in a stone-walled lecture room with the Scottish wind rattling the windows.
‘Did somebody tell you that once?’
‘A Miss Dorothy Tuckey on my first training course.
A long time ago.’
‘I didn't know you'd ma her.’
‘She taught me how to react and not to react.
The least I could do when you told me…
An unknown gave, I suppose.
She might have thought that was appropriate.’
After a time Maxim asked: ‘Did you ever live that sort of life?— for any length of time?’
Agnes took her own time deciding to answer.
The glow of her cigarette briefly outlined her snub-nosed profile against the dark wall.
‘Yes…right at the beginning before my face got known.
I got myself a job as typist and general dogsbody on a small magazine we thought was being financed from Moscow.
We didn't care about the magazine we just wanted to trace back the gold chain see who handled it.
After a time they used me as a courier: everybody else on the staff thought they were being watched.
They were quite right too by then.’
‘How long did it last?’
‘Eighteen months about.
Living and working with those people eating and drinking with them and the only taste I learnt to like was they don't know.’
The taste, relearnt that afternoon in New York was still in her mouth.
‘What happened in the end?’
‘Nothing special.
It just got too obvious that nobody bought the magazine so Moscow hauled in the chain.
Or  perhaps I made a mistake: you can see which I'd rather believe.
The magazine folded and we all got drunk on Bulgarian wine and I made a speech about going out to penetrate the government and cut the arteries of the police state right at its heart — you need Bulgarian wine to say things like that it makes me faint to think of it now.
And the next day — well nearly — the Service put me on the list as an Administration Trainee.
‘I suppose we got a few more names on a few more files learnt a bit about Moscow's accountancy procedures.
And I learnt a lot — mostly about myself…about giving everything but keeping something back because you'll have to start giving again tomorrow.
Is there some secret You inside that rather activist exterior?’
‘I don't know…
I don't think there was; you live a very open life in the Army the secrets aren't personal ones…
I suppose I used to think the worst that could happen was that I got killed.
Just Lights Out and somebody else's problem from then on.
Now…it's getting a lot more complicated.
The Army can teach you to handle anything — except loneliness.’
She breathed the last gasp of smoke towards the ceiling and stubbed out her cigarette.
‘Do you want to come into my bed Harry?’
‘Yes.’
‘Promise me one thing: don't say you love me.’
From then on everything went dreadfully and completely wrong.
Perhaps it was too small a bed because it had to hold the ghosts of Mo Magill and Jenny Maxim's dead wife as well.
And perhaps they were hoping for an innocence that was long past both of them…
It went wrong.
Sitting weeping in the bathroom Agnes demanded of herself how she could have been so responsive to every whim of Magill's mood and so dull but demanding and clumsy with Maxim…
When she went back he was asleep or pretending to be in his own bed.
In the dawn grey with sea mist she drove him to the airport.
29
Meanwhile back at the Ministry of Defence George was not back at the Ministry.
Something sudden had come up concerning the family fortunes and he had to consult his solicitors: it was the one excuse that his seniors being closer to retirement and thus deeply concerned with land values and capital transfer taxes accepted with sympathy.
George actually did spend the morning with solicitors although not his own.
Taplin Green and Keeley — or their ghosts since none of those names now survived in the list of partners — had offices on the south side of New Square a corridor with an uneven floor under the carpeting and doorways that had subsided to odd angles.
Mr Nightingale's room was the third along to the right.
‘I rather think’ Mr Nightingale said ‘that I was at school with your uncle C. A. Harbinger.
Would that be right?’
‘Really?
Uncle Charles?
Yes indeed.’
George had chosen to ask for Mr Nightingale because he had already established that connection.
‘First-class cricketer.
I'm sorry he missed his Blue but Oxford was very strong in those years…
How's he keeping?’
When last heard of Uncle Charles had been keeping a Malaysian girl less than half his.age in a Vancouver penthouse but George managed to recall some less interesting small-talk and like winged seeds the conversation spiralled delicately down to business.
‘We don't actually act for you do we?’
Mr Nightingale asked politely.
‘I'm sorry to say you don't one feels bound by tradition…
This is quite unofficial but’— hoping that would be interpreted as ‘almost official’—‘it does conern my work at the Ministry security and intelligence on the pol  side…’
Mr Nightingale had been a wartime soldier in a fairly respectable regiment (George's opinion as an excavalryman) and while he had filled out to a pink-and-white chubbiness he still wore a small military moustache that had stayed loyally ginger as a reminder of the Desert campaign.
George continued with deliberate diffidence: ‘It's all rather confidential I know of course you'll respect that; the problem is rather whether you feel you can disclose anything from your side without an official request from Security and I'm sure you'll understand why we'd rather avoid that at this stage…’
‘If it concerns one of my clients you must appreciate my position is quite clear.’
‘I really don't know whether it does or not…
May I simply go ahead and ask?’
‘By all means.’
‘I believe you were once a director of a small company called Anglam Gateway Ltd?’
‘Oh yes that…we wound that up ten years ago at least.’
‘Can you tell me anything about it?’
Mr Nightingale considered.
‘There was nothing confidential about it: it was a bright idea some Americans had for setting up training courses — that sort of thing — for their businessmen and other people coming over to Britain for the first time.
You spent a week in the countryside being lectured on British business practices, company law how to address a Duke…all sorts of things like that.
It did quite well for a time.’
‘What happened eventually?’
‘I think the American end decided to, ah, quit while they were ahead.
There was a trend for the multi-national corporations to set up their own courses on a European rather than purely British basis…
We were totally dependent on the American end to send us the, ah, trainees.
It was essential to recruit them over there before they arrived; if they found it was getting too expensive to advertise and recruit well that was that.’
‘And you were a nominee shareholder and director.’
‘Ye-es I think you could certainly assume that.
The  problems of American citizens being directors of British companies…’
So Anglam had been effectively entirely in American hands: they sent the trainees probably nominated the lecturers and when the time came could quietly pull out pleading changes in the American scene which the British directors couldn't challenge.
George veered away from the obvious next question which he was sure Mr Nightingale wouldn't answer.
‘Did the company itself own any property?’
‘Oh yes.
It rented an office in Knightsbridge for a while and actually bought a house in Tunbridge Wells.
We sold that when we picked up another house down near Eastbourne.
A more secluded place very pleasant.
I actually gave a few lectures there myself on company law.
Always had a most pleasant time.’
‘And that was sold when the company was wound up?’
‘Certainly.’
‘Do you happen to know who bought the properties?
Tumbridge Wells and Eastbourne?’
A slight frown crinkled just above Mr Nightingale's gold-rimmed spectacles.
The Uncle Charles connection was wearing thin.
‘I imagine we still have the conveyancing documents down among the cobwebs somewhere…’
George said: ‘Well I dare say I could find out from the Land Registry.’
Mr Nightingale beamed with gentle superiority.
‘I'm afraid you couldn't you know.
You need the permission of the owner to go in for a title search so you'd have to know the owner first.
You mentioned security: I can assure you that one of the most secure things in British life is who owns what property.
It's been said although I wouldn't say it for myself that the lack of pressure for change stems from the Royal Family's landholdings.
A remarkable amount of it is alleged to be had through nominees.
If the true tide to land were fully disclosed it might prove that Her Majesty really was the richest lady in the world which would be I'm sure you agree’— he smiled at George over his spectacles —‘rather vulgar.’
George smouldered quietly.
‘Of course,’ Mr Nightingale added, ‘you could always go and park a caravan on the grounds.
The true owner or owners would have to reveal themselves by going to court to have it removed.
A lengthy process, and perhaps you don't have a canvan…’
Mr Nightingale was enjoying himself
‘The Americans themselves’— George opted to risk it-’ for whom you were acting…can you…?’
‘I'm afraid not.
Not without a very good reason.
You said something about a security aspect…’
‘Yes.
It's quite possible that Anglam was a front organisation.’
George decided to plunge; he had already given away too much if Mr Nightingale himself was one of the List, but George didn't think he was, simply because he had been too easy to find.
‘A front?
For what?’
Mr Nightingale was no longer amused.
’ We came on the name through a retired CIA man in America; let me put it that way.’
‘There is a very serious allegation inherent in that.’
‘Yes,’ George said carefully.
‘Hence my quite unofficial approach.
Let me say that I would imagine the courses were genuine for most of the time, but on occasional weekends, perhaps, they taught something rather different.’
There was a long silence, apart from the creaking of Mr Nightingale's chair as he swung a few degrees either way, frowning down at his desk top.
At last he said: ‘You have no proof of this?’
‘And we're unlikely to get any.
If it was a front, it was designed precisely to block any such proof, with nominees and cut-outs unto the seventh generation.
But I'm not really concerned with your Americans of ten years ago.
They're water under the bridge, and if it was murky water…’
He shrugged.
‘I'm only interested if any aspect of Anglam still lives on.’
‘It was totally wound up.’
‘Yes…but the properties still, presumably, stand.
It's just conceivable that one or other of those houses was passed on to another organisation…
A long shot, but the only lead I seem to have.’
‘Are you implying that something is still, ah, going on?’
‘Something is certainly going on.
Where it's going on…’
Mr Nightingale considered.
‘The reputation of my firm, no matter how innocent our connection…
Tell me, Mr Harbinger, how do you envisage this, ah, matter being concluded?’
‘Very quietly,’ George said firmly.
‘The very last thing my Department wants is any overt scandal with a CIA connection.’
‘Quite.
Indeed, quite.
Let me see, now…
I could dig up those documents…
I seem to recall we dealt through local estate agents, and knowing the properties personally, I might well have recommended them to you, as a prospective buyer…
Dear me,’ he smiled wanly; ‘I seem to be becoming quite conspiratorial.’
30
When it was late enough for the embassy to be fully staffed, Agnes called to say she probably wouldn't be in, but could perhaps be contacted at the motel number.
Now, if the Liaison Office had got the same number from Maxim, then the embassy gossip vine had to be more security-minded than she believed possible for it not to come to one conclusion.
And how close and how far wrong they will be, she thought numbly.
The morning crawled past.
St Louis would be a nearly two-hour flight, and then getting to the university and making polite conversation…
She drove out for an early lunch at a small diner down the road and was back at the cabin by half past twelve.
That was when time really started to drag.
She wished she had brought a bottle of gin with her, even a bottle of wine, but now the only place she could find one was a state liquor store, and while the clerk would know of one, sitting with a bottle waiting for the phone to ring wasn't her own image of herself.
Anyway, she'd been drinking too much, of late.
She was also running out of cigarettes.
But she'd been smoking too much, as well.
Pull yourself together, girl.
She lit another one.
I'm not the type to get lonely, she thought.
It's a relief to get away by myself for once.
She switched on the electric kettle and made a cup of instant coffee flavoured with powdered milk and artificial sweetener.
At least the water must be real, she hoped.
She spilt it when the phone rang.
‘Alan J. Winterbotham.’
‘Hi, there.
How was the flight?’
She didn't care if the relief showed.
‘Routine.
Sorry I've been a time.
I've just sent a cable to the club: list of delegates expected for the next week's visit — does that sound okay?
The convention was quite a thing, it seems.’
‘Any mention of Tatham?’
‘No.’
He sounded surprised.
‘D'you think he was there?’
‘I would have been, doing his job.
It would need the personal touch.’
Tatham the believer, recruiter of believers.
Yes, he would have been there — but not as Arnold Tatham.
‘Give me the British names.’
He read them over, but Agnes thought she had heard of only two, and one of those now dead.
‘If we just get your one,’ she reassured him, ‘we're that much further forward.
It's up to George now.
Are you off to the wilds of Illinois?’
‘Wilds is right.
It's only two and a half thousand population and one bus a day in each direction.
I can't get there tonight: I'll probably spend the night in Springfield and be in something like ten tomorrow.
It'll give me time to buy a clean shirt here, anyway.’
‘Okay, and take care-Alan.’
She was going to have to spend a second night at the motel, if only to continue their cover of an ‘affair’.
My God, if only they knew…but nobody will ever know.
How could I have got it so wrong when it mattered so much?
Magill wasn't the first time I've given my Little All for my job, but that can't mean I can only get it right when…
With Graham, and David, it had mattered — for a while — and that was fine…
She let herself drift off to memories of fiercely joyful nights that now…that now…
They'd been snakes.
Whatever you said about Harry Maxim, he was no snake.
So why couldn't he have got it right last night?
He was like a schoolboy, never mind that I was behaving like a schoolgirl, I cannot stand a man who can't cope with me…
Even if I was using him, a time of my choosing, to wash away the guilt…
Why couldn't it have gone right?
In the middle of the afternoon, she rang her office: there was nothing more than a routine acknowledgment of the debriefing report she had sent after Maxim's meeting with the Secret Service.
Plus a warning not to let him start doing anything of his own.
Ha!
You try and stop him, she thought.
But soon — perhaps very soon — I am going to have to lay it on the line, tell them what really has been happening…
The trouble was, she could prove nothing yet and certainly didn't want her Service approaching Magill direct, for confirmation.
Still, she could get started on a draft.
She took out her pocket recorder and began dictating.
If somebody had suggested to Agnes that she was not security-minded, she would just have stared at them.
Security was her trade, always had been.
But, as Maxim had realised the evening before, her training was in hunting, not being hunted.
Even in the long-ago undercover work on the weekly magazine, she had always worked with the comforting feeling of being in her own country, with the big battalions immediately behind her.
She had never-quite-known what Dorothy Tuckey, and Magill and Tatham had known of the real loneliness of the hunted.
Otherwise, she would never have put anything on record in that isolated motel cabin, all ready for Them to snatch when they kicked the door in.
By Hand
Private & confidential 
Dear Mr Harbinger,
Anglam Gateway & its Properties
With the kind assistance of the local estate agencies I have gone some way to tracing the subsequent history of the two properties owned by the above company.
The Tunbridge Wells house was sold, as I believe I told you, when the company acquired the lease on Oxendown House near Eastbourne.
It was purchased by the late Colone; J. R. M. Clarke, and passed to his children on his death seven years ago.
Three years ago it was sold to a Dr William Baxter, who lives and operates his surgery there.
Anglam Gateway had only a nineteen-year lease on  Oxendown House, which is part of the Gardener Estates.
We sold the residual sixteen years, approx, to a client represented by Harvey Gough & partners , who soon afterwards resold it by private treaty to a small company whose name I have not yet discovered, with the rumoured intention that it would be turned into a private nursing home.
However, I understand it has since been resold to yet another private company, who appear to have resold the lease to the Estates who in turn sold the farmland to local landowners but rented the house to the company, presumably for a much reduced sum.
I am afraid this is all very complicated and difficult to untangle at short notice, but I hope, nonetheless, that it is of some help.
Please give my best regards to your Uncle Charles;
Yours sincerely,
Donald Nightingale.
George locked the letter away, smiling with grim satisfaction.
Practise in peace, Dr Baxter of Tunbridge Wells, he thought; you sound an honest pill-peddler to me.
But if that wasn't a second smokescreen settling on Oxendown House as fast as possible after Charlie's Indians had withdrawn their own, then I don't know smoke signals when I smell them.
He would have liked to know who that ‘client of Harvey Gough & partners ’ had been-Amold Tatham himself, perhaps, using the pension contributions he had withdrawn on his resignation.
Certainly that was as close to a gap in the smokescreen as there had been, when Charlie's Indians were screaming (silently) for a quick sale to sever their connection but before a barricade of shell companies could be erected to take it over…
But why had Tatham wanted to keep that house?
To keep a base, yes, and what could be an isolated one, surrounded by farmland, yes — but he could have bought some other, without any history.
Unless Oxendown had certain special facilities, something not easily transferred…
He would like to take a look at Oxendown House.
He also wished Maxim was back.
31
The East Coast of America is dominated by the big cities: Boston, New York, Philadelphia, Baltimore, Washington all exert such a gravitational pull that the smaller towns are sucked into an orbit of dependency on the nearest city sun.
In the Midwest, not even Chicago exerts such influence, and St Louis very little at all.
Across the plains on either side of the Mississippi and Missouri, it is as if a giant city planet had exploded, leaving a random scatter of asteroid towns frozen in their wanderings but uncommitted to an urban star.
Never quite random, of course.
Some grew up on river crossings, at water-holes on the westward trails, and a remarkable number — Matson included — on the railroads or, thanks to founding fathers with a keen eye for land values, where they deduced the railroads must come.
Robert Julius Matson had guessed right: the first train had come through just nine years after the town was founded in 1858, pulling behind it the fertiliser works, the com mill, the seed-com warehouse, and with them the quiet prosperity that spawned the first Masonic lodge in 1871, a voluntary fire brigade in ‘75, the telephone in ‘84 and the first sewer in 1920.
All this — and a lot more — Maxim learnt from a centennial booklet in the town library, just one floor up from the town offices.
Already he had spent an hour wandering around the town — it needed no more time than that — trying to get the feel of the place.
This wasn't easy, because it was clearly a private town: self-contained within its white wooden houses that seemed as well-rooted on their green lawns as the tall trees of Elm Street, Pine, Walnut, Chestnut…the usual street names of such towns, not unimaginative, just because you built houses like that and named streets like  that.
If you wanted to be different, you could find a big city at the end of the railroad and be different there.
He guessed a lot of young people had: the few faces on the street seemed of retirement age.
He realised why when he walked down to where Main Street crossed the railroad tracks and saw the grass-grown rails, the deserted depot and the dusty windows of the empty fertiliser works.
Robert Julius had been right, but only for just over a hundred years.
The railroad giveth and the railroad taketh away, and when it stops giving md taking, a lot more stops as well.
Maxim stood on the rails md tried to imagine the bustle as a train panted in, of the steam glowing the lamplight at night, of the sense of distance and connection…but it was trying to imagine the broken chimes of a clock you never heard.
Nobody had even thought to throw stones through the windows of the fertiliser works.
The Matson Sentinel had died, too, just a few years before and the bound copies of its back numbers were also in the library.
Maxim leafed through them because — as he was forced to admit to himself-he had no idea of how to approach Clare Hall.
Surrounding himself with local knowledge was a form of entrenchment; if you dig in and stare at a hill you can often persuade yourself you know what's going on behind it.
Confidence wins battles; even false confidence has won a few.
(This is not a battle, he reprimanded himself.
Alan James Winterbotham does not fight battles.)
The woman librarian finished a murmured telephone call and drifted across.
‘Are you finding what you wanted?’
‘Just pottering,’ Maxim (Winterbotham) said.
‘Seeing America by bus on my way home.
As far a Minneapolis, anyway.
My car busted there.’
Her indifference told him he had explained too much (but maybe Canadians, or Winterbothams, did explain too much).
‘Looking up the town history?
It's kind of quiet these days, since the railroad pulled out.
Mostly folk retired off the farms around here.’
She had the Midwestern accent that is usually called ‘flat’ because the Midwest doesn't believe that emotional  emphasis makes the corn grow taller.
Her tall thin elegance was camouflaged by a loose, dark woollen dress and heavy glasses, but restored by her prematurely grey hair — she was about Maxim's age — that was cut in simple elegant sweeps over her ears.
Perhaps she was playing the part of a small-town librarian but hoping not to be taken too seriously.
‘Anything more you'd like to know, just ask.’
She drifted away to the shelves, shuffling a book here and there.
County Board Approves Salary Hikes, Maxim learnt, along with Matson Mothers' Club Makes Donation.
This is not telling me much about the far side of the hill, he thought.
Hold on, now.
If Mothers' Club Donation makes the front page, how about Local Rector's Son Kidnapped, Murdered, In Italy?
Since he wasn't sure of the date, it took a little time, but there was no missing it when he found the right volume.
It ran across three weekly issues, and was blatantly lifted from the big city papers and radio, but the editorial comment was strictly home town.
If any Matson citizen had taken an Italian holiday that year, he would have kept very quin about it.
He read carefully, starting with the last issue where the facts would be most accurate, and working back.
He took no notes — why would Winterbotham bother?— but he had been trained to memorise map references and other details of a mission.
The SAS didn't like its people getting captured with pockets full of data.
There was, of course, a picture of Arnold Tatham himself, much younger than when he had died, and of his daughter Clare.
She, too, was younger and dark-haired — but unmistakably the librarian.
The room seemed very quin as he closed the volume and selected another and made himself turn its unseen pages for ten more minutes.
She was back at the desk when he stood up, stretched elaborately, and said: ‘Guess I'll get myself a cup of coffee.’
‘If you're coming back, we close for lunch around half twelve.’
The centre of Matson was brick-built, a few buildings rising to three storeys, a few of them whitewashed but the  rest left the whisky colour of the local clay.
Somehow the roads managed to be the same colour, but several tones lighter.
The drug-store, where he had breakfasted late, was around the corner on Walnut Street, a deep dim-lit room with a counter and stools midway down one side, after the racks of magazines and trinkets.
He bought a magazine and flipped its pages while he drank the coffee.
Perhaps he had been stupid, but had he actually done any damage?
She would recognise him when he made his approach, would know he had been behaving deviously but he would be straight into devious matters anyway.
And the accounts of Tatham's kidnapping and death had been very worthwhile reading.
A woman walked in and sat at the middle of the counter — Maxim had chosen the furthest end.
She wore a bulky mock-leather jacket of much the same colour as the local brick, a tweed skirt and even in that light, wrap-around sunglasses.
Apart from that, she was Agnes Algar.
Maxim felt a moment of total disorientation before he realised that something must have gone badly wrong, that because she had not greeted him he must stay being Winterbotham, that because they were strangers he must make the first move.
She had lit a cigarette and was alternating puffs with nibbling on a Danish pastry and sipping coffee.
He went and bought a pack of cigarettes from the machine behind him, searched his pockets, then asked: ‘Could I trouble you for a light, Miss?’
She snapped her lighter.
‘Can't give it up, either, hey?’
‘I've tried.’
He drew on the first cigarette for eight years, nearly choked, and wheezed: ‘First today, anyway.
Thank you.
You don't sound local.’
‘I'm British, just passing through.
You don't sound as if you were a native, either.’
‘I was born in London, I moved to Canada, oh, twelve years ago.
Are you from London?’
‘Not by birth, but I worked there.
Don't we all?’
The druggist, a bird-like little man in his fifties who longed to repeat his father's reputation as town matchmaker, but had so little chance since the youngsters who hadn't moved out permanently were commuting to bigger  towns, was delighted to see two mature strangers getting together over coffee.
In his view, friendships made over alcohol — as in the Star Bar around the corner-seldom lasted.
He threw his own span into the bridge he saw a-building.
‘Now, isn't that a funny thing?— I get two people meeting in a town like this, and wouldn't you know it?— their paths have crossed before.
Isn't that a funny thing?’
‘London's a big town,’ Agnes said coolly.
‘It sure is, I visited there five years back, with my wife — now, would you know the Bedford Hotel?
Wouldn't it be something if you both knew that?’
‘I think I used to drink there with a man called George Harbinger,’ Maxim invented, knowing how George loathed tourist territory.
‘A fat man.
He was something in the Civil Service.’
‘I don't think I ever heard of him,’ Agnes said.
The druggist surreptitiously slid Maxim's coffee along the counter, fixing him next to Agnes.
‘Lady, do you mind my asking if you have an eye problem?
With the dark glasses in here, like…
I could recommend some medication, or —’
‘I got mugged,’ Agnes said bleakly.
She pushed the glasses up, giving Maxim a glimpse of the purple bruise under her left eye.
‘That is terrible,’ the druggist pronounced.
‘I mean truly terrible.
It surely wasn't-’
‘Not here.’
‘Terrible.
You should get a doctor…
Mister, you should tell her she should get a doctor.’
There was a huge anger welling in Maxim that choked off anything he might have said, a yearning to reach that mugger and snap his arms, which he could do so easily, then kick the helpless manhood out of him…
I love her.
He had no idea whether that was a decision or a revelation.
It was just a fact, whose origins no longer mattered.
He shook his head slowly, to show some reaction, staring past the druggist at the dark handcrafted old shelving, wondering if he should remember every detail of this  place, and sadly realising he would only remember the huge can of chilli that appeared on the menu board as Home Made.
‘Dreadful,’ he managed to say.
A customer came past to the pharmacy counter at the back and the druggist said: ‘Excuse me, folks…’
Agnes touched his hand on the counter, quickly and secretly.
‘Calm down, Harry.
I'm all right.
Really.’
‘Was it Them?’
‘Them.
They got the Clare Hall address and that you're here; I was drafting a report…
I should never have put anything on record in that place…’
‘I led them to you.’
‘Not you.
I think they must have had a bleeper on my car; I never checked, and they'd have taken it away when they caught up — damn it, it's what I'd have done: a simple radio bleeper with a magnet, you can stick it on in two seconds.
We probably lost them on the Beltway, and they'd been chasing round the Virginia countryside trying to pick me up…those things only have a range of about three miles.’
‘I led them to your car.
I should have been there.’
‘I wished you were — but they'd probably have killed you.’
‘They could have tried.’
‘You aren't armed, Harry.
And they could try again.’
‘I wasn't going to ring you until I'd got something to say…’
‘I know.
Would you care to walk me around the block?’
The druggist was heading back purposefully.
In fact, they just walked around the corner and got into Agnes's rented car.
‘Are you really all right?’
Maxim demanded.
‘It just shook me up.
By now I'm mostly tired, I was driving most of the night.
The closest I could get last night was a flight to Chicago.’
‘What will London say?’
‘I'll dream up something for them later.
Now, have you contacted Clare Hall yet?’
‘Well, sort of…’
Rather shamefacedly, he told about the library.
‘At least we know she's not at home,’ Agnes said.
‘The Bravoes may not want to go around asking questions, they'll probably just stake out her house.
We'll pick her up when she goes for lunch — and we've got something to say, now, even if it's just Run for the hills, lady.’
‘We've got a little more than that.
Reading up about Tatham's death…’