

‘Here comes the ambulance, sir,’ called an armourer.
Woolley turned.
It was indeed an ambulance: a field ambulance, boldly redcrossed, lumbering down the track.
A couple of men put their arms round Gabriel and helped him up.
Woolley stared at the ambulance, took a couple of paces, stopped and stared again.
The ambulance blipped its klaxon.
He broke into a run.
As it slowed and turned the woman driver leaned out and waved.
She revved the ambulance into a U-turn, and Woolley jumped on to the running-board.
She changed up and accelerated away.
The men holding Gabriel put him down again.
‘In bloody credible,’ Lambert said.
‘How long for Woolley shouted.
‘Two days.’
‘Bring any Guinness?’
‘Case in the back’
‘I love you.’
He leaned inside and kissed her.
‘Do you love me?’
‘No.’
‘That's right.
Killed anyone lately?’
‘Three last night.
Are you all right?’
‘I'm all right’
‘You sounded bad, on the phone that night.’
'Nothing you can't cure.’
Her name was Margery, and she was a nurse.
Woolley met her in a Belgian hospital in the summer of 1916, after he had broken both ankles in a forced landing.
Since then she had followed Goshawk Squadron up and down the line, moving from hospital to hospital.
An uncle in the War Office managed the transfers for her.
At first she told him that she wanted to be near her cousin Freddy, in the Engineers.
Then Freddy got blown up and drowned in a shell crater, and all the time Margery was in a hotel two hundred miles away, putting Woolley to bed, dead drunk after a promotion.
That was the first time she hard him mention Mackenzie.
He seemed to wake with a cry that was half a snort.
‘Hah!’ he said, and stared at her.
‘Where's Mackenzie?’
‘Go back to deep.’
He blinked.
‘I want Mackenzie,’ he ordered.
‘I must have Mackenzie.’
‘All right,’ she said.
He stared for a few more seconds and let his head fall back.
Soon he was asleep.
Next day be remembered nothing of it.
She asked if there was a Mackenzie in his squadron, but he refused to talk about the war, which suited her.
Conversation between them had been a problem in the hospital where they first met, right up to the night when she pushed his cot into an empty room, locked the door, took off her uniform and climbed in beside him.
‘I realize we have nothing in common,’ she told him then.
‘Not true,’ he said.
‘We've our lust for each other and our disgust for everyone else.’
They made love, clumsily because of the plaster casts on his legs, while somewhere a patient shouted in delirium.
Afterwards she walked her fingers up his ribs.
‘Why is your body so dirty?’ she asked.
‘I was a miner,’ he said.
‘It got forced in.’
‘That's not true.
Tell me the truth.’
‘Listen, I'll make you a bargain.
I'll never tell the truth, if you'll never tell lies.’
He was serious.
‘All right.
Only what good will that do?’
‘It'll show us the best side of each other.’
Margery usually talked about her family, which was like Margery herself: ample and affectionate, in a critical sort of way.
They expected everyone to do something, and then expected to tell them how it could have been done better.
They approved of her becoming a nurse and going to France, but they told her she should have done it sooner.
‘You've left it awfully late,’ her father told her in January 1916.
Even then, at twenty, she was beginning to look matronly, and of course be had always been good with animals.
Everybody else was in France, and she was afraid that if she stayed at home she might fall in love with some disabled veteran and marry him.
The first few months horrified her.
Her experience of suffering had been limited to rabbits-in traps.
Now she spent her days  amongst men with holes blown through them, and every night some died.
By the time Woolley arrived in her ward she was turning into a slaughterhouse attendant: she no longer saw them as men but as damaged stock; if they screamed it was not a sign of pain but a signal to fetch a doctor.
Blood was part of the job, like spilled paint to a house-painter.
She could not help them, so she began to hate than for the waste they brought into the hospital.
Everything was waste.
Her life was waste.
Normally you tried to make things better; here you tried to stop them getting worse.
The waste-factory that produced these defective goods roared day and night.
It was making a scrap-merchant of her.
Woolley stopped all that.
He came into the hospital with six cases of Guinness and a shepherd's crook.
He had the bottles placed under his bed, and when the ward sister tried to interfere he fended her off with the crook while he produced medical certificates, all signed by army doctors, stating his need for regular supplies of the stuff.
She rejected them.
He appealed to her in several languages, including German.
She ignored his appeals and began to move the cases He placed her under arrest.
She turned white and rang for a doctor.
Woolley placed her under close arrest for mutiny.
When the doctor arrived Woolley was lying on the floor, apparently semi-conscious.
‘She hit me with my own stick, doctor,’ he whispered, displaying the scrapes and cuts received in his flying accident.
‘I was trying to save some of the Guinness for you, but she hit me with my own stick.
I — I must have passed out’
‘The doctor felt his pulse, then took a bottle from the nearest case and examined it.
‘He was ranting and raving at me,’ the ward sister said, ‘in German’
Woolley cringed.
‘Don't let her hit me,’ he pleaded.
The doctor opened the bottle and sniffed it.
‘All right, sister,’ he said.
When she had gone he helped Woolley to his feet.
‘You've got a bloody nerve, he said.
‘I paid two quid for those certificates,’ Woolley said.
‘They're all valid, you know.
You might as well drink that now you've opened it.
You don't want it to go flat.’
‘It's the real thing, all right,’ the doctor said.
He sighed.
‘All right.
Keep the stuff out of sight.
And I want a dozen bottles for myself’
‘Leeches,’ Woolley said.
‘Bleeding leeches.’
He was soon the centre of scandal and unrest.
Anybody with anything juicy to report went to Woolley for an audience and a bottle of stout.
He ran a sweepstake, supposedly based on the intake and discharge of patients; actually the winning number was the daily total of deaths in the hospital.
He got a key to the blanket store and rented it out to randy nurses and hungry walking-wounded, many of whom he had introduced in the first place.
For a sensational week he published a news-sheet which libelled everyone from the governor's wife to the assistant chaplain, including both together.
He won a piano-accordion at cards and taught himself to play sea-shanties.
He circulated two new rumours a day: cholera was sweeping Paris; the Kaiser was in Rome looking for a divorce; the kitchen was putting aphrodisiacs in the gravy; Lloyd George had been charged with rape; Switzerland had invaded Germany.
Nurse Jenkins was pregnant.
The hospital was about to be moved underground.
The Czar was going to visit the wards at 10 a.m. next day and everyone would get a medal.
At first Margery hated him for always showing off; and for mocking others who were suffering; above all for attacking the harsh and humourless atmosphere of her scrap-body factory.
But his outrageous irreverence was a relief; eventually she had to admit to herself that she looked forward to hearing what Lieutenant Woolley had done now.
He lifted some of the curse from that place of death.
She went out of her way to pass near him, and he went out of his way to insult her.
He disturbed her, because he was not handsome, he was ugly; he was not gallant, he was cynical; he was not worthwhile at all and yet inescapably she was in love with him.
Woolley's tent was hot.
He had spread a tarpaulin over the duckboards, and on top of it they dumped blankets from the  ambulance.
The door was tightly laced, and a pressure lamp burned whitely.
They sat, naked, and ate the food she had brought.
Margery sweated slightly.
‘We always do the same thing, don't we?’ she said.
‘Practice makes perfect,’ Woolley sail ‘Never change a winning team.
When in doubt, remove all clothing’
‘It's not really the same thing, I suppose.
Every time it's different.
But it's always…like this.’
‘Why chop and change?’
Woolley said.
‘Look at the dinosaurs.
They were happy.’
‘Happy,’ Margery said.
She put down her food and carefully brushed her fingers, storing at the floor.
Woolley belched, and stretched Margery sucked at the inside of her lip.
‘You know that I want you,’ she said steady, still not looking at him ‘And I know that you…you need me.
What I don't understand is why…
’ But here she ran dry.
Her voice had no more words.
She turned to face him and he saw how her skin was shivering, the self-control leaking out of the corners of her eyes, her face breaking up.
He put down the bottle and sat on his hands and waited.
‘I'll never be any use to anyone else,’ she wept.
‘You're the only one I want to help and you won't let me get near you except…except…
’ Now the hair was over her eyes, the drops were splashing wetly down her breasts.
He wriggled his toes, and saw a flight of aircraft peeling off, beautifully, one by one.
‘Well, I haven't changed,’ he said gently; only it came out curtly.
‘I know.’
She couldn't find a handkerchief.
‘Oh blast blast blast.’
She found it and mopped up.
‘It's all right for you.
You're not fat and you don't spend all day washing bloody bodies’
‘Everybody knows you're the best in the business’ He took her hand.
‘I could have married cousin Freddy's best friend Gerald,’ she said.
‘Tell me about him.’
He pulled her on top of him.
‘Tell me about yours, first.’
‘Mr cousin Freddy's best friend was Norman,’ he said.
‘He was  deported to Liverpool for strangling Lady Mayoresses.
Three, he done, in one afternoon.’
‘Liar,’ she said.
‘Lovely liar.’
They kissed.
That night, in the damp gloom of the mess tent, Goshawk Squadron got good and drunk.
‘Pneumonia,’ Lambert said, pouring gin.
‘I ask you: what a way to go.’
He sneezed.
‘You noticed that he didn't bloody condescend to pull a bloody trigger himself;’ Finlayson said.
He was wearing red flannel around his neck to ease the pain.
‘I'd like to see him hit one of those bloody kites.
Arrogant bastard’
‘Hear, hear,’ agreed Church.
He was wandering around, standing in front of people and smiling.
Occasionally he sneaked off to one side and had a good long suck at a silver flask.
‘P-p-p-ower c-c-c-corrupts,’ Killion managed.
‘I wonder if we've got grounds to complain to Corps?’
Dangerfield said suddenly.
‘Oh, definitely,’ Church said.
He came over and smiled at Dangerfield.
‘Tell you what,’ Dickinson said, ‘I bet you he does it again tomorrow.
I'll give five-to-one on.’
‘Oh Christ,’ said Lambert.
He reached for his glass and knocked it over.
‘Double Christ.’
He found she bottle and drank from that.
‘It's not impossible,’ Gabriel said.
‘After all —’
‘For God's sake take a drink and shut up,’ Finlayson told him.
‘I second that,’ Church said cordially.
He went over to Gabriel and smiled.
‘You can't dismiss the possibility that the old man might have a plan,’ Gabriel said stiffly.
‘Major Woolley to you,’ Rogers said.
‘If you ask me, I think she fellow is certifiably loony,’ Dangerfield said.
‘I think he's finally cracked a cylinder.’
‘Bound to happen,’ Kimberley said.
‘Bound to happen,’ Church agreed, nodding.
‘I'll lay three to one he's still sane,’ Dickinson offered.
‘Done said Woodruffe, coming in from the rain.
‘Put me down for a fiver both ways.’
‘You can't bet both ways on a two-horse race,’ Dickinson objected.
‘All right, old man.
If you want to back out.
Perfectly okay with me.’
The adjutant squinted muzzily through the cigarette smoke.
‘Look here, you chaps,’ he said, ‘I want to do something for you.’
‘Well, you can do something for me,’ Lambert said.
‘You can tell that sadistic bastard to cut out bloody gunnery practice in the pouring rain'
‘Sorry,’ the adjutant said.
‘Not possible.’
‘Useless clown Finlayson said.
‘Tell you what I will do,’ the adjutant said, ‘I'll get hold of everybodies score-card and alter it so you all get full marks.’
‘Bound to happen,’ Church said softly.
Killion stood up and walked stiffly over to Woodruffe.
‘W-w-w-what I w-w-w-want,’ he said, ‘is a g-g-g-girl’He blinked seriously.
‘You're sex-mad Killion,’ Dangerfield said.
‘Mad,’ Church endorsed.
‘Tell you what,’ Woodruffe said.
‘Can't get you a girl, but if you get her into trouble I'll see it's all right.’
Killion walked away, stony-faced.
‘I know you're tight, Woody,’ Finlayson said, ‘but the only thing you could do for us now would be to shoot the old man.
It's time he was put down.
Can you do that?’
‘Bound to happen,’ Church said.
‘Sorry.’
the adjutant said.
‘Can't shoot the Commanding Officer.
Tell you what, though.
If you shoot him, I'll get you off at the court martial.’
‘Shooting's too good for him,’ Lambert said.
Faintly, above the moaning of the wind, they heard a cracked wheezing, the unskilled sequence of chords of a sea-shanty played at half speed.
‘Listen!’
Finlayson said, ‘the bastard's at it again.
Celebrating another kill on his bloody squeeze-box.’
‘That p-p-p-poor g-g-g-girl,’ Killion said.
‘Bound to happen,’ Church murmured.
He slipped out and went to his tent, got his revolver, and emptied it in the direction of Woolley's tent.
Everyone ran into the rain to see what was happening; everyone except Woolley.
‘By the time I got my boots on it would all be over,’ he told Margery.
‘I don't suppose he hit anything, anyway.’
They found out next morning that be had in fact, hit an aeroplane; but not seriously.
Force 5: Fresh Breeze Small trees in leaf begin to sway
February was a wretched month.
Woolley's training programme was grindingly hard, tent-life cold, wet and colourless, and the news from the front depressing.
One day at breakfast Richards asked Woodruffe what was going on.
‘Nothing much, officially,’ the adjutant said.
‘All the rumours are that Jerry's been bringing his troops back from the east by the train-load.
Corps think he'll try a really big push as soon as the rain stops.’
‘He always does,’ said Finlayson wearily.
‘Spring wouldn't be the same without an offensive’
‘This will be different,’ Gabriel said.
‘What the hell do you know about it?’
Finlayson demanded.
‘I read the newspapers,’ Gabriel said, unmoved.
‘Presumably the Germans do, too.
They know the Americans are sending troops.’
‘They already have Rogers said, ‘as we well know.’
‘Only a few divisions,’ Gabriel said.
‘Not yet enough to stop a German assault.’
‘Balls,’ Finlayson said.
‘In case you didn't know, an American division is twice the size of an ordinary division.’
Gabriel supped his porridge in silence
‘In any case,’ Finlayson went on, ‘all those Huns the Kaiser is bringing back from Russia are fagged out.
They've been fighting out there for bloody years.’
‘And winning,’ Gabriel said.
There was a gloomy silence.
‘What d'you think, Woody?’ asked Rogers.
‘Has the Hun got enough troops to do any damage?’
‘Somebody did tell me he thought they might be a tiny bit stronger than us at the moment.
I believe the figure mentioned was one and a half million in rifle strength.’
‘Good Christ,’ said Killion, before he could remember to stammer.
‘Of course I got that from a chap in Intelligence,’ Woodruffe said.
‘They're always wrong.’
‘What I can't understand,’ Richards said, ‘is why we have to wait.
Why don't we hit them first?’
‘It's been tried,’ Lambert told him.
‘Remember Passchendaele?
That was our idea.’
‘Passchendaele,’ said Dickinson softly.
‘Passion Dale.
There's something almost Miltonic about it.
Or do I mean Bunyanesque?
Ranks of valiant warriors crashing to catastrophe, with a great deal of rolling thunder and rather too much sulphur and brimstone.
‘It was pretty bloody horrible,’ said Kimberley severely.
‘Don't tell me, chum.
I was there.
I flew forty-three patrols in one week.’
‘Have you really been in the Corps that long?’
Woodruffe asked in surprise.
‘I had no idea it was that long.’
‘Only last July,’ Dickinson said.
‘Still…’
Woodruffe peered at him thoughtfully.
‘If I were Jerry,’ said Finlayson, ‘I'd go for the France.
They don't want to fight any more Our froggy friends have had enough.’
‘I say, is it really true that the French artillery had to fire on their infantry?’
Delaforce asked.
‘To drive them over the top?’
‘Absolutely,’ Finlayson said.
‘They had a mutiny.
The troops wouldn't leave the trenches, so the French generals laid down a barrage on them.
That soon shifted them.’
‘What happened afterwards?’
‘Afterwards?
There was no afterwards.
Why d'you think they didn't want to get out of the trenches?’
‘It makes me feel sick,’ Rogers said.
‘Physically sick.’
‘Mind you, the other side has the same problem,’ Dickinson said.
‘I've seen the Jerries running up and down behind their men, waving pistols.
It's the same for both sides.’
‘What s filthy war it is,’ Richards said.
‘It's all so cramped.
There's no room for a bit of cut and thrust, it's just…it's like…two great stupid fellows standing toe to toe and…bludgeoning.’
Woodruffe listened to all this with deepening anxiety.
‘I was at Corps yesterday,’ he said, ‘and General Somebody was telling people how things looked, and he said we were definitely on top.
He thought that one big blow would knock the Germans right out.
He said there was every reason for optimism.’
‘God,’ Lambert said.
‘I didn't know things were as bad as that.’
As soon as the rain stopped, Woolley had the planes warmed up.
He went to the middle of the field and spread out a small tablecloth.
Then he rang his handbell and waited for the pilots to assemble.
‘This,’ he said, ‘is your life insurance policy.
Read the small print carefully.’
He walked across the white square.
Delaforce and Richards looked at his footprints doubtfully.
Church twisted his head sideways as if the writing were the wrong way round.
The others stood and smoked, or twitched or shrugged, or blinked, or nodded, or performed whatever other small compulsion their nervous systems required of them these days.
Gabriel noticed how grey the hairs were on the back of Woolley's neck.
Finlayson stood behind Kimberley.
‘This cloth is today's target,’ Woolley said.
‘It makes a good target, for two reasons.
First, you attack it from above.
Always attack from above.
When we get into action, some of you will forget that.
They will be killed.
Height is an advantage.
Always try to fight with an advantage.’
Woolley pursed his thin lips and addressed Rogers and Kimberley in particular.
‘I have been described as lacking in chivalry,’ he said, and his flat Midlands accent made the word sound medical.
‘This is not true.
I try to kill the man with the first shot.
I see no point in needless pain.’
Kimberley could not tell if Woolley were serious or mocking.
He looked away.
‘To kill with the first shot,’ Woolley went on, ‘means getting close.
The closer the better.
Twenty-five feet, one length of the aeroplane, is a good distance.
Fifty feet is the maximum.
I am talking now about the first shot.
Get in close and kill him before he knows it.
Marksmanship is more important than flying skill.
If you can kill him first, you won't need to out-fly him.
If you miss, you lose the advantage of height and surprise.
The enemy has a chance to out-fly you, and if he has a better machine he will probably kill you.
Never give him a chance to fight on even terms if you can sneak up and kill him first.
Do you all follow that?’
The wind licked at the white cloth and peeled up one corner.
Woolley stood on it.
‘Suppose there's a lot of them,’ Gabriel said.
‘Kill one or two and run away,’ Woolley told him.
Gabriel nodded as if that was what he expected.
‘The second reason why this is a good target is that it's the same size as the vital part of the aeroplane.’
Woolley turned his back on them and sat in the middle of the cloth.
‘Your bullets must hit this.
Never shoot at the aeroplane.
A Fokker or an Albatros or a Pfalz does not bleed.
You can perforate a Triplane until it looks like old net curtains, and the pilot will end up killing you and flying home.’
He stood up.
‘Shoot at the pilot.
If you miss him you may still hit the petrol tank or the engine.’
‘That's all very well.’
said Finlayson sourly, ‘but in a dog-fight you've got to fire at whatever presents itself.’
‘It's just luck, really,’ said Dickinson.
‘Anyone who depends on luck is a fool and a suicide,’ Woolley said.
He squinted at the overcast.
‘The sun is there,’ he pointed.
‘Come out of the sun and fire one burst of ten rounds from no higher than fifty feet.
Red flag for a hit, white for a miss.’
They walked to their aircraft, which stood gently shuddering against their chocks, the engines droning in unison.
Gabriel, Dangerfield and Finlayson discussed the best angle of approach.
‘The flatter you come in, the longer you can take to pull out,’ Dangerfield said.
‘So you get a better chance to aim.’
‘But you reduce the visible area of the target,’ Finlayson said.
‘Ideally, you should come straight down on it.’
‘At fifty feet?’
Gabriel asked.
‘He's never made us do this before,’ Dangerfield said.
‘If you ask me, it's bloody dangerous.’
‘That, it would seem, is half the point,’ Gabriel said.
‘Incidentally, taking the old man's philosophy to its logical end, I presume that one would be expected to destroy an enemy machine even if one knew that, say, the pilot were injured or out of ammunition, and therefore unable to fight back.’
‘Oh, shut up,’ Finlayson said.
Dickinson was the first to dive.
He came out of the non-existent sun at 45 degrees and concentrated on keeping the nose pointing just below the tablecloth, remembering that the Lewis gun would fire high to clear the propeller.
The wind tugged the machine one way and he nudged it back.
At fifty feet he squeezed the gun lever just as another block of air shouldered into the little SE5a.
The short burst made the plane tremble.
He pulled firmly back and cleared the target by twenty feet.
White flag.
Rogers was hard behind him but he undershot and came in shallowly, and only touched the Lewis lever for a second before veering away.
White flag.
Lambert learned from them both, steepened his angle, and left everything a fraction later.
His plane seemed to swoop down a straight slope until an abrupt crackle signalled the moment to pull out.
He levelled off about ten feet above the ground and banked as he climbed, looking back at the red flag.
The rest of the squadron, circling and watching from five hundred feet, took their turns.
Each pilot wheeled out of the fictional sun, nosed down, and jockeyed his bouncing machine into a dive.
The white square slowly magnified, then seemed to blossom, and there was one second when everything happened: the cockpit was shaking, the engine bellowing, the  ground looming, the tablecloth leaping and dancing.
Then he was swinging out of it, feeling the blood retreat from his head, sensing the ground reach up for his wheels: twisting to see the flag, before he went up and waited his turn to do it over again.
Everybody missed on the first attempt except Lambert, Church and Kimberly.
On the second round half the squadron scored hits, and by the end of the third only Finlayson, Delaforce and Rogers had failed.
Rogers was having trouble with his gun.
Finlayson couldn't master the wind conditions.
Delaforce was simply a bad shot.
On the fourth round the tablecloth was cut to ribbons, and there was a delay while the ground crew put a fresh one in its place.
Everyone except Rogers and Delaforce had scored with at least part of a burst.
Rogers landed to get his gun cleared, but Delaforce was by now wild with disgust; he had an almost physical appetite to see his bullets strike home.
He climbed hard, hurried around the field and broke into the circling planes for another attack.
This time he could not believe the white flag.
He was convinced that he had been on target.
He couldn't have missed: they were wrong!
He drove the plane back into the circuit and again forced them to let him through.
He dropped on that maddening, tattered square of dirty white like an eagle on a lamb.
He pushed the SE into a near-vertical dive and stared wide-eyed at the growing target.
Long before it was time to fire he realized that he would have to pull out or crash; below fifty feet there would be no recovering, not from this angle, not at this speed.
Yet he couldn't bear failure again, with the whole squadron watching.
He decided to risk a burst at long range and squeezed the trigger; nothing happened.
He checked that the gun was cocked, and squeezed again.
Again nothing.
The slipstream built up to a scream, and despair drugged his actions.
When at last he hauled back on the stick the ground was close and rushing up.
He pulled out of the dive and cleared the target area, every joint and spar in the aeroplane shuddering under the strain.
He could see the horizon just above the shining disc  of his propeller, and he fought to drag the leaden nose up to it.
His wheels ran into the wet turf and the whole machine crumpled and fell to its knees like an animal shot in the chest.
Delaforce was impaled on the control column, but by then his neck was broken anyway.
Woolley wanted to see only one thing: the ammunition drum.
It was empty.
Nobody spoke to Woolley at lunch, yet everybody meant Woolley to hear.
Accidentally, obliquely, the squadron had found this way of striking back.
It was a feeble retaliation, but it was all they had.
They spoke loudly and clearly, not interrupting each other: like actors.
‘I don't see why you should be a captain when I'm only a lieutenant,’ Dangerfield said to Rogers.
‘I'm a much bigger bastard than you are.’
‘You don't get promoted just for being a bastard, you know,’ Rogers said.
‘You've got to be a bloody bastard.’
‘I question whether Dangerfield has the right hide for a commander, anyway,’ Lambert said.
‘I saw him smile yesterday.
That's no good? you know.’
‘I'm more fitted for command than any of you,’ Kimberly said.
‘I once stuck a pitchfork through a toad.’
‘But did you enjoy it?’
Dickinson
‘Of course I did.
I revelled in it.’
‘That cuts you out, then.
Too emotional’
‘You're all wrong,’ Finlayson said.
‘You've got to have the right accent before you get promoted.’
‘What sort of accent is that?’
Gabriel asked.
Finlayson chewed his food while he thought.
‘Bloody horrible,’ he said at last.
‘As far as I can see there's only one reason why anyone gets promoted,’ said Richards, ‘and that's survival.
Live long enough, and up you go.’
‘Yes, but why do some people live longer than others?’
Dangerfield asked.
‘As I already said,’ Rogers told him.
‘You've got to be a bloody bastard.
Look at me.’
‘You're not a bloody bastard,’ Lambert objected.
‘You're not even a filthy swine.
When one gets right down to it, I doubt very much whether you're fit to be called a bad lot.’
‘Oh, I say, steady on,’ Rogers complained.
‘Dash it all I am Captain.’
‘Plenty of much bigger bastards than you have been made captain,’ Kimberly said.
‘Plenty.’
‘All right, then, name three,’ challenged Rogers.
‘You wouldn't believe me,’ Kimberly said dourly.
‘It would sound like a flock of sheep.’
Church tittered.
‘I'll tell you another reason why you won't get promoted,’ Lambert addressed Dangerfield.
‘You're far too clean.
You wash excessively.
I have evidence that you wash in excess of once per week.’
‘Only in order to remain tolerable to my comrades,’ Dangerfield protested.
‘I don't do it for any reason of self.’
‘As I said; you haven't got the right hide for command.
It requires a very thick, very dirt hide.’
‘What about b-b-b-brains?’
Killion asked.
‘Opinions are varied,’ Dickinson said.
‘Some say a commander needs no brains at all.
Others say he needs a very tiny brain.
Just enough to enable him to, say, count the survivors.’
‘I c-could d-d-do that.’
‘No, no, no.
You're far too intelligent.
Why, I've been told you can count up to fifty or sixty, on a good day.’
Killion nodded.
‘Well, then.
Besides,’ Dickinson sniffed hard, ‘you're not nearly filthy enough, you're only moderately dirty in parts.’
Church laughed out loud: the clear, delighted laughter of a child.
Killion glanced quickly and looked away.
Church wins certainly dirty enough.
A combination of tent-life and gin had kept Church away from soap and water for weeks.
He shaved but he did not wash and his bright, shallow smile was like the contentment of a piglet fresh from the teat.
The adjutant hurried in carrying a small cardboard box.
‘Dispose of this lot, would you, Dudley,’ he said.
‘I must eat or I shall collapse.’
He sat down and began lunch.
‘I thought we weren't going to do it like this any more,’ Rogers said.
‘I thought it was going to be first come, first served.’
He poked about inside the box.
‘Not much here, anyway,’ he grumbled.
‘Hardly worth bothering.’
‘For God's sake stop pawing it over like some damn pawnbroker's wife,’ Lambert said.
‘What is it?’
Richards asked.
‘What's in there?’
‘Hardly anything,’ Rogers said.
‘A few gew-gaws, a couple of knick-knacks and a what-not.’
He fished out a pair of carpet slippers.
‘Anyone want these?’
‘Two shillings,’ offered Dickinson.
‘Half-a-crown,’ Lambert said.
‘They're not worth half-crown,’ Dickinson grunted.
Richards threw the slippers to Lambert.
‘Sold he said.
‘Pay Woody, and make sure he puts it in the mess account.
Any offers for these hair brushes?
Silver-backed exquisite workmanship.’
‘Look here,’ said Richards strongly, ‘I'm not sure that I like all this.’
‘Then don't bid, laddy Finlayson said.
‘I suppose they're monogrammed?’ he asked Richards
‘Fraid so — C.P.D. Suit Dickinson or Dangerfield, of course.
They could always claim they were family heirlooms.’
Nobody wanted the hair brushes.
Rogers put them back and took out a New Testament.
‘In original wrappings’ he announced.
‘Mint condition, uncut leaves.’
He took it from its case and opened it.
‘With.
a rather touching inscription in green ink,’ he added.
‘Any offers?’
‘Damn it.
I'll have that,’ Richards said angrily.
He looked at Gabriel.
I'm surprised you don't want it.’
‘I already have one,’ Gabriel
‘Do I hear a bid?’
Rogers asked.
‘A pound.’
Richards snapped.
‘Any advance?’
Rogers looked around.
‘Not only green ink but also excellent spelling,’ he urged.
‘God damn you,’ Richards swore.
He jumped forward, snatched the testament, and thrust it into his tunic pocket.
‘Sold for a mere quid.’
Rogers rummaged around and produced a silver cigar-cutter, a small framed photograph of a middle-aged couple, and a pocket-watch.
Nobody wanted any of them.
He then took out a small book, expensively bound in limp leather.
‘Highways and Byways of Old Hampshire,’ he announced.
‘The work of a clerical namesake, possibly a relative.’
There were no bids.
‘Are you quite sure?’ he asked Richards.’
After all, you do have the beginnings of a small library…
As you wish.
That seems to be that, then'
‘Pitiful,’ said Finlayson.
‘Not worth the effort.’
‘All right,’ the adjutant said, ‘you can go back to a vulgar free-for-all if you like.
I don't care.’
‘Half a tick,’ Rogers said, ‘I missed something.’
He scrabbled in the bottom of the box and came up with a small piece of carved and polished wood.
‘This appears to be miniature cricket bat,’ he said, ‘carrying the miniature signatures of a pygmy team.
Some kind of trophy or memento, no doubt.’
He peered at it.
‘Somebody seems to have scored a hundred runs and been the hero of the school.’
‘I'll take that,’ Gabriel said.
Lambert raised his eyebrows.
‘As a keepsake,’ Gabriel said.
‘The chair will consider a motion,’ Rogers told him.
‘In other words, how much?’
‘Well; five shillings.’
Rogers looked at the little bat.
‘Five bob for an unbeaten century?
The chair is disgusted.
The chair itself will bid ten.’
‘A pound.’
‘Two pounds.’
‘Four pounds,’ Gabriel said thickly.
He was sitting with his hands inside his pockets, legs crossed, shoulders hunched, watching closely as if Rogers were trying to trick him.
Rogers tossed the piece of wood in the air so that it spun.
‘Oh, eight pounds,’ he said.
Now the squadron was alert, watching to see if Gabriel would fight.
He was taken aback.
‘Look here,’ he said.
‘You've no  right…’
Rogers flicked the bat in the air again.
‘Hell and damn,’ Gabriel said flatly.
‘A tenner.’
It was the first time anyone had heard him swear.
‘Fifteen.’
Gabriel looked at Richards, but Richards said nothing.
‘It's got absolutely nothing to do with you,’ Gabriel told Rogers.
‘You scarcely knew him.
I'll give twenty pounds for it.’
‘Forty,’ said Rogers shortly.
‘I would remind contestants that all bids are cash,’ Woodruffe said, ‘and if you haven't got it I shall take it out of your pay.’
Gabriel looked at the ground.
His head was quivering slightly, and his breathing was jerky.
‘The bid stands at forty,’ Rogers said.
‘Any advance on forty pounds?’
Woodruffe laid down his fork and closed his eyes.
Rogers cleared his throat.
‘Going, then, for forty pounds,’ he said.
‘Going.
Going.’
‘Eighty,’ said Woolley.
‘Eighty?’
Rogers asked.
He pulled his hat over his eyes, over his nose, his whole face, and held it there.
Then he lifted it, like a waiter taking the lid off a dish.
‘Do I hear eighty pounds for this excellent example of…of…’
‘You heard,’ Lambert said.
‘Now speak up or shut up.’
‘Ninety,’ Rogers said.
He looked at their sceptical faces as if seeking support.
He cleared his throat again and laid the little bat carefully on the table.
‘Ninety pounds.’
‘A hundred,’ Woolley said.
He was holding a bent fork and scraping at a loose fibre of wood on the table-top.
‘Guineas,’ Rogers said rapidly, before he could think about it.
‘And twenty.’
Rogers sat nodding, and looking down the table.
He reached for the bat and sent it skimming along the boards.
Woolley stopped it with his fork.
He picked it up and went to the door of the tent.
He looked at the sky, and scratched the back of his neck with the bat.
‘Gunnery practice,’ he said.
‘Take off in ten minutes.’
He walked over to the coke brazier where the cooks kept the  food hot: and looking first at Rogers, then at Gabriel, he tucked the little bat into the bright red fire, and walked away.
A sack of empty tins lay beside each aircraft: accumulated cookhouse waste.
Woolley briefed the squadron.
Starting in numerical order, each plane would climb to fifteen thousand feet and empty its sack.
The rest of the squadron would circle at twelve thousand.
By the time the tins had fallen that far, the wind and slipstream would have blown them all over the sky.
Close in to no more than twenty-five feet and fire no more than five rounds at a time.
The difficulty lay not only in hitting the tiny spinning fragments of silver but also missing the bigger objects flying all around.
It had been some time now since the old pilots had been in a dog-fight, and Killion for one was sweating heavily by the time he landed.
The nervous tension of dodging and ducking about a sky crowded with equally dodging and ducking planes, some firing, some looking as if they might fire at any instant, some sheering wildly away to avoid a collision; and all the time trying to grab a quick shot at a mere point of light: all this brought back the strain of combat, when you were pressed on by the excitement of chasing the enemy, pulled back by the horror of shooting a friend, and periodically shaken with fright by the thought that at any second you might be cut in two.
As soon as they had all landed, Woolley rang his handbell.
‘For Christ's sake, ding bloody dong,’ Finlayson growled.
He joined Kimberley and they trudged across the field.
‘This is the stupidest thing I've ever heard of,’ he said.
‘Jesus!
You've got to fly right up to them before you can see them.’
‘It's a madhouse,’ Kimberley said.
‘I nearly hit old Lambert just now.
Miracle I didn't hit him.
Miracle.’
‘Maybe you did.’
‘Well, he landed all right.’
Kimberley looked around for him.
‘As a matter of fact, I think I did hit him,’ he said.
‘In the tail.’
‘Somebody hit me-in the tail,’ Finlayson said.
‘There's a damn great hole in it.’
‘Could have been a tin,’ Kimberley suggested.
Finlayson grunted.
‘Any bastard starts shooting at me, I'll do the same back at him.’
‘Don't blame you,’ Kimberley said, without enthusiasm.
They fell silent as they got near Woolley.
He had found one of the tins, and it lay at his feet.
He took his revolver from its holster and cocked it.
‘Get closer,’ he told them.
‘Get much closer.’
He kicked the tin away from him and took a snap shot.
He missed.
The explosion made them flinch.
‘At a hundred feet,’ he said, ‘all you're doing is warning him that you're there.’
He stopped nearer the tin and fired again, and missed.
‘At fifty feet you might hit a wing, or a wheel,’ he said.
He bent and scooped up the tin with the barrel of the revolver, and held it high.
‘Get right up close!’ he cried.
‘Get right up where you can put the muzzle under the back of his helmet and blow his bloody head off!’
He pulled the trigger and sent the tin pinning through the air.
The echoes soaked into the vastness of the windy field.
‘Get close,’ Woolley whispered.
He holstered the weapon and walked away.
‘Some bastard got too close to me,’ Finlayson said.
‘I got a burst through the tail’
Woolley stopped and turned.
‘That was me, Finlayson,’ he said.
‘I thought you knew.
You were hanging back, Finlayson.’
‘Fighting's one thing,’ Finlayson said angrily.
‘Target practice is another.
I'm not going to get myself killed just because —’
‘Fool!’
Woolley boomed.
‘Feeble fool!
You can't survive, Finlayson.
You can only win.
If you want to survive, you shivering ninny, you might as well shoot off your big toe.
Here, I'll do it for you.’
Woolley snatched out his revolver.
‘A Blighty number, that's what you want.’
He pulled the trigger.
The bullet missed by twelve inches.
Finlayson jumped and retreated.
What's the matter, Finlayson, don't you want to survive?
I'm trying to help you survive Finlayson!’
He fired a shot over the man's head.
Finlayson ran backwards.
‘For God's sake, sir, have some sense,’ he pleaded.
Woolley lowered his gun.
‘Sense,’ he said.
‘Now there's a silly  word to use in the middle of a war.
All the sensible people are dead.’
Richards suddenly understood.
Richards saw that Woolley was trying to do more than train them, and lead them, and pass on the lessons of experience: he was also struggling to turn each of them into the kind of person that he himself had become.
When Woolley instructed them in shooting the enemy in the back he was not being melodramatic, he really meant it, because Woolley was a professional.
The amateurs played at fighting; they kept their scores and rejoiced in their adventures, and they were brave, good-humoured warriors.
But Woolley took it seriously.
He had asked the ultimate question — What is it for?— and got the obvious, the only answer.
You flew to destroy the enemy.
You did not fly to fight, but to kill.
It was neither fun nor adventure nor sport.
It was business.
Woolley was in business with death, while the rest of them were just playing with life.
Richards suddenly saw this, and he guessed how erodingly lonely the man must be.
Then Woolley looked at him.
All the emergent pity in Richards turned sour.
You couldn't feel sorry for Woolley.
You couldn't feel anything for him.
Woolley was a man you could only feel against.
It was still an eventful afternoon.
Half the squadron had a go at Woolley, popping off a couple of rounds in his general direction and then having to dive away fast when he swung towards them.
Woolley patrolled the squadron and gave a brisk burst more or less behind the tail of anyone he considered to be holding back.
The flying became more disciplined.
Instead of hunting all over the sky, the pilots concentrated on one scatter of targets and spiralled down through them, turning tightly in order to cut down the risk of collision.
Marksmanship improved.
The pilots became more aware of each other, developing a slick, anticipatory sense of where and when each one would go next
One man flew with real urgency and some venom.
Finlayson followed Woolley all around the squadron looking for a chance to get his own back.
Woolley gave the squadron a lesson in  evasive flying.
The only times he allowed Finlayson to get a clear view of him there was always another plane lined up on the other side.
Nobody — not even Finlayson — knew what would have happened if he had ever got the chance to pepper Woolley.
Meanwhile he blazed away at the tumbling dots of metal with a grim obsession.
The exercise nearly ended badly.
Dickinson was the last to empty his tins, and so he was the top plane when bits of wood began spitting in all directions.
There was a bang; the spinning disc vanished; and the engine raced from a bellow to a scream.
His propellor had gone.
At once he put the nose down and switched the engine of.
The plane slid into a shallow dive.
All around he could hear the toy snarl of wheeling planes.
It was a sound he had never heard before: like sitting in a tall tree full of hornets.
The weight of the engine tugged his nose down and he had to keep tugging it up again.
He slid between two planes, Church and Killion and saw them circle and follow him down.
He stood up and pointed forward.
Killion waved.
The rest of the squadron was still below, plunging and climbing and chasing its tail.
He side-slipped to miss three tightly spiralling planes, and found himself drifting into another cluster.
Automatically he hauled back on the stick.
The nose lifted sluggishly, the rush of air slowed, and the plane stalled.
Dickinson slammed the stick forward but by then be was falling, wavering, spinning.
He plunged past one plane and caught a blurred glimpse of another, wheeling towards him.
He man-handled and trampled the controls: nothing answered.
The other plane continued its turn its wingspan widening.
Dickinson half-rose and screamed at the man but the plane lumbered on seeming to spread itself with deliberate stupidity right across his path.
Dickinson shouted his rage.
At the last moment the other pilot looked up.
Dickinson ducked down and screwed up his face bracing himself against she shock, listening to the widening roar of the other engine.
The blow rattled the plane as if it had been a car bouncing through a pot-hole.
Then the engine note was suddenly fading, turning light and harmless, and Dickinson felt the controls start  to answer.
He eased the SE out of its manic plunge and into a steady glide.
One set of wing-tips was a mess, and both wings on that side looked a bit bent back; otherwise, nothing.
He looked up and saw a plane following him down; it too had a battered wing-tip.
He laughed aloud.
What a nonsense it all was!
The difference between two dead men and two slightly bent aeroplanes was just a fraction of a second.
What a joke!
A couple of wires in his damaged wing snapped, dashing open the fabric.
He stopped laughing.
The other plane powered along side him: Kimberley.
Dickinson waved, and Kimberley waved back, and dived away.
Dickinson sailed down in slow, sweeping curves, feeling strangely innocent.
It occurred to him that if this were over the Front he would be a gift for even the stupidest German pilot.
It also occurred to him that if he ever found a German plane as helpless as this, Woolley would require him to destroy it.
Finlayson came over and looked at she splintered stubs of Dickinson's propeller.
‘It's this bloody awful field,’ he said.
‘You must have nicked it when you were taking off:’
‘Probably.’
‘The least he could do is have it rolled.
He bloody well chewed it up, him and his childish kite-flying.’
‘No doubt about that.’
Finlayson walked around and looked at the damage from the other side.
‘Aren't you going to do anything about it?’ he asked, waving at the lumpy grass.
‘I expect be knows.’
Finlayson sniffed.
‘I'll make bloody sure he bloody knows,’ he said, and went away.
Woolley listened to Finlayson in silence.
‘You don't like the field,’ he said.
‘I don't see why it should be dangerously bad,’ Finlayson said, ‘Sir.’
Woolley drained his Guinness.
‘Draw a dozen spades from Stores,’ he said.
‘Take the pilots and flatten the field.’
‘But sir, it needs to be rolled.’
‘Hit the field,’ Woolley said, ‘with the spade.’
Finlayson looked at the bleak, vast meadow.
‘That'll take hours,’ he said.
‘Better hurry Woolley advised.
Finlayson walked away without saluting.
Woolley watched his resentful back.
‘Finlayson!’ he called.
Finlayson half-turned, ducked under the flying bottle, slipped on the wet grass, and fell.
Woolley, arms folded, watched him get up and limp away, trembling with rage.
It took the squadron all the remaining hours of daylight to clean up the airfield.
They replaced hundreds of divots, flattened hundreds of bumps, filled in scores of ruts, and pounded the turf until their backs ached and their hands burned.
From time to time light showers blew over, but the squadron plodded on with a mute, masochistic determination.
The sound of their sodden thwacking punctuated the dusk.
When it was too dark to see, they came in, grimly satisfied.
‘It's done and I hope he likes it,’ Finlayson told the adjutant.
‘I notice he never took his coat off and helped.’
‘That was hardly possible,’ Woodruffe said.
‘He was called to Corps H.Q. for a conference two hours ago.’
They received the news silently, unwilling to concede that Woolley had a good reason for doing anything.
‘When's he coming back?’
Lambert asked.
The adjutant shrugged.
‘You know Corps.
It's supposed to be a very big conference.’
‘Woody,’ Rogers said, ‘is it all right with you if we all go over to St Denis and cause a certain amount of devastation?’
‘That depends,’ the adjutant said.
‘Will it bring the fair name of the squadron into disrepute?’
‘Inevitably,’ Rogers said.
‘Inevitably and repeatedly.’
‘In that case I'd better come with you,’ Woodruffe said.
Force 6: Strong Breeze Large branches in motion; telegraph wires ‘sing’.
Umbrellas used with difficulty
Six empty barrels stood on the main dining table of the best restaurant in St Denis.
They supported two large chairs, which supported one small chair.
Lambert sat in this chair and emptied his wine over Finlayson, seated far below.
‘There was a Low Story,’ he said.
‘The chair find bloody old Finlayson guilty of telling a Low Story, the bastard.’
‘All right,’ Finlayson said easily, licking the drops off his upper lip.
‘Tell you another.
Man walking down quiet street, gets taken short —’
‘Heard it!’
The other pilots sprawled, bloated with food and squiffy with drink, around the table.
Some of them started throwing bread at Finlayson.
‘Another story, then,’ Finlayson said.
‘Man falls down at stag party and breaks his cock.’
‘Heard it!’
The squadron booed him.
‘Christ, that's old,’ Kimberley said.
‘My problem,’ said Finlayson, drinking, ‘is I don't know any new dirty jokes.’
‘Your problem is you don't know any old jokes,’ Dangerfield boomed.
‘Your problem is you have absolutely no sense of humour.’
‘I deny that!’
Finlayson cried.
‘I categorically repudiate that!’
‘There you are, that proves it,’ Rogers declared.
‘Boring and pompous.
‘Found guilty,’ Lambert ruled from on high.
‘Mr Woodruffe will pass sentence.’
‘Relax and enjoy your problem,’ the adjutant decreed.
Lambert emptied his glass over Finlayson again.
‘Perhaps you'll know better next time,’ he said.
‘Next problem.’
‘My problem is I can't see straight,’ Rogers said.
‘Seriously, chaps, you all look a bit squiffy to me.’
‘You're boozed, Rogers,’ Lambert told him.
Who's that?’
Rogers closed one eye and peered up.
‘Is that God?’
The bread-throwers turned their attention on Lambert.
‘I always knew God was on our side,’ Rogers mumbled, ‘but I never knew He was so bloody ugly.’
Lambert stood up.
‘Being God,’ he said, ‘and seeing as this is Tuesday, I shall now make water.’
He began unbuttoning.
The owner of the restaurant came in.
‘Non, non, messieurs!’ he pleaded.
Lambert sat down.
‘Good news,’ he said.
‘We've found someone who really has a problem.’
They cheered, and threw bread at the haggard Frenchman.
Lambert tried to douse him with wine.
‘In nomine Patris —’ he began when the street door burst open, and Killion rushed in.
‘I found them!’ he shouted.
‘You forgot to stutter,’ Rogers said.
‘Go out and come in again.’
Six sulky girls sidled through the door.
‘I f-f-f-found them,’ Killion bragged, ‘in a b-b-b-brothel.’
The restaurant owner had turned white.
‘Mon dieu!’ he gasped.
‘Ah! ça non!
Quand même!’
He rushed over to Killion and shook him, spitting demands.
‘I s-s-s-say,’ Killion said as he rattled back and forth ‘This is f-f-f-f-u-n.’
The girls slouched moodily into the room and found places to sit.
‘We shall now sing one chorus of ‘Praise God, from Whom all Blessings Flow’, Lambert announced.
Woodruffe rose and led the singing.
The girls found themselves glasses and bottles and began drinking.
The Frenchman slapped Killion hard on both cheeks and ran out into the street.
Dangerfield selected the thinnest girl and began dancing a waltz to the hymn-tune.
Killion stood there hiccuping until Lambert threw wine over him; then he woke up and went to the doorway and started calling out.
The singing ended.
Killion came back in.
‘I found these ch-ch-chaps in the b-b-b-brothel, too,’ he said.
Three elderly French accordionists eased sideways through the door, smiled  nervously, and played conflicting chords.
‘Music!’
Dangerfield shouted happily, and kissed them.
‘Allez, allez!’
The eldest one wheezed uncertainly into a waltz.
The others listened hard, launched themselves, and put on speed until they caught up with him.
Soon all the girls were dancing.
Lambert conducted them on high with an open bottle, sprinkling the couples as they passed beneath.
The owner came in with a gendarme.
‘Bonjour, gents,’ Lambert called, ‘vous avez une réservation?’
The gendarme came over to the table and began a long address to Lambert, who listened politely, commenting ‘Peut-être’, from time to time.
The restaurant owner went around the room, trying to separate the dancers.
He grabbed Killion and shouted at him, spitting heavily.
Killion put down his glass and used the Frenchman's necktie as a towel to mop his face.
The man trembled with rage, leaning slightly forward because of the strain on his collar.
Then he slapped Killion hard on the face and took a pace back and kicked him in the groin.
Killion collapsed, screaming; the music faltered, stopped, and started up again in a noisy polka.
Kimberley left his girl and knocked the Frenchman down.
Lambert leaned over and sprinkled wine on both bodies.
‘Ashes to ashes,’ he intoned.
‘A tooth for a tooth.’
The gendarme hurried around the table, drawing his truncheon as he came.
Dangerfield followed and, as the gendarme raised his truncheon, reached up and tugged it away from him.
The gendarme whirled around and swung a punch.
Dangerfield dodged; the Frenchman stumbled over Killion and lurched into one of the girls.
She kicked him on the leg and also knocked his hat off.
He got away from her and looked for Dangerfield.
The French girl came up behind him and kicked his backside.
The gendarme saw Dangerfield and flung a chair at him.
It went through a window.
The band faltered, took a breath, and plunged into a two-step.
The gendarme stood bewildered for a moment, and then ran into the street, where for some time he could be heard blowing his whistle.
But he did not come back, and soon they were dancing again.
Discarded clothing began to litter the floor.
The band was fairly drunk, and the tunes tended to overlap now.
A small crowd  gathered in the street and was watching through the shattered window.
Church came up from the cellar with his arms full of bottles, and handed them out to the spectators.
‘Plenty more downstairs,’ he assured them.
‘They've been hiding it, you know.
But I found it.’
Killion got to his feet, kicked the groaning restaurant owner, and took a bottle from Church.
Woodruffe found Rogers, and shook his hand.
‘Dudders, old boy,’ he said.
‘Don't you think we ought to be toddling off?
Otherwise the chaps might start getting into mischief.’
‘Can't go yet,’ Rogers objected.
‘These girls still have to be stuffed.
Besides, we're not all here.
Dickinson and Gabriel haven't come back.’
‘Where are they?’
‘Don't know.
Went off on their own.’
‘Damn nuisance.’
‘Never mind, Woody.
Relax and enjoy your problem.’
‘I hope you're sober enough to drive us all home, that's all.’
Rogers studied him curiously.
‘Funny thing, Woody,’ he said.
‘I can see your lips moving, but I can't hear what you say.’
‘That's because you're absolutely stinko, Dudley.’
‘I won't deny it, I am a bit squiffy.’
Dangerfield danced past and called out: ‘That nasty frog is beginning to come round.
He just tried to bite my ankle.’
‘We ought to do something about our genial host,’ the adjutant said.
‘Look here, I'm coming down,’ bawled Lambert.
‘I've been making several very funny speeches and no bugger has laughed, so I'm coming down.’
‘We could put him up there,’ Rogers suggested.
‘What, the high seat?
Not very safe, is it?’
‘Best place for him.
Better tie his hands, or he might do himself an injury.’
They bound the restaurant owner, who moaned feebly and thrashed about a bit; then with Lambert's aid they hoisted him to the high seat.
They got down and looked at him.
He swore so violently that he nearly fell off; then he froze.
Then he was sick all down his front.
‘Definitely the best place,’ Rogers said.
Twenty minutes later the band had been augmented by violins and drums, and several new girls had joined the party.
Church was making regular trips to the cellar.
The girls from the brothel had taken over a small back room.
Rogers found Killion and congratulated him on his work.
‘Don't get left out, old chap,’ he urged.
He tried to slap Killion on the shoulder and missed, and ended up on the floor.
‘Make sure you get your share,’ he advised.
‘Don't worry, D-Dudley,’ Killion said.
‘I h-h-h-had mine at the b-b-b-brothel.
All s-s-s-six of them.’
Rogers rolled his eyes.
He found himself looking up the skirts of a girl dancing by, and he rolled across the floor in an attempt to keep up with her.
The dancers kicked him and trod on him until he got to his knees and crawled away.
A few minutes later the lights went out.
‘Boche bombers,’ said Woodruffe complacently.
‘Hit the electricity works again.
Now we can all go home.’
He trod carefully, searching for pilots in the occasional glow of cigarettes.
‘Is that you, Kimberley?
The lights have all gone out.
Don't you think we might get started?’
Kimberley grunted as he took off his trousers.
‘I am,’ he said.
Woodruffe found a bottle and sat down.
A couple of minutes later a soft glow appeared in the cellar doorway.
Church tip-toed into the room, carrying a biscuit-tin full of candles.
He tittered nervously as he tried to see through the glare of the flames.
His sweaty, unshaven face gleamed like wet chalk.
‘Christ, Church, you look like the Spirit of Syphilis Yet to Come,’ Lambert said.
Church shook with silent mirth and dropped the tin.
All the candles went out.
‘Bloody good job,’ someone said.
‘I don't need any bloody beacons to guide my way.’
Eventually a few candles were lit, the band started playing, the couples uncoupled and went off to the back room, and the party went on.
Woodruffe slouched around, looking for Rogers.
He noticed that the floor was running with wine.
Over in one corner Church was systematically emptying bottles.
The dancers sent up a spray of froth and droplets.
Woodruffe turned his head sideways and dimly saw Rogers sitting under the table, cross-legged, smoking.
‘Come in out of the rain,’ Rogers said.
‘Bags of room in here.’
Woodruffe crawled in.
‘Far be it from me to play the killjoy, Dudders,’ he said.
‘Is that a bottle you have there?
Thanks.’
‘Good party, eh?’
Woodruffe drank thoughtfully.
‘Church is behind all this,’ he said, pointing at the floor.
‘Church is raining booze.’
‘Trouble with this lot,’ Rogers said, ‘don't know when to stop.’
‘I always said, right from the start — and you'll bear me out, Dudley — I always said it would end in tears.’
‘Right.’
At that moment the police smashed down the door.
The struggle was messy.
A dozen policemen rushed into the room and tried to herd everyone into the corners.
One of them slipped on the sopping floor, cannoned into the table, and brought down the pyramid of barrels and chairs which still supported the restaurant owner.
He fell badly, unable to use his arms to protect himself.
In the excitement Church hit a policeman with a bottle.
Abruptly the atmosphere changed, and the police began knocking people about.
The pilots were drunk and half-naked; they got no help from the French girls, who simply screamed and tried to get out of the window.
The band, too drunk to understand, began to play the Marseillaise.
More pilots ran out of the back room, aroused by the uproar, and joined in the fist-fight.
Only Woodruffe kept his head.
‘Candles, Dudley,’ he shouted in his ear.
‘Put out the candles.’
They crawled from under the table and knocked over every candle they could see.
Soon the room was no longer dim but gloomy.
The fighting became wilder and more confused.
One policeman accidentally hit another, who fell to his knees, cursing.
He was evidently their leader, for most of them stopped.
Woodruffe scrambled towards the splintered door and croaked: ‘Everybody get out!’
Nobody heard him.
Rogers bellowed: ‘Get out, get out, get out!’
This started a scrambling rush to the door.
Woodruffe was  vaguely puzzled by the passivity of the police.
One or two lashed out, but most did nothing.
He held the broken door and shoved people into the street.
Still nobody tried to stop them, or come after them.
It was too good to be true.
Perhaps the leader was too badly hurt to give orders…
He joined the tail-end of the rush and slammed the door behind him.
The night was ten times blacker than he expected.
He heard a confusion of puzzled shouts ahead and stumbled over something.
His wet feet slithered on a wooden ramp which sounded hollowly underneath.
Woodruffe paused, suspicious, yet too muzzy to decide.
‘Get on!’ rasped someone.
He scrabbled up the ramp and fell over a body.
Behind him the tailgate went up with a bang, and through his face he felt the vibrations of an engine.
Then the truck accelerated over the cobbles into a violent right-hand turn, and the squadron found itself thrown hard against the side of the police patrol-wagon.
The truck raced along bad roads for about five miles, crashing over pot-holes and making heavy weather of the gear change.
The pilots sorted themselves out, and tried to find something to hang on to.
The inside was black, dirty and deafening.
Woodruffe shouted a question which even he could not hear.
After that he concentrated on saving his battered skin.
The truck finally swerved off the road and jounced across pine roots before it stalled with a jerk in the middle of a little grove.
The pilots cautiously relaxed their grip and let their muscles slacken.
Nobody spoke.
Chains rattled and pins grated.
The tailboard fell with a bang.
A dark figure took off a police helmet and wiped his brow.
‘I think we've shaken them off,’ he said.
It was Dickinson.
‘Can we get out, Dicky?’
Woodruffe asked.
‘By all means.
Stretch your legs, have a smoke.
I'm out of cigarettes myself.
Got some snuff, though’
Groaning and wincing, Goshawk Squadron fell clumsily on to the springy turf.
‘I'll take a pinch, if I may,’ Dangerfield said.
‘Head seems a spot thick.’
Dickinson offered his snuff.
‘You didn't get beaten up by those savage rozzers, I hope,’ he said.
‘To tell the truth, I'm not one hundred per cent sure whether I did or not,’ Dangerfield said.
‘I wasn't paying much attention.’
He sniffed vigorously.
‘Look here, Dicky,’ Rogers said, ‘what on earth are you doing wearing that ridiculous hat?
And driving this filthy lorry?
I take it you were driving.’
‘None other.
I got her up to seventy-five, too.
Not bad, considering I had the handbrake on all the way.’
‘So that's what that funny smell is,’ Lambert said.
‘I thought it was Church’
‘I keep seeing great big purple Catherine Wheels,’ Dangerfield said.
‘Purple with orange spots.’
He sneezed hard.
‘Ah, that's better,’ he said damply.
‘I thought we were done for,’ Kimberley said.
‘I thought we were all going to end up in some manky frog clink.’
‘Dicky rescued us from the jaws of the Bastille,’ Richards said.
‘How did you do it?
Damned lucky you came along when you did.’
‘Actually, I'd been hanging around the street for quite some time.
Those coppers had been assembling, you see, so I lurked in the shadows and watched, and when the Top Cop turned up he told them all to get in the Black Maria.
Then they backed it up to the front door and they all charged inside.’
‘I remember that now,’ Lambert said.
‘They didn't even knock.
I mean, we could have been doing anything in there.’
‘I thought I ought to do something,’ Dickinson said, ‘but I couldn't think what.
The driver was still in the cab, you see, so I couldn't let the tyres down.’
‘What?’
Woodruffe interrupted.
‘You were going to let the tyres down?’
‘That was my first idea.’
‘Ah.’
The adjutant opened his mouth, then closed it.
‘Never mind,’ he said.
‘So what I did was, I got some stones and threw them at the driver.’
‘Quite right,’ Lambert said.
‘When in doubt, always stone the police.’
‘Well, it worked,’ Dickinson said defensively.
‘He jumped out and came galloping down the street, waving a sort of a club.
I remember he was an awfully big chap.
Big, but not fast.’
‘Like an elephant.’
Kimberley suggested.
‘Elephants are bloody swift,’ Finlayson declared.
‘I'd like to see you out-run an elephant.’
‘Shut up,’ Woodruffe said.
‘Well, I nipped down a little alley.
There was a doorway on one side, so I got in there.
I still had a stone in my hand, and the moment the bobby turned into the alley I threw this stone up the other end.
He thought it was me, and he put on a bit of a spurt and as he went by I tripped him up.’
‘With your foot?’
Rogers asked.
‘Well, yes.
I mean, it was all I had.’
‘Just trying to get the picture, old boy.’
‘Walking sticks are best,’ Kimberley said.
‘Walking sticks are bloody lethal.’
‘Shut up,’ Woodruffe said.
‘So down he went.’
‘Oh, rather.
He came the most appalling cropper.
I think he knocked himself out, or something.
Anyway, I removed his belt and pulled his trousers down and tied the legs in a knot, just to make sure.
Then I came back, just as you chaps were pouring out.
Fortunately, the engine was still running.’
‘Remarkable, Dicky,’ the adjutant said.
‘I honestly never thought you had it in you.
First-class performance.’
‘It did come off rather well, didn't it?
That bit about throwing the stone up the alley to make him rush off after it, I got that from a detective story.
The business with the trousers was my idea.
I must admit — Good God, what's that dreadful noise?’
They turned towards a choking, bubbling death-rattle.
‘It's only Church being sick,’ Finlayson said.
‘D'you think you could drive a little slower for the rest of the way, Dicky?
My arse is raw.’
‘Now that I've got the handbrake off,’ Dickinson said, ‘I think it'll be less of a struggle.
I suppose we can go back now?’
‘Why ever not?’
Dangerfield asked in surprise.
‘Well, everybody did get out?
You are all here?’
A simple count answered that question.
Killion was missing.
A minority was in favour of abandoning Killion and going home, but the others were persuaded by Rogers.
‘Killion got hold of the whores and the band,’ he pointed out.
‘Whatever you think about Killion, you must admit that it was a damn good band.’
They got into the truck and Dickinson drove cautiously back towards St Denis.
When they were still two miles away his headlights caught a half-naked figure trying to scramble through a hedge.
He pulled up alongside.
‘B-b-b-b-bugger off, you w-w-w-w-wogs,’ Killion called.
‘Ooooh!’ he added with feeling as a bramble raked his shoulder.
‘Killion, it's us.’
Dickinson got down and held back the prickly branches while Killion blundered out, his lips triphammering away at the opening consonants of all the swear-words he knew.
It turned out that Killion had been in the cellar when the police came, and he escaped through a trapdoor into the street.
As he was wearing only trousers and shoes he knew that he would soon be picked up in the town, so he got away through alleys and into the country.
It was sheer luck that he had chosen the same road as the truck.
‘Now, perhaps, we can all go home,’ said Finlayson.
‘N-n-n-n-no, not y-y-y-y-yet.’
Killion shook his head emphatically.
‘Who the hell else?’
‘G-g-g-g —’
‘Gabriel,’ said Rogers disgustedly.
‘I'd completely forgotten about Gabriel.
Where the devil is he?’
‘I know,’ said Killion.
Dickinson stopped outside a Catholic church on the outskirts of St Denis.
Killion and Woodruffe were in the cab with him.
‘Are  you sure?’ he asked.
Killion nodded.
‘He s-s-said he'd b-b-b-be here.’
Woodruffe said: ‘I can see a little light.
See?
In the corner of that high window.’
They walked through the churchyard.
It was bitterly cold, and Killion wore Dickinson's tunic.
Dickinson, in shirt sleeves, shuddered.
Faintly they heard music.
The church door was not locked.
Woodruffe pushed it open, and the organized moan of pleading chords reached out to them with the smell of cold masonry and dusty matting and faintly dinging incense.
They walked in, feeling their way along the matting: the church was even darker than the night.
From the middle they could see, by the limited and spherical aura of two candles, Gabriel's large and lumpy head, up on high beyond the choir-stalls, outlined against the soaring stalagmites of organ-pipes.
He leaned slightly to the right, and a high trickle of icy notes began to feel its way towards them.
‘Has he been up to this all night?’
Dickinson whispered.
Again Killion nodded.
Woodruffe took a deep breath.
‘He really does have a problem,’ he said; but he too spoke softly.
‘All the same, we can't stay here.’
They stood, feeling the groan of Gabriel's chords vibrate through their teeth, and tasting the pure crystal of his wandering notes.
At last, when there was a brief pause, Woodruffe cleared his throat.
Gabriel turned his head and stared.
He was utterly calm, waiting for the interrupter to explain himself.
‘We're going back now,’ Woodruffe called.
‘If you want to come with us.’
His voice resounded and redounded, searching into every cold corner.
Gabriel looked sharply in their direction.
Then he took his hands from the organ and looked all over the keyboard as if to make quite sure that all the keys and stops were there.
He snorted quietly: an unemotional noise; a punctuation mark.
He pinched out one candle and took the other to light his way down.
Nobody spoke on the way back to the truck.
‘Now can we please go bloody home?’
Finlayson said.
‘I think we might,’ Dickinson said, yawning.
‘You do know, of course, that you're pointing in the wrong direction,’ Gabriel stated.
Woodruffe stared.
‘You mean that's the way back to camp?
Back through the town?’
‘Unless you want to make a fifty-mile detour.’
‘We can't just drive back through the middle of St Denis,’ Rogers said.
‘They'll lynch us.’
‘I'm not so sure,’ Richards said.
‘It's the last thing they'd expect, you know.
Besides, I don't fancy going fifty miles the wrong way at this time of night.’
‘Church has just been sick again,’ Finlayson said, ‘partly over me’
‘You're absolutely sure, Gabriel?’
Dickinson asked.
Gabriel gave him a short, flat look.
‘Yes,’ he said.
‘All right,’ Dickinson said.
‘Only you don't know what's been going on.’
‘Let's get started, for God's sake,’ Kimberley growled.
‘I don't care if I sleep in camp or the Bastille.
There's damn-all to choose between them, anyway.’
They got into the truck and drove gingerly through the town.
They had to pass the restaurant in order to reach the right road; but as it happened nobody even looked at them.
The restaurant was on fire.
‘Not a happy day for our genial host,’ Lambert said.
They scrambled to the back to see the fire brigade squirting water on the flames.
‘He must be feeling pretty discouraged.’
‘I expect he did it for the insurance,’ Dangerfield said.
‘Some chaps are like that, you know.
Completely irresponsible.’
They turned a corner, and the scene vanished.
Almost immediately the truck came to a stop.
‘Police,’ guessed Finlayson.
‘Now we're for it.’
But it was Woodruffe who came around from the cab.
‘You can drive me home, Dudley,’ he said.
‘We've found your car.
‘Haven't got a car,’ Rogers said.
‘Have I?’
‘Well, you drove it here.
You might as well drive it back.’
‘I can't,’ said Rogers.
‘I'm too squiffy.’
‘But you must.
It's got your cheque-book in it, and we still haven't paid for tonight's meal.’
‘All right.’
Rogers got down.
The truck rumbled away.
With some difficulty he got the car to start and drove slowly along the middle of the road.
He gripped the wheel tightly and held his face quite close to the windscreen.
They were in top gear, but still moving slowly.
‘We'll never get home at this rate, Dudley,’ Woodruffe said.
‘These hills are a lot steeper than they look,’ Rogers said.
‘It'll be all right when we go down the other side.’
After a few minutes Woodruffe said: ‘You've got your foot on the brake, Dudley.’
Rogers released it, and the limousine bounded forwards.
He relaxed and sat back.
‘Dickinson has the same trouble, sometimes,’ he said.
A few miles later, Rogers asked what Gabriel had been doing in the church.
‘Playing the organ.
Rather well, too.’
‘You mean he played the bloody organ all night?’
‘Yes.’
Rogers frowned.
‘Odd thing to do.’
‘Yes.’
‘Sounds as if friend Gabriel has a bit of a problem.’
‘Perhaps.
On the other hand, he seems to be able to relax and enjoy it.’
They caught up with the truck and followed it back to camp.
It was four in the morning when they arrived, and the place was alive with men taking down tents and loading stores and checking supplies.
Woodruffe jumped out of the car in a panic and looked for Woolley.
He found him sitting in his canvas chair beside a brazier, drinking Guinness with the chief armourer.
Woolley gave the adjutant a single glance and then looked away.
‘Get dressed,’ he ordered.
‘We're moving back to the Front.
Fricourt.
Take-off at dawn.’
‘But they can't,’ Woodruffe said automatically.
‘They're —’ He turned and looked behind him.
Killion and Richards, half undressed and filthy, were carrying Church; his feet were dragging in the mud.
Behind came Kimberley, holding his head, and  Finlayson, barefoot and wrapped in a blanket.
Lambert, limping badly, wore a French police helmet, and Dangerfield was wiping mud from his eyes: he had just fallen down.
Only Gabriel and Dickinson were fully dressed and erect.
As he watched, Lambert tripped over his own stumbling feet.
The adjutant turned away in shame and disgust.
But Woolley was no longer there.
His chair was there, and beside it his empty bottle, but Woolley had gone.
The pilots dragged themselves over, and blinked painfully at the tableau, harshly delineated by the pressure lamps.
They shuffled into a semicircle and squinted at Woodruffe.
‘We're off to Fricourt,’ he said miserably.
‘Take-off at dawn.’
Out of the darkness came a squat metal canister.
It bounced and rolled between them and lay in the shadow of the chair.
Some of them leaned forward and tried to see what it was.
The thunderflash exploded with a stunning ferocity that shattered their jagged nerves and twisted their sagging faces with terror.
They were home again.
Force 7: Moderate Gale Whole trees in motion
Goshawk Squadron landed at Fricourt in light drizzle with blinding hangovers, and got away with only two accidents, thanks to the grace of God and an unusually long field.
Dangerfield eased his SE5a into a three-point landing while he was still twenty feet above ground and smashed his under-carriage.
Lambert touched down shakily, got lost and drove into some bog where his wheels stuck fast, the nose buried itself, and the tail reared high like a flag on a steeple.
When they came out with ladders to rescue him he was asleep.
The squadron spent the rest of the day settling in.
Three replacements arrived: Callaghan, Peacock and Blunt, straight from Flying Training Schools in England.
The adjutant, holding his head with one hand, took them to Woolley.
‘Replacements, sir,’ he said.
‘Their names —’
‘I don't want to know,’ Woolley said flatly.
He looked at their fresh, serious, eager-to-impress faces and turned away.
He was eating a cold sausage; his tongue located a piece of gristle and spat it out.
‘I am a genial, jovial and well-liked commanding officer,’ he told them.
‘My warmth and charm are exceeded only by my old-fashioned courtesy and my fucking sympathy.’
He stared at Lambert's stranded plane.
‘As long as you are in this shoddy squadron, there are certain words you will not use.
Here they are.
Fair, sporting, honourable, decent, gentlemanly.’
Woolley felt in his pocket, took out a flimsy telegram, read it, blew his nose on it, and threw it away.
‘Those are bad words,’ he said.
‘Bad, murdering words.
Don't even think them.’
The replacements saluted and withdrew, feeling bewildered.
The adjutant billeted them separately, each sharing a hut with an experienced pilot.
Callaghan got Finlayson.
He found him sitting on a bunk, holding a bottle of milk in one hand and cup of gin in the other.
‘Hullo!’ said Callaghan.
Finlayson winced.
‘I say, are you all right?’
Callaghan asked.
He noticed the dirt and congealed blood on Finlayson's head.
Finlayson thought for a good long time, while he stared at Callaghan's bright new buttons.
Then Finlayson put down his bottle and cup, rolled over, and was sick into a fire bucket.
Callaghan felt his pent-up excitement go flat.
This was not the way he had expected it to be, at all.
Next morning, Woolley briefed the squadron on its first combat patrol.
‘Just sweeping-up,’ he said.
‘We've got ten miles of Front to look after.
We'll fly in two sections.
Rogers leads the other.
Each section flies a zig-zag from here to the Front and back.
Nobody crosses the Front.’
‘What if we're chasing a damaged Hun, sir?’
‘You're an idiot, Rogers.’
‘Yes, sir.’
Woolley called the replacements to one side and asked them if they had flown an SE before.
None had.
He looked at them like an auctioneer trying to improve a poor lot m a cattle market.
‘I won't depress you with the truth,’ he said.
‘Just remember this.
If the engine fails on take-off, keep going straight ahead and crash land.
Never try to turn back.
Never.
If you manage to take off, follow me and do exactly as I do.
Can you make your head move?’ he asked Blunt.
‘Yes, sir.’
‘Show me.’
Blunt turned his head.
‘Move it right round,’ Woolley ordered.
‘Now up and down.
Turn it all the way.’
The others watched Blunt rotate his head.
‘Do that all the time,’ Woolley said.
‘Search for the man who is searching for you.’
He sucked in his ill-shaven cheeks and stroked his thin lips, and stared at them.
‘Finders keepers,’ he said.
The replacements got their planes off the ground and Woolley  marshalled them into a broad arrowhead, with Dickinson and Church out on the flanks.
The cloud ceiling was at two thousand feet.
The countryside lay dead and cold, waiting for spring.
The roads shone like strips of lead; every footpath was waterlogged.
Nearer the Front the land began to erupt in craters, set and changeless: boiling porridge caught in a photograph.
Then the Line itself-supply trenches angling cautiously up to an elaborate hem-stitch of Allied positions, with the wire lying beyond, scruffy and irregular, a tide mark in no-man's land.
They turned and flew back.
There was no enemy air activity at all.
For an hour they flew a repetitive zig-zag from their base to the Front and back, until Callaghan's neck was stiff and his eyes ached; but when he suddenly spotted an aircraft he wanted to shout the news.
After a few moments he realized they were flying on an interception course.
Then he remembered that Woolley had changed the course before he, Callaghan, saw the plane.
Reluctantly he conceded that Woolley saw it first.
It turned out to be French: a Nieuport.
Woolley led them down in a mock attack, the arrowhead formation swooping in a long, curling dive that went under the Frenchman's tail and zoomed up and levelled out, back on patrol.
The excitement of that plunge affected Callaghan.
If only they could catch a German!
But the war was asleep today.
After two hours Woolley turned for home.
Blunt gratefully recognized that they were losing height, and rested his neck; then felt guilty and started searching again.
They were within sight of the airfield when Woolley inexplicably wheeled left and they climbed towards the mattress of cloud.
Blunt couldn't see the reason for that.
He was four or five lengths away from the next plane when one by one they angled into the quilted greyness.
Cloud frightened Blunt.
It seduced his imagination: woolly wisps streaming past told him nothing; he could be flying into a mountainside…or diving…or two seconds away from a collision…
What if the cloud went up to five thousand feet?
Or six?
Or ten?
Blunt felt the sweat break out in his armpits and trickle down  his ribs.
He shut his eyes tight and locked his fists around the joystick.
Part of his mind queried the value or purpose of sweating.
What possible good could wet armpits do?
Deep purple shapes bloomed and turned orange on his eyelids, then everything went bright grey.
He opened his eyes.
They were in weak, hazy, winter sunlight.
Woolley flattened out, turned right and prowled over the surface for about a quarter of a mile.
Then he led them down into the bloody cloud again.
Blunt closed his eyes and loathed Woolley.
He locked his fingers around the joystick again and gripped it tightly in the angle of the dive, hearing the engine-note climb and the wing bracings develop a piercing whistle that merged into a slow shriek.
Fear slowed his thoughts, and grudgingly granted him one consolation: at this speed they must come out at the bottom a damn sight faster than they went through at the top.
He opened his eyes and searched for a break in the streaming fog.
There was nothing, and suddenly there was everything: solid, sodden fields slightly canted over, and three, four German aircraft flying across them at fifteen hundred feet.
Three Pfalz scouts and a lumbering two-seater observation plane.
A reconnaissance patrol.
The formation swam up as Woolley held the flight in its dive.
At ten lengths the furthest Pfalz turned to meet the attack, far too late.
The six SE5s went through the German formation like an Act of God, spraying fire in a red-hot probe.
Woolley, Callaghan and Peacock scored bursts on the two-seater.
Dickinson and Church engaged the scouts.
Blunt saw nothing ahead but he shot off a dozen rounds on impulse as he plunged through a great hole.
He remembered only details: the shiny, slate-blue skins of the German wings; the old-fashioned, pinch-waisted crosses; the swept-back tail-fins.
Then he was hauling back on the control column and edging in on Woolley as the flight hurtled up in a long recovery from its dive.
Centrifugal force clamped his backside and spine against the seat.
He screwed his neck around to try and find the enemy.
Ragged black smoke led to the two-seater; the Pfalz scouts had gone, vanished.
Woolley levelled off two hundred feet from the burning aircraft and flew parallel.
The pilot had collapsed inside his cockpit.
The observer lay sprawled across his gun, his blond hair streaming romantically in the wind.
Something erupted with a soft boom, like a distant starting-gun, and the aircraft crumpled.
Its tail stood up and it fell, spinning slowly as if it were gently unwinding itself.
It crashed on one side of a thick hedge.
A herd of cows had been standing on the other side, and Blunt watched them stampede away, fanning out like clumsy messengers with news for all parts.
‘I can't get over your not being related to C. G. W. Peacock,’ Rogers said.
He shook his head and frowned at his drink.
‘It really is the most remarkable coincidence.’
Peacock clasped and unclasped and reclasped his hands in an embarrassment of humility and candour.
‘Never even met him, I'm sorry to say,’ he said.
He put his hands in his pockets.
Nobody else had their hands in their pockets.
He took his out.
‘Hampshire,’ Rogers said.
‘Opening bat.
Useful bowler, too.’
‘We…live in Norfolk.’
‘Norfolk?’
Rogers looked at him doubtfully.
‘D'you know, I don't think I've ever met a cricketer from Norfolk.’
‘No, we…don't seem to go in for…cricket.
Much.’
‘Oh isn't there rather a lot of water up there?’
‘The Broads, yes.
Jolly good for sailing.’
‘Ah’ Rogers drank his drink with the air of a man who had found out why Norfolk people play so little cricket.
There was an odd silence.
The squadron had gathered in the ante-room to the dining-room for a drink before lunch.
Everyone felt relieved to have left Pont St Martin, with its freezing tents, and to be here in Fricourt, where the airfield had hutted accommodation and a village down the road.
Everyone was pleased about the German two-seater, whose remains lay outside in the back of a lorry; but nobody was going to say so while Woolley was in the room.
Rogers turned to Blunt.
‘There was a Jonah Blunt who turned out for Somerset occasionally,’ he said.
‘Sorry.’
Blunt flushed with shyness.
‘Different Blunt.’
‘I used to play cricket,’ Church stated.
‘I played for England, Scotland, Ireland and Wales.’
‘Pay no attention,’ Dickinson told the replacements, ‘he's only showing off in front of the visitors.’
‘In that order,’ Church said firmly.
‘England, Ireland, Scotland and Wales.
I was very good.’
He smiled craftily at Blunt and got himself another drink.
There was another pause.
Peacock glanced warily around him.
He noticed tiny signs of strain: finger-tapping, abrupt yawning, twitching of the eyes.
Some pilots stood serenely, studying their cigarette smoke; but then Peacock saw their white knuckles.
The only exception was the C.O. He leaned his backside against a table, arms folded.
He didn't look pleased with himself, or with anyone else, either.
He looked like one of those Irish rebels whose photographs one saw in the papers: swarthy, intense, indifferent to any opinion but their own.
Smudged by cheap newsprint.
Hanged.
Peacock wondered if all fighter squadrons were like this.
People at home said they were a gay, defiant, rather reckless band of cavaliers of the sky.
Peacock turned away and saw Finlayson picking his nose.
An airman came in: lunch was ready.
They finished their drinks.
‘This is a lot better than Pont St Martin,’ Dickinson said.
‘That mess tent was horribly draughty.’
‘My billet has cockroaches,’ Lambert complained.
‘Big ones.’
‘Clever wee beasts,’ Finlayson said.
‘They won't live where they can't get food and comfort.
Consider yourself lucky.’
‘I suppose we should consider ourselves jolly lucky,’ Peacock said.
‘I mean, to have a German plane shot down the first time we went up.’
Lambert shrugged.
‘I never expected the first scrap to be so easy,’ Callaghan said.
‘I must say it gives a chap confidence, that sort of thing.’
Woolley stopped in the doorway and turned around.
Everyone else stopped.
‘You found it easy?’ he asked Callaghan.
‘Well, sir…’
Callaghan was confused at finding himself the centre of attention.
‘I mean…they didn't really stand much of a chance, did they, sir?’
‘Isn't that as it should be?’
Woolley hadn't moved, but the other pilots were shifting and looking away.
‘Yes sir, I suppose…all I meant was, it's nice to start off with a gift from God, so to speak.’
Killion groaned and beat his fist against his forehead.
Callaghan glanced unhappily from him to Woolley.
‘Understand this,’ Woolley said.
‘While you are in this squadron, which I think will be a short time, you will never use the word ‘luck’.
Luck never killed anyone except the fool who believed in it.’
‘Yes sir,’ Callaghan whispered.
Woolley turned and went in.
Callaghan squeezed his hands to control the trembling.
Dickinson nudged him.
‘In a sense you were right,’ he said.
‘That two-seater was a gift from God.
But God around here is the old man, and believe me, he organized it.’
The conversation during lunch was a little more relaxed.
Killion took pity on Callaghan and tried to discuss Freud, which only confused Callaghan the more.
Eventually Richards told Killion to shut up and then found himself obliged to say something else in his place.
‘I knew a Dermot Cavanagh in Dublin,’ he said.
‘I don't suppose…’
‘We're not really Irish at all.
Must have been once, but…
Funny thing, we had another sort of Anglo-Irishman at our flying school, only he passed out before I did.
I heard he was posted here.
Rather hoped to see him, actually.’
‘Well, you know how it is.
People come and go.’
‘Yes.
Still, I'd like to keep in touch.
O'Shea, his name was.’
‘I shouldn't bother if I were you.’
‘But couldn't I get hold of his address, somehow?
He and I —’
‘Believe me, it's not worth it.’
Callaghan opened his mouth to beg to differ, saw Richards's expression, and shut it.
The adjutant came in.
‘I do think it's rotten the way none of you chaps speaks French,’ he said angrily.
‘You get into all kinds of trouble, and they come to me and complain.
Save me some lunch,’ he told a steward.
‘Are they causing a stink over what we did at St Denis the other night?’
Lambert asked.
‘No, no.
But don't worry, that'll come before long.’
‘We should have paid the bill, you know,’ Dangerfield said.
‘Dinner for ten, plus wine.’
‘I'll send them a cheque,’ Rogers said.
‘Remind me to send them a cheque, Woody.’
‘I think I'll get you to make out several cheques.
In fact you might as well sign the lot and give them to me.’
‘Thinking back on that occasion,’ Kimberley said, ‘isn't it odd that we haven't heard a squeak from the frogs about it?’
‘Frogs croak,’ Church said.
‘It's not odd at all,’ Woodruffe said.
‘For a start, we got posted the very next day.
That put them off the scent.
For another thing, I told a friend of mine at Corps to shuffle his documents if the frogs started looking for us.
He's put us down as posted to Belgium en route for Italy.’
‘Masterly staff work,’ Lambert said.
‘What a blessing it is to have fundamentally dishonest officers.’
A blackshawled French woman appeared at the window and rapped on it.
‘Oh my God.
Her again,’ Woodruffe said.
‘Don't let her in or I'll never get any lunch.
I can't understand a word she says.
‘I speak a little French,’ Blunt offered.
‘Go ahead,’ Woodruffe said.
‘Tell her there's nothing we can do.’
Blunt let her in.
An old man shuttled after her and hooked a horticultural implement of a hand around her arm.
The woman sniffed back her tears, and drew the shawl around her body, which was heavy and useful like a sack of potatoes.
Only the eyes lived in her face.
She faced Blunt and spoke bitterly in rapid French.
He tried to slow her down with gestures which she interpreted as signs of denial, and so she poured it on.
He looked helplessly at the adjutant, who was eating; then at Woolley, who was cleaning his ears with a match stick; and turned back.
‘Pas bon, pas bon,’ he told her, smiling miserably.
‘Je ne comprends pas.’
It sounded feeble.
She stared, and said something that might have been a question or a rejection.
‘Parlez plus lentement, s'il vous plait, madame,’ he said.
' Très, très lentement.’
‘He is asking how much her daughter charges,’ Lambert said in a stage whisper.
She took Blunt's arm and spoke urgently.
She pointed to the window.
She spoke again, led him to the window and pointed.
The old man went with her and stayed there, peering through the dirty panes, scrabbling absently for something to hold on to.
‘Un moment, s'il vous plait,’ Blunt said.
‘C'est très difficile.’
‘Now he is asking how much she costs,’ Lambert said.
Several pilots laughed.
Blunt went towards the adjutant.
‘I'm not at all sure, sir,’ he said.
‘It sounds as if something has died.’
‘It can't be the old man,’ Kimberley said.
‘I just saw him move.’
Woolley said something to a steward.
The man went out.
Woolley continued his ear-cleaning.
‘Send them to the police, for God's sake,’ Dickinson said.
‘What do they expect us to do?’
‘It does seem odd,’ Blunt said.
He went back.
‘Je ne comprends pas, madame.
Expliquez-vous encore, s'il vous plait.’
She looked from Blunt to Dickinson, who was peeling an apple.
She began to cry.
Through her tears she repeated her previous words, only with more anguish and entreaty.
‘She's cutting her prices,’ Lambert said.
‘I knew she would.’
‘Mais nous ne sommes pas la police,’ Blunt told her awkwardly.
‘C'est dommage, mais…’
He paused.
‘Damn and blast.
What's French for ‘Why don't you?’.’
Nobody had any suggestions.
‘Peut-être les gendarmes…’ he began.
Then the woman surprised them all.
She pointed downwards  with both hands, shook them violently, and made the sound of a machine-gun.
‘Good God,’ said Rogers.
He was quite startled.
Woodruffe stared at her trembling hands and face.
He swallowed uncomfortably.
‘Don't just stand there,’ he said, ‘find out what the hell she means, say something.’
He put down his knife and fork.
'Uh…madame…’
Blunt thought desperately.
‘Je regrette…’
She snorted.
‘…que…que tout ce que vous…er…disez n'est pas clair.
She glared.
She stamped to the window and thrust the old man aside.
‘Vos avions!’ she shouted.
‘Vos mitraillettes!’
She stamped back and seized Blunt's arm, rapping on his wrist-watch.
‘Aujourd'hui!’ she screamed.
‘Aujourd'hui vous avez tuée ma petite!’
And then she really began weeping.
‘Jesus Christ,’ the adjutant said.
‘I hope I didn't get that right.’
He looked at the stiff, unhappy faces of the pilots.
‘Come on,’ he called out over her sobs.
‘You were up there, you should know.’
The mess steward came in with Woolley's piano-accordion and gently laid it on the table.
‘All I got was ‘aeroplanes’ and ‘today’,’Finlayson said.
‘What the devil is the old bitch up to?’
‘She says we shot her daughter,’ Blunt said.
Finlayson held his breath, and then let it out in a rush.
‘Bloody nonsense,’ he snapped.
‘How the hell could we?
She must be mad.’
Woolley eased the broad straps around his shoulders and opened the bellows with a wheeze.
‘As far as I can make out,’ Blunt said, ‘the girl was in the fields under our dog-fight, and somebody's bullets hit her.’
‘That wasn't a dog-fight,’ Kimberley said contemptuously.
‘Shut up.’
Woodruffe turned to Dickinson, while Woolley played a few experimental chords.
‘Dicky, you were there.
Could you — could we have done that?’
‘I suppose so.’
Dickinson made a helpless gesture.
‘Anything's possible, isn't it?
We were low enough.
Anyway, high or low, the damn bullets have to end up somewhere, haven't they?’
‘It's a wonder more people aren't killed,’ Church said darkly.
Woolley edged his way into a shanty: The Death of Tom Bowling.
‘I still don't see what we can do, anyway,’ the adjutant said.
‘Ah…madame…’
Blunt hesitated, waiting for a pause, and finally tapped her on the arm.
‘Je vous en prie…uh…
Que voulez-vous?’
This brought on such a bout of weeping and incoherence that the old man shuffled forward to lend his support.
Blunt retired in despair.
‘What can anyone do?’ he asked.
‘If she's dead, she's dead.’
Woolley swung into a second chorus, and gave it greater volume.
There was now a touch of jauntiness about his phrasing.
‘Wait a minute, wait a minute!’
Richards cried.
‘What exactly did she say?
She said ma petite, didn't she?
How do we know it was her little girl?
It could have been her little anything.’
‘Little cow,’ Dickinson suggested.
‘Vache is feminine.’
‘Ask her how old it was,’ Woodruffe told Blunt.
‘Ask what?’
Blunt called, across the vibrant sea-shanty.
‘How old it was,’ Woodruffe shouted.
He looked impatiently at Woolley, but Woolley was putting his heart and soul into the music.
‘Uh…madame…’
Blunt said.
‘Votre petite…uh…quel age?’
She turned away and sank to her knees.
With her arms crossed over her breast, she rocked to and fro, while long, shuddering sobs twisted her face.
The old man looked accusingly at Blunt.
‘I don't think it can be a cow,’ Blunt called to the adjutant.
Woolley released three loud chords, and started on a ponderous version of the Sailors' Horn pipe.
For a few moments the pilots sat there, appalled by the racket, upset by the tragedy, unwilling to leave.
Woolley picked up the tempo.
His fingering was dreadful and his chords were wild approximations, but he pressed on, bashing out his horn pipe in direct competition with the French woman's lament.
Rogers stood up and said: ‘This is no good.’
Woodruffe shouted: ‘What?’
Rogers walked out.
Lambert got up, and with him Killion and Church.
Soon the rest of the squadron was trailing cautiously and apologetically past the French couple, until only Woodruffe and Blunt were left.
Woolley began the horn pipe again.
Blunt looked confusedly at the adjutant, but Woodruffe had his head in his hands.
Blunt went to the door.
Woolley followed, playing him out.
He hooked the door shut with his foot, and walked away, spilling wrong notes behind him like a gardener sowing weeds.
Fifteen minutes later Woolley had the squadron in the air.
They repeated the morning's patrol, landed, refuelled and took off again.
No German aircraft were seen.
Once, Woolley took his flight a little further over the Front than usual, just to provoke the gunners.
For the new pilots it was a disturbing experience.
Dirty blots of smoke appeared, leaking quickly into the sky like bad ink on cheap paper.
Then came the wicked crack-boom! and the tossing, jarring turbulence.
Next the murdering puffs of explosive charge and ragged steel fragments dissolved into weak smoke and the plane was butting through the piece of sky which, seconds before, had been laced with violence; and meanwhile, other shell bursts erupted just as unpredictably ahead, and behind, and below.
Woolley browsed this area, changing course and height every fifteen or twenty seconds to confuse the gunners.
Finally he had exhausted the new pilots' capacity for fear.
They loathed the German guns and they looked with longing and detestation at Woolley, but in each of them fear had given way to a curiously objective fatalism.
Some shells were distant.
Some were close.
The next might kill you.
So what?
They survived and flew home, and Peacock found himself savouring the memory.
Even mortal danger was not entirely unpleasant.
Kimberley's engine failed and he crash-landed in a field, without harm; the others touched down safely.
The adjutant watched them stroll back to their billets, unbuttoning their flying coats, stamping and kicking to work the stiffness away.
They shouted obscene greetings to him, treating him like a commissionaire, or a bar man.
Nobody asked about the French couple.
Woolley trudged towards the adjutant.
He recognized the pastel forms in his hands: indents and returns and vouchers and reports, all the papers that had to be signed to authorize the war to continue.
Then he saw bolder colours: huge red crosses against a white panel on a muddy truck.
He started to run, turning away from the adjutant.
He was carrying his hand bell by its clapper, and he shifted his grip to the handle and began clanging.
Startled pilots stood aside.
Church was too slow and Woolley's shoulder barged him out of the way.
The bell dashed all the way to Woolley's billet until he kicked open the door.
Then it was still.
Margery was sitting on the bed holding a bottle of Guinness that foamed all down her hand and wrist.
‘I heard you coming,’ she said.
‘I never could open these damn things.’
‘How did you know this was my hut?
Did they tell you?’
‘Certainly not.
To have asked would have been indiscreet.
I went around and smelled them.
This one smelled like yours.’
Woolley took the bottle and licked the Guinness off her wrist.
‘I don't smell so bad,’ he said.
‘All men smell lovely,’ Margery said.
‘But you smell magnificent.’
Peacock, Callaghan and Blunt walked to the village after dinner.
It was night; a brisk breeze drove chubby clouds to the east, effacing and revealing the stars as if polishing them for display.
When the wind dropped an occasional rumble in the distance reminded them of their first taste of war's excitements.
The sharp night air made them step out.
Stepping out made them feel bold and confident and strong.
Peacock said: ‘I've been thinking about our commanding officer.
You know, he can't be more than twenty-three at the most.’
‘He's twenty-three,’ Callaghan said.
‘Rogers told me.’
‘How old is Rogers?’
‘Twenty-one and a good bit.’
‘The old man looks twice his age.’
‘He's got that sort of a face,’ Blunt said.
‘You know, degenerate.
‘He's not my idea of a leader, I must say,’ Peacock said.
‘Not the sort of chap you'd want to be captain of a team.’
‘That uniform!’
Callaghan said.
‘He'd get shot if he turned up like that in England.’
‘You really trod on his pet corn before lunch, didn't you?’
Blunt said.
‘All I said was we were lucky to get a two-seater on a plate on our first flight,’ Callaghan protested.
‘No cause for him to be so stuffy, no cause at all.’
They walked in silence for a while, passing the first blacked out cottages.
‘Actually, Dickinson told me that it almost certainly wasn't a matter of luck,’ Peacock said.
‘He seems pretty sure that the old man saw them coming.’
‘Yes, but how did he know they would stay on that course?’
Blunt asked.
‘That must have been luck.’
‘Dickinson thinks not,’ Peacock said.
‘He said it was ten to one the Huns would fly over our field, since the two-seater was on reconnaissance and they'd want to take a picture or something.’
‘Oh,’ said Callaghan.
‘Of course.’
‘You seem to have been pretty thick with Dickinson,’ Blunt said.
‘Did he give you any other advice?’
Blunt still felt hurt about the old French woman.
‘As a matter of fact he did.
He said if you fire long bursts, you risk jamming your gun, so you should get in close and fire short bursts.
Apparently the old man has been hammering this into them for weeks.’
‘Apparently the old man is a bit of a Prussian,’ Blunt said.
‘One tries to be open-minded,’ Callaghan said, ‘but that sort of approach does put one off, rather.
Frankly, I'd respond more if a chap came up to me and said, ‘Look here, we've been doing this  for rather a long time now and we find that this way seems to bring the best results.’’
‘Exactly,’ Blunt said.
‘Oh, well.’
Peacock pointed to an inn.
‘I suppose we should be glad the fire-eater is on our side, and not the Germans’.'
‘From all I've heard,’ Callaghan said, ‘some of the German pilots are jolly decent chaps.’
‘Of course they are.
It's absolute nonsense to say that chivalrous men can't fight a chivalrous war,’ Blunt said.
‘That's why I put in for the R.F.C. We're literally the only sportsmen left.’
Killion saw the three men come in, and turned his back on them.
He was sitting at a corner table with an English girl called Rose Franklin.
She was a nurse at a hospital on the other side of the village, and Killion had met her the previous evening by simply walking into the hospital and asking the first girl he saw if she would come out with him.
Because Killion was young and trembling with desperation, Rose Franklin had agreed.
She had laughed very loudly, but she had agreed.
Rose was a strikingly handsome girl, big-breasted, high-coloured, dancing-eyed.
It was Killion's bad luck that she was boisterous, unromantic, insensitive and recently married.
Nevertheless, her presence was potent, and he persevered.
‘F-funny,’ he said, his sexual hunger overcoming his stutter, ‘I knew as soon as I saw you.’
‘Did you, now!’
Rose said brightly.
‘And what did you know, may I ask?’
Killion frowned with terrible sincerity.
‘Well, you know,’ he said, clenching his fists on the table.
‘Y-you and me.’
‘I certainly don't know.
Are they friends of yours, over there?
They seemed to recognize you.’
‘I bet you're j-jolly good at s-swimming.
Anyone can t-tell, just by looking.
Are you k-keen on swimming?’
She laughed, more for the exercise than anything else.
‘Well, if you go to the seaside you have to bathe, don't you?’
‘Not half!’
Killion spread his hands on the table, in the hope  that she would rest an arm within stroking range.
‘D'you like that?
I think bathing is jolly good f-fun.
Especially when you don't have to w-wear anything.’
She laughed again, but reproachfully.
‘I really couldn't say about that.’
‘They have swimming pools where you can swim in the b-b-b-buff.
It f-feels awfully g-good.
You ought to t-try it.’
Rose re-arranged her gloves and purse.
‘How stuffy it gets in here!’ she said.
‘It quite affects my head.’
‘Have some m-more wine,’ Killion urged.
He tried to add to her full glass.
‘Golly!
The very idea.
If anyone from the hospital sees me I'll never hear the last of it.’
She stared unblinkingly over his shoulder.
‘No, honestly, I m-mean it,’ Killion tried to smile, but felt foolish, so he went back to looking sincere.
‘You really are the m-most m-marvellous girl.’
‘There's something written on the wall over there.’
She tilted her head and frowned.
‘Do you read French?’
‘No,’ said Killion.
‘Not a bloody word.’
That made her jump.
‘Yes, it's definitely him,’ Callaghan said.
‘If you ask me, it's a grave mistake for a chap in our position to get too involved with women,’ Blunt said.
He sipped his wine.
‘Not too dry for you, is it?
I can always make them change it…’
Blunt had ordered the wine.
The others told him it was just right.
‘Actually, I prefer my wine on the dry side,’ Peacock said.
‘I've never been one for a sweet wine Never.’
‘I think you'll like this one,’ Blunt said.
He picked up the bottle and studied the label.
‘You've got to be awfully careful with some of them.’
‘Can it be his wife?’
Callaghan asked.
‘She's wearing a wedding ring.
‘No, no.
He's not married,’ Blunt said.
‘None of them is married, and a good thing too.
Far too many young marriages these days.
‘Take my elder brother,’ said Peacock.
‘He got married during his last leave.
Barely twenty-one at the time.’
‘Utterly ridiculous,’ Blunt said.
‘If I don't see another girl until I'm twenty, that'll be all right by me,’ Callaghan said.
‘Female company is vastly over-rated.’
‘Passed nem con,’ Blunt said.
‘Freud,’ Killion said.
‘S-Sigmund Freud.
You ought to read about him, honestly.’
‘Oh, foreigners!’
Rose laughed, exercising her healthy chest.
Killion watched, fascinated.
They moved.
What ecstasy it would be to see them really move…
‘F-Freud says everything goes back to s-s-s —’
‘Golly!
Is that the time?’
'— ex.
He s-says it's the most important th-thing between people.’
Killion sat with his legs tensed and looked earnestly, beseechingly at her.
‘I say!
What long words we use, for such a little boy.
If you were in my ward, the first thing you'd get would be a jolly good haircut.
When did you last go to the barber's, may I ask?’
‘Oh, Rose…’
Killion groaned.
‘Can't you be n-nice to me?
Can't we l-l-like each other, just a b-bit?’
He looked down to hide his misery.
‘Damn it Rose, I might be killed tomorrow.’
‘Pooh!
What about my Edward?
He's fighting in the Trenches.’
She made it sound as if her husband were in the employ of a superior company.
‘He could be killed at any time.
He might be dying now.’
‘Then take m-me,’ Killion urged.
‘Do, Rose, do.’
Rose gathered her gloves and purse.
‘You can take me home,’ she said.
‘The very idea!’
‘Can't say I'm too awfully keen on this idea of going for the enemy pilot,’ Blunt said.
‘I mean, deliberately going for him.’
‘Is that what they teach here?’
Callaghan said.
‘Oh yes, it's the old man's creed.
They say he expects people to shoot the other chap in the back, if they possibly can.’
‘Sticks in the craw, a bit, that,’ Peacock said.
‘One can't help sort of including the other chap in the general area of fire,’ Blunt said, ‘but I don't see the need to go out of one's way to commit murder.
Do you?’
‘No, no.’
‘Of course not.’
‘The way I look at it,’ Blunt said, ‘the chap can't stay up if his plane won't fly.
And it seems to me that everyone overlooks a very vulnerable spot.
Next time we meet a Hun, I know what I shall have a pot at.’
‘What's that?’
Callaghan asked.
‘The propeller.
One bullet in the right place, and down he goes.’
‘Yes,’ said Peacock.
‘Of course.
Odd that nobody's thought of it before.’
Rose Franklin stopped Killion at the gates of the hospital.
They had not spoken since they left the inn.
‘Thank you for a lovely evening, she said.
‘Oh well,’ Killion mumbled.
‘You know.’
‘I've been thinking about what you said.
You must get terribly lonely.
And I've got Edward, you see.’
‘Oh well.’
Killion twisted about and beat his gloved hands together, anxious to get away.
‘There's a girl who works in the hospital who I think might…
I mean I think you would…
Well, I can't promise anything, but I know she's awfully keen on…men.’
Killion stopped hopping about and gazed at her.
Sex blazed in the night like a beacon guiding a traveller to a city of delight.
‘Well, d'you want me to or not?’ she asked impatiently.
‘Oh, y-yes, yes!’
Killion cried.
‘Yes, p-please!’
‘Come around tomorrow night.
I can't make any promises, mind.’
Killion ran all the way back to camp.
At last!
‘Suppose we had a child,’ Margery said.
‘What should we call it?’
Woolley stopped shaving and looked at her in the mirror.
She was sitting on his bed with a blanket around her shoulders, trying on his flying-helmet.
After a while she noticed his reflected look and looked back, chewing on the leather chinstrap.
The drying lather got up his nose, and he sneezed.
More dry lather flew off and drifted away.
‘I'm sick of that question,’ he said.
He brushed on fresh lather.
‘I never asked it before.
Did I?’
‘No.’
‘Well, we might.
In fact if we go on like this we're almost bound to.
I mean, I don't especially want to, but…’
‘Oh, bollocks.
Of course you want to.
All women want to.
Nobody yet in the whole history of mankind has had the strength to resist doing what lies in their power to do, just to prove that they can.
Given a choice between doing something and not doing something people always do something, even if it's the wrong thing.’
‘Good gracious.
Philosophy,’ she said, surprised.
‘I never heard any of that before.’
‘Well.’
He twisted his face to shave the side of his mouth ‘It's true.
It explains this war, doesn't it?’
‘Oh God, not that again.
I came here to get away from that.’
She hunched up.
‘I am so sick of dead men…
They all seem to get hit in the head nowadays.
Ours do, anyway.
It's such a waste.
We use up miles of bandages and gauze and lint and dressings, and then they die anyway…
Can't they tell them to keep their stupid heads down?
I feel like…’
Woolley finished shaving and towelled off the soap.
‘Goodness gracious,’ he said.
‘Philosophy.’
He sat down and shared her blanket.
‘Your feet are cold.’
She dragged off another blanket and pushed it around his legs.
‘Anyway, I don't see why God had to put men's heads up on top of their stupid bodies if it means they just get blown open with shells, that's all.’
‘God has a very curious sense of humour.
Hence fornication.’
She thought about it.
‘Why hence?’
He drew her to him.
‘All right then, don't count fornication,’ he said.
He put his lips to her hair and blew softly.
‘But I want to count it.
Tell me.’
‘No.
You'll just be insulted.’
‘I promise.’
‘Well, don't blame me.’
‘Tell me, tell me!’
Woolley considered.
‘All right.
It's obvious, once you look at it objectively and dispassionately.
The whole business is grotesque.
It's like two bicycles fighting.’
‘Fighting what?’
‘Fighting each other, fathead.’
‘I don't see that at all.’
Woolley sighed gloomily.
‘I said you'd go all huffy.’
‘I'm not huffy, I just don't agree.
For a start, bicycles only go when they're upright.’
‘So do human beings.’
‘That has nothing to do with it.’
She wriggled away from him and stared him in the face.
‘Does it?
Go on, admit it has absolutely nothing to do with it.’
‘Look, why don't you let me demonstrate —’
‘No.
Not until you admit you were wrong.’
Woolley sniffed and looked around for something to blow his nose on.
‘All right.
I admit I was wrong.’
‘You're just saying that to shut me up.
You can be so rotten damn patronizing.’
‘Have you got a handkerchief?’
‘No.
And if I had I wouldn't lend it to anyone as rotten damn patronizing, stupid and heartless as you.’
Woolley was startled.
‘My dear Margery,’ he said.
‘What —’ He stood and blinked at her with his finger under his nose to stop the drips.
‘I apologize.
I really do.’
‘How can you?
You don't know what for.’
Her voice was thick with suppressed tears.
Woolley said nothing.
‘If you knew how ridiculous you look, standing there with nothing on and  your finger up your nose.’
She threw a handkerchief against his chest, and he caught it.
‘I think we'd better have a drink,’ Woolley said.
He fished out a bottle of whisky from a kit-bag, and cleaned two glasses on his towel.
‘Anyway, suppose we do have a child,’ Margery said damply.
‘Out of the question.’
Woolley half-filled both glasses.
‘My family has been sterile for generations.’
‘Oh, shut up.
You don't care because you won't be the one to have it.
I shall be left here looking ten times as fat as I do already and the poor little bastard won't even have a real name.’
‘Here's to generations yet unborn.’
Woolley clinked her glass.
‘Long may they stay that way.’
Margery drank and took off the flying-helmet and lay face-down on the bed.
Woolley sat beside her and wrote in whisky with his finger all along her back, starting from the neck.
‘What's that?’ she asked.
She sounded empty, drained by her anger at the end of a day of travelling and love-making.
‘I'm christening the bloody baby,’ he said.
‘Lie still.’
He reached her bottom and let a couple of drops fall down the cleft.
‘There!
Just drowned a flea.
Little bugger made a run for it, but I swamped him.’
‘Liar…
What did you christen it?’
Woolley checked off the names all the way down her spine.
‘Hardy; Lyons, Weston; Barber, Harrop, Leach; Wallace, Halse, Hampton, Stephenson, Bache.’
She tried to make sense of it while he parted her hair neatly on either side of her neck.
‘Who are they?’
‘Aston Villa's team in 1913, when they won the Cup.’
‘Oh.’
She took a sudden, deep breath, and wriggled deeper into the bed.
‘I thought it might be all the people in your squadron.’
‘Oh, God…
Them.
The Children's Crusade.
I got three new ones yesterday.
Dribbling infants.
Not a day over twelve, any of them.
‘It's not their fault they're young.
You were young once.’
She turned on her side and pulled the blanket around her neck.
‘I bet they're all nice boys.
Nicer than you, anyhow.’
She was falling asleep.
‘Nicer than me, probably…’
Woolley watched her eyes close and the lids stop flickering.
He finished his drink and started on hers.
She looked very tired: there were puffy smudges around her eyes, and bracketing her mouth were tiny lines like the first cracks in plaster.
He wondered if he could do her dreadful job; or rather, how long he could stand it if he ever tried it.
He turned down the lamp and wondered how he was going to get in without wakening her; when suddenly she started up, crying out with despair, fighting to be free of the blankets.
Then she saw him.
‘Oh my God!’ she said.
‘Oh my God.
Nightmares.
Already.’
‘You're all right,’ Woolley said.
‘Move over, now.
I'll be with you now.’
Someone knocked on the door.
‘Shit,’ Woolley said, one foot in the bed.
‘Who the hell is that?’ he called.
‘It's me, sir,’ came the adjutant's voice.
‘I saw your light was on and I thought you ought to know.
Despatch rider from Corps, sir.’
‘Whatever it is, don't read it.
Give him a mug of cocoa and a big kiss and send him on a month's leave.
Now bugger off.’
‘Too late, sir, I'm afraid.
Squadron's ordered to transfer to the field at Achiet with all speed at first light.’
Woolley took his foot out of bed.
‘Achiet?’
‘Yes, sir.
He needs your signature.’
‘Oh’ Woolley opened the door and took the despatch and Woodruffe's fountain pen.
‘Miss Brooke, Captain Woodruffe.’
The adjutant saluted.
Margery smiled weakly.
‘We have met, actually,’ Woodruffe said.
‘You introduced us before, sir.’
‘Balls.
I've never seen this woman before in my life.
Your pen leaks.’
He gave the despatch back and wiped his fingers on his thighs.
‘Make reveille an hour earlier.
Now piss off.’
‘Good night, miss,’ Woodruffe said.
He saluted.
Woolley closed the door.
‘Achiet,’ he said.
‘Fancy.
I lost half-a-crown there, two years ago.
And my virginity.’
‘In that order?’
Margery asked sleepily.
‘Be fair.
I was her living.’
He climbed in and hugged her.
‘You owe me about five hundred pounds,’ she whispered.
The next day was bright and cold, with a stiff breeze blowing straight down the field.
Woolley briefed the pilots on course and height, and they dispersed.
The planes were already warming up; it was a short flight, only thirty miles; with luck they would be on patrol again that afternoon.
It depended on supplies of fuel and ammunition at the other end.
Woolley went off to give final orders to the chief mechanics, and to Woodruffe, who was driving Rogers's limousine over.
As they talked, planes began to taxi out and rev up.
One by one they jounced over the ruts, and formed up in pairs.
The long, square noses aimed up-wind, and bored forward until the wings developed lift and carried them, rocking and bucking, high over the hedge.
Rogers and Lambert took off together; then Killion and Church, then Richards and Gabriel.
Callaghan and Peacock went next, with Blunt and Dangerfield taxi-ing out behind them.
The first two left the ground at almost the same instant and climbed easily with the help of the headwind.
At a hundred feet Peacock's engine failed.
It just stopped dead.
He panicked.
The breeze that had been lifting him, now began dragging him back, making everything heavy and sluggish.
The nose dropped alarmingly.
There were tiny fields ahead, but Peacock could see nothing but hedges and trees.
If he fell down there he'd crash, like the two-seater.
As his dive steepened he felt the speed pick up again; there was still life in the controls, somewhere.
Peacock shoved everything into a turn, straining to get a view of the airfield he had just left.
The SE5a was too heavy.
There was too much weight hanging from the wings to let it glide through an awkward bank like that, all the time losing the upthrust from the breeze; losing it twice, because now it followed the turning plane.
Half-way through the bank Peacock lost it altogether.
His plane fell sideways, helplessly, like a book toppling from a shelf.
Blunt, coming up behind him and hauling back on the control column  to get his plane over the hedge, saw Peacock sliding out of the sky and tried to turn inside him.
But his plane too was heavy, and it responded reluctantly.
Blunt changed course just enough to collide with Peacock head-on.
The impact ruptured both fuel tanks.
For a moment the embracing machines hung in the air, waiting, it seemed, for some act of coronation.
Then the flames bloomed, and the wreckage fell, magnificently orange and red.
It made the other planes droning around the dull sky look puny.
Force 8: Fresh Gale Breaks twigs of trees; generally impedes progress
In mid-March the sky over France was all exuberance.
Ragged flotillas of cloud sailed before a brisk west wind.
Sunlight sought out the gaps and flickered over the new-green fields far below.
The sky was a place of awakening, of vigour, as full of life as the million seeds in the earth Woolley hacked a long, scarlet gash in it with a burst of machine-gun fire and pulled up hard into a tight, half-rolling turn so that he could look back and down.
Still the bastard would not burn.
It was a Fokker Triplane.
It flew steadily homewards, nose fractionally down but wings beautifully level, trailing streamers of torn fabric like favours.
In the fuselage, holes as big as fanlights showed bright sky on the other side.
The upper wing was as bare of fabric as a garden gate.
No pilot could be seen.
Woolley and Dickinson and Callaghan had ambushed a patrol of six Triplanes.
Dickinson had burned one and gone down with it to confirm the kill.
Callaghan had damaged another and been damaged himself.
After less than thirty seconds of action everyone had vanished except Woolley and his own sedate victim, whose pilot was already dead.
Woolley dived from alternate sides and blasted the aircraft with the close attention of a man beating a carpet.
In five attacks he emptied every bullet in the drum, battering away at the vitals: the engine, cockpit, fuel tank.
The Triplane absorbed them all and droned on.
He levelled out on a parallel course.
He stood up, holding the controls between his knees, and dragged the Lewis gun down its sliding mounting.
Cold air like rushing water battered at his face, beating in his cheeks and making it hard to breathe.
The hot stink  of the engine tickled his nostrils.
He unclipped the empty drum and slammed on a full one, thrust the gun forward and sat down with a thud that shook the cockpit.
The Triplane flew its useless pilot home, unhurriedly, with dignity.
Woolley side-slipped and fell behind it, then climbed and injected a long burst into its belly, searching forwards until he saw the bullets slashing up between the wing-roots.
The Triplane shuddered but would not break and would not burn.
He curled away so close that his wash disturbed it.
Woolley swore, cursing the enemy into flames.
This was his fourth patrol of the day and only his first kill of the week.
The Germans would not fight without a clear advantage.
Always they had the wind behind them.
Pursuit meant slogging home.
Woolley approved and resented.
Even now, when he had succeeded in attacking, this Triplane refused to be destroyed.
He doublechecked the sky, climbed, dived, and blazed away again.
Nothing.
It was like firing into a sand-pile.
He flew alongside and swore again: at God, at the rubber bullets, at the serene stability of the enemy.
Then he saw that its nose had sunk a couple of degrees, and it was gradually pulling away.
A lick of colour pulsed out of the engine, dissolved, came again and grew strong.
Orange flame drew out and broadened.
The nose dipped further, and the flame suddenly raced along the wings and around the cockpit.
In an instant the whole aircraft was outlined in fire like a set-piece at a fireworks display.
The explosion detached the separate wings as if they had been plucked feathers.
Woolley felt the blast wash over his SE, pushing it aside, and he turned with the motion and set course for home, dissatisfied at the inefficiency of it all.
Dickinson landed at Achiet and went to the adjutant's office to report his kill and his availability.
He found Woodruffe with a tall, one-armed man in a raincoat and a bowler hat.
Like many tall men, he had a perpetually upright, weary look, as if he usually slept leaning in a corner.
He was examining the dust on top of a cupboard.
‘Ah, Dicky,’ Woodruffe said.
‘Did you have a good flight?
This is Inspector Philippe of the French civil police.
He's looking for Goshawk Squadron.
Any idea where they might have gone?’
‘The last I saw they were all flying away.’
‘Yes.
That would be three days ago, now.’
‘My goodness.
Is it as long as that?’
Woodruffe turned to the inspector.
‘I'm almost sure they said Brittany, although some of them might have gone to Bordeaux.
You could try both.’
‘Yes,’ the inspector said.
‘We didn't see much of them,’ Woodruffe went on.
‘They flew out as we flew in.
No time to chat.’
‘No,’ the inspector said.
‘Are you sure they were here?’
Dickinson said.
‘Quite sure.’
The inspector levelled his surviving index finger at the Squadron blackboard, which listed the patrols.
Across the top it read ‘Goshawk Squadron’.
Woodruffe clapped his hand to his brow.
‘Good Lord!
You must think us very ill-organized, inspector.’
He rubbed it out and chalked in ‘73 Squadron’.
‘There!’
The inspector looked at it, looked at Woodruffe, and said nodding.
‘Any message, in case they drop in?’
Dickinson asked.
Philippe picked up his despatch-case.
‘Please tell them,’ he said, ‘a warrant has been issued against them for manslaughter.’
He nodded at Woodruffe and went out.
They watched him get into his car.
‘Manslaughter?’ asked Dickinson.
‘The restaurant owner.
Chap we stuck up on the chair.
He fell off when the police charged in.
Hit his head and died, apparently.’
‘Oh.
Seen Callaghan?’
‘He staggered in ten minutes ago with a broken tail.
I think he went to have some tea.’
‘Tea?’
‘That's what he said.
Oh, I forgot.
We're out of booze.’
‘But my dear fellow, how awful.’
Dickinson sat down and looked at the adjutant, appalled.
‘There has to be booze, there  simply must be.
The whole thing is quite impossible without booze.
It…it can't be done.’
Woodruffe blinked, feeling uncomfortable.
Woolley came in, and the adjutant quickly got up.
‘Woody says there's no booze, sir,’ Dickinson said.
‘Did you confirm your Hun?’
‘Oh, yes.
He went off with a lovely bang.’
‘Why is there no drink for the squadron?’
Woolley asked the adjutant.
Woodruffe shuffled a little stack of telephone messages.
‘It seems that a Colonel Hawthorn refuses to approve the indent,’ he said.
‘Who's he?’
‘Apparently our new Corps Liaison Officer for Admin. and Supplies.
He's been appointed to, as it were, look after this section.
Been given a bomber squadron and one or two fighter squadrons and us.
He…straightens things out.’
‘Get him on the phone.’
‘Actually, sir, you can meet him now, if you want to.
He went over to inspect the ground staff.
Mechanics and armourers and so on.
‘What for?
Pox?’
‘Something a great deal worse, I'm afraid.
Clean webbing.’
Woolley looked sick.
‘D'you mean that our mechanics have stopped work while some fat arse-hole from bloody Corps inspects their scrofulous webbing?’ he shouted.
The adjutant looked out of a window.
‘Brasses, too,’ he said.
‘Colonel Hawthorn told me he puts a lot of stock in men's brasses.’
Woolley lurched towards the door.
Dickinson saw his face, heavy-eyed and working like a drunk's.
‘Also the silk scarves,’ Woodruffe added quickly.
‘He cancelled the indent for silk scarves.’
The door slammed, and his telephone messages fluttered to the floor.
Gabriel, Lambert and Church met the F2B at the rendezvous point and headed for the Front.
The two-seater looked old and  battered and slow.
They could see the patchwork of new fabric over old, where the repairs hadn't been painted yet.
There were moth-holes in the wing-tips, and the fuselage seemed warped.
It flew very slowly.
They crossed the Line at 3,500 feet.
As soon as the anti-aircraft fire began to thin out the F2B dived to begin photographing below cloud level.
The three fighters stayed above and searched for defenders.
For twenty minutes nothing happened.
Lambert distrusted it.
Usually, on reconnaissance escort, the Germans drove the camera plane home within ten minutes, and often they got it before it recrossed the Line.
This was Lambert's fourth patrol of the day.
He kept thinking how nice it would be to lie in a hot bath and soak out the cold and the dirt.
The F2B creaked through a 180-degree turn and began photographing another strip.
Naked Balinese dancing girls held tankards of ale to his lips.
Flak burst, black and bad-tempered, far below.
More hot water…
Church waggled his wing-tips: time to turn again.
What luxury it would be to get out and stretch.
For five more minutes they ploughed the sky.
Lambert forced his treacherous mind to keep alert, and made his tired eyes keep searching the wastes.
Again the camera plane turned, and they swung to follow it; and between them and the Line three trim shapes plunged in and out of cloud in a dive pointed at the F2B.
Albatros D IIIS: little blue-grey, lethal toys.
Gabriel was looking the wrong way at the crucial second.
By the time he had moved his head, Lambert and Church had gone, falling away in a howling power-dive.
He raced after them.
The camera plane was grinding up in a labouring climb, turning to present the smallest target.
The German planes reached it seconds before the SEs.
Gabriel saw bullets sparkle and flash all around the F2B; and then a longer streak from the British observer's rearfiring gun.
Lambert and Church bowled past the two-seater and eased into a long right-hand turn to follow the German planes, Lambert firing short bursts to attract their attention.
Gabriel had cut inside  the turn and was racing to meet them on their other flank.
In the end all six planes came together more or less head-on.
Lambert and Gabriel each managed to grab an enemy, but Church had to swerve to avoid Gabriel and he lost sight of the third German.
By the time he had got clear of the dog fight the Albatros was a couple of hundred yards away, closing on the two-seater as it chugged westwards against the implacable wind.
Church speculated with a long-range squirt, clicking his tongue in self-reproach as he did.
The Albatros ignored him.
He fired again, and this time it twisted violently.
He had hit it, or the pilot was jumpy, for the Albatros banked steeply to the left, flattened out, looked at Church, and dived for home.
Church went after him.
Lambert had his German in a tight circle and was chasing his tail; not far away, Gabriel had trapped the other plane in the same way.
Alternatively, the Germans had trapped Lambert and Gabriel.
What mattered was that the two-seater was getting away.
Meanwhile each pilot strained to force an advantage.
It was like driving the machines around an invisible Wall of Death Lambert found that he could look across the circle and see right inside the German pilot's cockpit.
The man had a black moustache.
Villainous.
Gabriel's man wanted blood and he blazed away at Gabriel's perpetually vanishing tail.
Gabriel encouraged this with tiny bursts.
After two noisy minutes the German fell silent.
Gabriel waited for him to break away and in that instant got in a good burst, peppering the cockpit.
The Albatros dived, and Gabriel turned away to check the state of Lambert's health.
He was drifting into a cloud, still chasing the other plane's tail.
A few seconds later they emerged, a hundred yards apart.
The German saw Gabriel waiting, and dived for home.
Church had followed his Albatros right down to ground level.
He flattened out and chased the German up a wooded valley.
The other pilot was either new or nervous; probably both; he zigzagged desperately to avoid Church's sniping.
The valley narrowed and hampered escape, and now Church began to score.
Bits of the Albatros were blowing past him.
He was crying with delight, as he often did in anticipation, when his engine started to cough, and he sailed slap into a rocky cascade.
Burning petrol floated down the stream like a Wagnerian funeral, terrifying the trout.
Woolley turned a corner and saw Colonel Hawthorn instructing Corporal Hemsley in the about-turn.
Hemsley got it wrong.
Hawthorn stopped him, and walked to where he could be seen by the rest of the squad of mechanics and fitters and armourers.
He transferred his swagger-stick to his left arm, thrust his hands alongside the piping on his breeches, and aimed his jaw at the horizon.
‘Skuh-wod, ay bout,’ he sang, ‘tun!’
He rotated on his right heel and left toe and brought the left boot alongside the right with a delicate crash which trembled his pink jowls.
He paused to let the demonstration sink in.
Woolley reached up and pulled the switch on the air-raid warning.
Like a tortured donkey, the klaxon brayed its amplified signal.
The noise ruptured the afternoon, shattered the parade, sent men pounding across the tarmac, colliding, cursing, racing for the trenches on the edge of the airfield.
Nobody hesitated.
A low-flying German plane could hop over a hangar and massacre a squad with one sudden burst.
It had happened.
Hawthorn blinked and flinched as men sprinted past him.
He held his swagger-stick in his left hand and massaged it with his right.
As the parade vanished, his confidence went with it, leaving a flatfooted, overweight colonel with poor eyesight and a build that suggested two sets of underwear.
The last man dashed around a corner.
Hawthorn turned and saw Woolley.
For a moment they stared at each other, while the klaxon remorselessly threw out a yard and a half of raucousness every two seconds.
Hawthorn signalled to him.
Woolley stood where he was.
Hawthorn's despatch case lay where it had been knocked over.
He picked it up and walked across.
‘Colonel Hawthorn,’ he announced.
‘From Corps.’
He looked pointedly at the solitary and tarnished crown on Woolley's shoulder.
Woolley did not move.
‘I'm Corps Liaison Officer for  Admin. and Supplies.
I take it you're Major Woolley, the C.O. here.’
Woolley took out an old, soiled handkerchief and blew his nose.
He looked into Hawthorn's restless, enthusiastic eyes and found no intelligence.
‘Air-raid warning?’
Hawthorn inquired.
Woolley turned it off.
Echoes from the last blast bounced off hangar walls and escaped into the vastness of the airfield.
‘You blocked this squadron's booze order,’ Woolley said.
Hawthorn looked away.
‘I'd advise you to give your chaps half an hour's rifle drill every day.
I wouldn't care to be in your shoes if the general took it into his head to inspect you now.
Very rusty.’
‘I want that booze delivered today,’ Woolley said.
‘No doubt you do, major.’
Hawthorn chuckled grimly.
He could afford to.
‘You're going the wrong way about it, though.
Don't you usually salute a superior officer?’
‘Yes.’
Hawthom flushed.
‘You'll get your beverage allocation when I'm satisfied with it, and not a damn day before.
I know all about irregular units like you Flying Corps wallahs.
There's been a sight too much laxity permitted with stores and equipment.
If you ask me, some of you odds-and-sods have been playing the old soldier.
Well, Corps happens to think so too.’
He held up his despatch case and tapped it with his swagger-stick.
‘From now on, all your indents and pro-formas and requisitions go through here.’
Woolley took out his revolver and blew a hole through Hawthorn's despatch case.
The man staggered.
For a moment the flesh hung slackly on his face as he gaped at the damage, and then he sucked up his lips and took a deep breath.
‘My God, Woolley, you'll pay for that!’ he said in an astonished, passionate whisper.
‘You'll pay a thousand times over.
Put yourself under close arrest, major.
At once.’
‘Bollocks.
I want that booze.’
‘Somehow I don't think you're going to need it!’
Woolley raised the revolver and pressed the muzzle against the glittering badge on Hawthorn's peaked cap.
‘My men need it,’ he said.
Hawthorn's brow furrowed with the effort of evading the  weapon.
His hands squeezed tightly on his case and stick.
‘These pilots can't fly without it.’
Woolley pulled the trigger, and Hawthorn's cap spun to earth ten feet behind him.
The explosion made the man's mouth gape and his eyes water.
‘I warn you, major,’ he croaked, and had to clear his throat.
‘I warn you, major, you may think you are acting in the interests of your men, but all you are doing is ruining your own career.’
‘If you don't get that booze here soon,’ Woolley said, ‘I'll kill you.’
A couple of airmen had come out of the trenches to see what the shooting was about.
They watched from a distance.
‘You're a little mad, Woolley,’ Hawthorn said.
He breathed deeply, playing for time.
‘But not completely insane.
Not completely.
Not so foolish as to put your head in a noose.
Even in wartime, murder is still murder.’
‘I'll kill you now,’ Woolley said flatly, ‘and stick your fat body in my plane, and in ten minutes I'll throw you out behind the German lines, unless you get me my booze and my scarves.’
‘Cut your losses, Woolley.’
Hawthorn indicated the airmen.
‘Too many witnesses now.’
Woolley reached down and shot the spur off Hawthorn's left boot.
The impact knocked his feet from under him.
He got up very slowly.
The airmen did not move.
‘This is the most arrant, selfish, unpatriotic swindle I ever heard of,’ he said thickly.
‘Don't talk to me about your bloody pilots.
They don't need a bottle of Scotch a day and new silk scarves every week.’
‘I don't know why I bother to tell you,’ Woolley said.
‘They need booze because the stink from the engine gives them the runs.
They also need booze to stop them from thinking about what they do all day.
And you, you po-faced runt, you've no idea what they do.’
‘On the contrary.’
Hawthorn had trouble with that word.
‘Artillery observation.
Take photographs.
Spot for us.’
‘Shite.
They go up and try to fry the enemy alive, two miles high.
You never even set fire to a man on the ground, so you don't know what it's like to burn one.’
Hawthorn lifted his despatch-case and looked at the hole, and said nodding.
‘The silk scarves go around the neck.’
Woolley rested the hot barrel against Hawthorn's neck.
‘The neck must turn.
The enemy is trying to creep up behind and fry you.
The head rotates.
The silk lubricates.
The machine goes on working.
Remove the lubricant and it seizes up.
Overheats.
Catches fire.’
‘All right,’ Hawthorn muttered.
‘But you can't tell me your hardworking pilots wear out a silk scarf every other week, so you don't need new ones all the time.’
‘The scarves wear out when the pilots do,’ Woolley said.
‘Unless you want us to use non-inflammable silk?’
Hawthorn took out a handkerchief and mopped his face.
Woolley touched it with the muzzle of his gun.
‘Silk,’ he said.
On the way to the adjutant's office, Hawthorn said bitterly: ‘You'll never get away with this.
How am I going to explain the holes in my hat and case?
And a broken spur…’
‘Tell them you got shot up by enemy aircraft,’ Woolley said.
‘You'll probably get a medal.’
He pushed open the door.
‘Woody, this officer will telephone Corps H Q. and have everything delivered today.’
‘How splendid,’ the adjutant said.
‘May I sound the ‘All Clear’ now, sir?’
‘Yes.’
Woolley went away.
‘I wonder if you could ask them to send us some decent toilet paper?’ the adjutant asked.
‘I can't believe the general staff use the same quality they send us here.
Could you?’
Hawthorn nodded dumbly.
After forty minutes at his ceiling of fifteen thousand feet, Killion felt drowsy and slow, like his aeroplane.
The air up there was too thin to support either of them properly.
He tugged at the flask of whisky inside his tunic and eventually worked it out.
It took a long time to open it and when he drank, it tasted warm against his mouth, as if it had been in the sun; only there was no sun, not even at fifteen thousand.
Cirrus at  more than twenty thousand screened it out.
Killion felt the encouraging, rewarding liquid charge slowly down his throat.
He drank another toast to himself.
It was his twentieth birthday.
He was going to get a Hun.
Killion should not have been flying; he was supposed to be on reserve.
But it was his birthday, so he invented a hiccup in the engine to let him take it up for height testing.
It was his birthday; he had letters from his mother and his grandmother, who sent a five-pound note and a newspaper photograph of the royal family.
And tonight he was going to meet a magnificent girl called Jane Ashton who worked in the Y.M.C.A. canteen in the village of Chavigny.
It was a happy day for Killion, too happy to be spent on the ground.
Down through the drifting cloud he could sometimes see the hazy plan-view of a German airfield.
Sooner or later, something had to land there.
Meanwhile Killion let the SE bumble along, barely dragging enough air under her wings to maintain height.
Occasional planes crossed the landscape, far beneath, but nobody toiled up to challenge him.
The enemy was oddly restrained these days.
Killion was too exhausted by the feeble air, and the cold, and the need to watch the airfield, to try and think of a reason.
He held the control column between his legs and sprawled across the cockpit, his frozen nose over the edge, and allowed Jane Ashton to drift around inside his head like smoke.
He dozed momentarily; his legs relaxed and the plane wobbled him awake; and there was a whole squadron of tiny Huns wheeling towards the tiny airfield.
Killion immediately put the nose down.
The engine stopped its fretful clacking and began to bellow with satisfaction as the air became stronger.
He steered through the middle of every cloud in his path.
With all that activity below it was unlikely that any German pilot would look upwards.
The ground staff must have seen him, but what could they do?
He streaked out of a thin patch and saw the aircraft bigger now and shinier, curling around in a wide arc to start landing.
They were too big to be fighters, even two-seaters.
They were bombers.
Twin-engined German bombers.
Probably Gothas.
Another birthday present.
Red flares began coming up from the airfield, but the first bombers were committed: they had nowhere to go but down.
Killion steepened his dive and began picking his targets.
He still had five thousand feet to go.
One bomber was just touching down; three others were strung out in approach; the rest were reforming.
He decided to attack right down the landing path, diving from behind them, and he nudged his throbbing aircraft slightly to one side.
He could feel the warmer, stronger air rushing past, making the whole machine vibrate.
Anti-aircraft guns opened up hopelessly off target, nervous of hitting their own planes.
Three thousand feet.
Killion reached up in a panic: he'd forgotten to cock his gun.
Two thousand feet.
Tracer laid stitches across the sky: the bombers still in formation were firing long shots at him.
Now machine-guns on the ground showed flame, and as he curled around to line up with his targets he saw smaller aircraft Rumplers or maybe Aviatiks — taxi-ing across the field.
One thousand feet.
The rearmost bomber was shooting at him, but its pilot was dodging to spoil Killion's aim, and the bullets sprayed wildly.
Killion cackled with pleasure at the trouble he was causing.
He plunged on the bomber and raked it from tail to nose; then let his dive carry him under it and pulled up in time to plant a burst in its belly before climbing into a half-roll which brought the next plane almost within range.
This time the enemy pilot could not even dodge: he was almost on the ground.
Killion raced down at almost three times the German's speed, and saw his shots plucking and smashing at the lumbering fuselage.
Bullets from somewhere rapped his own aircraft, and then he was hurdling the bomber and flattening out above the battered grass of the field.
He flew through a wild cross-fire of small-arms and caught up with the third bomber just as it was taxi-ing towards a hangar.
That had to be slaughter.
Killion opened fire at a hundred yards and emptied his drum in a series of probing bursts that brought a bloom of flames to the aircraft just as he skimmed over it.
Now Killion was defenceless.
A Rumpler, straining to make height, saw him coming, turned panicking away and hit a tree.
Killion jumped over a barracks through a cross-hatching of  furious ground fire, and fled to the west.
A huge explosion drowned the enemy fire and Killion caught a glimpse of a burning bomber slowly sliding along on its nose.
Then he was over a railway line, over a wood; out of sight and reach of the guns.
He hedge-hopped all the way home.
Men were shovelling dirt into steaming bomb-craters when he landed.
He was told that Woolley wanted to see him right away.
Killion found the pilots in the armourer's stores, silent and resentful, checking the rounds in Lewis drums.
‘Where the shit have you been?’
Woolley demanded.
‘Height-testing, sir,’ Killion said.
He felt apprehensive yet jubilant.
‘You're a cunt, Killion.
You were supposed to be here, on reserve.
While you were farting about, we got bombed.’
‘Yes, sir.’
Killion saw that he was very angry.
‘Three mechanics dead, Killion.
Three.’
Killion stared at the rounds in Woolley's dirty hands and said nothing.
He felt that Woolley had no right to be so contemptuous, so damaging; Killion alone could not have stopped a bombing raid; besides, hadn't he just destroyed two, maybe three of the enemy?
You couldn't talk to Woolley, you couldn't live with him.
Killion felt hatred flare inside his whisky-bound guts.
He refused to speak, or move, or do anything.
‘Too many guns jam,’ Woolley said.
‘From now on you'll check every bullet before it goes into your drum.’
He looked at Killion as if urging him to argue so that Woolley could knock him down.
Killion shuffled over to a box of ammunition.
‘Look out for over-size or deformed rounds,’ Woolley said, and managed to make the advice sound like a curse.
Killion got to work.
For a while there was nothing but the click of ammunition, the scrape of boots, and the stink of Woolley's rancour.
Then Callaghan came in.
‘I was told you wished to see me, sir,’ Callaghan said stiffly.
‘My batman was just running a bath.’
‘Start looking for over-size rounds,’ Woolley said.
‘Your batman can scrub his own arse for once.’
Lambert tittered, then laughed aloud.
Callaghan frowned.
‘Could it possibly wait for half an hour, sir?
I'd rather like —’
Woolley dropped a box of ammunition.
Rounds spilled and ran across the floor.
Everyone stopped work.
‘Get outside,’ Woolley ordered.
‘Really, sir, I —’
‘Get out!’
Woolley drew his revolver and drove Callaghan through the doorway.
‘You'll get a bath, you stinking schoolboy, like they get in the goddam trenches.
Run!’
Callaghan stood, hanging on to the rags of his self-respect.
Woolley lashed out with his boots.
Callaghan ran.
Woolley chased him to the nearest bomb-crater.
A shattered drain half-filled the hole with lumpy, scummy water.
Woolley ordered him into it.
When he hesitated Woolley fired.
The rest of the squadron watched and heard Woolley cursing, kicking clods down on Callaghan, shooting into the water.
They heard Callaghan splashing and collapsing in the quagmire of his own making.
‘This is how those poor sods live!’
Woolley bellowed.
‘This is what they get from arsehole to breakfast.
Get your head down!’
He aimed across the water.
The air split, smoke and flame grew, the bullet slammed into the crater wall and sprayed Callaghan with mud.
Callaghan was now utterly terrified.
He hurled himself away and tried to climb out.
He gibbered and choked over an appeal for mercy.
‘Get your head down!’
Woolley shouted.
Again the revolver exploded, again Callaghan staggered away from the spurt of dirt.
He retreated to the deepest part and stood up to the chest in filth, weeping.
‘I want to hear you swear,’ Woolley demanded.
‘Swear!’
‘Bugger,’ said Callaghan pitifully.
‘Bugger, bugger.’
Woolley fired into the muck, sewage spattered over Callaghan's face.
‘You piece of shit.’
Woolley said.
‘You couldn't fight a retired German whore.
Swear, swear!’
‘Shit,’ croaked Callaghan.
‘Shit, piss, oh my God, oh Christ, bugger, bugger, oh please, fuck, sod, fuck, oh please sir, fuck.’
‘This is where you live now,’ Woolley said.
‘You stay in there or I'll shoot you.’
He walked away.
After ten minutes, Callaghan peered wretchedly over the rim of the crater.
Woolley, sitting on a box thirty yards away, took a snap shot at him.
The bullet went high.
Killion heard it as he hurried down the road to see Jane Ashton.
It was his birthday, and he had had enough of war for today.
Force 9: Strong Gale Slight structural damage occurs; chimney pots and slates removed
Killion had arranged to meet Jane Ashton outside the Chavigny canteen.
It was a big place and he waited for twenty minutes while girls came and went.
After the dozenth girl Killion began to be afraid that he would not recognize her; but when she came out, even with a single dimmed-out light bulb behind her head, she was so much more than his memories of her.
Jane Ashton was a slim girl, with short, soft hair curling around a face so pleasant that people automatically smiled when they met her.
Yet her eyes were serious, even speculative.
You might wish to help her but you wouldn't think of advising her; and usually she needed no help, either.
There was a delicacy about her which dominated Killion, and a womanliness which sent the blood pumping to his head.
She made him nervous and reckless at the same time.
So had every other beautiful girl, of course; but Jane Ashton was now not only the first beautiful girl Killion had kissed good night, she was the first to kiss him in return, and kiss him as if she had a great deal to give as well as take.
Even now the shock trembled him, and when she put her arm in his he was afraid to speak.
‘That was an awful day,’ she said.
‘How are you?’
‘I'm twenty.’
‘I'm twenty, too.’
‘There must be a joke about that, but I've forgotten it.’
She laughed, and he felt proud because he hadn't stuttered.
‘I should have brought you a present,’ she said.
‘You have.’
Killion was amazed at his own sophistication: it  worked, it worked.
They walked towards the village while he struggled to contain and enjoy his feelings.
‘Would you like to eat at the same place?’ he asked, taking no risks.
‘Yes.
Did you have a good birthday?’
‘Good and bad.
Tell me something.’
‘What?’
‘Can I see you tomorrow?’
That sounded jerky, unsure, not at all sophisticated.
‘We should wait until tomorrow,’ she said; but it was a suggestion, not a statement.
Their feet stumbled on the cobbles, and she gripped his arm.
‘It's simply asking for trouble,’ she said.
‘We'd only be storing up grief for ourselves.’
I know.
But can I?’
‘I may have to work.’
‘The next day, then?’
‘God…
I was going to lead a quiet life.
I gave up men after the last time.
‘Give up giving up.’
‘We mustn't start…we mustn't get…’
‘No.
But can I see you tomorrow?’
‘Oh, why?
It's pointless.
Anything could happen at any time.
It's silly.’
He said nothing.
‘Besides, I have to wash my hair.’
He wanted to speak, to say anything so as not to seem sullen or graceless, but there was nothing; and they went into the restaurant stiffly, not looking at each other.
When they were holding menus she looked away.
‘You should have asked me later.
It's been a rotten day, you see.’
‘I just had to know.’
‘What if you got posted?’
Killion looked in the menu for an answer and was saved by the arrival of the waiter.
He ordered a lot of food and a lot of wine.
‘I see you're trying to guarantee results,’ she said, but lightly.
During the meal they talked about England, mainly London where they had both lived.
They exchanged experiences and enthusiasms.
She drank a lot of wine for a small girl, and enjoyed it.
They were at the brandy stage when she said; ‘You know, you got all that sex psychology wrong, before.’
‘Nonsense.
You're repressed, that's all.’
‘Not half as repressed as you are.
You see sex behind everything, and so you imagine that everything has sex behind it.’
The French couple at the next table heard the scurrilous word and stared reproachfully at this affront to their palates.
‘It's a good rule-of-thumb,’ Killion said loftily.
‘Only because it's your thumb,’ she replied.
He blinked with surprise.
She took his hand and squeezed the thumb.
‘Look, if I were hungry, I mean really hungry, starving, I would look for food everywhere, wouldn't I?
So everything I saw would be in terms of food.
If I saw this candle it would remind me of a carrot.
Well, that's what you're like.
You're hungry, and you see everything in terms of food.
Well, there is a lot of food about, but once you start trying to live in a world of nothing but food, you're going wrong.’
‘It's a nice mistake, though,’ Killion said wittily.
‘No, it's not.’
She surprised him by her intensity.
‘You can't see it now, because you can't.
But when you see it like that you don't just distort the world, you distort yourself.
Don't you understand?
You're trying to see more than exists, and so you're squinting.’
He refused to look at her.
‘Nice speech.’
‘Oh, don't sulk.
I can't like you when you're so childish and…heavy.’
He blinked at the words like you.
‘How do you know so much about it, anyway?’ he mumbled.
She took her hand away.
‘I'm tired of men who look at me as if I were a fillet steak, that's all.’
He took her home to the cottage near the canteen.
He was intensely miserable and, hidden by the darkness, tried to apologize.
His stutter resisted him.
‘I'm s-sorry.’
He held both her hands in his and looked down at the pale blur of her face.
He felt tears, stupid, pointless, treacherous tears.
‘I can't help b-b-b-being the w-w-way I am.’
He gave up in disgust.
Her fingers tightened around his own, hard and harder, pulling him down.
Briefly he refused, not wishing her to know about the tears, and then they kissed.
Her mouth was searching for him, and giving to him.
Killion's head surged: girls weren't like this; she had seemed not  to want to…
She had said…
He gave up.
Her arms slipped inside his tunic and encircled his thin body.
Relax and enjoy your problem, he told himself.
After a while she let go of him and buttoned his tunic.
‘You can't come in,’ she said.
‘Why not?’
He was all courage again.
‘Because it would be a waste of time, for medical reasons.’
She straightened his invisible tie.
‘Or didn't you get that far in your anatomy lessons?’
‘Oh,’ he said.
‘That.’
Killion was both elated and deflated.
‘Come tomorrow, if you still want to.’
‘Yes.
Good.’
‘It will all end in tears,’ she said, and went inside.
‘Church must have had very small feet,’ Lambert said.
‘His socks don't seem to keep me warm at all.’
‘He wore eights,’ Kimberley said.
‘I hope you had them washed first.
You know what Church was like.’
‘It's the worst thing about flying,’ Lambert said.
‘Cold feet.
I'd sooner be too warm than too cold.’
Dickinson said: ‘I knew a pilot who had cold feet one minute and was extremely hot indeed the next.’
‘Who was that?’
Callaghan asked, interested.
‘Pay no heed to him,’ Lambert told Callaghan.
‘Dicky's remarks are in the worst possible taste.’
They were all in a room near the adjutant's office, waiting for Woolley to get off the phone to Corps H.Q. and tell them where the day's flying would be.
It was only 7.30 a m., and still dark.
‘I wonder why people get cold feet,’ Killion remarked.
‘From a medical point of view, that is.
At a time of crisis, you'd think the body would try even harder.’
‘In a crisis, the body just panics,’ said Rogers.
Like everyone except Callaghan and Gabriel, he was sipping whisky with his coffee.
‘The bowels, in particular, behave with childish irresponsibility.’
‘Please,’ protested Dickinson.
‘Well, so they do.
And it's such a nuisance.
Especially when everything freezes.’
Callaghan tittered.
He was still trying to establish himself after the siege in the flooded crater.
‘I can't think of anything worse,’ he murmured.
Lambert pulled hard on his socks, failing to stretch them.
‘I can,’ he said.
Woolley opened the door and stamped in.
His teeth were clenched against the cold, and his sleeves were pulled down over his knuckles.
He stood for a moment, frowning, his head nodding, not looking at anyone.
‘Shit,’ he grunted.
He went out.
There was a pause; then Finlayson said: ‘That could mean almost anything, couldn't it?’
Dangerfield leaned across and whispered, with the grotesque drama of an elderly gossip: ‘I think he wants to be friends, you know.
Deep down.
He just can't bring himself to say it.’
Woolley came back with a wooden model of a biplane.
He put it on a table where they could see it.
‘Somebody has started using his brains,’ he said.
The model looked like a stretched-out SE5a, only smoother and cleaner.
‘The engine generates 160 horsepower, so the speed, ceiling and rate-of-climb are all good.
Top speed is about 120, ceiling is over 22,000, and I don't know the other, but you can guess.’
Woolley pointed at the wings.
‘Thick wings.
The controls still answer at high altitudes.
Very strong construction.
You could dive it hard and the wings won't come off.
Sensitive.
Easy to turn.
Might be too easy if the pilot wasn't careful.
Plenty of wallop: two machine-guns mounted on the engine and firing through the prop.
Big prop, too.’
Rogers leaned forward and licked his lips.
‘What a darling creature,’ he said softly.
Finlayson made a scornful show of lighting a cigarette, so that everyone looked.
‘It's a nice model,’ he said, ‘if you like models.
Personally I'd sooner fly what we've got, even if they are slow, tired and sick of the palsy.’
His hand was shaking.
‘Well, bully for you,’ said Woolley flatly.
‘I do like that tapered wing,’ Rogers said.
‘Do you think we might get these, sir?
What are they?’
Woolley took a bacon sandwich out of his tunic pocket.
‘The enemy calls them Fokker D.VIIs,’ he said.
‘If you try hard you might get one this morning.’
‘Oh my Christ, said Lambert.
‘Now they've got something better than Triplanes.’
He looked sick.
‘I don't fancy arguing with one of those,’ Kimberley said.
‘That's a wicked looking bastard, that is.’
‘Isn't there any chance of our getting better planes, sir?’
Rogers asked.
‘Couldn't we get Camels, or Bristols?’
‘I expect so.’
Woolley champed on his sandwich.
‘I haven't asked for any, and they haven't sent them.’
He discovered a piece of bone in his bacon and spat it out.
The pilots were looking at him with a mixture of dread and shock.
‘But sir —’
‘The SE5a is the best gun-platform made.
It's rock-steady.
It won't dip, or wobble, or swing, or scratch its ass when you tell it to keep still.
I want two things from an aeroplane: I want it to fly me up to the enemy, and then lie still while I shoot the enemy down.’
‘It's too slow, sir,’ Richards said quietly.
‘It's too slow, and it won't fly as high as we need to go.
The enemy can get on top of us.
In a Camel —’
‘Get there first,’ Woolley said, ‘and catch them coming up.
I'm not changing planes.’
For a moment, that silenced them.
Finlayson threw his cigarette at the model.
‘The Kaiser's wife could fly rings round us in one of those,’ he said.
‘Nobody ever killed the enemy by flying rings around him.
You kill him with the gun, not the aeroplane.
I have always maintained,’ Woolley said with ponderous irony, ‘that the way to avoid a long argument is to shoot the other man before he starts.
All you have to do is get up close, keep your temper, and shoot straight.
Camels wobble.
Spads wobble.
Bristols wobble.
SE5as do not,’ he brought up a long, curling belch, ‘wobble.’
Nobody smiled.
‘Now for the second piece of good news.’
Woolley went over to the wall map.
‘The General Staff has at last discovered what fighters are for.
They are for fighting.
From now on we shall not hang around our side of the Front, waiting for the foe and getting shot down by the French artillery.
We shall fly over the German lines, looking for trouble.
We shall fight.
Right?
As soon as it's light, my old school chums Finlayson, Richards and Callaghan will come with me and patrol the area Roeux-Riencourt.
Rogers will take Dickinson, Gabriel and Dangerfield and patrol Riencourt-Flesquières.
Lambert is the lucky one.
He goes balloon-busting, with Kimberley and Killion to help.’
‘Excuse me,’ Lambert muttered.
He hurried out, knocking over chairs, and ran to the latrines.
When Lambert found Kimberley and Killion they were out on the field, looking at a map laid on the bottom wing of a plane.
The grey light from the east did nothing to improve Lambert's face.
‘Where are these bloody balloons?’ he said.
‘Queant,’ said Kimberley.
‘That's just between —’
‘I know, I know.’
Lambert leaned against the fuselage and shuddered.
‘I've seen those sods before, they always keep a few Fokkers lurking at about five thousand.
How many are there?’
‘Three, yesterday,’ Killion said.
‘Oh God.’
He walked down to the tail and pressed his hands on the rudder, wet with morning mist.
‘Bloody sausages,’ he said.
‘Bloody lousy murdering sausages.
I shall never eat another sausage as long as I live.’
‘Come on,’ Kimberley said.
‘We might as well go.’
Planes were taking off.
Lambert came back, wiping his wet hands on his face.
‘You ever been balloon-busting?’ he asked.
They had not.
‘Dear mum, it's a bastard,’ he said.
‘They've got a ring of anti-aircraft guns all round them.
Then they've got the ground crews with dozens of machine-guns and hundreds of damn rifles, all blazing away.
If you get through that you've got to give the balloon a good hard squirt to make it burn, and if you do make it burn it goes up with a hell of a whoomph and you've still got to get away.’
‘Past the big guns, the medium-sized guns and the little guns,’ said Kimberley.
‘Did I mention the Jerry fighters?’
‘Yes.’
Killion offered him his flask, but Lambert just closed his eyes.
‘They let these sausages up pretty high, though, don't they?
About a thousand feet, it says here.
The ground fire shouldn't be too accurate there —’
Lambert waved a limp hand.
‘They pull 'em down,’ he said, his eyes still closed.
‘They pull 'em down as soon as they see you coming.
‘They won't see us if we fly low.’
‘The observers in the balloons will.’
‘Oh,’ Killion said.
‘Um.’
‘I'm getting cold,’ Kimberley complained.
‘What d'you want to do?’
‘Oh, bollocks, I don't know.’
Lambert opened his eyes and looked bleakly at the map.
‘If we go in high the Jerry planes will get us.
We've got to go in low.
I'll bust the balloons, you two split-ass about and distract their attention.’
‘What if they pull the balloons down first?’
Killion asked.
‘Oh, shut up,’ Lambert said.
He trudged away.
Hugging the ground, dodging clumps of splintered trees, hopping over hedges and walls and old fortified lines, Lambert led Kimberley and Killion so low that they had little opportunity to take their eyes off the terrain and look for balloons.
But his reckoning was good: they skimmed the British trench system and raced across the ruptured wastes of no-man's-land exactly opposite the given map reference.
As it happened, the Germans had moved the balloons one thousand yards to the left.
Lambert kept on going and made height as fast as possible, to clear the angry patter of small-arms fire and the explosive stutter of machine-guns.
At five hundred feet he banked hard and headed for the balloons.
Inevitably they were being hauled down, fast.
Both of them.
Kimberley and Killion swung out to broaden the attack and confuse the ground fire.
Flak blotted the sky ahead, making remote grunting sounds.
Lambert's mind registered the presence of aircraft high above, but they were irrelevant.
He was studying the nearer balloon, calculating where it would be when he got there.
Dimples like heavy rain spotted his wings as stray bullets went through, and then he reached the belt of anti-aircraft fire.
The grimy blots grew closer and bigger, sudden thunderclaps made visible, and hurled the little planes from side to side.
As Lambert laboured to get back on course another blast flung him lopsided.
The next pitched him violently upwards, or kicked him forward.
The controls felt sloppy and disjointed.
The explosions made his head hurt.
Through the smoke he saw the balloon dropping, its basket swinging wildly.
Now he could see the heads of the observers.
Abruptly the flak ceased and he flew into clear air: too near the balloon for the German gunners.
The bag was down to five hundred feet.
Lambert felt mildly surprised that he had arrived.
He lined up the dead centre of the target and scored with a long, spiralling burst.
The way his bullets plucked at the fat bag was slightly obscene.
He kept on firing until he could see each individual rope on the net, then hauled the nose up and vaulted the balloon, realizing as he did so that if it caught fire now he would be fried.
No flames came.
He looked behind: the balloon was still dropping.
Kimberley and Killion were prancing about the sky, failing to distract the defences, and Lambert strayed into a hail of machine-gun fire, splashed with flak.
He forced the unhappy plane into an Immelmann turn and dived back on the balloon.
From a hundred feet he raked it from side to side and back again.
This time he curled away before he could overshoot, and as he kicked the rudder bar across he saw a glowing redness develop.
Before he had completed his turn the whole sphere was blazing, and two parachutes were unfolding below it.
For a moment Lambert want rigid with horror as it looked as if the fire would fall on top of them; but they drifted clear.
The second balloon was a quarter of a mile off, and by now very  close to the ground.
Kimberley and Killion made mock-attacks while Lambert dived through the intense machine-gun fire and a screen of flak so dense that he lost sight of his target.
Something clouted his left shoulder with a blow that numbed the arm and knocked him across the cockpit.
The plane staggered and refused to fly straight; it lurched crabwise out of one shell-blast and into another.
Lambert's eyes went hazy; he felt unconsciousness rising in him like a tide; it drained reluctantly away, and he was through the barrage again.
But now the balloon was in the wrong place…it should be in front…the plane wandered away from it, sluggish and disobedient.
Lambert strained to force it back but the controls insisted on turning for home, and so he had to slip past the balloon, all plump and shining grey, soon to be on the ground.
Feeling sick and disgusted, Lambert let the plane lumber over the Front.
The bruising flak searched for him again, but he ignored it and eventually it went away.
He looked for the other two aircraft.
They were still over German territory, quite high, about half a mile apart, and heading for home.
There was a lot of flak but the Fokkers had gone.
As Lambert watched, one SE5a took a hit from a shell and fell sideways.
Rich black smoke, like costly velvet, unfurled from its engine.
The plane began a slow, spiralling decent which developed into a steep side-slip.
Lambert watched it as long as he could, but his own plane was losing height, and he limped over the British lines at fifty feet.
High above, the third plane flew home, apparently unconcerned by war, destruction or anything.
Lambert nursed his coughing, shaking aircraft back to the field and thankfully touched down on the first available yard of turf.
He cut the engine and felt the tailskid sink, bounce, settle and finally run.
There was something odd about the way the plane was rolling; one wheel was broken.
Lambert slumped and watched the grass go by and listened to the strut tearing itself apart.
The  plane juddered to a halt and the under-carriage noisily collapsed.
The right wing buckled.
Lambert got out and left it all.
Woodruffe came over from his hut and met him.
‘Are you all right?’ the adjutant asked.
Lambert showed him his left shoulder.
‘Something hit me,’ he said.
He wanted a drink, now it was all over.
‘Nothing there, old chap,’ the adjutant said.
‘Not even a hole.
What did it feel like?’
‘Let's have a drink’ Lambert sat down on the grass and put his head between his knees.
‘They moved the damn sausages,’ he said.
‘I hate sausages…
I feel rotten, Woody.
I think…’
He lay down and blinked, while the blood roared behind his ears.
The adjutant sent a man for whisky.
After a while, Lambert's head stopped roaring and he could see clearly.
He saw an SE5a high above, circling and circling.
‘Why doesn't the silly bugger land?’ he asked weakly.
Woodruffe helped him drink some Scotch and put him in Rogers's limousine which a mechanic had brought over.
Together they sat and watched the plane circle.
After about ten minutes it came down and flew a cautious lap, and then landed.
‘Killion,’ Woodruffe said.
Black fumes were coming off the engine.
They drove over and picked him up.
‘Where's Kimberley?’
Killion asked.
He had oil all over his face and hands.
‘You should know,’ Lambert said.
He was lying in the back seat, drinking.
‘He was right next to you when he got hit.’
Killion climbed into the car.
‘I couldn't see a damn thing,’ he said.
‘This oil kept blowing back and messing up my goggles.
it was all I could do to get home.
I must have got a splinter in the engine, somewhere.’
He spat out of the window.
‘Filthy-tasting
‘Well, we got one balloon,’ Lambert said.
‘I hope they're bloody grateful.
Woolley landed with Finlayson and Richards an hour later; then Rogers came in with Dickinson and Gabriel.
Dangerfield was already there, having struggled home with a broken rudder  line, probably clipped by shrapnel.
Callaghan had made a forced landing in a field, but they had seen him get out.
Woolley sent Finlayson off with a truck to lead the driver to Callaghan.
Meanwhile, the ground crews refuelled, re-armed, and slapped patches on the worst holes.
Everyone was fairly pleased: each flight had killed one German and damaged others, and no German planes had crossed the Front on that sector.
Woolley went over to the adjutant's office.
Two Frenchman were sitting, drinking coffee.
‘And here is the Commanding Officer, now, gentleman,’ Woodruffe told them.
Everyone stood up.
‘Did you have a good flight, sir?’
‘Where's Lambert?’
Woolley demanded.
‘I believe he's…resting.
In his billet.’
‘Get him.’
Woodruffe went into the next room.
The Frenchmen sat down.
Woolley took off his helmet and vigorously massaged his scalp.
He picked a match out of an ashtray and cleaned his finger-nails.
Something sprang to the floor and he mashed it with a large flying-boot.
One of the Frenchmen glanced to see what it was.
‘French,’ he told them.
They looked at each other blankly.
The adjutant came back.
‘Yes, he was resting.
These gentlemen, by the way, are from the French civil police.’
‘Did you get the booze?
And the scarves?’
‘Yes, sir.
And two replacements arrive tomorrow.’
‘New machines?’
‘Well, Corps says six good aircraft should be flown here today.’
‘Should?
The first goddamn pilot I see sitting on his ass, I'll send him to Corps to shoot a general.’
‘Yes sir.’
There was a pause while Woolley kicked monotonously against a filing cabinet.
Woodruffe indicated the visitors.
‘They would like to arrest about half the squadron,’ he said.
Woolley looked at him.
‘Don't be fucking stupid,’ he said.
‘We have warrants,’ one of the Frenchmen told him.
He unfolded some documents.
‘Against Captain Dudley Arthur Rogers for manslaughter and conspiracy to defraud.
Against Lieutenant George Yates Finlayson for manslaughter, assault and conspiracy to defraud.
Against Lieutenant Frank Alan Michael Church for  manslaughter, arson, assault, rape and conspiracy to defraud.’
His English was good.
He riffled the other warrants and put them away.
‘Rape?’ said Woodruffe.
‘Not rape, surely.
That must be a mistake.’
The man gave a very faint smile.
‘You might say that the whole affair was a mistake,’ he said.
‘Get rid of these farts,’ Woolley said.
‘You should know, sir, that I understand you,’ the Frenchman said.
‘If I might explain,’ Woodruffe said hurriedly, ‘'Fart’is a term of familiar respect in the British Army.
Rather like ‘bastard’.’
‘Kick these bastards off my airfield,’ Woolley said.
‘You should also know that we consulted with your Corps commander this morning,’ the Frenchman said, ‘and he ordered that we should be given every possible assistance.’
‘He is a fart and a bastard,’ Woolley said.
An airman opened a door.
‘Captain Lambert, sir,’ he said.
Lambert came in, looking scruffy and pale.
‘You did a piss-poor-job on those balloons,’ Woolley told him.
‘I came over there fifteen minutes ago and they had two of the buggers up again, and the Boche artillery was pounding shit out of our lines.’
‘Oh, Christ,’ Lambert said.
He sat down and fumbled for a cigarette.
The Frenchman sorted his warrants.
‘Captain Gerald Frazer Neil Lambert?’ he said.
‘I did get one,’ Lambert protested miserably.
‘They moved their rotten sausages during the night, they saw us coming, they pulled them down.
You couldn't…'Woodruffe struck a light, but Lambert's eyes didn't see it, and the flame burned itself out.
‘We lost old Kimberley, as it was,’ he said.
‘What did they lose?’
‘I got one —’
‘Did you get the observers?’
Lambert took in a long, shuddering breath.
‘They damn near went up with the balloon,’ he said.
‘They jumped, and I thought  their parachutes were going to catch fire.’
He discovered the cigarette in his hand and examined it as if it were a mistake.
‘You didn't kill them?’
Woolley stared bleakly, like a butcher with an incompetent errand-boy.
‘No, I got the balloon, I didn't…’
Lambert shrugged.
‘I didn't…
I got the balloon, that was…
I got the goddam balloon, didn't I?’ he demanded angrily.
‘I got the goddam balloon!’
Woolley parodied in a shrill voice.
‘Go back and get the goddam observers!
You shoot down the gas-bag, dummy, to make them jump out so you can machine gun them while they go down!
By Christ!
You think you pop balloons for sport?
‘You should have told me,’ Lambert muttered.
‘Told you?
I should have told you we go up to kill men and not pop balloons?
I should have told you the Huns have balloons the way you have the runs, but they are short of skilled observers?
I should have told you that snot comes out of your nose?’
The Frenchman stepped forward, and his colleague moved with him.
‘We will start with this officer,’ he said.
‘Captain Gerald Frazer —’
‘You're not taking any of my pilots,’ Woolley said harshly.
‘You can stuff those warrants right up the Corps commander's bum.’
‘Then we shall return in force and compel the arrest.’
‘No you won't.’
Woolley glowered at him.
‘No you won't, you French turd, because Captain bloody Lambert is under military arrest already.’
‘lndeed.
What charge?’
‘Cowardice in the face of the enemy.’
The adjutant covered his face with his hands.
Lambert looked at Woolley with dull loathing.
The French policemen raised their eyebrows fractionally, and picked up their hats.
Woolley scratched his stomach.
‘After all we have heard,’ the Frenchman said, ‘I am surprised that you still find the services of Captain Lambert so necessary.’
‘Is that a fact,’ Woolley said.
‘Well, he's got that job still to do, hasn't he?
He's got to get after them balloons again, today, as  soon as possible.
And I want those observers dead this time.’
He gave Lambert a grubby smirk.
‘Gerald,’ he said.
Lambert stumbled as he came out of the adjutant's office, and collided with two airmen.
‘Where's Lieutenant Killion?’ he demanded.
‘Dunno, sir,’ replied one.
‘We're on cookhouse fatigues, sir.’
Lambert stared at him, licking his lips.
He suddenly felt cold; shudderingly cold.
‘Cookhouse?’ he said.
‘So what?’
The words came out slurred.
He heard the slurring and wondered what caused it.
‘You might try Mr Kimberley's room, sir,’ the other airman suggested.
‘Don't want Kimberley.
Want Killion.’
Lambert shivered and put his hands in his pockets.
‘Can't have Kimberley,’ he muttered.
‘I think I saw him go in Mr Kimberley's room, sir.’
Lambert walked heavily away.
There was a deep puddle in the path and he walked through it.
‘Charming,’ said the first airman.
‘He's not to blame,’ the other said.
‘Poor bastard's tiddly.
Smell the whisky on him?’
Killion was sitting on Kimberley's bed, reading one of Kimberley's books, when Lambert came in.
‘Here's a funny thing,’ he said.
‘I bet you didn't know the Scotch thistle doesn't really grow all that much in Scotland at all.’
‘Great news,’ Lambert said.
‘It grows mainly in England.
But bog myrtle grows mainly in Scotland.
So does bog asphodel.
Scotland and Wales.’
‘Great news,’ Lambert sat down and rested his head in his hands.
‘There's an awfully pretty flower here somewhere, called golden something…
They say it likes chalky uplands…’
Killion leafed through the book.
‘It looks a bit like a cowslip,’ he said.
‘I didn't know old Kimberley was interested in botany, did you?’
‘Great news.’
Killion glanced at him, and turned back to the Scotch thistle.
‘What is?’
‘We're going back.’
‘Back where?’
‘Back to the same place.’
‘Oh.’
Killion put the book in his pocket and went to the chat of drawers.
He found half a dozen handkerchiefs and a green silk scarf.
‘Just the thing for my girl!’ he exclaimed.
He put it around his neck and showed Lambert, but Lambert wasn't looking.
‘Have they got the balloons up again?
I suppose they must have.
When are we going?’
‘As soon as they've patched up my plane.
Four o'clock, five o'clock, I don't know.
We'll have to get someone to take Kimberley's place.’
Killion rummaged through the bedside locker.
‘Chocolate…want some chocolate?
I say, a wristwatch!
What on earth did he want with two watches?
Not very accurate: five minutes slow.
I suppose you saw the old man about it.’
‘He wants me to machine-gun the observers this time.’
Killion was brushing his hair with a pair of silver-backed brushes from the top of the chat of drawers.
He stared at Lambert through the mirror.
‘What, in the basket?
You can't see them in the basket.’
‘Not in the bleeding basket,’ Lambert said angrily.
‘After they've jumped out, while they're going down.’
Killion didn't like the idea at all.
He sat on the wooden chair in the corner and looked at Lambert as if he were a self-confessed criminal.
‘You can't do that, though, can you?
I mean, they're completely helpless.
It's like —’
‘If you so much as mention sitting ducks or fish in a barrel,’ Lambert said acidly, ‘I'll kick your teeth in.’
‘But what good will it do?
Did he tell you that?’
‘He says Jerry is short of skilled observers.
He says there's no point in busting a balloon if the observers can go up in another.
They can replace the balloons but not the observers.’
‘He can't make you do it, you know.’
Killion ate some chocolate while he thought about it.
‘You're within your rights to refuse, you know.
He wouldn't dare court-martial you.’
‘Oh, shut up.’
Lambert got up, opened the window, closed it, leaned against the wall.
‘I didn't join this rotten squadron to become his hired assassin,’ he muttered.
‘No,’ Killion agreed.
‘Of course, that's where the old man would probably differ.’
‘I've just realized.’
Lambert looked at him with such energy that for a moment Killion thought he had discovered a way out of it.
‘Woolley never knew the observers weren't killed until I told him.
How could he?
He tricked me into telling him.
What if I'd said we killed them all?
He couldn't prove otherwise.’
‘How did he trick you?’
‘He asked me what happened to them.
Whether they were dead.’
‘Oh.’
Killion sniffed.
‘Diabolical cunning.’
‘If I'd only thought…
Still, that's the answer, isn't it?
Bust the balloons, bugger off home, tell him we shot everything that moved.’
‘He might get a different report from our gunners.
Frankly I think you should just tell him to go to hell.
He wouldn't dare court-marshall.
It's sheer, cold-blooded murder, and in full view of everyone.’
Kimberley came in.
‘Hullo,’ he said.
‘You two hiding from someone?’
He had a dirty bandage above one eye, and mud all over his breeches.
‘What happened to you?’
Lambert asked.
‘Just about bloody everything.
I got bitten by a rat.
Look.’
He showed them the mark on his hand.
‘Our trenches are full of them, horrible great brutes.
God, I'm tired.’
He lay down on the bed.
‘I was just coming home when I got hit in the engine.
Fortunately it didn't go off, but it made a hell of a mess, and I came down in a shell-hole just outside our wire.’
‘In no-man's-land?’
Killion said.
‘You were lucky you didn't get shot.’
‘Yes…
Excuse me, but is that my scarf?
Thanks.
Just put it back in the drawer…
Well, they got me out, and into our trenches, and patched me up, and I was just leaving when the Huns started shelling.
Have you ever been shelled?
It's horrible.
It's nothing but screaming and colossal explosions and everything shaking and you keep thinking the next one is going to hit you, and you pray for it to stop, and it goes on, and on, and on.
You want to scream out and make them stop it, and you want to cringe up your body and hide it somewhere, and there's nowhere to hide, and the shells keep screaming down and blowing everything up all around you.
That was when I got bitten by the rat.’
Killion and Lambert watched him curiously.
This was stocky, stolid Kimberley, the Derbyshire ploughboy.
‘How long did it last?’
Killion asked.
‘An hour, I think.
I've no idea, I lost count of time.
It took me ten minutes just to stop shaking so I could walk.
They took me out with the wounded.
Just think.
Those men have to stand that over and over again.
I never knew it was like that.
We lost a lot of men.
Direct hits on the trenches.’
‘Was it really accurate?’
Lambert asked, stupidly.
‘They couldn't miss, they just couldn't miss.
They had that sausage up again, the one we didn't get.
The Jerry observers were looking right down on us.
It was murder.
Like shooting fish in a barrel.’
‘Well, if it's any consolation we're going back this afternoon to have another go.’
‘So we should.
Those balloons are just murdering our poor bloody infantry.
It's a crime to let them do it, a bloody crime.’
‘Woolley wants us to kill the observers,’ Killion said.
‘Fire the balloon, make them jump, than shoot them as they parachute down.
‘Couldn't agree more.
Shoot the buggers dead.
Then their guns won't be able to see what they're hitting.’
‘It doesn't strike you as…’
Killion hesitated, ‘a bit cold-blooded?’
Kimberley looked at him sideways.
‘Listen,’ he said.
‘If someone threw a bomb at you and ran away, would you shoot him in the back, or would you let him get some more bombs and try again?’
‘It's not as easy as that,’ Lambert mumbled.
‘It's as easy as that,’ Kimberley said.
He closed his eyes.
‘Now piss off and leave me alone.’
He sounded angry.
Lambert's plane was ready at 3.45 p.m.
He tried to telephone the British artillery unit nearest the balloons, but the operator couldn't get through.
The line had probably been cut by shell-fire.
It was a fine, clear afternoon, dry and bright in an unexpected spell of sunshine.
Lambert waited until 4.
I5.
He wanted to go in with the sun behind him.
He took off first and circled the field, testing the controls.
The rudder felt as if it were covered with barnacles, and the engine sounded old and tired, but there was no reason for grounding the plane.
He performed a laborious loop, the signal for Kimberley and Killion to join him.
Again they skimmed the ground all the way to the Front, but this time the Germans had no chance to hear the warning buzz of engines, for they were shelling again.
Lambert was climbing hard over the German wire before the first balloon began to move.
The ground fire was much worse than it had been that morning.
Lambert glimpsed a flickering of muzzle-flames from a hundred machine-guns, and heard the deft tug of bullets speckling his machine, with sometimes a spang! as a round struck metal.
He realized, without interest, that the enemy firepower had been tremendously increased during the day.
Kimberley and Killion were still with him, he observed, but fanning out to distract the gunners.
Killion waved to him.
Lambert stared, and looked back at the balloon.
Suddenly the flak awoke and got in fifteen seconds' vicious pounding before giving up.
It was like being ambushed with filthy snowballs; they materialized without warning, crashed painfully against the eardrums, and buffeted the aircraft.
The balloon loomed up, gross and jerking, and the storm fell away.
Lambert climbed hard at his descending target.
For a moment there was nothing to do but let the shabby old SE haul him up the last stretch, so Lambert actually relaxed and momentarily enjoyed his peace.
He sprawled sideways and took in the twitching, frightened balloon with its cross-hatched plumpness rounded out by the  golden sun on one side, curving into purple dusk on the other, and the heavy, ugly, functional basket.
At two hundred feet he began firing.
He could not miss.
The balloon was a target indecently big.
His bullets streamed into its chubby underside, slitting and probing with veterinary purpose.
The flames came almost immediately.
Lambert kept on firing, criss-crossing the balloon, underscoring the obvious, until at last he had to turn away.
When he looked back the gas-bag was roaring, a spherical furnace illuminating the early dusk.
The basket was still there.
Than it became detached.
Lambert dived, but nobody came out of the basket.
It dropped fast, keeping its upright stance at first, than turning as if emptying itself, and the men fell out.
No parachutes opened.
Lambert watched the tumbling bodies until they were little spinning, waving irrelevancies; and turned away.
The kill infuriated the gunners.
They sent up a thick screen of flak between the Goshawk planes and the second balloon, damning anyone who tried to break through The usual haphazard spray of machine-gun fire sprinkled the air, inaccurate and half-spent at that height, but it only needed one bulletin the head to destroy a whole aircraft.
Lambert was now very afraid.
Something smashed into his instrument panel and thin oil streaked his goggles.
He circled, looking for the other two, and then found he couldn't level out: the outer half of the left wing was shredded, as if by hailstones.
Lopsided and vulnerable, he tried to climb the barrage and get to the second balloon.
The barrage climbed to meet him.
He saw Kimberley and Killion curling in from either side, and wondered that they were both intact.
Weaving and dodging, the three planes shuffled across the blotched and shuddering sky.
Continuous eruptions created a wilderness of blast and air pockets; they barely recovered from one sickening jolt before something hurled them in the opposite direction, or the plane stumbled into a vacuum and hit bottom fifty feet down.
Often Lambert lost sight of the other two.
He slumped inside the cockpit as far as he could, out of sight of the pounding high explosive, protected by old canvas against jagged  shell-fragments; and dimly recognized the familiar sensation of hot urine soaking down his right leg.
Like flies in a thunderstorm, their very lightness carried the British planes through.
Anything short of a very near miss merely blew them away.
Three strong men could lift a SE5a, fully loaded; so blast blew the planes about, aged them, weakened them, but it did not destroy them.
Lambert raised his shaking head to see the sky ahead clear of flak, with the balloon in the centre.
There were also three circling Fokker Triplanes.
This balloon had not descended.
Lambert realized that far below the barrage was still pounding away; that the observers reports were still going down the telephone wire, correcting ranges and bearings, selecting new targets from the shop window of the British Front.
This attack was important to the Germans.
Hence the Triplanes.
They came out of the circuit one by one and bore down on the SE5s, each of which was now heading for the balloon from a different quarter.
Lambert saw his German change from profile to head-on-view: a black, kite-like pattern edged with gold, dropping out of the pure purple of the dusk.
He turned slightly to meet the attack.
The German fired a couple of rounds to clear his guns.
Lambert blinked to rid his eyes of a sudden haziness and then the German was on him, with a curiously muffled stutter that swelled and was lost in the bellow of their engines as they passed in a blaze of flashing muzzles and white-hot exhausts and shinning propeller blades.
Lambert heard something crack and thrash itself in the slipstream, but the plane still flew and although there was stink coming from the engine it was not on fire.
While the Triplane recovered and returned he closed in on the balloon.
Killion and Kimberley were keeping the other Germans honest.
The balloon rotated gently in the evening breeze, presenting its serial number to him.
With the Triplane boring in from behind he fired a long burst at the dead centre of the bag, and saw the fabric split and flare.
Lambert dropped his right wing and dummied to go around the right of the balloon, and just as the Triplane started firing he banked steeply to the left and got away.
He missed the burning  bag by ten feet, standing his plane on its tattered wing-tip, and held the turn until the whole scene came in sight again.
The observers were straddling the side of the basket.
Then they jumped.
Lambert hesitated, finding excuses in wanting to oversee the complete destruction of the flaming balloon, or wondering where the Triplane was, or perhaps they had a third balloon somewhere…
The parachutes opened like conjuring tricks, and still he circled.
A hundred yards away a smokeball appeared: the flak was back.
The parachutes drifted away, controlled now by their own laws, out of the war.
Still Lambert circled, uselessly, neither doing nor not doing.
A sheet of flame created itself away to his left, like a scrap of brilliant paper, and a Triplane was on its back, trailing smoke.
Kimberley came pounding across the sky to the parachutes.
Lambert saw his own Triplane diving to protect them and he plunged after it, far too late.
Kimberley let fly at the dangling men from a hopeless range.
He duelled briefly with the Triplane, lost it, and came round in a wide, searching turn.
He flew into an anti-aircraft shell with the precise catastrophe of a drunken driver speeding into a wall.
The petrol tank exploded in a bloom of yellow and red, and then there was only a lot of smoke, with bits falling: bits of wing, bits of wheel, bits of pilot.
Lambert held his dive.
The Triplane came after him and made a long, angled pass, but he was unaware of it.
He reached the parachutes and killed the observers in two attacks from close range.
Then he dropped to roof-top height and fled for home through the deepening dusk.
Killion landed right behind him.
‘I'd like to introduce myself,’ said the replacement.
‘My name is Shufflebotham.
I just came today.’
‘Oh’ Rogers looked at him.
The man was neat and dean and nervously ingratiating.
‘I'm Rogers.
Have you got somewhere to sleep?’
‘Oh, yes.
The adjutant —’
‘That's all right, then.’
Rogers went back to oiling his cricket bat.
He seemed anxious about its condition.
‘Can I buy you a drink?’
‘Got one.’
Rogers indicated the half-full bottle of Scotch on the floor between his legs.
Shufflebotham watched him work for a few moments.
‘Sorry about my name,’ he said, unconvincingly.
‘Damn silly name, really.
I ought to do something about it.’
‘Oh?’
Rogers said.
He waited.
‘Oh,’ he said.
Shufflebotham wandered away.
Lambert was putting records on the gramophone.
He was drunk, and he dropped one.
Shufflebotham picked it up for him.
Lambert played a record.
‘Jolly little tune,’ Shufflebotham said.
‘What?’
‘I don't think we've met.
My name is Shufflebotham.
Awfully Sorry…’
‘Nonsense.’
Lambert blinked at the blur of the spinning label.
‘That's a waltz.
Know it anywhere.’
‘No, no.
My name is Shufflebotham.’
‘Never heard of him.
Not in this squadron.!
He picked up his bottle and tramped away, treading on Dickinson's feet.
‘Who's that?’
Dickinson said, waking up.
‘Shufflebotham,’ Lambert said angrily.
‘Not in this squadron, never.
Fellow's got the wrong squadron.
Never, never, never.’
His narrow, bloodshot eyes glared at the replacement.
‘Wait a minute,’ Finlayson said.
‘You're a bloody liar, Lambert.
Wait a minute.
I know you're a bloody liar.’
‘Where?’
Lambert demanded.
‘What?’
‘There was a Shuttlecock in this squadron,’ Finlayson said.
‘I'm almost bloody certain of it.’
He sniffed morosely.
‘You always were a bloody liar, Lambert.
Hey,’ he turned on Dangerfield.
‘You remember the bastard, don't you?’
‘Who's that?’
Finlayson looked back at Lambert.
‘Come on, then, who was it?’
‘Nobody,’ said Lambert.
‘There never was one.
Never.’
‘I'm afraid it's all a bit of a misunderstanding,’ Shufflebotham said with a light chuckle.
‘Who is this screaming hysteric?’
Finlayson said.
‘You mean Shackleton,’ Dangerfield announced.
‘You remember old Shack, Dudley?
Came down in a tree and broke both his legs.
You remember, he used to do those tricks with matches.’
Rogers thought.
‘No,’ he decided.
‘Oh, come on,’ Dangerfield protested.
‘How can you forget old Shack?’
‘I never knew him,’ Rogers said.
‘Before my time, probably.’
‘I win, then,’ Lambert said loudly.
‘You're all bloody liars.’
‘Listen,’ Finlayson said.
He went up to Lambert and hiccuped rum fumes into his face.
‘Listen, I can remember this fellow whatsisname as clear as you.’
He waved at Shufflebotham.
‘Clearer.’
‘All right, then,’ Lambert challenged.
‘All right, ask old Woody.’
‘You ask old Woody.’
Finlayson closed his eyes to help him think.
‘The burden of the evidence rests on the other side to disprove whatever it is, and not on the other side to disprove the other side's evidence.
That's English justice.’
Lambert turned to Dickinson.
‘Is that right, Dicky?’ he asked, confused.
‘Better ask old Woody,’ Dickinson said.
‘That's what I said,’ Finlayson confirmed.
‘You ask old Woody.’
The adjutant came in, followed by a one-armed major.
‘Aha!’ said Dangerfield.
‘Now for a duel between giants.
Lambert wants to ask you something, Woody.’
‘Fire ahead.’
‘I forget,’ Lambert said.
There was a chorus of booing and laughter.
‘There never was one, that's why!’ he shouted.
‘Are there the officers named in the arraignments?’ the major asked Woodruffe.
‘Yes.
Manslaughter and fraud all round, more or less, and rape, arson and assault sort of sprinkled through.
This is Major Gibbs,’ he told them.
‘Have a drink,’ Dangerfield offered.
‘It's damn ticklish, really,’ the major said.
He accepted some  whisky.
‘Thanks.
I've been sent down to arrange your indictments before a French civil court on all these charges.
Cheers.’
‘But it's all balls,’ Richards said, emerging from behind a newspaper.
‘Tell them to go to hell.’
‘It is their country,’ Woodruffe pointed out.
‘They don't deserve it.
We're fighting much harder than they are.
Besides, look at the rations they sell us.
Look at the eggs we get, they're tiny.
It's scandalous.’
Richards was trembling with indignation.
‘Well, never mind about that,’ the major said.
‘We can't get you before a French court anyway, as long as you're all awaiting court-martial.’
‘I am not awaiting court-martial,’ Gabriel declared.
He put down his pocket Bible and looked around with a certain grim satisfaction.
‘Nor am I charged with any crime under French civil law.’
‘Good,’ said the major.
‘Then maybe you can give me a hand.
We've got to get one set of charges or the other in motion, and I'm your defence counsel.’
‘We plead guilty but insane,’ Lambert said.
‘I shall have nothing to do with unrighteousness,’ Gabriel stated firmly.
‘The soul that sinneth, it shall die.’
He looked calmly from Gibbs to Lambert.
‘But if a man be just, and do that which is lawful and right, he shall surely live, saith the Lord God.’
‘I don't think you understand,’ said Gibbs.
‘I just need someone to help with the paperwork.’
‘Oh no.
That's quite impossible.
If ye shall despise my statutes, or if your soul abhor my  judgments , I will even appoint over you terror, consumption, and the burning ague.
And I will break the pride of your power.’
He tapped his Bible with his finger.
‘You see, it's out of my hands.’
‘Jesus Christ,’ Finlayson growled in disgust.
‘Who else?’ asked Gabriel.
‘What about the other girl who lives here?’
Killion asked.
‘She's hiding behind the curtains,’ Jane Ashton said.
‘Why are you shivering?
Perhaps you'd better put some clothes back on.’
‘Who's shivering?’
He swished the wine around in his glass to disguise the tremble.
‘Anyway, I've had a hard day.’
She stepped out of her skirt and undid her hair.
Killion watched from the corners of his eyes.
‘Let's bring the mattress through here, in front of the fire,’ she suggested.
She cocked her head.
‘If you can wait that long, that is.’
Killion turned away, pretending to look for somewhere to put his glass.
‘All right,’ he said.
‘Are you sure it will go through the door?’
He picked a china ornament off the mantelpiece and looked at its base.
‘Neat, but not gaudy,’ he said.
‘Is it yours?’
She came up and put her arms around him.
‘Oh, Jack,’ she said.
Killion felt the warm and cool curves and points pressing against him.
He put the ornament down very carefully.
It fell over.
‘It's all very well for you,’ he said meaninglessly.
‘You live here.’
‘Oh, come on.
Stop muttering away to yourself.’
She reached down and began tickling towards his groin, and he broke away.
‘Where is it?’ he demanded.
They dragged the mattress through, and stood panting with exertion on either side of it.
Killion said: ‘You really do look absolutely wonderful.
’ There were tears in his eyes, and he did not look away.
‘Thank you.’
They lay down, and started to begin the endless discovery of the pleasure of each other, and the endless pleasure of each discovery; while outside there was a faint, remote rumble which could have been shell-fire, or heavy traffic, or even a loose window vibrating in the wind.
‘If we had a house,’ Margery said, ‘what would we call it?’
She was frying eggs and bacon and mushrooms on a camp stove in Woolley's billet.
‘Clèry-le-Grand.’
Woolley was looking at a large-scale map, and drinking Guinness.
‘What?
Seriously.’
‘Seriously, I can't think of anything more serious than Clèry-le-Grand.
Right now it's just about the most serious little piss-pot of a frog pox-factory in the whole world.’
She glanced at the map, and went back to spooning hot fat over the eggs.
‘It depends what sort of house it is, I suppose, but what if it was a, you know, biggish place, in the country somewhere.
Like Hampshire.
What about that?
What would we call it?’
‘Dunromin.
Shangri-la.
Justanook.’
He rubbed a grimy thumb in his palm, collecting dirt off both surfaces.
‘Bide-a-wee.
Cosycot.
Cedar Lodge.
The Moated Grange.
The Station Hotel.
The Bottom of the Barrel.
The End of the Road.
The Skin of our Teeth.
The Broken Reed.
Bottomsup.’
He went back to the map.
‘Clèry-le-Grand.’
‘We used to live in a house called The Nest.’
She forked out the bacon, letting it drain before she arranged it around the plate.
‘We didn't give it that name, but all the same it made a difference.
I mean, it wouldn't have been the same if it had been called something else.’
‘We lived in hundred and ten Canal Row,’ he said.
‘If it had been called hundred and twelve we'd have had our own lavatory.’
She slid the eggs, one by one, onto slices of toast in the middle of the plate.
‘It does matter,’ she said.
‘You give names to the things that matter to you, and where you live matters.’
‘As long as the postman puts the begging letters through the right door,’ he said.
He felt a throbbing strain at the outer corners of his eyes, and pressed them with his finger-tips.
Margery's face was hidden by her hair as she bent over the stove.
‘I'd like to live somewhere nice, that was called something nice,’ she said.
The mushrooms were being dotted around the eggs, bright and buttony.
‘What I want more than anything is to have somewhere I can look forward to.’
She put the plate in front of him, and he began eating.
‘I once had a week in a boarding-house called St Monica's,’ he said.
‘What I look forward to is never seeing it again.’
‘Why don't you want to live somewhere nice, for God's sake?’ she asked.
‘Haven't you ever wanted a home of your own?’
Woolley grimaced.
‘This bacon,’ he said.
‘Bloody salty.’
She reached forward and overturned the plate so that it landed on his lap.
Mushrooms bounced about the plank floor.
He stared at her.
‘You're an absolute bastard,’ she said.
The tears came, and rapidly dissolved her angry expression to one of utter despair.
Woolley sat, knife and fork in hand and tried to think what to do.
‘Why have you got two watches on?’
Jane asked.
She held his wrist and smoothed the soft hairs on his arm.
‘Extra precaution,’ Killion said.
‘in case one goes wrong.
Hey!
That reminds me.’
He jumped up and went to his tunic.
‘I brought something for you.’
He handed her a green silk scarf.
‘How beautiful!’ she said.
‘You are kind.’
She kissed him.
‘Try it on,’ he said.
She put it around her neck and let the points fall between her breasts.
‘What a perfect day,’ she whispered.
Force 10 Whole Gale Trees uprooted; considerable structural damage
The following night Killion was awakened by the drumming of a loose pane of glass.
He found his watch: 5 a.m.
The window frame vibrated steadily, producing a buzz like a trapped fly.
Killion got out of bed and went over and rested his brow on the cold glass.
He heard a dull thunder that was not the blood in his ears.
He opened the door and listened.
From the east came the roar of ten thousand blast furnaces.
Killion stood and let the cold air chill him, as a kind of left-handed penance for not being at the Front where all that pounding and pulverizing of flesh and bone and blood with steel and explosive was taking place.
Somebody walked past, and said: ‘Damn noisy, isn't it?’
It was Dickinson.
Killion asked: ‘Is this it, d'you think?’
‘No, no.
They're just loosening up.
The real barrage comes later.’
Killion got dressed and went to the mess.
He saw some figures on the roof and climbed a ladder to them.
‘This is definitely worse than Passchendaele,’ Rogers was saying.
‘I mean, just look at it.’
The entire eastern horizon was red.
‘It's like the Great Fire of London, 1666.’
‘I suppose it is the Hun, and not us,’ said Finlayson gloomily.
‘We haven't got the guns to do a quarter of that damage,’ Dickinson said, ‘and in this weather it would take a week to bring them up.
Good God Almighty!’
A huge explosion bloomed and reverberated on the skyline.
‘Somebody holed out in an ammunition dump.’
as if this were a signal, the entire barrage magnified and intensified itself.
Now the horizon was brighter, with little curling lights flaring into the glow.
The battering clamour seemed to shake the air.
‘It's not possible,’ Rogers muttered.
‘No one can live through that.’
‘We kept it up for ten days before Passchendaele,’ Finlayson said.
‘I wonder how long they'll do it for?’
‘They haven't got ten days to waste,’ Dickinson told him.
‘I'll give you fifty to one the Jerry infantry is drinking its Schnapps in the front row of the stalls right now.’
Rogers produced a flask that had belonged to Church, and they circulated this while the appalling display went on.,
‘How far are we from there?’
Killion asked.
‘About twenty miles.
Far enough,’ Dickinson said.
‘Nobody's advanced twenty miles in this war since the soldiers settled down to do their gardening.’
A figure climbed on to the roof and came towards them.
It was Gabriel.
‘What d'you think of that for hellfire?’
Finlayson asked him sourly.
‘The Lord shall smite thee with an extreme burning, and with the sword, and with blasting, and with mildew; and they shall pursue thee until thou perish,’ Gabriel said firmly.
‘Thy carcass shall be meat unto all the fowls of the air, and unto the beasts of the earth’
‘It beats me why you want to fly with us at all, Gabriel,’ Rogers said.
‘If that's the way you feel.’
‘To me belongeth vengeance and recompense,’ Gabriel told him.
‘Their foot shall slide in due time: for the day of their calamity is at hand, and the things that shall come upon them make haste.’
‘Ah,’ Rogers said.
‘Well, I suppose that's different, then.’
‘The Lord will smite thee with the botch of Egypt, and with the emerods, and with the scab, and with the itch, whereof thou canst not be healed.’
‘How disgusting,’ Dickinson declared.
‘I shall go and make them cook me some breakfast.’
He climbed down the ladder.
‘The botch of Egypt, indeed!
And the emerods…’
His words were lost in the violent pounding from the east.
Rogers and Lambert took off at first light to see what was happening.
More than three hours after it began, the German barrage was still going full blast.
They heard it through the clatter of their engines, but they could not see its faults.
Dense fog covered the Line.
Whatever war was being fought below them was taking place either at the long range of bombardment or the short range of a brawl.
It was curious.
Rogers had flown over the Front many times, and he thought of it as two huge armies entrenched against each other, launching and repelling attacks massively and obviously; but now, he supposed, the fog must have dissolved the armies into isolated soldiers, each fighting his own tiny battle, with no way of knowing whether his side was winning or losing.
Well, Rogers thought, it's the same for both sides.
Our chaps can't see their chaps, but their chaps can't see ours.
And our chaps will be ready for them.
Lambert, nervously watching a couple of single-seaters at height, thought: Please God, get me home, I don't want to land down there…
His face was twitching; he tried to stop it, and failed; looked for Rogers and couldn't see him; lost track of position and direction and why he was up there at all.
His brain moved with a mocking ponderousness, deliberately not helping.
He panicked because he wasn't keeping a look-out.
Found his flask, gulped from it.
Nobody fired at him.
Rogers was alongside.
Slowly his panic faded.
The fog was still thick when they crossed the German Line, but it thinned out on higher ground.
Rogers took advantage of the absence of flak to fly low.
Everywhere that he saw ground, he saw troops moving up.
The grey lines patterned the green-brown earth like odd bits of carpet.
He turned north and searched for more openings and found more troops.
They hurried forward, ignoring the planes.
Other patches revealed supply columns, horsedrawn wagons, ambulance units, strings of gun carriages.
Then more troops.
More troops, more troops.
More.
Hurrying forward with the absorbed attention of worker ants moving their colony.
Hurrying towards the square miles of deafening battering that had been provided to smash open the British Line for their benefit.
After a while Lambert stopped looking.
He had seen too many troops already.
There was no point in measuring how much was too much.
The sun was shining at two thousand feet, but it did no more than lacquer the fog.
Rogers gestured towards home.
As they recrossed the submerged inferno, they saw other aircraft, Germans, further down the Line.
Presumably the attack was not considered a secret any more, for nobody made any move to intercept.
In any case, there was nothing anyone could do about the men in the trenches until the fog lifted.
And precious little after that.
‘Like all bad ideas,’ Woolley said, ‘this one is brilliantly simple.’
He sat on the big table in the mess, one bare foot tucked up, and cut his yellow toe-nails with heavy scissors.
The pilots stood out of range of the parings.
‘You will load your aeroplanes with T.N.T.,’ he said, ‘fly in line-astern to Corps H.Q., and crash on to the roof of the Corps commander's chateau, in alphabetical order.’
Nobody laughed.
Dickinson lit a cigarette, and they watched the match burn out.
‘When you have done that,’ Woolley said, ‘you will fly to Berlin, where you will stand to attention in your cockpits and piss on the Kaiser, thus ending the war.’
He sheared laboriously through a horny overhang.
Lambert looked at his watch, and yawned.
‘And after that,’ Woolley said, ‘you will come back here and stop the German air force from examining the hole which their artillery has just blown in the British Line, a hole about the size of Lancashire, and that will be the biggest waste of time of all, because the German Army found that hole an hour ago, and is now galloping through it as fast as its little legs will carry it, heading in the direction of…’he snipped the final toe-nail and straightened his leg to study the fault'…us.’
Rogers had been looking out of a window.
He started, and turned, pretending a well-bred confusion.
‘Awfully sorry, sir,’ he said.
‘Miles away, I'm afraid.
What is it you want done, again?’
Woolley pulled on a sock.
‘Just get up there and fend them off,’ he said.
‘Stay over the Jerry lines, and keep them busy, that's all.’
He stamped his foot into his flying-boot.
‘Keep them away from the fighting until the poor bloody infantry gets a chance to stop running.
‘How long do you think that will be, sir?’
Callaghan asked.
‘About a week.’
They looked at him, but Woolley was serious.
‘Well, that seems simple and straightforward enough,’ Rogers said.
‘You're simple,’ Woolley told him.
‘The plan is utterly bloody impossible, but if you can't see that, you're probably better off.’
‘I hope you told the Corps commander it was impossible,’ Finlayson said sourly.
Woolley laughed through his nose.
‘On the contrary, you sickly convalescent, he told me.
He doesn't expect us to succeed, but on the other hand he doesn't expect the German attack to succeed, either.
He's got to do something with us, we're on his ration strength.
If you want his exact words, he said ‘Get up there and make bloody nuisances of yourselves until I tell you to come down’.’
‘What a way to win a war,’ Lambert said in disgust.
‘Don't talk daft.
You're not here to win the stupid war, you're here to help make sure nobody loses it.
You're not Henry the Fifth on a flying bloody charger, you know.
You're a semi-skilled mechanic, just like the municipal rat-catcher, on piecework.
Keep your mind on your job, or some big grey bastard will bite you in the thumb.’
A fitter rapped on the window.
‘They're ready.
We'll fly in pairs.
Shufflebotham, you come with me.
Goshawk Squadron flew all that day, and came back from the patrols badly mauled.
German aircraft crossed the Line in a constant stream: two-seater observation planes, single-seater scouts, twin-engined bombers, heavily escorted photographic planes.
By noon all the squadron's reserve aircraft were in use, and the mechanics were sucking blood from cut fingers and grazed knuckles as they worked too fast on battered planes which had just creaked home with streaming canvas and smashed spars, or labouring engines, or cracked fuel lines, or crippled controls, or lopsided under-carriage.
Half a mile away smoke still rose from Dangerfield's machine, where he had crash-landed on fire after stopping a burst of tracer in the wing.
The fire had spread to the fuselage and reached the cockpit by the time he got the wheels on the ground and jumped out.
He flew again within the hour, fat blisters coming up on his right hand and not much left of his eyebrows.
In the late afternoon Dangerfield and Killion were flying together on their fifth patrol when they saw a formation of five Pfalz fighters climbing towards them.
Dangerfield had started the day tired; now, after repeated bouts of combat and the shock of his crash-landing he was weary beyond anything he had ever known.
He watched the Pfalz D VIIs coming up out of the east, with all the loathing and resignation of a slum-dweller who sea yet another street-brawl lurching his way.
Two against five.
The advantage of height, the disadvantage of numbers, and of fatigue.
Dangerfield felt a deep desire to rest his head and just let the enemy go by.
He had done enough, it was unfair to ask for more…
He slumped and waited for God to save him.
Suddenly, definitely, he decided to quit, turn back, go home, leave everything until tomorrow.
He straightened up and waved at Killion, pointing hard to westward.
Killion waved back and dived into the attack.
Horrified and enraged, Dangerfield watched him go.
Killion looked back.
Dangerfield swore and thrust into a dive.
His disgust mixed with despair as the Germans drove towards him, and the emotions drugged his tired brain.
When the enemy formation scattered he took a second too long to pick out an opponent, and one of the  Germans slid under his tail.
The first burst from his machine-gun hammered through Dangerfield's weary back and smashed his instrument panel.
Killion saw the SE5a topple and fall over, but he was too busy fighting off the circling scouts to see if Dangerfield crashed.
A formation of six Camels came to his rescue and the battle broke up, drifting away to other parts of the sky, leaving Killion to cruise home, alone.
The adjutant found Woolley with the armourer, checking ammunition before he allowed his machine-gun drums to be filled.
Woolley looked as if he had been fighting a forest fire: his eyes were red, his face was filthy, and one ear had bled down his neck.
He sucked at a bottle of Guinness, and went on fingering the rounds.
‘Corps wouldn't tell me the latest position on the phone, sir,’ Woodruffe said.
‘I had to go over and get it in person.
They say too many of our telephones have been captured, you never know who you might be talking to at the other end.’
‘What have we lost?’
‘Well, it's not as bad as it might have been.’
The adjutant settled down and looked through his notes.
‘They attacked along about sixty miles, from Lens down to La Fère, more or less.
They just about levelled our Front Line with that bombardment.’
‘I know.
I saw it.’
‘Yes, of course.
Well, they broke through on about a forty mile stretch Where they really gained ground is up towards Arras, they made about five miles there, and down around St Quentin.
It looks as if we might have to pull back behind the Crozat Canal and hold St Simon.
That would mean they've taken something like ten miles at that point.
Of course we're digging in now —
‘Five miles.
Ten miles.
How long is it since anyone advanced five miles in one day?’
Woodruffe shifted uncomfortably.
‘Not since 1914, unless you count —’.
‘How did they do it?’
‘Well…that's the extraordinary thing, nobody quite knows.
The bombardment destroyed our first system, of course, and there seem to have been a lot of gas shells landing amongst our gunners — those that weren't killed — and they say the Hun did a lot of damage with his trench mortars and those awful Minenwerfers.
But it was the mist that really let him in.
The Jerry troops just sort of walked right through in a lot of places, and the next thing anyone knew we were retreating.
It took Corps rather a long time to adjust, I believe.
They're not accustomed to moving five miles in one day.
Especially backwards.’
Woolley held up a bullet and showed it to the armourer.
‘Piece of shit?’ he said.
‘Piece of shit, Mr Woolley.’
He threw it into a bucket.
‘Presumably the cruel, implacable, scheming Teuton hordes will do the same tomorrow,’ he said.
‘Ah well, now that's an open question,’ the adjutant said.
‘Corps rather thinks not.
Corps feels that with all the losses they must have taken, the Germans will almost certainly be consolidating tomorrow.
Evacuating wounded and bringing up supplies and generally tidying up.’
‘Corps is an arse-hole full of farts.’
Woodruffe smiled uncertainly.
‘Also, sir, you must remember that we've brought up all possible reserves to plug the gap.’
‘You amaze me,’ Woolley said.
‘You truly do.
What happened today?
They attacked our Line.
It wasn't a very brilliant Line, but at least it was a Line, with trenches and wire and stuff.
They bashed hell out of it so much that it bust wide open, and we had to use all our reserves to hold them.
By which time they were miles inside our Front.’
‘Yes, but we shall do better tomorrow,’ Woodruffe insisted.
‘I mean, we won't be taken by surprise tomorrow, shall we?’
‘And tomorrow they won't be attacking strong positions, they'll be hitting us out in the open.
Good Christ, if they can make five miles a day when they have to fight through four systems of trenches and get right inside our Battle Zone, how  bloody far d'you think they'll go when we've got nothing to hide behind except cow turds and haystacks?’
‘The reserves are fresh,’ Woodruffe said.
‘The reserves will hold them.’
‘The Hun has reserves, too.
What happens when he makes another hole?
What do we plug that with?’
‘It's never happened before,’ Woodruffe said stiffly.
‘I suppose we should have to ask the French for help.
Or the Americans.
Frankly, sir, I doubt if the occasion will arise.’
‘You mean you hope it won't.
It looks to me as if we've forgotten how to retreat.
I don't suppose the Germans have forgotten how to advance, and if they do it again tomorrow we shall have to leant something new, won't we?’
Major Gibbs came in.
‘Ah, Woolley.
Sorry to bother you, but this squadron has assumed unusual significance in the present difficult situation.
The French have been accusing us of lack of co-operation lately — military co-operation, that is.
Naturally they are plotting to get us to take over the dangerous bits of the Front, and launch all the expensive attacks, and so on.
Typical dago trickery.
Anyway, they've seized on this legal brouhaha as an example of Albion's perfidy, so to speak.
How can they help us if we don't help them?
That sort of thing.
I needn't tell you what a nuisance they can be.’
‘Then don't.
The French can go and fuck themselves, for me.’
‘Me too.
Unfortunately we need their help too much at the moment.
Unless we get some French reinforcements soon, we're going to have nothing left to fight with.
Assuming that the Hun keeps attacking, of course.
Anyway, Corps commander has promised them immediate action, which being translated means: a couple of your pilots will have to face the music, I'm afraid.’
Woolley finished his Guinness.
‘Next week,’ he said.
Gibbs shook his head.
‘Now.’
‘Tell Corps we're flying from dawn to dusk.
Tell them about — the war against the Germans.’
‘That's exactly it though.
The generals are falling over themselves  to get French divisions sent up as reserves.
We can't risk any friction.
It's all thoroughly political, but you must see the military sense behind it.’
‘But surely we can't need reinforcements as desperately as all that,’ Woodruffe said.
‘Oh yes we do.
We do indeed.’
‘All right, you can court-martial someone,’ Woolley said.
‘Invite the French police along.’
‘On what charge?’
‘Desertion in the face of the enemy.’
‘Good Lord, that's a bit stiff.
The penalty's death.’
‘Serve the bastard right.
I never did like him.’
‘Who is it?’ the adjutant asked.
‘Any of ‘em.
’ Woolley looked at them with stony satisfaction
It was three miles to Jane Ashton's place.
Killion trudged it with a kind of dogged stupidity, too tired to think after the all-day violence.
He passed bivouacking troops on their way up, and had to stand in gateways while supply columns clattered by, or lines of ambulances rumbled back.
He got lost, he forgot where he was going; he gave up and sat down; he set off again.
When at last he got there and knocked on the door with a sticky bottle of claret, a stranger let him in.
‘I'm Mary,’ she said, as if there were nothing more to be said about that.
‘You must be Jack.
Jane's in the bath.
I'm cooking dinner.’
That accounted for everyone.
‘I see,’ said Killion.
‘You're the other girl.’
He blinked at the bright lamplight.
Jane should have been here, not…whoever this was.
Mary?
Mary.
‘What's that you've got?’
‘This?
Bottle.
Wine,’ Killion explained.
Mary took it.
‘I could have used some half an hour ago, in the sauce.
We'll just have to drink it.
Sit down.
You look like something the cat brought in.’
Killion sat down and fell asleep.
Jane woke him.
‘Dinner'sready, Jack,’ she said.
‘Don't want any,’ he mumbled.
‘Too…tired…’
‘Rubbish,’ Mary told him.
‘If I've cooked it you'll eat it.
You can wash your hands in the bathroom.
They look as if they need it.’
She began dragging chairs up to the table.
Jane smiled and helped him up.
He washed his face in cold water and came back red-eyed but awake.
The table was laid, and a roast chicken lay waiting for him to carve.
Mary organized the plates and kept an eye on his carving.
Killion felt her watching, and sawed clumsily at the bird.
Hot grease spotted the fresh tablecloth.
Eventually he managed to hack off a wing, in two parts.
The knife slipped and cut his finger.
He sucked it, sniffing, and then started on a leg.
Drops of blood fell on to the chicken.
‘Here, give me that,’ Mary said impatiently.
‘Suck your finger.’
Killion sucked and sipped while Mary sliced the chicken rapidly and efficiently.
Jane watched him.
‘I feel like a walking wounded,’ he said.
‘I thought you said he was a medical student,’ Mary muttered.
‘So I was, once,’ Killion protested.
She discarded the shattered wing.
‘You'll never take my appendix out, I can tell you that.’
‘Poor Jack.’
Jane kissed him behind the ear.
‘Have you had an awful day?
I hear it's been bad at the Front.’
‘Flying all day.
Flying, flying, flying.
Never stopped.’
‘I don't know what you men make such a fuss about,’ Mary said.
‘As far as I can see you don't do anything, you just sit up there.
Take some more potatoes.’
‘Honestly, I've got enough.’
‘Rubbish.’
She gave him more.
‘You need to keep your strength up.
The war's going to last a long time yet.’
‘Anyway, what do you do?’
‘Me?
Same as Jane.
I work in the forces’ canteen.
We seem to spend most of the day rejecting indecent propositions.’
‘Here's to indecency,’ Jane said.
‘The only thing that never dies.
Mary sniffed, but she drank the toast.
The meal was solid, orthodox and delicious.
Killion tucked in.
After twenty minutes he was quite awake, and he suddenly noticed Mary's face.
‘Good heavens,’ he said.
‘How good looking you are, Mary.
I only just noticed.’
She half-smiled.
‘What was I before, then?’
‘I don't know.
Maternal, maybe.’
‘But you didn't say so.’
‘No.
Still, we know each other much better now, don't we?’
She began collecting their plates, and Killion saw a wedding ring on her finger.
He swung around on Jane.
‘You're not saying much, funny face.’
‘Perhaps I'm waiting for you to ask me how I am.’
‘Ahah.
How are you?’
She looked away, played with a spoon, looked back.
‘Only wonderful,’ she said.
They laughed, unexpectedly, even Mary.
They had spoken their unknown passwords; now they recognized each other.
For half an hour their talk was easy and pointless, and then Killion began to wonder whether Mary was going to stay in all night and he became uncomfortable, chatting pleasantly to someone he wanted to get rid of.
When Jane went into the kitchen, Mary cleared her throat and looked at him seriously.
‘Jane has told me a lot about you,’ she said.
‘Of course, I'm two or three years older than she is…
I have no possible right to interfere, of course; however, I would just like to ask you one thing.
Do you plan to marry Jane?’
Killion had never even thought about it.
‘Of course,’ he said.
Mary seemed satisfied.
She leaned back.
‘Of course I do,’ Killion said.
The idea attracted him.
‘I shall be going on duty in ten minutes, you see,’ Mary said.
‘Why, of course,’ Killion said again.
‘I mean, why not?’
Jane came in.
They both looked at her with satisfaction; Mary sober, Killion a little drunk.
She raised an eyebrow.
‘Have I done something clever?’ she asked.
Simultaneously, Mary said ‘No’, and Killion said ‘Yes’.
When Mary had left for the canteen, Jane asked: ‘What was all that yes-no about?’
‘Nothing.
Everything.’
‘Well, tell me then.’
Killion stood up.
‘Mary wanted to know if I planned to marry you.
Of course I said I did.’
He sat down.
Jane perched on the arm.
‘Well, I certainly don't intend to marry you,’ she said.
Killion was shocked.
Jane smiled cheerfully, so that he thought she was being charitable, or even contemptuous, and he looked down at his hands.
Then he looked back.
‘But don't you love me?’
‘Yes, I do.
Does that mean we have to get married?’
‘Uh…’
‘I think it's a good reason for not getting married.’
‘Really?
But we could fix it up now, if we wanted.
I mean…
Well, this week, anyway.’
‘What good would that do?’
‘I've no idea.
Mary seemed to think —’
‘Mary's different.
She can't help hating me because I'm single and she's a widow.’
‘She doesn't hate you.’
‘She hates the fact that I've lost nothing and she's lost everything.’
‘Oh.
Well.
Yes.
I see.
Well, I suppose we needn't get married, need we?’
Jane slid on to his lap and kissed him on the mouth.
‘My lovely Jack…
We would make a perfectly rotten married couple.’
‘But lovely lovers.’
‘Lovely.’
She groped underneath and found something angular in his tunic pocket.
‘Are you carrying a gun, just like the cowboys?’
‘It's for you.’
He dragged out a beautiful, silver-backed hairbrush ‘Sorry about the monogram.
I won it off a chap at poker.’
‘What was his name?’
She fingered the lettering: J.T.D.
‘Dangerfield.’
‘It's beautiful.
Won't he need it?’
‘No.
He got posted.’
‘Poor Dangerfield.’
‘Poor me.
I nearly got court-martialled tonight.’
‘Why?
Because you were gambling?’
‘No, no.
It's all to do with the C.O. He wanted to court-martial me, only I heard them trying to find me so I hid in the latrines and I don't know what happened in the end.
I think they gave up on me and started looking for Finlayson instead.
Maybe the old man decided to court-martial old Finlayson instead…’
Jane was not listening; she was unbuttoning his tunic, and then his shirt.
‘Shall I undress you?’ she whispered; and Killion nodded.
Away in the east the barrage had begun again, but as they lay in front of the fire it was remote and harmless.
Nothing could touch them now.
Next day the German attack repeated itself with meticulous Prussian efficiency.
The bombardment chewed the British defences as savagely; the dawn advance was cloaked in the same white mist of invisibility; within hours the storm troopers had overrun the new Front and the retreat was on again.
Woolley had the squadron in the air very early.
They crossed the booming fog-bank, shapeless and lethal like some fungoid growth, and patrolled behind the German lines in flights of two or three.
For an hour and a half no German aircraft came near.
The flak was heavy, relentless as hounds chasing a cornered stag up and down high ground.
Rogers was flying with Lambert.
They droned about, surrounded by the black, dissolving snorts of high explosive.
As they climbed so the flak followed them; as they dived so it came down to harry them.
They dodged and doubled back between ten and twelve thousand feet, where the gunners were not accurate; but the chance of flying into a burst was always there.
The changes of height and course became automatic after a while.
Rogers was thinking about a cricket match in which he had made a good score, reliving the running between the wickets as  he bucketed about between the shell-bursts.
He braced himself to clout the ball, and watched it race away, like a round of tracer…
He started, sweating guiltily: he hadn't been checking the sky.
The flak cracked on, bad-temperedly, puffs of charcoal, sharp-edged in the cold sunlight.
Two miles below, the mist was thinning, revealing God knew what disasters.
Rogers waggled his wings and they turned for home.
Within minutes they met another flight: Richards and Gabriel.
The flak tailed off, mercifully, and Dickinson and Finlayson angled across from the north to join them.
In this formation half the squadron, with guns unfired, intercepted a solitary German two-seater heading eastward.
Almost certainly it had been on camera-reconnaissance, photographing the British reserves being rushed up.
Where was its escort?
Perhaps the Germans thought it would be less conspicuous on its own.
Perhaps they hoped that it would be able to hide in the fog.
But now the fog was collapsing, evaporating, dying.
Rogers and Lambert dived ahead of the two-seater and turned it.
The machine seemed to manoeuvre heavily, as if pregnant.
The-other four Goshawk aircraft came down in an angled line which allowed each gun to rake the target from nose to tail in a continuous devastation of bullets.
The teamwork was superfluous, because the pilot was dead before the second burst hit him, his plane was on fire before the third burst cut it apart, and the fourth simply knocked sideways a wreck which had only to fall to the ground.
Finlayson found Major Gibbs and the adjutant waiting for him.
‘I know you've got a lot on,’ Woodruffe said, ‘but Major Gibbs says it's absolutely essential that you be charged properly, according to King's Regulations.’
‘Oh Christ,’ said Finlayson.
He sat down on an oil drum.
‘Is the old man still playing that game?
I thought that was last night's bad joke.’
‘He must have something to show the French,’ Gibbs said.
‘A formality, and some documents.
Something they can see and  feel, and be impressed by, and tell all their pals in the Ministry of Justice about.’
‘Let them squeeze the old man's balls, then.
They're about the biggest thing in this squadron.’
‘Quite.
But at the moment, I suggest we adjourn to the adjutant's office.
The French lawyers are waiting there now, and I'd like them to hear the C.O. actually make the charge.’
‘So would I.’ said Finlayson bitterly.
‘I'd like to know exactly where and when I deserted in the face of the enemy.’
‘Oh, I forgot to tell you,’ Gibbs said.
‘That's all been changed.
He's decided to make it cowardice now.’
‘Cowardice?’
Woodruffe frowned.
‘Are you sure?
He told me he was going to make it incompetence.’
‘Good God, I hope not.
I can't change everything at this stage.
It'll have to be cowardice’
The two French civil servants shook hands with everybody.
They seemed competent and satisfied.
Woolley was making a long telephone call.
The line was bad and he kept shouting.
Gabriel sat by a window, reading his Bible.
Woodruffe saw Finlayson looking at him.
‘Gabriel has agreed to defend you after all,’ the adjutant said.
‘I don't want the silly bastard!’
Finlayson exclaimed.
Gabriel turned a page.
‘I'm afraid you must,’ Gibbs said.
‘Everyone else is liable to court-martial too, and you must be represented.’
Woolley shouted: ‘Bollocks!’ and hung up.
‘Get on with it,’ he told Gibbs.
‘We're off again in ten minutes.’
Finlayson and Gabriel stood up.
The Frenchmen watched carefully.
Woolley picked his teeth with a matchstick.
Gibbs read out the charge: there was a great deal of florid preambling, all about the defence of the realm, and the jurisdiction of the provosmarshal, and the patriotic obligations of the King's subjects to defend the royal allies against the common enemy, most of which Gibbs and Woodruffe had cooked up to impress the French.
The charge itself was brief.
Lieutenant George Yates Finlayson had displayed cowardice in the face of the enemy all the previous week.
Signed, Stanley Woolley, Major.
Despite the transparent nonsense of it all, Finlayson felt his guts tighten at the word cowardice.
His head was half-bent; he looked up at Woolley, stiff with disgust and hate; and saw Woolley watching him coolly, almost curiously.
‘Jolly good,’ Woodruffe said.
‘Now, what I propose is, I propose a week's adjournment before we fix the date of the hearing, if that suits the defending officer.’
Gabriel took his Bible from under his arm as if it were loaded, and opened it.
‘And if ye will not for all this hearken unto me, but walk contrary unto me,’ he read out, ‘then will I walk contrary unto you also in fury; and I, even I, will chastise you seven times for your sins.
And ye shall eat the flesh of your sons, and the flesh of your daughters shall ye eat.’
He closed the book and nodded to Finlayson and Woodruffe.
‘Time to fly,’ Woolley said.
To Finlayson's surprise, he took him by the elbow and steered him, quite gently, to the door.
When they were outside and walking towards the aircraft, Woolley said: ‘The French make such a fuss, you see.
And we need their reinforcements, or something.’
‘Yes.
Woody explained.’
‘I could have made it something piddling, like embezzling the mess funds, but I thought it might as well be, you know, melodramatic.’
‘I see.’
‘The frogs like melodrama.
Besides, Goshawk Squadron has never been known for doing things half-heartedly, has it?’
‘No.’
‘I knew you'd understand.
I didn't want it to get you down.
After all, it's not going to make any difference, is it?’
Finlayson watched Woolley's face for a trace of sarcasm and found none.
‘Why should it?’ he said.
‘You're right,’ Woolley said warmly.
‘Nothing's going to make any difference.’
They parted.
Finlayson met Rogers.
‘I think the old man's cracking up,’ he said.
‘I think he's finally out to lunch.
I've never seen him like this before.
He's just been nice to me.’
‘I thought he was going to charge you —’
‘Yes, yes, he did all that.
But nicely, as if it didn't matter.’
‘Oh’
They looked uneasily towards Woolley.
He was leaning against his machine, arms resting on the upper wing, head resting on his arms, eyes dosed.
‘Odd,’ said Rogers.
Force I I: Storm Small house and sheds moved
It was the third day of the German assault.
Dickinson was in hospital with bullet wounds in the leg.
Three replacements pilots had arrived the night before, straight from England, none having flown more than twenty hours.
Woolley refused to see them; he had retired to his hut and practised the accordion.
In the morning he put one replacement and two experienced men in each flight.
Their mission was less ambitious than the day before: just to clear the air over the battlefield.
Attack any and every German plane, stay over the fighting, use up left-over ammunition on German troops.
The replacements listened carefully and tried not to show their excitement.
‘A special instruction for our newcomers,’ Woolley said heavily.
‘Don't get shot down, but if you d get shot down, try and ram a Hun on the way.’
That made them blink.
Rogers, Lambert and an eighteen-year-old called King took off together.
The Front was nearer now, and Rogers climbed to five thousand feet over the airfield before he turned east.
King was clumsy with the aircraft, never having flown an SE before, and Lambert watched nervously.
It was a gusty morning.
The sky over the Front was dotted with wheeling, plunging, dodging aircraft.
From a distance they looked like birds; there were no formations, and the movements seemed random and pointless.
Then one of the specks flared with a sudden, intense brightness that lasted as long as struck match, before it dropped.
A smear of smoke was all that was left, and it rapidly grew ragged and thin.
The other machines went on circling and dodging as before.
As the Goshawk flight got closer they could see the flickering criss-cross of tracer.
Rogers held off until they had climbed to twelve thousand, then prowled about, searching for an easy target.
Everything was tangled and confused and fast-changing.
Lambert fired a couple of round to attract his attention.
Six Fokker D.VIIs were diving from fifteen thousand feet.
Rogers put his nose down and they escaped into the chaos.
For the first thousand feet there was nothing; then a couple of private duels; then a sprawling mêlée of about twenty aircraft spread over half a mile of sky.
Rogers hoped that King would go off and look for his own target, and not stick close to him.
He saw a shaky-looking Halberstadt turn eastwards and went after it.
Now he could smell the burnt-phosphorous of tracer in the air.
He glanced at Lambert and saw him blaze at a green-and-yellow plane, then bank hard away as tracer scorched past.
Roger's Halberstadt came looming up, its observers firing steadily: bright dashes which seemed to bend towards Roger's machine.
He jinked and tried a burst at long range, but the Halberstadt was diving hard now and pulling away.
He zoomed to save height, heard the cackle of machine-guns, skidded round in a savage, 180-degree turn, and instinctively ducked as a bright blue Pflaz hurtled over his head.
By the time he had recovered he was gone.
Quite suddenly the whole battle has moved far away.
Individual skirmishes flickered and stuttered in the distance.
Rogers checked above and behind: no sign of Lambert, but King came wobbling by, grinning and waving.
Rogers acknowledged.
King pointed downwards and waved goodbye.
He side-slipped neatly; he was getting the hang of the thing.
Rogers saw the left wing start to buckle in the centre.
It fluttered for a moment and then folded right back against the fuselage, like a roosting bird.
A strut had failed; collapsed for no reason at all.
Rogers dipped a wing so that he could watch the aeroplane tumble away, lopsided, dwindling to a grey-brown fragment that flickered in the early sunlight.
King did not jump, not that it  would have made any difference if he had.
Perhaps he couldn't get his straps undone.
Perhaps he didn't want to.
Perhaps he didn't know what the hell was happening to him.
The SE hit the ground in a cluster of shell-holes.
Rogers felt relieved: at least it hadn't been a flamer.
And now they wouldn't have to worry about collision on the way home.
He went off to find Lambert.
Finlayson's flight consisted of Richards and a new boy called Tribe, a big, broad New Zealander.
Finlayson spent fifteen minutes teaching Tribe the signals, and describing the blind spots of enemy aircraft.
He emphasized the need to hold height; to keep searching around, above, below, behind; to get in close; to fire short burst; to go for the pilot, not the plane.
It was a waste of time.
Tribe barley knew how to fly.
On take-off he almost crashed into a hangar.
In the air he never mastered the throttle setting, so that he either fell behind of pulled ahead.
He seemed physically uncomfortable in the cockpit.
Once Richards had to dive out of the way as Tribe, twisting and stretching in his straps lurched across the formation.
After that Finlayson did his best to get Tribe to fly a hundred feet below them, but the man kept wandering up.
They reached the fighting at a height of eight thousand feet.
Finlayson searched around for something simple to blood Tribe on.
There was nothing simple, only tangled dog-fights.
After five minutes the decision was made for them: they were jumped by six D-Vs which came dropping out of a stretch of dirty cloud.
Finlayson had no time to protect Tribe.
Within seconds each man was twisting and skidding away from the attackers.
Richards zig-zagged violently as two D-Vs go behind him and took turns to fire.
Each burst ripped the air like split canvas.
He felt the SE kick, and tasted hot tracer on his breath.
In desperation he faked a dive and hauled the SE up on a tight loop.
He glimpsed the enemy overshooting and banking steeply away, half-rolled and took a snap shot at a dappled D-V, then saw Finlayson behind it and yet another D-V behind him.
Richards sprayed shots wildly and saw the second German swerve away.
Where was Tribe?
He climbed and saw three Germans circling a lone SE and firing at it.
The SE was doing nothing but loops.
Loop after loop.
Richards raced over and broke it up.
The Germans turned on him, blocking his escape.
Richards glimpsed Tribe, still laboriously and pointlessly looping.
A D-V flashed across, firing and missing; Richards got off a burst and saw his bullets rip open the fuselage.
He skidded hard in the opposite direction anticipating attack, but none came.
The enemy were out of ammunition.
Or low on petrol.
He scanned the sky, suspicious of tricks and ambushes.
There was nothing.
They had decided to call it a day, that was all.
Extraordinary
Finlayson came toiling back up, and Tribe was at last levelling out.
Richards flew alongside, waiting for Finlayson.
Tribe stood up and hammered at his gun.
He pointed at it and waved his hands in the wash-out signal.
Richards pointed homewards, which was behind them, and turned to escort Tribe across the Lines.
Tribe paid no attention.
Richards came back and signalled clearly, but Tribe was busy with his gun again.
Richards fired a few rounds.
Tribe looked up, waved, and went back to work.
Finlayson reached them and Tribe repeated the pantomime.
They were flying steadily eastwards, deeper into enemy territory.
Finlayson pointed backwards, towards home.
Tribe looked back, studying his tail, trying to see what they saw wrong with it.
It looked all right.
He worked the rudder pedals to show them.
Nothing wrong there.
It was the gun that was jammed.
Finlayson gave his wash-out signal several times, and turned westward.
Tribe was puzzled, but he followed.
When they were well inside the British Line Finlayson motioned Tribe to go on home, while he and Richards went back.
Tribe mistook the signal for the ‘enemy aircraft’ warning, and searched the sky.
He gave up looking and found that he was on his own.
He wheeled around and chased after them.
Tribe caught them up as they were attacking a pair of two-seaters which were climbing away from the British Line, if there still was one, having just bombed an artillery position.
Tribe  knew better than to join the attack, unarmed and gunless.
He circled above it, watching, in case there was anything he could do; until a passing Albatros fell on him and hammered a dozen bullets into his engine.
Other aircraft joined in the fight, and before it could make a second attack the Albatros found itself under attack.
Tribe, not knowing how to fly when the propeller stopped turning, glided heavily eastward and crash-landed in a field full of German infantry, who were having a meal before going up to join the attack.
His machine struck several of the soldiers and actually killed one.
Some German military police took Tribe prisoner and locked him in a barn, where they shot him fifteen minutes later.
Killion had Shufflebotham and a replacement called Beattie in his flight.
He told Beattie to climb as high as he could and watch what happened, but not to join in the fighting.
This Beattie did, and learned a lot.
When they landed, Finlayson came over to ask if they had seen anything of Tribe.
‘Who's Tribe?’
Killion asked.
‘Tribe is, or was a bad joke,’ Finlayson said morosely.
‘He nearly killed me, he nearly killed Richards, and then his gun jammed before he could do any real damage.’
‘Never saw him.’
They watched Woolley's flight land, and went indoors.
Major Gibbs was waiting for Finlayson with some typed papers.
‘Just sign these for me, there's a good chap,’ he said.
‘What are they?’
‘Oh…depositions and arraignments and things.
Legal junk to foozle the frogs.
You know.’
‘I want nothing to do with it.
Sign it yourself.’
‘Oh, come now, be reasonable.
Nothing personal in this, you know.
We're depending on you to co-operate, surely you see that?’
‘I want nothing to do with it.
If you don't like it, bloody well arrest me.’
‘Me too,’ Lambert said.
‘I'm as guilty as he is.
In fact I demand to be charged alongside him.’
‘Hear, here!’ shouted Killion.
‘Charge us all, charge us all, or don't charge anyone!’
The others applauded.
‘No, dammit, you can't all be scapegoats,’ Gibbs said, ‘that would be absurd…
Finlayson, you must do your bit, you know.
I mean, one scapegoat is enough as long as he does hit bit.’
‘Bollocks.’
‘Look here…
’ Gibbs sat down and thought.
‘All right, I'll tell you what we'll do.
You make a statement denying everything, professing innocence, know what I mean?
I'll get it typed up.
That'll do nicely.
Also, we need a photograph.’
Finlayson laughed coarsely.
‘But dammit,’ said Gibbs, exasperated, ‘we must have something to put in the French papers.’
Woolley, Gabriel and Callaghan came in.
‘Can't you do anything with him?’
Gibbs appealed to Gabriel.
‘I don't know how you can defend him unless he either denies everything of confesses something.’
Gabriel smiled winningly at Finlayson.
‘Moreover Abishai the son of Zeruiah slew the Edomites in the valley of salt eighteen thousand,’ he said.
‘Imagine that, eighteen thousand.’
‘You seem bloody bright this morning,’ Richards said.
‘Aahh!
I got two flamers.’
Gabriel swung his arms.
‘And what good did that do?
Lambert muttered.
‘Oh, what good does any of it do?’
Rogers interrupted.
‘We kill them, and they kill us.
The war still goes on downstairs, doesn't it?
We're just a rotten little side-show up in the sky.
Do you realize — all this was going on exactly the same last March?
Ant the March before?
And the March before?
And d'you think that anyone will remember us next March?
Or care?’
‘That reminds me,’ Lambert asked him.
‘What became of our young friend?’
‘I don't know.
He folded his wings,’ said Rogers.
‘He sent in his resignation.
Another triumph for gravity.’
Beattie turned white.
‘You don't mean Tom King,’ he said.
‘I thought that was the capital of China,’ Killion murmured.
‘Was that his name?’
Rogers shrugged.
‘How did it happen?
Was he shot down?’
Beattie was agitated.
‘Did you see it?
Are you sure he crashed?’
‘What does it matter?’
Rogers was fed up with the subject.
‘All I know is he spun in from five thousand on half a wing.’
‘You mean he wasn't shot down?
So he could have jumped, then.’
Beattie turned on Woolley.
‘Why don't they give us parachutes, for God's sake?
You never knew him, you never knew what he was like…’
Woolley looked at the twitching, furious face, and turned away.
He scratched his armpits.
‘I don't think I'll do any more flying today,’ Finlayson said.
‘I think I'll go to the pictures.’
He stared across at Woolley, but Woolley stared back.
‘I'm no good up there, anyhow,’ Finlayson said complacently.
‘I run away all the time.
Don't I, major?’
‘I'd dearly like to know what were supposed to be achieving, that's all,’ Lambert bitched.
‘They're all over us in the air, and we can't stop them on the ground.
We're just going through the motions.’
‘Until the Yanks come,’ Killion muttered.
‘Then let 'em come,’ Lambert said, ‘and we'll keep the war warm for ‘em, but for God's sake don't tell me I'm helping to knacker the Kaiser by farting around in a clapped-out one-gun flying coffin, because I've seen too much of it.’
‘The fogs have the right idea,’ Finlayson said.
We won't attack.
We'll defend, but we won't attack.’'
‘But surely…to win the war —’ Shufflebotham's voice was drowned in laughter.
Rogers and Lambert, Killion, Finlayson and Richards lay back and guffawed and waited for Woolley to do something abut it.
They watched him with sly greediness.
For once they had him by the balls.
‘You don't want to fly,’ Woolley said.
‘It's bloody mutiny, major,’ Finlayson said cheerfully.
‘Don't you tolerate it.
Have 'em all shot.
That'll make 'em respect you.’
‘If you don't want to fly…
What do you want to do?’
‘Speaking for myself,’ Rogers said, ‘I want to live.’
‘I think I'll have the whole bloody lot of you transferred to the infantry,’ Woolley said.
There was an unreal atmosphere, like a courtroom where the jury has decided to impeach the judge.
‘Oh, you can do that, certainly,’ Lambert told him.
‘You can throw your weight around.
What you can't do is tell us what good we're doing up there, day after day.
Can you?’
‘There is no alternative,’ Woolley said.
‘It's not a question of good.
This fucking war has got to be fought.
So there.’
‘The terrible part about that,’ Richards said, ‘is that its perfectly true, and it's also the stupidest thing ever said.’
Woolley swung on him, eyes staring, brows raised, face stiff.
The adjutant pushed open the door and cleared his throat.
‘Corps on the phone sir,’ he said.
‘We're off again.
Squadron's transferred to Rosières.
It seems that this field is in some danger of being overrun.’
As he spoke, the crack-thud of anti-aircraft fire sounded.
Woolley shoved past him.
A two-seater was cruising overhead at six thousand feet.
The white balls of flak looked close, but Woolley knew better, Suddenly there was a heavier explosion, drowning the guns.
A fountain of earth and smoke erupted in a nearby field.
‘Cheeky bastard!’
Woodruffe said.
‘He's bombing us.’
‘He's not,’ Woolley said.
‘He's spotting for their batteries.
We're being shelled, old cock.’
A second explosion blotted out a length of hedge.
Woolley shouted into the hut: ‘Get in the air!
Quick as you can!’
As Rogers came by he grabbed him, and said, ‘That's right.
isn't it?
You do want to live, don't you?’
Rogers twisted free and pounded across the grass.
Woolley watched, and smirked.
A shell scored a direct hit on a petrol tank, and he felt the wave of heat from fifty yards off.
He made for his aircraft, walking fast.
Jane Ashton heard the shelling as she was packing to get out of her cottage.
She opened a window and listened.
‘They're bombing the aerodrome,’ she said.
‘I wonder —’
‘Get a move on, before they start bombing us too,’ Mary told her.
‘If we don't get on that truck we'll be walking to Doullens.’
‘It sounds very heavy.’
She sat on the bed and chewed at a thumb-nail.
‘I feel so helpless.’
‘That's because you are helpless.’
Mary was stuffing wet towels into a dirty pillowcase.
‘What are we going to put the food in?’
‘My God!’
A violent explosion rattled the windows.
‘Surely they can't make them fly through that, can they?’
She stared at Mary, white-faced.
‘I don't know what that question means, so I certainly can't give you an answer.
Here we any more string?’
‘I bet they move the squadron.
It must be too dangerous up there now.
They must move them.
Mustn't they?’
Mary shrugged.
‘Who knows?
Perhaps they moved them already.’
Jane stared.
She turned and dumped everything out of her suitcases.
‘We'll never get a seat, my girl, unless you buck your ideas up,’ Mary said sharply.
‘You haven't time to fiddle-faddle about like that.’
‘I'm not coming.’
She was sorting out her clothes, packing some in the smaller case, throwing the rest aside.
‘You go on as soon as you're ready, don't wait for me.’
‘I can't possibly manage all the kitchen stuff on my own.’
‘I don't care.
Leave it behind.
It doesn't matter, does it?
What does it matter?’
Mary picked up a woollen scarf.
‘Are you leaving this?’
‘You have it, if you want it.
Take anything.’
Jane changed her shoes to a heavier pair.
‘I'm not coming to Doullens.
‘I've just realized, I can't come with you, Mary, I'm sorry.
No, I'm not, I'm not sorry, I'm glad.’
‘You're not making very much sense, I can tell you that.’
‘I'll let you know where I am when I know it.
Soon.’
‘You're off to that stupid squadron.
You're chasing that —’
‘Goodbye, goodbye,’ Jane said to shut her up.
‘I've got to go, don't you see?’
She grabbed the case.
‘How can I go one way when he's going the other?
How can I?’
‘You don't even know which way he's going.’
‘I do, I do!’
She hurried out.
Mary waited and watched her 
running down the road.
‘Bitch,’ she said aloud.
‘Black bitch.’
She found herself crying.
‘Black bloody bitch.’
Rosières turned out to be a big old field, already occupied by a squadron of bombers and a squadron of Bristol Fighters.
It was converted racetrack, with the mess and administration in the grandstand.
Goshawk Squadron drifted in by twos and threes.
Some had chased the German two-seater all the way back to its own territory, furious at this interference by the military in their air war.
Others had scrambled across the field, dodging shellbursts, and had taken off only to forget where they were supposed to be going.
Some flew to the wrong field and had to telephone around before they heard about Rosières and took off again.
The adjutant drone Rogers's car and got their before anyone.
Major Gibbs navigated.
It was a well-equipped field, probably the best on the Western Front.
It had a cemetery, a hospital, and an up-to-date War Room, with a direct line to Corps H.Q. and a vast relief map of the Front, beautifully cast in plaster of Paris and painted to show all the woods, canals, roads, railways, towns and villages along a fifty-mile stretch.
The zig-zag stripes of trench-systems lay on either side like the skin shed by a massive snake.
But when Woodruffe took Woolley in to see it, nobody was looking at the trench-systems.
A great arrowhead, outlined with coloured markers, had split the British Front wide open.
Soldiers with bits of paper were moving the markers.
Before long they would be off the map.
Here and there the advance had flowed around little bunches of markers, now isolated far behind the real Front.
‘What are they?’
Woolley asked an Intelligence officer.
‘Targets?’
‘Lord, no.
Those are the last reported positions we got from various units.
Let's see…that the 21st/23rd Sherwood Foresters…these are the Manchester Regiment…over here you've got mixed units of the Black Watch and the Durham Light Infantry…
All last reported positions, you see.
Nothing fresh sine then.’
He picked up a marker.
‘Two days ago, that lot.’
‘Are they still there?’
‘Oh, yes.’
He thought about it.
‘Well, they must be.
One way or another.’
‘Are we still falling back?’
‘Well, we're holding them here and here.’
He pointed to the extreme ends of the breakthrough.
‘And we're consolidating along prepared positions here.’
He waved vaguely at the limits of the German advance.
‘It's given us a chance to improve our over all strategic attitude by shortening our supply lines, you see.’
A soldier moved some markers from one side of a canal to the other.
‘The general situations more of less fluid, in some respects,’ the officer said.
‘Woody, get Corps on the phone,’ Woolley said.
‘As far as I can see, Jerry should capture Arras the day after tomorrow, in which case the Americans can stay at home.
The frogs won't fight if they lose Paris, will they?’
‘Paris is quite safe, major,’ the Intelligence officer broke in.
It's Arras we're concerned about.’
‘You lose one you've lost the other.
They're shelling Paris already with those long-range cannons.
From Arras they'll be able to flatten it.
You see where you say we're holding them?’
Woolley pointed to the extremes of the German breakthrough.
‘Gateposts, mate.
Pure gateposts.
The gates themselves are wide open.’
Corps ordered trench-strafing.
‘I flew over there two hours ago,’ Woolley told the telephone.
‘There isn't a trench to be seen.
Our lot haven't got time to dig them, and their lot don't need to.’
‘Well, strafe the blighters where they stand, then,’ Corps said angrily.
‘How the hell do I know?
Just make sure you don't shoot the wrong men.
They need all the help we can give.
Fly low, damn you and get the uniforms right.’
‘Where are the French?’
‘Mind your own bloody business.’