

CHOOSING A PRIME MINISTER
Leader of the Party
I. QUALIFICATIONS OF A PRIME MINISTER
The Prime Minister must be an M. P. (or be about to take his seat as an M. P. after a general election), and so cannot be a peer (unless he can disclaim his peerage: see below, p. 504.
He must usually be the elected Leader of his party.
The Leadership election rules of the three main political parties follow.
2.
PARTY LEADERSHIP ELECTION RULES
(I) THE CONSERVATIVE PARTY
Procedure for the Selection of the Leader of the Conservative Party
Timing of elections and general responsibilities
1.
If the position of Leader of the Party is vacant, an election shall be held as early as possible.
2.
Otherwise there shall be an election in the House of Commons beginning within twenty-eight days of the opening of each new session of Parliament, except that in the case of a new Parliament the election shall be held not earlier than three months nor later than six months from the date of assembly of that Parliament.
The actual date will be determined by the Leader of the Party in consultation with the chairman of the 1922 Committee.
3.
The chairman of the 1922 Committee will be responsible for the conduct of all ballots and will settle all matters in relation thereto.
Nominations and lists of candidates
4.
Candidates will be proposed and seconded in writing by Members of the House of Commons in receipt of the Conservative whip.
The chairman of the 1922 Committee and scrutineers designated by him will he available to receive nominations.
Each candidate will indicate on the nomination paper that he is prepared to accept nomination, and no candidate will accept more than one nomination.
The names of the proposer and seconder will not be published and will remain confidential to the scrutineers.
Nominations will close by noon on a Thursday five days before the date of the first ballot.
5.
If only one valid nomination is received, the chairman of the 1922 Committee shall declare this person elected.
If more than one valid nomination is received, the chairman of the 1922 Committee and his scrutineers will publish a list of the valid nominations and immediately transmit a copy to the two vice-chairmen of the 1922 Committee, the Chief Whip in the House of Commons, the chairman of the National Union, the chairman of the Executive of the National Union, the president of the Scottish Conservative and Unionist Association, the chairman and deputy chairman of the Party, the chairman of the Party in Scotland, the Leader of the Party in the House of Lords and the Chief Whip in the House of Lords.
Procedure for consultation with members of the party outside the House of Commons
6.
During the period between the close of nominations and the date of the first ballot, it shall be the responsibility of the constituency associations, represented by Conservative Members of Parliament, to inform the Member of their views regarding the candidates.
7
.
Similarly, the Leader of the Party in the House of Lords and the Chief Whip in the House of Lords will make such arrangements as appropriate to obtain the views of peers in receipt of the Conservative whip.
8.
In order that all sections of the Party shall be consulted, area chairmen of the National Union will obtain the opinions of constituency associations, through their chairmen, and report their findings to the chairman of the National Union and the chairman of the Executive of the National Union.
In Scotland the area chairmen will similarly consult and report to the president of the Scottish Conservative and Unionist Association.
They will also report to Conservative Members of Parliament within the area of their responsibility the views of constituencies not represented by a Conservative Member of Parliament.
9.
The Leader of the Party in the House of Lords, the Chief Whip in the House of Lords, the chairman of the National Union and the chairman of the Executive of the National Union, together with the president of the Scottish Conservative and Unionist Association, will on the Monday attend a meeting of the Executive of the 1922 Committee for the purpose of conveying to them the collective views of the peers in receipt of the Conservative whip, the National Union and the Scottish Conservative and Unionist Association respectively.
First ballot
10.
The first ballot will be held on the Tuesday immediately following.
For this ballot the scrutineers will prepare a ballot paper listing the names of the candidates and give a copy for the purpose of balloting to each Member of the House of Commons in receipt of the Conservative whip.
11.
For the first ballot each voter will indicate one choice from the candidates listed.
12.
Where any Member is unavoidably absent from the House on that day, through sickness or by being abroad, the scrutineers will make arrangements to receive their votes.
13.
The ballot will be secret and neither the names of those who have voted for a particular candidate nor the names of those who have abstained from voting shall be disclosed by the scrutineers.
14.
If, as a result of this ballot, one candidate both (i) receives an overall majority of the votes of those entitled to vote and (ii) receives fifteen per cent more of the votes of those entitled to vote than any other candidate, he will be elected.
15.
The scrutineers will announce the number of votes received by each candidate, and if no candidate satisfies these conditions a second ballot will be held.
Second ballot
16.
The second ballot will be held on the following Tuesday.
Nominations made for the first ballot will be void.
New nominations will be submitted by the Thursday, under the same procedure and with the same arrangements for consultation as described in paragraphs 4–9 for the first ballot, both for the original candidates if required and for any other candidates.
17.
The voting procedure for the second ballot will be the same as for the first save that paragraph 14 shall not apply.
If, as a result of this second ballot, one candidate receives an overall majority of the votes of those entitled to vote, that candidate will be elected.
Third ballot
18.
If no candidate receives an overall majority, the three candidates receiving the highest number of votes at the second ballot will be placed on a ballot paper for a third and final ballot on the Thursday following.
19.
For the final ballot each voter must indicate two preferences amongst the three candidates by placing the figure I opposite the name of his preferred candidate and the figure 2 opposite the name of his second choice.
20.
The scrutineers will proceed to add the number of first preference votes received by each candidate, eliminate the candidate with the lowest number of first preference votes and redistribute the votes of those giving him as their first preference amongst the two remaining candidates in accordance with their second preference.
The result of this final count will be an overall majority of votes cast for one candidate, and he will be elected.
Party meeting
21
The candidate thus elected by the Party in the House of Commons will be presented for confirmation as Party leader to a Party meeting constituted as follows: Members of the House of Commons in receipt of the Conservative whip; Members of the House of Lords in receipt of the Conservative whip; Adopted Parliamentary candidates; Members of the Executive Committee of the National Union not already included in the above categories.
(a) The first Conservative election (1965)
Peter Emery, a former Parliamentary Private Secretary to Heath, was secretary of the 1922 Committee.
It fell to him and his chairman, Sir William Anstruther-Gray, to receive the nominations in the contest which Sir Alec's decision [to resign as Conservative Leader]immediately set in train.
At first, nobody could be sure how many there might be.
Besides Heath, Maudling and Macleod, who seemed certain runners, Hogg, Soames and Peter Thorneycroft were also expected, at one moment or another, to let their names go forward.
Then Macleod, to the astonishment of some of his most ardent supporters, decided not to enter the lists.
He calculated that he could not beat either Heath or Maudling, and he preferred to avoid the contest.
Hogg also remained on the sidelines, as did Soames and Thorneycroft.
In the event the only other contender was Enoch Powell- and he was a late starter.
Nominations had to be in by 11.30 a.m. on Monday 26 July [1965]for the first ballot to open twenty-four hours later.
Over the weekend the Chief Whip, William Whitelaw, detected a strong feeling in the Parliamentary Party that there should be only two nominations, not more.
The Heath and Maudling camps were already at work; but then Enoch Powell let it be known that he too would be running.
A friend of mine in the Commons has described the Heath and Maudling campaigns to me.
‘Ted's camp left nothing to chance,’ he recalls.
‘Everybody was canvassed-everybody.
Nothing was left undone.
It was a beautifully organised campaign run by Peter Walker from H. Q. in Gayfere Street.
They treated it like a war, and they were determined to win.
Reggie's campaign was charming, easy-going, rather haphazard, very nice-like the man himself.
But his side got a lot of things wrong.
They were not fully organised.
They took too much for granted, and they made mistakes of a kind that they ought not to have made.’
Enoch Powell, who needed nobody to tell him that he couldn't win (he knew that perfectly well), was not the object of anything that could properly be called a campaign: he was a loner with just a few devoted friends behind him.
William Whitelaw and his Whips did not take sides in any outward way.
Each of them exercised his right to vote as an individual, but as Whips they were all expected to avoid any open expression of preference.
Hour by hour, they were of course sizing things up: nobody was better placed to judge the feeling in the House.
Lord St Aldwyn, the Opposition Chief Whip in the Lords, was also taking soundings among Conservative peers-he consulted sixty-five of them.
Within the National Union, Sir Clyde Hewlett, as chairman of the Executive Committee, spoke to the area chairmen and other officers.
While neither the National Union nor the peers could have a direct say in the choice of leader it was nevertheless thought desirable, if only for reasons of tact, to know their views.
Though the Lords expressed a slight preference for Heath, the  upshot of all these inquiries was that most people, in the House of Commons and out of it, intimated that they would be equally happy with either Heath or Maudling.
This suggested a very close contest and was gratifying to both camps-to such activists for Maudling as Robert Carr, Lord Lambton and Richard Stanley, and equally to Peter Walker, Robin Chichester-Clark and Anthony Kershaw, who were foremost in promoting Heath.
The result of the ballot stood up pretty well to the Whips' calculations.
The figures, announced about two o'clock in the afternoon on Tuesday 27 July, were: Heath 150 votes, Maudling 133, and Powell 15.
But the ballot was inconclusive because Heath had failed to secure the necessary 15 per cent lead-he had not received 15 per cent more of the votes cast than any other candidate.
According to the rules there would have to be a second ballot.
Then an hour later, having heard the outcome in the City, where-rather characteristically-he was lunching, Maudling decided to withdraw.
Powell did the same.
Thus the evening newspapers were able to report Heath's victory that day; and it was confirmed at 11.30 next morning when the second ballot closed and there was only one nomination-for Heath.
Sir William Anstruther-Gray formally declared him the victor and his election was duly rubber-stamped at the ceremonial party meeting six days later.
A total of 298 votes had been cast.
There were then 304 Conservative M.P.s.
William Whitelaw believes, however, that there were no abstainers: the six who did not vote were either too far away to present themselves at Westminster, or they were ill.
[George Hutchinson,Edward Heath (London, 1970), 141–4.]
The voting in the first-ever Conservative ballot was : Edward Heath 150 Reginald Maudling 133 Enoch Powell 15 Maudling and Powell immediately withdrew .
(b) The second Conservative election (1975)
Our defeat [at the October 1974 general election]was nothing like as heavy as most of us had feared.
But within twenty-four hours I told Ted that his only chance of carrying on as Leader was if he submitted himself to an early election through the 1922 Committee.
He replied that he didn't intend to submit himself to a leadership election because he was determined to fight the right wing, I told him that if he refused to go he would probably end up giving them exactly what they wanted.
Maybe I delivered my opinion more bluntly than I should have, but I had always been candid with Ted.
I felt that there was no chance that he could sustain his position.
An early decision to submit himself to re-election was probably his only chance of holding on, though I doubted if he could in any circumstances.
My impression was that Ted by then was only hearing the advice he wished to hear, including some from sources to which previously he had paid scant attention.
I was surprised by the number of people who were saying that they disliked him, and by the degree of bitterness and the spiteful determination that he had to go.
The executive of the 1922 Committee met at the home of its chairman, Edward du Cann, on October 14, and decided to press for a leadership election.
The executive had been dubbed the ‘Milk Street Mafia’, after a more public meeting at Edward's City office at Keyser Ullman, in Milk Street.
Again Ted demurred, but the Parliamentary Party's unease over the procedure for new leadership elections caused him to set up a review committee under Alec Home.
The conclusions of Alec's review committee, however, were not at all helpful to Ted.
There should be a provision for annual leadership elections in the Parliamentary Party.
If there was a second ballot, new candidates could stand at that stage.
The most likely of Ted's challengers was Keith Joseph, the most senior ‘dissident’ who had been in Ted's Cabinet.
No one had then realised that, however decent the man, his political antennae were too insensitive.
But they very soon did, for within a few days, on October 19, Keith made a speech in Edgbaston which demonstrated almost unbelievable ineptitude for someone in the running for the Leadership.
He referred to social classes 4 and 5 as being the least able to bring up children without resort to the state, and appeared to suggest that they should be encouraged through birth control to have fewer.
In fairness to Keith, he realised very quickly that he lacked the requisite qualities and threw in the towel.
This posed the dissidents with quite a problem.
They did not really want Edward du Cann- he was recognised as having been disloyal to Ted Heath, and his  City activities, with Lonrho and Keyser Ullman, were not universally accepted.
He soon announced his decision not to run.
At this stage most people would have given up the struggle and for a time settled for Ted, who by now had enlisted new blood into his team, including the trusty old campaigner, John Peyton, and Peter Walker, who was re-engaged as Ted's campaign manager.
But we reckoned without the persistence and almost obsessive scheming of Airey Neave.
Airey was a man of great courage-he had escaped from Colditz -and bitter determination.
He was an implacable enemy of Ted's, from the 1 950S when Ted had been Chief Whip, and they had a great row.
Someone who had been determined enough to escape from Colditz was unlikely to be put off by losing a couple of potential candidates, so the next in line was pushed forward.
This was Margaret Thatcher.
Up to that time, I do not believe that she had thought of herself as a candidate for the Leadership.
My conversations with her gave me no inkling to that effect, and, although she was ambitious, I do not think she felt that her time had come.
However, Airey ran a brilliant campaign-I was in a good position to judge because at that time Margaret had the little box of an office immediately opposite mine in the Shadow Cabinet corridor at the Commons, and this became Airey's headquarters.
There was a constant flow of MPs to see them, and I began to realise that these were drawn from a wide cross-section of the Party.
Although Margaret knew I would not support her, I was on reasonable terms with her-so much so that during the battle for the Leadership I attended her constituency annual dinner and dance as guest of honour.
Airey Neave's exercise was carried out by a combination of promises and flattery, and was brilliantly masterminded.
Margaret's stature in the Party had been enhanced by her performances at the dispatch box as Robert Carr's deputy opposing Labour's Finance Bill.
Her courage in opposing Ted went down well in the Party and in much of the press.
Other potential candidates, who were remaining loyal to Ted but who it was known would come in on the second ballot if Ted were defeated, were quietly being accused of cowardice by the Neave camp.
The fact that a vote for Margaret was the only way to secure a second ballot was also turned to advantage.
There was only one really bitter outbreak of in-fighting, prompted  by a story which Peter Walker had raked up from somewhere that gave an account of Margaret hoarding food during the miners' strike.
The intention had been to brand her as a ‘hoarder’ as well as the ‘milk snatcher’, but most of us thought this seemed an eminently sensible thing for her to have done.
On the day of the first ballot, February 4, 1 975, I was on a political tour of the East Midlands.
I had allowed plenty of time to return to the Commons to vote, but the train was one and a half hours late.
I arrived at the House in time to be greeted by the sight of Alan Clark, the maverick right wing MP for Plymouth Sutton, rushing out of Westminster Hall shouting at the top of his voice, ‘She's won, she's won.’
Margaret received 130 votes to Ted's 19 and Hugh Fraser's 16.
Thank goodness my vote would not have made any difference.
It was one of the most miserable days in my life.
The next day I received a visit from Humphrey Atkins, by then our Chief Whip, telling me in enthusiastic and forceful terms that I should stand for the leadership.
This surprised me, as I had not thought of him as someone who would favour me, and in any case I presumed that he would support Willie Whitelaw.
My main supporters were my former PPSs, Michael Jopling and Barney Hayhoe, the former retiring to bed with ‘flu for the rest of the week between the two ballots.
I received a number of approaches to withdraw.
Ian Percival, the lawyer on the right of the party, suggested that Margaret as Leader and myself as Deputy would be a winning team and the votes could be delivered.
I cannot believe he came without Airey Neave's permission, but it did not look a very comfortable arrangement, and I declined.
On the second ballot on February 1l, Margaret won 146 votes, Willie Whitelaw 79, myself and Geoffrey Howe each won 19 votes, and John Peyton 11.
It was clear that Geoffrey Howe and myself would be the also-rans, but I was a little surprised that I ran so badly.
I discovered when I later spoke with Geoffrey that he too had been persuaded to stand by Humphrey Atkins.
Margaret had won convincingly.
The party was greatly relieved to get the whole business over and done with.
I have no doubt that Willie lost his chance of being leader and perhaps Prime Minister as a result of his loyalty to Ted during this period.
If he had been free to enter the leadership stakes  immediately after our October election defeat, he would almost certainly have been elected.
No one can fault the absolute loyalty that Willie gave to Ted and then Margaret.
He has had a very distinguished career and by dint of old-fashioned virtues and a marvellously warm personality has held the Party together on many occasions.
There was no way that the Party was going to be generous to Ted Heath after three General Election defeats out of four.
The right wing hated Ted and the scenes of rejoicing when he was beaten in the leadership contest by Margaret Thatcher left me feeling very sad.
[James Prior, A Balance of Power (London, IgX6), g8–1ol.]
First ballot : Margaret Thatcher 130 Edward Heath 119 Hugh Fraser 16 Second ballot : Margaret Thatcher 146 William Whitelaw 79 James Prior 19 Geoffrey Howe 19 John Peyton 11
(2) THE LABOUR PARTY
Constitution, clause VI 
(I)
There shall be a leader and a deputy leader of the Labour Party who shall be ex-officio leader and deputy leader of the Parliamentary Labour Party.
(2)
The leader and deputy leader of the party shall be elected or re-elected from amongst the Commons members of the Parliamentary Labour Party at the party conference…and with the provision as may be set out in the standing orders for the time being in force.
Standing Orders, No. 5 
(2)(a)
The leader and deputy leader of the party shall be elected separately at a party conference.
(b)
Affiliated organisations, Constituency Labour Parties and Commons Members of Parliament may nominate for each of the offices of leader and deputy leader, one Commons Member of the  Parliamentary Labour Party attending conference (unless excused attendance as provided in sub-section (c) below) as a delegate or ex-officio delegate.
(c)
Nominees who do not attend the party conference shall be deemed to have withdrawn their nominations unless they send to the secretary on or before the date on which the conference opens an explanation in writing of their absence, satisfactory to the party Conference Arrangements Committee.
(d)
Before sending in nominations on the prescribed form, the consent in writing of the nominees must be obtained and each nomination must be supported by twenty per cent of Commons Members of the Parliamentary Labour Party.
Unless the written consent is attached to the nomination paper and twenty per cent of Commons Members have indicated their support, the nomination shall be null and void.
Valid nominations shall be printed in the agenda together with the names of the nominating organisations and Commons members supporting the nomination.
(3)(a)
Voting in the election of the leader and deputy leader of the party shall take place consecutively in three sections as follows:
(i)
Section I shall consist of those Commons Members of the Parliamentary Labour Party who are at present at Party Conference and each such Commons Member shall be entitled to one vote in each ballot held under this section in the election.
Commons Members unable to attend conference through sickness or because they are abroad on parliamentary business may send instruction to the secretary of the party or to a parliamentary colleague on how their vote shall be cast provided that they send to the secretary on or before the date on which conference opens an explanation in writing of their absence.
(ii)
Section 2 shall consist of those delegates from affiliated Constituency Labour Parties present at Party Conference and each Constituency Labour Party shall be entitled to vote in each ballot under this section…
(iii)
Section 3 shall consist of those delegates from affiliated trade unions, socialist societies, co-operative societies and other organisations present at party conference and each delegation shall be entitled to vote in each ballot under this section…
(b)
The votes for each nominee in a section shall be calculated as a percentage of the total votes cast in that section and then shall be apportioned in the following manner, Section I Parliamentary Labour Party 30% Section 2 Constituency Labour Parties 30% Section 3 Affiliated organisations 40%
(c)
The votes apportioned as provided in paragraph (b) above shall be totalled and the candidate receiving more than half of the votes shall be declared elected and if no candidate reaches this total on the first ballot further ballots should be held on an elimination basis.
(d)(i)
Subject to sub-paragraph (iii) below, when the Parliamentary Labour Party is in opposition in the House of Commons the election of the party leader and deputy leader shall take place at each annual party conference.
(ii)
When the party is in government and the party leader is prime minister, the election shall take place only if requested by a majority of the party conference on a card vote.
(iii)
Subject to paragraph (4) below, in any other circumstances an election shall be held when a vacancy occurs.
(e)
The votes cast for each nominee by each affiliated organisation, Constituency Labour Party and Commons Members of the Parliamentary Labour Party shall be recorded and made available as soon as possible.
(4)
When the party leader, for whatever reason, becomes permanently unavailable, the deputy party leader shall automatically become leader until a new party leader is elected at a party conference.
(a)
Election for Deputy Leader (1981)The electoral college was first used in 1981 to elect the Deputy Leader.
The results of the second ballot were : Denis Healey 50.43% Tony Benn 49.57% 
(b)
Election for Leader 1983 Thefirst-ever use of the electoral college to elect a Leader took place on the resignation of Michael Foot.
The results were : Neil Kinnock 71.27% Roy Hattersley 19.29% Eric Heffer 6.30 % Peter Shore 3.14%
(c)
Election for Deputy Leader 1983 On the same occasion, the Deputy Leadership votes were : Roy Hattersley 67.27% Michael Meacher 22.27% Denzil Davies 3.53% Gwyneth Dunwoody 1.32%
(d)
Election for Leader 1987 The figures in this ballot were : Neil Kinnock 88.63% Tony Benn 11.37%
(e)
Election for Deputy Leader On the same occasion, the Deputy Leadership votes were : Roy Hattersley 66.82% John Prescott 23.69% Eric Heffer 9.48%
(3) THE SOCIAL AND LIBERAL DEMOCRATIC PARTY
Constitution, articles 8 and 10 8.5.
The Federal Executive shall have power, after appropriate consultations and subject to ratification by the Federal Conference, to make and from time to time vary Party rules as to membership, elections and such other matters as it may consider necessary or desirable to give effect to or supplement the provisions of this  Constitution.
Any election rules must provide for elections to be by STV and secret ballot.
10. 1
The Leader of the Party shall be elected by the members of the Party in accordance with election rules made pursuant to Article 8.5.
10.2
An election for the Leader shall be called upon:
(a)
the Leader asking for an election;
(b)
the death or incapacity of the Leader;
(c)
the Leader ceasing to be a Member of the House of Commons (other than a temporary cessation by reason of a dissolution);
(d)
the receipt by the President of the resignation of the Leader or of a declaration of intent to resign upon the election of a new Leader;
(e)
a vote of no confidence in the Leader being passed by a majority of all Members of the Parliamentary Party in the House of Commons;
(f)
the receipt by the President of a requisition submitted by at least 75 Local Parties following the decision of a quorate general meeting; or
(g)
the second anniversary of the preceding general election being reached without an election being called under any of paragraphs (a) through (f), provided that:(i) in exceptional circumstances, the Federal Executive may postpone such an election for no more than one year by a two-thirds majority of those present and voting; and (ii) this paragraph (g) shall not apply if the Leader is a member of the Government.
10.3
Upon election, the Leader shall hold office until death, incapacity or resignation or the completion of an election called under this Article.
10.4
Upon the calling of an election, the Federal Executive shall publish a timetable for nominations, withdrawals, despatch, and receipt of ballot papers and the holding of ballots and shall appoint a disinterested person or body to receive and count the ballot papers.
10.5
Nominations must be of a Member of the Parliamentary Party in the House of Commons, who must be proposed and seconded by other such Members and supported by 200 members in  aggregate in not less than 20 Local Parties (including, for this purpose, the Specified Associated organisations representing youth and students as provided by Article 13.
X) following the decision of a quorate general meeting and must indicate acceptance of nomination.
In the ballot for the Leadership of the new, merged party, the votes were as follows : Paddy Ashdown 41,401 Alan Beith 16,202
CONSTITUTIONAL CONSEQUENCE OF PARTY LEADERSHIP ELECTION RULES
Now that each party has formal election procedures through which to choose its Leader, the Queen in normal circumstances will not have to make a personal choice between rival candidates for Prime Minister, a choice which she had to make in 1957 and in 1963 before the Conservative Party adopted election rules.
(1) 1957
On the morning of 9 January 19571 was working at the Treasury when a message was delivered summoning me to Number 10 at 3 o'clock.
I remember asking my private secretary to enquire what would be the main subjects of our discussion.
The state of the sterling exchanges, the progress of the negotiations for financial aid, the estimates of the likely flow of oil-these were all matters on which I knew the Prime Minister would want the latest information.
But from the nature of the reply which came from his private office, it was clear that he wanted a personal talk.
Eden was in the little drawing-room, the smallest of the three saloons which occupy the front of the famous house.
All these face north and seldom see the sun; but in this room there is a window to the west, looking over the garden, and the afternoon and evening sun give it, even through the gloom of a London winter, a touch of warmth and glow.
He told me with simple gravity, as a matter decided and not to be discussed, that he had decided to resign his office.
The Queen had already been informed; this had been the  purpose of his visit to Sandringham the previous day, which had generally been regarded as part of the normal routine, and not as marking any special occasion.
He had already spoken with Salisbury and Butler.
There was no way out.
The doctors had told him the truth about his health and, though he was not doomed as a man, it must be the end of his political life.
I was deeply shocked, for I had not been at all prepared for this sudden and tragic end to the adventure on which we had set out so gaily some twenty months before.
I had certainly learned from my talk with Sir Horace Evans of the nature and seriousness of Eden's malady; but the great doctor had seemed hopeful in November that a few weeks’ rest, followed by the normal holiday at Christmas, would be sufficient.
Indeed, when Eden returned from Jamaica in the middle of December, he had seemed almost, if not fully, restored.
He himself had no suspicion of the advice the doctors were to have to give in January.
Nevertheless, the doctors were inexorable, and there was nothing to be done but accept the verdict.
Throughout our short and painful conversation he was as charming, as elegant and as dignified as ever.
I could hardly believe that this was to be the end of the public life of a man so comparatively young, and with so much still to give…
I walked sadly back through the connecting passage to Number 11, and waited almost stunned with the news.
The Cabinet had been summoned for 5 o'clock, but nothing had leaked out.
When, therefore, Ministers were told the truth for which they were wholly unprepared, they were dazed.
On his return in mid-December all his colleagues had felt encouraged by the Prime Minister's buoyancy; he had conducted the last debates with all his old skill and command of the House.
Attributing his illness to the mental stresses and strains of the last few months, they were ignorant of the true medical causes.
It was a painful, and unforgettable scene.
Eden spoke shortly, and with great dignity.
The doctors' decision was irrevocable.
He must resign.
Salisbury spoke-with great emotion, almost in tears-of his lifelong friendship.
Butler spoke next-very appropriately.
I said a few words.
Then it was all over.
It was a dramatic end to an extraordinary and, in many ways, unique career.
What seemed so dreadful was that he waited so long for the Premiership, and held it for so short a time…
I was one of the first to leave, making my way back to Number 11 unobserved.
I heard afterwards that Butler left also, and that Lord  Salisbury, as senior Cabinet Minister, invited the remaining Ministers to give their opinion about who should succeed to the vacant and, in the circumstances, not very alluring post.
The Ministers were asked to see Lord Salisbury (the Lord President) and Lord Kilmuir (the Lord Chancellor) one by one in the Lord President's room in the Privy Council offices, which could be reached without leaving the building.
There were two light reliefs.
Practically each one began by saying, ‘This is like coming to the Headmaster's study.’
To each Bobbety [Salisbury]said, ‘Well, which is it, Wab or Hawold?’
As well as seeing the remainder of the ex-Cabinet, we interviewed the Chief Whip and Oliver Poole, the Chairman of the Party.
John Morrison, the Chairman of the 1922 Committee, rang me up from Islay the next morning.
An overwhelming majority of Cabinet Ministers was in favour of Macmillan as Eden's successor, and back-bench opinion, as reported to us, strongly endorsed this view.
There was no attempt by either Salisbury or Kilmuir to use what one might call a prefect's influence on the opinion of those they interviewed.
They merely asked a question and received an answer.
Since both were senior members of the Government and neither, from the nature of things, was a potential candidate for the Premiership, they acted with strict propriety in a difficult situation.
These two senior Ministers had agreed on this course before the Cabinet met.
They were rightly anxious to preserve the Queen's Prerogative, and not to allow the election of a Prime Minister as the result of a Party meeting.
This point had some importance because, in Gaitskell's absence in America, there was an attempt by Griffiths, the Deputy Leader, to object to the course which had been adopted.
He even accused the Conservatives of having placed the Crown in a very difficult and embarrassing position.
When Parliament returned, the Opposition would take the matter up and proceed to a vote of censure.
However, Gaitskell was much too sensible to fall for this nonsense.
No more was heard of any such protest.
Nevertheless, in view of the controversy which was later to follow when illness brought my own tenure of office to an end, it is perhaps worth rehearsing the true story.
While this novel but not ineffective procedure was at work, Eden had gone to the Palace.
In the evening, a bulletin signed by Sir Horace Evans and three other doctors was published in the following terms:
The Prime Minister's health gives cause for anxiety.
In spite of the improvement which followed his rest before Christmas there has been a recurrence of abdominal symptoms.
This gives us much concern because of the serious operations in 1953 and some subsequent attacks of fever.
In our opinion his health will no longer enable him to sustain the heavy burdens inseparable from the office of Prime Minister.
At the same time the Queen's acceptance of her Prime Minister's resignation was announced….
The next morning I thought it wiser not to go to the Treasury.
I heard that Lord Salisbury and Sir Winston Churchill had been sent for by the Queen.
But since no one had told me about what had taken place the night before, I had no idea of what advice they would give.
It is since clear that Lord Salisbury did not give his own views.
He merely informed the Queen of the general view among the leading members of the Party….
Since the Socialists afterwards tried to make out that this was a personal and private effort by the head of the Cecils, it is important to record that Lord Salisbury merely acted as a means of conveying to the Queen the general view inside the Party.
I gathered from Anthony (whom I saw later on Thursday) that he had neither been asked for his advice nor had volunteered it.
I passed the morning in the downstairs sitting-room, to which I had restored the picture of Mr Gladstone, and I read Pride and Prejudice -very soothing.
At noon Sir Michael Adeane rang up and asked me to be at the Palace at 2 o'clock.
So it was settled.
We had then a small dining-room at the top of Number 1 l, which my wife and I used when we were alone.
I sent a message to ask if we could have some luncheon at one o'clock, sharp.
I had not told her about my summons to the Palace, but when I appeared in a tail coat, this unusual costume, combined with the insistence on punctuality, led her to make an accurate deduction.
The Queen received me with the greatest kindness and consideration.
Although in various posts, especially as Foreign Secretary, I had seen her not infrequently, yet this was the beginning of a quite different relationship.
The Prime Minister is above all the Queen's First Minister.
His supreme loyalty is to her.
I could not disguise from her the gravity of the situation.
Indeed, I remember warning her, half in joke, half in earnest, that I could not answer for the new  Government lasting more than six weeks.
She smilingly reminded me of this at an audience six years later.
[Harold Macmillan,Riding the Storm (London, 1971), 180–5.]
Anthony returned from his enforced rest on 14th December.
He at once declared his intention to carry on as Prime Minister.
Suddenly, on 8th January, he telephoned me to say that he was going to Sandringham to tender his resignation to the Queen.
Cabinet Ministers were ‘corralled’ to give an immediate judgement between Harold Macmillan and me as successor.
Selwyn Lloyd objected to this procedure being carried out by two peers, Kilmuir and Salisbury.
A majority of the Cabinet decided for Harold.
The Queen sent for Churchill and Salisbury.
I had no doubt what Salisbury's advice would be.
I had served Churchill for ten years and for four as his Chancellor, but he told me later ‘I went for the older man.’
It was clear from the representations that had been made to the Chief Whip's office that there were many on the back-benches who would oppose my succession; there was no similar anti-Macmillan faction.
Ted Heath was sent to inform me of the result.
As I wrote at the time, I was not surprised.
I had been overwhelmed with duties as head of the government, and had made no dispositions for the emergency which occurred.
Horace Evans had told me that Anthony Eden would get better, and I had relied on him going on.
That night Anthony's wife sent me the following balm from Chequers:
Dear Rab.
Just a line to say what a beastly profession I think politics are— and how greatly I admire your dignity and good humour.
Yours ever, Clarissa.
In the precarious situation that now confronted the government and the party, it was my duty to give the new Prime Minister loyal and sincere co-operation.
I thought I could best do this at the Foreign Office, since in the aftermath of Suez so many dangerous tangles remained to be unravelled and so many ruptured friendships to be mended.
However, as he pungently states in his memoirs, Macmillan ‘felt one head on a charger should be enough’, and was accordingly anxious not to dislodge the faithful Selwyn Lloyd.
His memory plays him false in averring that I ‘chose the post of Home  Secretary’.
But he was clearly relieved when I agreed to accept it at his hands.
Dining a few nights later at the Beefsteak, I was reminded by a bright spark that Home Secretaries scarcely ever become Prime Ministers.
But since the exceptions include Melbourne and Churchill, this ‘rule’ need depress no incumbent; nor was I ever Home Secretary tout court .
Other jobs and dignities, including the leadership of the House, the chairmanship of the party, the conduct of Central African affairs, the oversight of European negotiations, the first Secretaryship of State, and even the Deputy Premiership, were to be added unto me for varying periods in the years that followed; and each time Macmillan went abroad-notably during his Eastern tour in 1958 and his African trip in 1960-I was automatically invited to act as head of the government.
But to do him justice, the Prime Minister never gave me any impression that he wanted me to succeed him….
[Lord Butler,The Art of the Possible (London, 1971), 195–6.]
(2) 1963
When we assembled for Cabinet on 8 October we found that the Prime Minister had suffered a severe attack of his prostate gland trouble during the night and had to see his doctor again.
It was apparent that his attendance at the coming Party Conference must be assumed to be very unlikely, and that the question of replacing him as leader could arise.
In Cabinet in his absence we had a short discussion.
The Lord Chancellor (Viscount Dilhorne) said that, as he was not himself a candidate for the leadership, if anyone wished to have any private talk he would be available.
I said that the same applied to me.
Enoch Powell later cited this indication of my position as a kind of pledge from which, when events turned out as they did, I should have had the whole Cabinet's leave formally to withdraw.
It was, however, nothing so dramatic or pompous-merely a statement revealing that at that time the question of my succession to Macmillan had simply not crossed my mind.
When the others went off to Blackpool I stayed behind to attend to Foreign Office business, as my speech to the Conference was not to be until later in the week.
On 9 October I went to see Macmillan in the nursing home and he  talked about the future leadership.
He asked me whether I had thought of taking it on, and if not why not.
I replied that I had not done so-that I was happy in the Foreign Office, and in the House of Lords which I had never contemplated leaving, and that it was in these fields that my strong preferences lay.
He seemed to accept that, and said that he had concluded after much thought that Lord Hailsham might be the best choice.
I had watched Quintin under pressure during the Suez crisis where he had shown admirable calm at the Admiralty in testing circumstances; and while I had some misgivings about his famous ‘judgement’ I felt that he could take on the leadership and the job of Prime Minister, and make a success of it.
I left it with Macmillan that he would continue his talks with him and others.
He asked me to take a message to the Blackpool Conference conveying to the delegates that he felt that he could not lead the Party at the General Election, and inviting those whose business it was to do so, to take soundings about the future leadership.
I did not enjoy the journey to Blackpool with these grim tidings; and when I came to the platform to deliver his message to the audience of 4,000 the hall was hushed with anticipation that something ill was in the wind.
As President of the National Union for the year I read the message which contained Macmillan's decision.
‘I will not be able to carry the physical burden of leading the Party at the next General Election.
I hope that it will soon be possible for the customary consultations to be carried out within the Party about the leadership.’
All of us felt a long way from the happy days when ‘we never had it so good’.
I walked back from the Meeting with Quintin who knew by then that he was Macmillan's selection, and I told him that the idea had my support.
Had I known that he intended to throw his claim to the leadership into the ring within a matter of hours, I would have tried to dissuade him from it then and there, for people never like being bounced, and least of all at a time of emotional stress.
As it was, others advised him against precipitating the issue, and I had a late word with him shortly before his evening meeting with the Conservative Political Centre; but by then it was too late for he considered himself to be committed to his friends.
In his speech he declared himself a runner.
The immediate instinct of his audience was to acclaim, but there followed a swift reaction against his candidature, and the tactical advantage which he had seemingly tried to gain by  such instant action fell right away.
This had been predictable; and the opposition increased rapidly in the succeeding days.
It was sad.
He had many of the qualities of an inspiring leader; for he combined a keen intellect with an ability to speak from the heart; and over and above that the power to make up his mind and to decide.
It was after this debacle that a number of Conservatives came and told me that I ought to consider coming forward as a leader of the Party and a potential Prime Minister.
I was the last thing which I had anticipated, and the last thing which I sought.
At first my reply was that which I had given to Macmillan.
I was happy in my Office; it was exacting but I could carry it easily in the House of Lords; and I had no wish to re-submit myself to the rough and tumble of electioneering and the House of Commons…
One thing was clear in the confusion-that I could not even let myself think about the matter unless my physical health was up to it.
Overstrain had brought on tuberculosis in 1939 and I had been having a lot of trouble with my eyes.
I told Lord Dilhorne that I would ask my doctor whether in his opinion I could last the course if the task were laid upon me.
After a thorough examination he said that I was well enough to hold it down.
That escape route was closed.
I then had to consider all the political and governmental aspects of the matter.
There was one rather serious minus in the countdown.
I was not trained in economics, and economic matters were sure to figure largely in the run-up to the election and in the years to come.
Unluckily, in 1962, in an interview with Kenneth Harris of the Observer , I had publicly admitted this deficiency.
He had asked me whether I felt that I could ever be Prime Minister, and I had answered light-heartedly, ‘No, because I do my sums with matchsticks’.
It did not worry me unduly because all that was needed would be to choose a good Chancellor of the Exchequer; but Harold Wilson was not likely to miss a trick like that.
On the plus side was the fact that the Foreign Office and the years spent in Cabinet were a good apprenticeship, while in addition I had never been afraid of taking decisions.
That, above all else, is what a Prime Minister is for.
Naturally I talked over every aspect of it with Elizabeth and the family; and in the end I concluded that if- and only if-convincing evidence was brought to me that a substantial majority in both Houses wished me to take on the job I would do so.
The procedure  for ascertaining the opinion of members of the Commons and of Peers and of prominent people in the Party Organization was then conducted by persons who were later to be christened ‘the Magic Circle’.
They were in the main Conservative Whips in both Houses, for if they did not know the form then nobody else would.
When the result of the canvass was conveyed to me I had no doubt whatever that it had been thorough and honest and that I could command the necessary support in Parliament.
There was therefore no longer any reason for or point in hesitation; and I said that if I were the choice that I would respond to the best of my ability…
On 18 October I was sent for by Her Majesty and invited to form a Government.
I expressed my gratitude, but explained to the Queen that I must ask leave to go away and see if I could form an administration.
I was by no means sure, after the drama of the recent weeks, what the attitude of some of my colleagues would be.
I had to enlist Butler, Maudling and Hailsham at the very least, to have the foundation on which to build a Cabinet and Government which would command support in the country and respect overseas.
Butler had for long been heir-apparent, and had given devoted and distinguished service to the Conservatives.
Maudling was the best equipped on economics, and Hailsham was the possessor of a keen brain and was a colourful and popular figure.
None of them could have been happy at that time.
With kindness and loyalty and sacrifice they gave me their support, as did all but two of my colleagues in Macmillan's Cabinet.
They were Ian Macleod and Enoch Powell, who were not natural bedfellows, but who for the moment had got into a huddle.
The reason which they gave to me was that they did not believe that a man with my social background could win a General Election for the Conservative Party at that time in the twentieth century.
I said that I thought they were wrong; but that if that was their reason for declining to serve I could only accept it and be sorry.
I had a feeling that at the back of their minds was the calculation that, although we might lose in 1964, the next opportunity would not be long and that then we would win under another leader.
But in politics one cannot do such clever mathematical sums and hope that events will conform.
When a General Election comes it is necessary to fight flat out to win.
[Lord Home,The Way the Wind Blows (London, 1976), 180–5.]
As Randolph Churchill so eloquently described in The Fight for the Tory Leadership , Macmillan had seen Hailsham on the Monday before the Conference and indicated that in the event of retirement he would support his candidature.
Accordingly the ‘cohort's- including the family, especially Maurice Macmillan and Julian Amery-warmly urged the case for Hailsham at the Imperial Hotel.
Randolph himself returned from America with hundreds of badges marked Q for Quintin.
He came up to my room and obligingly handed me some for my wife, myself and friends.
These I consigned to the waste-paper basket.
Meanwhile Home with great determination had been to the hospital in London and obtained Macmillan's written resignation, which was read to the Conference on Thursday afternoon: ‘I hope that it will soon be possible for the customary processes of consultation to be carried on within the party about its future leadership.’
Alec Home obtained this and himself read it out.
The fact that the P.M. asked for the processes of selection of his successor to be undertaken in the middle of a party conference was bound to create consternation, confusion and intrigue, and indeed it did.
I cannot imagine an atmosphere less suited to such a declaration with scores of journalists, television interviewers,et hoc genus omne .
It turned Blackpool into a sort of electoral Convention a l'Americaine .
After that there was no peace.
The effect of Macmillan's encouragement was that Quintin Hailsham announced to the C.P.C. meeting on the Thursday night his determination to renounce his title.
When I entered the Winter Gardens he was emerging surrounded by an hysterical crowd, having been greeted by a demonstration described to me by a hostile witness as ‘reminiscent of a Nuremberg Rally’.
He had been up to my room that afternoon and asked my advice.
I had recommended him to say he was considering his position and no more.
He said he thought it very good advice but would not take it.
Alec Home gave him similar advice.
Home's biographer implies that if Hailsham had taken it and not publicly shown his judgement faulty, Home would have supported Hailsham as Macmillan's designated heir.
We had frequent opportunities for meeting the Homes, who had the next-door set of rooms.
He told us on more than one occasion that he could not himself contemplate coming down from the House of Lords and denuding it of himself as well as its leader.
He  appeared to Mollie and me to stick to that view during the Conference until the Saturday when he told us he was consulting his doctor.
The Lord Chancellor, travelling down with us in the train, took Mollie a bet of 5 to 5s. that he would not stand.
At that time the Lord Chancellor seemed fairly sure that, with the slump in Quintin's stock, my position was good.
He was, however, extremely discreet and did not tell us any results of the Cabinet soundings in detail.
It became clear to me at Blackpool that there was considerable support for Alec, partly because he made a good speech on foreign policy, partly because he took the chair at my meeting in his capacity as President of the National Union, and partly because of lobbying by back-benchers who saw him as the best compromise candidate.
His wife, Elizabeth, has told Mollie that they did not really get the view that it was coming their way until the next week; but, in fact, it was.
My speech to the party conference on the Saturday had a good reception, but those who favour ‘democracy by decibels’ noted a victory for Home on points…
I returned to London and the Prime Minister made clear what I had always known, that, had he not been stricken down, he would have made a speech on the Saturday at Blackpool saying that he was going on.
This would have avoided all discussion of the succession.
Rather to my surprise popular support, especially in the Daily Express of the 16th, showed me to be in the lead-Butler 39 1/2, Hailsham 21 1/2, Maudling 11, Home 9 1/2.
I also had many more letters than usual and much assurance from Michael Fraser at the Research Department that the national polls really indicated a very considerable measure of support in the country.
The situation was not however quite the same in the Parliamentary party.
There was an element of criticism there of which I was informed by the Chief Whip and the Lord Chancellor, just as there was an element of criticism of Hailsham, and it seemed quite possible that the Whips would prefer a compromise candidate.
On the other hand I was assured by the Lord Chancellor and by the Prime Minister that the Cabinet would be perfectly happy to work either under me or Alec Home.
I think that Harold himself always had a feeling, despite the nine years between us, that my succession would not make enough difference between his regime and the next, and he mentioned this argument to me on the 17th.
I pointed to the fact that I was younger  than when he took over.
I also pointed out the difficulty of bringing a peer down from the Upper House-not only the short-term difficulty of the delay but also the psychological impact on the country.
I therefore did my best to keep the doors open.
Despite the unpleasantness of the situation personal relations were maintained.
I saw Alec Home, Reggie Maudling and Quintin Hailsham.
In my talk with Alec he himself expressed grave doubts whether he wished to take it on.
He said his wife was encouraging him, but that he realized the difficulties of coming back to the Commons and of the years after the election if we were in office or even more if we were in opposition.
He said he would be perfectly happy to back me.
I got the impression that he was personally not keen to stand himself but could be persuaded.
He said he hoped that if he had to do it he could count on me.
My talk with Reggie was very short.
He simply said that he did not know how the M.P.s would react in his favour but that he counted on me to work with him.
My talk with Quintin had more content since he said that if another peer came down from the Upper House he would withdraw from public life whether he was in the Upper or Lower House.
He would then go back to the Bar and try to make a living there.
I reminded him of my advice that he should not have renounced the Upper House so speedily.
He agreed that this advice had been good but said that things had now gone too far.
I besought him if the decision went against him to return to the Upper House and do his bit there.
He said he would be perfectly ready to serve with me.
There then followed the inquiry by the Whips in the Commons about whom M.P.s wanted as Leader.
I have never seen the result of this operation.
I simply heard from numerous of my friends that they were rung up by quite junior Whips who stressed that Alec was standing, having decided to renounce his peerage.
The Whips had a difficult job and were as usual a good body of men, but the accounts sent in to me showed me that each man in conducting this inquiry adopted a different emphasis according to his own character.
At any rate we were informed that the Chief Whip had carried a document to the sick Prime Minister showing the majority preference.
By the Thursday afternoon the newspapers had smelt that things were going Home's way.
A meeting took place that night at Enoch Powell's house at which Toby Aldington, lain Macleod, Reggie Maudling and Freddie Erroll were present.
They were later joined by the Chief Whip.
This was a meeting of revolt against the choice of  Home.
They telephoned me at the St. Ermin's Hotel, where Mollie and I were staying while our house in Smith Square was under repair, to pledge their support.
Quintin himself rang saying ‘This simply won't do’ and Mollie answered him.
She was superb throughout, counselling me to stay out, and this made my eventual decision all the more poignant.
Other members of the Cabinet who were friendly to me were Henry Brooke, Edward Boyle and John Boyd-Carpenter.
I was also spoken to by the Chief Whip who reiterated that the majority of the party were for Alec.
One presumes and hopes that the Chief Whip informed the Prime Minister, as he was requested to do, that seven or eight members of the Cabinet were opposed to the choice of Home.
What is certain is that Macmillan decided to ignore this powerful objection and acted (as he had done in 1962) with utter determination and dispatch, making a definite recommendation of Home.
[Butler,Art of the Possible , 242–3, 246–8.]
Before 1965 the Crown's role in choosing a Prime Minister was greater than it has now become.
If a Labour Prime Minister had died or retired whilst in office the Parliamentary Party election procedure would have produced a new leader.
But the death or retirement of a Conservative Prime Minister made it necessary for a choice to be made by the Queen in accordance with the convention that the office should be filled by an incumbent most likely to command the support of a Commons majority.
That principle dictated the choice as the Prime Minister's successor of a leading figure in the party, but it did not indicate precisely who the appointee should be when the Conservative party was in office and there were competing claimants for the succession.
Between 1945 and 1965 that situation arose on two occasions (in 1957 and in 1963), on the retirement of the Conservative Prime Ministers Eden and Macmillan.
The practice was that the Queen with the aid of her Private Secretary would take soundings from a variety of sources including Privy Councillors, senior politicians and party whips.
It was agreed that the retiring Prime Minister did not have any right to nominate or give binding advice as to his successor, though he might be consulted along with others.
The choice by the Queen of Lord Home in 1963 was of some importance since the circumstances in which it took place illustrated  the difficulties of the process and led fairly quickly to the adoption by the Conservative Party of a leadership election process that was designed (like the Labour Party's leadership election) to make the choice of a Prime Ministerial successor a constitutional formality.
The events surrounding the appointment of Lord Home (as he then was) have been the subject of rival accounts.
A criticism made by those in both parties who were opposed to the appointment was that on Mr Harold Macmillan's prompting the Queen had allowed herself to be urged prematurely into a decision without having at her disposal all the available evidence about feeling in the Conservative Party.
In effect the process of consultation and decision was cut off at a point where the situation was changing rapidly and when the leading contenders for office had in fact agreed to express their willingness to serve under Mr R. A. Butler.
It was alleged that efforts to convey this information to the Queen's advisers on the morning when she saw Macmillan were unsuccessful.
It is still unclear from the account given in Macmillan's memoirs what facts were made known to the Queen when the Prime Minister read to her from his hospital bed a memorandum of advice containing the suggestion that she should invite Lord Home to attempt to form an administration.
What is said is that mention was made of the ‘so-calledrevolt of certain ministers’.
When asked about this revolt the Prime Minister replied that he ‘thought speed was important and hoped she would send for Lord Home immediately-as soon as she got back to the Palace’.
Randolph Churchill reported a similar sentiment as being expressed by Macmillan to Home: ‘…
We can't change our view now.
All the troops are on the starting line.
Everything is arranged.’
This perhaps supports the criticism that the Queen's advisers should not have allowed her to be urged into an immediate invitation to Lord Home and that she should have taken at least a little time fully to apprise herself of the changing political situation and of the views of the Conservative leadership, as it was then emerging.
If she was aware of the situation as it was on the morning of 18 October 1963 she was possibly mistaken in her action.
If she was not aware of it she was deceived.
Mr Harold Macmillan was admittedly fortified by an informal poll of Conservative members and notables, but it may be argued that he should not have been the sole fountainhead of advice, if it is indeed a constitutional principle that a retiring  Prime Minister has no special title or status to advise on the choice of his successor.
In fact, at the time when Macmillan's advice was sought he had ceased to be Prime Minister and it is the more odd that the Queen on this occasion should have, in Macmillan's words, said that ‘she did not need and did not intend to seek any other advice but mine’.
Other criticisms were of less validity.
Macmillan related that the Queen believed, or at least agreed, that ‘Lord Home was really the best and strongest character’.
On the publication of Macmillan's memoirs Mr Humphrey Berkeley wrote to The Times to complain about this as being a ‘gross constitutional impropriety’.
The impropriety was not, it is to be assumed, the expression of this arguably valid assessment of the political talents of Messrs Maudling, Butler, and Hogg, but the fact that it should have been revealed to the general public.
The complaint, if valid, would suggest the existence of a constitutional practice or convention, which has certainly not been observed with complete fidelity in the past.
Lord Attlee's memoirs, for example, as well as Sir John Wheeler Bennett's biography of George VI described a number of views held by the King without the authors being accused of constitutional impropriety.
In 1963 Queen Elizabeth, like her father, was exercising one of Bagehot's three monarchical Prerogatives-the right to encourage, the right to be consulted, and the right to warn.
No doubt she encouraged Mr Macmillan at a time when he needed some encouragement; and there seemed little danger to the Constitution in this fact being revealed in 1973 to those readers of Sir Harold's memoirs who had stayed the course through the Winds of Change , the Blast of War , and the Tides of Fortune to the End of the Day .
Conservative dissatisfaction with the episode of 1963 led almost immediately to the adoption of a procedure for election of the party leader by a ballot of members taking the Conservative whip.
Recent changes in the party system, however, suggest that there may still be situations in which it may be necessary for the Prerogative of appointment to be  exercised in accordance with the independent judgment of the Queen and her advisers.
[Geo) ffrey Marshall,Constitutional Conventions (Oxford, 1984), 29–32.]
Possible Causes of Change of Prime Minister
1.
GENERAL ELECTION
(I) SUCCESS OF THE GOVERNMENT
No constitutional action is necessary when the government is returned with an absolute Commons' majority, as happened in l906, l918, 1922, 193l, 1935, l950, 1955, 1959, 1966, October 1974, 1983 and 1987.
So it was all over, with a new House of Commons containing [after the 1959 general election]365 Conservative, 258 Labour and 6 Liberal members.
Since on the morning of Polling Day The Times had forecast a majority of twenty-two I felt more than satisfied- but it was impossible not to feel, with all the excitement and gratification, a sense of humility and even awe.
At a Press Conference at the Central Office I tried to express this.
‘We must try,’ I said, ‘to emphasise the fundamental unity of our people and not exaggerate the differences which divide us, important as they may be.’
Nevertheless, it was a staggering result.
No Party has been victorious three times running increasing its majority each time.
One more duty I was able to perform the next day.
I had advised Her Majesty the Queen not to break her holiday and leave Balmoral because of the General Election.
Accordingly I was glad to be able to write to her formally on 10 October:
Madam,
Mr Macmillan with his humble duty to The Queen.
I was glad that in the course of the night of 8/9 October it became clear that it would not be necessary to trouble Your Majesty to return to London.
I must admit that this situation caused me some anxiety at an earlier stage, but no point was made about this in the Press either before or after the Election.
The new Americanised habit of one of the Leaders ‘conceding’ the Election in the early hours of the morning was an advantage from this point of view.
I propose to think over the situation of the Government generally during the week-end and I have not yet made any definite decisions as to possible changes of Ministers.
I do not anticipate that these will be on a very substantial scale and I do not see any reason why it should be necessary to  ask Your Majesty to return to London prematurely.
Ministers can go from London to Balmoral as well as Sovereigns from Balmoral to London, and the former has to my mind a far better and longer tradition behind it.
At any rate, perhaps I may be allowed to communicate with Your Majesty on this point, or ask my Private Secretary to discuss it with Sir Michael Adeane.
With regard to the general result of the Election, naturally my colleagues and 1, and those who think with us, are more than satisfied.
But we realise the heavy work that lies ahead, both at home and abroad.
The people at home have become accustomed to a very high and stable economic situation.
The slightest change in the barometer, although it might be due to factors quite outside our control, would correspondingly depress them.
Abroad, although hopeful, they are a little more realistic.
The most encouraging feature of the Election however, from Your Majesty's point of view, is the strong impression that I have formed that Your Majesty's subjects do not wish to allow themselves to be divided into warring classes or tribes filled with hereditary animosity against each other.
There was a very significant breakdown of this structure of society which, in spite of its many material advantages, was one of the chief spiritual disadvantages of the first industrial revolution.
It will be curious if the second industrial revolution, through the wide spread of its amenities of life to almost every home in the country, succeeds in destroying this unfortunate product of the first.
At any rate, anything that makes Your Majesty's subjects more conscious of their unity and of their duty to each other seems to me to be a real gain.
With my humble duty, I remain, Your Majesty's faithful and devoted servant.
To this the Queen returned a gracious reply which while maintaining the full impartiality of the Crown encouraged me to continue to do my best to serve her as her First Minister.
[Harold Macmillan,Pointing the Way (London,1972),14–15]
(2) SUCCESS OF THE OPPOSITION
The Opposition was returned with an absolute Commons' majority in 1924, 1945, 1951, 1964, 1970 and 1979.
The procedures followed in the very different circumstances that arise from the electoral defeat of the party in power are inevitably simpler, provided that the result creates a viable situation for the  majority party.
The Queen, without of course receiving any advice from the outgoing prime minister, sends for the leader of the successful party.
In this generation there has not been any doubt about his identity.
[Harold Wilson,The Governance of Britain (London, 1976), 24.]
(3) SUCCESS FOR NO SINGLE PARTY
This is discussed below: see p. 64
2.
RESIGNATION THROUGH ILLNESS OR OLD AGE; DEATH
A solution is suggested which combines the requirements of always having someone, with next to no power vacuum, at the helm, together with what today may be taken as being the common preference in the political parties for the Leader (and hence Prime Minister) to be elected.
Save for the case where a Prime Minister is to resign as the result of advanced years, and therefore where speed is not essential and an ordinary party election could take place, the following course of action is proposed to find a new Prime Minister for a continuing government.
First, the outgoing Prime Minister would inform the Queen and his parliamentary party of his illness and desire to resign.
Secondly, the Queen would ask the Prime Minister's deputy (if there were one), or the number two in the order of precedence in the Cabinet list (if there were no formal deputy), to take charge of the government, while retaining his portfolio, but without appointing him Prime Minister.
He would look after the government on as much of a care and maintenance basis as circumstances permitted, deciding only urgent matters and then only with Cabinet consent if this were possible.
Thirdly, the government party would proceed to an election as expeditiously as might be and, when a successful candidate was elected, the Prime Minister (if able, or the deputy or number two if not) would recommend him as successor, resign, and the new Leader would kiss hands on appointment as Prime Minister.
In such a way the democratic ideal would be preserved; at no time would the government be rudderless, and the Queen would remain isolated from party politics.
It might be objected that for a politician to act as a ‘caretaker’ might in itself enhance his chances in the subsequent Leadership election, simply by his being seen to fulfil the duties of the office of Prime Minister.
But it is equally possible that he could spoil any chances he might have had by making some political slip.
And even if the ‘caretaker’ solution is still disliked, would not a strong argument in its favour be that the automatic selection of the ‘caretaker’by virtue of his position preordained either by the stricken Prime Minister or (in the case of a Labour government) by his position as Deputy Leader of the Labour Party mean that that selection would keep the Queen above the party infighting, and overall would ensure that the royal prerogative of choice of a new Prime Minister in this context would have no part to play?
As a matter of strict law, party elections can neither preclude nor pre-empt the prerogative of choice.
If a Prime Minister indicated that he wished to resign because he was ill, the Queen would indeed be acting in accordance with constitutional law if she were then and there to accept his resignation and appoint a successor after taking whatever soundings seemed appropriate.
But that law has upon it a rich gloss of practice, realism, and political sophistication which, I suggest, would preclude a repeat of events such as those which occurred in 1963.
This gloss was added when all the parties came to accept the desirability of Leadership elections-that is, after 1965.
[Rodney Brazier,Constitutional Practice (Oxford, 1 gXX), I l — 1 3]
Accepted procedural rules appear to be that the person selected must have the support of a majority in the House of Commons (if need be, after a new general election), and that the Monarch must ‘secure the strongest Government in the minimum time’ while still observing the need for public impartiality.
Most frequently, under the two-party system, all these requirements are met easily by sending for the Leader of the Opposition or of the majority party, as the case may be, upon the fall of government-as happened, for example, in 1945 and 1951.
Here the facts are such as to allow of no other choice.
There was until recently one situation in which the Monarch might be called upon to exercise a degree of discretion but even this has now in practice been removed as the result of party political developments that took place between 1957 and 1965…
This situation arose when a Prime Minister died in office or resigned for personal reasons, that is to say, when a vacancy  occurred which was not accompanied by any change in the position of the parties.
Even then, there might sometimes be no room for choice, as when Sir Anthony Eden succeeded Sir Winston Churchill.
But when Sir Anthony retired in his turn in 1957, the Queen was not presented with any one obvious successor.
Under such circumstances it was normally assumed that, although the Monarch would probably seek advice in order to discover what persons would be acceptable to the party in power, yet for the final choice she alone was morally and constitutionally responsible.
It was clear, however, that an unwise or ill-advised Monarch might conceivably act in a manner which could be construed as partial, in that it appeared to reflect a royal preference for one particular group within the party.
It is true, and important, that a party in a majority is able to reject any selection of which it does not approve-if it is prepared to undergo the internal conflict this would probably entail.
A royal ‘mistake’ is not final; but it could still harm the Monarch's own reputation.
To prevent this there must exist rules capable of serving as effective guides to action.
In 1957, on Sir Anthony Eden's resignation, the Queen apparently sought and acted upon the advice of Sir Winston Churchill and Lord Salisbury, both elder statesmen of the Conservative Party who had themselves no personal ambitions at stake, and who appeared to have the confidence of their own party.
At the same time the Labour Party took the opportunity of outlining the procedure it wished to be adopted in the selection of a Labour Prime Minister under comparable conditions.
It declared that the Monarch should make no selection until a new Leader had been elected by the Parliamentary Labour Party in the same way as a Leader is chosen when the Party is in opposition.
The Labour Party, thus, had given notice that it would not be prepared to accept a Leader chosen for it by the Monarch.
The Conservatives, on the other hand, appeared still to accept traditional methods of selection.
It is to be doubted, however, whether they would have done so had the Monarch exercised a wide personal discretion without seeking the advice of Conservative elders.
Both parties, nevertheless, seemed concerned to limit or even abolish the Monarch's culpability in this situation, and to insist upon a new procedural rule of what might be called ‘party responsibility’.
Such a ‘rule’ should not conflict with authority and precedent which require, essentially, only that the person selected be acceptable to the party in question.
What it does is extend the requirements to  include methods of selection which should virtually guarantee that the ‘proper’ choice is made for each party.
To acknowledge this rule should thus have the double advantage of eliminating any appearance of royal partiality in selecting a Prime Minister on these occasions, and of ensuring that the parties obtain the leaders they want by the methods they want.
[Geoffrey Marshall and G. C. Moodie,Some Problems of the Constitution (London, 5th edn., 1971), 47–8.]
This afternoon to the Commons and talked to Frank Barlow, the Secretary of the PLP, who told me in detail the arrangements that had been made in the event of Harold Wilson dying.
The news will be conveyed to a meeting of Ministers at Number 10, which will include the heads of all Departments, i.e. Ministers of Cabinet rank, as well as Cabinet Ministers themselves.
Though there is no Deputy Prime Minister, George Brown is Deputy Leader of the Parliamentary Labour Party and will therefore have Harold's Party responsibilities.
Bowden as Leader of the House would be responsible for informing the House.
As soon as Ministers know, letters or telegrams will be sent to every Commons Member of the Parliamentary Labour Party and a meeting will be summoned within twenty-four hours if the House is sitting or within forty-eight hours during a recess.
No Lords will be present.
At this meeting, nominations will be received and ballot papers will be duplicated on the spot.
Four tellers will be appointed and the Party will proceed immediately to a vote.
It will be the usual exhaustive ballot procedure and if the first vote does not give an overall majority to one of the candidates there will be an adjournment for fifteen or twenty minutes in the same room to give candidates the opportunity to withdraw.
There will then be another ballot and so on, until a new Leader of the Parliamentary Labour Party is appointed.
The press will not be admitted until that is decided.
The announcement will be made in a statement by Frank Barlow, as Secretary to the Parliamentary Labour Party, and will be conveyed to Sir Michael Adeane at Buckingham Palace.
The Queen has been told that she is not to summon anybody to form a Government until she has heard who the new Leader is.
Adeane understands this and the man elected Leader will be summoned.
These arrangements have been agreed with the Liaison Committee  of the Parliamentary Labour Party under Manny Shinwell's chairmanship and approved by Harold.
[Tony Benn,Out of the Wilderness: Diaries 1963–1967 (London, 87).
263]
3.
VOLUNTARY RETIREMENT
(I) BALDWIN I 937
Retirement is one of the few moments which a politician can choose with deliberation and Baldwin had been preparing for it for months, if not for years.
There could be no doubt, after 1935, that Neville Chamberlain would succeed him.
Only the Abdication had prevented Baldwin from going at the end of 1936.
Some of those very close, including Dugdale, urged him to withdraw as soon as that episode was over.
But he refused.
His conduct of the crisis could be seen as a great achievement, yet something so negative and distasteful was not what he would have wished for his last service.
Instead, he would see the new King firmly into the saddle and retire after the Coronation.
For five months, therefore, after Edward VIII signed the Instrument of Abdication, Baldwin remained Prime Minister, steadily handing over control to Chamberlain, but keeping a watching brief in matters of defence.
The domestic events of the spring of 1937 were not without importance but he took small part in them, and a cursory reading of the Cabinet minutes might suggest that he had already retired in mind.
His position was not unlike that of MacDonald two years before: but he was able to exert his influence with most of his former strength when he thought it right to do so.
Wrapped in the adulation which expressed the country's relief at being saved from a constitutional crisis, Baldwin went down to Astley in December.
‘We had a wonderful day yesterday,’ he wrote to Tom Jones, on Boxing Day.
‘The sunlight was as the opening of the gates of heaven itself and the glow it threw on the western hills transfigured the whole landscape for half an hour.
The strange unearthly light lasted nearly all day…
I am feeling quietly content and very thankful.’
Early in January, the Baldwins stayed at Sandringham for a weekend with the new King-'a family gathering, with the Bishop  of Jarrow as preacher and the only other visitor.’
On the Sunday, a crowd of eight thousand cheered the Royal Family on their way to church and Baldwin was given a most cordial reception.
He found the King's strength and confidence increasing and he had no doubts about his fitness to rule; but the King was still anxious for time in which to adjust himself to his new station and duties.
When Baldwin returned to London, Tom Jones showed him an article in the Political Quarterly , suggesting that the new Monarch should mix with a wider range of people.
‘Oddly enough,’ Baldwin replied, ‘I was talking over this very matter with the King.
I asked him if he would be willing to meet some members of the House, if Lucy and I fixed up some small dinner parties after my resignation.
I am going round about Whitsun, perhaps May 20th…’
Neville Chamberlain returned that day from France, where he had taken ten days' rest, and the last session of Baldwin's leadership began.
The key dates were soon fixed: the Coronation for 12 May and Baldwin's resignation for the 27th.
Since these cut across both the Finance Bill and the Imperial Conference, Chamberlain had to make his dispositions in advance.
[Keith Middlemas and John Barnes,Baldwin (London, 1969), 8-l9]
(2) WILSON 1976
In the relatively simple hand-over of what is in fact, though not constitutionally, a continuing government, the test, given the normal circumstances of a party majority, is whether A or B can in fact command a majority in the House of Commons.
Where the party's procedure for selecting a leader is laid down and is seen to have worked, e.g. the eliminating ballot procedure used by the Parliamentary Labour Party in March-April 1976, the selection is fairly clear, though it still has to be made.
The Parliamentary Party was not in fact electing a prime minister; it was electing a new party leader.
When the process is complete, the outgoing prime minister goes straight to the Palace and formally tenders his resignation; the most he needs to do is inform the monarch, who will have been given the figures already, that the ballot has produced a given result, probably adding that in his view the newly elected leader can command  a majority in Parliament.
(The procedure might be somewhat different in a situation where the Government was in a minority, for example had I resigned between March and October 1974.)
Contrary to widespread belief, there is no duty on the prime minister, still less any inherent right, to recommend the man to be sent for.
It is the sovereign who decides whom to send for and invite to form a government.
[Wilson,Government , 2l-2.]
Harold's secret was well guarded and the Cabinet gathered at No. 10 on the following Tuesday without the slightest inkling of the dramatic news they were to hear.
Whilst Ministers were assembling, Harold called Ted Short, the Deputy Leader, Denis Healey and me to his study and there broke the news to the three of us.
I do not know whether the other two also had prior knowledge, but no one gave any indication to this effect as we all filed silently to the Cabinet Room.
The Prime Minister opened the meeting.
Ministers had hardly settled themselves in their seats before the bombshell burst.
It was several seconds before they recovered their breath.
The purport of his remarks is already familiar.
This was no sudden decision on his part, as he had never intended to stay longer than two years after the 1974 election.
The task of the Prime Minister was unremitting, for he was on duty every minute of the day and night and must know all that was going on in the Government.
That demanded constant attention, and yet the Prime Minister must also be able to stand back from the pressure of events and think about the future.
He recalled that he had led the Party for thirteen years, nearly eight of them as Prime Minister.
We were living in a period of change and he wanted to avoid the danger of rejecting courses of action merely because they had been considered and turned down on some earlier occasion during his leadership.
He had stayed long enough to see the first stage of the counter-inflation policy accepted and the clash and confrontation of two years earlier replaced by a new partnership.
His next sentence unobtrusively removed an argument that might have been used against me in the leadership contest.
He said the fact that he was leaving at the age of sixty should have no bearing on the choice of his successor.
I was grateful for not only was I four years  older than he but I would also be the oldest of the potential candidates.
It was a great regret to me that our partnership was to come to an end.
Except for our differences over Barbara Castle's proposals for trade union reform, he and I had worked closely together since 1964, and during my early days as Chancellor of the Exchequer when sterling was under great strain he was a considerable strength and comfort.
When we were in difficulties his sagacity and sangfroid were beyond doubt, as was his kindliness to his colleagues.
There had been a period when he allowed Barbara Castle, Dick Crossman and George Wigg, all of whom suffered from the belief that politics was a conspiracy, to influence him too much, but in later years he had broken free from them and I suddenly realised how much I had got used to him being there to shoulder the final responsibility, to feeling able to turn to him naturally for a second opinion and for well-informed advice.
Now in a short time he would be gone, and the era that had begun in the 1960S with the triumvirate of Harold Wilson, George Brown and myself would be at an end.
Only I would be left.
Three weeks later, on the day I became Prime Minister, my first impulse was to sit down in the study which had been Harold's and write him a letter of appreciation and grateful thanks.
Strangely enough, at no time did I have real doubts that I would be elected, and this determined my public attitude during the three successive ballots that were necessary.
Merlyn Rees, Gregor Mackenzie and John Cunningham, all of whom were friends who had served me as Parliamentary Private Secretaries, rallied at once and with Tom McNally, my Political Adviser, formed a small inner team to conduct the contest on my behalf.
I told them I would prefer to give no interviews to press or television.
In my view our fellow Members, who lived with us cheek by jowl, were fully aware of my strengths and weaknesses and were unlikely to be impressed by pictures of me on their TV screens dressed in a striped apron and pretending to wash up in the kitchen, as had happened during the Tory leadership election.
Coincidentally, I had a very busy schedule as Foreign Secretary at that time.
During the ensuing three weeks the French Foreign Minister, M. Sauvagnargues, was due to visit me in London for talks, as was the Turkish Foreign Minister.
There was to be a European Council 
Meeting in Luxembourg which required the attendance of both the Prime Minister and myself, and in an important improvement in Anglo-Soviet relations, Andrei Gromyko, the Soviet Foreign Minister, had accepted my invitation to pay an official visit to London-his first for some years-for discussions on East-West relations and bilateral affairs.
All of these meetings required careful preparation and I was relieved when my election team agreed with my general tactics, although they added that I must make myself available for private talks with any colleague who asked to see me.
We further agreed that we would make no promises and twist no arms, and having decided on this general strategy, my friends urged me to leave the campaign to them.
We expected Michael Foot, Roy Jenkins and Tony Wedgwood Benn to stand, but when Denis Healey and Tony Crosland also announced they were candidates, my team calculated that I would lose a number of votes to them, for the three of us were close in our thinking and attitudes.
As far as I am aware, there was good feeling between the candidates during the election, and I was somewhat surprised to read in Susan Crosland's splendid biography of her husband that Roy Hattersley had told him I was angry that he was standing, and that he must give me his support before the first ballot or I would have no interest in him.
If this happened, it was a piece of private enterprise and done without the agreement of my election team or myself.
[James Callaghan,Time and Chance (London, 1987), 390–2.]
4.
EMERGENCY COALITION
(I) SITTING PRIME MINISTER TO CONTINUE
It is doubtful whether any Government could have surmounted the world slump in trade and the financial crisis of 1931; but MacDonald's was memorably inept.
The Prime Minister allocated no fewer than three of his Cabinet colleagues to stem unemployment, which throughout 1930 rose from 1.5 to 2.75 million.
Thomas and Lansbury, however, lacked both imagination and thrust; and Mosley, who did produce a Keynesian scheme of public works, resigned after the Cabinet had rejected it as impracticable.
The misery which unemployment inflicts on human lives cannot  be measured; but its impact on the Exchequer was all too calculable.
The mounting cost to the nation of State benefits pointed, if not to bankruptcy, at least to a dangerously unbalanced budget.
Conclaves of economists argued this way and that.
But it was not until March 1931 that the Government appointed an independent committee to recommend how national expenditure could best be reduced.
Its chairman was Sir George (later Lord) May, who had spent nearly half a century in the Prudential Assurance Company, broken only by a wartime interlude administering soldiers' canteens.
After four and a half months of deliberation, the committee presented its report.
It offered neither tea nor sympathy.
To meet an estimated budget deficit for 1932 of 120 million, a majority of the committee recommended cuts in Government expenditure of 97 million: 67 million to be saved from a reduction in unemployment benefits and the remaining 30 million to be found out of taxation.
Brooding on this severe prospect, MacDonald and his colleagues departed for their summer holidays.
They were soon summoned back to London.
The May Committee's indictment of an unbalanced budget had further undermined confidence in Britain's financial stability and accelerated a run on the pound.
On 12 August, a Cabinet Committee met to act on May's recommendations.
It consisted of MacDonald, Snowden, Thomas, Henderson and William Graham, President of the Board of Trade.
The Chancellor revealed to his shocked colleagues that May had underestimated the budget deficit for 1932; it would not be 120 million but 170 million.
This unexpected blow left the Big Five (as the Cabinet Committee came to be called) with scarcely any room for manoeuvre.
Only by raising loans in New York and Paris could the Bank of England prop up the pound; but foreign bankers were unwilling to risk their money unless the British Government balanced its budget.
There would thus have to be drastic cuts in public expenditure, particularly in the soaring cost of unemployment benefits.
By 19 August, the Big Five had reluctantly agreed to economies of 79 million, of which nearly 50 million was to be met by cuts in unemployment benefits; the remainder of the budget would be balanced by additional taxation.
In proposing such unpalatable measures, albeit with reluctance, the Big Five were showing both realism and courage.
For among the rank and file of the Labour movement, no issue was more emotive than the relief of unemployment.
‘It was a bitter day,’ wrote, ‘and grievous is our just complaint against Providence.’
On Wednesday, 19 August, from 11 in the morning until 10.30 at night, the Cabinet debated the report of the Big Five.
There was a majority in favour of its recommendations, although many were unhappy about the scale of cuts in unemployment benefits.
A minority rejected any reduction whatsoever in the dole, and instead pleaded for a tariff revenue.
In spite of its indecision, the Cabinet did not reject the report, but hoped to reach an agreed solution during the next forty-eight hours.
Thursday, 20 August, brought a setback.
The Conservative and Liberal leaders told the Prime Minister that they could not countenance new taxation of the order of 100 million, and that only further substantial cuts in expenditure, particularly in unemployment benefits, could restore public confidence.
But even as the country's gold and currency reserves continued to drain away, worse was to come.
The general council of the Trades Union Congress, led by Walter Citrine and Ernest Bevin, warned MacDonald that there must be no tampering with the social services, least of all with the dole.
Thus was the Prime Minister ground between the millstones of rigid retrenchment and obstructive idealism.
The Big Five sat late that night, but failed to agree.
‘We're done,’ Thomas exclaimed in disgust as he left the Cabinet room.
‘Bloody cowards!’
For by then two of the Big Five had defected.
Henderson and Graham, in deference to the TUC, would no longer support any but the most exiguous cuts in unemployment benefits.
MacDonald was tempted to bring his frustrated administration to an end there and then.
But by the following morning, Friday, 21 August, he had recovered some of his resilience and determined to make one last appeal to the divided Cabinet.
It was in vain.
Forty-eight hours earlier, the Cabinet had agreed in principle to the Big Five's recommended savings of 70 million, of which nearly 50 million was to come from cuts in unemployment benefits.
These were now reduced to 56 million, of which only 22 million was to be cut from unemployment benefits.
The revised figures were unlikely to satisfy the Opposition, much less the foreign bankers on whom Britain depended for her rescue from imminent bankruptcy.
But the intransigent majority of Cabinet members would not be moved by threats.
Rather than compromise on welfare payments, they were prepared to resign and leave social butchery to the Tories.
Throughout these painful exchanges, the King had remained at Sandringham; it was not for the sovereign to intervene between one faction of the Cabinet and another.
But before leaving by train for his annual Scottish holiday on that Friday evening, he inquired whether the Prime Minister wished him to change his plans.
MacDonald thought that it would further alarm the public if he cancelled his journey.
That was an unwise decision; for already the leaders of the Opposition parties had told him that the Cabinet's latest financial proposals were ‘wholly unsatisfactory’, and had suggested that he should consult the King.
Hardly had the King reached Balmoral on the Saturday morning when the Prime Minister sent a message that it might after all be necessary for him to return to London.
‘I at once spoke to His Majesty,’ Wigram later wrote, ‘who quite rightly said that there was no use shilly-shallying on an occasion like this, and he would proceed south that night.’
The King afterwards explained his sudden decision in a letter to the Archbishop of Canterbury ‘When I realized how serious the situation both political and financial had become, I felt that it was necessary for me to be in close touch with my Prime Minister and of course he couldn't come here.’
It proved to be one of the most important interventions of his reign.
Within two hours of arriving back at Buckingham Palace on Sunday morning, the King received MacDonald.
‘The Cabinet is divided,’ he noted in his diary, ‘and he fears he will have to resign.’
The only gleam of hope the Prime Minister could offer was that the Cabinet had on the previous day agreed to ask the Bank of England whether an increase of cuts from 56 million to 76 million, including a ten per cent cut in unemployment benefits, would be enough to ensure an American loan.
The Bank of England had at once consulted the New York banking house of J. P. Morgan, and an answer was expected that Sunday evening.
But it was not an offer by the Cabinet, merely an inquiry.
Even if New York agreed to a loan in return for promised cuts in expenditure of 76 million, the Cabinet remained free to reject such a solution.
MacDonald's lack of trust in that slippery manoeuvre emerges from his conversation at the palace on Sunday morning.
He wrote in his diary:
King most friendly and expressed thanks and confidence.
I then reported situation and at end I told him that after tonight I might be of no further use and should resign with the whole Cabinet.
He asked if I would advise him to  send for Henderson.
I said ‘No’, which he said relieved him.
I advised him in the meantime to send for the leaders of the other two parties and have them report position from their points of view.
He said he would and would advise them strongly to support me.
I explained my hopeless parliamentary position if there were any number of resignations.
He said that he believed I was the only person who could carry the country through…
He again expressed thanks and sorrow.
The King, acting upon his Prime Minister's advice, next summoned the leaders of the Opposition parties to the palace.
Lloyd George had in 1926 succeeded Asquith as leader of a reunited Liberal Party.
Throughout the crisis of 1931, however, he was confined to bed after an operation.
His place was taken by Sir Herbert Samuel, Postmaster General during the first years of the King's reign.
He told the King that he would prefer MacDonald to remain in office in order to carry out the necessary programme of economies; but that if he failed to carry enough of his colleagues with him, then the best alternative would be for MacDonald to head a National Government containing members of all three parties.
Later that afternoon, Baldwin gave similar advice on behalf of the Conservatives and agreed that if necessary he would serve under MacDonald.
Both in his contemporary record of those conversations and in a separate note a month later, Wigram wrote that it was Samuel's clarity of exposition which had convinced the King of the need for a National Government.
That is also the view taken by Nicolson in his biography of the King.
Certainly the Liberal leader, a spare-time philosopher, put the case with conviction.
As he himself later recalled: ‘The King listened attentively.
He was quite a good listener sometimes.’
But the Prime Minister's account of his own conversation at the palace earlier that morning reveals that the King had already determined to try for a National Government headed by MacDonald.
What else could the King have meant when he told MacDonald that he was ‘the only person who could carry the country through’ and that he, the King, would strongly advise the leaders of the other parties to support him?
Even as early in the ministerial crisis as that Sunday morning, the King needed no prompting on what his course should be.
That evening, while the Prime Minister waited at No. 10 for a telegram from the New York bankers in reply to the Cabinet's inquiry, the King had a single guest to dine.
He was Mr (later Sir) Edward Peacock, one of the two directors of the Bank of England in  day-to-day touch with the Prime Minister about the deterioration in Britain's gold and currency reserves.
Left-wing partisans were later to refer to the establishment of the National Government on the following day as a ‘bankers’ ramp': and here, it seems, is evidence of just such a conspiracy.
The truth is more prosaic.
Peacock was indeed a director of the Bank of England; but he was also the partner in Baring's who two years earlier had succeeded the late Lord Revelstoke as adviser on the King's private finances.
It was in that personal role that he had been summoned to dine at short notice.
Peacock afterwards recalled that the political crisis had not been mentioned during dinner; instead, he and his sovereign, like two farmers at a cattle sale, had discussed fluctuations in the price of wheat and barley over the past ten years.
At about nine o'clock on Sunday evening, the reply of the New York bankers reached Downing Street.
It offered only a short-term credit, and that hedged about with oppressive conditions.
In plain language it meant that there could be no public loan unless the British Government was prepared to commit itself to severe retrenchment, including a cut of ten per cent in unemployment benefits.
After the Prime Minister had appealed to his colleagues to weigh the proposed reduction in the dole against the sacrifices to be made by the country as a whole, each was invited to give his opinion.
Eleven ministers supported the cuts; nine, including Henderson and Graham, Clynes and Lansbury, rejected them.
No Government could continue on so wafer-thin a majority.
MacDonald declared that he would at once see the King and advise him to hold a conference on the following morning attended by Baldwin, Samuel and himself.
On his way out he said: ‘I'm off to the Palace to throw in my hand.’
Twenty-four hours later he was still Prime Minister-but of a National Government.
There can be no doubt that MacDonald truly intended to resign.
For the past two days he had been saying so to all who would listen.
He telephoned his son Malcolm with the message on both Saturday and Sunday.
At Buckingham Palace on Sunday morning he declared that he had no other course, and afterwards wrote in his diary: ‘I commit political suicide to save the crisis.’
He repeated that there was no alternative when again received by the King late that night.
And on returning to Downing Street for talks with the Opposition leaders, he spoke of his death warrant.
Were he to join a Government  of Conservatives and Liberals, he continued, he would be a ridiculous figure, unable to command support and bringing odium on them as well as on himself.
Whatever else persuaded MacDonald to head a National Government, it was not premeditated ambition.
Yet that audience with the King on Sunday night did produce an improvement in spirits if not a change of mind.
Peacock, who had not yet left the palace after dining with the King, noticed that the Prime Minister had gone into the King's room like a shattered man-'scared and unbalanced' was Wigram's phrase- and emerged with head erect and confidence restored.
For the second time that day, his sovereign had assured him that he was the only man to lead the country through the crisis and had asked him to reconsider his resignation.
The King added that he knew MacDonald could depend on Conservative and Liberal support, and he agreed to preside over a meeting of the three party leaders on the following day.
Until then MacDonald must withhold his resignation.
Next morning at 10 o'clock, when MacDonald, Baldwin and Samuel assembled in the Indian Room of the palace, the Prime Minister repeated his by now familiar litany; indeed, he had the resignation of the entire Cabinet in his pocket.
For the third time in twenty-four hours, the King replied that it was out of the question.
He told MacDonald that by remaining at his post with such colleagues as were still faithful to him, his position and reputation would be much more enhanced than if he succumbed; the Prime Minister must come to some arrangement with Baldwin and Samuel to form a National Emergency Government which would restore British credit and the confidence of foreigners.
And in his best quarterdeck manner, the King impressed on the three party leaders that before they left the palace there should be a communique to end speculation at home and abroad.
Then he withdrew to his own rooms to let them get on with it.
Rather more than an hour later, the party leaders sent a message asking the King to return.
They had drawn up a memorandum agreeing to a National Government led by MacDonald; it would dedicate itself to economies of 70 million, including a cut of ten per cent in the dole.
Although supported by both the Conservatives and the Liberals, the new ministry would not be a Coalition but a ‘cooperation of individuals’, to last only as long as the emergency.
It was to be followed by a general election which the three parties  would fight on their individual platforms.
The King was pleased by his stage management.
Wigram's note on the meeting with the three statesmen concludes:
His Majesty congratulated them on the solution of this difficult problem, and pointed out that while France and other countries existed for weeks without a Government, in this country our constitution is so generous that leaders of Parties.
after fighting one another for months in the House of Commons, were ready to meet together under the roof of the Sovereign and sink their own differences for a common good and arrange as they had done this morning for a National Government to meet one of the gravest crises that the British Empire had yet been asked to face.
With that comforting little homily, the King sent them on their way.
At 12 noon MacDonald returned to Downing Street, where the Cabinet awaited him.
Still hopelessly divided, they expected to hear that he had tendered their collective resignations to the King.
Had he not left them the night before, exclaiming: ‘I am off to the Palace to throw in my hand’?
Instead he announced that he was to lead a National Government.
‘Consternation when I reported,’ he wrote in his diary.
That morning there had been a renewed run on the Bank, and he asked his colleagues to share with him the burdens both of office and self-sacrifice.
Only three agreed to do so: Snowden, Thomas and Sankey.
But that token Labour force was enough to justify the formation of a National Government in name as well as in purpose.
‘Looking worn and weary’, as Wigram described him, MacDonald went back to the palace at four o'clock that afternoon.
At last he was allowed to resign as Prime Minister of the Labour Government, but only in order to kiss hands as Prime Minister of a National administration.
When its members received their seals of office two days later, MacDonald's mournful countenance was accentuated by his frock coat and black tie.
‘You look as if you were attending your own funeral’, the King chaffed him.
‘Put on a white tie and try to think it is your wedding.’
The Prime Minister was not to be comforted.
‘This is a lonely job,’ he wrote.
Without the King's initiative there would have been no National Government.
Three times in twenty-four hours MacDonald tried to resign and three times the King dissuaded him.
Then he gave way and agreed to remain Prime Minister, an eminence for which he professed no enthusiasm.
The motives of public men are rarely as base or as quixotic as their enemies would have us believe; and no  portrait of MacDonald is complete which depicts him as the ambitious, fawning courtier of Labour mythology or the martyred patriot of his own invention.
He did not become less willing to relinquish office during those forty-eight hours of crisis; but he did become less willing to relinquish office at the behest of Arthur Henderson.
As one of the Big Five, Henderson had at first accepted the need for cutting the dole in order to save the credit of his country; then he changed his mind under pressure from the trade unions and carried half the Cabinet with him.
‘They chose the easy path of irresponsibility and leave the burdens to others,’ MacDonald wrote as his divided ministry broke up.
And on the following day he told Margaret Bondfield: ‘Until there is some new spirit in the Labour Movement, a Labour Government will run away from two things:(I)[At]the orders of the T.U.C. and (2) An awkward crisis.’
[Kenneth Rose,King Ceorge V (London, 1983), 371–7.]
(2) A NEW PRIME MINISTER
Lloyd George did not receive Asquith's letter until the following morning-Tuesday, December 5th [1916].
He replied at length and almost at once.
There was no question of his accepting the new situation.
He intended to fight; and, to a much greater extent than Asquith had done, he wrote a manifesto and not a letter:
As all delay is fatal in war, I place my office without further parley at your disposal.
It is with great personal regret that I have come to this conclusion.
In spite of mean and unworthy insinuations to the contrary-insinuations which I fear are always inevitable in the case of men who hold prominent but not primary positions in any administration-I have felt a strong personal attachment to you as my chief.
As you yourself said, on Sunday, we have acted together for ten years and never had a quarrel, although we have had many a grave difference on questions of policy.
You have treated me with great courtesy and kindness; for all that I thank you.
Nothing would have induced me to part now except an overwhelming sense that the course of action which has been pursued has put the country- and not merely the country, but throughout the world, the principles for which you and I have always stood throughout our political lives-in the greatest peril that has ever overtaken them.
As I am fully conscious of the importance of preserving national unity, I propose to give your Government complete support in the vigorous  prosecution of the War; but unity without action is nothing but futile carnage, and I cannot be responsible for that.
Vigour and vision are the supreme need at this hour.
This letter of strong but not unexpected challenge reached Asquith soon after noon.
So did one from Balfour, written from a sickbed in Carlton Gardens.
This announced, quietly but determinedly, that Balfour did not want Asquith's backing for the Admiralty:
I am well aware that you do not personally share Lloyd George's view in this connection.
But I am quite clear that the new system should have a trial under the most favourable possible circumstances; and the mere fact that the new Chairman of the War Council did prefer, and, as far as I know still prefers, a different arrangement is, to my mind, quite conclusive, and leaves me in no doubt as to the manner in which I can best assist the Government which I desire to support.
It is doubtful whether Asquith fully assimilated the shift of allegiance which this letter quietly announced.
He saw Balfour and Lloyd George in such different lights that, the issue of the Admiralty apart, the idea of an alliance between them hardly entered his head.
In any event he had little time to give careful immediate consideration to the letter; he merely wrote a short reply pressing Balfour to reconsider his position.
At 12.30 Crewe arrived at Downing Street.
He had been to Buckingham Palace for a Privy Council, and he was able to inform Asquith that the King still hoped for a solution without a change of Prime Minister.
Then, at one o'clock, all the Liberal ministers with the exception of the Secretary of State for War assembled.
Lloyd George was resentful at the absence of a summons, but as he had chosen to work almost exclusively with Unionists during the preceding weeks, this resentment was hardly justified.
The business of the meeting was to consider the situation created by Lloyd George's letter of resignation.
Montagu apart, there was unanimous agreement that his challenge must be resisted, and that Asquith could best do this by resigning.
The outcome, it was believed, would then turn on the attitude of the Unionist ministers.
Montagu's alternative proposal was that the King should be asked to convene a conference of Asquith, Lloyd George, Bonar Law and Henderson.
‘My suggestion was derided,’ he recorded, ‘and McKenna most helpfully asked me if I wanted four Prime Ministers, or, if not, which one I wanted.’
The attitude of the Unionist ministers was made clear during the afternoon.
At 1l o'clock in the morning they had met-Curzon, Cecil, Long and Chamberlain-in the Secretary of State's room at the India Office.
At three o'clock the ‘three C's’ were summoned to Downing Street.
Asquith asked them two questions.
Were they prepared to continue in a Government from which both Lloyd George and Bonar Law had resigned; and what would be their attitude towards Lloyd George if he attempted to form an administration?
To the first question, in Austen Chamberlain's words,
we replied that our only object was to secure a Government on such lines and with such a prospect of stability that it might reasonably be expected to be capable of carrying on the war; that in our opinion his Government, weakened by the resignations of Lloyd George and Bonar Law and by all that had gone on during the past weeks, offered no such prospect and we answered the question therefore with a perfectly definite negative.
‘This was evidently a great blow to him,’ Chamberlain added.
‘Had we replied in the affirmative, he would clearly have been prepared to make the attempt…’
To the second question their reply was equally discouraging.
In effect they said that if Lloyd George looked like succeeding, they would join him.
Cecil urged Asquith to do the same, but, Chamberlain said, Asquith ‘would not allow (him) to develop this idea, which he rejected with indignation and even with scorn.’
The three Unionists then crossed Downing Street for a meeting with Bonar Law.
From this meeting they sent back Curzon with a formal resolution, urging Asquith's immediate resignation, and saying that he must in any event accept and publish theirs.
In the meantime Asquith had received Balfour's second letter, written at 4.0 p.m.
Once again the style was casual but the intention was firm.
Balfour would offer no opposition to Lloyd George.
In these circumstances immediate resignation was the only course open to Asquith.
He announced this to the Liberal ministers who had once again congregated in 10, Downing Street.
Perhaps one or two of them were so blinded by hatred of Lloyd George as to believe that the move would still show up his impotence.
But this was not the general view.
Montagu testified that they never seriously doubted Lloyd George's ability to form a Government.
And it was certainly not Asquith's view.
He decided to resign, not as a tactical manoeuvre, but because he did not have sufficient support to carry on.
He gave effect to his decision at seven o'clock that evening.
He had been Prime Minister for eight years and 241 days.
‘The Prime Minister came to see me,’ the King recorded in his diary,
and placed his resignation in my hands, which I accepted with great regret.
He said that he had tried to arrange matters with Lloyd George about the War Committee all day, but was unable to.
All his colleagues both Liberal and Unionist, urged him to resign as it was the only solution to the difficulty.
I fear that it will cause great panic in the City and in America and do harm to the Allies.
It is a great blow to me and will I fear buck up the Germans.
Back in Downing Street, Asquith dined with Crewe.
The King in the meantime had asked for a constitutional memorandum, dealing with a new Prime Minister's right to a dissolution, from Haldane, and had summoned Bonar Law.
His interview with Law went as badly as it is easily possible to imagine.
They argued about a dissolution, about the course of the war, about the relations between politicians and the military.
Having established this happy basis of almost universal disagreement, the King performed his constitutional duty by asking Law to form a Government.
The Unionist leader then went immediately to see Lloyd George, with whom he had conferred before his visit to the Palace.
Afterwards he went to Downing Street where he called Asquith out from dinner and asked him if he would serve under him.
Asquith demurred, and also responded discouragingly to a suggestion that they might all serve under Balfour.
He did not believe that any such combinations would work, but he did not close his mind on continuing consultation.
Later that evening Bonar Law again saw Lloyd George, this time at Carson's house.
The following morning (Wednesday, December 6th) they went together to see Balfour, still in his sickroom.
It was probably this occasion which prompted Lloyd George to write of Balfour: ‘I confess that I underrated the passionate attachment to his country which burnt under that calm, indifferent, and apparently frigid exterior’; upon which Balfour's latest biographer has somewhat severely commented: ‘By ‘passionate attachment to his country,’ Lloyd George, presumably meant Balfour's backing for him as Prime Minister…’
But this may be a little hard.
Such a firm commitment was not sought at this stage.
A Buckingham Palace conference was to take place that afternoon.
There is doubt as to where this idea originated.
Beaverbrook said that it came from Henderson; Balfour said that it came from Bonar Law; Law's biographer said that it came from Balfour; and Crewe said that it came from Montagu and Derby.
Whoever sowed the seed, the conference was due to meet within a few hours.
Balfour's role was likely to be crucial.
He had kept himself the most aloof from the crisis so far.
The main concern of Bonar Law and Lloyd George was that he should give no support for an Asquith restoration.
Law that morning, according to Montagu, ‘had objected to any Conference to put Asquith back.’
They went away reassured.
Balfour saw the King for half an hour before the others came.
He gave his opinion that no one man could be effectively Prime Minister, leader of the House of Commons, and chairman of the War Committee.
It was arranged that he should open the discussion with a statement of this and other views.
Then the other participants-Asquith, Lloyd George, Bonar Law and Henderson arrived.
Beaverbrook, presumably informed by Law, wrote that Asquith's mood differed from that of the other members of ‘this grave assembly’.
‘His manner in fact was fairly like that of a schoolboy who has got an unexpected half-holiday.
He was jocular with everybody.’
This is to some extent contradicted by Lloyd George, who subsequently wrote: ‘It is now a matter of history how we expressed our readiness to serve under Mr Balfour-all of us except Mr Asquith, who asked indignantly, ‘What is the proposal?
That I who have held first place for eight years should be asked to take a secondary position.’
This broke up the conference.’
Whatever else this interchange may be, it is not a matter of history.
There is no hint in the contemporary accounts of either Balfour or Stamfordham that such a conversation ever occurred; indeed it seems unlikely that the premiss of a Balfour premiership was ever before the conference.
Lord Stamfordham's memorandum describes how Asquith was urged by all the other participants to serve under Bonar Law, and then continues:
Mr Asquith maintained that the Prime Minister and nobody else could preside over the War Committee, otherwise decisions might be arrived at which he could not agree to, which would result in friction and delay…
Mr Asquith continued by denouncing in serious terms the action of the Press.
The Prime Minister's work was sufficiently heavy and responsible without  being subjected to daily vindictive, merciless attacks in the columns of the newspapers, and he urged that whatever government might come into office, measures should be taken to prevent the continuance of this Press tyranny.
He had been accused of clinging to Office, but he appealed to all those present to say whether such a charge was justifiable.
He could honestly say that on waking this morning he was thankful to feel he was a free man.
Mr Asquith referred in touching terms to the unquestioning confidence the King had invariably placed in him.
of which he had received His Majesty's assurance only two days ago.
He deeply valued it, and only hoped that his successor might enjoy the same generous trust and support which His Majesty had graciously reposed in him.
This may not have been very constructive, but, except towards the newspaper proprietors, it did not sound particularly bitter.
Furthermore, it is an account almost exactly borne out by Balfour.
But what next?
The King, after Asquith had spoken, pointed out that no decision had been reached.
Balfour attempted to sum up:
(He) said that he considered it was impossible for Mr Asquith to form a Government after what Mr Bonar Law had said about his party.
A Government without Mr Lloyd George was impossible.
Apparently Mr Bonar Law was ready to form a Government if Mr Asquith would agree to accept a subordinate place, but, failing this, he would propose that Mr Lloyd George should form an Administration.
The result of the meeting was an agreement that Mr Asquith should consider the proposals made to him, and let Mr Bonar Law know as soon as possible whether he would join the Government under him.
If the answer was in the negative, Mr Bonar Law would not form a Government, but Mr Lloyd George would endeavour to do so.
Again Balfour's account is in substantial agreement, although he adds the gloss that when, at one stage in his summing up he referred to his assumption that Asquith would not serve under either Law or Lloyd George, Asquith intervened to say that he had not gone quite so far as that; he must consult his friends before giving a final answer.
The conference broke up at 4.30.
Asquith returned to Downing Street and immediately began this consultation.
There was a full turn up of Liberal ministers, with the exception of Lloyd George.
Henderson was also present.
Decisions were taken in two stages.
First it was agreed (the meeting in this respect giving the impression of being a little behind events) that Asquith should make no attempt  to form a Government without Lloyd George and the Unionists.
Then came the question of whether he would serve in a subordinate post.
Crewe, Grey, McKenna, Runciman, Buckmaster and McKinnon Wood all urged him not to.
Three others (Harcourt, Samuel and Tennant) apparently indicated silent agreement with this view.
Montagu and Henderson were alone in dissenting, not only from the advice tendered but also from the implied assumption that if Asquith did not serve, none of the others present would either.
‘Mr Asquith’, Crewe recorded, ‘entirely concurred with our statements…’
He did so, the account continued, not out of‘personal dignity or amour propre ’.
What, then, were his reasons?
First, he could hope to exercise no real influence in the new Government.
Its tone would be set by those who were most distrustful of his leadership.
It was doubtful whether he would even be a member of the War Committee.
He saw no prospect of avoiding for long a head-on collision.
It was better to stand out at the beginning than to go in with the expectation that he would soon have to provoke a further crisis by resignation.
Secondly, if on the other hand he were completely to subordinate himself to the new Government his influence in Parliament and the country would quickly be eroded.
This was not a selfish consideration.
Politicians exist to exercise influence.
Unless they believe that they can do so beneficially they have no raison d'etre .
Asquith thought that the erosion of his would lead to the growth of an irresponsible opposition, undermining the near unanimity of support for the war effort.
This may have been something of a rationalisation of his instinctive desires, but it was a perfectly defensible attitude.
While not the most encouraging offer which a Prime Minister can receive, support from outside is a time-honoured formula and one which has frequently been used with much less excuse than Asquith had on this occasion.
Furthermore he interpreted it in such a way that ‘support’ was not an empty word.
He did not cause Lloyd George a tenth of the trouble that Lloyd George, outside, would have caused him.
There was a third consideration, not mentioned by Crewe, in Asquith's mind.
He believed that so long as he remained in the Government the Press attacks would continue and that his supposedly malevolent influence would be blamed for every failure.
This would further undermine his position both with his colleagues  and with the public.
It would be an extreme form of responsibility without power.
By six o'clock Asquith had conveyed his decision, in a letter, to Bonar Law.
The importance of the communication was symbolised by Lord Curzon, who had come across to 10, Downing Street to hear the news, acting as messenger boy.
At seven Law went to Buckingham Palace and declined the King's commission.
At 7.30 the commission was passed on to Lloyd George.
Within 24 hours he had succeeded in discharging it.
‘Mr Lloyd George came…and informed me that he is able to form an administration and told me the proposed names of his colleagues,’ the King wrote in his diary.
‘He will have a strong Government.
I then appointed him Prime Minister and First Lord of the Treasury.’
The new Government was principally but not exclusively a Unionist one.
The War Cabinet was composed of Lloyd George, Curzon, Milner, Bonar Law and Henderson.
Carson, although not after all included in this body, became First Lord of the Admiralty.
Balfour, directed by the pistol's point, moved with speed but dignity from the Admiralty to the Foreign Office.
No Liberal member of the late Cabinet (except for Lloyd George himself), not even Montagu, joined the new Government.
None was formally invited, except for a late and not very attractive offer to Montagu, but Lloyd George would probably have been glad to have two or three of them had he believed that they would accept.
A few lesser-known Liberals were brought in, and there were two Labour heads of departments, apart from Henderson.
[Roy Jenkins,Asquith (London, Fontana edn., 1967), 510–19.]
If a new Prime Minister were needed for an emergency coalition and no obvious successor existed, the Sovereign would have to make the best choice possible.
In deference to democracy, and if time permitted, perhaps the House of Commons as a whole might elect the new Prime Minister .
5.
LOSS OF THE PARTY LEADERSHIP
If a Prime Minister were to be ousted from the Leadership of his party, he would have to resign as Prime Minister.
A formal party vote might not be necessary to remove him: senior members of his party  might make it clear to the Prime Minister that he no longer had the confidence of the parliamentary party (as, in a sense, happened with Churchill in 1955), or the lack of support might become clear as the result of a Commons vote (as in 1940, when Chamberlain obtained a drastically-reduced majority in a vote of confidence).
A formal party Leadership vote could take place against the wishes of the Leader and Prime Minister in any of the main parties: the constitutional problems could be particularly acute in the Labour Party.
Although at the time it was seen as no more than the correction of an anomaly, only at the Labour Party's annual conference in 1979 was the formal position of the Leader of the Parliamentary Labour Party brought into line with the de facto position by his being accorded the title of ‘Leader of the Labour Party’.
The changes in the method of electing the Leader, introduced at the special conference at Wembley in January 1 98 1, and the 1 980 requirements about reselection of candidates have, however, possibly laid a constitutional minefield.
Broadly, the rules require that an electoral college choose the Leader.
A weighted voting system is used, giving seventy per cent of the votes to the Party outside Parliament-forty per cent to trade unions and other affiliated organizations, thirty per cent to the constituency Labour parties-leaving the previously autonomous Parliamentary Labour Party (PLP) with only thirty per cent.
The system was first used in 1981 to elect the Deputy Leader.
In 1983, on the retirement of Mr Foot, Mr Kinnock was elected Leader by the electoral college and Mr Hattersley was elected Deputy Leader.
This system could present three separate constitutional problems.
The first is centred on the attitude of the PLP.
Now, the Leader of that parliamentary party with an overall majority is entitled to be asked to form a government.
Under the old system, the Leader of the PLP would be seen to enjoy the confidence of that body because it had elected him through an exhaustive ballot.
The obvious danger under the 1981 arrangements is that, given the overwhelming percentage of votes from outside the Commons, a new Leader might have little support in the PLP.
Leaving aside for present purposes the polarizing of the different parts of the Party which would take place, the constitutional issue may be highlighted by examining a hypothetical House of Commons.
Suppose that a Labour Prime Minister, A, with an overall majority gives notice of  his intention to retire as soon as a new Leader is elected (following the Wilson precedent of 1976).
The electoral college elects B, mainly through trade union and constituency votes.
But it is obvious, through public statements, media polls, and so on, not only that B would have fared badly under the old PLP electoral system, but that another MP, C, would have won convincingly under it, because in this example the PLP is to the right (or to the left) of the Party outside the House of Commons.
B enjoys the full-hearted support of only a small percentage of the PLP.
Assuming, as it seems safe to do, that the opposition parties would not support B as Prime Minister in the Commons, his parliamentary majority just does not exist.
What ‘right’ would B have to become Prime Minister?
One plausible result might, of course, be that the PLP would make the best of it, tolerating B as their Leader because he was the choice of the Party.
The consequences of rejecting him could be (a) a fatal split in the Labour Party as a whole;(b) an utterly confused state of party politics in the Commons; and-most serious of all in the immediate term for Labour-(c) the danger that the Queen might refuse to appoint B Prime Minister because of his obvious lack of a Commons majority.
Constitutional development could be thrown back to before 1965, with the Queen exercising the prerogative of choice based on the best advice available to her.
No one in the Labour Party would want that; the Party outside Parliament would be outraged; the Sovereign would be seen, however unavoidably, to be taking sides.
And there would be no solution in appointing a Labour Prime Minister conditionally on a request for a dissolution, because were Labour to be returned to power the Leadership question would still be there.
A compromise (which by definition would not satisfy everyone) can be suggested.
It would avoid, on the one hand, the use of the prerogative of choice in appointing C as Prime Minister (not as Leader of the Party but as the Leader of the majority of the PLP) and, on the other, an automatic use of prerogative of appointment to install B (as Leader of the Party), knowing that he had no Commons majority.
The PLP could conduct a poll of its members to test which man had the greater support.
Presumably, in the hypothesis presented, C would win and he would become Prime Minister.
Even as this is written, howls of anger from Labour ranks can be imagined, but every political party must remember that i
A second difficulty could arise from the Labour Party rule (again dating from 1981) that a Leader in office as Prime Minister can be challenged for the Leadership at a Party conference if an election is requested by a majority of the conference on a card vote.
Now it could be argued that this likelihood is so remote as not to be worthy of consideration.
After all, the Conservative Party has had provision for electing a new Leader while in office since 1975 and it has not been used in that circumstance.
In 1975, Mr Heath, as Leader, accepted amended rules which had been drawn up under Lord Home's chairmanship and announced that the first ballot would be held on 4 February 1975 (the Party, of course, then being in opposition).
Of relevance here is the rule that a ballot for the Conservative Leadership must take place if the post is vacant, or within twenty-eight days of the beginning of every session, or between three to six months after the opening of every new Parliament.
(In the event, Mr Heath, who had lost three general elections, lost the 1975 ballot to Mrs Thatcher.)
There is thus a Conservative requirement of an annual election-although, of course, if there is no challenger, no election will be necessary.
The Conservative Party has no record of loyalty to failed Leaders or Prime Ministers.
So is it safe to be sanguine about Labour's procedures, given the mood which deepened in the early 1980S and which strives for even greater accountability in the Labour Party, of which this rule is an example?
I suggest that an attempt may well be made at some future Labour Party conference to dislodge a Labour Prime Minister.
If it were successful, he would have to resign as Prime Minister.
Whether his successor took over smoothly would depend on the issues discussed above in relation to the Leadership changing hands in a hypothetical House of Commons.
The last major problem potentially caused by changes in Labour rules in 1980 is that every Labour MP must undergo a reselection process.
This must happen once in each Parliament, usually not later than thirty-six months after the last general election.
It is very unlikely that a Labour Prime Minister would be deprived of his seat in this way, but it deserves to be noted that, however unwittingly, a piece of machinery has been created which could be used locally to deprive a Labour Prime Minister of his seat.
If this were ever done, then unless some other constituency took him on board in time for  the general election, or perhaps unless he stood and won in his constituency as some kind of independent Labour candidate with at least PLP support, then, on the declaration of the result in his constituency, he would lose any right to remain Prime Minister.
Labour might be in the extraordinary position of winning a general election with its Leader outside Parliament.
[Brazier,Constitutional Practice , 18–21.]
(I) The desirability of contesting the constituency for parliament shall be considered by the Executive Committee of this party in consultation with the National Executive Committee or its officers prior to the procedure laid down in this clause being set in motion.
(2) The General Committee shall be asked to give authority to the Executive Committee of this party in co-operation with the National Executive Committee to secure nominations for the candidature.
(3) The normal procedure shall be as follows:
(a)
A circular, in terms prescribed by the National Executive Committee, shall be sent to affiliated and party organisations entitled to appoint delegates to the General Committee inviting nominations.
Such nominations to be made within a period of time and under conditions mentioned therein.
(b)
Affiliated and party organisations entitled to appoint delegates to the General Committee and the Executive Committee of this party, may nominate an individual member of the Labour Party who is not disqualified under the constitution of the Labour Party, or under the decisions of party conference as a parliamentary candidate.
(c)
No nomination shall be valid unless made on the form in terms prescribed by the National Executive Committee and bearing thereon the consent in writing of the member nominated.
In the event of the name of a member nominated being on the official panel of available parliamentary candidates of an affiliated organisation the consent in writing of the Executive Committee thereof must also be obtained and sent in with the form of nomination.
(d)
Prior to a meeting of the General Committee being  called to consider the nominations, the Executive Committee of this party shall consult with the National Executive Committee or its officer to determine the validity of the nominations received.
(e)
The Executive Committee of this party may tender such advice as it deems necessary to the General Committee on the nominations found to be valid, and may suggest to the General Committee the manner in which they shall be dealt with provided that all valid nominations shall be placed before that body for its consideration at an ordinary meeting.
The notice calling such meeting must indicate the business to be transacted.
The General Committee shall then fix a date for a special meeting to decide which nomination, if any, shall be submitted to the National Executive Committee for endorsement as prospective parliamentary candidate.
(f)
The last day for the appointment of delegates to attend this special meeting of the General Committee shall be decided in accordance with regulations sanctioned by the National Executive Committee.
(g)
To be eligible to attend a meeting of the General Committee referred to in paragraphs (e) or (h), a person must have been a member of this Constituency Labour Party for at least twelve months prior to the date of the relevant meeting and have attended at least one previous meeting of the General Committee during the same period.
(h)
The special meeting of the General Committee to select a prospective candidate shall be convened by circular in terms prescribed by the National Executive Committee.
It shall be attended by a representative of the National Executive Committee, appointed for the purpose.
When a vote is necessary to determine which nomination is to be sent to the National Executive Committee for endorsement, it shall be taken by an eliminating ballot on the basis of one delegate, one vote.
(j)
The selection of a prospective parliamentary candidate shall not be regarded as completed until the name of the member selected has been placed before a meeting of the National Executive Committee, and his or her  selection has been duly endorsed.
Until such endorsement has been received this party shall not introduce its prospective candidate to the public.
(4) Where no valid nominations are received, or when an emergency arises, or when the Executive Committee of this party or the National Executive Committee are of opinion that the interests of the Labour Party demand the suspension of the procedure laid down in section (3) of this clause, normal procedure may be dispensed with by the National Executive Committee.
(5) If a parliamentary by-election occurs in the constituency the procedure laid down in section (3) of this clause shall be suspended and the National Executive Committee shall co-operate with the Executive Committee of this party in the nomination of a candidate.
The National Executive Committee may, if it deems it necessary in the interests of the Labour Party, advise the Executive Committee of this party to select a nomination it may submit to it.
The National Executive Committee may also give advice and guidance on any special issue to be raised or in the conduct of the campaign during the by-election.
(6) In accordance with the constitution of the Labour Party the General Committee of this party or the executive committee of a nationally affiliated organisation shall by resolution formally accept responsibility for the election expenses of the prospective candidate selected and a copy of such resolution shall be attached to the application of the constituency party to the National Executive Committee for endorsement.
(7)
(a)
If this party is represented in parliament by a member of the Parliamentary Labour Party, the procedure set out in section (3) of this clause (for the selection of a prospective parliamentary candidate) shall be set in motion not later than thirty-six months after the last time the said Member of Parliament was elected.
Where a member of the Parliamentary Labour Party is representing this party in parliament for the first time the above (normal) procedure shall be set in motion not earlier than eighteen months after his or her election as Member of Parliament.
(b)
The Member of Parliament shall be eligible for nomination for selection as the prospective parliamentary candidate and, whether nominated or not, he or she shall be entitled  to appear as if they had been nominated before the special meeting of the General Committee convened in accordance with section (3) of this clause and to be considered for selection as the prospective parliamentary candidate.
(c)
If the said Member of Parliament is not selected as the prospective parliamentary candidate at the special meeting referred to in paragraph (b) above to be the prospective parliamentary candidate, he or she shall have the right to appeal to the National Executive Committee on the grounds, and only on the grounds, that the procedure laid down in these rules and the general provision of the constitution and rules have not been properly carried out.
(d)
Where there is a formal announcement of a royal proclamation to dissolve parliament before the special meeting referred to in paragraph (b) above has been held the provisions of this section (other than this paragraph) shall be suspended and the said Member of Parliament shall be reselected as the prospective parliamentary candidate unless he or she intimated his or her intention to retire in which case the provisions of section (4) of this clause shall apply.
(8) Where the prospective parliamentary candidate has been selected and subsequently intimates his or her intention not to stand for parliament in the constituency as the Labour Party candidate at the next election, the procedure set out in section (3) of this clause shall (subject to section (4) of this clause) be forthwith set in motion again.
(9) When this party has selected the prospective parliamentary candidate, section (3) of this clause shall be applicable only when section (8) applies or, having received a written request from the General Committee of this party for permission to reconsider the selection of the prospective parliamentary candidate, the National Executive Committee has decided that in its opinion there are changed circumstances relating to the prospective parliamentary candidate since his or her selection, and has given authority to this party to convene a special meeting of the General Committee in accordance with regulations sanctioned by the National Executive Committee to consider a resolution that the prospective candidate selected previously shall not be the candidate at the next general  election.
The prospective parliamentary candidate against whom such action is taken shall have the right of appeal to the National Executive Committee, which committee shall have the power to confirm, vary, or reverse the action taken by the General Committee.
(10) An election shall cancel any parliamentary candidature.
(11) Every parliamentary candidate must undertake to stand as ‘the Labour Party candidate’ independent of all other political parties and, if elected, join the Parliamentary Labour Party.
(12) This clause shall be read with clause X of the constitution of the Labour Party, and the provisions of the latter shall apply to this party.
[Rules for Constituency Labour Parties and Branches, cl.
XIV.]
6.
A HUNG PARLIAMENT
(I) HUNG PARLIAMENTS THIS CENTURY AND THEIR CONSEQUENCES
(a) January 1910 Party Seats Liberal 275 Conservative 273 Irish Nationalist 82 Labour 40 (b) December 1910 Party Seats Conservative 272 Liberal 272 Irish Nationalist 84 Labour 42 The Liberal government which had taken office in 1905 won the 1906 general election by a landslide, and remained in office after the two  inconclusive general elections of 1910 with tacit support from the small parties .
(c) 1923 Party Seats Conservative 258 Labour 191 Liberal 159 Others Several outcomes were theoretically possible, but neither Labour (under MacDonald) nor the Conservatives (under Baldwin, who had played an important part in breaking up the Lloyd George coalition in 1922) would countenance a coalition.
The Liberals would not support the Conservatives, who had campaigned for protection.
A minority Labour government, with tacit Liberal support, was the result .
What had happened was that Birkenhead, Austen Chamberlain, Worthington Evans, Derby and Joynson Hicks had, together or separately (and, according to Bridgeman, backed by Beaverbrook and Rothermere) succeeded in persuading Balfour that Baldwin intended to resign; that he should, if asked by the King, advise him to choose not MacDonald nor Asquith, but another Conservative- Derby or Austen Chamberlain, because he held Baldwin personally to blame rather than his party; further, they had so worked on Stamfordham, that if Baldwin had gone to resign at once, the advice tendered to the King by his private secretary would have been the same.
It is not certain how many of the leading members were privy to this scheme: Lloyd-Greame seems to have sat on the fence; Hoare, Wood, Cave, Salisbury and some of the other peers stood out for Baldwin, but this was not contained in the advice which convinced Stamfordham.
Of course the plot depended on Balfour, and on the King following his private secretary's advice.
In the circumstances the latter was unlikely: he had not done so in May on an infinitely more difficult decision.
But the intention of the rebels was to bundle Baldwin out of the leadership before opinions had time to come to terms with the election results.
The plotters represented the hard core of the right wing.
In other  sections of the party there was no lack of advice, only of agreement.
Neville Chamberlain wrote that the Cabinet was a nest of intrigue, which was, considering everything, an understatement.
His voice was cast on the side of moderation-he ‘was clear on all grounds that Labour should be given office’.
He added, cynically, that if Labour came in ‘it would be too weak to do much harm, but not too weak to get discredited’.
On the fringe of the political scene, the Daily Mail campaigned vigorously for a coalition under a new leader and various important figures in the City of London let it be known that a Socialist Government would be a financial disaster.
Walter Long favoured an Asquith government with Conservative support and Austen Chamberlain hoped, rather improbably, that the King would call on Asquith and MacDonald together.
Balfour (who was not wholly convinced by the plotters and who refused finally to do their bidding) sent a message to Baldwin to say that the constitutional course was to meet Parliament.
His reversal astonished Derby, who realised that the plot was dead and wrote at once to Austen Chamberlain to explain that he intended to turn about and support Baldwin's decision to meet Parliament.
The message which Balfour sent was that, ‘He is also of the opinion that it will be a serious danger if the Socialist Party is allowed to assume office at the present time and he thinks every means ought to be taken to avert the Parliamentary defeat which would bring them into office in your place.
’ 'This meant,’so Balfour advised, ‘a working arrangement with Asquith, which he believed could be done without loss of dignity or authority.’
Such an alliance was popular with many back benchers:James Hope, lately Chairman of Ways and Means, suggested, ‘a composite Government but not a coalition.
Let some patriot of repute (Grey?) form a Government of whomsoever he pleases or can get.
Let Liberals and Conservatives take office under him without prejudice to their party allegiance- but let the leaders stand out, keeping their party machinery intact, and promise support say for a year only.
At all hazards we must avoid the creation of an amalgamated ‘bourgeois block’ which leaves the Socialists as the sole alternative.
This was Bonar's greatest fear…’
Meanwhile, to forestall the wreck, the party secretariat prepared to wind up the secret Supply and Transport Committee before the Labour Party uncovered its strike-breaking organisation.
Most remarkable of all the suggestions put to Baldwin came from  Lord Haldane, who only a month later was to take office as Lord Chancellor in the Labour Government, and who advised him to continue in office; ‘It may seem the odder in as much as I have supported the Labour Party and free trade through this general election.
But you are placed in a great difficulty.
The King's Government has to be carried on and I think that you are the only man who has a chance of doing this successfully.
I think it especially because you are much esteemed, even by your political opponents, for your exceptional personal qualities.’
Baldwin's own opinion of the Labour Party had been shown by his conduct during fifteen years in the House of Commons.
He believed that it was the official Opposition and had an undoubted right to take its place as the next in line.
He was close to MacDonald and trusted him to respect the constitution.
He was far too honourable to approach Asquith with a deal which could only mean the compromise of both their principles for a period of artificial power, not unlike the last years of the Coalition; and he saw that an anti-socialist alliance could only lead, in the end, to a major Labour victory.
But to make certain that MacDonald would be chosen, he had to be sure of his own party and the Liberals.
G. M. Young suggested that he wavered before coming to his courageous decision not to resign at once.
On the contrary, he could do nothing else without playing into the hands of those plotting his downfall and a return to a form of Coalition.
He judged Asquith's sense of probity correctly-meeting him in the Travellers' Club later, the Liberal leader said ‘You have done quite right.’
Asquith's confirmed his own rejection of an anti-socialist alliance on 18 December and maintained it, in spite of what he called ‘virulent manifestations of political hysteria…
I have been intreated during these weeks, cajoled, wheedled, almost caressed, tortured, threatened, brow-beaten and all but blackmailed to step in as the saviour of society.’
Once Baldwin's decision was made, the right-wing plot collapsed as suddenly as it had grown up and, as always after prolonged but successful mental strain, he felt free.
Tom Jones found him more than merry, preparing his final speech for 21 January, when it was obvious that Labour would defeat the Government.
‘I found him in great spirits.
‘I have not felt so well for a long time and I shall be tempted to be very vulgar in my speech.’
' Nervousness had left him entirely, when the crisis of decision was past.
The Government were  defeated that evening by 72 votes and MacDonald was summoned to the Palace next day.
[Middlemas and Barnes,Baldwin , 251–3.]
Polling was on December 6th.
In Aberavon, MacDonald was returned in a straight fight with Byass by a majority of 3,512.
Nationally, the Conservatives lost 115,000 votes as compared with 1922, while the Liberal and Labour Parties gained 180,000 and 120,000 votes respectively.
Thanks to the quirks of the electoral system, however, the change in seats was much more striking.
The Conservative Party now had 259 seats in the House of Commons, the Labour Party 191 and the Liberals 159.
Neither the Labour nor the Liberal Party had won, but it was clear that the Conservatives had lost- and in an election called by them on an issue of their own choice.
MacDonald returned to London on December 8th to find that the evening papers were prophesying that Baldwin would resign after the weekend and advise the King to send for him.
‘Ah! were she here, to help me,’ he noted.
‘Why are they both dead-my mother and she?’
The evening-paper headlines turned out to be premature.
A group of Conservative malcontents, headed by Lord Birkenhead, tried to use the prospect of a Labour Government as an excuse for removing Baldwin from the leadership of the Conservative Party.
They failed; but Baldwin had to abandon his original intention of resigning straight away, and decided to stay in office until the new Parliament met.
In the next few days there was much wild talk about the dangers of allowing Labour to take office, and many wild schemes were designed to avert them.
The English Review thought that the ‘sun of England seems menaced by final eclipse’.
Winston Churchill, who had just been defeated as Liberal candidate for Leicester, West, declared that a Labour Government would be a ‘national misfortune such as has usually befallen a great state only on the morrow of defeat in war’.
The Times advocated a coalition between Liberals and Conservatives.
Lord Balfour thought it was Asquith's duty to keep Baldwin in power, Lord Long that the Conservatives should offer their support to Asquith.
In some quarters it was suggested that the best solution would be to set up a government of ‘national trustees’, headed by McKenna, who had deserted politics for banking and had not sat in; Parliament since 1918.
Consternation in the more excitable sections of the older parties was mirrored by a revealing mixture of awe, incredulity and apprehension in the Labour movement.
Over the weekend, when it still seemed possible that Baldwin would resign in the next few days, Sydney Arnold and Lees Smith advised MacDonald not to take office, on the grounds that a Labour Government would be bound to fail and that the party would then be ‘overwhelmed’.
The Clapham I.L.P., H. N. Brailsford reported, held a discussion on the pros and cons of taking office, in which ‘every single speech was against’.
Little by little, however, MacDonald and his closest colleagues became convinced that if they were given the opportunity to form a Government it would be folly to turn it down.
On December 9th, as well as talking to Arnold and Lees Smith, MacDonald discussed the situation with J. A. Hobson and J. H. Thomas.
Hobson, he noted later, advised him to ‘risk it’, and to appeal to the nation with a policy of ‘European settlement, improved unemployed [sic ]schemes, housing, co-ordinate pensions etc., Committees on Agriculture [and]National Debt’.
‘Not sure’, MacDonald wrote, ‘if party wd.
give confidence to do this moderate work, but think it would.’
Thomas's view, he noted, was the ‘same as is forming in my own mind’.
On December 10th, the party leaders decided to jump the fence if it were presented to them…
In the next two days, the position was considered, in turn, by the Labour Party National Executive, by a joint meeting of the National Executive and the T.U.C. General Council, and by the executive of the Parliamentary Labour Party.
At each of these meetings, MacDonald pointed out that if the Labour Party were to refuse office after defeating the Government with the aid of the Liberals, and if Asquith were then to form a Government instead, the Liberals would sit on the Government benches.
The Opposition front bench, and most of the other Opposition benches as well, would be occupied by the Conservatives.
The Labour Party would be relegated to the position of a group, and would probably sit below the gangway on the Liberal side of the House.
When the Liberals were defeated, as they would be in due course, it would be they, and not the Labour Party, who would take the Opposition front bench.
By refusing office, Labour would lose all the parliamentary advantages it had gained by becoming the official Opposition in 1922; its position in the country might be put back by a decade.
These arguments proved conclusive.
On December 12th the National 
Executive resolved that ‘should the necessity for forming a Labour Government arise, the Parliamentary Party should at once accept full responsibility for the Government of the country without compromising itself with any form of coalition.’
'One against taking office,’ MacDonald noted, ‘but he voted for to make unanimity.’
On December 13th the joint meeting of the National Executive and General Council followed suit; and in the afternoon the Parliamentary Labour Party executive did the same.
On December 18th, Asquith made it clear, in a speech to the Parliamentary Liberal Party, that the Liberals would not keep the Conservatives in office or join in any combination to keep Labour out.
If a Labour Government were ever to be tried, he declared, ‘it could hardly be tried under safer conditions.’
Whoever might be in office, ‘it is we, if we really understand our business who really control the situation.’
To all intents and purposes, a Labour Government was now certain.
Early in January, MacDonald returned to London from Lossiemouth.
Parliament met on January 8th, and that evening MacDonald addressed a great demonstration at the Albert Hall.
With characteristic skill, he managed at one and the same time to tap the vein of emotional, utopian socialism which played such a large part in the Labour movement, and yet to make it clear that the Labour Party would take office in a severely pragmatic spirit.
He wanted a Labour Government, he  declared ,
so that the life of the nation may be carried on.
Nineteen-twenty-four is not the last in God's programme of creation.
My friends, we will be dead and gone and forgotten and generation after generation will come, and there will still be the search for the Holy Grail by knights like Keir Hardie.
The shield of love and the spear of justice will still be in the hands of good and upright men and women, and the ideal of a great future will still be in front of our people.
I see no end, thank God, to these things…
I see my own skyline, but I am convinced that when my children or children's children get there there will be another skyline, another horizon, another dawning, another glorious beckoning from heaven itself.
On January 15th came the King's speech, announcing a full legislative programme.
On January 17th, Clynes moved an amendment to the address in the name of the Labour Party.
On the 13th, MacDonald had noted in his diary that Cabinet-making looked ‘as if it is to be the most horrible job of my life.
Am beginning to suspect human nature.
’ By the 19th his depression had become more acute.
‘C. making worse than I thought,’ he wrote.
‘All but two or three disappointed…
One after another behave as though I insulted them in offering them anything but a Cabinet place.
To-day a wild letter had come from the wife of one who refused subordinate office which will give me a sleepless night.
I feel like an executioner, I knock so many ambitious heads into my basket.’
Little by little, however, the process was completed.
January 21st was the culminating day.
As MacDonald described it later:
Consultation with Thomas, Henderson, Clynes, Snowden, Spoor.
Produced my proposals for Ministers and under Secys, etc.
List generally approved after explanations of why and wherefore.
Wheatley finally fixed.
Necessary to bring Clyde in.
Will he play straight…
Hurried dinner with Leach's party; Speech at 9.47.
Govt. defeated and so I am to be P.M. The load will be heavy and I am so much alone.
On January 22nd, Baldwin left office.
At midday, MacDonald went to the palace to be sworn of the Privy Council.
The King complained about the singing of the ‘Red Flag’ and the ‘Marseillaise’at the Labour Party meeting in the Albert Hall a few days before.
MacDonald told him that if he had tried to stop it, there would have been a riot, and that it had required all his influence to prevent his followers from singing the ‘Red Flag’ in the House of Commons itself on the night the Baldwin Government fell.
They had ‘got into the way of singing this song’, he explained, and it was ‘by degrees that he hopes to break down this habit’.
In the afternoon he returned to kiss hands as prime minister.
Later he noted privately:
My dear Ishbel is splendid.
The little maid is sedate as a judge and reminds me every day of her mother.
10.30 Party meeting.
Watched the disappointed ones and charity came into my heart.
H. raised his special grievance, but his complaint published in the Sunday Express has only added to the completeness of his downfall…
Had to go to Buckingham Palace and meeting had to be adjourned-12. sworn member of the Privy Council, and afterwards had 55 minutes with the King.
He explained as House met today, better not to swear me in as First Lord of the Treasury until it rose.
He talked so steadily that I could hardly thank him.
Most friendly.
Referred to Lansbury's King Charles speech and Albert Hall songs.
I pointed out that if there had been any counter demonstration effect would have been serious and very uncomfortable to both of us.
He agreed.
Fixed appointment after the adjount. of the House.
2.45 House met.
One or two ineffective speeches.
I took no part and declined to be drawn-4.30 Returned to King and ‘kissed hands’.
Another long talk.
Referred to Russia.
Hoped I would do nothing  to compel him to shake hands with the murderers of his relatives.
King plays the game straight, though I feel he is apprehensive.
It wd.
be a miracle were he not.
[David Marquand,Ramsay MacDonald (London, 1977), 296–305.]
In any case, a Conservative-Liberal alliance to exclude Labour from office depended on Asquith's support; and this he declined to countenance, in spite of what he described as ‘appeals, threats, prayers from all parts, and from all sorts and conditions of men, women and lunatics, to step in and save the country from the horrors of Socialism and Confiscation’.
Disliking the Tories more than he disliked Labour, he declared that on the defeat of Baldwin's Government in the new Parliament, the King should ask MacDonald to form an administration, which he and his fellow Liberals would keep in office as long as it avoided extremist policies.
Asquith could also reflect with satisfaction that ‘if a Labour Government is ever to be tried in this country, as it will be sooner or later, it could hardly be tried under safer conditions’.
After an initial hesitation in December that lasted no more than forty-eight hours, the King's sense of fair play had led him to the same conclusion.
He told Davidson that ‘a Socialist Government would have an opportunity of learning their administrative duties and responsibilities under favourable conditions and that it was essential that their rights under the Constitution should in no way be impaired’.
Stamfordham, too, could look back with satisfaction on his conduct of negotiations with the party leaders.
He wrote to a friend in mid-January:
Ever since the result of the General Election, I have taken for granted that, on Baldwin's defeat in the House of Commons, the King would send for Ramsay MacDonald; and I have deprecated any attempt to prevent his having the same facilities which would be accorded to any Minister entrusted by the Sovereign with the formation of a Government.
I therefore entirely agree with what you say-as things are the sooner the Labour Party comes into power the better.
Personally I am not alarmed and, unless they are upset by their own extremists, it would not surprise me were they to remain in office for some time, during which they may do considerable good.
So it came to pass.
The King opened the new Parliament on 15 January 1924.
Six days later, at the end of the customary debate  on the Address, Labour and Liberals united to defeat the Conservatives by seventy-two votes.
Baldwin at once resigned as Prime Minister and MacDonald was summoned to the palace.
The King wrote in his diary for 22 January 1924:
I held a Council, at which Mr Ramsay MacDonald was sworn in a member.
I then asked him to form a Government, which he accepted to do.
I had an hour's talk with him, he impressed me very much; he wishes to do the right thing.
Today 23 years ago dear Grandmama died.
I wonder what she would have thought of a Labour Government.
Members of the new Cabinet who celebrated over lunch the next day were burdened by no such solemnity.
‘We were a jolly party,’ wrote Beatrice Webb, wife of the President of the Board of Trade, ‘all laughing at the joke of Labour in Office.’
MacDonald faced unusual difficulties in forming his Cabinet.
Most newly-appointed Prime Ministers are embarrassed by a plethora of well-qualified supplicants; MacDonald could scarcely find enough party stalwarts with the ability or experience to fill even the major posts.
For the second most important place in the Government, that of Foreign Secretary, he initially chose J. H. Thomas, a man of coarse speech and coarser wit who had demonstrated his administrative talents in directing a succession of railway strikes.
But there was fierce hostility to the appointment within the Labour ranks; Thomas instead accepted the Colonial Office, where his instinctive patriotism and robust utterances were more appreciated.
In the absence of any more eligible candidate, MacDonald became his own Foreign Secretary.
He was encouraged to assume this double burden by Arthur Ponsonby, the younger brother of Fritz, who after nine years in the Diplomatic Service had resigned to sit in the Commons as a Liberal; finding his colleagues inadequately radical, Ponsonby had then joined the Labour Party and in January 1924 was installed at the Prime Minister's elbow as Parliamentary Under-Secretary for Foreign Affairs.
Philip Snowden, dour but competent, became Chancellor of the Exchequer; and the avuncular Arthur Henderson, who alone of his colleagues had sat in the Cabinets of Asquith and Lloyd George, Home Secretary.
J. R. Clynes, the new Lord Privy Seal, wrote picturesquely of ‘the strange turn in Fortune's wheel which had brought MacDonald the starveling clerk, Thomas the engine driver, Henderson the foundry labourer and Clynes the mill-hand, to this pinnacle beside the man whose  forebears had been Kings for so many splendid generations.
We were making history.’
[Rose,King Ceorge V , 324–7.]
In 1922 the Conservative/Liberal Coalition led by Lloyd George which had ruled Britain since 1918 was overthrown by a revolt of Conservative back-benchers who refused to accept the advice of their leaders that the Coalition should continue.
A purely Conservative government was formed under the leadership of Bonar Law, and Parliament was dissolved in October 1922.
Bonar Law's leadership of the Conservatives was, however, by no means secure, since the majority of leading Conservatives, including such figures as Austen Chamberlain, Lord Birkenhead (formerly F. E. Smith), Lord Balfour and Sir Robert Horne, remained loyal to the Coalition.
They hoped and believed that Bonar Law would fail to secure an overall majority for the Conservative Party.
It would then become apparent that the experiment of resuscitating an independent Conservative Party had failed, and a new coalition between Conservatives and Liberals would be the only way of meeting the socialist threat.
The Liberal Party was also divided, between the supporters of Lloyd George, who, like Austen Chamberlain and Birkenhead, hoped for a revival of the Coalition, and the independent Liberals under the leadership of Asquith who had opposed the Lloyd George Coalition from the Opposition benches since 1918.
But it was the Labour Party which had become the official Opposition in 1918.
It was the most united of the three parties, and, having adopted a socialist constitution in 1918, it was in no mood to form a coalition with either of the ‘capitalist’ parties.
It sought a socialist majority in its own right, but most of its leaders believed that a long period of education and propaganda would be necessary before that majority could be secured.
In the event, the general election of 1922 gave the Conservatives an overall majority of 37, albeit on only 38.2% of the vote, a consequence of the fact that the Conservatives were competing with three other parties-Lloyd George Liberals, independent Liberals, and Labour.
However, the Conservative Government of 1922 was destined to prove an ill-fated one, for in May 1923, only six months after assuming office, Bonar Law was found to be suffering from incurable cancer of the throat, and he immediately resigned.
Most  of the leading Conservatives who might have hoped to succeed him were disqualified as supporters of the Lloyd George Coalition, and the succession went to the relatively unknown Chancellor of the Exchequer, Stanley Baldwin.
After six months as Premier, however, Baldwin told the Conservative Party Conference that unemployment was the gravest domestic issue which the country had to face, and that ‘if we go pottering along as we are we shall have grave unemployment with us to the end of time’.
The remedy, in his view, lay in a protective tariff keeping out those imports likely to damage British manufactured goods.
Unfortunately, however, Baldwin was prevented from applying this remedy because of a pledge given by his predecessor Bonar Law that there should be no fundamental change in the fiscal arrangements of the country.
‘I am not a man to play with a pledge’, Baldwin told the Conference.
‘I am not a clever man.
I know nothing of political tactics, but I will say this: Having come to that conclusion myself, I felt the only honest and right thing as a leader of a democratic party was to tell them, at the first opportunity I had, what I thought, and submit it to their judgment.’
Baldwin therefore decided to seek the dissolution of a Parliament which was barely a year old.
George V tried to dissuade him from this course and indeed went so far as to register a formal protest:
I then pointed out to him that I strongly deprecated a dissolution at this moment as I had implicit confidence in him and in the Conservative Party now in power, and I considered that as most countries in Europe, if not in the world, were in a chaotic and indeed dangerous state, it would be a pity if this country were to be plunged into the turmoil of a General Election on a question of domestic policy which will arouse all the old traditional bitterness of the hard fought battles between Protection and Free Trade: also that it was quite possible that his majority might be reduced, or that he might not get a majority at all.
I was therefore prepared to take the responsibility of advising him to change his mind, and I was also prepared for him to tell his friends that I had done so.
But Baldwin was not to be moved.
He answered that he had gone too far now and that the Country expected a dissolution.
Parliament was dissolved on 13 November, and the election announced for 6 December.
Baldwin's declaration for Protection had the immediate effect of reuniting the two sections of the Liberal Party around the historic  cause of Free Trade, and Asquith and Lloyd George came together at public meetings to exchange insincere pleasantries.
The leading Coalitionists in the Conservative Party-Austen Chamberlain and Birkenhead-had, perforce, to come to terms with Baldwin, and sustained him as unwillingly as Lloyd George accepted Asquith's leadership.
Labour, the most united of the three parties, fought the election on the basis that socialism was the true answer to Protection.
But it did not seriously expect to win.
Indeed, according to Beatrice Webb, ‘So far as I know, no member of the Labour Party, certainly not any Front Bench man, foresaw the possibility of a Labour Government arising out of the election’, and most expected either a continuation of the Conservative government or a renewal of Conservative/Liberal coalition.
Memories of the Lloyd George Coalition, however, and the taint of corruption which adhered to it-Baldwin had regarded the Lloyd George Cabinet as a ‘thieves’ kitchen'-made most politicians unwilling to contemplate a renewal of the experiment.
Moreover, there was in both the Conservative and Labour Parties at this time a widespread mistrust and fear of Lloyd George.
Thomas Jones, Deputy Secretary to the Cabinet from 1916 to 1930, recorded that at Baldwin's Worcestershire home, there was an ‘L. G. obsession…
I came across a picture of Lloyd George as Chancellor of the Exchequer defaced.
How they do hate him’, while the second Labour government of 1929 ‘like their predecessors, are apparently haunted by the spectre of LI.G. never absent from the Cabinet Room’.
This hatred of Lloyd George on the part of both Baldwin and MacDonald made it very difficult for the Conservative or Labour Parties to contemplate either coalition with the Liberals, or even a tacit understanding with them to sustain a minority government; and the politics of the 1920s cannot therefore be understood without appreciating the widespread antagonism both to coalition and to Lloyd George personally.
The electorate, to the surprise of many, rebuffed Baldwin and denied him a mandate for Protection.
The result was as follows: Conservatives 258 seats Labour 191 seats Liberals 158 seats Others 7 seats 
Such a distribution of seats allowed, in the abstract, for a wide variety of possible governments.
The Conservatives might seem to have a legitimate claim as the largest single party; but they had failed to obtain a mandate for Protection.
Therefore, perhaps Labour as the largest anti-Protection party, should be allowed to govern.
Yet Labour had not fought the election solely on a negative programme of hostility to Protection but on its socialist programme; and the electors had given even less of a mandate to socialism than to Protection.
Since the election had been fought on the issue of Protection, there was an argument for the two Free Trade parties-Labour and the Liberals-joining together in a coalition.
But Labour saw the Liberals as being a ‘capitalist’ party, and therefore hardly better than the Conservatives; and there were, in addition, powerful social factors predisposing Labour to a dislike of the Liberals whom they regarded as haughty and patronising in manner.
Socialism, however, had been repudiated at the polls even more decisively than Protection, and there seemed to be a stronger case for an anti-socialist coalition composed of the Conservative and Liberal Parties than for a Free Trade one.
The Liberals, although the smallest of the three parties, would seem to be the only party whose programme had not been rejected by the electors; and, as the only party which could co-operate with either of the other two, it would seem to have been put in a particularly strong position by the result of the election.
Certainly Asquith saw the situation in much this light.
But, as events were to show, the Liberals were quite unable to take advantage of their pivotal role, and their high hopes were to be rapidly dashed.
It was possible, therefore, to argue for any of a range of governments-Conservative/Liberal Coalition, Labour/Liberal Coalition, or minority Conservative, Labour or Liberal governments- depending upon which principle of government formation one believed to be the most important.
The outcome, however, would be settled not by determining the relative validity of different principles of government formation, but by the complex process of political  manoeuvring which began as soon as the election results were known.
The election was held on Thursday 6 December, and the result known the next day.
Baldwin returned to London on the Friday, and told his friend Geoffrey Dawson, the editor of The Times , that  he would resign immediately and would probably be succeeded by a Conservative/Liberal coalition, possibly led by Asquith, in which he, Baldwin, might well participate.
On the 8th, Baldwin saw the King's Private Secretary, Lord Stamfordham, and told him that although he ‘had come to no decision’, his inclination was ‘not to meet Parliament but to resign’.
‘He had asked the country for a mandate for Tariff Reform, this had been refused, and the honourable thing would be for him to resign at once.’
As regards his successor, ‘it seemed to him that there were only two alternatives-a Liberal/Conservative Government or a Liberal/Labour Government’.
Stamfordham reports Baldwin as saying:
The latter seemed to him almost impossible, as the Labour policy was primarily based upon the two principles of a Levy on Capital and Nationalisation.
Also, he did not believe that Labour would coalesce with a Government of which Mr Lloyd George was a member.
But he thought that Mr Asquith might form a Coalition with the Conservatives, although there again Mr Lloyd George might be a difficulty.
Baldwin was encouraged in his inclination to resign immediately not only the Premiership but also the leadership of the Conservative party, by the Conservative Party Chairman, F. S. Jackson, and his immediate predecessor, Sir George Younger.
Their advice was not wholly disinterested, however, since there seems to have been a move in the Conservative Party at this time to replace Baldwin as Party leader by Austen Chamberlain, and so prepare the ground for another Conservative/Liberal Coalition-a reversal, as Cowling puts it, of the verdict of the Carlton Club which had destroyed the Lloyd George Coalition.
The Marquess of Lincolnshire, a former Liberal Minister (as Earl Carrington) and confidant of Asquith, wrote in his diary on 8 December with emphasis, ‘The general opinion is that Baldwin has made such a mess of it that he must go at once ’, and on 18 December, ‘There is a Chamberlain-Birkenhead intrigue going on backed by the ‘Daily Mail ’.’
Lord Birkenhead, who lunched with Lord Derby (the Secretary of State for War in Baldwin's Cabinet) on 10 December, told him that Baldwin would resign, that the King would then send for Lord Balfour, the only living Conservative ex-Prime Minister, to seek advice.
Balfour would say that Austen Chamberlain should be sent for; and, according to Birkenhead, Balfour thought that this was ‘the right course to pursue as it gave the King one other alternative before  sending for Ramsay MacDonald’.
There was some possibility that Asquith and the Liberals would support a reconstituted Conservative government, and in this way the nation could be saved from the perils of socialism.
Certainly the general belief was that, having wantonly thrown away a Conservative majority, Baldwin could not remain as Party leader let alone Prime Minister; and Randolph Churchill, the biographer of Lord Derby, comments that ‘It is interesting to notice in Derby's correspondence, and in that of other leading Tories of the time, how for the first two or three weeks after the Party's defeat in the Election there was an unchallenged assumption that Baldwin could not survive the catastrophe.’
However, no sooner was the intrigue launched than Baldwin killed it by the simple expedient of deciding to remain in office and meet Parliament.
For, by Monday 10 December, on the same day that Birkenhead told Derby of the plot, Baldwin saw the King and told him that he had decided not to resign.
His decision was clothed in the rhetoric of constitutionalism.
His supporters, Baldwin said, thought that he should meet Parliament, ‘and that former precedent did not apply in this instance, in which the question at issue was one concerning not two but three Parties, and that the House of Commons was the proper place for the choice of the Electorate to be made known’.
The King approved of this decision, and indeed Lord Stamfordham wrote a memorandum which revealed that the King had seen Balfour on 8 December and told him that, ‘If Mr Baldwin wishes to resign, the King will refuse, on the grounds that he is still the head of the largest Party in the House of Commons and for every reason, constitutional and otherwise, it would be right and proper for the Government to meet Parliament and leave it to the representatives of the people to decide whether or not they will support the Government.’
Comments of this type have led some commentators to accept an exaggerated interpretation of the King's role.
The King could hardly ‘refuse’ to accept Baldwin's resignation if Baldwin insisted on going.
All that he could do would be to advise him strongly against resigning, and, as he had done when attempting to dissuade him from dissolving Parliament, back up his advice with a formal protest, allowing Baldwin to tell his colleagues that the King objected to the course he was taking.
It is therefore quite wrong for Maurice Cowling, whose account of the crisis is by far the best, to  write of ‘The King's decision to make Baldwin stay in office .’
(My italics.)
The King was in no position to make such a decision and, in any case, Baldwin had already decided to meet Parliament when he met the King on 10 December, and so the King did not even have to persuade him to adopt what he believed to be the correct course.
After telling the King of his new-found resolve to meet Parliament, Baldwin added that he was ‘absolutely opposed’ to Coalition.
He had, after all, played a prominent part in destroying the Lloyd George coalition fourteen months before, and had no wish to be involved in another one.
The King responded by asking whether a working arrangement with the Liberals might be possible, and Baldwin said that he would find out.
The Cabinet met on Tuesday 11 December and unanimously approved of Baldwin's decision that the government meet Parliament in five weeks' time on 15 January.
With this, the first phase of the crisis was over, and the intrigue against Baldwin collapsed.
His continued leadership of the Conservatives, at least until the government met Parliament, was now assured.
Had Baldwin resigned immediately after the election, on the other hand, the King might well have sought to ascertain whether another Conservative could have formed a government and secured Liberal support.
Baldwin's decision, therefore, limited the options available to the Liberals.
If they wished to prevent Labour forming a government, they would have to come to an arrangement with Baldwin, rather than any other Conservative; and since the Liberals had only just fought an election opposing Baldwin's policy of Protection, this would be a difficult course for them to take.
On the other hand, if the Liberals voted against Baldwin, they would be putting Labour into power, something which many Liberal electors had not envisaged when they had voted Liberal to preserve Free Trade.
In making up their minds what to do when faced with the expected no-confidence motion from Labour therefore, the Liberals were put in a most unenviable position.
Asquith, however, was in no doubt as to his course of action.
On 18 December he addressed the Liberal MPs assembled at the National Liberal Club, making what one observer called ‘the speech of his life’.
He began by declaring that Liberal members ‘were not sent here by your constituents to play the part of soldiers of fortune to settle squalid fights’.
He declared that if either Protection or the capital levy were submitted to the Commons, they would be defeated by a majority of more than 200.
Neither the Conservatives nor  Labour, therefore, had a chance of retaining or obtaining office unless they abandoned for the time being the principal position which they fought the election to obtain.
‘Whoever may be the incumbents of office, it is we who really control the situation.’
Asquith then made it clear that he would do nothing to assist the Conservatives.
‘The days of the present Government are numbered.
They will go, and they will go with short shrift…
Their record is an almost unbroken one of impotence and humiliation.’
In the Debate on the Address when Parliament reassembled, Asquith made clear the reason why the Liberals would turn the government out.
There may be many theories, I have no doubt there are, why we have been sent here by the electorate in such strange proportions.
But there is one theory which will not hold water for a moment; and that is, that we were sent here to maintain the present Government in office.
It was their election, not ours.
It was they, not we, who threw down the challenge.
It was they again, not we, who invited the judgment of the electorate.
They have got it.
The Liberals, then, would support Labour's amendment declaring no confidence in the government.
The consequence would be that the King would send for Ramsay MacDonald, the leader of the Opposition.
Labour, however, was determined to govern on its own, without recourse to coalition.
How, then, could the Liberals hope to gain advantage from the situation?
At the National Liberal Club meeting, Asquith revealed his thinking.
He made it clear that he thought a minority Labour government would have no right to a dissolution if it was rapidly defeated in the Commons.
The King could legitimately refuse a request to dissolve for the third time in a little over a year.
Asquith claimed:
the Crown is not bound to take the advice of a particular Ministry to put its subjects to the tumult and turmoil of a series of general elections so long as it can find other Ministers who are prepared to give it a trial.
The notion that a Ministry which cannot command a majority in the House of Commons…a Ministry in a minority of 31 per cent…in these circumstances is invested with the right to demand a dissolution is as subversive of constitutional usage, as it would, in my opinion, be pernicious to the general and paramount interests of the nation at large .
Either, therefore, Labour would govern with the support of the Liberals which would indeed make the Liberals the arbiters of government; or Labour would be defeated in the House, and seek a  dissolution which would be denied to them.
‘Father asks me to say’, wrote Asquith's daughter Violet Bonham-Carter to Winston Churchill, ‘that there are an immense number of Dominion precedents for refusing one [i.e. a dissolution]under such conditions.’
Asquith would then be summoned to form a government which would be supported by the Conservatives.
Asquith gave Stamfordham his views on how he imagined the situation would develop.
He saw the Labour Party's position as a difficult one, and began his conversation with Stamfordham by saying rather patronisingly that in MacDonald's position, he, Asquith, would decline office ‘on the grounds that he and his Party were not yet fit to undertake the responsibility’.
But if MacDonald did form a government, the Liberals would sit on the Opposition benches.
Stamfordham reported:
The next step that he foresaw would be that Mr Ramsay MacDonald comes to the King and asks for a Dissolution: indeed Mr Asquith believes that in accepting office Mr Ramsay MacDonald will very probably ask His Majesty to promise a Dissolution in the event of an early defeat of the Government in the House of Commons…
Mr Asquith considers the King would be constitutionally justified in giving an absolute refusal…there can be no possible justification for a third Election within a year; and, if on the King's refusal to dissolve Parliament Mr Ramsay MacDonald resigned, and his Majesty sent for Mr Asquith, the latter would accept all responsibility for the King's action.
No doubt he himself would have difficulties: but he thought that the Conservatives, without entering into any general undertaking, would support his Government, which would not embark upon any extravagant legislation; and in this way the King's Government might be carried on for another Session or even longer.
Asquith's approach caused some alarm to the Labour Party and to the King.
Labour's suspicions were immediately aroused that Asquith's speech at the National Liberal Club was part of an ‘Establishment’ plot to deny Labour fair play, and that a Labour government defeated in the Commons would be denied the right which other governments had enjoyed, of an immediate dissolution.
Asquith's remarks, therefore, gave rise to the expression of some anti-monarchical sentiment.
The Rev. Campbell Stephen, a prominent figure on the Labour Left, declared that if Labour was refused a dissolution, the monarchy would be in danger.
George Lansbury, speaking at Shoreditch Town Hall in January 1924, reminded the monarch that ‘Some centuries ago a King stood against the common  people and he lost his head.’
MacDonaid in a speech at Elgin in December voiced his ‘suspicion that between now and January…there was going to be a serious attempt to wangle the Constitution so that the democracy of this country might not have fair play given to them’.
The King, understandably enough, did not thank Asquith for implying that he would deviate from the role of strict constitutionality by denying to Labour what he had given to the other parties.
Hugh Dalton, whose father was Canon of Windsor, reports a conversation which he had with Stamfordham at Windsor Castle on 26 December.
According to Stamfordham, ‘The King frightened by Glasgow speeches, including especially one by Campbell Stephen, saying that if J. R. M [i.e. MacDonald]is refused a dissolution, that will be the end of the Monarchy.
The King had rung up S [i.e. Stamfordham]about this from Sandringham.
S blames Asquith for raising the constitutional aspects of the right to obtain a dissolution in his recent speech.’
Whatever the constitutional value of Asquith's approach in the abstract, his speech ignored political realities.
If he were to defeat a Labour government as soon as it had taken office, the Liberals would be accused of frivolity in precipitating an unnecessary election, especially if Labour contented itself with moderate policies as it intended to do.
No one could predict with certainty whether or not the King would grant a dissolution in such circumstances, but his inclination was to ensure that the Labour government be given every privilege that previous governments had enjoyed.
The King was particularly anxious to dispel the view expressed by Campbell Stephen and Lansbury that he was hostile to Labour; and he told J. C. C. Davidson, a confidant of Baldwin, on 21 January after the Conservatives had been defeated in the Commons, that ‘it was essential that their rights under the Constitution should in no way be impaired’.
‘I must confess’, Stamfordham wrote to St Loe Strachey, editor of the Spectator ,'…at the present moment I feel that His Majesty should do his utmost not to hamper in any way Ramsay MacDonald in, what we must all admit will be, a task of almost incalculable magnitude.
And I expect that the King would be interpreting the general feeling of the people of the country that, true to British ideas, the Government, whoever they may be, should have a fair chance…’
Nor was there any reason to believe that the Conservatives would  support an Asquith government when Asquith had been responsible for turning them out of office.
Asquith ‘rather took for granted’, Stamfordham confided to the Archbishop of Canterbury, ‘that the Conservatives would help keep him in office, although without any agreement’.
The Conservatives, Winston Churchill predicted, with rather more prescience than Asquith, would not ‘act as bottle holders to those who kicked us into the street three months ago and deliberately erected this Socialist monstrosity’.
In fact, the first Labour government which took office in January 1924, after Baldwin had been defeated on an amendment to the Address, lasted until October, when the new government in turn was defeated on a Liberal amendment to a Conservative motion which MacDonald chose to regard as a matter of confidence; and the Conservatives rather than the Liberals were to be the beneficiaries of MacDonald's fall.
[Vernon Bogdanor,Multi-Party Politics and the Constitution (Cambridge, 1983), 91- IoI.]
(d) l929 Party Seats Labour 288 Conservative 260 Liberal 59 Others 8 Several of the factors which had produced a minority Labour government in 1923–4 still existed, and MacDonald accordingly formed another minority government .
The general election was now only a few months away.
As in 1923, Labour had to fight on two fronts; as in 1923, the Liberals were, in many ways, a more dangerous enemy than the Conservatives.
On November 6th, MacDonald noted that the by-election results showed only that the Government would be defeated, not that an independent Labour Government would succeed it.
‘If the three party system is to remain,’ he wrote gloomily, ‘it is obvious that the question of coalitions in some shape or form has to be faced.
Our immediate duty is to place every obstacle we can in the way of the  survival of the three party system.’
Despite occasional misgivings, however, he was optimistic enough to speculate about the form which the next Labour Government might take…
During the next few weeks, however, it became clear that the result of the election was not yet a foregone conclusion.
The Conservatives were fairly quiescent, but the Liberals were buzzing ominously with activity.
On January 31st, R. H. Tawney wrote to warn Arthur Henderson:
An acquaintance who is well-informed as to the intentions of the Liberals writes to me that they propose to make a big plan of public works the centre of their election programme.
The idea is to create employment until the total unemployment is brought down to half a million.
If the Labour Election Programme is to be any use it must have something concrete and definite about unemployment.
The pages on what subject in Labour and the Nation are…not up to the mark…
[W]hat is required is a definite statement that (a) A Labour Government will initiate productive work on a larger scale, and will raise a loan for the purpose.
(b) that it will maintain from national funds all men no absorbed in such work….
This matter ought to occupy a prominent place in the Election Manifesto.
Do get the Leader to authorise a bold statement.
Tawney's letter was sent to MacDonald by Arthur Greenwood, accompanied by a covering note: ‘Middleton passed this to me today.
It happens to be in line with what is being done.
But I thought you ought to see it.’
Greenwood's assurances turned out to be wildly overconfident.
At a dinner for Liberal candidates on March 1st, Lloyd George announced that the Liberal Party had prepared a series of public-works projects, which could be put in hand the moment a Liberal Government came to power, and which would reduce unemployment to ‘normal proportions’ in a year.
The projects were set out in a pamphlet with the alluring title,We Can Conquer Unemployment : 350,000 men were to be employed on road-building, 60, 000 on housing, 60,000 on telephone development and 62,000 on electrical development.
The cost would be 250 million, and the money would be raised by loan.
Since the increase in tax revenue and the fall in unemployment expenditure would compensate for the cost of servicing the loan, there would be no burden on the exchequer.
In the next three months, Keynes and his protege, Hubert Henderson, published a pamphlet in support; Lloyd George addressed a series of great meetings up and down the  country; and the Government was provoked into issuing a special white paper, proving that the plan was unworkable.
In Trevor Wilson's words, it was the ‘Indian summer of the old Liberal Party’; and, as sometimes happens with Indian summers, it was at least as spectacular as anything that had happened during the real one…
At the Manchester Free Trade Hall on May 24th, MacDonald delivered a brisk attack on Lloyd George's record, and returned to the well-worn, but still telling, argument that the Liberals were trying to steal Labour's clothes.
In a broadcast appeal to the electors on May 28th, he denounced the idea that unemployment could be cured by ‘patchwork’ and declared that Labour's solution was ‘not a programme of relief works upon which the capital spent will be mainly lost to the country.
It is a programme designed to add to the wealth and efficiency of the nation, to give a spur to industry and to open the way to markets.’
A vote for the Liberals, he concluded, would be a vote for a minority Government, dependent on parliamentary compromises and without real responsibility for its actions.
For the most part, however, he concentrated on other issues-the defects of the Government's ‘safeguarding’ policy, the need for a body to co-ordinate the economic activities of the state, the responsibility for the general strike and, above all, the danger of a drift to war.
The last was probably his strongest card, and no one who heard this broadcast on May 28th could doubt that it was the one about which he cared the most.
What, he asked, had happened to British foreign policy since 1924?…
Polling day was on May 30th.
In Seaham, MacDonald was returned with a majority of 28,794.
In the country as a whole, the Conservatives won 8,664,000 votes, the Labour Party 8,360,000 and the Liberals 5,300,000.
But the bias of the system worked in Labour's favour, and in the House of Commons the Labour Party had 287 seats, the Conservatives 261 and the Liberals 59.
Labour had gained over 130 seats, and for the first time in history it was the strongest party in the state.
Egon Wertheimer had written not long before:
After the inglorious fall of his Government, accompanied as it was by a whole series of faux pas , Ramsay MacDonald's future, crowed the wiseacres of London, was not worth a single cent.
Yet he sits more firmly in the saddle than ever.
His leadership was never less disputed than at the present moment.
For this his ability to compromise and reconcile is beyond doubt responsible in part.
The true reason, however, is to be sought outside the  immediately political.
In the imagination and consciousness of thousands his position is beyond party politics…
[I]n the slums of the manufacturing towns and in the hovels of the countryside he has become a legendary being-the personification of all that thousands of downtrodden men and women hope and dream and desire.
Like Lenin…he is the focus of the mute hopes of a whole class.
Wertheimer's judgment would have been echoed by most of MacDonald's followers.
[Marquand,Ramsay MacDonald , 483–8.]
At No. 10 on the evening of 30 May, the gloom deepened as the results came in, worsening as the night dragged on.
Central Office experts had to confess that their harshest forecast had been far exceeded.
Baldwin found it hard to reconcile the results with his reception during the election campaign.
By next morning the rout was obvious.
Conservatives dropped to 261, Labour rose to 287 and the Liberals came home with a mere 59.
Labour had swept Lancashire, Yorkshire, Cheshire, the West Midlands and London.
The peculiarity of the electoral system was shown again, for the Conservatives had kept the majority of votes-8.66 million against the Labour 8.36; and there was something to be said for the view that a drift of mainly middle-class population southward, and the absence of an up-to-date register of the already enfranchised voters, had benefited Labour in the tally of actual seats.
What hurt most was that the Liberals had, by fighting the Conservatives rather than Labour, let in many Socialists.
Many of the best young men were lost-Macmillan, Duff Cooper, O'Connor, Bentinck and Charles Rhys, the Prime Minister's Private Secretary, all went down.
‘So we are beaten,’ wrote Lucy Baldwin, ‘but, God willing, will flourish again.’
Baldwin was stricken more by this result than that of any other election in his life.
His administration had been the most productive of the century, save only that of the Liberals in 1906.
But gratitude, as his son was to comment later, is not a political category.
Patrick Duff wrote, ‘This reverse has come as a great shock.
The Party Headquarters thought we were going to get about fifty over all other Parties, and they are wrong by about eighty.
When one thinks of all the PM's work these last four and a half years and of all he is and stands for, and that this is the response it gets, it makes one lose faith a bit.
But he and Mrs B. are wonderful.
Never a word of  bitterness or complaint.
They both ‘treat those two imposters just the same’ if ever anyone did.
And this, after spending themselves to the last ounce, only within the last three weeks, and being greeted everywhere with roaring crowds and cheering streets and the appearance of universal applause and approbation.
It must make it all the harder that this reception has availed so little in the result…still this isn't the end of everything.
As the PM says, no one has ever done anything big and good if he has always had success and hasn't had some thumping clouts on the head on the way.
And this may be just the recoil for a bigger jump, like 1923 was.’
In Central Office, Patrick Gower consoled himself, ‘It has been a strenuous year but it has been worth it and it has been fun.
I was hoping that our humble efforts would help bring S.B. back.
I never before worked with such complete belief in and admiration for any man or any government and one's faith in democracy is apt to be shattered when one sees a man like S.B. defeated by falsehood and misrepresentation.
But I am convinced that it is only temporary and we've damn well got to see it is.’
The immediate problem, like that of 1923, was whether to resign at once or wait and meet Parliament.
Lengthy research went on to find suitable precedents but the overriding consideration was the position of Lloyd George and the Liberals.
If Baldwin met Parliament, Lloyd George might keep the Conservatives in for a few weeks to humiliate them.
On the other hand, the King was ill and there was the usual pressure for a Tory/Liberal combination to keep Labour out.
Baldwin had intended to resign at once if Labour got a majority and this was still his instinct, but now he retired to Chequers where on 1 June came Davidson, Eyres Monsell, Austen Chamberlain and Hoare.
He also consulted constitutional experts who assured him that it was in the Prime Minister's hands to do as he chose.
Dawson wrote in his diary for I June, ‘the Prime Minister was undecided and Mrs Baldwin urging him to go!’
Chamberlain wanted to meet Parliament, saying ‘the loss of Steel-Maitland need not determine an essential question of policy.’
Churchill agreed, but later changed his mind.
On Sunday came Salisbury, whose advice was indecisive.
Tom Jones and Duff argued for resignation, and Lady Astor helped to sway Dawson to the same line, which was duly reflected in The Times leader of Monday morning.
But already on the Sunday Baldwin had seen Stamfordham: ‘He had appealed,’ he told the King's Private Secretary, ‘to  the people to trust him, as in 1924, and they had refused.
He was beaten and he accepts it and thinks this sporting attitude will count in his favour next time.
If he hangs on they will say, ‘Here is this man clinging to office, he won't take his defeat, he is trying to prevent the Labour Party from enjoying their victory.’
' As always, when he had taken the decision, Baldwin's care fell away.
He overbore Neville Chamberlain and the others who still wanted to ride for a fall on a bold safeguarding policy.
On Tuesday he went to Windsor to resign.
[Middlemas and Barnes,Baldwin , 526–7.]
Had some bold prophet told the King that he was one day to preside over a change of Government wearing a Chinese dressing-gown, he would scarcely have believed his ears.
But immediately after the general election of 1929, the reopening of a surgical wound obliged him to receive both Baldwin and MacDonald in his bedroom at Windsor.
That was indeed a revolution.
So too was the instant transfer of power from Conservative to Labour.
After the general election of 1923, the King had asked the defeated Prime Minister, Baldwin, to defer his resignation until the new Parliament could meet.
Disputable even in 1923, that narrow constitutional doctrine had become outmoded by 1929.
Labour now commanded 287 seats, compared with 261 Conservative and 59 Liberal: an effective though not overall majority.
There was nothing to recommend preserving the old Government until it had been formally defeated at Westminster.
As Stamfordham wrote: ‘We must recognise that Democracy is no longer a meaningless sort of shibboleth; with the enormous increase of voters by the women's franchise it is the actual voice, for better or worse, the political voice of the State.’
Baldwin agreed.
If he were to hang on, he told Stamfordham, the nation would say: ‘Here is this man clinging to office, he won't take his defeat, he is trying to prevent the Labour Party from enjoying their victory.’
So he at once resigned, and the King sent for MacDonald.
[Rose,King Ceorge V , 367.]
In December 1923, the key decision had been that made by Baldwin not to resign immediately.
In 1929, the Parliament elected in 1924, having nearly run its course, was dissolved, and the  election, held on 30 May produced another hung Parliament.
The result was as follows: Labour 288 seats Conservatives 260 seats Liberals 59 seats
The Conservatives, although having fewer seats than Labour, had a larger share of the vote:Votes Share of vote Labour 8,389,512 37.1% Conservatives 8,656,473 38.2% Liberals 5,308,510 27.7% 